





Salesmen would be
Better Salesmen
if they knew more of the details of modern
office procedure, the import and export
methods, currency, exchange, cabling, card
index and loose-leaf systems of record,
modern practices in book-keeping and ac-
counting, enabling them to meet up-to-date
progressive ‘ ‘ prospects ’ ’ on familiar ground
with greater sympathy and understanding.
How much more easily the man of wide
knowledge throws over the last little “hook”
in closing a sale. Some day, too, you hope
to have a business of your own.
Salesmen would be
Better Salesmen
if they learned and used Summerhayes
Shorthand to help them with their studies.
And men who would reach the top of their
profession in these times cannot avoid study.
Summerhayes Shorthand is easy to learn,
and is facile, brief and wonderfully legible —
just the system for you busy salesmen, and
could be learned in your spare moments.
Particulars and Booklet from
Metropolitan Business College L*. d -
(''Noiseless” Typewriter Agency)
338 Pitt Street (near Snow’s) Sydney


BOYIvAN & CO. I/TD.
Printers,
528 Kent Street
Sydney.


SALES TALK
BY
DONALD H. BOURKE
Assistant-Manager, The National Cash Register
Company of Australasia Ltd.
WITH AN APPENDIX
BY
H. TASMAN LOVLLL, M.A., Ph.D.
Lecturer in Psychology, University of Sydney
Sydney
G. J. HALL & CO,
VICKERY CHAMBERS, 82 PITT STREET.
1918


DEDICATED TO MY FRIEND,
T. H. ROWLANDS,
Of MANDURAMA, VICTORIA.


PREFACE.
I was asked to' deliver an address on “Salesmanship” at the
inaugural meeting of the Business Men’s Efficiency Club of
Sydney. The “Talk” I gave that evening forms the basis
of this little book. It is not published as a complete exposi-
tion of the Art of Salesmanship, but as the results of experi-
ence gained in the selling-fields of Australia, and tried suc-
cessfully for many years.
I am indebted to the National Cash Register Company for
my training as a Salesman. What is good in my part of this
book is due mostly to a study of President Patterson’s teach-
ings and N. C. R. methods.
I am deeply grateful to Dr. H. Tasman Lovell for his kind-
ness in writing the Introduction, and in contributing the two
very interesting chapters which comprise the Appendix.
My thanks are also due to the Australasian Stenotype Com-
pany for furnishing me with a transcript of the “Talk” which
I delivered to the Business Men’s Efficiency Club.
I hope my readers will derive some benefit from the perusal
of these chapters, and that those friends who persuaded me
to have this “Talk” published will be pleased with the result.
DONALD H. BOURKE.
Sydney,
November, 1918.




INTRODUCTION.
It will be admitted that any unbiassed publication should
be read with the writer’s view-point in mind: so much is due
to him who writes. One may otherwise be led to expect a
manner of treatment out of keeping with the author’s aim,
and the inclusion of much that it was never his intention to
say.
For example, in this little book, probably the first of its
kind to be published in Sydney, the author has no intention
of offering to the public a “treatise” on salesmanship, but
merely a modest and helpful “talk.” He has therefore striven
to preserve the intimacy which should mark such a mode of
address. This aim has led him to restrict his material, and
to adopt a more or less sustained colloquial style. The title
thus foreshadows the treatment.
But though the work is thus unpretentious in form, and
somewhat restricted in scope, it should yet prove of singular
value to all salesmen; while it might well become the fore-
runner of a more complete and systematic account of the prin-
ciples and practice of salesmanship.
One is struck by the high note upon which the author opens:
Salesmanship “is the selling of good goods at a good price,
in order that the transaction might benefit the buyer and seller
alike. It is not good salesmanship to sell a man things that


would do him or his business no good, or to sell him more
than he wants or less than he wants. ” And this pitch of moral
elevation the writer endeavours to maintain throughout. The
salesman may regard it as a counsel of perfection, and lay-
men may recall occasions on which the seller was not alto-
gether considerate of the rights of the purchaser. Still, the
author’s insistence upon honourable purpose and fair-dealing
is noteworthy and commendable, when one remembers what
opportunity and temptation the unscrupulous, though clever,
salesman has of prostituting his knowledge of psychology to
the disadvantage of the purchaser. It is here demanded that
service shall be rendered whenever a profit is made. Were
it not that the idea of “service” can maintain itself bravely
beside the idea of “profit,” the business relation now being
discussed would become one of deception and selfishness.
The pages of this little “talk” are full of recommendations
of a practical kind. The aim is outlined, and the means are
discussed. The aim in selling is clearly stated: it is “to con-
vince the prospective purchaser that the goods offered - will
increase his profits.” But a clearly-stated aim, valuable as
it is, does not suffice. The reader will ask how that aim is
to be achieved. He desires practical guidance as to the means,
the procedure to be followed. And here one can be heartily
glad that the publisher was finally successful in overcoming
Mr. Bourke’s reluctance to make adventures in authorship.
It is just in this capacity to provide practical information
about detailed procedure that the author is most successful.
He speaks out of a full and ripe experience. It has been
gained in the field and matured by time. Further, it has been
enriched and deepened by the results of discussions, so regu-
larly and efficiently conducted as to take on the character of


scientific research. The effect ot this research has been the
systematisation of the acquired knowledge in accordance with
permanent principles, true for every salesman and for every
sale. As an example, one might cite the five steps which go
to the making of a sale. All of this means, of course, the
application of scientific method to salesmanship, and it is
in the direction of science that all business methods are now
tending. Such a tendency can but dignify both salesmanship
in particular and business-procedure in general.
But these practical recommendations, which are rightly so
numerous as to constitute almost the whole of this “Sales
Talk,” will not merely be helpful to the prospective salesman,
but can be substantiated by mental science, or psychology.
The different kinds of procedure advocated in various situa-
tions are not fantastic and unreal, but true to life. They
will therefore work, and may be trusted. If we refer the
various practical means suggested as necessary in making a
sale, to the principles of the science of psychology, we shall
find that the practice does not laugh at the theory, nor the
theory at the practice; but, instead, that each supports and
justifies the other. It will therefore be well to take a few
instances of the coincidence of the experience gained from
practice with the knowledge derived from science.
The writer says, that the first thing a salesman should do, is
“to know his goods.” Indeed, he should have clear and de-
finite knowledge of (1) the goods he sells; (2) the business
he follows; (3) the business of the prospective purchaser.
Now, in psychology, it has been recorded that one of the chief
requisites for clear, direct, and efficient mental work and
practical action, is just this clearness of vision which comes


from precise knowledge. If one were to analyse any case of
indecision, the hesitancy would be traceable as a rule to con-
fusion among our ideas. Now, our thinking is intended to
serve action. If, then, opposing ideas are contending with
each other in our mind, neither has a clear run. Each tends
to prevent the other from gaining control of the motor tracts.
An idea becomes action when it is transformed into nervous
impulses which pass to the muscles, carrying to them the
command that the idea shall be realised in a physical act,
be it in speech, or in gesture, or in writing, or in facial ex-
pression. Thus it is, that mental indecision is necessarily
accompanied by hesitancy in action. The detrimental effect of
that bewilderment upon the prospective purchaser is known
to all who have ever attempted to sell anything. On the
other hand, an idea which has no antagonist in the mind, can
maintain itself before attention with ease, and readily passes
into action. That is why, for example, children so unthink-
ingly act out the next day what they have seen at “the pic-
tures” the evening before. It is this undisputed dominance
in the salesman’s mind of the dear idea about procedure, which
causes him so easily and intuitively to say and do the right
thing for bringing off a sale. That is why the more exper-
ienced salesman, other things being equal, has the advantage
over the less experienced one. The former has profited by
experience; and the profit has resulted from the gradual elim-
ination of ideas which he has found to be wrong. This elim-
ination finally leaves the field clear for the right ideas. To
sum up on this one point of knowledge, then, we may say
that one can manipulate one’s ideas when they are clear and
compelling; when they are not, mental confusion and hesi-
tancy must be the result. Again, clearness and directness of


knowledge mean clear and direct vision; and this in its turn
implies definite and telling directness of action. Nowhere
is it more true than in selling, that “he who hesitates is
lost.” Keeping one’s end up as salesman, is often a veritable
intellectual feat. The man whose ideas are confused and
scrappy, is literally unable to hold his own. With real know-
ledge behind him, on the other hand, the salesman can, as the
author asserts, prove what he claims, “because he has only
claimed what is demonstrably true.”
In another place the writer insists upon the value of con-
crete illustrations, and of demonstrations with the actual goods
present. This involves a sound psychological principle, true
of all minds both youthful and adult. It is a principle, the
application of which has, for example, almost revolutionised
instruction in schools. In this connection, one should note
that this world consists for us of (1) real things and events,
and (2) symbolic representations of those real things and
events. The realities are what count; and they may be sym-
bolised (1) by words, (2) by gestures, (3) by sketches. But
none of these symbolisations are more than secondary; they
are phantoms of the real things, and cannot therefore make
the same strong appeal to the interest of the prospective pur-
chaser. A salesman, therefore, who demonstrates on the goods
themselves, will have a great advantage over the one who
merely talks about the goods. Most people understand things
better than they do words, and with less mental effort. Things
have an appeal of their own, which words, dissociated from
things, never have. Things are experienced at first hand,
Penetrate to the mind with force, and command the attention
in a way which words can never do, being as they are only the
symbols and shadows of real things. If symbols are used,


then, it is to be noted that most people learn, notice, and re-
member better through seeing things than through hearing
about them. It is thus advantageous to use illustrations
which appeal to the eye, as well as to describe the goods by
word of mouth.
Again, the author is unkind enough to remind us that “all
we like sheep have gone astray,” by stating that, where goods
of the kind one is offering are already in use, it is easier
to make sales, because people readily do as others have done.
Here operate the laws of suggestion and imitation —processes
about which the science of psychology has much of importance
to say. Suggestion and imitation issue from a native dis-
position—the social or gregarious instinct. This instinct pre-
disposes us to notice, and be interested in, our fellows. And
as the disposition is native, it works easily and unconsciouslv,
leaving us quite innocent of the fact that we are imitating the
suggestion of another, and not originating the idea and its
resultant act ourselves. The operation of suggestion and
imitation are observable every day and everywhere amid con-
gregations of people. On the ferry-boat, for example, one
man rises, and looks out of the window over the harbour:
immediately others lift their heads from the morning paper
and do, or tend to do, likewise. And they do this, without
ever realising that suggestion and imitation are operating. And
history is full of cases of the working of the gregarious in-
stinct in its extreme form of contagion. One only needs to
cite the witch mania which overran Europe; the children’s
crusades; the dancing mania; and others, to see how far
people may be led by the power of this instinct. This vul-
nerability of men makes it the more desirable that the sales-
man should be honourable; the temptation to utilise suggest!-


bility to his own advantage, without doing a corresponding
service, is very great, and is only too often apparent in some
cases of advertising, for example.
To be effective, a suggestion from the salesman to the pros-
pective purchaser must remain undetected by the latter. It
should, therefore, be subtly indirect rather than bluntly direct.
A direct suggestion would perhaps readily be accepted by chil-
dren and feeble-minded adults. But your prospective pur-
chaser is, as a rule, neither a child nor feeble-minded; but
rather the possessor of a strong personality. If he were not,
he would hardly be successful enough in business to have ac-
quired the wherewithal to purchase your goods. It is for
this reason that the author warns the salesman to be tactful,
and adds: “You must not argue with your man at any time.
You can’t afford to. No one likes to lose an argument. If
your arguments are so strong that he has to lose, he feels a
bit sore about it.” Arguing is not only not indirect sugges-
tion; it is not even direct suggestion. It is an attempt to
make the other man your victim, to dominate his personality.
That, no man will tolerate lightly. If it is the business of
the salesman to dispose favourably the mind of the prospec-
tive purchaser, then the former should do and say nothing
which will make the latter feel ever so slightly belittled. On
the other hand, the salesman should both respect, and show
he respects, the prospect’s personality. This would justify the
author in his recommendation that the salesman should “say
something nice in the first two or three sentences. There is
something good in every man’s business for you to commend.”
. Similarly, habit, custom, conservatism, to which are due
the inertia of men’s minds, are recognised as factors interfer-
ing with the closing of a sale, and upon the surmounting of


this difficulty the author has something both interesting and
practical to say. Indeed, just because in selling two minds
meet, so almost the whole procedure must naturally be psycho-
logical. There are still other outstanding instances in this
little book, of the operations of sound psychological principles;
but the reader will doubtless find it more interesting to un-
earth these for himself.
It is because psychology is latent throughout these pages,
and because of the lofty note which the author strikes, that
I have become interested in his task. It has, therefore, been
a pleasure to write this introduction, inadequate as it is, and
a privilege to be allowed to add the appendix, which is in-
tended to give a somewhat more theoretical account of some
of the psychological principles involved in salesmanship.
In conclusion, I should like to suggest that even after the
salesman has been trained in the principles of salesmanship,
there is still his personality, disposition, character, remaining
as an influential factor. This is the reason why many clever
salesmen can introduce goods upon the market, but cannot
maintain them there or hold their customers. One should,
therefore, not rely merely upon one’s knowledge and clever-
ness, but should practise sincerity, good-humour, and the other
personal qualities which commend a man to his fellows.
H. TASMAN LOVELL.
Sydney,
October, 1918.


SALES TALK.
A definition of salesmanship is hard to give. There are
many definitions by successful salesmen. In my opinion, it
is the selling of good goods at a good price, in order that the
transaction might benefit the buyer and seller alike. It is
not good salesmanship to sell a man things that would do
him or his business no good, or to sell him more than he
wants or less than he wants.
A young man adopting the calling of a salesman has a
few questions to ask himself. Firstly, he must sell himself
the job—be sure he wants to be a salesman. He should look
round at the quality of the goods or machines that are on
the market or to be sold. He should discover what kind of
goods he would like to sell, or, if not goods, what kind of
services—because all of us sell something. If we are not
selling machines, or merchandise, we are selling service, advice,
or something to get a living. Hence, he should definitely de-
cide the kind of things he would like to sell. He should be
sure they are good things, honestly made, at a fair price, and
serving useful purposes. He would lose time and money if
under the necessity of continually defending the quality of
the goods he was representing. Let us suppose he has satis-


fied himself respecting the quality of the goods. He should
then look at the firm that is managing, selling, marketing or
making those goods. He should, moreover, look closely into
the reputation of the firm by inquiries from the firm’s em-
ployees, customers, and competitors. He should do all this,
inasmuch as up to this stage the would-be salesman is the boss
of the situation, yet risking maybe his future.
Any bright young man, who shows talent or ability to talk
common sense in a plain way, can go to any selling organisa-
tion and virtually sell himself to the firm. He can get a
job at any time, because there is no selling organisation that
is not looking for the man who can sell —they’ll try anyone
once, provided he looks “the goods.” Having looked at the
firm, and being convinced its reputation is good, he is then
aware he will not have to quarrel about that when he is con-
fronted with his Prospective Purchaser. He knows he has at the
back of him quality, and a firm with a good reputation for
honest and fair dealing. Another thing he should look to,
is the possible future there is for him in the business. The
goods may be good, and the firm may be good, but the oppor-
tunity of continuous selling may not be just what it should
be for him. In addition, therefore, he should see that there
is a big field for the goods; that, as far as a man can judge,
those goods will be saleable for many years even though the
selling is not easy. None of us wishes to start at 40
or 45 the learning of a new profession. At that age, it’s
hard to make a new departure. We don’t want to get into
something to-day, find it worked out at forty or forty-five,
and have to start all over again.
Now the position is, that the goods are good, the firm is
good, and the field is large; with hard work and proper


methods the possibility of selling is great. A salesman should
therefore look into the methods of the firm; he should see
how they promote their men. Are men promoted in that
business or company owing to long service, or good character,
or faithfulness? or are they promoted because of efficiency?
If it comes to a question of being promoted because of long
service, or seniority in the business, you are starting out under
a big handicap, inasmuch as there are a dozen or more em-
ployees who were in the business before you came; and they
may live a long time. If promotion goes by efficiency you are
all right, seeing that the extent of your success depends en-
tirely upon yourself. It is then dependent upon you whether
you get ahead in the business or not. If it is a firm with
many branches and world-wide agencies, all the better; you
are not then bound to live in one country all your life, but
may carry your knowledge of the firm’s business anywhere, and
be sure of employment. If the main works are in America,
England, France, or any other country, and the one you con-
template joining is only a branch agency, then you will need to
consider whether, in the event of the highest position in that
branch becoming vacant, the company will send a man from
headquarters, or give the local man a chance. Should they pro-
mote by efficiency, and show a tendency to give the local man
an opportunity of finally controlling the local branch, then
• ♦
join up with them —the best man gets the best job.
The position now is that the goods are good; the firm has
a good reputation; the field is large and extending day by day
and year by year; promotion is by merit, not by length of
service; and the salesman has joined the firm. Now we have
Established our salesman. He has got the goods, and has to
sell them. To sell those goods he should plan out his work,
should set out for himself a definite aim—a definite method


of selling. The first thing he should do, is to know his
goods. Know them inside, outside, upside down, so that
he can answer any question. Knowing the quality, and how
they are made, makes the price look small, and gives him
confidence when asking that price of the purchaser. Every-
thing that can be learned about these goods, should be his
continual study. The more he knows about a good thing
the better he can sell it. Every piece of advertising matter
the firm gets out, he should go through thoroughly; he
should weigh the meaning of its every phrase, at every pos-
sible opportunity. Next, he should know about the other fel-
low’s business. A salesman might know all about the goods he
has to sell; how fine they are; but to sell these goods he must
be able to show how the use of them would help the other
fellow in his business; how a profit could be made by stocking
them. It is easy, for example, to get a man interested in
something mechanical, especially modern machinery. Modem
machinery does a lot of wonderful things. What the machine
will do, will interest most people to-day; but that would not
be a reason for a man buying it. An aeroplane or a lino-
type, for instance, are wonderful things; but to talk to a
grocer or a draper about an aeroplane or a linotype would be
useless, because, while he would be interested, and you could
definitely assure yourself of being able to bring him along
to see it, yet you would never sell it to him in a hundred
years. Hence, getting a man to agree to look at your goods
must be for the definite purpose of showing him how they
will benefit him. The main thing, as a rule, is, to convince
him it will make more money for him, save him work, make
for him more profit, or something along these lines. Then,
if he comes to see the goods, or the machine, you have only
to prove what you claimed when in his store, and the order


is yours. You will be able to prove it, because you have only
claimed what is demonstrably true. No matter what you are
selling, when you go out into your territory, you need to
remember that you carry the reputation of your firm in 'our
hands You are the Company the minute you put your foot
outside the office door; and by your actions the Company
and its goods will often be judged. Many and many a time
a sale is not effected, not because the goods are not good,
but because the advocate is not the best advocate. Your goods
are dumb —they may be the best in the world, but they
themselves cannot say so. That’s your job. Put the case
badly, and the good goods are still unsold. Tell the truth,
all the truth, state the good points in logical sequence, so
'tiiat your Prospective Purchaser can understand you. When
a man knows as much about the goods as you do, he’ll buy.
Now, we’ve got you out in the cold world with a lot of goods
which nobody wants to buy.
HOW TO SELL.
They’ve got to be sold. How are you to do it? What
have you got to do? You have studied your work, and
planned it. One important point is to call on everybody who
is a likely Prospective Purchaser, everybody whose business,
•
in your opinion, should use or sell the goods you have. (The
P.P. may not think so; your job is to show that you are
nght.) Do as one company tells its salesmen to do: “Go to the
end of the street.” It is an impossibility for any man to stand
m the street, look up one side and down the other, and then
Say: “This man will buy; that man will not buy. ” You
can t do that by reading the signs and names over the doors
of the business houses. There is one good and sure way for
you: to find your buyers, call on every man.


PERSISTENCY A VIRTUE.
Make no mistake; call on everyone. Many a man has
spoilt his career as a salesman through failure to do this.
My own case is to the point: When I first went out for my
Company my destination was Cowra, where I succeeded a
good man. He had sold to most of the people. I had been
in Cowra, a good town on the Western line of N.S.W., for
seven or eight days, and had not made a sale. My Company
gets after its men a good deal; keeps writing to them; send-
ing them suggestions and encouraging letters. Because the
letters were encouraging, I felt my position the more keenly
in not being able to sell such a wonderfully good thing. I
wired to the manager of the firm, and said: “I think I had
better come back for more training.” Our Company trains
its men to know their goods, and to know the reasons why
*
merchants who want to succeed must use them. The Mana-
ger wired back: “We don’t think you need it; keep going,
you will do all right; we are sure of that.” There’s encour-
agement for you! When I wouldn’t believe in myself, the
Company believed in me, and didn’t mind saying so, even
when I was doing very badly. At the same time, through
the post, came one of the monthly publications of the Com-
pany—some of you may have seen it—the “N.C.R.” The
slogan for that week, or that month, was in big letters right
across the front of the paper; “GO TO THE END OF THE
STREET.” This message seemed to me to come all the
way from our factory in America, and I had such a be-
lief in the factory’s methods that, if they told me the way
to sell their goods was to go outside, stand on my head, turn
round three times, an 4 say: “How d’y Pap,” I would do it.
You see they have had 30 years’ experience of selling, and have
paid the best brains in the world to discover how to sell.


I had my samples packed to go to Grenfell. I walked out
into the street again to see if I had called on
everybody; I had a good look round. I said: “I have
not been over to one of the chemist’s, and to the fruitshop
on the other side of the road.” The reason I had not gone to
the fruit shop was that they had no fruit in the window,
and I thought that, if a man had no goods to sell, I would
not succeed in selling him anything. The reason I did not
call on Mr. Blank, the chemist, was because he did not have
the usual shop front. It was just an ordinary two-storied
house, with a small window, in which hung a card or two
and a few goods notifying the public he was a chemist.
Now, I had overlooked the fact that Mr. Blank was a chemist
of reputation. I did not know at the time that he had been
established there for many years, and, I believe, did the best
business in the town and surrounding districts. Taking
notice of the special message, I called on Mr. Blank.
I told him that my name was Donald Bourke, that
I represented the National Cash Register Company;
that the object of my visit was to interest him in
something that would make him more money. Mr. Blank said
to me: “I have often been going to buy a Cash Register,
but the price was too high.” At the time my predecessor had
called on Mr. Blank that register was higher-priced; when I
called it cost £lO less, because of the large number being
Manufactured owing to greatly increased sales. So when he
said: “I have often been going to buy a Cash Register, but
the price was too high,” I asked him what Register he had in
his mind. He went to his desk, and brought out a catalogue
Wl th the price alongside this particular register. I said;
‘Mr. Blank, if I can sell you that machine for £lO less, will
you buy it?” He said; “If you can, I will buy it now; but
I don’t think you can.” Then the hardest job I had was to


convince him it was the same cash register for £lO less. He
would not believe it for a while. He was probably talking to me
for ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, and through the talk
got to have confidence in me. (When you’ve studied your
business the Prospective Purchaser will have confidence in you.)
Anyhow, he gave me £lO deposit, and the machine was to be
sent along. I wired the firm that I had sold the best machine,
and they wired back “Congratulations” on my first sale. I sold
it to him for £lO deposit and so much per month. He only
gave me a deposit because he did not believe it could be the
same register for £lO less. When the register arrived, and
he saw it was the same, he paid cash. The slogan, “GO TO
THE END OF THE STREET,” next made me walk over
to the fruit shop, where I sold the owner a second-hand
register with little trouble. I thus sold my only machines in
the two places I had not called on. I went to Grenfell, full
of courage, and full of belief in the Company’s methods;
and I have never lost that belief to this day. If you are with
an old-established company selling good goods, you can - tak.e
it that what they tell you to do is the right thing to do, be-
cause it has cost them a lot of money to find it out.
PLAN YOUR WORK.
In making a sale to anybody you should plan your work;
if you do that, you have the other fellow at a disadvantage.
You know where you are going; you know your side of the
business; and you know his side of the business as well. At
the most, he only knows his own side; in few cases does he
know all that. That is why you sell him. Now, there are
five steps that go to making the sale. They are these:


1. INVESTIGATION.
2. PREPARATION.
3. APPROACH.
4. DEMONSTRATION.
5. CLOSING.
The necessity of the “Investigation” fdr most specialty
salesmen, lies in the fact that, if you do not know all about
your Prospective Purchaser’s troubles, and the weakness and
cost of his present methods, you are at a disadvantage. You are
selling motor trucks; then you want to know just what it costs
him for horses, horse-feed, upkeep, fares, drivers, and so forth.
If you are selling him a billing-system, you need to know just
what his ordinary method costs him to make out statements,
and to keep books. If you are selling short-credit system, you
need to know all the cost, weaknesses, and troubles that he
finds with his present system. A thorough investigation puts
you in the position of knowing just what a man’s troubles
are. All your aim should be to impress those weaknesses on
him so strongly that he will want them remedied. He will be
unable to rest till he finds some cure. Then bring the cure
along.
After you have made your investigation, you “Prepare”
your case. You can take those two steps together at the
first interview if you wish; but it is much more impressive
to go away and prepare your case, writing out the defects of
his system, and detailing for him just what is wrong with it.
Then come back to him, with the preparation ready to put on
his desk. He may not have time to come along with you right
awa 7 and witness a demonstration. You cannot always


guarantee that the merchant, even if he is willing, could give
you the time to discuss the proposition at the moment you
call on him. Hence the value of your “prepared” case,
which, having been placed upon his desk or in his office, is
always an advocate for yourself, suggesting a further inter-
view; it is always in front of him when you are not there.
Every time he looks at your list of his troubles, he says:
“Donald Bourke says he can get over these troubles.” And
he is thus mentally making that appointment which you are
trying to get. When that is completed, you “approach” him,
and try to convince him why it would pay him to come along
and look at what you are selling. In my case, I sell him on
the advisability of discussing the proposition with me; that
is what is called the “Approach.” I point out to him the
weaknesses of his system; show him what those defects cost
in £. s. d., in time, and in worry; I point out that they could
cost an unknowable amount in addition. I go over them
again, and tell him I could overcome them, if he would come
along and look. He will put up all sorts of obstacles, and
fence himself round with the barbed-wire entanglements of In-
difference, Ignorance, Prejudice, and so forth. But that
makes no difference. Stick to your facts; show that they are
facts. He knows he has those weaknesses, and you say you
can overcome them. It costs him nothing to come along and
have you prove it.
You are qualified to talk that way, because your Company
for 34 years —or whatever the number of years your Com-
pany has been established —has done nothing else but discuss
these particular weaknesses; for 34 years they have accumu-
lated a lot of knowledge as to the needs of the Prospective Pur-
chaser’s business. You are thus in a position to talk to the
merchant about it; you can show that others in the same line


of business as himself are willing to tell him that they have
been helped to make more money by such a purchase. Convince
him of that; then he will come along and have you prove it.
Pf you can prove your case, then he is glad he met you.
The next step is the “Demonstration.” Such demonstra-
tion needs to be simple. Use simple language; speak clearly;
make every point plain. Do not leave one point on which
he is not convinced, until you have thoroughly satisfied him.
If you leave him with a lingering doubt in his mind that you
have not overcome all his objections, that is going to spoil the
sale, no matter how good the rest of your work has been.
I have now outlined four of the five steps. You then pro-
ceed to “Close,” and secure the order. There is thus a definite
road to go, and the man who neglects any one of those steps, is
injuring his chance of making the sale. That I have proved
by experience. But it is easy to tell just what should be done;
I would like to go a little further now, and say how it should
be done.
“INVESTIGATION.”
In the first place, to make your “Investigation” you have
to introduce yourself. That is not quite so easy as it looks;
it depends a good deal on what the Prospective Purchaser
thinks of you during the first five or ten seconds, whether you
are going to be successful or not. Firstly, if your appearance
18 n °t good, your shoes dusty, your clothes stained, your linen
frayed or unclean; if you are not bright, and don’t show some
intelligence; if you walk in chewing gum, smoking a cigar,
smelling of strong drink, or keep your hat on in his office —
a thing which might be quite all right for him to do —-you
make a bad impression.


How, then, would you introduce yourself to the merchant?
Three things he wants to know. He wants to know who you
are; whom you represent; why you are there. In anticipation
of these enquiries of his, you should work out for yourself
some formula, some way of opening the campaign. You should
«
be prepared, as soon as you meet the man, with set words to
say to him: then you are not at a loss. If you stammer and
stumble over the first few sentences, you will lose a lot of
weight; not make quite the good impression you should make.
Look like a well-informed man, with a definite, important mes-
sage to give, and say something like this: “My name is Donald
Bourke; I represent the Blank Co.; I have called on you this
morning to interest you in something that will make your
business return you more money.” He may not say any-
thing. He may sit there dumb; leaving it to you. A salesman
is beaten if he can’t get the other man to talk. Until he
does talk, the salesman does not know what impression he is
making, or whether he has the Prospective Purchaser’s in-
terest, and after a while begins to halt and stumble, praying
all the time that the other fellow will say something. TThe
more the prospect talks, the more opportunity you have of
getting acquainted and of putting your case. But the hard
thing sometimes is to get him to talk. He has said nothing at
all to that first statement. What are you going to do? You
must make him talk. All right! Then ask: “You are in-
terested in learning how to make more money, aren’t you?”
He must answer that; and if he says: “Yes,” you have got
him to speak. When he does so, you are free to look at his
face; you can see just what sort of man he is; and how much
he is interested. A man betrays himself a good deal in his
speech. The next thing you say to him might be: “No doubt
you are wondering how I am going to do that?” Probably, that


is what he is wondering. Then you wait for him to answer, in
order to see just how far you can go; just what you can do.
He says: “Well, yes;” and then you tell him your real mission.
The way you tell him will be determined by the line of goods
you sell. I would say: “It is by offering you some suggestions
about the way you now handle the transactions that occur
between your assistants and your customers.”
Then you have to make your “Investigation”; you are to
get a lot of information from him before you can tell him
anything. I would ask for the information I need. He
answers my first question; and I make no comment at all, un-
less it is a good one. I ask him three or four more questions,
and then he may say: “What are all these questions for?” I
reply: “Well, at the beginning I said that I wanted to interest
you in something that would make you more money, and the
way I was going to do it was by offering suggestions. Of
course, like any good doctor, I cannot prescribe a remedy
until I diagnose the case. I just wanted to know how you
handled the problem, so that I might be of assistance in
pointing out any defects in your system whereby persons
could take advantage of you. Would you not rather have me
draw attention to such defects than that someone should use
them to your disadvantage?” Without waiting for his answer,
I ask him further questions. He will answer a few more
questions before he stops me again; by that time I have all
the information I want. When I now start to point out the
weaknesses, he cannot turn round and deny that he handles
them in that way; he has told me already that he does. He
cannot retract; he has no way out; he has to go right on,
because he has revealed to me his whole system. The pos-
sible losses which I picture to him, really could occur. He is


shrewd enough to realise that, and to listen to what I have to
say about the defects in his system. When I have got to
that point, I am half way to my sale.
You must not argue with your man at any time. You can’t
afford to. No one likes to lose an argument. If your argu-
ments are so strong that he has to lose, he feels a bit sore
about it. You cannot afford to lose, for then he would be boss,
and not you. So, at an early stage of the interview, let him
understand that it is not an argument between the buyer and
seller, but just a discussion to see if they cannot benefit each
other in some way. You should remember that your Pros-
pective Purchaser knows that you will reap a benefit if he
buys. You must show him that he will benefit, too, or you
won’t sell him. If he replies that his system is a very good
one, and he does not need any help, that discourages some
salesmen so that they walk out. He might say, for example: “I
have a good system, Mr. Bourke; it is the best one I know
of; I do not need any cash registers.” “Well, I am pleased
to meet you,” I say. “You have a good reputation among
business men for being systematic. Before I came I was told
you had a good system. In our Company we meet once a
week all the world over in convention-rooms; our men come
in from the country, and the city men attend as well. Once
a year they come from all over Australia, and talk your busi-
ness and nothing else. They talk storekeeping, insurance,
banking, and business methods generally; then the results of
the discussion are sent from our office, all round the world to
our various branches. All that knowledge is interchanged, so
really I had some justification for being in your store: after
34 years of investigation we do know something about the
business. You have a reputation for being a systematic man;
if I cannot help you, perhaps you can help me. lam a young


man starting out in this business. I am sure you would not
object to helping me, would you? You would not mind talk-
ing over your system with me for a few minutes.” Then he
will talk. When he does, I don’t care how good his system
is; if he has not got the system I wish to sell him, then he
is losing money: I would not be selling it were it not the
best.
The same thing applies to whatever you are selling—a
machine or merchandise.
At your first visit, it is well to be on good terms with your
merchant; say something nice in the first two or three sen-
tences. There is something good in every man’s business for
you to commend. It can’t be all bad; because, if it were
all bad, he could not be in business. Study of store condi-
tions in your own country and elsewhere, will enable you to
pick out the good points; if it is only the way he keeps his
stock; the way he has his window dressed; the appearance of
the assistants; or the civility with which they wait on custo-
mers. Say something nice; don’t get him sore by pulling his
system or his goods to pieces right away, for it takes about
twice the quantity of sugar to remove the bitter taste from a
dose of quinine.
PREPARATION.
Make out a written preparation, showing what it costs him in
s - d.: the needless work he is doing; the unnecessary hands
he is employing; the profit he is losing by continuing with his
Present methods or by stocking his present lines. All of this
you have found out by your investigation. A written prepara-
hon shows you have gone to some trouble, and that you have


studied his particular case. It advances your proposition from
the general to the personal, and interests him because it is all
*
about his business. Call on him again with this written pre-
paration, and discuss it with him.
When you do come to pointing out weaknesses, it is
infinitely more effective, more convincing, to pick on
one real loss than ten or more theoretical and proble-
matical losses. You could, of course, point out to him that he
may be losing his money this or that way; he may be spending
too much, or not getting proper returns. But it is much bet-
ter to be able to say that in one particular spot he is losing
money, and to be able to put it down in terms of pounds,
shillings, and pence, than merely to suggest generally that he
may be losing thousands. Tell him the probable losses; em-
phasise the real ones.
APPROACH.
Get him to see that these losses, real and problematicaly-pre-
vent him from getting all the profit he should get out of his
business, and get him to agree to a “demonstration” of the
methods which will remove these weaknesses or losses. If you
are effective in pointing out these losses, and get him to see
that he cannot afford to continue with his present method, he
will readily assent to the “demonstration,” because he is
anxious to have some remedy, and will give you a chance to
provide it.
DEMONSTRATION.
Further, when talking to a Prospective Purchaser one needs
#
to “Keep to the Line.” We must know where we are going.


KEEP TO THE LINE.


In order to keep to the track, let us set down particular
rules to follow out in talking to a merchant, or in demonstra-
ting a machine. You cannot sell anything that looks com-
plicated, anything that runs with wheels and costs big money,
unless you give a clear demonstration of its working, and a
clear exposition of how it is going to save the man money,
and do him good. The clearer and more connected your
statements are, the easier it is for him to understand. Re-
member, it has taken you perhaps years of study to be able to
demonstrate all the things the machine will do; you have got
to tell your Prospective Purchaser all in half an hour. Just
imagine how clearly you must speak; how thoroughly you must
explain, in order that he may get a working knowledge of what
you are talking about in that half hour. Speak in words of
one syllable. A certain Company decided that its salesmen
must give a set demonstration, learned word for word,
The salesmen objected. They knew how to sell, and
what to say, and were not going to have anyone
put any schoolboy stuff over them. To these men,
who complained at the idea of learning verbatim a
set demonstration, it had to be proved they were
wrong, the Company right. They w r ere called together and
asked, one by one, to give a demonstration, such as they
would give when talking to a prospective purchaser. There
were smart young ladies behind a screen taking down what
they said, word by word. Each salesman afterwards was
handed his talk, as he gave it. When he read it, he could
see why he was not selling sufficient machines. They were
all alike —no sequence in their arguments, confusing, un-
convincing, illogical. They would jump from the first point
to the fifth; then to the third; back to the first point; to the
fifth; then to the third; back to the first; on to the last. All the


time it sounded fine to the salesman; he was showing all the
4
machine could do, yet the Prospective Purchaser could not
make head nor tail of the jumble of facts; knew less, in fact,
than when he went in. When you are demonstrating you need
to take the steps one at a time, logically, in their consecutive
order, until you have given a clear impression of the machine.
If you take the second step first, then go back to the first;
and from that to the third, you will say a lot of things, and
talk a long while; but the man will know no more than if you
had said nothing. All he knows is, that there was a lot of
talk about something you wanted to sell for an alarming
price. Work out some set line of procedure for yourself,
and stick to the line. Your prospective customer may get
away from your straight line to one side; you have to get him
back again.
CLOSING.
After you have kept him to the line, got in a thundering
good demonstration, and proved that your claims are right,
something will happen to stop the order. He wants to jump
away from your straight line. He must be brought back. He
may say, again, that your machine costs £250, while, at the
most, his system only costs him a shilling or two a day. All
kinds of excuses he will advance; anything not to give you
the order. You now have to launch your final convincing
argument, to bring him back to the order. You can only do
that when you know where you are going. Keep to the line,
and see that he keeps there too.
You need not be always talking your business to him. He
is not so very much interested in your business, anyhow; you
must talk his business as well as your own. A man is not


interested in anything so much as he is in his own business,
his own money. The only time you have to talk about your-
self is, when you show him methods for overcoming weak-
nesses in his system.
ADDITIONAL POINTS—TACTFUL APPROACH.
Now, some points: When you do call at a man’s store or
office, don’t walk to the first man you see, and say; “Is Mr.
Johnson in?” It may be Mr. Johnson you are talking to.
It would wound his pride to think he has been in business
10 or 15 years, and you yet do not know him. What is he
living for? Walk up, and say: “Is this Mr. Johnson?” If
he is an assistant he will not be offended; he will help you
from the beginning by making some effort to find Mr. John-
son. If it is Mr. Johnson, he’ll be pleased you picked him
out.
MAKING THE APPOINTMENT.
Again, do not proceed to make the appointment for your
Prospective Purchaser: that would be a mistake. Let him ar-
range it; he will be more inclined to keep an appointment made
by himself. Don’t say to him: “Come right along now.” He
will say he can’t come right now. You may be inclined to urge
him saying; “Well, come along at ten o’clock; say half-past,
I’m sure you can come then.” He will feel it is no use struggling
any longer, and he will agree. More than likely he won’t be
there, if you don’t give him time to think when he will be free.
If you say to him: “When will it be convenient for you to come
along? I know, if you do come along, I can show you how to
save a good deal of money.” He will think, and say, “I


cannot come right away; I may have to go to town on Wed-
nesday morning; after I have been to the bank and fixed up
my business, I will come along and see you; in any case, I
shall see you on Wednesday.” He will keep that appointment,
because he made it himself. Let him fix an appointment for
any time of the day, be it before breakfast, or after dinner, even
Sunday, if he wants it. These may seem small matters; but
it is often the way you make an appointment to demonstrate
your goods that causes the sale.
DEMONSTRATE TO THE REAL BUYER.
When making appointments for demonstrations, get per-
mission to put your case before the real buyer yourself. It is
well, of course, to have everybody that is interested there,
so that you can answer the objections, if any, that they may
bring up. No one can answer them like yourself. The Pros-
pective Purchaser’s Managers, Accountants, Heads of Depart-
ments should be shown what your proposition is. Have them
with you if possible, but do not depend on them to get you
the order. As a rule, they have not the power, but they can
prevent you getting it. Do not leave it up to them to put
your case to the real buyer. How can they? It has taken
you months, perhaps years, to learn how to put your propo-
sition up in the right way, and no one less trained than you
in your business, can do it after hearing only one demonstra-
tion.
POWER OF ILLUSTRATION.
If you are selling a machine, and you want to
tell the Prospective Purchaser what the machine will
do, illustrate it. If you tell him that certain effects


will result from doing this, pressing that, pushing the
other, then show him that, in fact, it does do so. For example,
you can illustrate selling points if you wish. It won’t take
long. Here is an illustration by means of a barrel:
I tell the man he has a
good store; good location;
good goods; good assistants
r
—which is true. That pleases
him. Of course, after all
that sweetness there is a
fly in the treacle; it is
his poor system.
You see, if that were the bottom hoop the barrel would
not be strong; no matter how good were the goods, the assis-
tants, and the position of the store, the money would still
fall out of the barrel, if the system was poor.
But with a good store; good
location; good goods; good
assistants; and a good system
the money will be heaped up
instead of leaking out.
SEE THAT THE BOTTOM HOOP IS STRONG,


LEAVE A REMINDER.
When leaving a man after an interview, leave him with
something to think about; anything may happen between now
and the day of the appointment. In my own case, I take a
piece of paper, and choose my closing remarks so that he
is led to think I am writing down the particulars of the ap-
pointment. Then I fold the paper, and say with a smile:
“Just put this note in your cash drawer; and I would ask
you not to look at it until you have closed the store, and
balanced your cash.” When he comes to balance his cash,
it is there staring him in the face. On the note will be these
questions: “Did your cash balance to-night? If it was short,
can you tell yourself why? If it was over, do you know the
reason why? Did any goods go out of your store uncharged
to-day? Did a customer pay his account to-day with-
out you being able to account for the payment? Was money
paid out to-day and not recorded?” He will smile when he
reads that, but he will not forget it. He will see it every
night when he balances his cash.
BELIEF A FACTOR.
Studying the thing you are selling intensifies your belief
in it. As you increase your belief so does your pleasure grow
and grow, until you arrive at that happy condition of want-
ing to sell your goods just for the joy of selling them —“Art
for Art’s sake.” Salesmen are salesmen because their money lies
that way; the most successful ones, when they are selling
their hardest, think not of the money to accrue, but only of
the sale itself; they feel all they want to do, is to secure the
sale; the commission will look after itself.


SELF-RESPECT.
Belief in his goods should be supplemented by belief in
himself. This belief the salesman cannot have unless he
respects himself. You should get acquainted with yourself;
see how you measure up with the ordinary man. You will
find, if you are a salesman, you will be just a little more ener-
getic, a little better dressed, know a little more, and have a
little more courage than the ordinary man. You have got a
job to do that calls for a little better man than most jobs do.
The goods you sell and the reputation of the Company you
work for, put you on a level with any prospective buyer. You
are asking no favors of any man to buy your goods; you are
doing as much good for him in selling to him as he is to you in
buying. Servility will lose more sales than impudence, and
is just as detestable. Be courteous, and act as if you expect
courtesy in return.
When dealing with the Prospective Purchaser, hold your-
self above reproach; show him that you respect both your-
self and him. You should do this because yourself, your
goods, and your Company are worthy of any man’s respect.
Your Company would not expect you to be less respected than
your Prospective Purchaser. Uphold the dignity of your
position as a real leader in the sale. Say and do only such
things as you would willingly have the Prospective Purchaser
repeat. Think before you act (even though you think quickly),
rather than worry after the act. Prevent the need of any
apologies on your part. Take a just pride in presenting your
proposition. You are there to do the Prospective Purchaser
good as well as yourself. Therefore your mission commands
respect.


ANOTHER FACTOR—SATISFACTION.
Buyers are like sheep; they like to follow a leader. If,
for example, one man in a street brightens up his shop, adds
a new shop-front, the others will soon follow. For this
reason, no matter what the quality of your goods, it is hard
to sell them in a town where no one is using them. To be
able to quote a number of satisfied users, is one of a sales-
man’s best selling-points. Therefore, look after your users;
do everything that is consistent with fairness and justness
to see that they are satisfied. You can definitely consider and
count on every sale as two sales, if you see the buyer gets
satisfaction. When you are out of the district, and your
goods are discussed, he will inform others how you treated
him; will go out of his way to recommend your goods, if you
have done the right thing. It is a strong point to be able to
say to a Prospective Purchaser: “Just ring up Mr. Smith;
he has an exactly similar business to yours; get his opinion
■—he uses one of our machines. If you do not care to do so,
I will ring him up, and you can hear the conversation; —If
there is anything wrong with the machine I am selling, Mr.
Smith would say so; he has had to put up his hard cash. If
he had any complaints, he would not hesitate to make them.
If it has made money for Mr. Smith, there is no reason why
it should not make money for you. I told Mr. Smith what
I am telling you —that this machine would pay for itself in
a short time, and thereafter would show him a profit as long
as he continued to use it. Just hear what Mr. Smith has to
say; if he does not agree with me, then I cannot expect you
to buy.” Now, you see, to be able to do this, gives the
Prospective Purchaser confidence in you; removes just the
little bit of doubt that is standing in the way of the order.


INFLUENCING SALES.
Live in your territory, if possible; then no matter to whom
you are talking, nor the hour of the day or night, you are
influencing sales for your goods in your district by your
mere presence. If what you sell is an office labour-saving
device, take a walk around the streets at night after business-
hours. Note in which stores the lights are shining; see if
there is a light in the office; that tells you that someone is
working back to pull up arrears of work; gives you a place
at which to call in the morning, when you may tell the late
worker how much time, work, and worry you can save
him.
You can further influence sales by cultivating the goodwill
of the commercial traveller. He goes everywhere; and is
generous enough to say a good word for you and your goods,
if you are the right man. Many travellers are advisers-in-
chief to the storekeeper, and many of them are representing
houses that are financially backing the storekeeper. Many
times, it is through the traveller’s advice that his firm gives
the storekeeper a start, or has stuck to him when things were
bad, so you can see that the travelling man has the power to
be of great help to you. You will need to be on your best
behaviour to get his goodwill. You must be clean in your
ways, courteous, ready to give up your seat in the corner to
an older traveller if he would like it, ready to make room in
a crowded carriage, ready to lend a book or newspaper, ready
to listen to his business. You must be sober, smiling, and
low-voiced. You must not “butt in”; you must be a gentle-
man, yet without being self-conscious or unable to “loosen
up” occasionally. Be optimistic, look prosperous, talk
prosperity, and boost your Company; be modest about


goods; be the man your Company thinks you are, and wants
you to be, and you will get past. Your earning power is apt
to be reduced if other travellers don’t like you.
The traveller can tell you who is starting in business, when
they are starting, who is the man to see; and can give you
good points on the kind of man he is. Many a time a sales-
man wastes valuable time demonstrating to the nominal head
of a firm, when it is not he at all that can give a decision. The
traveller can often tell you who is the real buyer.
COMMISSION BASIS.
The salesman who wishes to make money, should try to get
on a commission basis only; do not work for wages if you
can help it. Wages mean that you generally have to show
you are worth an increase in salary a whole year before you
get it. On a commission basis, you get all you earn, when
you earn it; and the more it amounts to, the more incentive you
have to work. Nothing makes a man work harder than get-
ting the results of his labour immediately. The larger your
commission-cheque grows, the harder you work; you know
the money is there immediately your sale is made. You are
the fellow who decides about the increase; if you want more
money you just work a little harder.
COMPARATIVE SYSTEMS.
In selling anything you should always compare the present
system with the one you wish to sell; your goods with the
goods now used; your machine with the machine now in use.
Begin by showing what is wrong with the present method;
then show how your method will put things right; show how
it will pay for itself.


AVOID SPEECHES.
Do not make speeches to your Prospective Purchaser when
demonstrating; he will get to think you such a clever talker
that he will mistrust himself in your company; he will be
afraid your eloquence will overcome his objections, when his
common sense tells him not to give in. Appeal to his reason
by telling the truth. If you have to lie about the goods you
sell, then get a different line of goods. Give him facts that
he can understand. You are not selling yourself; you are
selling your goods.
THE OTHER FELLOW’S MIND.
Many a man has to overcome habit before he can bring
himself to buy what you have to sell. Your Prospective Pur-
chaser probably never spent £lOO in one lump in his life
before; although he is convinced right up to the hilt that he
ought to have the goods, he cannot bring himself to say:
“Yes.” You, perhaps, cannot understand why he will not
order. It is just because he cannot make up his mind. There-
fore make up his mind for him by getting him to agree to have
a part of what you offer; then assume that that means the
order for the whole; For instance, if you are selling a motor
car, and you just cannot get him to say: “Yes,” although you
feel he is convinced, try this: Say to him: “If you did have
one of these cars, would you like it painted grey, or brown,
or green?” He will say: “Oh, I would prefer to have it
grey.” Then say: “All right, we shall make it grey for you,”
thus assuming that he has given you the order. He will feel re-
lieved himself, if the last plunge has been taken; once he
has been definitely committed to say he would have it, you
won’t be able to deliver it quick enough for him.


BETTER THAN A CROWN.
The salesman’s job is the best in the world, and I make no
exception to this. His earning power is as great as any
man’s; his work is a continual pleasure. The sense of victory
that comes with every signed order, is recompense enough al-
most; when the commission for the sale is added to this, the
salesman would not exchange jobs with the king.
SET YOURSELF A QUOTA.
Suppose that a fair month’s business for you was £500; a
} T ear’s £6OOO. Then set up a mark for yourself to aim at, say
£6OO per month and £7OOO for the year; you will find yourself
doing it in a short time. You can do it, because you will have
an incentive. Your wanting to attain the £6OO a month, and
the £7OOO a year, will get you through. The higher you aim,
the further you’ll get.
SLAVE TO CUSTOM.
Man is born conservative; he is the slave of customyJais
natural tendency is to do what others do; to say what others
say; to wear what others wear; to eat what others eat; to
think what others think, when he does think. However good
a product might be, it is difficult to persuade the average man
to buy it. Even the motor car and the cash register, which
«
have given rise to tw T o of the greatest industries of modern
times, were originally met with howls of ridicule. It follows,
therefore, that, side by side with manufacture, there must be
concerted efforts to place the new products on the market. The
world is divided into two classes, the pushers —a very small
class, and the pushed—an enormously large one. To the latter
class the average man belongs. Hence the necessity for the


art of selling. The public have to be sold to; they will not
generally buy of their own accord.
KNOW YOUR GOODS.
There are two things to which the salesman must give
careful thought and study, if he would be successful. The first
is the benefit of the goods he sells; the second, the troubles
of the Prospective Purchaser who does not use them. He
should know his goods as well as the young mother knows
baby-talk, and should be as proud of his Company as a young
father is of a 121 b.-boy. He must believe in himself, and
make his Prospective Purchaser take stock in him at par and
accrued interest. He must have the scent of a bloodhound,
the grip of a bulldog. He has to get up every morning with
determination, if he is to go to bed with satisfaction. He
must eat his goods, think his goods, dream his goods, if he
expects to get on as a salesman. Every sale must be to the
mutual advantage of the buyer and the seller. That is why
it is necessary for the salesman to know all about the benefits
of the things he sells. He must not only be convinced that
what he is selling is right; he must be able to show reasons
why it is right. Selling is demonstration plus persuasion.
The average successful salesman attributes his success to his
own personality. A little better thought would prove to him
that there are two other factors —the goods he sells; the Com-
pany he represents. A successful salesman must have vision.
He needs to have the spirit out of w'hich generals are evolved,
successful field marshals made. He must view the field, and
be able to grasp its possibilities. He must have facts—plenty
of them; but they must be in orderly array. There is a vast
difference between having a load of miscellaneous facts,
loosely gathered in one’s mind, getting mixed up in transit,


and carrying the same assortment of facts properly arranged
for convenient delivery. A salesman should have tabulated
information regarding every Prospective Purchaser in his ter-
ritory. To some men this is an irksome task; to others it is
a pleasure; it gets results, and pays.
MOTIVE BEHIND ACTION.
There is a motive behind every action. When you approach
a Prospective Purchaser, he knows that you will benefit if he
does business with you. To get him feeling right, therefore,
it is your duty to show him he will benefit equally with you.
Your business is to induce four states in a customer’s mind:
Attention,
Interest,
Desire,
Action.
The mental law of selling is that attention properly secured
and sustained, ripens into interest; interest properly augment-
ed, changes into desire; desire intensified, passes into action
The compelling motive that will cause a Prospective Purchaser
to buy, is the feeling that he will be benefited by doing so.
Your task and your duty is, to show how this can be done.
LOOK AFTER USERS.
I have mentioned that one should look after the users. Do
it this way: keep in close touch with them; keep all your
promises to them; if it is a machine they have bought, keep
the machine in order; if it is ordinary goods they have
bought, send them a customer or two when possible; show
them effective methods of selling the goods; keep them in


touch with effective methods used by others in their line;
pass along to them any good idea in merchandising; keep
them enthused by mailing advertising matter and helpful hints;
give them that little extra service which keeps customers
pleased. Thus you will influence satisfied users to get more
business for you.
CLOSING THE SALE.
You want the Prospective Purchaser’s interested attention;
then bring up to his mind at your first meeting something
in which he is directly interested, yet which enables you di-
rectly or indirectly to refer to your proposition. To reach
his understanding, make every point clear in your proposition;
present it fully, in the fewest and simplest words. If it is
possible to write it and say it at the same time, do so; he will
learn more quickly through the eye than through the ear.
To awaken desire, show him the profit; and convince him
that it will be to his benefit to buy. Desire will come through
his belief in what you say. It is not what you say that
counts; rather how much he believes of what you say. To
help him make a choice, impress him with the superiority of
your goods or machines over any other, that his judgment will
also be satisfied. Summarise your strongest point; for it is
the idea uppermost in the mind which leads to action. Choice
%
is made when judgment and desire act together. To close the
sale and get the order, give him opportunity to buy the in-
stant he is ready; help him to get ready by your own plan.
CLINCH EVERY POINT.
I have stated and discussed the five steps in the sale. One
should follow them all with thoroughness. Watch carefully


the details of the sale; make full preparation in advance; make
strong enough appeals to compel your Prospective Purchaser to
hear you; have everything at hand that could be used in
making the sale —testimonials, a list of satisfied users, photo-
graphs, etc. When an objection is raised, meet it frankly, and
remove it positively before leaving; by showing the advan-
tages make the objection look unimportant. Clinch every
point with an acknowledgment or admission. Do not ask
him to admit; ask him to agree; people do not like admitting
things, but they do not mind agreeing. Sell only as much as
you should; neither more nor less without good reason. Serve
your Prospective Purchaser in as many ways as you can; pre-
pare his mind for future sales; secure his influence for making
sales to his friends.
BE OPTIMISTIC.
A successful salesman, always strictly on business bent,
must yet have room in his make-up for good humour and
optimism. Let your Prospective Purchaser find you in a
good humour. See the pleasant side of a too serious remark.
If he is a bluffer meet his bluff with goodwill and friendli-
ness. See your chance for business, even when turned down
the hardest. Be like the rubber ball —the harder you are
thrown down the higher you bounce. His strongest objection
might be his last line of trenches; get over it, and the sale is
yours. The best way to get over it, is to compare the troubles
and costs of his present methods with the freedom from
trouble and the savings of the method you suggest. Keep
feeling sure that you will get the order; the very fact of you
taking it as quite a matter of course that he is going to buy,
will help to lead him to buy. (I am talking about the thing
that is good for him to buy.) Show him that you expected him


to buy; treat all his objections as an evidence that he is anxious
to discover reasons why he should buy. Make your sales;
0
talk hopefully; be bright and spirited; close your order while
your Prospective Purchaser is feeling good,
BE WELL-INFORMED.
You will, if you are wise, gather helpful information from
all the respective purchasers you call on. Watch for what is
good in their methods of conducting business. Be on the
look-out for the thing they do that is better done than their
neighbours do it. Carry this information with you, and give
it for nothing to a difficult Prospective Purchaser. He will
soften up, if you can show him for nothing some better way
of doing things in his business. I used to get many a favor-
able interview, by telling a man whom I saw using card
ledgers or card filing systems, how to find a card that was
misplaced, in a few seconds, instead of wading through hun-
dreds or thousands of cards to trace the missing one. I told
him this had nothing much to do with my line. It pleased
him, however, and showed that I knew more than he did
about card filing systems. Therefore, there was good ground
to believe that I might know more about other parts of his
business. So I got an interested hearing. Read the maga-
zines that deal with system: like “System” Magazine, trade
journals for the Grocer, the Chemist, the Ironmonger, such
as “The Storekeeper,” “Draper of Australia,” ‘ ‘Machinery and
Hardware,” “The Australian Traveller,” etc. You will see
many a good hint in them for your Prospective Purchaser that
will help him. Give it to him, and he will be glad he met you.
SAMPLES OF GOODS.
If possible, always carry samples of the goods you have to
sell. If travelling out of the city, show them in the best


hotel; the best room is not too good for you. Have them
displayed neatly, that, as well as being good, they may look
good. If you are selling machinery, typewriters, stenotypes,
cash registers, adding machines, billing machines, etc., never
demonstrate these from a catalogue. Show the actual
machine; show what it does; how it does it; and why it is a
good thing. If you can sell a £SO machine from a catalogue,
you can sell a £IOO one from the machine itself. If you fail
to sell to the Prospective Purchaser from a catalogue, it will
be difficult to get him interested again; he will say he knows
all about it, because you have told him all about it. You
cannot tell him half as well as you can show him. Get your
Prospective Purchaser in front of the goods. The man who
says he doesn’t want to see your goods, because he has seen
4
them before, is like the blacks who saw Mt. Morgan every
day for hundreds of years, and got no benefit from it; white
men probed into it, and made millions.
PRICE.
If he is likely to kick about price, you can make the price
look small in many ways. When he asks you: ‘‘How much?”
say: “Well, Mr. —, you will be surprised when you know
how little the price is. If it were £SOO it would be cheap;
it isn’t £SOO, nor even £400; it is only £150.” When you
say it that way, the £l5O looks small in comparison with the
£SOO or £4OO, but would have looked a lot to him, if you
had not given him a much larger amount to compare it with.
Comparison, that is the method. You can ease the blow a
little after you have given him the price, by saying: “There
are many dearer machines than this one; I would advise
you not to buy them; this one does everything you want;
there is no need to spend more than £150.” Be emphatic


about this. Of course he had no intention of spending more
than £l5O, or even £l5O itself; but he won’t say so now.
In fact he is flattered to think you ever thought he would.
SOME HIDDEN REASON.
Your proposition being a good one, your Prospective Pur-
chaser needing it, and your terms and price having been clearly
proved to be convenient and right, there must be some hidden
reason if he still will not buy. Get at this reason, and you
may be able to sell. If you don’t get the reason, you will
never get the order. Perhaps he will say his wife objects,
or he will buy later on; anything but the real reason. When
you seem to be unable to get further with him, put it this way;
“Mr. ——, lam leaving you now, and may not see you for
a long time. Ido not expect to sell you this time, but would
you mind telling me the real reason why you have not said:
‘Yes,’ to this proposition? I shall be calling on many mer-
chants like yourself, and may lose a lot of orders, even
though it would pay them over and over again to buy, just
because I do not know the reason at the back of your head
that is stopping the order. I would not have the courage
to keep calling on you, if I did not know I was right about
this proposition. I would never come back after the first
time you turned me down. It is only the absolute knowledge
that this would be good for you, that gives me the courage
to call. When you study it as I have done, you will not need to
be asked to buy, so I keep calling to put the facts before you.
If there were any holes in the proposition I put to you, I know
you would see them; you are too wise not to. Knowing this,
I still call, because there are no holes in it.”


INCREASING PROFIT.
“Knowing that I can definitely increase your profit, gives
me the confidence to call again. If I were wrong, I would
not dare. What would be the use anyway of a busy man like
myself wasting time trying to sell to a successful business
man something that would be no use to him? I have got
more sense than that. I do not blame you for thinking your
way, but when you know my goods you will know the benefit
of them. Here is a list of hundreds of men in similar businesses
to yours, who say these goods have made more money for them.
Won’t that induce you to look? You are under no obligation
to buy when you do look; you won’t buy unless your judgment
tells you to. It costs you nothing to look, and may be worth
thousands of pounds to you.”
NOTE TO SALES MANAGERS.
Get your men together every now and again; if on a fixed
date or night in the week, so much the better. Give them an
instructive, enthusiastic talk on the matter of the goods - you
sell; give them new arguments; show them new ways to sell.
Remember that nine-tenths of your salesmen’s time is spent
in listening to people saying the goods are no good to them.
Give them a chance, as often as possible, to renew their faith
by hearing a whole-souled, convincing assertion that the
goods are good, and that the Prospective Purchaser would
make more money if he used them.


APPENDIX.
BY
H. TASMAN LOVELL, M.A., Ph.D.
(Lecturer in Psychology , University of Sydney ),
i.
Personality in Its Relation to
the Shop Assistant.
11.
Increasing One’s Output.




Personality, and Its Relation
to the Shop Assistant,
By H. TASMAN LOVELL, M.A., Ph.D.
(Lecturer in Psychology, University of Sydney).
By science personality to-day is scarcely regarded as a
hidden mystery, as something entirely incomprehensible, de-
creed from birth, and unalterable. Personality may rather,
with some show of right, be looked upon as something which
can be developed by the person, as the whole inner life of the
man which can be moulded, as the composite resultant of all
he has lived through, thought, been, and done. With some
limitation, one might be permitted to say, according to the
experiences passed through so is the man. The focus-point
of all these experiences is the mind of a man. It is there
that personality may be moulded if anywhere. It is what
one thinks, feels, and wills to do in this very centre of his
being, which makes him what he is as a person, which
greatly constitutes his personality.
First, as to what one thinks: The more one thinks about
a certain sphere of facts, say, prices and textures of a certain
class of goods, the more does one’s mind and, therefore, to
some extent, one’s person, grow in that direction, and mould
itself in that way according to the law of habit, the more re-
sponsive does our personality become to anything which may
concern that sphere. One might fairly assert, that what a


man thinks about at a given moment, that he himself as a
person actually is for the time being. Did not Shakespeare
realise that “the thought of ill deeds makes ill deeds done”?
Just as ill thoughts can make a criminal of a man, and good
thoughts an upright citizen, so thoughts about the selling of
certain goods can develop the salesman of such goods.
THE PART PLAYED BY A MAN’S MIND IN HIS
EFFICIENCY
is the point I wish to make clear. Should he think intently
about values and prices of a certain class of goods, and grow
interested in them, they will constitute his life, his person for
the time being. Is not this the reason why one can with
difficulty refrain from “talking shop” when away from the
sphere of business? The more frequently, constantly, and
persistently such ideas find place in his mind, the more does
he become moulded to the sphere of values and prices of that
particular class of goods. Thus the more interest in his par-
ticular sphere grows, the more sustained the attention paid
to it becomes, the more enlarged the experience or body of
ideas concerned with the retailing of a certain commodity, the
more easy, sure and capable must the mind of the person be-
come in disposing of and turning to account the store of
knowledge he has acquired as to values and prices.
Let him devote himself earnestly to a study of qualities of
goods, of values, and prices, and it will assuredly repay him.
APPROACHING A CUSTOMER.
Add to the knowledge thus gained a knowledge of cus-
tomers, of men and women, and there results a further de-
velopment. There arises the power to read from their de


portment, expression, self-control or lack of it, the estima-
tion in which each customer holds himself. It is this power
which makes of the assistant a tactful person.
Such knowledge, gained from frequent, continuous and per-
sistent study, will once more secure that the assistant’s mind
grow, and mould itself so as to almost intuitively realise
how to approach each several customer. Thus the mind be-
comes moulded by constant recurrence within it of the same
or similar ideas, which systematise themselves so as to become
available, and dominate while the assistant is following his
duties, and in many cases after he leaves them. This con-
tent of his mind is greatly himself, and is, therefore, a con-
siderable contribution to his personality.
CONFLICTING PERSONALITIES.
But when the assistant is in the presence of a customer it
becomes a case of personality meeting with personality. This
is always interesting, whether it be the meeting of the per-
sonalities of salesman and customer in business, of two per-
sons in social intercourse, of teacher and pupil in the school,
of lecturer and audience at a public meeting, of preacher and
congregation in the church, of commander and men in the
field. In this view personality would seem to resemble the
magnetic needle with its two poles. If the salesman-pole is
to attract and not to repel the customer-pole of personality,
the former must not encroach upon, or be too familiar with,
the latter. The salesman must, therefore, practice restraint,
and eschew undue aggressiveness, or show of disappointment,
and the like. It is this seemly restraint which constitutes
the art of the assistant. “Art is to conceal art,” and the
maximum of result with an apparent minimum of effort is as
desirable a principle here as elsewhere in art.


By this restraint the assistant leaves the field free for the
customer’s personality to feel comfortably untrammelled. The
customer will return to a firm where the capacity and deport-
ment of the assistant has divined and supplied his wants,
while allowing him to feel perfectly at ease and uncoerced.
Even should a customer for once fail to obtain the goods he
requires, he will still return to a shop where the assistants
have refrained from appearing to impose their personality
upon him, causing him to remember it as irksome, unpleas-
ant, and a restriction upon his own wishes.
The writer had once to do with a salesman in London
(perhaps the manager of the branch) who, being unable to
produce from his stock just the kind of goods required, ex-
hibited much wounded feeling at the thought of his firm be-
ing unable to satisfy a customer, and said with some show of
warmth that, if that shop could not supply a man with what
he required, then no other in London could do so. Of course,
this salesman’s personality had obtruded itself unduly. It
was occupying the foreground at the expense of driving that
of the customer into the background. It was imposimpit-
self upon the customer in an unseemly fashion. It is not to
investigate what the salesman personally feels that one enters
a shop, but rather to secure a certain type of goods. If the
shop cannot supply it, aggressiveness of personality will cause
the customer to be either repelled, or disgusted, or belittled.
He will assuredly think twice before again submitting his
personality to such exclusion from consideration.
Of course, restraint of this kind does not imply that an
assistant is not to act and think quickly, or to exhibit all
likely goods in order to win the customer, or to speak as to
values, and the like; but he should not give the impression of
forcing a thing upon the customer, and this demands that


what he has to say should take the form of polite and un-
offending suggestions. A male assistant in a mercery busi-
ness once asked a- customer his requirements. On being asked
for collars, the assistant inquired; “The Apollo or the Belvi-
dere, sir? I wear the Apollo myself.” “Then give me half
dozen of the Belvidere,” was the customer’s quick retort.
THE SUCCESS OF AN ASSISTANT.
One might fairly say, then, that the success of a shop-
assistant will depend chiefly upon three factors:
(1) Upon the possession of a systematic or well organised
store of knowledge as to what goods he can show, their
prices, and qualities.
(2) Upon a knowledge of men and women in the role of
customer, i.e., upon the power to read faces, and estimate the
value a customer places upon himself, and the style of goods
he is likely to need.
(3) Upon a restraint in intercourse with the customer.
All these three factors may be cultivated, and this implies
that the shop-assistant can develop a desirable personality,
if he but put himself earnestly through a course of self-
discipline. In the case of (1), as we have seen, he must put
himself devotedly through a course calculated to give him
the necessary knowledge as to values, textures, prices, stock.
In the case of (2) it is also greatly a matter of acquiring
knowledge, a knowledge, that is, of men and women, and
along with it, a feeling for personality in another. Such
knowledge is acquired all the more quickly if the assistant
diligently reflects upon his experiences with customers, and
earnestly endeavours to get the most out of those experiences.


While in the case of (3), it is not so much a matter of
knowledge as of self-control. But if a training, a self-
discipline was necessary in the previous case, much more is
it necessary in the acquirement of self-control. In this con-
nection, too, the assistant must put himself continually and
consistently through his facings, if he is to acquire the atti-
tude of restraint that is so desirable in his case. It is here
a matter of the will of the man rather than of his knowledge.
THE WELL-BRED MAN.
All know the well-bred man. The personality of each of
us responds to his personality, otherwise than to that of the
boor. Our personality is, so to speak, tamed by the quiet,
self-contained strength of his. How did his personality re-
ceive this respect-commanding quality of quiet strength? Not
from temperament, but rather from training and discipline.
At first, when young and fortunate, this training is received
at the instance of careful and far-sighted parents; later, it is
continued by the exertion of his own will effort. He early
learns to be circumspect; to control the impulse to speak
rashly and unfittingly; to attend to his person and his mind
even on occasions when such attention becomes irksome and
difficult; to know what to do with his hands and feet; to
know how to bow to and address his elders; and the hun-
dred and one other little matters that alternately go to make
the man of breeding. It is continued self-discipline in these
little matters which causes each of them to become habitual
and automatic, to pass over into the very stuff of the man,
and become a constituent part of his personality. Not only
do these actions now “go off” of themselves with facility and
naturalness, giving to other persons present the sense of


ease, but they also release his mind from the necessity of
attending to them, and so allow of undivided attention to the
matter in hand —the making of successful sales.
TRAINING IN DETAILS.
Of this training in details an example may be found in
the career of one who says;
“I feel that I owe a very great deal to the training provided
by my father. I was sent first to Paris to the buying house of
Vyse, Sons and Co., where I had much to do with the hand-
ling and packing of flowers and feathers, lam satisfied that
this work developed my taste for the grouping of colours,
which has been of great benefit to me ever since.
“I was then at Whiteleys for some time, and passed through
three departments—the country orders, laces, and mantles.
Nowadays among assistants conversation goes on in the in-
tervals of leisure concerning cricket and football. There,
when we had a few minutes to spare, we assistants would get
out a bundle of samples of Horrocks’ calico, and compete with
one another in guessing values and numbers. Some of us got
so expert that, almost without failing, we could name both
number and value of any sample put before us. Such com-
petitions are not very frequent to-day. . . . My next experience
was at Brighton, England, in a general house, and there I
was trained in the pushing of sales to a degree which has been
very valuable to me ever since.”
SELF-CONTROL.
In acquiring self-control, the first step is, perhaps, to learn
to command one’s physical parts, one’s body. For example,
an assistant requires so to control the external signs of ner


vousness, impulse, feeling, and the like, as to be able to stand
quite still. Especially should he find a fitting place for his
arms and hands, and be able to keep them calmly there for
some time without fidgetting. His body and head, too, should
be well poised, in order that the appearance of self-control
and of alertness is given, and not that suggestion of an in-
*
different and uninterested mind such as is betrayed by the
“lolling” attitude.
Further, the face should be in repose. A continual smile
is unnecessary. Many a person smiles during intercourse, as
if constrained to do so against his will. He is nervous, and
the unnecessary smile (especially unnecessary and out of place
when the customer’s face is in repose) betrays the fact that
he has not full control of himself. Then again, he should be
able to look steadfastly at the customer, and his gaze should
be one of real interest in the needs and remarks of the cus-
tomer, one of inquiry as to what is wanted, one of eagerness to
satisfy that want, not one of impertinent inspection.
These outward signs of inward self-control are incalculably
subtle in their effect upon the customer’s personality. For
example, they inspire confidence, if nothing else. But more
than that, they tend to create an atmosphere of repose pleasing
to the customer rather than one of flurry, which is disturbing
and perhaps irritating to the customer’s personality.
But in addition to these external signs of self-control, the
actual inner self-control is necessary. The mind of the as-
sistant, indeed his whole being—thoughts, feelings, impulses
—must also be under control. It should be noticed, however,
that control of bodily movements and postures is a remark-
ably successful condition of control of the mind. If the as-
sistant move decisively, and yet be able to stand still and
poise his body with satisfactory muscular control, he will


probably find that his mind will, by that very fact, tend to
work quietly and calmly, that is, with clear control of his
ideas, so that he realises what he should say or do, to effect
a sale.
DECISION AND EFFORT.
The chief factor in personality which is being here con-
sidered is decision and effort. These are chiefly a matter of
will. “One thing at a time,” “clear-cut thinking,” “be able
to cease talking,” “be able to say what you think ought to be
said, and stop,” are all practical recommendations calculated
to secure seemly restraint. Yet such practical gains are the
expression of a personality, which has been based by its
owner upon a habit of decision and volitional effort.
If it should be advanced against the foregoing position, that
a man cannot alter his temperament and his other hereditary
tendencies, one might answer that the temperament of a man
and the nature of his nervous tissue are certainly given from
the beginning. Still, the practise of self-control, open to
every man, may so compel the choleric temperament, for ex-
ample, that its impulsive tendencies will become so restrained
as to cause other persons not to realise that its owner is of
such choleric temperament. To appear outwardly as calm, as
self-controlled, and as restrained as another assistant with a
lethargic temperament, will call for the exertion of far more
effort than is put forth by the latter. But of this effort the
customer need know nothing. It is a matter for the silence
of the choleric salesman’s own inner life, where he himself
alone rules, which he himself alone experiences. The poet
Burns spoke once of people not knowing “what’s resisted.”
As a matter of fact the choleric assistant who has once reached
self-control, though he maintains it only by continuous effort,


is likely to prove a more engaging personality than the lethar-
gic assistant, who may run the risk of being dull and wooden.
In the former a fire burns that makes his restraint interesting
and effective.
In conclusion, then, it might be claimed that, whatever the
temperament, the assistant who devotes himself diligently (1)
to storing his mind with the right kind of information; (2) to
gaining control over himself, will, to that extent, conquer
heredity, make his own mind, create his own personality, and
be the artificer both of himself and his fortune.
(j ßeprinted from “The Draper of Australasia,” by kind
permission of the Editor, Mr. G. W. Piper.)


How to Increase One’s Output.
By H. TASMAN LOVELL, M.A., Ph.D.
(Lecturer in Psychology at the University of Sydney.)
“What on earth use would ability be to us if it did not
lighten our toil and increase our gain? . . . Just as high
farming increases the yield of an acre of land, so education
may increase the yield of a man.”
With these two statements of Bernard Shaw one feels quite
disposed to agree. The first rightly points to ability as the
instrument of any increased yield. The second asserts the
possibility, through education, of every man increasing his
yield—that is to say, ability may be acquired by education.
If, however, the salesman should inquire: “What of the man
who has completed his education, and left school?” the obvi-
ous reply would be, that even when one has “left school,” it is
false to speak of “completed education.” The salesman may
attend evening technical classes, he may periodically meet in
discussion his fellow-salesmen, or he may continue to educate
himself. If all three of these should be neglected, his sur-
roundings, the people with whom he comes in contact, the
things he has to do, would all compel his education to continue
in some sort
There is, then, no adequate reason why the salesman should
consider ability to be a gift of Nature, unalterable in the one
who has it, and for ever denied to him who has it not. Mental
science, as well as biological science, has conclusively estab-
lished man’s plasticity of mind and body, his wide capacity


for adaptation, his freedom from rigidity, at least in earlier
years. Man may become almost anything. To be sure, the
germs of what one may grow to become are given; yet they
are capable of extensive development. If the salesman should
neglect the conscious endeavour to develop the elements* of
ability implanted within him, he will do so either because he
regards ability as a “gift” not made to him rather than as
a “growth” possible to all, or else because he is too indifferent
to consider the necessary effort worth while. Science shows
that the first attitude is quite untenable, all it grants being
that there are native differences among individuals; whereas
the second attitude reveals an individual who is hopeless,
simply because he does not possess the very first pre-requisite
of success —the will to succeed. For such a man one cannot
legislate, for he will lend no ear to any recommendations
whatsoever. If a man is to acquire ability, the first condition
is that he should desire it. “Seek and ye shall find” would
appear as pertinent an injunction here as in the matter of
salvation.
In order to determine the conditions governing the acquire-
ment of ability, it may be well to examine briefly a few cases
in which the operation of acquired ability is evident. We shall
then proceed to apply the results of our examination to the
calling of the salesman. To begin, then, there is that
example which commanded such general attention at one
time, namely, the extraordinary ability of Melba as a vocalist.
What that ability may command in hard cash is well known.
How it was acquired, however, is our concern now. First of
all, gifted as the diva is, the ability which has won her fame
is scarcely to be classed as entirely native. How diligently
this great songstress studied and practised her art, she alone
knows. No doubt she could a strenuous tale unfold of most


exacting application. Over and above her natively-given vocal
organs there were necessary a knowledge of the principles of
breathing, voice-production, and enunciation, together with
diligent daily exercise, in the course of which this knowledge
was applied with ever-increasing facility. Now, one of the
wonders of Melba’s voice is the marvels of technique which
she can execute with it. It is by no means extravagant to
assert that Melba, with nothing but the voice given her by
Nature, would never have been Melba as her audiences now
rejoice to find her. Even the gifted ones must labour in order
to come fully into their inheritance.
Not otherwise is it with the pianist, the painter, the boxer,
and others. The pianist must understand music, but must
also have practised assiduously throughout a continuous
period. The painter requires to possess a knowledge of the
physics of colour and also of the laws of perspective, together
with the facility which only comes from long exercise. Finally,
the pugilist, to take a very different type, must know the
movements of feint, defence, and attack, as well as be so
thoroughly practised in making them, that they may become
almost automatic in their execution.
From these few examples it will be seen that especially two
factors are always involved as conditions of ability. These
are:
(a) Knowledge (of the specific thing to be done);
(b) Practice or training (in the application of that know-
ledge).
It should be carefully noted, however, that both factors
must unite. Knowledge would be useless if its possessor
lacked the necessary facility in applying it; on the other hand,
the facility gained from practice alone - would be some rule


of-thumb method, unenlightened by the insight which know-
ledge and reflection alone can give. Compare one who plays
the piano “by ear” with one who plays “from music.” The
former, not having the necessary knowledge, never can com-
pete with the later. On the other hand, all possible know-
ledge of music and the piano would be unavailing if one had
never tried to apply it in practice. Necessary as knowledge
is, ability is judged by practical results. It is here a matter
of the worth of a man as an instrument of production.
APPLICATION TO THE SALESMAN.
(1) The salesman should possess knowledge of what is to
be sold, and also of the conditions surrounding such sale.
(2) Secondly, he should have had practice or training in
applying such knowledge; that is, he must acquire a certain
facility.
To take the first: Knowledge is always mental equipment,
and its elements are called ideas. The amount of reflection
which he devotes to his special department will determine the
extent and the nature of the knowledge the salesman possesses
concerning the lines he has to sell, and the conditions under
which he must effect the sale of them. For example, the
salesman in a gentleman’s mercery department has ideas of
different kinds of half-hose, ideas of different personalities
among customers, ideas of different prices of half-hose. These
ideas he possesses, stored in his mind, even when the half-
hose, the customers, and the price labels are no longer present.
That is, his ideas are free, and can be manipulated. Thus a
salesman may improve himself by reflecting upon them in
the intervals elapsing between attendance at business.
This introduces the next point concerning knowledge. It
is this: that the mere number of ideas does not constitute


real effective knowledge, such as is capable of influencing
ability. The knowledge which Bacon said was power, has a
*
further characteristic. The ideas must become connected into
groups or systems in such a manner as to enable us to “think
together” whole groups of prices, whole types of personalities,
whole sets of half-hose. Thus the able salesman has his ideas
of half-hose classified in his mind. He does not laboriously
docket in his mind every individual pair of half-hose. This
would literally consume time and attention, and reduce his
efficiency. What he does is to think together simultaneously
all half-hose of a certain make, of a certain quality, of a,
certain price, of a certain style. At most, then, a competent
salesman of such goods has four ideas (those of make,
quality, price, style) and not thousands of ideas, as he would
have, did he call up a particular idea for every pair of
half-hose in stock. It is needless to point out the ease with
which one can attend to and manipulate four ideas as com-
pared with the difficulty of attending to, and manipulating
thousands of particular, isolated ideas. Every particular idea
is now connected with every other under the general or group
idea of make, quality, &c. Thus there comes organisation and
system into the mind of the salesman. It is this connection
among ideas which brings him power and efficiency. To
realise this, note the beginner. He has only separate ideas,
no group ideas. Because of this, he must blunder through
pair after pair of half-hose in a frantic, often hopeless, en-
deavour to satisfy a customer, by a method of chance. The
waste here is deplorable. If connection among ideas prevent
such waste by rendering those ideas more readily available,
and more easily manipulated, then customers will be more
readily and frequently satisfied, and the salesman’s output
correspondingly increased.


This establishment of s} 7 stem among the ideas of the mer-
cery salesman may be continued still further. He now pro-
ceeds to connect up his ideas of make, quality, style, and
price on the one hand, with his ideas of different types of
personality among his customers on the other. Here, again,
the tyro exhibits almost anything to a customer, on the off-
chance of effecting a sale. The capable salesman, on the
contrary, knows almost unerringly the peculiar quality, style,
make, or price that such a customer is likely to require. He is
accustomed to connect in idea such a customer with such
quality, style, &c. Thus all the salesman’s ideas come to be
connected into groups, having a pointed bearing upon the
effecting of sales.
What has just been said, is true of the salesman of any
department. What differentiates the man with the large out-
put from the bungler, is not merely the number of pertinent
ideas his mind contains, but more especially the simplified-
tions which reduction of those ideas to a few groups has
effected. The salesman with ideas economically grouped will
be clear-headed, decisive, and efficient; while the salesman
with ideas vaguely and clumsily organised will be confused,
indecisive, and, therefore, inefficient.
But how is such systematic knowledge best acquired? Is
a man to be left to “pick it up” by degrees? Or can the
science of mind make any useful statement as to the con-
ditions under which such knowledge may be obtained? One
can at least reply that the man who merely “picks up” his
knowledge, though he may possibly become capable enough,
wdl yet need infinitely more time than is necessary. In ad-
dition, no matter how he may be gifted naturally, he may
never attain to quite the same wealth of ideas, nor to the


same facility in manipulating those ideas, as a man who em-
ploys a better method.
But there is- more to be said. For mental science has
established beyond doubt the fact that the most favourable
attitude of mind for the reception of new ideas is that of in-
terest and attention. It is notorious how little the bored, in-
different person derives from his experiences of what goes on
around him from day to day. Even on the “picking up” plan,
the salesman-beginner who is interested, will “pick up” far
more than one who is not, even though the two may be of
equal native ability. Interest makes the difference, because
it brings a certain enthusiasm to bear, and clothes the ideas
with some sense of value. Ideas in which one is not interested,
are scarcely attended to at all; if they effect an entrance into
the mind, it is only soon to pass again out of the portals of
the memory.
But, granted the undeniable part played by interest in the
acquirement and retention of information, can a man yet de-
termine his interests and the direction they are to take? Are
they not determined rather by his natural inclinations? As to
this, it might again be quite definitely affirmed, that a man can
call lustily and with effect upon his will. He should fix his
attention upon ideas connected with his department, and in-
terest will grow. Compare the interests which grow up round
the ideas of home, flag, country, Empire. In how many cases
of men, who at the outset find their callings uninteresting,
do the increased ideas concerning the calling and the group-
ing of those ideas, build up in them an interest? The content
of one’s mind comes to determine one’s interests. Hence must
a man “make” himself attend to such ideas, until he has so
many of them that they become the greater part of his mental
“make up,’’ until they greatly become himself. And as


everyone tends to be interested in himself, he will ere long
find that a keen interest has grown up round the ideas con-
nected with his department. He will very soon remark the
increase of knowledge which that interest brings. A man is
only called upon to make the effort of attention in the be-
ginning, when interest, arising, will bear him easily along to
conquest. We may, then, fairly assume, that everyone has
that modicum of will-strength to direct the attention in the
beginning.
The chief condition under which ideas are systematised is
reflection. The salesman should himself endeavour to group
them. To do this suitably, he should consciously think upon
the most fundamental and pertinent principles of connection.
Reflection will reveal ever new points of similarity and, there-
fore, of connection among ideas. Of course, here again, the
mere lapse of time will account for a good deal of organisa-
tion among one’s ideas. But, if the salesman is to reduce
his calling to a science, and to achieve the greatest efficiency,
then he must himself take control of the process of syste-
matising. He will make trial of the groupings his reflection
has dictated, and if these prove suitable will adopt them. __lf
they do not, he will rearrange his grouping in accordance with
the new knowledge which the trial brings. For instance, if
a certain type of personality evinces no predilection for the
prevailing vivid half-hose, then the salesman will in the future
group that type of personality with quiet colours. Thus by
determination to think, and by a combination of the methods
of reflection and “trial and error,” he must continually ad-
vance to ever more suitable groupings, while his “rule-of-
thumb” colleague is perhaps at a standstill.
Specific means at the disposal of the salesman for acquiring
new ideas are his reading, his conversation with others, his
observation, his travel, and his imagination.


Now, take the second condition of ability—that of prac-
tice. Here we have the operation of repetition and habit:
repetition of, or a habit of, applying the knowledge gained.
It is the capacity to apply his knowledge to practice which is
the ultimate test of the salesman’s ability. Though the
acquirement of facility is oftentimes difficult enough, yet it
is greatly a mechanical process, depending chiefly upon assi-
duous application.
INCREASE OF OUTPUT.
Any increase of output will thus depend upon the sales-
man’s increase of knowledge, as also upon increase of train-
ing. Increase of knowledge may be an increase of ideas, an
increase of system among ideas, or an origination of new
ideas as a result of the operation of the salesman’s imagina-
tion. It is the imaginative man who is most fruitful in
making suggestions. It is no exaggeration to assert that no
one ever reached the limit of knowledge of his particular call-
ing. Always more knowledge of goods, conditions of sale,
types of personality may be acquired. Such fresh acquisition
of knowledge demands effort of will and opportunity. The
opportunity is always at hand in some degree, and the effort
of will may be made by everyone. If attention be persistently
bestowed, increase in knowledge becomes merely a question
of time. It is, therefore, possible for all, even allowing for
native differences of capacity.
As regards increase of training, there is opportunity in the
course of business. In addition, the plan of instituting com-
petitions among the salesmen of any particular firm would
be favourable to the increase of facility. Facility is, after all,
greatly a matter of drill . Compare the tram conductor col-
lecting fares: How slow and fearful of error he is when first
he enters upon his duties! How quick and accurate after


months of practice have supervened! Or consider one learn-
ing to drive a motor: How clumsy and incapable at first,
even when giving his whole attention to it! Later on, note with
what facility he drives through crowded city streets, thinking
perhaps of to-morrow’s race-meeting. Determination to
acquire even more experience, and persistency in the right ap-
plication of that experience, must eventually enable any sales-
man to increase his output.
POSSIBLE DANGERS AND THEIR REMEDIES.
The very repetition which induces facility, establishes and
fixes our method. Hence the danger of getting into a rut.
The possibility of change grows less and less, the more firmly
established our methods become. We tend to become fos-
silised, and are at the mercy of habit. The remedy in this
case is to be found only in the other condition of ability—that
of reflection. If the salesman continue throughout to use
his head, he will keep an open and well-informed mind. The
open-minded attitude being plastic, will allow the assimila-
tion of ever fresh knowledge, while the up-to-date nature of
that knowledge will prevent the stereotyping and crystallising
of methods.
A FURTHER LIMITATION.
But just as too great a crystallisation of methods prohibits
progress, so does too much changing of methods prevent the
acquirement of facility. For facility depends upon repetition
of the same methods. Thus the salesman who would continue
to increase his ability must preserve the mean between the
extremes of fossilisation with great facility and thoughtfulness
with little facility.
{Reprinted from “The Draper of Australasia, Retailers'
Handbook and Diary,” by kind permission of the Editor,
Mr. G. W. Piper.)


