

7 *2L


ADVERTISEMENT.
The Rev. T. Binney having, in answer to our urgent
request, consented to the publication of some of his
Sermons, (or reports of them,) we propose issuing a few of
those which may be available for the purpose. The present
discourse is one which was delivered in the Tower Church,
Belvedere, in Kent, the seat of Sir Culling Eardley, on the
occasion of the meeting of a number of the members of the
Evangelical Alliance, representing different bodies and
nations. The late Rev. F. Monod, of Paris, preached yi the
morning, in French; Mr. Binney, in the afternoon, in
English ; and Dr. Krummacher, in the evening, in German.
The morning and afternoon services, from the unusual
length (as it happened) of the former, were continued
without interruption. The second preacher thus rose to
fulfil his duty under the circumstances referred to in the
introductory words of the sermon. These, we have thought
it best, for many reasons to give, and to precede them by
this explanatory note.
SPURGEON’S SERMONS
SERMONS, by the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, cloth, lettered,
7s. fid.; half-roan, Bs. fid.; half-calf, 9s. fid.; calf, gilt, 125.;
morocco, gilt, 14s. Post free, sixpence extra.
THE CRYSTAL PALACE SERMON, preached by the
Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, in the Crystal Palace, to 24,000
persons, with the Hymns sung, and the Prayers offered up
on that occasion. To which is added a Critique on his
Peculiarities, thirty-two pages. Price Sixpence ; post
free, eight penny stamps.
SPURGEON’S SERMONS, Sixpence each; post free,
eight penny stamps.
“WHY HALT YE BETWEEN TWO OPINIONS?”
An Appeal to the Undecided, by the Rev. H. G. Guinness,
commonly called “ The Irish Spurgeon,” uniform with
and supplementary to “ Spurgeon’s Sermons.” Price
Sixpence ; post free, eight penny stamps.
SIX SERMONS, more or less bearing on the application
of Christian Principles to the circumstances of the Present
Age. Preached at Brisbane, Moreton Bay, by the Rev.
James Carter, S.A.C., Minister of St. Mark’s Picton, with
the Oaks, and West Bargo. Stitched wrapper, 25.; cloth, 3s.
Post-free, 2d. extra.


SALTATION BY FILE.
ETC, ETC.
In the prospect of this service, I wrote a sermon which
I intended to have read. Having, however, been now occu-
pied with the previous engagements of the day for more than
three hours,- —some of us with a very brief intermission, —
most of you not having been out of the building at all, —
I feel that it would be out of the question to proceed to the
fulfilment of my original purpose. Reading a discourse
requires, with me, more exertion, and is far more exhausting
and laborious, than my usual mode of address ; while a con-
gregation like this, suffering under an oppressive atmo-
sphere, uncomfortably crowded together, and having already
had large demands made on its attention, would, I fear, be
impatient under the infliction of a formal manuscript instead
of the employment of free speech. It would be unfair,
perhaps, for either of us to be taxed too severely in our
present circumstances. I shall not attempt, therefore, to
read what I had written; but, throwing my mind back on
some train of thought which I may hope on the instant to
recall, I shall request your attention to a few remarks, spoken
with the freedom and familiarity of conversation, rather than
in the style of a printed book. I take, then, two passages of
Scripture, and I read them in immediate connection with
each other. Looked at together, they present to you the
subject on which I have determined for a little to speak.
f *7#,? 3
l*\ -J c ft /fT, . «,


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
They will be found in First Corinthians, iii. 15, and Second
Peter, i. 11. They read thus :—■
“If any man’s work shall he burned, he shall suffer loss ; hut he him-
self shall be saved, yet so as by fire.”
“If ye do these things ye shall never fail; for so an entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of
our Lord And Saviour Jesus Christ,”
These two passages present to us, you will observe, the
two sides of one and the same subject. The central idea is
salvation; —the one Apostle leads us up to it from one point,
the other from another ; we examine both, and we find that
we are put in possession of these two views of the same thing
—“salvation ” “by fire” —and salvation “in fulness.”
I propose, very briefly, to expound to you the whole matter;
not by preaching from the two passages now read, but by
going over the previous trains of thought with which each is
connected, and thus endeavouring to ascertain its exact
sense.
The first passage, from the Epistle to the Corinthians,
is the conclusion of a somewhat extended illustration, —that
is, of an argument put in the form of a figure or similitude.
This sort of speaking and writing is of great use, and is often
employed by St. Paul.' An illustration is not a mere pretti-
ness —an ornamental phrase, that might be left out without
detriment to the train of thought,—it is something which
really lights up that train of thought itself, and enables the
reader or hearer to see the aim, as 'well as to feel the force,
of the logic. An argument may be demonstrative, —it may
thoroughly establish the position maintained, —but it may
not, at first, and simply as an argument, be fully appre-
hended ; when, —the understanding having done its work, —
passion and genius shall crown the whole with some vivid
illustration, which shall make it stand out with a distinct-


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
ness that shall never be forgotten; it is one great Faculty of
the mind holding up a lighted torch to the workmanship of
another. The Apostle was a master of logic,—-a hard, severe
reasoner, who at times went on for a good while exercising
and addressing simply the understanding; he was a fervid
and feeling man, however, —with a large, glowing, burning
soul in him, —and hence he frequently puts his argument
into the form of something that seizes the imagination of
his reader, or he illustrates it by the force and flashings of
his own. You have an instance of this in the case before us.
He wants to convince the teachers and ministers of the
church at Corinth, of the importance of care, devotedness and
fidelity, in the fulfilment of their work; and he does this
through the medium of an analogy, or an extended figure,
addressed to the imaginative faculty, but adapted to pierce,
through that, to the reason and the conscience. He calls
the Church “ God’s building.” He speaks of having, “as a
wise master-builder,” “ laid the foundation.” He represents
the ordinary ministers of the Church as builders building on
that foundation. He supposes that they may do their work
differently: —one building with “ gold, silver, and precious
stones;” another, with “ wood, hay and stubble.” He warns
every man, —every recognised official builder, —to take heed
“ how he buildeth;” and he grounds this on the fact that
every man’s work is one day to be “ tried,” or tested, “ by
fire —that “ the fire” shall bring out and show, with respect
to every man’s work, “ of what sort it isand that then,
each shall have appropriate praise or blame ;—“ if a man’s
work abide, he shall have a reward“ if any man’s work
be burned, he shall suffer loss; —yet—he himself may be
saved; —but —so as hy fire.”
There is a difference of opinion among learned theologians
as to what it is that the builders build into the edifice. Some
suppose that by Christ being the foundation is meant the
doctrine respecting Christ, and that the gold and silver, the
hay and the stubble, are, respectively, true or false doctrines,


SALVATION BY FIRE, AISTD
-taught as portions of the Christian system. Others think,
that by Christ being the foundation is meant, his being per-
sonally the object of faith, “ to whom coming, as unto a
living stone,” men are to he personally “ built up, as spiritual
stones, into a spiritual house;” the “gold and silver,” the
“ hay and stubble,” in this case, representing, respectively,
true or false professors, united, by the ministry, to the visible
Church. I incline myself to this latter opinion; but it so
happens, that the point and force of the Apostle’s argument,
as I wish to expound and exhibit it at present, would, for my
purpose, be precisely the same, whichever of the views you
might choose to prefer.
By what I have already said, it will be seen, that I take
the one set of materials to represent what is good,—the other
the contrary. There is a question about that, too, among
commentators ; but, without regarding it, we shall assume
the rightness of the natural impression that the words would
make on the common mind. Ordinary understandings would
generally, I should think, take “ gold, silver, and precious
stones,” to signify the true in respect to doctrine, or the good
in relation to character; and that “ the wood, hay, and
stubble,” stood for the false of the one class, or for the bad
in the other. Without arguing the matter, we shall adopt,
and proceed upon, this impression.
Two individuals, then, are supposed by the Apostle to be
alike ministers, —ministers officially,—and alike spiritual
and true men. This latter idea must be understood, for, in
the first place, ho does not accuse either of them with wish-
ing to lay any other foundation—he only charges them to
take heed how they build upon that which is laid: and, in the
second place, even he, you will observe, who loses everything
at last, is yet saved ; —'and this, you are aware, could not, by
possibility, be supposed to occur, except on the supposition
of his having been, previously, a man of sincere and genuine
faith. These two persons,—as individuals, alike Christian,
and as ministers, equally recognised,—proceed to the work


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
given them to do, “the edifying of the body of Christ,” —or
the building up of the visible Church, by the addition to it
of those who profess to come, by faith, to Him who is set
forth as its foundation. These two persons, the Apostle pro-
ceeds to suppose, may do their work—the same work, or
ostensibly the same work—after two very different fashions ;
the one may build on the foundation, and into the rising
walls of the edifice, nothing but what is congenial with the
properties of the one and the destiny of the other: all his
materials are solid and substantial, —adapted to durability,
intrinsically precious: he has a great and j ust idea of what
is to be done, —a house to be built in harmony with the fact
of its standing on a living and Divine basis, and to be so
constructed that it may rise and grow into “ a habitation of
God through the Spirit.” But the other man, whatever
might be his personal truth and sincerity, so blunders in his
official sphere, and in relation to his official work, that he
actually builds into the building, “ wood, hay, and stubble,”
—chaff and refuse, —-as if these were materials worthy to be
put on a spiritual foundation, or fit to constitute a Divine
temple to be filled and beautified by the Divine presence!
Somehow or other, the man’s ministerial life is a perpetual
mistake. There is a terrible defect about his understanding,
or his earnestness, —his vigilance or his sagacity,—his know-
ledge of men, —his idea of the Church in its properties and
its end, —his notion of the way in which a great and Divine
work is to be done ! Year after year, he goes on, building
away,—and building, it may be, with some diligence and
some complacency; really thinking that he is doing his
business with tolerable success, and erecting what will stand
for the Master’s use and his own honour! “ I have laid the
foundation;” “ another buildeth thereon;” “ one ” buildeth
“ gold, silver, precious stones ;” —“ another, wood, hay,
stubble.”
You are next to suppose, that while this process is going
on, and the two men are thus busily employed in doing their


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
work, i,t is not obvious, either to others or themselves, how
they are doing it. The materials, it must be understood,
may, in both cases, appear very much the same ; —there may
be an external and formal resemblance, with an intrinsic
difference, so essential and so vast, that the one shall be
solid as gold and gems, and the other insubstantial as straw
and chaff. A day, however, is coming, says the Apostle,
which will test the nature of each man’s work, and ascertain
and reveal the sort of materials he has added to the building.
“ Every man’s work shall be made manifest: for the day
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire ; and the
lire shall try every man’s work of what sort it is.” Now,
I quite admit, that this may have a very good sense as
applied to persecution. Persecution is a “ fiery trial.” It
tests and tries the reality of men. Out of it, some come “as
gold that has been tried in the fire by it, other some, in
respect to their profession, are scorched and perish; they
are the stony ground hearers, likened by the Lord to “ the
grass” that fades “ as soon as the sun rises with his burning
heat,” for when troubles or persecutions arise, “ by-and-by
they are offended.” While admitting this, however, —
admitting that the fire that is to try the work of the two
builders may refer to persecution,—we prefer to take it in a
higher sense, and to regard it as an allusion to the ultimate
revelation of the last day. That those revelations may be
such as to surprise even the bad, we learn from our Lord
himself. Some, when charged with specific defects, are
represented as asking “ When saw we Thee naked or athirst,
hungry or in prison, and did not minister unto Thee ?” and
others, whom He says He will indignantly reject, are made
to refer to.their expectations and their claims by enumerat-
ing their doings,—“ Have we not prophesied in thy name,
and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name done
many wonderful works ?” If, then, the bad may be surprised,
in this way, by the discoveries of the judgment, much more
may the good,—the good, who are really sincere men, but


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
weak, inconsistent, ignorant or indiscreet. We purpose, there-
fore, taking the passage as referring to the final appearance
of the Master; that “ the fire” with which Ho himself “ shall
he revealed,” shall penetrate and “ reveal” everything else
when men and ministers, with all their works, must undergo
the public scrutiny of Him whose eyes, even now, are “ as a
flame of fire;” when He “ shall bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the intentions of the
heart, and when every one shall have praise of God,” —or
blame.
Imagine, then, that you see the finished building stand-
ing before you, on their separate and respective portions of
which, the two builders have bestowed their labour. Imagine
that the time has come, when the great Architect, or Supreme
Master-builder, is going to test each man’s work ; and, how-
ever violent the next supposition, imagine that He is going
to do this by applying fire to the edifice ; and finally imagine,
that the two builders are looking on from a little distance,
and are waiting to see the result and the revelation of the
momentous experiment. Each knows, it must be supposed,
his own work, —whereabouts it is, and where to look for it,
—and has his eye fixed upon it intently. The fire is lighted ;
it seizes the structure; it spreads and rises, and the whole
fabric is enveloped in the flame. On some portions of the
building it makes no impression; the materials are incom-
bustible ; they cannot be burnt; and not only so, but the
fire actually reveals in them properties and perfections which
were not known, or not suspected, to be there; they not
only stand the test, but they glow and sparkle in the midst
of the flame, with the flashing lustre of precious gems! The
man who is looking on, and Avho recognises in this portion
of the edifice his own work, is not only gratified by finding
that it “ abides,” but is astonished at the discovery that it
is a diviner thing than he had dared to hope! “He has a
reward —a reward in himself, —in the blessed conscious-
ness that fills his soul; and a reward from the Master, in


SALTATION BY TIRE, AND
his expressed approbation and assigned honour. “Well
done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” But now
turn and observe another part of the building, and notice
in connection with it, the spectacle of the man who
recognises it as his. Instead of resisting the action of
the flame —“abiding,” in spite of it, and exhibiting,
in addition, splendour and beauty;—instead of this, it is
“ devoured,” and perishes ! It emits, at first, a portentous
smoke; —it is involved in blackness; —anon, suddenly the
flame breaks out, and the whole mass is consumed as in a
moment! The terrified builder is looking on, and sees the
catastrophe. His work is “ burned.” The revelation of its
character stuns him as by a blow. He did not suspect it, or
not to the extent to which it is “ made manifest.” He has
“to suffer loss the loss of all the labour of a life the
destruction of his work, —its utter annihilation; loss in him-
self, —in the extinction of his hopes, and the dreadful disap-
pointment that sweeps like a hurricane through every region
of his soul; —loss, in relation to those expressions of approval,
and those circumstances of honour, which, in the other case,
flow from the gracious lips of the Lord, and accompany the
servant’s admission to his joy. Nay,—while you keep look-
ing at the spectacle, which these several particulars
an additional phenomenon consummates the picture. The
flames have leaped from the building to the builder! He is
in danger of being destroyed along with his work. He who
could attempt a divine thing in so tmdivine a manner as it
turns out his work has been done, must have a good deal of
mere chaff, and straw, and stubble in himself. To that, then,
the fire now flies ; on that it fixes ; he is involved in smoke,
and scorched hy the flame; he is ready to give up all for
lost—even himself; when—the loving hand of his com-
passionate Master, seizing him as it were by the hair of the
head, lifts him up, out of the midst of his terrible environ-


SALVATION IN' FULNESS.
ment, and lays him down in safety by His side ! He is
like a man snatched, as by miracle, from a burning house ;
and who, awaking from unconsciousness, and from remem-
bered terror, finds himself alive —but nothing more ! —his
property is gone ; his house is consumed; his very clothes
are burned off his back; his body itself is scorched and dis-
figured ; —but he breathes and lives! He feels this. He
comes gradually to the conviction of its certainty ; and this
one blessing, though with “ the loss of all things,” is suffi
cient to fill him with a deep and thankful, though silent,
joy ! Thus it is with the builder before us. “ His work is
burnt“ he suffers loss “ hut he himself is saved; Yet
—SO AS BY FIRE.”
Such, I take it, is a fair and honest exposition of this
argumentative illustration of St. Paul. If it means any-
thing, it means just what we have brought out, in this
attempt “to give the sense, and to cause all of you to un-
derstand the reading,” And now, at this point of transition
from the one side of the subject to the other, —in passing
from Paul’s standing-point to Peter’s, —we might give
utterance to a good many suggestive sentiments, which
what we have been looking at must have already awakened
in every deep-thinking soul here. It will perhaps be better,
however, to reserve these till we have the whole subject
fully before us. We can then gather up, into one series of
concluding remarks, the practical lessons which the two
Apostles combine to teach. Waiving, therefore, for the
present, the doctrine and uses of this great and pregnant
Corinthian illustration, we shall make our way to the other
aspect of our twofold picture, by one necessary connecting
remark.
Let it be noted, then, that this parable of the builders,
while it undoubtedly addresses itself, first and chiefly to
official men,—-to those who sustain the ministerial office, and
whose work is the “actual edifying of the Church,”- —does
yet contain in it a general principle, which is applicable to
9


SALVATION BY FIRS, AND
every individual believer. Every Christian is in himself a
temple, “ a temple of God,” as well as a separate or single
stone in the general edifice. He has to build up, on the
foundation of faith, all that is holy in personal character.
“ Other foundation can no man lay,” as the inward basis of
Christian virtue, “ than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.” Religious faith—faith which accepts a personal
Redeemer and a personal redemption—is the support and
groundwork of Christian excellence. That excellence, how-
ever, is reared and perfected by sore labour and slow
degrees. “ Let every man,” therefore, “ take heed how he
buildeth;” —after what model and with what materials.
The aims and purposes, the motives and ends, which
influence the soul, —the walk and conversation, the prac-
tical habitudes that appear in the life, —all that properly
constitutes character, the character of the inward and
the outward man, —this is the building which individual
Christians have to labour to erect. How, it is perfectly
obvious, that there may be great differences in different men
as to the idea they entertain of what they are to do, and the
proper methods by which it is to be done. In the materials
that constitute personal character, as in those that compose
the visible Church, there may be the solid and the durable,
and the chaffy and the worthless. There may be the gold
and silver, the precious stones and resplendent-ornaments of
a Divine virtue; or there may be the wood and hay, the
straw and the stubble of an earthly life. I do not mean
that, by these, respectively, the saint and sinner,—the true
Christian and the hollow hypocrite,—may be distinguished 5
but that an actual and sincerely believing man may be
so ignorant, so careless, so low in his standard, and
so practically inattentive—to his “ high calling,” as either
to be satisfied with what falls far short of religious good-
ness, or intentionally to build his allotted work with
foreign materials and ujxtempered mortar: —not only with-
out being aware of his mistake, —imagining all the time


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
that he is acting consistently with his duty and pro-
fession, —hut, in some cases, actually regarding with high-
est estimation, and accumulating with hugest labour,
what the first spark of the light of eternity will burn to
ashes! Just as it is incumbent, therefore, on the official
builders to take care, in their relation to others, that they
teach nothing but the true, and sanction and encourage
none but the good,—so is it incumbent, on the private Chris-
tian, to take care, in relation to himself, that he do the same ;
—that is, that he have just views of what it is that is to be
built up, on the foundation of his faith, as “ holy living,” and
that he strenuously endeavour to embody and realise this
Divine “ idea,” in the positive habitudes of his daily life.
And still further; —just as in the end, the work of one builder
will “ abide” and he “have a reward,” and that of another
will be “ burnt” and he “ suffer loss,” so also will it be with
individual Christians, according as they may be found, at the
day of reckoning, to have traded with their talents with intel-
ligence and skill, or to have misunderstood, or abused, or
buried them in the earth. When the Lord is revealed at the
last day, the event will be productive of various feelings even
in the circle of the saved themselves! Some will rejoice with
instantaneous exultation, and be “found of Him in peace,
without spot and blameless,” —while others “will be ashamed
before Him at his coming,” awake to apprehension, and be
“ saved as by fire.” Proofs and illustrations of these state-
ments may, however, with more propriety, be adduced after-
wards ; at present, we content ourselves with laying down
the position affirmed, —that the parable of St. Paul respect-
ing ministers, involves in it a general principle applicable to
every individual believer. This is sufficient for our present
purpose; and will be seen, if I mistake not, to be amply
sustained by the teaching of St. Peter. To his standing-
point, and to that side of the subject which he presents to
us, we will now advance.


SALTATION BY FIRE, AND
“If ye do these things ye shall never fall; for so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
“Ifye do these things:’— What things ? The things enume-
rated in the previous verses. Here, then, as in the former
case, we are thrown back on the context, and must attempt
a similar rapid exposition of the Apostle s argument, in order
to bring out the force of his conclusion. The “things”
referred to are the matters contained in the fifth, sixth,
seventh, and eighth verses, which read thus :—“ Giving all
diligence, add to your faith virtue ; and to virtue knowledge ;
and to knowledge temperance ; and to temperance patience ;
and to patience godliness ; and to, godliness brotherly kind-
ness ; and to brotherly kindness charity.” In a few brief
words, we must endeavour to give you an outline of what we
have here, and show you how it connects itself "with the
subject before us.
Begin, then, by noticing, as a sort of preliminary position,
—but which it is essential to the right understanding of the
passage that you should keep in view, —that the Apostle is
addressing Christians ; —persons whom he desciibes, in the
first verse, as those who “ have obtained like precious faith
with us,”—that is, with himself, “ a servant and apostle of
Jesus Christ.” Peter, then, is not “ preaching the Gospel
he is not making known to the ignorant what they have not
heard, or urging on the wicked and impenitent what they
have neglected; he is not proclaiming pardon, mercy, recon-
ciliation, and so on, to the miserable and the lost; he is con-
templating persons of another sort, and doing a different
kind of thing altogether. He assumes that the persons he
addresses are believers, —that they have faith, “like pre-
cious faith” with himself-—they do not need, therefore, to
have the Gospel “ preached” to them, made known, pressed
on their acceptance, or they themselves to be “ besought


SALVATION IN' FULNESS.
and entreated “to be reconciled to God.” They are past all
that. They have heard the Gospel; have believed it; and
are recognised as partakers of that faith in “ the righteous-
ness of God and our Saviour Jesus Christ,” to which, in
Scripture, the justification of the sinner is attached. Hence,
you will observe, they are not exhorted to have faith,—‘-or to
“ add” faith to anything. They have it; and, as having it,
they are exhorted to “ add” to it all the other things that the
Apostle enumerates. That is to say,—to recur to the figure
which has hitherto been before us in Paul’s arguments,- —
faith being laid, in the individual soul, as the “ foundation”
on which a Christian life is to be erected, every believer is
to build upon it the virtues and excellencies of that life.
Each of these is as a separate stone which is to be added to
the structure. All Christians are “builders” here. They
have to do a work for themselves which ministers can only
help them to do, —which none whatever can do for them-
Every one of you must be the real fabricators of your own
character. Let each man, therefore, take heed “how he
buildeth.” The work you are engaged in will one day be
examined. It will be tried and tested; and it will then be
seen whether you have built on “the foundation” of your
“ faith,” “ gold, silver, precious stones,” —or “ wood, hay,
and stubble.”
What those materials are, which will constitute the solid
and the enduring in Christian character, the Apostle goes on
to explain in those verses in which he specifies the attributes
of personal excellence, which Christians, “ with all diligence,”
are to “add to their faith.” Those verses have already
been read. Supposing them to be lying before you, accept
a rapid elucidation of their meaning; and let your eye and
your mind go with us, as we glance over the picture, and
look for a moment at its several parts.
“ Add to your faith, virtue.” Now, this word “ virtue,”
you easily see, cannot be taken here in the sense which it
bears in ordinary use. As a general term, it is employed to


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
designate all excellence; —here, it is only one excellence out
of many. It must stand, therefore, for something distinct
and specific. It does so. It stands, according to the exact
import of the original term, for “ force,” “ energy,” “ manly
strength.” It describes a readiness for action and effort;
the disposition and the power of strenuous achievement.
Faith is a combination of sight and trust; “ the substance of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen it opens
to the reason the beauties and splendours of the Divine and
the Infinite ; and it leads the soul to perfect repose in Omni-
potent Love. The dangers on the side of its exclusive
exercise, are mysticism and indolence:—the indulgence of
Divine contemplation,—as if the mind was made for nothing
but to be absorbed in looking upwards to spiritual truth;
and the indulgence of such trust in God—‘'foreordaining
whatsoever comes to pass” and “ working all things after
the counsel of his own will,” —as renders forethought
unnecessary, and power impossible, and action unim-
portant, and God himself the sole and exclusive agent
in the universe. It may be all very pleasant to get
away from the rough road of daily toil, or from the
anxieties and the struggles of the battle of life, by getting
into some monastic retreat to indulge in the delights of
heavenly meditation, —or by spending hours upon hours
in reading and prayer and religious exercises, leaving
piously, everything to God, —everything belonging to our-
selves or families, society or the Church. Not so; says the
Apostle. Christianity is not a system of spiritual luxury.
it does not preach flight from the world, but conquest. “ This
is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.”
Religion is not to be the business of life, —it is to make all
the business of life religious. Up, then, and be doing. Work.
You can work. God has made you capable of voluntary
action. You are “ partakers of the Divine nature”—of that
nature which originates and plans, wills and accomplishes.
God works in you and with you; but you work; —the voli-


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
lions and the performance are alike yours. “Add,” then,
“to your faith”— force. Be strong. Have manly energy;
and let it he manifested by promptness, and decision, and
resolute action. It may show itself in courage—in profess-
ing the Gospel amid surrounding difficulties or impending
persecution ; or by the invincible determinations of a-strong
will; or by planning and attempting great things; or by
fulfilling the daily duties of life,—the little concerns of your
little sphere,—with conscientious fidelity. “ Whatever thy
hand findeth to do, do it, —do it “ with thy might.” Nay,—
because thou hast faith, have action. He only who believes
greatly, can dare greatly. He, who believes in nothing but
what he sees in the material world, and what he feels of
physical sensations, may consistently lead a poor and ignoble
life. Thou art called “to glory and virtue.” What you believe
respecting your nature, God’s love, Christ’s redemption, the
heavenly inheritance, the harvest of which time and life are
the seed-field, —all this forbids you to be satisfied with any-
thing low, indolent, or mean. It is a great thing to be born
a man; greater still to be re-born, and thus to become a son
of God. “Be ye followers of Him.” “My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work.” That is our prerogative;—ceaseless,
uninterrupted activity. “Be not weary in well-doing.”
“ Quit yourselves like men.” Partakers of “ like precious
faith” with apostles, “ add” to that faith resolution, courage,
energy, like theirs.
“To virtue— knowledge —that is, practical wisdom;
just judgment, intelligence, and discretion to direct force.
Knowledge, here, does not so much mean enlarged appre-
hensions of spiritual truth; the reason, —exalted and purified
by the light floAving and falling upon it from revealed objec-
tive realities, —“comprehending” more and more the mean-
ing of the “ mystery” “ in which are hid,” or deposited, “ all
the treasures of Avisdom and knowledge.” It does not mean
this; but rather the instruction and culture of the under-
standing, which has to do with terrene and tangible matters:


SALVATION BY FIRR, AYD
—*-the proper apprehension of the possible and the right; and
the wise adaptation of means to ends. Strength and force,
resolute purpose and daring energy, are to be presided over
and directed by large knowledge. Without this, with the
best intentions a man may blunder in all he does; may
waste his powers in attempting the impossible, and be dis-
tinguished for nothing but for indiscreet and undiscriminat-
ing zeal. Ignorance is neither the mother of devotion, nor
a skilful and effective doer of work. As contemplation and
action must go together, so also must action and intelli-
gence. “With all thy getting, therefore, get understanding.”
Cultivate, continually, contact and acquaintance Avith all
that is practical and preceptive in Scripture; seek to obtain
clear notions of the Divine will; try to form a just estimate
of your talents and obligations, your station and opportu-
nities ; endeavour to understand the Avants and demands of
the age you live in,—what, at any time is “the present
truth,” and the pressing duty; and, in this Avay, so regulate
the impulses and efforts of your imvard force, that you may
not ultimately labour in vain nor spend your strength for
nought.” By this union of “ energy” and “ wisdom,” stand-
ing together on the basis of “ faith,” there Avill come to be
within you the harmonious co-operation of great powers,
principles and habits; —high aims, true thoughts, sound
judgment, rectitude of purpose, strong impulse, practicable
plan, indomitable perseverance, tact to discern “ time and
opportunity,”—all issuing in a Avise and intelligent course
of action, fruitful in noble deeds, and crowned Avith frequent
success.
So far, for what relates to doing’; —to the energetic dis-
charge of active duty. All that has been hitherto inculcated
might be obeyed by an angel,—by every moral and spiritual
nature in the universe of God. To such “faith” in Him and
his attributes, the principles of his government, the immuta-
bility of his Davs, and the revelations of the future, as is
exercised by innocent and unfallen beings, they have to add


SALVATION- IN FULNESS.
“ force,” and, to force, “ knowledge.” This, indeed, is their
revealed character. They are literally described as “ great
in might,” and emblematically represented “ with the face of
a man,” and as “ full of eyes,” to express their possession of
high intelligence. They are thus capable of wise and wonder-
ful achievements. Men, however, are not angels, though
they are capable of rising to the same sphere of unclouded
thought, divine vigour, and spiritual action. In the mean-
time, they inhabit “ an animal body,” with its acute suscep-
tibilities of pleasure and pain ; —their whole nature dislocated
and disordered, which religion itself only imperfectly and
progressively rectifies, —and hence the propriety of the next
two injunctions, which peculiarly bear on human modes and
manifestations of goodness.
“To knowledge, tempebance : and to temperance,
patience.” These two virtues have relation to life
as a scene of mixed enjoyment and suffering;—enjoy-
ment and suffering, not, of course, with exclusive refer-
ence (or even mdinly) to the physical susceptibilities of
pleasure and pain, but to everything that touches our
wonderful nature at any point—regales the reason, gratifies
sensibility, lacerates the heart, ministers to emotion of any
sort, producing, respectively, agony or rapture. We live in
a world full of the beautiful, —we are surrounded by all that
is calculated to please; there is flowing towards us, on all
sides, much that is adapted to communicate delight; and
there are within and about us, and spread as it were over the
surface of our being, exquisite sensibilities, instincts and
impulses, which gladly inhale this atmosphere of pleasure,
and often leap up to welcome the joy! In respect to all this,
then, we want “ temperance that is, self-government, self-
control ; —a regal power to limit or resist. If, by this power,
affection and emotion are not regulated and restrained, the
two virtues already illustrated will be unattainable, or, if
attained, might be rendered nugatory. A man devoted to
mere enjoyment,—whether of the gross, animal sort, or of
c 17


SALVATION - BY FIRE, AND
refined, voluptuous emotion, sentimental or religious,—will
have little relish for the pursuit of knowledge, moral or intel-
lectual-little anxiety “ to dig for it as for hid treasure,” or
to listen to the lessons of divine wisdom. An abandonment
to mere passive impressions, and these of an indulgent
luxurious sort, saps and destroys all moral strength; wastes
and wears energy of character, or prevents its development;
rendering the man utterly incapable of high aims, resolute
purpose, strength of volition, and perseverance in accom-
plishment. Knowledge being neglected and strength lost,
faith itself, if it was ever possessed, may come to be eclipsed
or extinguished too : it may get faint and weak, or corrupted
and diseased; it may cease to look at the spiritual at all, or
may be perverted and transformed into the instrument or
minister of a licentious religionism ! There is room, then,
you will observe, with respect to every part of our nature, for
the regulating control of this virtue of temperance. Body
and mind must alike be subject to itand the mind in rela-
tion to all its affections, —the human and the divine, —the
heart, the intellect, and the spiritual sensibilities; —for, in
every wuy, without vigilant observation and interference, we
are liable to be seduced and drawn into sin. But the same
nature, and the same constitution of things, that renders
“ temperance” necessary, expose us to that which requires
“patience.” We are surrounded by evil as well as good,
and are called to suffering as well as joy. The one is perhaps
the necessary shadow of the other, in such a world and with
such a nature as ours. We are liable to pain, because of
the kind of pleasure we enjoy; while our susceptibility to
the pangs, and our exposure to the possibility of evil, are
generally in proportion to the richness of our constitutional
structure, and the greatness and number of our providential
possessions,—the one giving acuteness to feelings of all
sorts, and the other presenting a broader mark to the
poisoned arrows of calamity or death. It is not necessary to
enumerate the varieties of human sorrow; —pain, poverty,


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
vicissitude, disappointment, withered hopes, blighted affec-
tions, terrible bereavements, humiliating disease, sudden
desolation, mental anguish, with all the other “ ills that flesh
is heir to,” and with those added that are peculiar to Chris-
tians, or peculiarly felt by religious men. There is nothing
for it but to submit and bear; —or to bear up, and to oppose
to suffering a store of determined, passive force, in the form
of the “ patience” inculcated by the Apostle. Yet, not alto-
gether “ passive” is this virtue at least, not in the sense of
mere dogged, stubborn submission. It is not this; nor is it
indifference, or anything whatever destitute of intelligence,
piety, and love. “ Patience” stands opposed to pride and
insensibility, levity and thoughtlessness, on the one side;
and, on the other, to querulousness and discontent, depression
and despair;—to a man’s feeling exasperated against Provi-
dence, or even against himself. “My son, despise not thou
the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art
rebuked of Him.” Feel, when thou art under the Divine
hand—or give way to feeling—neither too little nor too
much. God is serious in inflicting the evil; by thee, there-
fore, it ought to be seriously and thoughtfully received. But,
“He does not afflict willingly,” nor willingly “ grieve the
children of men —“ He does it for our profit—and, there-
fore, “ lift up the hands that hang down,” and “ let not your
heart be troubled—despair not, “ prisoner of hope;” trouble
may “ continue for a night, joy will come in the morning.”
“ Light is sown for the righteous in darkness.” In this way,
“patience is to have its perfect work,” —a patience wise,
trusting, filial. Cheer up, my burdened brother. A little
longer, and thou shalt rest. In the meantime, toil away.
Bear bravely what God appoints,—take quietly what thy
sins deserve. “ Even Christ pleased not himself.” “He also
suffered.” Thou, too, mayest be “ perfected by suffering,”
and find hereafter that thy “ light afflictions, which are but
for a moment, work out a far more exceeding, even an
eternal weight of glory.” “I reckon that the sufferings of
c 2 19


SALVATION BY BIKE, AND
this present time are not worthy to be compared to the
glory that shall he revealed in ns.”
“ And to patience, godliness.” At first sight, the men-
tioning of this virtue just at this place seems hardly natural.
In looking at the order in which the different attributes of
character are named, and in looking for the reasons on
which that order itself rests, one is rather surprised to find
“godliness” put where it is. For a moment, it appears to
us as if it would have come better at the beginning or at
the end of the entire series; and the question occurs,
whether, indeed, it is not included in that “ faith,” which
lies at the basis of the spiritual structure. I am much mis-
taken, however, if both these primary impressions may not
he rightly put aside, and their place taken by second and
sounder thoughts. “ Godliness” and “ faith” are not iden-
tical ; and though, in a certain general sense, the one may
he said to he included in the other, seeing that “ godliness”
cannot exist without “ faith,” yet they are not so involved as
to preclude their being clearly separated and distinguished,
and placed, if needs he, with some space between them in a
series like this. Faith is godliness in its principle, as light
in the reason ; —godliness is faith in its actings, as love in
the heart. The one flows from, and is the utterance and
development of the other. Godliness is faith alive; and
not only alive but active ;—not only looking and thinking,
hut feeling, speaking, doing, and thus infusing into all out-
ward and visible performance, a moral element that makes
virtue holiness. Now, on this account it is, that I think
there is great propriety, nay, beauty and emphasis, in
“godliness” being introduced after the mention of “tem-
perance” and “ patience,” and in its having to be carefully
connected with these. “Temperance” and “patience” are
forms of virtue to be met with often in worldly men, and
which spiritual men are in danger of displaying on mere
natural principles. Self-denial, self-government, and self-
restraint, —brave, calm bearing of evil, patient submission


SALTATION - IN' FULNESS.
to what is inevitable, —these things are, in some sort, but
the ordinary attributes of manly virtue. A proud feeling
may swell the heart, as an individual is conscious of the one
or the other; and mere secular motives, —motives originat-
ing and terminating in self, —may lie snugly at the bottom
of both. The stoics of old, —-philosophers, soldiers, states-
men, —did, as a part of their philosophy, cultivate these
virtues; and a poet of our own day, reasoning on purely
natural principles, says, or sings,—
“ Unless above himself he can
Erect himself,— how poor a thing is man 1 ”
Fearing, then, we may almost suppose, that Christians might
learn to be temperate and patient, rather as taught by
worldly philosophy than as actuated by Divine faith; —
rather as men that properly respected their own nature,
than as religious men who reverently regarded the Supreme
will—‘the Apostle interposed the idea of “ godliness,” just
where it stands, to suggest the importance of all virtue, as
displayed by the Church, being filled and animated by a
spiritual principle, and especially those particular manifes-
tations which, in outward seeming, men of the world can
so closely approach.
The circle of duty seems to he getting complete.
“ Energy” and “ knowledge,”—motive force and practical
wisdom; —“temperance” and “patience.”—masterhood of
self in two noble forms ; —-these elements of heroic action,
of regulated joy and uncomplaining endurance, based on
“ faith ” and beautified by “ godliness,” would seem to
make provision for almost all the excellence that can be
demanded of humanity. • The individual builder, who has
“ built himself up on his most holy faith” thus far, has surely
succeeded in erecting an edifice that must be shaping itself
into something like completeness! It is rising rapidly, let
it be admitted, and is putting on the appearance of a well-
proportioned and ample structure ; but it "wants something
yet—and something important—to finish and perfect it. It


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
might not, I think, he extravagant to say, that all that has
been mentioned might, in some degree, he required of an
individual if he were living in the world alone. Take Adam
before the formation of Eve; —think of him as a mature
moral intelligence, existing as an isolated, solitary man ;
and suppose that that state of his had been greatly extended;
—it is true, that there are many forms of life and action
possible to us, of which he would have been incapable,
but, in principle, “ faith” and “energy,” “knowledge and
“ temperance,” “ patience” and “ godliness,” might all have
been exercised, and have been “ knit together into the
fabric of his personal virtue. But men are not living alone,
now. Goodness in us, is not only to be divine and personal,
but is especially to have a social and human aspect. We
are not solitary, either as belonging to the general race, or
as standing within the sacred limits of the Church, dhe
Apostle, therefore, having inculcated the principle of “ god-
liness” to purify and elevate all mundane virtues, proceeds
to show how that same principle may find for itself issue
and utterance more directly divine. “ Your heart,” he
seems to say, “ having been lifted up by what I have
enforced, and by what you have done; —lifted up to the
high heavens, and laid, as it were, in filial trust, close, for a
while, to the heart of God; —out of that infinite fount of
love, let it drink in all that it can, according to its power
and capacity of reception, and then, when it returns again
to this lower sphere, let that love, with which it is thus
laden, come forth in two streams —let one flow into the
Church, and* find its proper direction there; and let the
other flow the world over, —visiting, in its various gush-
ings and wanderings, men of every clime, colour, and con-
dition, —of all lands and of all languages !” “To godliness,
brotherly kindness ; and to brotherly kindness, charity.
“ Brotherly kindness” is the love of the brotherhood,—
“the household of faith.” It is the fraternal or family
affection of Christianity, which unites together, or ought to


SALVATION IK FULNESS.
Unite, all those who profess to regard themselves as “ heirs
together of the grace of life.” Christians are represented as
the “ sons and daughters of God Almighty—as “ members
one of another; —-as, “in the Lord,” “ brothers” and
“ sisters;” —-as united in Him from whom “ the whole family
in heaven and in earth is named;” —as constituting his
Body, and as so pervaded by a common consciousness
and a common sentiment, that “ if one member suffer, all
the others suffer with it, and if one member he honoured,
all the others rejoice with it.” The feeling that comes
next to the love of God is, or ought to be, the love of God-
like men. This is expected in the Church as a natural
result; it is inculcated upon it as a primary duty. “In
Christ, so far as thorough interest and sympathy are con-
cerned, natural and artificial distinctions are superseded;
“ there is neither Jew nor Greek, circumcision or uncircum-
cision, barbarian, Scythian, bond or free; but Christ is all
mid in all. He makes each like the other, by making all
like Himself. He requires, therefore, mutual recognition
and love ; -family-love where there is family-likeness. “By
this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love
one another. ’ “We know that we have passed from death
unto life, because we love the brethren.” “He that loveth
not his brother abideth in death.” “If a man love not his
brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he
hath not seen ?” “ Let him that saith he loves God, see to
it that he love his brother also.” “ Brotherly kindness”
may be shown by solicitude for union among all Christians ;
the mutual recognition and intercommunion of churches;
and by earnest endeavour to help forward whatever seems
likely to secure such result. In private intercourse, it is to
be shown by little, rather than by great, things,—by what
is the spontaneous outcome of habitual feeling, rather than
by acts which are done from a sense of remembered duty.
It is to make itself felt as a perpetual presence;—a thing
cheerful and genial as light, but which is not thought of,


SALVATIOK BY FIRE, AXD
noticed, or spoken about, unless something should suddenly
disturb or interrupt it, like a dark cloud deforming the day.
“ Brotherly kindness” is the “ charity” of St. Paul. It is
the “ love,” that “ suffers long and is kindthat is desti-
tute of envy, vanity, and pride ; that is not selfish, sus-
picious, or petulant; and that will remain and be honoured
when the most coveted and splendid gifts and distinctions
shall have passed away. It will show itself great by small
services, by sincere respect, by unaffected courtesy, by little
attentions, by readiness to help, by true sympathy and solid
assistance, by charitable judgments, by candid construction
of motive and purpose, by loving speech,—and often by still
more loving silence! It has a heart “to devise liberal
things,”—and a hand to accomplish,—and a tongue to
encourage ; —service for many and intercessions for all.
“And to brotherly kindness, charity.” Charity here
signifies “ philanthropy,”—universal love; the love of
humanity, of all mankind, as distinct from, or additional to,
the peculiar domestic affection of the Church. Lest “ the
love of the brotherhood” should degenerate into a selfish
and sectarian thing; a narrow, exclusive, unamiable senti-
ment ; the Apostle directs that it is to flow beyond the walls
of-the sacred enclosure, or rather to have added to it another
sentiment that will do this, and that thus the Christian is to
acknowledge in every man one that has claims on his soul
and service. This love towards men, —of men, as men, the
entire race, as it exists immediately in the neighbourhood
of the Church, or fills “ the habitable parts of the earth” in
all lands, —is not, as a Christian sentiment, to be a bit of
barren though beautiful idealism, —a vague, philosophic
glow of “ fraternity,”—a feeling that utters itself in no
deeds of valiant endeavour to better the world, but only in
grand, eloquent talk, —talk, too, it may be, about anything
but men’s highest interests, or even in flat contravention of
such. It is not to be this; but a really deep, earnest,
intense thing, as to its nature ; and a real, effective doer of


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
work, as to its expression. Observe how the Apostle would
seem to teach that his own burning love for his friends was
to be the model and measure of theirs for mankind! “ The
Lord make you to increase and abound in love, one towards
another, and towards all men , even as we do towards
you.” Remember the high standard of the Master when he
would inculcate universal benevolence; —not only saying
“ Go and do likewise” when he had illustrated the “ philan-
thropy” of the good Samaritan; but telling his disciples of
the love of Him, “ who makes his sun to shine on the evil
and on the good, and his rain to descend on the just and on
the unjust,” and then adding, in relation to this, “Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father in heaven is perfect .”
Christian “ philanthropy ” is to be like “ the kindness and
philanthropy of God our Saviour;”* a philanthropy that
compassionates the worst miseries, would lovingly accom-
plish the highest service, and spares not expense to secure
the result. “ God so loved the world as to give his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not
perish, but have everlasting life.” “He spared not his own
Son, but freely gave Him up for us all.” “ God, our Saviour,
will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the know-
ledge of the truth ;” for “ Christ gave himself a ransom for
all, to be manifested in due time.” In consistency with all
this, we have, —in addition.to those benevolent injunctions
which bear on the charities of the present life, —the
“ clothing the naked,” “ feeding the hungry,” “ visiting”
“ the widow,” “ the fatherless,” and the “ sick,” “ giving to
him that needeth,” and extending help of all sorts, as to
physical things, to every human being that may require it, —
recognising him as a “ neighbour,” and admitting the claims
of a common humanity;—in addition, I say, to all this, we
have the constant inculcation of both prayer and effort for
the conversion of the world, —the spiritual good of the people
* Titus iii. 4. Philanthropia, [Gb.] rendered "love, [of God our
Saviour] toward man,”
d 25


SALVATION BY FIRE, AJ»T)
we live amongst, and the salvation of all that are afar off.
“Be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation,”
among whom, “ shine ye, as lights in the world, holding
forth the word of truth." “ I exhort, therefore, that, first of
all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, giving of thanks,
he made for all men." —“ Finally, brethren, pray for us, that
the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified,
even as it is with you.” “ Love the brotherhood; — honour
all men:" —Recognise, everywhere, in every individual
member of the race, the partaker of a nature the same as
thine own. “ For him," too, “ Christ died.” “ God has made
man great, by setting his love upon him.” Value and
reverence, then, — love and serve, —maH, as man, the world
over. “ Herein is love, not that we loTed God, but that He
loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins.” And “He is the propitiation, not for our sins only,
but also for the sins of the whole world.” Love, then, as
God loveth ; —think of men as He thought; let them all
know what He did, and what Christ is doing ;—Christ, the
righteous “ Advocate,” who, “ because He ever liveth to
make intercession, can save to the uttermost all that come
unto God by Him.” Try to contribute to His predicted
“ satisfaction,” —for He is “ to see of the travail of his soul,
and to be satisfied.” If it be possible, let “ every man,” at
last, be “ presented perfect in Christ Jesus;” or, if not,
endeavour, at all events, to “ save some.” “To godliness,
brotherly kindness ; and to brotherly kindness, charity.”
Such is the edifice, which every individual Christian, as a
wise, diligent and honest workman, is to build up on the
“ foundation” of his “ faith.” It is wonderfully comprehen-
sive, and exquisitely beautiful, this enumeration of virtues,
—this catalogue of the materials, which, being put together
according to rule, shall stand forth a noble, symmetrical,
divine thing;—a thing, so to speak, that shall seem a fitting
abode for a heavenly inhabitant, the becoming embodiment


of a divine life. The series, you will observe, begins with
“ faith,” and ends with “ loveit thus touches, at one
extremity, all that is revealed of God and the infinite; and,
on the other, all that belongs to the world and man; while,
between the two, are placed in their order whatever can be
required for practical goodness—for the various utterances
of a manifold virtue ; —for the personal and the relative, the
active and the passive, the divine and the human. These,
then, are “ the gold, silver, and precious stones,” with which
Christians are to construct what they build on their faith in
the form of character. There is nothing of “ wood, hay, and
stubble,” —chaff and refuse, —here. Hence you are prepared
for the further announcement, that, in the end, there will
be nothing about those who thus build of “ salvation by
fire.” Salvation by fire! salvation with difficulty! salva-
tion after something like terror and tears ! No :—“ if ye
do these things, ye shall never fall; for so an entrance
shall be ministered to you abundantly into the ever-
lasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.”
The “ add” in the fifth verse, and “ ministered” in the
eleventh, are both parts of the same verb ; as if it were said,
“add” to your faith these virtues, in this world, and God
will “ add” to them, —or to you because of them, —“ an
abundant entrance” into that which is to come. Or, as the
word has an allusion to the joining together, and the leading
up, in majestic order and beautiful harmony, of those who
constitute a chorus or dance, the idea expressed might be
thus rendered :—Be careful, to cultivate and display, and to
lead forth, as with constant gladness, in harmonious order,
in all their becoming grace and beauty, those virtues that
are to attend upon and adorn a religious life; and, at the
close of thy course, thou shalt be met by an angelic choir,
who shall hail thy approach to the divine land with ready
gratulation; who shall gather about thee as an attendant
company of heavenly forms; —while all those that sur-
rounded thee on earth (the Christian graces) shall go with


SALVATION' BT FIRE, AN©
thee, —a radiant train of glorious associates; —thus shalt
thou “ enter into the joy of thy Lord,” —with choral sym-
phonies and solemn pomp,—as one whom He shall “ delight
to honour!”—Or you may take another illustration from a
vessel returning after a long voyage, and being received and
welcomed by expectant friends. She has been, let us sup-
pose, absent for years ; —has been toiling and trafficking in
every sea ;—touching at the ports and trading in the markets
of many lands: she is approaching, at last, her “ desired
haven”—the harbour from which she set out, —whence
loving thoughts went with her as she started on her perilous
way, and where anxious hearts are now wishing and waiting
for her return. She is descried in the distance: —'the news
spreads; all is excitement; multitudes assemble ; pier and
quay, beach and bank, are crowded with spectators, as the
little craft pushes on, and every moment nears her destina-
tion. There she is!—worn and weather-beaten, it is true ;
covered with the indications of sore travail and long service,
and with many signs of her having encountered both battle
and breeze. But all is safe. Her goodly freight is secure
and uninjured; her profits have been large ; the merchandize
she brings is both rare and rich. She is coming along over
a sunny sea, —leaping and dancing as if she were alive.
Her crew are on the deck, and with straining eyes and pal-
pitating hearts are looking towards the shore. A soft wind
swells the sails; the blue heavens arc bending over the
barque as if smiling on her course, while the very waves
seem to run before her, turning themselves about as with
conscious joy, clapping their hands and murmuring a wel-
come !—How she bounds forward! She is over the bar!
She is gliding now in smooth water; is passing into port;
and is preparing to moor and drop her anchor for the last
time!—While she does so, there comes a shout from the
assembled spectators —the crowds that witness and welcome
her approach—loud as thunder, musical as the sea! Glad-
ness and greeting are on every hand. Eloquent voices fill


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
the air. The vessel has received “an abundant entrance ;”
her crew have been met with sympathetic congratulations
—are surrounded by eager and glad friends—hailed with
enthusiasm, embraced with rapture, and accompanied to
their home with shouting and songs!—How different it
would have been had she come in a wreck! or had she
struck on a rock, lost her cargo, and her crew have been
saved with difficulty and peril, only getting to shore “ on
masts and broken pieces of the ship,” and reaching home
naked and destitute, —with life in them, but nothing more!
—And all this, as the result and consequence of some grave
neglect—some ignorance or incapacity, carelessness or pre-
sumption, which attached to them hlame on account of the
disaster. Even in this case, indeed, they would have reasons
for gratitude,—deep gratitude that they were saved at all.
Stripped as they were, their friends would welcome them,
with love and joy; but pity and sadness would mingle
with that welcome; congratulation itself would sound like
rebuke, or seem undeserved; and the poor mariners would
require time to be reconciled to themselves. Such a differ-
ence, we are justified in thinking, may exist, at last, in the
circumstances and feelings of the “ saved’’ from among men.
There is “ salvation in fulness”—and there is “ salvation by
fire.” There is the “ abundant entrance” into the kingdom
of God; and there is the getting in with something like
“difficulty,” One man may be conducted to his “joy and
crown” through thronging multitudes, amid outstretched
hands and reverberating hosannahs, and along the great
public thoroughfares of the city; while another shall
advance with hesitating step; be glad to get an entrance
without observation ; be met by no congratulating crowds;
creep stealthily through some unfrequented street to his
undistinguished abode ; —tremulous with a thankful though
shaded joy that he is saved at all! “ Therefore, my beloved
brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your
29


SALVATION - BY FIRE, AND
labour shall not be in vain in the Lord.” But “ every man’s
work shall be made manifest of what sort it is. It shall be
revealed by fire, —for the fire shall try every man’s work.”
“If a man’s work abide, he shall have a reward.” “If a
man’s work be burned, he shall suffer loss.” “ The Lord is
at hand.” “ Let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but
in deed and in truth;” that “we may assure our hearts
before Himand that, “ love being made perfect, we may
have boldness in the day of judgment;” otherwise, not
“ being found of Him in peace,” we may have to be
“ashamed before Him. at his coming.” “Well done, good
and faithful servant, —.thou shalt be ruler over ten cities.”
—Mistaken man! who didst labour abortively in all thou
didst; — thy work must be “burnt;” “thou must suffer
loss ;” but “ thou thyself shalt be saved,” yet—“ so as by
fire.”
Having now completed the exposition of the subject,
according to the two sides of it which the two Apostles
respectively disclose, I shall draw towards the conclusion of
the whole matter by enumerating some of the things which
the views we have illustrated should suggest or enforce.
1. In the first place, you should admit, I think, and
impress upon your souls, that what we have advanced must be
true, —first impressions to the contrary, or doubts and difficul-
ties from other quarters notwithstanding. That such doubts
and difficulties may be felt by many, we have no wish to con-
ceal. We have put the subject, in both its aspects, rather more
strongly perhaps than is usual, though not more so, most
assuredly, than the plain meaning of the Word warrants.
Yery possibly, however, some who have never thought of
anything but “justification by faith,” “eternal life,” as
“ the gift of God,” and correlative subjects, may be startled
and scandalised by what, at first sight, may seem to be
contrary to their views of truth, or out of harmony with


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
tlieir habits of feeling. But, if the passages I have expounded
do not mean what they say (which is all I have brought out
of them), what do they mean ? If they mean what they
say, that meaning is a truth; as such, it must be in har-
mony with all other truth, whether we can perceive that
harmony or not; and, with the like condition, simply as a
separate piece of truth, it is practically binding on the con-
science of the Church. I firmly believe in justification by
faith, —in the pardon of the sinner on the ground, exclu-
sively, of Christ’s glorious redemptive act. A thing, this,
purely gratuitous ; in itself incapable of degrees; admitting,
therefore, of no modification in different individuals in con-
sequences of differences in them, but conferred upon all
alike, in virtue of their union by faith with Him whose
work is the Divine reason for the blessing being bestowed
at all. There is no doubt about all this; but depend upon
it, whether you can see it or not, there is a harmony
between this justification by faith, and a judgment by
works; and—whether you have yet found it or not, —there
is a principle, somewhere, on which that harmony can be
demonstrated. In some way or other, there is “ a prize” of
our high calling, as well as “a gift” of God “through
Jesus Christ.” There is “a crown,” in relation to which
some may “so run” as to “obtain,”—and some so, that
another shall “ take” it. There is a being saved—and
nothing more ; saved because on the foundation ; saved, as
it were, with difficulty, like “ a brand plucked from the
burning;” that is,—“ so as by fire and there is a being
saved “abundantly;” saved —and something more; saved
and distinguished,—distinguished, because to the foundation
has been “ added” that which the Master will delight to
recognise and honour.
It may not be easy to understand this. It may be diffi-
cult to reconcile the second thing with the first, or with
much that would appear to be the teaching of Scripture.
How different, it may be said, —how much more comforting,


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
—the parable of Christ in which he illustrates the grace and
sovereignty of the Lord of the vineyard! He who can “do
what he will with his own,” is there represented as giving
the very same reward to those who had served only one
hour, as to those who had gone’ through the toil of twelve,
and had “ borne the burden and heat of the day.” Very
true. Let me warn you, however, that going to the parables
is rather dangerous, unless you are accompanied by a well-
instructed and trustworthy guide. You will find in them,
I am afraid, far more that it will be difficult for you to
reconcile with the popular idea of gratuitous justification,
than what will illustrate it; and far more, certainly, corro-
borating and confirming, than appearing to oppose, the doc-
trine of this discourse. I quite admit, that the parable of
the “ penny” does, at first sight, seem to oppose it. But
that of the “ talents/’ of “ the faithful and wise steward,”
“ the unjust steward,” and several others, directly sustain
us. The fact is, no parable is meant to teach everything.
Even as a whole, the parables are not intended to reveal
the Gospel, properly so called; while, as to some views
which have often been associated with it, as if belonging to
its very essence, the pith and point of certain of the parables
are dead against them. Look at that of the unforgiving
servant. His debt is freely remitted by his Lord, —answer-
ing to gratuitous justification ; he goes forth exulting in the
consciousness of his new condition—“ the grace in which he
stands,” and in which he is permitted to “rejoice;”—but,
acting inconsistently with it, he is summoned again to the
august presence ; his pardon is revoked; it is abrogated and
annulled; his Lord recalls the benefit conferred; unjustifies
him, so to speak; reimposes the debt, and orders him “to
be delivered to the tormentors till he has paid the utter-
most farthing!” How, I am not going to discuss this
subject at present, nor to expound my views of the prin-
ciple on which the parables must be explained to make
them perfectly tally with Evangelical teaching; but spch a


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
principle there no doubt is, whether we have succeeded in
finding it or not. So, in relation to our previous remarks,
we have only to repeat, that, whether or not you see the
harmony between the views we have advocated and the
admitted doctrine of justification by faith, you must con-
clude that there is such harmony,—that there cannot but
be a principle somewhere that reconciles the two things
together;—for, that the views advanced are expressly
taught in the passages before us, is a thing that admits of
no denial; being taught,—taught by inspired, apostolic
men, —they are true ; as true, they must be in unison with all
other truth ; and, in common with everything else that is a
part of truth—God’s truth—-they are binding alike on our
reason and our consciencehave a right to a place in our
system of belief, and a right to rule in our daily habits with
whatever practical force there may be in them.
The fact is, that different churches, and different schools
of theology, are in danger of holding their characteristic
principles in a way that exaggerates them; —they are not
seen in their proper dimensions, from not being looked at
in their just relations to other truths. Revivals and Refor-
mations have too frequently been merely reactions against
particular errors or prominent abuses. They have led often,
and very naturally, to people running to the opposite extreme
of what they saw to be wrong,—as if they were then sure to
be right. While restoring and establishing a lost truth,
men get so exasperated against the error they oppose, that
they lose sight of some other truth of which that error may
be an exaggeration. Popery was a great mechanical appa*
ratus for the formal manufacture of Christian people.
Ritually infusing spiritual life; sustaining and regulating,
purifying and advancing, it by various devices, all empirical;
always contemplating its masses and myriads as Christians,
—their virtues as Christian virtues, —their failures as
spiritual defects, —They and them, therefore, to be ail con-
templated and treated in this light, both in the present
e 33


SALVATION BY FIRE, AYU
vrorld and another, —a vast system of error was the conse-
quence, developed at last into impudence and fraud. Against
this, the Reformation protested; and, on one side, took the
shape of the re-assertion of the doctrine of justification hy
faith, opposing this to priestly ritualisms, to secular
morality, to desert and merit in every form. In doing this,
it is not to be denied, there was a danger that the Reforma-
tion should lose sight of what was a truth, — the sinner's
justification hy faith, notwithstanding, —namely, the Chris-
tian life of the justified man ; the relation of that life to the
rewards of eternity; the intrinsic and recognised value of
its virtues, as contrasted with the worthlessness of “ works
of law” done with a view to justification itself. The danger,
it must be confessed, was not wholly escaped, nor have the
consequences been slight or few. An almost exclusive
attention has been given to one thing (a great truth), to the
forgetfulness of another thing (equally a truth). Hence the
difficulty we all feel in tolerating certain ideas and expres-
sions, which, nevertheless, are simply the utterance of “ the
mind of the Spirit,” on the worth and the rcwardableness of
that virtue which is the outflow and actings of a real,
healthy, divine life. It may be difficult, but depend upon it,
it is not impossible, to find some ground of reconciliation
between the doctrine of justification by faith, and that
portion of truth which underlay the error against which we
embodied our protest, in the revival and re-assertion of
“ the doctrine of a standing or falling Church.”
2. After expounding the parable respecting the builders,
we advanced the statement, that, though it referred primarily
to official persons, it involved a principle applicable to the
entire Christian community. We reiterate this. We would
now, also, especially observe, that, in respect to “ salvation
by fire,” there must be a sense in which the subject should
bear upon and admonish us all. There can be no doubt
that a great many professing Christians are neither more nor
less than stuffed figures. They may make a great show, be


SALVATION' IN FULNESS.
of large dimensions, and have even much repute,—and yet
they may only be pieces of manufacture, —things “made
with hands,” —very well proportioned to the eye of the
observer, skilfully coloured, artistically dressed, and mechani-
cally moved! Such people are nothing hut “ wood, hay, and
stubble they are composed entirely of base materials, and
are destined to vanish into smoke and blackness, when
“ fearfulness shall seize the hypocrites,” and “ fire” shall
purge the Church. Others, again, are true men, —with a
real, throbbing, spiritual life in thetn, —who, as guilty,
‘‘ have fled for refuge to the hope set before them,” who,
through their faith, are on the foundation, and from it, and
because of it, are, as sinners, “ looking for the mercy of the
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.” Very good this, —as
far as it goes. Unfortunately, a great many never get much
farther. They get to the foundation, —“ other than which
no man can lay,”—which is “Jesus Christ;” the faith which
unites them to Him, is a foundation in themselves, on
which is to be built the beautiful fabric of the Christian
virtues ; but they build nothing upon it at all, —or nothing
but “ wood, hay, and stubble ;” —or the materials of their
character are so heterogeneous, that it appears to consist of
a strange mixture of the valuable and the worthless. Chris-
tian professors, Avith enormous means, do nothing! Avith
great influence, they neA T er exert it for great ends! Avith
talents for service, they let them lie unimproved; or, having
only one talent, they bury and conceal it because they have
not ten! What strange practical inconsistencies are to be
seen on all sides! What questionable conformity to the
Avorld! What subjection to fashion! What luxury and
display! What liberties of speech! What keenness in
business, —so very nigh to taking an advantage—imposing
upon ignorance, or overreaching the unwary! What clutch-
ing, and covetousness, and hardness of heart! What terrible
justice in some people! In others, Asdiat explosions of
temper! In most, what a want of harmony and entireness ;
d 2, 35


SALVATION BY FIRE, AJTD
and in many, at times, what strange apparitions of even the
old animal life! —Yet, along with all these diversities of
defect, or in connection with most of them, there shall he
unquestionable proofs of the men having a firm standing on
“ the foundation and there shall be manifest in the entire
structure of their habits, several portions of solid masonry,
and, mixed with the mud and rubble they put into it, a
good many valuable and precious things !
Now, what is to be done with such people? It is no use
their going to heaveiTas they are. There will be no admit-
tance into the upper world for their mere lath and plaster
embodiment of the Divine ; and when that portion of them-
selves is destroyed, what will there be left? It must be
destroyed, for instead of a “ meetness,” it is a disqualifica-
tion, “for the inheritance of the saints in light.” How,
then, is it to be got rid of? Is there a purgatory, through
which they can pass on their path to Paradise, and have
their earthly accretions burnt out before they appear in the
world of light ? I don’t think there is. It is not, however,
so unnatural an idea that there may be such a place, for
something of the sort would really seem to be sadly wanted!
Purgatory, you will remember, is for the good. That is, the
proper idea of the place. The word itself involves this.
You may destroy what is worthless, or you may transform
it; you can only purge what is in substance valuable. The
bad, then, are consigned to simple punishment,—punishment
of such a nature that it is itself an end, having no object
beyond itself; the imperfectly good are subjected to a severe
disciplinary process, to be purged from the adhesions and
stains of sin that cling to them to the last, and unfit them
for the immediate presence of Hod. This is the Popish
notion of Purgatory. I don’t believe in it. I don’t believe
that Scripture reveals to us such a third world. At the
same time, as I have already admitted, (and I care not what
advantage may be taken of the admission,) I do not think
the idea so very unnatural; and I further confess, that Ido


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
not see hoiv many Christians are to get into heaven, or how
they could enjoy themselves in it if they did, without under-
going, some time, and some where, such a process as the
purgatorial idea embodies and represents. Even at the last
day, when Christ is revealed, and when some of his people
are “ ashamed before Him,” —in a very brief space of time
—in “the twinkling of an eye,” in accordance with the
rapidity of some mental processes—it may be, that they
shall have such a sight of the past, and suffer so much, and
be so corrected in their views and feelings by the revelations
and the experience of that moment, as to be thus relieved from
“ the wood, hay, and stubble” that are in them, and find
themselves “ saved,” though it may be “as by fire.” But,
however this may be, —and I offer respecting it no positive
opinion,—l am quite sure that, in general, God provides fer-
tile inconsistent, and for the worser sorts of the imperfectly
good, a very severe purgatory here. The whole of the dis-
ciplinary chastisement of his providence is of this nature.
Trials and afflictions which at once test the character and
improve the man, are like a purifying fire, out of which he
who suffers may ultimately emerge as “ gold refined.” By
means of these, there is often a fearful conflagration in the
soul, —a burning up of the straw and refuse which Chris-
tians have foolishly wrought into their character, from the
destruction of which they come forth sadder, it may be, but
wiser men.
The constant phraseology—the almost unvaried imagery
—of Scripture respecting the Divine chastisement of the
good,—corroborates these remarks. Even in this world
there is a difference between corrective discipline and con-
dign punishment. The impenitent are “ punished;” the
wicked are “ destroyedthey are “ overthrown as in a
moment”—they are utterly “ consumed with terrors ;” or,
they are “ let alone;” they “ have their portion in this
life;” they “ have no bands in their death;” yet, “in the
sanctuary of God men may consider their end,” and uuder-


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
stand how they were “ set in slippery places.” But “ whom
the Lord loveth he chasteneth “ now, no chastening for
the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous ; neverthe-
less afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteous-
ness to them that are exercised therebyit is “ for our
profit, that we may be made partakers of his holiness.”
“ The fining-pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, but the
Lord trieth the hearts.” “He shall sit as a refiner and a
purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and
purge them as gold and silver” is purged, “ that they may
offer unto God an offering in righteousness.” “ Think it
not strange respecting the fiery trial that is to try you.”
“Now, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold
temptations, that the trial of your faith, being much more
precious than of gold which perisheth, though it be tried
with fire, may be found unto praise and honour and glory
at the appearing of Jesus Christ .” “ Blessed is the man
that endureth temptation: for when he is tried he shall
receive the crown of life which God hath prepared for them
that love him.” The very worst judgments inflicted upon
the Church, —the fires kindled among the people at Corinth
in consequence of their unworthiness, their almost impious
desecration of sacred things,—are represented as of a purga,
five and reformatory character. “ For this cause, many are
Weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.” But, “if we
would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.” If we
would ourselves pull down or burn out “ the hay and the
stubble” we have built on the foundation, —or, still better,
not use it at all,—-we should not need the hand of God to
destroy it. “ But when we are judged, we are chastened of
the Lord that we may not he condemned with the world.’’
Now it is not to be denied that this Divine interposition
may be deferred till near the close of life. The purgative
“judgment” may not be designed to send the man back into
the world again, that he may there show, by “ the beauties
of holiness,” how God has “ purely purged away his dross,


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
and taken away all his alloy,” but be just intended to secure
his safety, that he may not he “ condemned” with the lost.
Many a proud, secular, self-willed, ill-regulated Christian, is
suffered to go through an outwardly prosperous career, and
to get towards the end of it, without having suffered what
might humble and purify him. But it may come at last,
ihere is many a one amongst us respecting whom the wise
and thoughtful will sometimes say—“ If that man be what
I believe he is,—one with * the root of the matter in him,’
then, if there be truth in the Bible, or a God in heaven, he
v ill not be suffered to die, till by some terrible purgation he
is freed from the sins that have disfigured his course, and
have so long darkened his Christian profession;—till, by
the blazing up of some internal fire, that shall consume the
rubbish he has been gathering for years, he get such an
astounding revelation of himself, as shall operate upon him
like a second conversion, and fit him for the society of the
upper world;—in which world, as a publicly recognised
member of Christ, he must learn to be something very dif-
fer ent from what he has been here.” And thus it has often
been. In a single week, —in a few hours, it may be, —men
have gone through a little eternity of anguish! Light has
penetrated the mind, and fire has fallen on the heart. The
hay and stubble have been burnt up. The process has
been exceedingly dreadful; but it has had its effect. The
man has been reduced to his proper dimensions, and has
been made to see and to know himself. He has had to groan
for a time amid smoke and darkness, preyed upon by remorse
and agitated by terror. Things have at length cleared about
him,—he has ventured to hope,—and has died hoping, but
nothing more,—in some cases, hardly that! He has° been
“ saved,”—but “soas by fire.” Partial relatives and inex-
perienced observers have been scandalised or astonished at
what has been seen. Wiser men have looked on without
surprise, even thankful and glad, accepting the judgment as
a sign of sonship, and feeling that the real wonder would


SALVATION' BY TIRE, AND
have been, if the erring man had been suffered to die without
experiencing all that he endured!
3, In reflecting on the present subject, you must guard
against mistake. Observe, then, in the next place, that,
with respect to the honours and rewards of those who shall
obtain the “ abundant entrance,” it is not to be supposed
that they can be, in their nature, anything external. They
cannot be conferred except on the worthy. They can only
be worn by those that win them. The words of our Lord to
the two ambitious disciples, express, not so much limitation
of power, as the law of propriety. “To sit on my right
hand and on my left is not mine to give, except to them for
whom it is prepared,” —’those, of course, who are prepared
for it. Whatever the glory may be that shall invest the
loftier orders in the world of light, it will be something that
shall flow, as by natural sequence, from the previous
spiritual condition of their minds. Omnipotence has its
limits. It cannot do what is physically impossible ; —even
in cases where physical impossibility does not exist, it may
still be limited from the moral necessity of its actings being
regulated by higher laws. Hence, mere power could not,
perhaps, confer heavenly distinctions on minds to whom
they would be uncongenial; or, as wielded by wisdom, it
would not \ —or would not, if it could, employ itself in
creating such congeniality. The same law will rule in
heaven that we recognise here,—the law that makes it
impossible to enjoy any outward, conspicuous honour, that
does not harmonise with the soul’s internal consciousness.
Nothing is more painful than praise secretly felt to be unde-
served. Gratuitous forgiveness, with whatever that of itself
involves, can be gladly and gratefully accepted by the sinful,
because it is given to and received by them as such. But to
be hailed and welcomed with a “ well done, good and faithful
servant,” would be felt to be a mockery, if goodness and
fidelity had not been previously cultivated and displayed,
To any one burdened by an opposite consciousness, crowns


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
and kingdoms could give no pleasure. All spiritual and
moral laws are universal and eternal; and, if we can feel
the force of that already referred to, in a world like this, in
which honours seem to fall on some hy mistake, or to he
stolen by others from their rightful proprietors, much more
may we expect it to be felt hereafter, in the world of truth,
reality, and light. Let us deeply ponder, then, the practical
inference—-that nothing we have said, can, when properly
understood, foster or excite a spurious ambition. The wish
for the distinctions, whatever they may be, which shall
attend or constitute the “ abundant entrance,” can only be
gratified by your being now, in principle and achievement,
or at least in sincere purpose and effort, that which you are
anxious to be on high. The saints in heaven, of every
degree, will be what they are, in some sense or other, as the
natural outgrowth and divine development of what each in
reality was upon earth. He who is to shine “as the bright-
ness of the firmament,” must, in the present life, by some
essential goodness, be “ a partaker of the glory that is to be
revealed.” Probably, as we have hinted, it is not within the
power of God to make it otherwise ; we might almost assert
that it is certainly not his intention to do so. There is no
way that we can conceive for the desire of future distinction
to be fulfilled, but by being distinguished now for a divine,
uniform, and comprehensive virtue. And even this, it must
be observed, must be the result of the love of the virtue
itself, and not of the desire for its ultimate reward. “ The
army of martyrs,”—the heroes of one world, the nobility of
another, —they who stand in the front of the throne, “ with
white robes and palms in their hands,” in consequence of
having “ come out of great tribulation,” —would not have
been there if they had not suffered because it was not within
them to do otherwise; it was impossible for them to deny
themselves; to be false to their Lord, or to the “ Divine
nature” of which they were “partakers.” They could not
help doing as they did; they thought nothing of any
F 41


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
“ recompence of rewardthey had it in themselves even
when they suffered, —-in obeying unconsciously, or without
calculation, the laws and instincts of their spiritual life.
“ Therefore are they before the throne.” It is their proper
place. They never thought about securing for themselves a
position of honour, but they were honourable. They would
not have asked to be set down on the right hand or on the
left of their Lord; they would have shrunk from the thought
of far inferior distinctions ; but they were inherently in pos-
session of that “ meetness” for distinction, to which the
high places in Paradis'e belong. They were not made noble
on their arrival there; they were noble even upon earth.
Others may have also “ resisted unto blood,” or have even
“ given their bodies to be burntbut, being without love,
“it profited them nothing—it was not the involuntary
and uncalculating “ obedience of faith.”
The labourer is worthy of his hire. The Lord’s labourers
shall have their wages ; —but they must do his work from
other motives than the thought of the wages. The service
must be felt to be reward in itself, or there will be that
wanting in their spiritual condition which would make them
capable of reward hereafter. You shall be paid,—no fear of
that; but- you must not be constantly anticipating a world’s
Saturday night. The predominance of this idea would
vitiate your character, or prove that it was altogether vitiated
already; it would reduce your subjection to Christ to a
miserable bargain; your obedience, to a price for an expected
advantage; the distinctions of heaven, to things that might
be bought,—in principle this, something approaching to his
sin who thought “ the gift of God could be purchased with
money.” Imagine for a moment a man receiving the medal
of the Humane Society for having risked his life in saving
his mother! But fancy, if you can, his having thought of
the medal before making the effort, and being induced to
make it by the prospect of securing it! You shrink from
this idea with instinctive abhorrence; you feel that an


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
unreasoning filial impulse is what you want to see in a son ;
that the action of this will bring its own reward; that
nothing external need be added where it is, or could confer
honour where it is not. Consider it well, and you may find
here a principle applicable to our present subject. Heaven,
depend upon it, is not what you are to get, hut what you are
to he; and what you are to be in the upper world, must he
the outgrowth and fulness of what you are here. It may
not he easy to understand the doctrine we have been
attempting to develope ; or not easy to make it intelligible.
The fact is, there are some things, especially in the depths
of the religious life, which can only be understood by being
experienced, and which even then are incapable of being
adequately embodied in words. “ 0 taste and see that the
Lord is good.” The enjoyment must come before the illumi-
nation ; or rather the enjoyment is the illumination. There
are things that must he loved before we can know them to
be worthy of our love; things to he believed before we can
understand them to be worthy of belief. And even after this
—after we are conscious of a distinct apprehension of some
spiritual truth—we can only, perhaps, answer, if required
to explain it, in the words of the philosopher to whom the
question was put, “ What is God?”—“ I know, if 1 am not
asked.”
4. The subject must he protected from abuse. There
is a spurious contentment, as well as a base and spurious
ambition. I can easily conceive that some one might reply
to some of our statements, —and reply with apparent edify-
ing humility,—“ lam a poor creature, with nothing to boast
of, and nothing to glory in. ‘ God be merciful to me a
sinner—the first words of my religious life shall be my
last. I wish to die loathing and rejecting my own righteous-
ness, spurning my virtues as well as my sins, that I may
appear naked in the presence of God, as a poor sinner saved
by grace! Salvation!—that is a blessing so great, so
unmerited; it comprehends in itself so much, simply as


SALTATION- BY FIRE, AND
salvation and nothing more, —that I shall he content if
I obtain it, though I may secure nothing besides ! Let me
only get into heaven and feel myself safe ! Even if I enter
by the obscurest path, and can only be permitted to stand
behind the door, that will be enough. It will be more than
I deserve. I shall be thankful to all eternity if lam only
saved, —saved even ‘by fire ‘ salvation by fire’ will be suf-
ficient for me.” Now, all this may be either sheer ignorance)
or miserable affectation. It may look like humility—and it
may he it does not necessarily follow that
it is. The speaker may be a proud, sanctimonious bigot,
who arrogates to himself the Divine regard, and leaves the
rest of the race to “ uncovenanted mercy.” The whole
thing is founded on a mistake of the nature of the Gospel.
Such people as the individual before us conceive of the
Gospel simply as an expedient for saving them from hell,
not as an instrument for making them like God. Its grand
object, they can only think of as future, and external to
themselves, not as something to be accomplished now in the
developed virtues of a subjective life. The speech we have
just heard, embodies feelings that are very dangerous. It
seems to imply that for a man to be securely on the foun-
dation is enough; that to have the belief of this, is what is
important; personal safety is the one thing needful! Now,
this may not only lead to great carelessness in respect to
character, —to a neglect of the virtues which are to be
“added” to faith, and the use of “'wood, hay, and stubble,’*
in their stead, —but it argues a low, base mind, utterly
unworthy a loving Christian. The Kedcem r of the world
is the Sanctifier of the Church. The Saviour of the Sinner
is the Model of the Saint. In each case, the one relation is
auxiliary to the other. Justification is a means to an end.
Christ died not merely that you might be “ saved from
wrath,” but that He might be “glorified in you.” Nay, as
His, he has given you talents to be employed in his service ;
He has appointed you your work, and promised you your


SALVATION IN' FULNESS.
reward; He has spoken pregnant and wonderful words of
what he will give to the faithful at the last day—the dis-
tinction and honour with which they shall he crowned!
Yet, for all this, you are so absorbed with the mere idea of
future personal safety, that you care nothing for a present
godlike life; nothing for the honour of Him to whom you
profess to be so much indebted; nothing for a working*
pains-taking fidelity in trading with the talents with which
He has entrusted you ; nothing for “ the prize of your high
calling,” which He tells you to “ let no man take!” It is
enough for you if you are only saved! Like the indolent
and ignoble at school or college, if you can manage to “ get
through,” that will satisfy you;—if you can contrive “to
pass,” let those that choose, labour to be distinguished, and
by steady and “patient continuance in well doing” “seek
for glory, honour, and immortality.” Why, even among us,
such distinctions as avc have now referred to, are not in
themselves intrinsically A r aluable; they are valuable as
proofs of A\diat an individual is, and of what he has been.
When righteously conferred, they are but the public apoca-
lypse and the public recognition of the inner man. This is
the principle on which avc have explained the predicted
honours of the upper Avorld ; but this is just the thing you
seem incapable of comprehending.
Understand, then, that indifference to securing the
“abundant entrance,” is, in reality, indifference to spiritual
character; if is a Avillingness to obtain deliverance from
suffering, Avith carelessness in respect to God-likeness. It is
a poor, vulgar, grovelling selfishness; a meanness of soul,
indicative of a base, inferior nature. It may be Avorth your
consideration, however, that heaven itself may not prove to
you quite what you expect, on the supposition of your only
being sa\ T ed “as by fire.” That you will be thankful for
being saved at all, avc have no doubt, —nor that the event
will deserve your thankfulness. Still, it may not be right
that you should be content with the prospect of such a con-


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
summation, nor certain that it will perfectly satisfy, you at
last. It is well that salvation by lire is possible ; and true
that salvation by fire is a mercy: but it may be true also, that,
for such as you, salvation by fire will be a disgrace! With
your knowledge, privileges, talents, profession, you ought
not at last to be saved with difficulty;—you ought not now
to be content with the thoirght of it; —you may not find
hereafter that it is without consequences that shall occasion
you regret. “If any man’s work be burned,” though “he
himself may be saved,” “ he shall suffer loss.” —ln the present
life, at any rate, your avowed condition may certainly come
to have serious results. You may “ suffer loss,” in a variety
of ways. You may have to endure chastisement which you
might have escaped. Throughout your course, —in approach-
ing the close of it, —at your last hour, —many may be the
deprivations to which you must submit. Nor is it quite
clear that you may not carry with you, into eternity itself,
the marks and scars of your perilous purgation, and miracu-
lous escape! We are too much in the habit, not only of
equalising everything in heaven, but of hesitating to transfer
to it our present nature, consciousness, and experience. It
does not follow that it shall not be heaven to a poor, care-
less, inconsistent man, who “ suffers loss,” and is “ saved as
by fire;” but, neither does it follow that he shall not be
conscious of something like shame, from feeling that his
position is not what it might have been. He will possess
too much not to be blessed; but he may have got to it by a
process, the recollection of which, for a long time, may
shade his gratitude with a dash of regret.
5. The subject ought to teach us a lesson of love. “If
any man build on the foundation wood, hay, stubble, his
work shall be burnt; he shall suffer loss ; but— he himself
shall he saved.” Let us think of this; and let us thank
God that, in spite of much with which we may be offended
in religious systems and religious communities, there may
be true souls and loving hearts belonging to them all. In


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
some places they may “ teach for doctrines the command-
ments of men,” and darken the Divine Word “by their
traditionsin others, there may be serious speculative
errors held in connection with essential truth; many are
the mistakes in respect to the real nature of religion by
which people may be misled, so that their solicitude and
diligence may come to be expended on the veriest trifles, —
their lives consumed in gathering and accumulating chips
and straw, while they are taught to think that they are all
the while “ laying up treasure in heaven,” and are daily
becoming richer and richer “ towards God.” Look at that
poor Catholic girl, there ; —-doing her penance, and counting
her beads; repeating her “ aves,” and saying her “ pater-
nosters lighting a candle to this saint, or carrying her
votive offering to another; wending her way in the dark,
wet morning to early mass; conscientiously abstaining
from flesh on a Friday; or shutting herself up in conventual
sanctity, devoting her life to joyless solitude and bodily
mortifications! She is imagining, perhaps, that she is
piling up by all this a vast fabric of meritorious deeds, or at
least of acceptable Christian virtue. She may expect on
account of it to hear from the lips of her heavenly Bride-
groom, “ Well done, good and faithful” one ; —“enter thou
into the joy of thy Lord.” “ Thou shalt walk with me in
white, for thou art worthy.” We, however, believe that
“ she labours in vain and spends her strength for nought;”
that she is building with “wood, hay, and stubble;” and
that the first beam of the light of eternity will set fire to
her worthless structure, and reduce to ashes the labours and
sacrifices of her whole life. Be it so. Her “ work may be
burnt;” she may “suffer loss;” but she herself may be
mercifully “saved.” In the midst of all that mistaken
devotedness to the gathering and amassing of mere lumber
as materials for building up a divine life ; —even in connec-
tion with the strange fire of an erring devotion flaming up
towards saints and Madonnas; there may be in her soul a
4.7


SALVATIOST BY FIRE, AYD
central trust in the sacrifice and intercession of the “ on©
Mediator,” which shall secure the salvation of the super-
stitious devotee, at the very moment that she witnesses the
destruction of her works. The illustration is an extreme
one. I purposely select it because it is so. The greater
includes the less; and this large demand on your charitable
sympathies, if you respond to it, will be felt and acknow-
ledged to involve a principle applicable to inferior degrees
of error, —to other forms of mistaken zeal, of uninstructed
religiousness, of ritual infatuation, and even of defective
practical behaviour. Let us never forget that we owe love
to all men; and, though we owe none either to their doc-
trinal errors, or their moral defects, it may yet happen that
some, in spite of both, may be worthy of our love. They
may be “ living stones” on “ Christ” “ the foundation,”
though not cut and squared according to the pattern used
for ourselves ; and theytoay have within them, as the foun-
dation of their character, “ like precious faith with us,” in
spite of the errors of judgment or education, of crude percep-
tion or tyrannous circumstance, which may have led them
to disfigure what they build upon it. They will have “ loss”
enough at last; add not to their deprivation by withholding
from them now your charitable love.
“ Let no man beguile you of your reward, in s. voluntary
humility and worshipping of angels;—why are ye subject
to ordinances, [(such as) touch not, taste not, handle not,]
after the commandments and doctrines of men ? Which
things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and
humility, and neglecting of the body, but only to the dis-
honourable satisfying of the flesh.” In the latter times
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits and doctrines of devils ; speaking lies in hjqrocrisy ;
having their conscience seared with a hot iron; forbidding
to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which
God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them
that believe and know the truth.” In all great systems of


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
superstition and fraud, there must have been some persons,
sometime or other, who deliberately and consciously helped
to construct them; and, very possibly, there must always
be some who, “ speaking lies in hypocrisy,” continue the
delusion. There is no doubt, also, that every individual is
under an obligation “to take heed what he hears“ to try
the spirits, whether they he of God;” and thus to guard
against the danger of being so “ led away by the error of
the wicked,” as to fall with them into the pit of destruction.
Admitting this, however, there will still he numbers, in
almost all sects, so circumstanced, as to deserve to be the
objects of a comprehensive charity. There may he ignorant
victims of artful heresiarchs, and poor slaves of priestly
domination, who, born and trained in the midst of influ-
ences mighty to mislead, are not to be excluded from the
chance of salvation because of the errors they receive for
truths, or the puerile frivolities they mistake for duty. In
the first of the passages just quoted, it would seem as if the
Apostle shaped his admonitions in exact conformity with
the doctrine we have learnt from him in this discourse. Bad
men are supposed to he in the Church, attempting to pervert
the minds of the faithful, and to bring them into bondage to
frivolous superstitions ; —to voluntary humility, worshipping
of angels, invocation of the dead, ritual niceties, macera-
tions, celibacy, abstinence from meats. The men are
hardened, false, unscrupulous, and might “ deceive, if it
were possible, the very elect.” The disciples are exhorted
to take heed and to beware of their teaching, lest they
should be “ beguiled of their reward .” Paul regards those
whom he exhorts—as Peter regarded those whom he
addressed—as partakers “of like precious faith,” with
himself; —but he thinks it possible that they may be so
seduced as to be set to work on mere “wood, hay, and
stubble;” to waste their time on profitless objects; and
thus to be in danger of finding at last that they had lost
the crown that might have been theirs; —and that, though
a 49


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
“ saved/’ and admitted to the kingdom, it was without that
“ reward” of which they had suffered themselves to he
“ defrauded .” How wonderful will be the revelations of
the judgment! “The last will be first, and the first last.”
Some of the adherents of an orthodox creed, will be lost for
want of a true “ faithsome of the victims of error and
superstition having that, shall be among the “ saved,”
though they may lose something which, if better instructed,
they might have attained, and see destroyed what they were
taught to value. Let us distinguish between systems and
persons,—things and men. The true and the good may be
occasionally included in the false and the pernicious. If
God’s people are to “ come out” of Babylon, they are sup-
posed to be in it; nay, for a time, both in it and of it; and
it is surely competent to charity to think that some of them
may be in it now, and may even die there, not hearing, or
not comprehending, the command to depart.
6. Two words, addressed respectively to Christian men,
and to those who are living in impenitence and sin, may
fitly conclude this protracted discourse. The subject should
leave on the minds of the faithful, a deep sense of the
greatness of “ the work given them to do.” They have not
only to avoid obvious -sin, to be “ blameless and harmless,
the sons of God, without rebuke they have “to increase
and abound” in active virtue ; to be “ holy in all manner of
conversation.” To advert to the figure so often referred to,
they have to build up, on the basis of faith, the cumulative
excellence of Christian character; and they have to see to
it, not only that they labour assiduously, but that they
make use of the proper materials. To young Christians
I would specially commend the subject we have been dis-
cussing, in all its manifold lights and aspects. It is an
incomparable blessing for a man “ to fear the Lord from his
youth—to be quickened by the Spirit, and made intelli-
gently the subject of the faith of Christ, in early life ; and
thus to begin the formation of habits, and the structure of


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
the character, on the firmest foundation and after the
highest model. Many have to lament—“ Thou makest me
to possess the sins of my youthhappy is the man who
creates for himself no such inheritance. “It is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners,” even “ the chief.” It
is well to know, that the man steeped in guilt, and hoary in
iniquity, may be converted and turned from the error of his
ways, and “ obtain mercy” through “ the blood that cleanseth
from all sin.” But it is not necessary to be a great sinner
to need mercy; and never desirable to defer for a day atten-
tion to duty, or to widen the distance between ourselves
and God. It is better not to commit sins than to have
them fox-given. Innocence is preferable to repentance,—an
unspotted conscience to one purified from previous guilt.
There is quite enough in the disease of our nature, and in
the fact of our daily and customary transgressions, to render
it impossible for any one to he saved hut through the
atoning sacrifice and the sanctifying Spirit. But there are
sins which many men have never committed ; —sins which
are pardonable, and are often pardoned;—yet no wise man
would wish to exchange the consciousness of innocence for
the hope of indemnity. So, I affirm,- with respect to other
sins, less heinous, —it is better to he kept from them, than
to have them forgiven. It is better to begin life in the
service of Christ; to lay early the Divine foundation of
religious faith; and to build on it from the first the solid
edifice of holy character; —than to be brought at the ninth
or at the eleventh hour, with wasted time and prostituted
talents, with burdened conscience and broken energies, to
the Cross that might have been reached before; to yield
but the dregs of existence to God ; to spend the residue of
life with regret for its beginning, or to leave it with a
trembling and hesitating hope, having done none of the
work for which it was conferred. “ Preventing grace” is as
worthy your solicitude as forgiving mercy. He who is
51


SALVATION' BY FIRE, AND
“ wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning
evil,” is better than he who has known-and fathomed “ the
depths of Satan,” though he may have “ risen” from them
“ with Christ” into the life of God.
Let the young, then, especially, consider well their great
advantage with respect to the duties we have been attempt-
ing to teach. Let them begin at once. As early discipled
to the Lord, and presumed to be possessed of religious faith ,
let them diligently “ add” to it, the different virtues incul-
cated by St. Peter. In their conscientious prosecution of
this great work, let them guard at once against indolence
and mistake; against doing nothing, and doing wrong;
against adding worthless materials to the building, or
foolishly “ pulling it down with their hands.” To give way
to anything that violates the conscience, and burdens the
heart, is to do this. God can forgive the sins of his
children, but they may find it difficult to forgive them-
selves. The wound of a great sin may be healed, but the
scar long remains upon the soul. The consequence of
transgression in relation to eternity, may be cut off by the
intervention of the accepted sacrifice ; but its consequences
here have often to be endured while life is prolonged and
memory lives. We have heard much of the awful nature
of “ sin after baptism,” and of its only alleviation being a
baptism of tears. While they who so speak, practise the
rite in relation to infants, and thus make it inevitable that
no actual sin shall be committed except such as must be
after baptism, their conduct and their teaching would seem
to be a mixture of folly and cruelty, insincerity and deceit.
Applied, however, to the case of those who have been fully
instructed in the knowledge of Christ; who have been
regenerated by a higher regeneration than baptism; and
are intelligently in possession of the elementary principle of
a Divine faith and of spiritual life ; —there is something in
the representations to which we have referred, which
should not be altogether disregarded. Let no Christian be


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
indolent or careless, —negligent of duty or tolerant of sin,—-
because blood hath been shed to remove guilt, and “ a foun-
tain opened” for uncleanness and iniquity! And let no
man think that it will be all the same if he is saved at last,
whether or not he was practically conversant with all evil.
Happy is the man “ whose iniquity is forgiven and whose
sin is coveredbut happier he, who, “ kept back from
presumptuous sin,” free from and “ innocent of the great
transgression,” is planted, from the first, “by the rivers of
water,” and “ brings forth his fruit in his season”—each
stage in the journey of life distinguished by the virtues
appropriate to it. It is in this way, usually, that the most
solid and symmetrical characters are formed,—or the most
durable and best proportioned edifices built. To do any-
thing great, however, there must be put forth great effort,
industry and skill. The Christian virtues are not self-sown:
they spring not spontaneously even from the soil of a
regenerated heart; they require care, culture and time.
Nothing durable is raised suddenly; nothing Divine is by
chance or accident. The structure that shall stand the
testing flame, and present, from the midst of it, its beautiful
proportions and lustrous magnificence, being built according
to the plan of the Architect, and composed of marble, gold,
and gems, —that is not a thing to be the work of a day,
or to be left to itself without thought and assiduity on the
part of the builder. Hence it is, that while we press on
all the grand moral of our whole discourse, we press it
especially on the youth of the Church, since, in their case,
the ground is clear and the day before them. Observe how
with the work to which Peter exhorts, he associates the
idea of the necessity of laborious and pains-taking perse-
verance. “ Therefore, give diligence, to make your calling
and election sure—“ giving all diligence, add to your
faith, virtue.” “If these things be in you and abound, —so
shall an entrance be ministered to you abundantly lt is
not only the possession of Christian goodness to which the


SALVATION BY FIRE, AND
Apostle exhorts, but tire possession of it in large and ample
proportions; and to secure this, not only diligence, but
“ all diligence” is required and demanded. The neighbour-
hood of the text is studded with terms illustrative of what
we have been attempting to enforce. “We are labourers
together with God. Ye are God’s building. Let every
man take heed how he buildeth. Every man’s work shall
be made manifest, for the day shall declare it. It shall be
revealed by fire. The fire shall try every man’s work, of
what sort it is. If a man’s work abide, he shall receive a
reward. If a man’s work be burnt, he shall suffer loss.
Ye are the temple of God. The temple of God is holy;
which temple ye are. Let no man deceive himself.'”
And let no sinful and impenitent man depart hence,
without attending to the lesson he should carry with him.
If even the imperfectly good,—men with real, spiritual life
in them, of true faith, but defective character, —if even they
are to be exposed to punishment for their errors, what may
be expected by the dead “ in sin,” —by those who have no
faith at all, —and whose character, instead of being imper-
fectly good, is essentially evil, consisting of unbelief,
impenitence, and crime ? “If the righteous scarcely he
saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?” If
some of the good are to be saved with difficulty, how can
the bad be saved at all ? If it be something terrible to be
“ scarcely saved,” what must it be to be utterly lost ? If
for a man to “ suffer loss ” is represented as so awful, what
must it be for him “to lose his soul?” “Judgment must
begin at the house of God ; but, if it first begin at us, what
must the end be of those who obey not the Gospel of
Christ?” It is terrible to have to endure some purgative
discipline intended to save us from being “ condemned with
the worldmore terrible must be that condemnation
itself! Painful is the process of cutting and amputation to
preserve life,—piercing into the flesh to root out that
cancerous core, —plucking out the eye, or taking off the


SALVATION IN FULNESS.
arm, lest some deadly taint should pervade the system and
paralyse the heart; but more painful and tremendous must
it be, to be “ delivered to the tormentors” to be “ cut
asunder,” —to be cut off, body and soul, from the regions of
the living, and to be for ever consigned to “ the congrega-
tion of the dead.” It is a fearful thing to be saved “as by
fire”—to be plucked from the flame as a brand from the
burning;—but it must be a more fearful thing to be burnt,
—to be left in the flame, and not snatched from its devour-
ing environment! It will be awful to be seized upon by
the flaming minister of the Di vine displeasure, and, instead
of being purged by it from superficial defects, to have
“utterly to perish in your own corruption!”
May the great and loving God, in his infinite mercy,
avert from all present such a terrible result. May “ the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts—may they “ repent and turn themselves from
all their transgressions, that so iniquity may not be their
ruin.” And if any are present, who not only “ lack those
things” of which we have been speaking, but who, though
“ once enlightened, and made partakers of the Holy Ghost,
and the powers of the world to come,” have, through the
drugs and devices of the Devil, become “ blind, not seeing
afar off, and have forgotten that they were purged from
their old sins,” —-may they, too, have “repentance given
them unto the acknowledgment of the truth,” and, “escap-
ing from the snare of him by whom they have been led
captive, may they awake up again unto the will of God!”


fX | p, ;. . I'D
“ GOD IS LIGHT
1 John i. 5.
Eternal Light ! Eternal Light
How pure the soul must he,
When, placed within thy searching sight.
It shrinks not, hut, with calm delight,
Can live and look on Thee.
The spirits that surround Thy throne
May hear the burning bliss,
But that is surely theirs alone,
Since they have never, never known
A fallen world like this.
Oh! how shall I, whose native sphere
Is dark, whose mind is dim,
Before the Ineffable appear,
And on my naked spirit hear
The uncreated beam ?
There is a way for man to rise
To that sublime abode,
An offering and a sacrifice,
A Holy Spirit’s energies,
An Advocate with God.
These, these prepare us for the sight
Of Majesty above ;
The sons of ignorance and night
Can dwell in the Eternal Light,
Through the Eternal Love!
—REV. THOMAS BINNEY,


SERMONS, THREEPENCE EACH
POST-FREE, TWOPENCE EXTRA ; BY
The Rev. Thomas Dale, M.A., at St. Bride’s Church,
Fleet Street.
The Rev. Hugh Allen, A.M., of St. Jude’s Church,
Whitechapel, preached at St. Olave’s Church, Old Jewry.
The Rev. J. J. West, M.A., Rector of Winchelsea,
Sussex.
The Rev. John Gumming, D.D., at the Scotch Church,
Crown Court, Drury Lane.
The Rev. James Hamilton, D.D., at Exeter Hall.
The Hon. and Rev. Baptist Noel, M.A., at John Street
Chapel, Bedford Row.
The Rev. Hugh Stowell, M.A., at St. Jude’s Church,
St. George’s Road, Southwark.
The Rev. William Brock, at Exeter Hall; and others.
HYMN BOOKS.
BAPTIST HYMN BOOKS; The New Selection, all
bindings, from Is 6d. to 7s. 6d. each.
DITTO; The New Selection and Watts’ Psalms and
Hymns, bound together, all bindings, from 4s. to 12s. 6d.
CONGREGATIONAL HYMN BOOK, large size, calf, Bs.
WESLEY’S HYMNS, all bindings.
WATTS’ PSALMS AND HYMNS, all bindings.
G. E. ADDISON,
PRINTER, BOOKSELLER, AND PUBLISHER,
487 late 334, George Street South.
Theological and other works, books published by the
English and American Tract Societies, Sunday-school Union,
Bibles, Testaments, and Hymn Books of all kinds can be
obtained.
All kinds of Printing executed with neatness and des-
patch, and at moderate prices.
Account Books, Envelopes, Letter Paper, and fancy and
plain Stationery always on hand.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS, received by every
MAIL. Particulars of terms of Subscriptions can be sup-
plied both in town and country, post-free.


SUNDAY-SCHOOL REQUISITES.
ADMISSION CARDS, printed in gold, beautifully embel-
lished with texts of scripture, in packets of twelve, 2s.
CERTIFICATE CARDS, for Scholars leaving Sunday
School, beautifully embellished with texts of Scripture,
in packets of twenty-four, 3s.
PACKETS OF PICTURE CARDS FOR THE YOUNG,
Is. 6d.
REWARD CARDS, various colours, in packets of ninety-
eight tickets, Is.
PICTURE REWARD TICKETS, in packs of forty-two, Bd.
THE MOTTO FOR LIFE, A New Year’s Address to
Children, by Rev. John Curwen, 2s. Bd. per 100.
AN ADDRESS TO PARENTS, inviting them to send
their Children to a Sunday-school, 2s. 6d. per 100.
A LETTER FROM THE TEACHERS TO PARENTS, on
the late attendance of their Children, 2s. Bd. per 100.
AN ADDRESS TO PIOUS YOUNG PERSONS, inviting
them to become Sunday-School Teachers, 2s. 6d. per 100.
FIRST, SECOND, AND THIRD CLASS READING
BOOKS, 12s. per 100.
INFANT SCHOLAR’S HYMN BOOK, containing 84
hymns, 10s. per 100.
THE SABBATH-SCHOOL HYMN BOOK, 255. per 100.
THE CHILDREN’S HYMN BOOK, 12 in a packet, Is.
THE CHILDREN'S HYMN BOOK, No. 2, 12 in a packet,
Is. 6d.
HAYDEN’S SCRIPTURE CATECHISM OF THE
GOSPEL OF St. MATTHEW, Is.; cloth, 2s.
A PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY OF SCRIPTURE
PROPER NAMES, cloth, 6d.
ROYAL JUVENILE LIBRARY, reward books, embossed
covers, 2d. each.
SELECT MINIATURE TRACTS, by Mrs. H. B. Stowe,
in packets of twelve, 9d.
THE CHILD’S SCRAP BOOK, Nos. 1 to 48, price Is.
G. R. ADDISON, 487, George Street South, (Brickfield
Hill).
CARDS, PRINTED IN GOLD AND BLUE.
GOD IS LIGHT, by the Rev. T. Binnet, 2d. each ; or,
12s. per 100.
SPEAK GENTLY, 2d. each; or, 12s. per 100.
