

FIRST SERIES.
/ - price, ei
[l[|ll|lllllllllll|ll!ll!llllllll!!lllll!illM




SAM
JONES’
SERMONS.
' i
Published by the “Australian Christian World ”
Newspaper and Publishing Co., Limited.
gnjMterr :
Edward Lee, Excelsior Printing Works,
53 Market Street,




AtlSSfw f?
a ■ io
PREFACE.
America has lately been startled by the rise of a
young preacher of Georgia called Rev. Sam Jones.
He has drawn the largest crowds who have listened
to the Gospel in this generation in that country.
His sayings are quoted in most of the leading papers
as they are caught from his lips, and his talks or
sermons are eagerly read. During his mission at
Cincinatti, Ohio, 20,000 people were unable to gain
admission to the great hall in which his meetings
were held, and the same thing was repeated at
Chicago during his stay there.
This young, fearless, and manly preacher is about
5 feet 8 inches high, is rather slim, has a large head
above the ears, wears a black moustache, has brown
hair and eyes, is gentle and pleasant in manner, and
slow of speech, his power lies in his original expression
rather than in his eloquence.
He is down on hypocrites, gamblers, theatre-goers,
card-players, dancers, cheaters, liars, saloon-keepers,
and professing Christians who do nothing to save
others. This little volume is a collection of sermons
and sketches taken from reports of his Chicago
meetings in the spring of 1886.
During ’BS a remarkable man was converted at his
meetings down South, also a lawyer, who immediately


began to preach the Gospel. His name is Sam
Small. He accompanies Rev. Sam Jones, and takes
some of the meetings, and he bids fair to become even
a better preacher than his spiritual father.
The editor hopes that this edition will do as much
good in Australasia as the sermons have done in the
United States. Such original, quaint, and witty
presentations of truth may awaken some who have
long slept under smooth words; the ram’s horn may
succeed where the silver trumpet has failed.
Yours in the Gospel,
ED. J. PARKER.
Petersham, N.S.W., Nov. 1886.


RELIGIOUS TESTS.
Sam Jones Tells His Hearers What
They Must and What They
Must Not_ Do.
He Denounces Card-Playing, Theatre-
Going, Social Amusements, and
His Other Bugbears.
And Authoritatively Announces that
all Indulging Therein Will Go
Directly to Hell.
No Loophole of Escape Left tor the
Worldings Who Will Enjoy
Themselves.
IN THE MORNING.
Rev. Sam Jones spoke to a comparatively small
audience yesterday morning at the Chicago Avenue
Church, that building being only about half filled
The most of his hearers were aged people, and
noticeable for their gray hairs and wrinkled faces.
Mr. Jones chose for his text:—“ Do the Work of an
Evangelist ” —Timothy, iv., 5.


He said : What a man does is the test of what he
is. What I am doing for the world is the only test
of my worth in this world. When a man thinks
himself something when he does nothing he deceives
himself. My worth is not determined by the number
of miles I have ridden in a Pullman sleeper, or by
the number of magnificent books I have read, but it is
determined by the number of miles I have walked to
preach the words of God, and the number of good
books I have written. The salvation of my own soul
was a secondary consideration in the eye of God when
he converted me. The moving cause in the heart of
God was that He should ever after have a propa-
gandist who would work to help save the world. God
is dependent on us to help win the world to Christ,
and He calls on us in this great work to bring the
world to Christ. About the only business the church
has when we get people to Christ is to keep them
there. I don’t care what your religion is, but there
is no work in the universe pans out so much as work
for God. People say they haven’t got time for
religion. Why, my brother, the best licks you ever
put in for your wife and children were put in on
your knees praying for ’em. You haven’t time !
Why, an engineer might as well say he hadn’t time to
take on water and coal and go rushing past the
stations sixty miles an hour. But you look up the
road aways and you’ll see him up there in the woods
and he can’t turn a wheel. [Laughter.]


The conditions on which I succeed as a Christian
are about the same as those of a farmer, or any other
calling in life, and
THE RETURNS ARE BETTER.
The only way the world will ever be saved is by
faithful, uncompromising effort on the part of every
man to save the world. Now, how do you make
drunkards ? Chicago probably makes as many as any
city, with its four thousand saloons. Why, they dot
the city with saloons and make them glitter with
lights, put agents on the streets and advertisements
in newspapers. When Christians put forth one-half
as great an effort then they were going to save the
city. The saloon-keeper was in earnest; he was
driving business; he kept his bar-room open twenty
hours a day. Christianity is open on an average of
ten minutes a day. [Laughter.] The devil has two
hours against every minute of Christian influence.
No wonder Chicago is driving to hell. God has
remedies for all these things. There is not a bad in-
fluence of earth but there was a remedy for it in the
book of God. Take God’s prescription yourself and
give it to the world. Now I’m a mothodist, but I’m
no more to blame for it than I am for being Sam
Jones. I was born in it. But I ain’t ashamed of
it, and so if anybody asks you what I am you may
tell them I’m a Methodist! ! ! [The last word was
pronounced with such vehemence as to convulse his
hearers with laughter.] I don’t know as a Methodist


is better than any other Christian, I think a Baptist
is as good as a Methodist if he is as good, and I think
a Presbyterian is as good as a Methodist if he is as
good a man. [Laughter.] There is no sectarianism
about me. If there was any E would want my vein
lanced to let the muddy, filthy stuff out. I want my
Methodism a sort of concern on wheels to roll around
on and have it tie me down. I hate these fellows who
are so very clever in everything until you strike them
on their religion and find them as mean as the devil.
[Applause.] I held a sort of class-meeting once down
in Georgia, and I asked a brother what he was doing
to bring the world to God, and he said he was reading
his bible and praying. I asked another brother, and
he said he read his bible and said his prayers, and I
found that all any were doing was to say their little
prayers and read their little bibles to bring the world
to Christ. Oh ! how I get disgusted with that sort.
I could put them all in my vest pocket and never feel
them till I looked for my toothpick. [Laughter.] I
like the sort of Christianity that carries a
MUSKET AND A CARTRIDGE-BOX.
Why, some of your big religious papers and some of
your ministers are opposed to revivals. But I always
know what the trouble is when I hear from that sort
of a minister. They have tried some time or other to
stir up-' assort - of a t-Uvfval find made a failure of it,
and so they are dead against it I Do the work of an


evangelist. I’m not an evangelist in any special
sense—l’m a member of the North Georgia confer-
ence, and have my work given out to me the same as
other preachers. I’m not talking for myself, but for
the last eighteen hundred years you’ve been turning
the world over to the ministers, and them to
do all the work, and you go to church and pack
around the preacher like a |lot of blocks of ice, and
then blame him because he don’t sweat in the cause of
Christ. [Laughter.] Why, if he’d bring his cream
to the church and set it down where it would be
struck by your Methodist wind he would have good
ice-cream. The preacher is not to blame for the con-
dition of things, but the people of the church are to
blame. They all told him they would help push, and
he got between the shafts and pulled away with his
tongue lolling out, supposing the church was pushing,
but he couldn’t make it go, and he looked around and
saw the church was all up in the wagon. [Laughter.]
If every member of the church would bring one soul
to Christ every year, in fifteen years this church
would have the whole city converted, and would start
out to save the rest of the world.
Every one here who believes the blood of Christ
will cleanse from all sin stand up. [Nearly all the
church stood up.] Thank God for so many witnesses.
After you hear the truth be witnesses to the truth
and work under the truth. Go out and do the work
of an evangelist and bring people to Christ.


Mr. Jones talked a half-hour and then announced
that next week fewer services would be held each day.
IN THE EVENING.
An audience of something like six thousand
persons gathered in the Casino rink last evening to
hear Rev. Sara Jones deliver one of his characteristic
discourses. It was an audience composed of young
and old, and was made up of all classes of society,
from the very poor to the very wealthy. After the
customary hymn-singing Rev, Dr. Lorimer announced
that the collection would be taken up, and he begged
them all to be a little more generous than they had
been in the past, for the previous collections had not
met the current expenses of the meetings. There was
no use in being mean, and, surely, more than 45 dols,
ought to be taken up in such a crowd.
Before Mr. Jones began his regular talk he said a
word to those who are in the habit of leaving before
the services are finished : “ Every city, as well as
every individual,” he said, “ has its characteristics.
The characteristic of Chicago seems to be for the
people to gather their hats and break ont before the
benediction is pronounced. If you are a drinking
man, and have got to that point where you are afraid
you’ll fall into a fit if you do not get a drink, leave
now. If you are a woman, and have a bearish
husband who will growl at you for coming home
after 9 o’clock, go now. But if you don’t want a


drink and haven’t got a bearish husband stay till the
service is over. A great many people seem to be in a
hurry to get co hell, but what is the use of being in a
hurry to go home ? I’d be a gentleman and a lady,
anyway. I now move that we will all stay till after
the benediction. Is this seconded ?”
“ I second it,” said Rev. Dr. Lorimer, from his seat
on the platform.
“ It is moved and seconded,” continued Mr. Jones,
“ that we remain till the end. Those in favour say
aye.” The motion was unanimously adopted, and the
evangelist announced the following as his text:
“ Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In everything
give thanks ; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus con-
cerning you.”—l. Thes. v. 16, 17, 18.
“ A man,” began Mr. Jones, “ who understands
practically what those verses teach is a practical
philosopher. There is a great deal of philosophy in
Christ. The best philosophers make the best
Christians. I have no use for any joy that is not on
the divine side. I know that if I
TEND TO MY BUSINESS
the Lord will tend to His. Our great motto should
be : ‘ I am satisfied with the past, contented with the
present, and hopeful for the future.’ How many can
say, looking back at the past, that they are satisfied 1
Very few, indeed, and it is your own fault. The way
to secure a happy home in heaven is to be practical
here. I was talking once to a grand old man down in


my country who had the blessing of God about him and
asked him how he managed to keep it. He said that
when he got religion he told God the truth and quit
all meanness. I told him that perhaps he had done
wrong and did not know it, and he answered me that
if he had God would have told him about it. If I
were to ask all those who had never lied to God to
stand up—hold on, I’m not going to ask you to do
that because I don’t want the others to see us. Every
man’s condemnation is bottomed on neglect. Let the
best citizen in Chicago neglect to pay his debts and
the meanest tramp in creation would not care to
know him. [Laughter.] If you managed to sneak
into heaven, after neglecting your duties here, the
angels would refuse to recognise you.”
Here Mr. Jones paused for a while to wipe the per
spiration from his face, and to press his hand to his
forehead. He was evidently tired, and the marks of
his labours were begiuning to show on him. After
a brief pause he continued : “ Can you, father ; can
you, mother, say that you have brought up your
children as they should be ? What is your home life 1
You say you are satisfied with it. Sister and brother
you may be satisfied with it now ; but will you, yon
card-playing mother and father, when you have turned
out three more gamblers on the town? Nine tenths
of the gamblers are from the best families. You will
always find that they have brains and are well edu-
cated. I have been told, ‘ Jones, you hit a little


thing as hard as a big thing.’ What if Ido 1 Our
church to-day is paralyzed. If you want to know
what is paralyzing our church I will tell you. It is
the tide of the world that is sweeping away our
homes. Your card-rooms, your rush to the theatres,
and into society, is what is breaking up your home
life. The day you entered into society you gave up
your piety. No person can be pious and at the same
time a member of your society. What do you want
with society, anyway—the dirty, sneaking, cowardly,
nasty thin that it is 1 (Laughter.) I’d rather any
day that my daughter should be rattlesnake-bitten
than society-bitten. (Applause.) Wherever you see
a card-room in a family you may say that they belong
to society. I never met a man who prayed and paid his
debts that would play cards in his own home, or allow
others to play there. lam accused of saying things
that hurt people. When I say anything that insults
anybody who prays I’ll apologise, but I’ll die before
I’ll apologise to you, you uncircumcised Philistine.
I WON’T DO IT.
When a man looks back at the past and is satisfied,
then comes the present. A contented man has one of
the elements of scriptural joy in his life. Hope, as it
shines on a satisfied past and a contented present, is a
mile-post to tell us how far we have gone, and to show
us how far we must go before we reach the end of our
journey. There is only one thing that we can do, and
that is to exclaim : ‘ O Lord, I will burn up the cards,


throw away the wine, and say I am with God.’ Then
God will blot our your offences, and you can start
afresh. You never can find a better time than the
present to turn away from your evil ways. If you
were to get into my house by the back way, and find
a deck of cards, a basket of champagne, a billiard-
table, and a lot of theatre tickets; if you looked a
little further you would find Sam Jones dead at the
front door. They will never get into my house while
lam alive. You can let them in if you want to, but
you don’t know the risk you are running. You don’t
know what your boy is doing to-night, or where he is.
He plays cards that he learned at home, and belongs
to a club. I tell you if you let that boy continue
playing cards he will bring your gray hairs in sorrow
to the grave. How many mothers are wearing their
lives out worrying about their boys 1 If my boys ever
drift that way, and cause my wife to weep for them,
do you know what I’ll do 1 I’ll go up-stairs some
morning before they get up, and tell them to get out
their breech-loading shot guns, go down-stairs, and fire
every barrel at their mother. They may kill her that
way, but they never will cause my wife to die by
inches. And there is many a boy who would do a
good thing if he’d go home and kill his mother to-night.
“ At Chattanooga,” continued Mr. Jones, “ I met a
woman who attended one of my meetings with her
daughter. When she went home her son asked her to
play the usual game of cards. She told him that she


had been to hear Sam Jones, and had resolved never
to play cards again, and had burned the pack. The
daughter likewise refused to play with him, and,
becoming angry, he said he would go down town and
find some friends to play with. His mother begged
him for that one evening to attend the revival. To
please her he came to hear me, and was converted.
Parents, I beseech you, call a halt before it is too
late. It is true that if you can not touch a man
about his children
HE HAS NO HEART.
If you can not wake up that woman by showing her
the danger her children are in, she has no feeling at
all. You’d sit up here all day to hear me call men
drunkards. You’d shout ‘ Lay on Macduff; give
’em more,’ but when I talk about making drunkards
in your own homes, you stick up your noses and say
you belong to the bon ton and I can’t talk to you
that way. Some of these days you’ll see that lam
right, and you are wrong.
“ Pray without ceasing. There is a railroad train
over there going on fast time. The conductor stops
six minutes at an out-of-the-way place and you
wonder what he is doing. Surely he is losing time
he’ll never be able to make up, But he stopped to
get coal and water, and now he has the material to
go sixty miles an hour and make up his lost time.
He could not have done it if he had not stopped
there six minutes. The best time you ever put in is


when you were up to God Almighty’s wood and water
station. [Laughter.] That is the way to get up
steam. A man who really prays anywhere will pray
everywhere. You say the reason you don’t pray at
home with your families is that you are timid. You
lie when you say that; it is because you don’t want
to, because you haven’t got the respect of your
families. Many a man puts his meanness ofl on his
dyspepsia. My dear woman, if you have a man who
will not pray with your family, go to the legislature
and get your name changed and give him the one
you had before marriage. If your husband hasn’t
got the manhood to pray with you, take the tin horse
and the marbles away from the baby and give them
to him to play with. If he hasn’t the manhood to
pray with his family I’d take the baby out of the
cradle and put him there and nurse him the rest of
his life. If I were a woman and had such a husband
I’d hire some old colored man, one in whom the
children had confidence, and get him to read prayers
for them.”
Here Mr. Jones asked those men who prayed with
their families to stand up, and about forty stood up.
He went on to say that the only kind of .religion was
that which reached the family, and said he would
not give a flip of his finger for any other kind.
Then he said: “ I hope you understand me.- I
want to make myself clear. If you don’t like what
I say don’t come. I’m going to have your seat or


your hide before I get through. I’d rather my boy
never was converted than that his religion would
lead him to damnation. If I must go to hell God
gram I may never go there as a professor of religion.
Cards, wine, and religion will not mix, and there is
no use trying to make them.”
Mr. Jones closed by drawing a picture of his own
home life, and what he expected, his life in heaven
to be.
SAM SMALL.
Sam Small conducted services at the Chicago
Avenue Church in the evening, and was greeted by
an unusually large audience. He took for his text
the words,
* For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty,”
from which he spoke for nearly an hour. The speaker
commenced his discourse by saying that the man who
was given to his appetites, passions, and lusts was a
slave, and that he who had taken up Christ and
followed Him was a free man. With this general
proposition by way of introduction, he proceeded to
speak of slavery as against liberty, and called up the
late war and its results—the emancipation of six
million slaves—which, he said, had been a bold stride
in the cause of freedom. But the blessing, he con-
tinued, had not only fallen upon the slaves, but upon
their masters, who had by the same divine stroke
been emancipated from their sins and lusts, and from
the scorn of the world. The masters joined with the


slaves in thanks for the striking off of their shackles.
Some of his hearers, he thought, might have known
something of the slavery spoken of, which he depicted
as horrible in every feature, but they knew far more
of even a worse slavery—the slavery of sin, which
was the worst possible taskmaster. In the South
slavery had meant the ownership of one’s body, and
it had been so abhorrent that the slave would undergo
almost anything to attain the surroundings of freedom
or the semblance of liberty. The result of the
abominable system had been that as soon as the slaves
had learned where the boundary line between slavery
and freedom was they stood ready to risk their lives
to get their feet on the side of liberty.
The speaker next proceeded to institute a com-
parison between human and spiritual slavery, and in
so doing covered a great deal of well-worn ground.
There were men in the audience, he said, whom
Satan owned, and though they might say they were
free they knew in their own hearts they were not.
He had met a man during the day who was the slave
of every barkeeper he came in contact with, and the
money he earned was taken from his family and
invested in the essence of hell with these agents of
hell. The barkeeper owned the fellow’s body and
muscle, and when he had spent his last cent he would
see him pawn his overcoat. This was slavery, he said,
in all its hellishness, and he knew something about it
from his own bitter experience.


GEORGIA RELIGION.
Sam Jones Injects Some More of It
Into the Minds of Chicago
Hearers.
He Is Again Explicit in Telling Them
How They Are Going to Hell.
And Gives Them Fewer Opportunities
Than Ever of Escaping a Warm
Climate.
His Confrere Small Abandons Much
of His Former Style, and Shines
in Contrast.
THE SERMONS.
THE AFTERNOON MEETING.
As many empty chairs as human countenances
stared Rev. Sam Jones in the face during the services
held yesterday afternoon at the Casino rink. He,
however, declared that the rink half full meant a pretty
large congregation, and there were more present than
he saw at Cincinnati after he had been there three


weeks. He also said that he had heard of a number
of cases of the clearest conversion of persons who had
not been near his services, but read of what he said
in the newspapers. He read a number of verses
from the hible and chose for his text:
“ I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and
how thou canst not bear them that are evil, and thon hast
tried them which say they are apostles and are not, and hast
found them liars”.— Revelation ii. 2.
“ This book talks mighty plain,” he said. “ I don’t
remember going out of the Bible to get a word. I
called a man a red-nosed devil, but the devil part of
it I got out of the Bible, and that is the part he
objected to. Mr. Davis said the most intolerable
feature of his prison life was not that he was in cap-
tivity of a foe, but, whether day or night, eating or
trying to sleep, he was ever conscious of the two
burning eyes of the sentinel resting on him. Is was
intolerable. Brother, the two
BURNING EYES OF GOD ARE RESTING
ON YOU.
He understands you. He knows all about you. He
knows whether you are trying most to please Him or
please man. lam glad God sees me. The world
sees my f ibles and mistakes, but it does not see how
much I pray. God knows. ‘ I know work.
Suppose for the benefit of a class here we put it this
way : I know thy laziness ; I know thy indifference ;
know thy carelessness ; I know thy fruitless life. I


judge a man’s faith by his works. When I hear of
Christian people getting up to say they have so many
doubts, I want to tell them it ain’t no credit in them
to say it. There is not a doubt in you but what if
you pull it up by the roots you will find the seed is-
sin. You will never find a minister fallen in faith,
but he is fallen in life, as God knows him. I’d as
soon a man would get up and say he had drunk so
many more drinks of whisky than anybody else, as to
say he had more doubts than any other man. • Or I
would as soon a sister would say she had beat the
crowd in the number of games she had played of pro-
gressive euchre and had got the jack prize. [Laughter.]
Quit your meanness. If your woiks were right it
would be the best proof your faith was right. There
is just as much sense in praying for sweet potatoes as
to pray for faith. Now, you will say I have stepped
beyond orthodoxy. No I haven’t. I never have*
My orthodoxy rests on the steel rails taken out of
this bible, and they are laid down on the cross-ties of
humanity. O Lord, give me muscle ! That ain’t the
way to get it. Go over to the blacksmith-shop and
swing the big hammer. Just keep your mouth shut
and do what God tells you to do.
“ There has been much said since I came here of
INDISCRIMINATE DENUNCIATION OE THE
CHURCH.
I had to do this, for you see if I had let down the
gap they would all run out. There was no danger of


liurting the good Christians. My plan is to beat the
goats and feed the sheep, and if you have got hit it is
because you was a goat. [Laughter.] The best way
to prepare for a revival is to turn everybody out of
the church who is not living right. Some seem to
think purity a second consideration to peace. If you
can’t have any peace except at the expense of purity I
wouldn’t have any. If I had had a church here—
which I won’t have, for I won’t get a call, and I
wouldn’t answer it if I did—and if you kept running
on your present schedule I would turn every one of
you out or bust your church into a thousand pieces
Now is the time you ministerial brothers on the
platform could come in with your amen. [Laughter.]
“ Brother, let us let iniquity alone and get after the
deviltry of this community. Thank God there is not
a Christian church in the world that has not pro-
nounced against these things. Oh, your little church
around the corner may not, but I wouldn’t stay in
the little rotten thing long enough to get my hat,
[Laughter.] I just want to
HURRAH FOR METHODISM !
[One amen from the ministers’ row.] And hurrah for
any ism that is down on these things. [Chorus of
amens.] Talk about preaching : ‘ Blessed are the
pure in heart.’ Wait until we’ve got them. Let us
lay aside all such foolishness. Lord pity us stilting
ourselves on what we are. Let us have a grand old
Holy Ghost revival, We want the prayer-meeting


and financial revival. I want to see God Almighty
control as much money in this city as devil does,
I want a revival of honesty and revival that will bless
everything as high as the shoulders of God and as
broad as humanity.”
Mr. Jones concluded by relating his own phenom-
enal success as a minister from the day he became a
Christian. He had never sat in a pew, for he com-
menced to preach at once, and he had been wonder-
fully successful, and had preached an average of five
hundred sermons every year for thirteen years
IN THE EVENING.
There was a large audience at the Casino rink last
night to hear Sam Jones, although there were a
number of vacant chairs in the large building. Rev.
E. F. Williams presided. Rev. Dr. Barrows read a
scripture lesson from the eleventh chapter of St.
Matthew, and Rev. Lewis Curts offered prayer. Rev.
Mr. Bland called attention to the contribution-boxes
put up around the building, and he stated that the
incidental expenses of the meetings were over 100 dols.
a day. Mr. Jones said his text consisted of an impor-
tant question and a significant answer. It was :
“ Wherewithal can a young man cleanse his sins ! By
taking heed thereto according to the word.”
“ I understand something about religion, about
Christianity,” he said, “ when you tell me it is a way
somewhere, a thoroughfare. I have been in the world


about thirty-seven years, and I know a certain road
leads to somewhere. Certain moral roads run to
certain moral destructions. One road leads to heaven,
and we can all get in by that road and go to glory.
Some roads are adapted to travel and some are not.
Christ said about eighteen hundred years ago ‘ I am
the way.’
“ Suppose I had never seen a railroad. I might
wonder what the track was for. I would see the way,
and I would get a wheelbarrow and out, but
before I had gone ten steps I would see the wheel-
barrow was not made for the way and the way was
not made for the wheelbarrow. Then I might lead a
horse on, but I would find the same difficulty with the
horse. Then I would go down to the round-house
and see the magnificent locomotive engine, and I
would think I had found the thing that was made for
the track and the thing the track was made for. I
would see the
FITNESS OF THINGS
after all. So the moral thoroughfare is not adapted
to an ox or a horse, and they fell out with me down
in Tennessee because I said that next to a good
woman I liked a good horse. [Laughter.] But a
fellow can’t help exposing his affinities in certain
directions; but I find that the track is alapted to my
soul and my soul is made for that track. You take
an engine off the track and it is a most helpless thing,
while on the track it is the most omnipotent you ever


looked at. You start the soul off on the dirt road of
profanity, and it will mire down in guilt and shame;
you start it on the dirt road of licentiousness, and it
will mire in guilt and sin and cry out in its lost
estate; you start it out on the dirt road of infidelity,
and it won’t go ten steps before its headlight will go
out and it will be mired and it can’t go any further.
Whenever I see an infidel I say there is Mr. Nobody
going nowhere. (Laughter ) You can’t run your
soul on any dirt road on earth, but you lift it up to
the track of holiness and it will strike a bee-line for
the heavenly shore.
“ A man receives a box by express, and on opening
it finds a dozen pieces of iron, some pieces of wood,
and some polished machinery, but he doesn’t know
what it is and so sends it into the lumber-room. A
few days later he gets from the Post Office a book of
directions for putting the machine together and run-
ning it, and finds it is a sewing machine. And so a
man does not know how to run himself until he reads
the book of instructions. It is the only book you can
be run by. There are some machines that won’t run
because they ain’t all there. If you can’t run by the
book it is because you ain’t all there. (Laughter.)
But God will be compassionate, and if you try to run
by the book wnen you are not all there there will be
a side door you can get in at. This book says : ‘ Let
the wicked man forsake his way and come to God/
That is about what Christ wants us to do.


BUT THE DEYIL.
puts everything he can in our way. If you want to
get on the highway of holiness you must throw down
all your sins, and not take them up again. When I
was pastor of a circuit down in Georgia, with four and
a half churches, I was trying to get a prominent farmer
to join the church. He said he couldn’t join as he
drank whisky and cussed. He said he wouldn’t join
till he * done got religion.’ I asked him if he thought
he would know religion if he met it in the road.
Well, I was mighty hard up for members, and when
his wife came in I talked with her, but she was
equally positive, and I finally gave them up as hard
cases, but the very next day they both came marching
into church, and all their relations with them. A
short time after one of the neighbours, who was a
member of the church, said he was tired of belonging
to the church. He had behaved himself, but he
hadn’t got any feeling. Well, while we were
talking, he commenced jumping up and down, and
yelled out ‘ Glory to God I I’ve got it! ’ I tell you
a man gets religion just like he gets measles.
You have just got to keep religion up to fever heat,
and thousands of people in Chicago will get it, too.
When a fellow is feeling mean, it shows he has been
exposed to religion, and you have got to give him hot
gospel tea till it breaks out on him. Religion is like
measles: if it goes in on you it will kill you.
(Laughter). Feeling had nothing to do with repen-


tance. Reform is all the repentance I ask for. When
you turn from the wrong you turn toward God. If
you want to be a Christian the doors are wide open.
You have but to reform and turn toward Christ.”'
Mr, Jones, in conclusion, announced an afternoon ser-
vice, and invited those who desired to remain. A
large majority of the audience did so. Then, with the
assistance of Dr. Lorimer and Dr. Barrows, Mr.
Jones induced about twenty-five would-be converts to
go into the enquiry room. One of the number was a
young coloured woman, who caused quite an excite-
ment by rushing out of the audience, wringing her
hands, and crying out in a loud hysterical way
“Thank God! Praise de Lord! Oh, my soul’s so
happy ! ” and the tears were actually pouring from
her eyes.
Mr. Jones said he hoped no one would keep back
because any one had shouted. If they did they were
selling out pretty cheap. He did not want any who
professed religion to go into the inquiry-room.
SAM SMALL.
An interesting and deeply sympathetic audience
filled Farwell hall yesterday noon, and listened to Sam
Small deliver a sermon, which, in greater part, was
composed of finer sentiment and sense than any
either he or Jones has yet given. A very noticeable
guide to its character was the fact that there was much


less laughter and more generous applause from the
audience. Mr. Small choose for his text :
“ And there is much rubbish, so that we are not able to build
the wall.—Nehemiah iv., 10.”
The first duty imposed on us by the architect, he
»aid, is to get rid of the rubbish, as nothing lasting
could be built on it. A distinguished architect was once
put on the stand in a certain court, and a lawyer,
with the wisdom so many of his kind possessed, ad-
dressed him : “ Ah, so you are a builder ? ”
“No, sir, I am an architect”
“ Well, isn’t an architect a builder 1 ”
“No, sir. The architect conceives the ideas of what
is to be built.”
“ Well, will you then be kind enough to tell me
who was the architect of the tower of Babel ? ”
“ No, sir; there was none, and hence the confusion.”
And so, in building character, it is just the same
as in building houses and walls and palaces. I must
have the place cleared of everything that is useless
and that will in any way retard the building, and in
the next place I must have an architect who can
conceive a building of grand and perfect character
and give me plans and specifications on which I can
build righteously and grandly. If my object is to
build a perfect and symmetrical character I must set
resolutely to work abiding by the plans of the
architect, and not abridging or adding anything which
I may think is better. If you are reckless as to the


character you are building you have no need of an
architect. A bad man is continually marring and
tearing down and destroying the timbers needed for
the building, leaving old scattered refuse. The first
thing is to get rid of the rubbish, and then I must
examine myself according to the plans and specifica-
tions. Christ is the architect, and His word is the
plans and specifications for building my character,
ajid the rubbish in the way must be removed.
They may say it is bigotry to say we must put out
of the way the social dram, the theatre and opera, the
social dance, and the clubs, those high-toned respec-
table bar-rooms, but they are all recognised by every
minister of Jesus Christ as the elements of the great
tidal wave which is washing out the foundations of
the churches and doing so much damage to God.
(Applause.) The worldling, who is not professing to
live according to the plans and specifications prepared
by the Great Architect, can take his own chances in
indulging in these things, but those who go back
to them after professing Christianity will surely
be put in hell for perjury. No doubt the fine arts
were put into the world for the benefit of humanity,
but the devil has seized hold of them to make his
carnival and his orgies, and while he has hold of them
God’s people should keep their hands off.
Some men, because Paul said to Timothy to take
a little wine for the stomach’s sake, carry such a
motto in their hats, but I do not know as he ev^r


said to hustle out of bed in the morning to get a
cocktail, and to get a whisky punch before dinner,
and to sit up at night surrounded by beer bottles,
playing whisky poker. (Laughter and applause.)
They are all rubbish in the corner of the temple, and
the Christian has no business with them. Friendship
with the world means enmity with God. Take
Christ as your architect and build trustfully according
to His plans. He will make living stones of your
character blocks. You will have difficulties in the
building from the barbarians of this enlightened age,
as Nehemiah had with the Samaritans when he was
trying to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem. You will
be criticised, and you will need all the courage,
temperance, love, and brotherly kindness you can
summon, but be firm and courageous, building with
one hand on your sword if necessary, until the armies
of Satan get behind you.
But you will not only get criticisms from the
world. The cruelest stabs of any will come from
inside the church. (Applause.) Joab’s blade is not
a typical circumstance to what some will do in these
days. I have seen young men break down when
called on to pray because all eyes were cocked up to
see how he would appear and whether he was
grammatical. (Applause.) I have had ministers
sit about as cold as basilisks while I was trying to
preach, and I have had to stop in what I was doing
to ask God to forgive them. But you’ll have to keep


up courage. So far as the criticisms of literary clubs
and such go I’d as soon have the opinion of Pete
Conklin, the circus clown. I’m not trying to conform
to the Knowall club programme. I am building
according to the plan Christ has given, and I am as
good ten minutes after I am converted as those who
have been for forty years, and the first slip he makes
he will go as quick as I would. (Applause.) I know
it is sometimes looked upon as a sort of a sin to be a
young man, but it is not my fault. My only fault is
that 1 did not commence to build sooner, and now
I am going to try and redeem lost time, and I don’t
care what men or devils say about it. (Applause.)
I would rather be the humblest in the kingdom of
God than the grandest on this earth.
In response to the inquiry, “ How many want to
build according to Christ’s plans ?” every one in the
large building stood up. The benediction was then
pronounced by Rev. William Fawcett.
I —6*s -sj—- ► ■-r'U (© — I


JONES AND SMALL.
They each Talk to Interested Audiences
in their own peculiar Georgian style.
One discourses on Faith as an Element, and
Necessary One, of Religion.
While his Co-Worker indulges less in
theories, and Preaches a Practical
Christianity.
Two Sermons.
SAM JONES.
The only interesting thing about the services at
the Casino rink last night was a solo by Mrs. J. H.
Cameron and the music by the choir, under the
leadership of Mr. J. H. Burke. Sam Jones was not
well, and his physical depression was reflected in his
talk. His text was :
“ What must Ido to be saved? Believe on the Lord Jesus
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.”
Mr. Jones said he had never sought a reputation in
his life. God had picked him up a poor, wrecked,


ruined boy in obscurity, and if he had any reputation
at all it was because he had put his hand in God’s
and been led by Him. He did not care what the
verdict of Chicago might be in regard to him, he
should be sorry he ever came to Chicago unless he
could win thousands of souls to Christ. Unless souls
were saved, he felt this would be the most magnificent
religious failure the world ever saw. He thanked
God for what had been done, and had faith much
good would result from his work here. He knew a
man could belong to a church, and read good books,
and be baptised, or sprinkled, or have water poured
on him, and yet go to hell. He would not under-
estimate these efficient means to take men to God,
but they were only efficient means. There was but
one sufficient means, and that was faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ. Salvation was not a song, or a
sentiment, or a tear, or a shout, or a feeling happy ;
salvation in its broadest sense meant salvation from
sin and a step further from wrong. Conversion
meant a ceasing to do evil, and an effort to do good.
There was nothing in the Bible about “ getting
religion.” He did not want to get religion, but
wanted it to get everlastingly hold on him. A great
many people thought when they got religion they
would know it by signs. That was the greatest curse
of the world. Religion came by faith, and not by
signs. He had always believed in Christ, but for
twenty-four years he had lived just as though he did


not believe in Him. But for the last thirteen years
he had believed in Christ, and had tried to live as he
believed. There had been many mistakes in his life,
and if he ever got to the pearly gates, it would not
be for anything he had done. In some of his most
serious moments, he had doubted whether he would
ever go to heaven, but if he ever did it would be
through the mercy of Jesus Christ. He used to
want to be religious so as not to go to hell, but
heaven and hell were now secondary considerations.
He wanted religion to make him a true man, and he
did not believe he could be a true man except through
the influence of Christ. Power to believe, he said,
was the gift of God, but believing was the act of man.
When a man said that he couldn’t trust in God, he
meant, in plain English, that he would not trust in
Him. The trouble was that men would not believe.
Faith was a condition of receptivity, and a man
would never get in that attitude who did not first
throw down his sin.
The services lasted to a later hour than usual, and
many went into the inquiry-rooms.
SAM SMALL.
“ Old Si ” was welcomed by an audience filling
Farewell-hall to overflowing yesterday noon. He
gave an interesting, clear-cut, and logical argument in
behalf of Christian behaviour from the text:
‘ ‘ For it is better, if the will of God be so, that you suffer for
well doing than for evil doing.”—l. Peter iii., 17.


That, said he, seems to be a plain, logical saying,
even if you leave out the clause, “ if the will of God
be so.” If we were to consider ourselves as though
there were no God, it seems to me the proposition
would strike every man that it were so ; but when we
put in that clause it has a great and comforting
influence upon the Christian. I would rather be
arrested by the police for nothing than for some-
thing. (Mild laughter). I’ve got some chance to get
out, and probably the newspapers would champion my
cause and say I was a good citizen, and give me some
free advertising. (Moderate laughter). I would
rather be a Christian, even though all the suffering
and distress of public denunciation were put on me,
than to be a reprobate. The blood of the martyrs of
the past has become the seed of the Church, and their
sufferings are exalted through all the world, while
their persecutors have gone down unhonoured and
unsung with names held in execration by all good and
virtuous ages. This is a hard doctrine to get men to
apply to their lives, because it subjects them to
privations and sufferings, and at times to disgrace
among men. There are certain societies in Chicago to
which you will not be admitted because you are
Christians. Your names will be passed over in giving
out invitations. It is better for you to suffer that
way than to go in and engage in the iniquities of good
society, so-called, and the joung lady who ignores it
and its attendant evils is laying up treasures for the


crown in glory for ever. Those young men who are
not sought after because they are not up in clubs,
cards, base-ball, and dancing, and are tabooed and
passed by because they are Christians, can say : “ The
very contumely you would heap upon me is honour in
the sight of my God.” Whatever false judgments
society may put on these qualities, there is one Judge
who judges all things right. Glory be to God, He has
given us the right if we are faithful to reap our reward
and wear a crown in eternity !
It is better to suffer for honesty than for dishonesty.
There is no doubt men are often put in places where
they lose by being honest. The merchant says to
retain trade he must be as dishonest and tricky as his
competitor, and yet the man claims to be a Christian
and goes and sits in a front pew of the church and
looks as solemn as an owl, and he would rather lose
all the Christianity he ever had than a dollar bill.
(Laughter).
The young man who has a position in his store says
he is not dishonest; he is only a clerk, acting as an agent
of the merchant, and he asks what he would do if he
failed to keep his position 1 It is a hard predicament,
but 1 would rather beg on the street than have the
certainty of hell hanging over me, and be dishonest, in
order to keep my position. Your agency for a
dishonest man will not serve you any purpose when
you get before the judgment bar of God. There is
not a merchant but would be made to quake if the


meanest little clerk in his store should walk up and
say he must leave because he could not serve a
dishonest man.
I can bear being banished from any presence in the
world for telling the truth, but if there was anything
would drive the iron in my soul, it would be to have
men say I was not truthful, or that I was a hypocrite ;
but, knowing the truth, I can stand anything. The
best proof I have that I am teaching the two-edged
Gospel of God is that lam making both sides mad. I
can not speak of the impositions put upon labour, but
I am subjected to the criticisms of the bloated
capitalist, and you can’t talk freely and say those men
who do not work should not eat, and that labourers
ought not to submit to the influence of demagogue
dead-beats, but those lazy blackguards go into some
dirty sheet and denounce you and all the good you
have ever said. Thank God what I have said is but
the truth, and I will bear the criticisms of one and
the contumely of the other. If I had a church in
Chicago, I would preach every man out who did not
like the truth. (Applause). I would not be afraid
of God not feeding me. There are enough men and
women who love truth and honesty to fill every church
in this city and this country. (Applause). I want to
see ministers brave enough to tell men to their faces
of their hypocrisy and meanness, and I want to see
patient, courageous soldiers to back up their captain
every foot of the way. (Applause). Let no glamour


of wealth make them cowards. Let them look to
Christ for their reward, and not to the contribution-
boxes and subscription-rolls, and they will be backed
up to the bitter end. (Applause). Better a small
profit with righteousness and peace than great gain
and distress. You had better sacrifice some of your
pleasures to preserve something of the likenessof Christ
in your character, than cultivate some of the fleeting
pleasures of the ball-room, theatres, and card-playing.
It is better to suffer from ignorance of the wickedness
of the world, than to suffer eternally for your know-
ledge of it.


ASSAILING SATAN.
Rev. Sam Jones talks on Humility, and says
from the Depths the Heights are Reached.
Mr. Jones spoke only for half an hour, and com-
menced by reading from the Bible :
And leas I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn
in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me.
For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might
depart from me.
And He said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for
My strength is made perfect in weakness.
I want you to pay particular attention to this. “My
grace is sufficient for thee.” The devil is a cunning
and artful adversary; his first effort is to make you
think you are good enough without any religion, and
if you finally reach the conclusion you are not good
at all the devil gets hold of you and says you’re too
weak and too trifling to think of being good. And
now, brother, I want to say to you that of the two
cases I think the last is the more hopeful. There
is no hope for a man while he thinks he is alright,
but I have hope for the man who has touched bottom
on the other side. I wish every Christian in this


house, and every minister, could say they had lost their
will-power, and were swallowed up in the will of God.
Now here we’ve got a case before us to-day. Paul
was much like us, in that he thought he was all right.
Touching the law he was all right, but the time came
when he counted all as nothing compared to the
excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ. At last the way
up is down, and the deeper down you go, the greater
artesian power there will be to your current. There
are a great many little shallow wells among you, and
along in the fall they get full of wiggle-tails. You
may not fully appreciate that illustration, but down
in Georgia some of the wells are very shallow, and
when you go for a drink you will find a gourd and a
pine knot at the side of the well. The first thing you
do when you want a drink, you don’t dip in the
gourd, but you take the pine knot and rap on the
box curb to drive the wiggletails down. There’s many
a preacher has a use for a pine knot in his church
occasionally.
Oh, brother, the deepest depths will go up in the
highest heights, Oh, brother, let’s go down in
humility in honest confession before God. David
said when he was brought lower the Lord helped
him. God fishes on the bottom, and if you want to
get in His net you’ve got to go down low. St.
Paul had been low, and he was given a thorn in the
flesh. I’m glad no human being knows what that
thorn was. Some wise men say that the thorn in his


flesh -was a defection in his eyesight, and when he was
going along the street the people would cry out:
There goes the old half-blind Paul teaching the way
to heaven.” Others say that the thorn in his flesh
was a defect in one of his legs, by reason of which he
was compelled to hop along, and the multitude would
watch old Paul hopping along teaching the way to the
gate of glory. Another wise man thinks the thorn
was the continued suppression of the ambition of his
nature.
God never made a grander man morally,
intellectually, or socially. I don’t know what was
the biggest, his heart or his brains—and it takes both
to make a mao. You show me a man with a big
brain and no heart, and I’ll show you a solid, stolid
old doctor of divinity. They have no fellow-feeling
or sympathy, and I have never been wise enough to
know what they are for, but I suppose there is some
use for them. There is a woman in lovn who
is all feet, but it is sadder still for a man to have
a head that weighs about fifty-six pounds on a body
weighing forty pounds. I don’t believe the thorn
in Paul’s flesh was a defection in his eyesight or a
laneness or suppressed ambition ; I don’t know what
it was, and I’m glad I don’t. If it was suppressed
anbition I could have no trouble about being
relgious. If it was just a bme leg I could hobble
along into heaven. The consolation to me is that
evmy man in this world has got a thorn in the flesh,


and it may be the same that cursed St. Paul. Do you
know there are some things in your life you never told
anybody about ? There are some retreats where God
must take me by the arm and walk alone or I won’t
go. There are some things in your life that you
ought not to talk to men about. Where is the man
here who has not carried a thorn in his flesh about
which he has spoken to no one 1 St, Paul carried
this thorn in his side as a messenger from Satan to
buffet him, and he carried it till he felt he couldn’t
carry it any longer, and he besought the Lord to
relieve him. There was no answer to his prayer,
and he dropped on his knees the third time to pray
—there is a charm in that third prayer—and then
Christ said to the Father, “ Something must be done,”
and the great God stood in the presence of angels and
reached over the parapet of heaven and put his hand
on the thorn and drove it up and said, “ My grace is
sufficient for thee.” That’s it, my brethren. What-
ever your supremest thorn may be, if He does not
pluck it out, he may drive it up in the tender flesh
and tell you His grace is sufficient for you. It may
be your thorn is an appetite for drink or gambling, or
something worse, but thank God, in your weakest
moments He shows His power for you. May God
help you to-day to trust in Him the remainder of
your life.


THE
GEORGIA EXHORTERS.
Sam Jones Urges His Hearers at the State
Street Rink to Confess Their Sins.
He Professes Great Admiration for the Man
Who is Without Guile.
Sam Jones drew an audience of four thousand
pe>ple at the Casino rink last night regardless of the
coidition of the weather. Dr. Lorimer presided at
th; meeting and Dr. Scudder invoked divine blessing.
Mss Heckle added an interest to the services by
a 1010, “Jesus, Lover of My Soul,” and Prof. Excel
also favoured the audience with a song, assisted by
M*. J. H. Burke.
Mr. Jones read five verses of the thirty-second
Palm and commented on them.
* Blessed is he whosa transgression is forgiven, whose sin
is lovered.”
* Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not
iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile,”
‘ When I kept silence my bones waxed old through my
roaming all the day long
‘ For day and night the hand was heavy upon me : my
mdsture is turned into the drought of summer.”
“ I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have
I rot hid.”


We have before us a very interesting question
indeed, David first makes a statement that you'will
be blessed, happy, and joyous if your transgression is
forgiven. He took in the whole situation, and said
if you want to be happy, if you want joy and
peace, seek it in pardon. Peace and pardon are
synonymous. Lord Byron, with perhaps the greatest
capacity for earthly enjoyment of any man we know
of, shortly before his death counted up and said
he had never had but eleven happy days in the
world. There was not a cup of pleasure he didn’t
drink with a genius and appetite perhaps never
enjoyed by any other man, but I reckon his eleven
happy days were in his early youth. This old
epicurean idea, “ eat, drink, and be merry,” is fatal
and false. Real enjoyment is in self denial. I’m
glad the bible says the kingdom of God is not meat
or drink. If it was you would die of gout or of
delirium tremens. David teaches us a different
philosophy, “ Blessed be he whose transgression is
forgiven.” Not blessed be he who lives in a four-
story house; not blessed be he who owns the most
stocks and government bonds. A great many realise
there is nothing in money, but they have acquired
a habit of getting it, and they persist in it. They
know money is eating the heart out of them, and they
are left only great big piles of dirt in the shape of
men. Then blessed is the man on whom the Lord
has not imputed iniquity. Brethren, after all, my


relations to God are determined by my loyalty to
God. If I know a boy is loyal and upright to his
father he will not need looking after to see if he is
disloyal. The Lord does not look so much at what
you do as to what made you do it. He does not
look at how hard you fall, but how hard you try to
get up. God treats with the motive altogether.
This is deep water ; when Igo out in this question,
I never go but I have a pair of gourds under my arms.
Motive —motive. Blessed is the man on whom the
Lord imputeth not iniquity. If the Lord knows you
are loyal and do the clean thing all the time He will
not have the sheriff watching over you. Some of you
would like very much for Him not to look after you
for a month at a time. (Laughter.) Just live on a
plan that you can not only be pardoned, but that
God may have confidence in you. The Lord doesn’t
have to look after me to keep me away from bar-
rooms and clubs, because I’m not going that way.
I hope some day to be so loyal to God that I won’t
have to be watched in any other sense. And now
listen : “ And in whose spirit is no guile.” I not'ced
at a dentist’s shop the other day there were some
plugs in a set of artificial teeth, and the dentist tol 1
me he made them that way so they would look
natural, and I’ll tell you they are running guile on
everything nowadays. If there is anything in this
world I despise it is guile, and if there is anything
I admire about a man it is to know he is worse


outside than he is inside. I’ve a contempt for the
man who has got anything to hide. I believe in
wearing one side out one day and the other the next.
Be what you are through and through. Some pieces
of humanity are put up like bales of cotton down
south. They put nice cotton outside, and inside is
what they call the dogtail cotton. (Laughter.)
There’s many a Methodist and Baptist in this town
like that, but some day God will show you up
through and through. I do like a guileless, trans-
parent sort of fellow. Guileful people are always
talking around that everybody has got his price.
That fellow is measuring other people’s corn in his
own half-bushel, and if you want to buy him he has
got his price. If you have sinned, confess it when
you walk up to the penitent chair or go into the
inquiry-room ; that is confession that you think you
have not lived right. Some of you who are members
of the church haven’t had peace for months. The
trouble is with you as it was with David that you
want to confess, and that you don’t want to confess.
When you people who are unhappy get to where you
confess and forsake your sin you will find mercy and
peace. There are not many of us here to-night, and
we are not in a hurry, and as this is a good line of
talk I may keep on till 12 o’clock, so if any of you
want to go you may consider you have received the
benediction and go now. Sin is a debt. You had
better die than go into debt. If you can’t pay your


debts God will put you in hell for it just the same
as for stealing. The man who fails to settle his
accounts at least once a year is on the road to
bankruptcy, and not only loses his money, but his
character with it. Sin is a debt, and the best way is
not to sin at all. You can help sinning just as you can
prevent getting into debt; but if you do happen to
slip up don’t let your sin get cold till you repent.
I believe in a man dropping right down on the side-
walk and asking God’s pardon when he sins. I don’t
believe in bankruptcy and homestead laws. I don’t
say some good men don’t take advantage of them, but
they are making a mistake. I want to see the day in
America when you can take the coat off a man’s back
to pay his debt. Before you sleep to-night see to it
that you have a receipt from Jesus Christ that your
sins are forgiven. Now, I have been talking the
truth to you all in this rink for five weeks, and I
have said some plain things, and if I can muster
enough grit I may say some stronger things before I
go. You may not like them, but you can lump them.
(Laughter.) I am smart enough to know I could
have had your praise if 1 cared more for them than
the praises of God, and old Col. A. would have given
me a SSOO cheque before now, but I have let you
people abuse me and have looked to God for glory.
And I could have had all the newspapers with me if
I’d been a mind to work that way. The newspapers
will take any fellow that preaches there is no hell.


(Laughter.) Confess and go to the bottom. We
want the bottom facts. A good many church mem-
bers have been waiting to me about tobacco, while
they do such guilty things as would bring the blush
of shame on my cheeks. You, I mean. You! You
couldn’t throw a stone at me to save your life, but
you could throw paper wads. (Laughter.) Let’s
clean up before our own doors first, and if you do you
will be so busy you won’t know who chews tobacco
and who don’t. (Laughter.) Seek pardon for your-
selves and then go out and take the world for Christ.
You have helped me, and now let me help you.
Sister, why do you drink three cups of coffee at each
meal and drowse your intellect ? Throw it down
before God, won’t you 1 Won’t you ? Confess your
sins, and you shan’t beat me at confessing.
(Laughter.) You sisters, confess your sins. There
are a thousand things I can’t talk to you about. The
Holy Spirit will talk with you. A big society woman
here called on a poor family recently where the
husband had been injured, and she went with
I ornpous parade to do her charity work, and when she
got inside the poorhouse she turned up her majestic
nose and said : “ Just look at the children ! No
wonder they’re poor.” There were six children.
Now if you don’t like the turn I am taking you know
where the door is. (Applause and laughter.) And,
br Jher, you confess your sin. Let’s rush into the
kingdom to-night. Don’t stay back and die.


JONES’ EFFECTIVE TALK.
He Moves a Vast Throng of Men by an
Elucidation of the Prodigal-Son Parable.
Sam Jones delivered the most effective talk he has
yet given in Chicago to an audience of six thousand
men at the Casino rink yesterday afternoon. At the
close many strong men were in tears, and expressed
a deep desire to repent from evil ways. One man,
who was under the influence of liquor, wanted to
shake the hand of Mr. Jones, and kissed it repeatedly.
Now, brethren, commenced the revivalist, this is the
last time we shall be together at this rink ; let us
make it the grand meeting of the series. We have
selected the parable of the prodigal-son, and will give
a running commentary upon it. It is a wonderful
parable. I like Shakespeare and Dickens and
Thackeray for their expositions of human nature.
But Jesus Christ differs from all our best authors in
that He takes us by the hand and shows us all the
downward steps of life and then leads us back to
heaven. If when the prodigal returned his father
had refused to accept him and hired him as a servant
at $lO a month and put him out in a cabin on the
plantation he’d a stole something before Saturday


night. (Laughter.) Preachers, in talking of this
parable, commonly speak of the prodigal as a very
wicked and profligate boy. I think it is shown in this
parable that he was a very good boy, and worthy the
confidence and love of his father. • I say every man
has naturally enough meanness to damn him, and I
don’t know what any man wants of more than that.
Let us bring this parable down to the nineteenth
century so that every man can get hold of it. We will
say the younger son has asked for the portion coming
to him, and on Monday morning he commences to-
gather his camels, sheep, horses, money, servants, etc.,
and by Saturday he is ready to start on the journey
with his caravan. The next Monday he drives the
caravan out in- front of the old homestead and
affectionately bids good-by to his fond and anxious
parents. And oft’ the vast caravan moves, and I
imagine that a little before sundown he pitches his
tent and goes about to see that all the servants and
stock are well provided for, and he goes to sleep as
the stars are twinkling in the heavens with the
reflection that it is the first night he has been away
from home. I have often wished he had come to the
conclusion then to turn around and go home. He
would then have escaped so many trials and
difficulties; but he went to sleep, and the next day he
marched on, and each afternoon the scene was
repeated, and Saturday night he looks for a nice spot
to camp, for he expects to stay over Sunday. He


had not got to violate the Sabbath yet. If he could
only have settled in his mind on that first Sunday
away from home that it would be his last one regard-
less of what anyone would think of his returning
then. But instead he rises early Monday morning
and on he drives. I imagine about the middle of the
week he passes through the fertile country and thinks
to settle down, but concludes he won’t because he is
too near home, and the old man and woman will be
coining down to break up his plan®. He thinks his
father is a little old-fogyish, but that he saw his boy
was a heap smarter than he was, and the boy thinks
he will soon double his estate. He drives on, and
thinks he will build a beautiful palace and have
a great plantation, and he will then drive down in his
chariot and bring his father and mother down, and he
never had anything else in his mind. He wanted to
get away off where he would not be disturbed,
and he would show there was one wise father who
was almost as smart as himself. I’ll tell you another
thing ; he’s moving in style, too. People talk of the
magnificent pageant that went down the road. Oh,
sir, I imagine if he put up in a mansion by the way
and left the servants out in the tents, he would walk
up in a Chicago banker style and ask, in his lordly
way, for his bill, and when told he owed nothing he
would say : “ I’d have you to understand, sir, that
I’m no pauper !” and he would come near having a
fight with his hospitable host. He moves on like a


prince to make his fortune. He does not make it,
but expects to make it, and if he needs money he
sells a camel or two. And the parable tells us that
when he came into a far country he built a magnifi-
cent palace, and buys a hundred thousand acres of
fertile land, and is an honour to the country, and a
blessing to all in that land—in a hor-r-r-n. [Laughter
and applause.] “ And there he wasted his substance
in riotous living.” Hear that ! Ah, me ! How fast
it goes—“ and when he had spent all, there arose a
mighty famine in that land.” How much human
nature there is in that ! Did you ever notice how
when you are broke it seems as though there was no
money in the world 1 Everybody’s broke. [Laughter.]
But when a fellow’s got a plenty it’s just heaped on
him. Let the governor of Illinois come up here, and
if it’s known that he wants a carriage there will be
five hundred carriages after him, but just let old man
Smith down here, who is poor and miserable, want a
horse to bring a bushel of meal, and there ain’t nobody
in town a horse. [Laughter.] “And he was in
want, and he joined a citizen of that country, and was
sent into the fields to feed swine.” He was a Jew
recollect. (Laughter.) If you can put a Jew at any
more disreputable business than feeding swine I’d like
to know what it is. (Laughter.) He can’t eat
them—and I’m about half Jew myself on that
line. The more hog a man eats the more he
gets like them. (Laughter.) I’m not running


against Armour’s business, but that’s the way I feel*
A man has a spiritual inheritage, and your Father
has turned over to you all that has ever made you
happy—and there is a man there, and another
there, who has not only wasted it in
f'
riotous living, but forgot the most precious things o 1
your life. You drink wine at the clubs, and play
with silk cards, and on you go till you spend all, and
there is a mighty famine, and then you go around and
join yourself to a citizen. The devil is the citizen of
this country that you join yourselves to. You are
not put to feeding swine, but you are put to the most
disreputable work that ever disgraced mortal man—
profanity, gambling, adultery, and all sorts of wicked-
ness. Where were you last night 1 What is your
record this blessed Sabbath morning 1 Oh, to what
depths man can sink ! “He was put to feed swine,
and he fain would have filled his belly with the husks
that the swine did eat.” Did you ever notice the
devil makes you feed on what you give the swine ? 1
Nine liquor men out of every ten die from whisky.
Go down here into a beer saloon and see men gulp
down till it is a question whether they will stay
intact without hoops around them. (Laughter.)
There is not a gambler hears my voice, but is a thief
in the worst sense of the word. If there was such a
thing as honest gambling, no gambler would ever get
rich. What have you of your spiritual inheritage %'
Ain’t there a spiritual famine? What was the matter


■with the prodigal boy all this time 1 I will tell you.
He was beside himself. That is the key-note—“ and
when he came to himself ’’ —that is the trouble with
them all—they’re mad ! they’re mad ! they’re mad.
Every sinner in this town is mad ; that’s what’s the
matter. If we can get you to come to yourself, we
■can get you to come to Christ this afternoon. As
:soon as the boy came to himself he reasoned. He
was ragged, hungry, and starving, and not only that,
but he had disgraced his father and mother, and he
reasoned that even his father’s servants had a plenty.
And then he came to the conclusion to arise and go to
ii is father. He had not a dollar, or shoes, or a hat,
and he was a thousand miles away. He was a dirty,
■ disreputable wretch, thinking to go back to his pure
father’s house. He hauled himself out of the hog-
pen first. That was a start to turn his back on a
place like that, and I reckon if there had been an old
•coloured man going up the road with a cart and a
steer in it he would have asked to ride. And when
he passes the residence where he came so near having
a fight about his bill, he climbed the fences and went
away round —he wouldn’t be seen within a mile of
That house, (Laughter.) And when he passed along,
such a miserable specimen of humanity, no one recog-
nised in him the prince who went by in such style a
few years before. When the devil gets a man in his
hog pen and wallows him around awhile you don’t
know him. (Laughter.) A woman asked me once


not to speak so as to hurt her husband’s feelin’s, be-
cause it was so hard to get him to church. He was-
going to the hog-pen. (Laughter.) If I hurt your
feelin’s I can put the dogs on you and tree you at the-
hog-pen in less than ten years, and I can’t hurt your
feelin’s then. (Laughter.) When the prodigal got in
sight of his boyhood home he stopped under an old
tree and looked at himself and decided to go no
further—he would die under the old oak tree and let
them bury him there ; but his father had seen him
when he was yet a great way off, and ran to him, and
threw his arms of mercy about him, and kissed him,,
and when the poor boy said, “ I am no longer worthy
to be called thy son,” the merciful father put his hand
over his boy’s mouth, and called the servants to pre-
pare to rejoice over the return of his poor, lost, way-
ward boy. You wandering men, let’s go to the old
homestead to-night, won’t you 1 Everyone who wants
to go back to purity and peace and heaven stand up.
Nearly every man in the great audience arose, and,
with a few exceptions, stayed to participate in the
after service.
QUITS THE USE OF TOBACCO.
SAM JONES ANNOUNCES THAT HE HAS
GIVEN UP THE HABIT.
The rink was crowded last night by a mixed
audience. Eev. Dr. Scudder presided, and said
Mr. Small was expected to speak exclusively to


the audience last nigh 1- ', hut Mr. Jones was
present, and made the first remarks. He f-poke
of the satisfactory nature of the meeting held in the
afternoon, at the conclusion of which eighty-six men
gave themselves to Christ. He would not be satisfied
unless as the result of the meetings this week 2500
persons should be converted. He thought this
revival the most successful ever held, and thought it
would be realised by the city in the future. He
asked those who had been blessed by the meetings to
arise, and a majority of those present stood up. He
then asked those to arise who had been worked up by
the meetings to a degree to desire prayer, and about
thirty persons arose. He then gave way to Mr.
-Small, who selected for his text a part of the thirteenth
verse of the sixth chapter of St. Matthew, the
doxology of the Lord’s Prayer, and delivered a brief
sermon. He took it for granted that there were few
present who had not been taught to repeat the Lord’s
Prayer in childhood. He wondered if those who
repeated it understood it, or if they did understand it,
whether they would repeat it 1 When it was said,
“ Let Thy kingdom come,” it meant God’s will. The
kingdom of God was not of the earth, peculiar in its
character, not to have particular government over
things that were considered brightest and best on this
earth ; but it brought man into a state that he could
take part in the dominion of God. When I pray for
the kingdom of God to come, I pray for all relations


to come, that make me treat my brother man in a
righteous manner. It gives me peace ; puts me in
right relations with the Holy Ghost, and brings me
nearer to the kingdom of God. How, in the midst of
the sin and wickedness of the world, am I to pray that
the kingdom of God may come, and I become a
citizen of it 1 It is to live in conformity to the will
of God, and love Him with all my heart, and my neighbour
as myself. Every man and woman who conforms to
the will of God will find their names lettered within the
walls of the kingdom of God. We say, “ Thine is
the power,” and we mean all the power of the earth
comes from the Creator, and He has manifested it in
all things. Christianity is marching on with majestic
strides, and will surely triumph. The story of the
cross and the song of salvation have the magnetism of
bringing great congregations together, and are auguries
of the establishment of Christ’s kingdom on earth.
May you be prayerful for tl\e coming of the kingdom,
and may you pray that prayer with sincerity and
truth.
Sam Jones again stepped forward and talked for
a brief time of the mockery of earthly glory and
ambitions. He related some pathetic incidents which
brought tears to the eyes of many of the women
present, and ended with a statement that he had quit
using tobacco, which created a great sensation. He
said : “ I consecrated myself to Christ thirteen years
ago, and have since tried to live rightly, but I find


I have a habit which is called a stumbling-block to
others by good Christians in the north, and I announce
to you to-night that you can say Sam Jones has got
no habits that will be a stumbling-block to anybody.
(Tremendous applause.) Whenever I find I have
about me anything that may prove a stumbling-block
to keep others from Christ it shall go down forever.
I ask your prayers for me. I have had a fight that
no one knows anything about. I give God the glory
and you the benefit, and if I do no good in Chicago
you may thank God that Chicago has done some good
to the poor little, pale southern preacher.” (Laughter.)
The ministers who have been labouring with Mr.
Jones to induce him to quit the use of tobacco
gathered about and shook his hand and congratulated
him.


OF REPENTANCE.
SAM JONES.
Repentance to a man in this world in his relations;
toward eternity is just exactly what the alphabet is to
a man of letters, precisely that thing. That litl le boy
standing at his mother’s knee, just four years old, is
learning a, b, c,d,e,f,g, and the little fellow learns from
a to z, and from z back to a, and now he commences
with m, and goes up and down, and directly he has
his letters perfectly. Now, mother says, “ Son, you
know your letters well, the alphabet, and now we will
begin to spell.” The little fellow turns over a page,
and as he turns the page he says, “ Good-bye a, b, c’s,”
But when he turns the page it is a-b ab. He could
not spell the first word without the alphabet—and
then “ib”; and I recollect when I got over to
“ baker ” I was getting on finely, and I could not
spell baker without a “ b,” and an “ a,” and a “ k,”
and an “ e,” and an “ r ; ” and when I got way over
to “ publication ” there was a “ p,” and a “ u,” and a
“ b,” and so on. Well, by and by I. got clear through
the spelling-book, and the teacher said : “ Now, you
tell your mother to get you a grammar.” “ Well,”


thinks I, “ Good-bye a, b, c’s now,” but I opened my
grammar, and every page was covered with the alpha-
bet. And one day the teacher said, “ Tell your father
to get you an arithmetic.” “ Well,” I says, “ that is
the science of numbers, I won’t be bothered with the
alphabet there.” But they couldn’t state a proposition
in mathematics without the alphabet, you see. And
finally they said, “We’ll take you into rhetoric.”
Well, thinks I to myself, “ Now I will bid farewell
to a, b, c,” but my rhetoric was covered with the
alphabet. And so finally the teacher said, “ I will
put you into Latin.” Well, thinks 1 to myself,
‘‘When I get among the dead languages, good-bye,
a, b, c,” but the first page of my Latin book was
covered with the alphabet; and by and by they said,
“We will put you into Greek.” Well, thinks Ito
myself, “ Surely I will get away from that alphabet
business now ; ” but it was “ Alpha,” commenced that
way, and went on down a, b, c, clear through. Well,
then, when the last lesson has-been said the President
writes me out a diploma, and, bless your life, every
line of the diploma is filled with the a, b, c’s, and I
say to myself, “ The higher up I get the more need
have I of the alphabet.
Well, brethren, just what the alphabet is to a man
of letters, just that thing repentance is to the sinner
in this world. The first thing I ever did religiously
in my life was to repent, and I have been repenting
every day since I started; and about the last thing I


■ever want to do in this world is to get down, with a
good hearty repentance before God, and go to heaven
a poor sinner saved by grace.
MOTHERS.
The preacher knows the worth of a good mother.
Mothers ! mothers ! Oh, my ! What we want in
this country is some earnest mothers. Now, suppose
we had a few mothers like Brother Amos Kendall told
me about. He was the presiding elder of one of the
Mississippi districts, and he told me himself : “ There
were ten of us boys. My mother had ten boys at her
home, and my brother Will was the only bad one
among us, Nine of us were preachers. Brother Will
was a bad boy—the black sheep of the family ; and,”
said he, “ Brother Will went from bad to worse, and
by the time he was 24 years old, he told me himself,
there wasn’t a sin known to God and man that he had
not committed except the sin of murder. Will went off
and stayed two years, and mother didn’t know where
he was, but he came back home one day and walked
in the front gate. Mother was sitting on the front
porch knitting, and he walked up, and mother looked
a t him as he walked up the steps and came on the
porch. Mother threw her eyes into his face, but
there were such traces of dissipation in the boy’s face,
mother did not recognise him, but when she threw
her eyes into his eyes, she jumped up, and threw
her arms around him, and cried out, “My poor way


ward boy. You never shall go down to hell until
you have swum through rivers of my tears and
climbed over mountains of my prayers.” And mother
broke the boy down there on the front porch,
and he gave his heart to God ; and he’s been
the best boy mother has had from that day to this.”
TO THE DRUNKARD.
A fellow coming home every night, his wife heart-
'broken, and his children beggars—he coming home
every night drunk, and sitting there and blubbering
and blubbering, “ Wife, I am so sorry I got drunk
again to-day.” I will tell you another thing—this
world is wrong on some things, sure as you live. We
have gone around here and patted these drinkers on
the shoulder, and said, “ You are a mighty clever
man ; it is a pity you drink, it is a pity you drink."
Why, he is one of the nicest men in the country, ruin-
ing himself with drink. Look here, my friend, if you
are drinking whisky and pauperizing yourself and
children, and breaking your wife’s heart, if you call
that clever, I want to be the meanest man that
walks this earth. Clever ! (Clever, means good-
natured in America.) You call that clever ? You old
brute you, you call that clever 1 I don’t believe the
devil himself, if he was a married devil, would treat his
wife as some drunken scoundrels in this town do
theirs. Talk about a clever fellow, it is a pity that he


drinks. Nothing clever about you ; you are mean
and debauched; the meanest man iti the world is the
man that will mistreat his wife, I don’t care who he
is. Clever fellow, pity you drink.. You mean devil
you. Talk about clever ! Many a fellow in this
town quit drinking his whisky, thinks he ought have
a chromo ; he thinks he ought to be petted ; he thinks
he ought to be petted now. “ Wifey, you ought to
pet me ; I have quit drinking.” You ought to have a
thousand lashes every day for ever having treated your
wife in that way, sir, and you don’t want no chromo \
you want the community to Idok on you as a dog.
THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD.
I have had members of the Church sometimes come
to me and say, “ Mr. Jones, do you think it is wrong
to dance 1 ?” “Are you a member of the Church?”
Yes.” “ And you want to dance ?” “ Yes.”
“ Well, go and dance, then. Dance as much as you
please, and be sure you get in a good lot of it here,
for it is going to be too warm where you are going
for that sort of exercise.” “Mr Jones, do you think
there is any harm in playing cards ?” “ Are you a
member of the Church?” “Yes.” “And want to
play cards?” “Yes.” “You like it?” “Yes.”
“ Well, you go and play, and play all you can, and be
sure and get your game ended, because it is going to
be too warm for cards unless they are made of asphalt
or something of that sort where you are going to


You had better have it out here.” “ Mr. Jones, do'
you think there is any harm in a dram ?” “You
want a dram ?” “ Yes.” “ You a member of the
Church?” “Yes.” “You like it?” “Yes.” “Well,
go and drink, old fellow, and drink a lot of it. I tell
you right now you won’t get any drams or any water
there in the country you are heading to.”
He suggests this test for the half-and-half Chris-
tians ;
Well, now, here is a dog going along, following
two men. But you don’t know whose dog he is, to save
your life, for he is following two men. But you say
to yourself, “ I will find out whose dog that is. I’ll
go up a little farther, to where the road forks off, and
when one of the men goes one way and the other man
goes the other, I’ll watch which road the dog follows,
and then when he turns to the right I shall know the
dog belongs to that man, and if he turns to the left I
shall know he belongs to the other man.” Now, if
there is a prayer meeting and a theatre
on the same night, and I see a crowd going up
Michigan avenue, I cannot tell for my life
whose dogs they are, but I go up to the forks of the
road and then I can tell. I stand right at the forks
of the road and I see some of the crowd head off
toward the theatre, and some to the prayer-meeting.
And now, if you turn on Wednesday night to the
theatre you are the devil’s dog, and you need say
nothing more about it.




THE AUSTRALIAN
“Christian World”
16 Pages. Price, 3d
_
ÜBLISHEL EVERY IF 1 IE?, XIDA. Y
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE AND BRISBANE.
The Australian Christian World is the exponent of
a bright, joyous, and evangelical Christianity. It is
thoroughly unsectarian, clergymen and laymen of all
the principal Protestant Denominations being upon
its regular staff.
It contains the important church news of all the
colonies, and is acknowledged to be the best, cheapest,
and most interesting religious paper published in
Australia. It should be in every home.
A Specimen Copy may he ordered from any 'Bookseller ,
or direct from the office :
Sydney : 80 HUNTER STREET.
Melbourne: 102 COLLINS STREET, B.
Brisbane : 156 EDWARD STREET.
A Book Department, where all kinds of good literature
(and also stationery) may be obtained, is
connected with each office,
