

SAMARAI
Samarai
Jure 1, 1911-THE LONE HAND
A Little Known Papuan Island Paradise
BY E. HARRIS.
(Illustrated by Photographs by the Author.)
ONE requires the pen of a poet to
describe Samarai and to do jus-
tice to its beauty. It is a tiny
island in the China Straits, some sixty
acres, lying off the eastern end of New
Guinea. It is an isle of palms, cro-
tons, coral paths, and sweet warbling
birds. It is a green gem—an emerald
—in the amethyst setting of the ocean,
girdled by isles of tropic beauty,
Samarai irresistibly reminds one of a
scene from “Florodora.” It is a mass
of vivid color, the sky surely of a
deeper blue than in any other part of
the earth; the sea revealing through
its crystal clearness masses of brightly
colored coral, while the crotons are a
riot of rich shades of yellow—pale ten-
der yellow merging into green, faint
delicate green darkening to red, the
many shades of red mellowing into
brown, and the brown into black, each
color catching the eye as being separ-
ate and distinct, and yet impossible to
define as to where one shade ends or
the other begins. Here is an avenue
of those gorgeous crotons, with the
white coral path winding like a silver
ribbon down the side of a hill; there
is an avenue of palms, whose tall,
stately trunks tower aloft like the pil-
lars of some majestic cathedral. From
the summit of the small hill in the
centre of the island one looks over the
tops of the palms, an ocean of cool,
green feather-like fronds, between
which are seen glimpses of soft, cool
green sward beneath. The air is as
full of sweet sounds as the scene is
beautiful. There are sweet song birds
B2


carolling merrily, and the ear is en-
chanted by the distant cadences of sea
breaking on coral shores.
Commercially, Samarai is the prin-
cipal settlement in Papua, although
Port Moresby, by reason of its being
the seat of government, is more heard
of. Nearly twice as much money is
contributed to the public revenue in
Samarai as is collected at Port Mor-
esby ; and Samarai is the centre for the
The First Bank in Samarai
The Bank of New South Wales and its Staff
engagement of most of the native labor
employed in the Territory.
The two or three Government build-
ings, three hotels, and half-dozen
stores face the beach, upon which the
waves seem ever to break gently, as
though loth to disturb the peaceful-
ness of the place, although between
the island and the mainland the tide
races like a millstream, and tales are
told of a wall of water five or six feet
in height occasionally, upon the turn
of the tide, bearing down upon un-
suspecting crews of whale boats.
Samarai is fortunate in having three
well managed hotels. Credit must be
given to all the “whites” for the man-
ner in which the law is observed pro-
hibiting the supply of liquor to the
natives, but some of the Europeans—
who, in justice it must be said are
not in all cases permanent residents of
the island —might set a better example
of sobriety. You see, there is no white
policeman on the island; and one could
not expect the Resident Magistrate—
who is representative of the Govern-


ment—to run the local drunks in with
his own hands, while it would be un-
thinkable to allow a native policeman
to lay a finger on a white man, even
though he were an inebriated one!
The curfew bell is an institution at
Samarai. It is sounded at nine o’clock
each night; and no colored “boy”
must be found abroad after that hour
A Novel Cricket Match (Brown v. White) at Kwato
unless with a written permission. The
island is a receiving depot for labor re-
cruited in the neighboring islands and
other parts of the Territory, at which
they await vessels to tranship them to
their destination —mine or plantation.
They used to congregate at nights and
keep late hours card playing and gamb-
ling, so the “curfew” was established
to make them return at an early hour
each to his own quarters,
there are no native villages on the
island, but on it one may see odd
specimens of almost all the numerous
tribes of Papua. Surly black savages.
from the Fly, as ugly as our own North
Queensland aborigines; copper-colored
boys from the “east-end,” with fine
hair and quite handsome features; nat-
ives from the north with Jewish faces
and their hair in ringlets bound with
bits of straw and fibre; black boys,
brown boys and piebald boys. They
are a happy good-natured crowd, affec-
tionate to each other, and usually faith-
ful to their employers, even on occa-
sions unto death.


Armed Native Constabulary at Samarai
Life at Samarai is much more peace-
ful and agreeable than at Port Mores-
by. (At the latter place there is an
atmosphere of distrust amongst the offi-
cials. Getting below the surface one
finds cliques and parties, each 'suspi-
cious and jealous of the other.) The
climate is like unto'- t-hat of a Turkish
bath—in the vapor ‘ chamber —chang-
ing little during the twelve months ex-
cept that in some months it rains a
little heavier than in others. The rain-
fall measures some fifteen feet per an-
num. Right round the periphery of
the island a path has been constructed
—a most romantic walk, at the edge
of the sea, and shaded by tall palms.
After sunset the proper thing is to take
a constitutional round the island, the
circuit occupying less than half an
hour. The more energetic have a turn
at the tennis net; or stand in front of a
wicket with a bat, and have “boys”
hurl cricket balls at them.
Beautiful though Samarai is, life
upon it becomes very wearisome after
a while ; and so week ends and holidays
are availed of to visit neighboring is-
lands or the mainland. Almost op-
posite is the island of Kwato, a station
of the London Missionary Society,
One memorable afternoon I went there
and saw the white residents of- Samarai
A Native Laundress.


badly beaten at cricket by the colored
Mission boys. The missionary’s house
is built on the top of a hill, the way to
it being by a path through a dense
tropical growth of greenery. The
stillness of the night, the bright moon-
light, the strange tropical palms and
vegetation, the silent flitting to and
fro of dark and almost naked forms,
gave the scene an air of unreality, an
impression of the theatre. And round
The Beautiful Coral Walks and Palm Avenues of Samarai.
the big hall of the house, each on its
own mat, were ranged numbers of
little piccaninnies—the Mission babies,
miniature pictures in bronze; w’hile on
the verandah their fathers and mothers
—the Mission “bovs” and “girls,”
the lamplight shining on their shapely
brown bodies, with well trained voices
sang part songs and glees perfectly in
tune, but with quaint pronunciation .
“Her fader he has locked d doar, her
mudder has d’ key” !
Samarai can never be a city of any
size; her location on a small islet more
than counterbalances her superior posi-
tion, commanding as it both the
north and south coasts of the Territory,
The Royal Commission which visited
Papua some four years ago recom-
mended that the township be removed
to the mainland at Fyfe Bay; and, with
a '“hinterland” of some of the richest
country in the Territory, there is not
much reason to doubt but that devel-
opment and growth would be rapid.
But Port Moresby will see. to it that
Samarai remains where it is!
At one time there were swamps on
the island, and the place had rather a


bad name for malaria. The swamps
have now been drained, and the Resi-
dent Medical Officer boasts that there
is not an anopheles—the particular
species of mosquito which carries the
germ of malaria —on the island. In
fact, Samarai is now a sanatorium for
sick and injured diggers, traders and
planters. During my visit the fashion-
able disease was a “blown up arm,’’
and there were quite a number of pasty
faced men, each with an arm in a
sling, who had come in from surround-
ing districts to receive medical treat-
ment. It is an offence under Papuan
law to fish by means of a stick of dyna-
mite, but it apparently has attractions,
and when one is rather slow in parting
with the dynamite after ignition, the
result is disastrous to one’s arm, and
means a visit to the doctor at Samarai.
Within easy distances there are smok-
ing mountains, sulphur springs, extinct
and active volcanoes, salt lakes and
the most wonderful island scenery. In
the future—perhaps in a century or
two —Samarai will be the centre of a
big tourist traffic.
During a recent stay in Samarai, an
event of unusual interest to the com-
mercial community occurred in the
opening of the first bank in that end
of the Territory, a branch of the Bank
of New South Wales. The transport
of the large safe from the steamer to
the bank premises was —in the lack of
any wheeled road vehicle —rather a
difficult problem, but was successfully
accomplished by using several lengths
of tram line taken from the jetty, and
one of the small tram trucks. The
rails were taken up from behind as
soon as the truck had passed over, and
laid down in front, and so, slowly, with
the aid of some two score “boys,” the
safe was got home.
The joke of Samarai is its fire en-
gine. Samarai wanted a fire engine,
and 1 after much agitation and official
correspondence became the possessor
of the only fire engine in the Terri-
tory. But some Departmental wit
must surely have cracked a joke at the
Islanders’ expense, because when land-
ed, behold a gorgeous machine all red
paint and brass, on four stout, heavy
wheels, with fine broad tyres fitted with
shafts and horse gear, driver’s seat,
brake and the whole paraphernalia for
a horse-drawn engine! And Samarai
with never a horse on the island ! The
local wit pictures the captain of the
fire brigade in the driver’s seat,
cracking his whip over a team of a
score or two of native “boys,” and
the Australian Press shrieking in hor-
ror at the awful sight!
A L’IMPERATRICE.
BY EDWARD PERUGINI.
I HAVE desired the World as a plaything for my moods»
I have desired the Stars in the jewelled, haunting night;
I have desired Love, and all the delight it includes :
These I desired for myself when I came to my manhood and might.
Now I desire the World that You may be throned on high t
Now I desire the Stars that You may be fitly crowned;
Therefore I give You love, adoration, and I
Only desire them now, that Your love may encompass me round.
