

SAMOA AND THE SAMOANS
Next to the Fijian group of islands, that of Samoa is the most
lovely as well as the most important in the South Pacific. The
natives are less brutal and savage than those of Fiji; but, although
there is a handsome national revenue to be obtained from their
cocoanut tree alone, they are sadly wanting in enterprise, and have
little or no conception of the value of their natural resources. Three
of the islands are among the largest in Polynesia. Savaii, having a
circumference of 140 miles, is the largest, and bristles with forests,
from its rugged coast line to the summit of its highest mountain.
Upolu, having a length of 44 miles from east to west, is pre-
eminently the richest in the group, having the best land, the best
timber —nowhere stunted in growth—the best harbour, and the
most of everything. Its Apia port is the chief emporium of Samoan
commerce, the principal resort of foreigners, and a pleasant
place of residence. Other islands are smaller than Upolu, but all
are coated with rich and fertile soil. Apolima is one of the most
remarkable among them. Its dark stone ribs bend out from the
cliffs and bind the basin isle together. From its summit you look
straight down four or five hundred feet to the snowy foam at its
base. Inside the isle there is a village of 200 natives, who are
independent of imports from other parts of the group. The fertility
of their little island is sufficient to sustain them. Here, and all over
the group, there are traces of former volcanic fires. Cones and
craters are common. Volcanic cinders cover every isle. Vents,
passages, and fire shafts are clearly defined among the hills. There
are numerous deep gorges, abrupt and overhanging precipices? and
broken walls of basalt on Upolu. Spurs shoot out from the chief
ranges, and dip into longitudinal and transversal valleys, which are
very rich and fertile. There are no rivers worthy of notice, but
there are a few fine lakes in the interior of Upolu and Savaii. The
coasts are fringed with the cocoanut palm tree, and the villages are
embowered beneath the shade of the deep-green bread-fruit tree.
The large islands abound with useful timber. Some trees yield an


unfailing supply of materials from which the Samoans make their
houses, oil, food, clothing, mats, fishing nets, ropes, scents, ornaments,
medicines, and implements of war. Edible roots grow in rich
abundance, especially the yam and the taro. The taro is the “daily
bread” of every Samoan. Birds are numerous, but animals and
reptiles are comparatively few. The climate is warm, but not
unhealthy on the coast. Winter is unknown. The air is usually
clear, and free from the sudden plunge from heat to cold so common
in Australia. The mean temperature on the coast is 80deg. in the
shade. The most unpleasant part of the year is from December to
March, when the heat becomes greater, and gales, and cyclones, and
light earthquakes occur.
ORIGIN,
There are about 34,000 inhabitants in the group, and only a few
hundred Europeans, Americans, and Tongans among them. The
origin of the Samoans is involved in obscurity, as they have no
written account of their ancestors. Writing was unknown to
them before the introduction of Christianity, in 1830. They
have no authentic information in any form concerning the past. It
is to them as utterly unknown as the future. They possess
traditions, but these are fabulous figments, which are now believed
only by the ignorant and superstitious. If their traditions flow
from facts in the far past, the semblance between them is obliterated,
and the events are caricatured, and hopelessly obscured and indeter-
minable. There are many of these traditions retailed among them,
and they serve at least to discover the wild exuberance of frivolous
phantasms in the heathen mind on the one hand, while on the other
they indicate the value of Christian missions in displacing such
worthless legends by correct information and useful knowledge.
TRADITION
The following is a specimen tradition, found in their inherited
lore and ante-mission knowledge : —ln the beginning the world was
water, and the great god Tangaloalangi rolled a rock down from
the heavens, which became fixed in the sea, having its top above
the sea level. The god had a daughter who dwelt in the tuli
(snipe), and who visited the new rock isle, and took a fancy to it.
Nothing could please the young goddess until she made her home
upon it; but she, being afraid of the sea at high tide, returned to
Tangaloalangi, and asked him to raise the islet, which was done as


she requested. Till now all was bare rock, but the goddess brought
to it a little soil and a creeping plant. She planted the wild vine,
which grew, and soon crept over the rock. This was so far
pleasant; but she disliked solitude, and desired and asked her
father god to find for her a suitable companion. He directed that
a quantity of the creeper should be collected, and then left to
wither and decay; and further appointed that her companion should
come from the withered vine. Her preparations were soon com-
plete, and the anxious maiden goddess watched for her mate, when
lo ! there came forth an “ anufe,” whence grew a man. Thus the
Samoans trace their origin to a goddess and an “ anufe,” which is a
page further back even than the records which have come down to
us from our ancient gorilla brethren.
The legend contains a dim reference to the volcanic origin of
the group. It began with a new-made rock. The traditions of
other groups of islands vary from this. The Tongans say that
theirs were fished up by the god Naui-kiji-kiji, with a fish-hook ;
and the natives of Aneiteum say that Nungeraim hauled up Anei-
teum in the same way.
Both tradition and history fail to supply the clue to the origin
of the Samoans, but their physical peculiarities, customs, and
language point with strong probability to the Malayan Peninsula
of Asia as their original source.
Like the Malayan nations, they are dark-brown in complexion,
with lank coarse black hair, and are generally robust in figure, and
about the average height, resembling the European races. Their
features are regular and even, and the facial angle of the head is
less acute than in the Negro Polynesian of the westward islands.
They have an average development of the intellectual faculties.
All the Malayo-Polynesian tongues in South, Central, and
Eastern Polynesia, including, of course, Samoan, come from one
family or ancient language now dead, whose off-shoots only survive.
The coincidences between these branch dialects are numerous.
Take, for example, the numerals of a dozen of them. The cardinal
six is “ ono ” in Samoan, Marquesas, Tahiti, Raratonga, Manihiki,
Nine, Fakaofu, Tongan, Fijian, Maori, Nina (New Hebrides), and
Yate. Here, then, is one word which has passed unchanged for
many ages, while twelve distinct languages have grown around it.
The number two in Malayan has a similar history to give. In
Malayan it is “ dua,” and lives dismembered as “ua ” in three
Vol. VI.—No. 33. T


tongues. In seven others the offensive “d” has been sup-
planted by the favourite letter “ r,” and the word is “ rua.” Then
in four dialects the letter “ 1 ” has been preferred, and the word is
lua. It is “ lua in Samoan. Many other words could furnish
similar evidence, no doubt, of their first parents and subsequent
adventures among the tongues of the South Seas, and throw a
considerable amount of light on the origin of the Samoans.
GOVERNMENT.
From their manner of life, any visitor might hastily infer that
the Samoans were without any form of Government. A temporary
residence among them would correct such an error. They have a
paternal government, which has become hoary with antiquity, and
is scrupulously upheld in every tribe. Each village is governed by
its own chiefs, one or more of whom can at any time use any neces-
sary power over the inhabitants. All the villages and towns are
united by the same customs and language, and by intermarriages.
These social ties are strengthened by civil alliances between two or
more tribes, and these are constituted what are called “ malo,” or
small kingdoms. Kings are elected by two of these “ malo,”
namely, Aana and Atua; but neither of the kings has any repre-
sentative power beyond that which he exercises in his own town.
Within his own tribe a chief exercises powers of very con-
siderable extent. His will is the law of his family. The
unanimous decision of all the chiefs in a village is the law of the
village. A few titles are held by each village, and these
are conferred on usually about half a dozen chiefs, who constitute
the common court of appeal in all cases of difficulty, and are, in
fact, the local magistrates.
The political constitution of the towns is the same on all the
islands. Saleiatana, the chief town of Manono, is divided into six
“ a^a ’ or wards; four of which are represented by three ruling
titles, and the other two “ ala ” by five titles, making a corporation
of eight ruling chiefs over a town of about 400 inhabitants. Then
next to these titled chiefs, there are forty-nine heads of
families in this town j each of whom may represent one, two,
or three families. The head of the family has alone
the power of disposing of any part of the family land. All the
members of such family enjoy the common privilege of cultivating


it while it remains in their possession, which it usually does from
one generation to another.
The usages and customs of their forefathers have a measureless
influence over them. Compared with these, all their modern petty
laws, made in imitation of European Governments, are puerile and
useless. When such are attempted by them it is merely to feed the
vanity of chiefs, and without any reference to the welfare of the
common people. Hitherto the rulers have shown no capacity for
forming themselves and their people into a united and independent
kingdom like Tonga. Now that Fiji and Rotumah are annexed to
our empire, the Samoan group should follow. At present every
town is nominally united to others, and ready to assist in war, and
much care is bestowed on tribal alliances ; but, except on religious
occasions, no assembly is called for the accomplishment of securing
better government, or the promotion of public works of utility or
ornament. The objects contemplated by their uncertain union are
the safety or honour of a tribe, the indulgence of revenge, or the
lust of war. They do not appreciate nor understand the benefits of
good government, and even if a Samoan of commanding will
and capacity were to arise, their interminable factions would be a
fatal barrier to his successful rule.
There are at present four leading powers, but they are con-
tinually shifting. One of these has been struggling for supremacy,
but has hitherto failed. If all were united under one head they
would make a kingdom of greater numerical strength than Tonga,
and equal to that of Thakombau before the annexation of Fiji.
TABOO.
Instead of enjoying the blessings of law and good government,
they live under the iron bondage of superstition. The taboo is a
terrible power among them. It is a mute appeal in some well
known symbol to one of the gods, and is, in fact, solemn cursing.
The sign used for this purpose is commonly a piece of cocoanut
leaf, or a basket of the same material, or an empty cocoanut sfrell,
or a burnt stick, or some other article of a similar kind. This sign
may be seen almost in every part of the group, and is often hung
on fruit trees or near taro plantations to keep off thieves. The
Samoan means by it that his god will punish the thief. He is
conscious that he cannot obtain civil protection from his rulers, and
hopes by this custom to ensure the safety of his property. If his


taboo fails, and his fruit trees are stripped of their fruit, or his
yam and taro gardens are laid waste, he then resorts to audible
imprecation. On finding his garden robbed, and his yams
stolen, he would stand near the spot whence they had been
taken, and shout—
“Itigata e, ai atu ia, ma oti atu, ma lipi, ile na gaoia ata ufi. E aue ! Moso e!”
Itigata and Moso are names of his god. He would thus pray :
“ 0 Itigata, eat, kill suddenly the person who stole my yams. Alas,
O Moso ! ” A burglar would tremble less at the sight of a lamp
turned upon him, or at the sound of a voice in a room which he
was entering, than a Samoan would on hearing those words while
he held the stolen yams in his basket.
CUSTOMS.
Samoans live in villages and small towns. Their houses are
built irregularly on the sides of winding footpaths, and have the
appearance of a number of conical hayricks, being all thatched
with leaves. There is not a single native dwelling in the group
worth the price of an ordinary brick cottage, and streets and
roads are rarely to be found anywhere. Most of the natives
in their heathen state went about in a bare apology for a covering.
Their only clothing was made of leaves or the bark of a
tree The most common working dress now is the “ titi,”
which is merely a girdle of long leaves of the Ti-tree skilfully
platted by their stems, and made into a fringe of sufficient
length to fasten round the loins, and cover the body to
the knees. Both men and women prefer this in fishing and garden-
ing and, in fact, in all kinds of work. The “ siapo ” is a walking and
lounging dress of greater value to them, and is used alike by both
sexes and all ranks of the people—in the night for bed-clothing and
mosquito curtains, as in the day for dress. It is a sheet of cloth in
one piece, which varies in size from fifty feet square to two hundred
feet. The women spend much of their time in making it, and
usnally have a good supply for their families. They make it
from the bark of the paper mulberry tree, which is carefully taken
from the tree in long strips two or three inches wide. These are
steeped a time in water, and then hammered out with a wooden
mallet to a width of from a foot to eighteen inches, the length


meanwhile being reduced. The edges are fastened together with an
arrowroot paste to the size required, and one sheet pasted upon
another until the desired thickness is attained. After this, it is com-
monly painted on both sides with a brown paint, and finally with a jet
black in squares, stripes, or any figure the female fancies. This
cloth, as a matter of course, is never washed, and is often worn
until it is fit only for the fire. “ le,” or fine mats and rugs, are
festal dresses. The mats are neatly plaited, and flexible as a piece
of calico, and are named and preserved with great care. Some of
them have been in certain families for several generations in suc-
cession, and are valued according to their age and the number of
persons by whom they have been worn. There is nothing
more to notice in the wardrobe of a heathen Samoan,
and there was room enough for a general reformation
in dress, which is now being made by the agencies of
Christian missions, and their attendant traders from Europe and
America. These require and supply clothing, but they cannot
create Samoan taste. Both sexes are destitute of taste, and are
blind to neatness and beauty in personal adornment. Instead of
dressing even their hair, the women crop it short, while long hair
was formerly in great esteem among the men, who then and now
dye it weekly with coral lime, and daub themselves freely with
turmeric and scented oil.
TATTOOING,
The males are tattooed from the loins to the knees, andfewyoung
men have courage to face the reproach to which the absence of it
would subject them. It is esteemed as a mark of manhood, and Samoan
youths and men are proud to suffer this painful and barbarous
custom. The operation is performed by professional tattooers, who
use only instruments which are made of human bone. One of these
is a small serrated adze, and the other a small mallet. The mixture
used in pricking the figures and stripes on the body is made from
candlenut ashes, which neither washing nor change of body
obliterates. Three months are usually spent in tattooing one youth,
and during the operation no stranger is allowed to come near him.
I knew a native who unwittingly passed a hut where a youth was
undergoing the operation, and he was savagely attacked and
maimed for life. After tattooing, the young men have no difficulty
in obtaining a wife. Thev have to conduct their
o
negotiations and courting business, not with the young ladies,


but with the parents or an elder brother. A female’s affections, if she
has any, are ignored altogether. A young man’s advances must be
made with a present to the girl’s nearest relatives, this bribe being
usually a basket of taro, or a choice fish, or fowl, or pig. If it be
received, then similar presents are repeated and continued until the
parents or guardians of the young lady give their consent. After
they have consented to the wedding, they commence to prepare and
collect “ siapo,” and “ie” for the dowry, more or less, according to
their rank. The relatives of the bridegroom also collect, and on
the wedding-day further presents are made to the family of the bride.
They use no religious formalities on these occasions. These have
been added by the missionaries, but, as a rule, are only observed by
church members among them.
MYTHOLOGY.
The Samoan system of religion scarcely touched their domestic
life, and was entirely divorced from morality—a certain mark of a
false creed. Their mythology is very obscure even to themselves.
We cannot learn much from them. Until about 1830 they were
wholly given up to hero worship. Their gods were spirits of dead
heroes, whose chief attributes were superhuman power and pre-
science, and who dwelt in their chosen shrines. These were held as
sacred by them ; but the “ aitu,” or spirits, alone were worshipped
and distinguished as family or war gods.
Some of the principal family “ aitu” were Lesa, Titiusi, Tuialii,
Lealiitu, Sepomalosi, Faana, Moomu, Nifoloa, &c., &c. Lesa, or the
holy one, was worshipped in most parts of the group, but always
without symbol, similitude, likeness, or any mode of manifestation.
No priest ever professed to have any revelation from him. He was
their “ unknown God.” They believed in his existence, but nothing
further was known. Titiusi, or god Greenleaf, communicated freely
with his priests, and was honoured by numerous families. Sepo-
malosi, or strong Sepo, seems to have been an honoured hero, who
was distinguished as the Samoan Samson or Hercules. Nifoloa, or
Longtooth, will pass for a brother of the one-toothed god of Fiji, and
was feared by many. Segivave was still more feared and hated
by all, as the “ aitu” that ruled over sudden deaths. Mangoifoa
was a nimble spirit, who made war with other “ aitu,” and gene-
rally had to seek safety in flight. He fought with Melomelo-i-


Manua, but fled, and escaped his pursuer at Foa, a village on Savaii,
and is derided in the following couplet:—
‘ I A tulituliloa
Ua ole Mangoifoa.”
It has become a proverb of reproach, and is given to the vanquished
who have been deceived and driven away defeated in war, Saumani
and Lafasa were fire goddesses that appeared on the sea, south and
north of the islands. The air in warm nights at times became
inflamed by the phosphorescence of the sea, and shone like a fishing
torch, to which it was compared. The following song is still sung
to the praise of Saumani—
“ Tou funa Saumani
Tagai le lama e fai ma sulu
Oh si a oulua tama.”
Literally—■“ You lady Saumani, light the ‘ lama’ to make the torch
for your children.” Another, and a favourite, goddess was Sau-
maeafi, whose character is somewhat similar to that of the
Aphrodite of Homer, She was the Samoan Yenus, and fully
merited her place among the “unclean spirits.” None of these
“ aitu” belonged exclusively to one tribe; but it was different with
their war gods, the latter being local and strictly identified with
particular tribes. Some of them were supposed to appear in
animals or birds, or to be invisibly present on sacred land.
The “ aitu” Yave came to his people in a bird, the Manualii or
chief’s bird. Lulumaveve was invisibly present on two particular
stones in Palauli or Savaii. Sacrifices or offerings were placed on
these stones before going to war, and the following prayer was
repeated:—
‘ Lulumaveve e ! ia e faasaoina i matou i le taua.”
Meaning—“ 0 Lulumaveve, do thou bring us safely through the
war.” Another “ aitu,” Moafelo, was supposed to dwell in the cock.
The crowing of the cock was often a call to war. If it hapjxmed
that one crowed alone between four o’clock in the afternoon
and sunset, and this was not followed by a general crowing, it was
believed to be Moafelo’s command to battle, and in this faith a
whole tribe went to war. Another of the “ aitu ” dwelt in a canoe
called “ Tafanga,” the property of a tribe at Faleapuna, who trusted
in that canoe as the Jews did in their “ ark.”* They had, in fact,
more faith in Tafanga than in their own prowess. Among the war


gods, none ranked higher than Saveasiuleo, the “ aitu ” of Savaii
and Manono. He was the great king, the Pluto, of Hades, whose
power was infinite, and to whom all yielded the profoundest
homage. He had a human head with the vast extremities of a sea
serpent. Chiefs of the highest rank were the pillars of his house.
An intimation to a chief, when dying, that he would become a
pillar in the house of Saveasiuleo would afford him the
utmost comfort and delight A piece of ground was consecrated for
the worship of this war god. On assembling the natives
marched round the sacred allotment, each warrior being armed with
' o
his spear or club, and then, having formed themselves into a circle,
they all sat down on the ground, when a public speaker offered the
following prayer:—
“ Saveasiuleo e!ta e faafofoga mai. Tanumia tagutu mamaa taanoa. la tafe
toto le ala matou te ui ai. la u mai muliulu ole itutaua.”
Meaning—“ Hear, 0 Saveosiuleo! May stumps of trees and scat-
tered stones be buried. May blood flow in our path. May the
back of the head of the enemy be turned toward us.”
The natives of Faleata observed another ceremony before going
to war, under the protection of their god Tuitui. The warriors
paraded in their war costume, with their bodies besmeared and
daubed with paint, and then with a flourish of clubs sat down. A
person now passed a newly-plucked cocoanut into the hands of a
“ tulafale,” who received it standing. He first jerked off the stalk
of the nut, and then, holding the latter in his right hand, stretched
out toward the east, shouted aloud, “ manu na ” —blessings there.
Then, turning westward, he repeated the act, and shouted, “ mala
na ” —calamities there. He next flung the stalk of the nut towards
the west, and proceeded to open the nut, which was full of fluid,
and, solemnly walking round the circle of assembled warriors, he
sprinkled them all for battle, and the usual prayer to Tuitui
followed.
The national faith of Samoans in their “ aitu ” was strong and
influential before Christianity reached them. They believed sin-
cerely in their existence and manifestations, and promptly obeyed
their commands, and gravely endured the ludicrous tricks of their
deluded priests. If a priest announced that he had received a
revelation, the people forthwith crouched servilely at his feet, ready
to obey the most foolish orders. Many of them still covertly cling
to their old faith, and retain a superstitious reverence for their


desecrated sacred things. But the present generation will see the
end of their heathenism, as all their priests have now ceased to
minister, and their prophets have ceased to prophesy, and their
ancient worship is defunct, and their idols and temples are
abolished.
Before this was accomplished, their shrines were very numerous
in every part of the group. In fact, any living creature might
possibly have an indwelling “ aitu.” The Samoans were “ fools,
and changed the the incorruptible God into the likeness of
an image of corruptible man, and of birds and four-footed beasts,
and creeping things.” Nifoloa was supposed to dwell in the serpent.
If a Samoan accidentally saw one in the bush, he instantly sat down
and prayed—
“ Ua ou mao mai i lau afio a ia ou ola.’
Meaning—“ I have undesignedly come into thy presence, but may
I live ? ” The term “ afio ”is only used of the presence of a god, or
a chief of high rank. The sea-eel was the shrine of Moso, and any
of his devotees would scrupulously worship it. But those who did
not belong to Moso would kill, cook, and eat the eel with indiffer-
ence. If, however, a worshipper of Moso chanced to enter the bake-
house, and learned that an eel was in the oven, he would remain a
voluntary prisoner in the place until the eel was removed, and then
himself spread a quantity of leaves and lie down in the hole
where it had been baked or roasted, the hot cooking-stones having
been taken away. His design was to assure the god that he was
not an accomplice with those who had killed and cooked his shrine.
If he had not entered the bakehouse, but only approached it, when
he was informed that his god was in the oven he would call for a
bottle of oil—which anyone would supply—and he would take a
drink as penance for being in the vicinity of Moso’s desecration.
Among other creatures which the gods were supposed to inhabit
there were the cuttle-fish, the turtle, the vampire bat, birds, fowls, and
dogs. A bird was sacred to Nifoloa, the fowl to Moafelo, and 4he
dog to Salevao. Christianity has turned some of these shrines into
articles of food, and the liberated heathen mind has rushed to an
extreme in this matter ;so that, together with sacred fish and fowl,
the dog has fallen to the level of the swine, and, like rats and
lizards in Tonga, these are now converted into common dishes
among their viands. Sacred places also have been utilized for
commonplace purposes. In early times these were either small


temples or select allotments of land, or sometimes forests of timber.
Moso had numerous temples. One of these was at Satupaitea
Savaii, and contained only a wooden bowl, which was used as an
oracle by the priest. The bowl was called “ lipi,” or sudden death,
and the oracle was worked in the detection and punishment of
crime. If theft had become unusually prevalent in the place, the
rulers convened an assembly, before whom the priest brought out
his “lipi,” which was carefully concealed from view beneath a vast
profusion of “siapo” until required. All formalities being over, it was
then exposed in silence, and placed in the open space before the
chiefs, and a drink called “ ava” was made in it ; the priest mean-
while sitting by. Then any one of the people present who had lost
anything came forward, and, approaching the bowl, cast a fibre of
sinnet into the “ ava,” naming at the same time the missing article.
“My fowl has been stolen,” said one; “my pig was stolen,” said
another; “my (canoe) paddle has been stolen,” said a third, as the
fibre dropped from his hand. When each had thus published his
lost article, the “ maulasia,” the priest of “ lipi,” with a fan in his
hand, gave a significant sweep over the bowl, and delivered up the
thieves to the wrath of Moso. The bowl was now covered over, and
restored in silence to the temple. After this ceremony, whoever
died suddenly from any cause was condemned by public opinion as
a thief.
In another of Moso’s temples at Lefanga there was a sacred seat
on which the “ aitu” was supposed to sit; and in the temple of
Taema and Tilifainga there were two sacred stones, which the priest
held in his hands behind him whenever he delivered an oracle from
them. One of the sacred forests contained most valuable timber,
called “ ifilele.” No Samoan durst touch it, even after all the
inhabitants had become nominally Christian. They were still held
in bondage by a superstitious fear of the abandoned “ aitu.” But
one of the missionaries determined to put an end to this, if possible,
and made known his intention to cut down one of the sacred trees
In the presence of a crowd of awe-struck witnesses he carried
his purpose into execution. They expected that he would
have fallen down dead; but, when they saw no harm come to
him they took courage, and forthwith followed his example, and
cut sufficient timber for a boat. The taboo now being removed,
the whole forest became common. The most stubborn opponents of
religious knowledge here, as everywhere, were the priests. These
were usually self-appointed, and their office was not hereditary.


No special qualifications were required for it, beyond that of having
received an “ aitu,” from whom all the oracles came. Sometimes a
tribe would be aroused by the oracle with, “ Prepare for battle and
victory.” At another time—“ Depart to war, and be defeated.” If
a famine were predicted, it would be “ 0 100 i tai le atule”—mean-
ing, “ There are herrings in the sea, but nothing on the land.” The
priests controlled all acts of worship, which consisted in libations,
donations, prayers, and imprecations. The libations were petitionary
and propitiatory. Instead of wine, honey, or milk, which could not
be obtained, they used “ ava” and oil for the purpose. Sacred gifts
were continually presented, and some valuable ones. Both gifts
and libations were accompanied with prayer. In view of the former
state of this people—their gods, worship, morals, and manners —it is
manifest that they were irrecoverably ruined, religiously, morally,
and socially for all future time, had they had not been brought into
contact with Christian nations and the potent agencies of the
Christian religion. Their manners were degrading and licentious, and
virtue and moral purity were well nigh lost from among them. But by
the introduction of the purifying and elevating power of Christianity
among them, a reformation has been commenced which would be
greatly accelerated by the annexation of their beautiful group of
islands to the British empire.
Maktin Dyson.
