

SAMOA
A STORY THAT TEEMS
::: WITH TRAGEDY :::
-BY-
H. E. HOLLAND
PRICE - - THREEPENCE
WELLINGTON. N.Z.
Printed at the office of The Maoriland Worker Printing and Publishing
Company, Limited, 290 Wakefield Street.


SAMOA
Interest centres on Samoa by reason of the organised effort that is
being made throughout New Zealand to create a “public opinion" in
favour of annexing the German portion of the unfortunate little archi-
pelago to New Zealand. There are elements in this country—elements
that are numerically weak, but financially strong—that would be pre-
pared to say that the question of Samoa’s future should be made a
determining factor in the continuance or ending of the war. And this
mischievous element, itself knowing little of the tragic history of the
Samoan people during the last half century, assumes a similar lack
of knowledge on the part of our people generally, and seeks to trade
on it. It is to be noted that at none of the meetings held to further
the idea of annexation did the speakers—or any one of them—attempt
to deal with the problem from either the historic, the economic, or
the social viewpoint. Neither did they approach the subject from the
viewpoint of the relationship of Samoa to the world’s peace. They
were only capable of insularly regarding it, and then again only from
the narrow vantage ground of an ignoble class interest. It is the
purpose of this pamphlet to outline, as far as limited space will per-
mit, the history of Samoa under British, German, and American con-
trol; and the reader will agree that it is a history that teems with
interest and towers with tragedy. It reveals a primitive people used
like pawns in a game played by trading gamblers, with their respec-
tive Governments backing the gamblers.
The Samoan Archipelago consists of 14 islands, about 1560 miles
steaming distance from Auckland. The three most prominent of these
islands are Upolu, Savaii, and Tutuila. German Samoa has about
36,000 inhabitants, only 500 of whom are whites. About 1000 of the
others are half-castes, and 5000 are Chinese (indentured labour).
American Samoa has 5750 inhabitants, 3750 of whom are on Tutuila.
The earlier missionaries found the Samoans in the later Stone Age
period; and it is well to note that most of the conflicts which have
torn Samoa during the past 50 years or so —and emphatically all of
the struggles between the natives and the whites—have grown out of
the fact that the interests of the traders demanded conformity on the
part of the people with the conditions imposed by the necessities of
modern Capitalism, and the further fact that the traders, supported
by their respective Governments, sought to compel this primitive
people to step out of the historical period of the Stone Age and free
themselves, almost at the word of command, from the determinism of


an environment that was itself the result of long historical processes.
It was, of course, an impossible demand.
To-day we are told by the advocates of annexation that the
Samoans are quite incapable of governing themselves, and that this
is one strong reason why we should undertake their government.
Now, it is indisputable that all peoples are capable of self-government
in the light of their own historical development; but it is a self-
evident fact that no primitive people could possibly govern itself ac-
cording to the standards and requirements of Twentieth Century Capi-
talism. And that is all there is in the argument. If the Government
of Samoa is to be in the interests of the Samoans, they are quite able
to attend to the matter. But if Samoa is to be controlled and admin-
istered so that the interests of either the German, American, or
British traders will be the paramount consideration, it follows that the
Samoans cannot be entrusted with the Government.
The capacity of the Samoans for self-government may well be
gauged by the political system which the whites found in operation,
and which has been so well described by the Rev. J. B. Stair (Church
of England missionary) in “Old Samoa.” Mr. Stair tells us that the
Samoan Islands were divided into districts, subdivided into settle-
ments, and these again into villages. The districts —the great divi-
sions—were quite independent of each other, their boundaries were
clearly defined, and the care of them committed to the nearest villages
on each side. The local affairs of each settlement were under the
immediate control of the people, and were discussed and decided in
a public assembly composed of the leading men of each village or dis-
trict. More weighty matters, SUCH AS DECLARING WAR OR
MAKING PEACE, the appointment and installation of chiefs, or
indeed any matters of general importance to whole districts, were
deliberated upon in a general fono or parliament of the whole dis-
trict —composed of representatives of all the different settlements and
villages of the district. Each district had a leading settlement called
its Laumua, and it was the duty of the Laumua to convene the fono
or general assembly of its respective districts. These meetings were
usually conducted with much formality and decorum, the general
fono of the district being always held in the open air in the great malae
—a large open space reserved for public assemblies —of the leading-
settlement of Laumua.
It follows that a race that has not progressed beyond the Stone
Age is a race in its childhood, and it is not surprising to find that
the Samoans used to think they and inhabitants of adjacent groups
were the only human beings in existence. They thought the world
was flat, and supported by a pillar ascending from the regions below,
while the sky was supposed to cover them as a canopy, forming a
junction at the distant horizon. They had only seen visitors from
other islands come in canoes, and when the first big ship with sails
appeared off their coasts they were filled with astonishment and awe.
They lined the shore or climbed the tall cocoanut trees to watch the


mystery, and generally concluded that the ship came from the spirit
land. They called the sailors “sky-bursters,” for, they said, “these
people have either burst through the clouds with their ship, or else,
lifting them up, they have passed beneath, and come to visit us.”
They were spellbound to see white men, with feet not divided into toes,
and their skin provided with bags into which they could place such
articles as they wished. The natives saw portions of a pig hanging-
up in the ship, and thought it was human flesh. They concluded the
whites were man-eaters who had come for a fresh supply of human
meat, and the natives hurried off the boat accordingly.
In 1830, when the Rev. John Williams (Wesleyan missionary)
visited Samoa and introduced Christianity, the King, Malietoa,
agreed to renounce idolatry and become Christian, but he advised
his family to wait six weeks before following his example. His sons
waited three weeks, and then—seeing that the insulted gods had not
wreaked vengeance on their father—“they gathered their horrified
friends together, and in their presence ate the sacred fish called anae
(mullet), in which their tutelary gods were supposed to dwell.” When
nothing dreadful followed this act of sacrilege, a great meeting was
called, and the chief war god—“an indelibly sacred bit of matting-
dropping to pieces with age”—was sentenced to be drowned in the
depths of the sea. However, it was eventually given to the Rev. Mr.
Williams, who sent it to London, and it is now in the museum of the
London Missionary Society. Mr. Williams and his friends regarded
this as the “overthrow of Paganism.”
In 1839 the American explorer, Charles Wilkes, came and made a
survey of the archipelago. Wilkes negotiated the first treaty between
the United States and Samoa. It was designed to secure the right
to enter the harbour to all American vessels, and to buy stores and
refit in general. “At this time,” says Mrs. Churchill (wife of one of
the American Consuls) in her book, “Samoa ‘uma,” “navies had not
begun to see the necessity for coaling stations.”
R. L. Stevenson has described how, following closely on the heels
of Captain Cook, adventurers swarmed into the Pacific. It was in-
evitable that the traders should come in the wake of the London
missionary and the American explorer; and so, in time, the Samoan
islands began to attract American, German, and British capitalists;
and (inevitably) with the traders’ advent Samoa’s real troubles began.
Speculators got possession of the lands, and incessant disputes arose.
It might be as well to digress here for the purpose of letting Mrs.
Churchill explain how America, Britain, and Germany came to be in
Samoa. She says:
“The reason for the presence of the United States in Samoa is to
be found in the annals of the whale fishery. . . . Following the
whale fleet came consuls to arrange their disputes.
“How it happened that the English had interests in Samoa is one
of those things that scarcely need explanation. It is quite the usual
thing to find the British Empire, ‘morning drum-beat and all,’ frac-


tioned off all over the world, protecting this spot, annexing that, and
generally with a managing director’s concern in the affairs of a
weaker people.
“What brought the Germans to Samoa, what gave them that abso-
lute trade supremacy, . . . was plain, ordinary commerce, the
selling dear and buying cheap, extending credit to a people who never
yet have learned that between a bill and a receipt there is any differ-
ence worthy of consideration, and who would mortgage anything of
the future to obtain the object of present desire.”
; lO'
In 1871 we find another treaty (executed at Washington) between
the United States and Samoa, giving the United States (for the first
time) exclusive rights to Pago Pago Harbour for a coaling station.
To what extent the natives understood the significance of this treaty
we are unable to discover: The right thus conferred lay dormant till
the war of 1889, when the United States dumped large quantities of
coal there.
Dr. Geo. Brown (another missionary) tells us that in 1872 some
American gentlemen busied themselves, and got the chiefs to sign a
paper asking America to annex the islands. An immense company
had been formed, with President Grant as chairman, “and they are
buying up land in all directons,” the missionary wrote. “And so is
Mr. Weber and others.” (Mr. Weber was head of the German firm.)
The scheme did not succeed, however, for the U.S. Government re-
fused to take Samoa.
In 1878 the United States made yet a further trading treaty with
the natives.
In 1879 there were innumerable disputes between the whites and
the natives and between the whites themselves. As a result of these
disputes, Germany, Britain, and America formed a Tripartite Govern-
ment, and took away from the people of Samoa the control of the
harbour, town, and neighbourhood of Apia. This control was now
vested in a Municipal Board, consisting of the three Consuls and their
nominees, and this Board (or Council) took power to “levy rates and
issue licenses for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the Muni-
cipality, the police, etc., and for carrying on the necessary public
works, such as jail, roads and bridges,” etc. A magistrate was
appointed, with power to fine and imprison, and he also had charge of
the police and the prisoners.
This change was brought about principally by the efforts of Sir
A. H. Gordon (British Commissioner), “who was cordially assisted
by the German Consul.”
Under the new arrangement, apparently without the wishes of the
natives being considered, Germany was given the harbour of Saluafata
as a coaling station, and Britain got Fagaloa Bay—both in the island
of Upolu. The United States still had Pago Pago.
In 1881, when Malietoa Laupepa was crowned King (March 19),
there were dissensions among the natives; and in April two provinces
elected Tamasese and Mataafa to an alternate monarchy, Tamasese


taking first turn. The three Powers were, however, backing Malietoa:
and in November a great fono (parliament) was held to receive the
German Emperor’s official recognition of Malietoa, which was read
out by the German Consul IN LOUD ENGLISH. The German Consul
then shook hands with Malietoa, the British and American Consuls
did likewise, and all three Consuls tendered congratulations, after
which the German gunboat fired a salute of 21 guns. Stevenson says
the natives took no interest in the ceremony, but on the contrary
looked rather bored.
Towards the end of 1884, Malietoa and a number of the chiefs
signed an agreement, handing Samoa over to the Germans. This
document was drawn by the German authorities at Samoa, and the
natives were refused a copy for discussion. They were required to
sign it on the evening of the second day—the intervening day being
Sunday. “Should they fail to do this, they were told, there was one
warship in the harbour, and more were coming.” They signed under
compulsion.
Immediately after, they drew up a petition to Queen Victoria (and
forwarded it through the Governor of New Zealand), asking that
England should annex the islands. In a letter, dated November 12,
1884, Malietoa tells the British Consul, Churchward, not to take any
notice of the agreement he (Malietoa) has made with the Germans,
and says he is prepared to tear it up as soon as England is ready to
act. England, however, was not then prepared to do anything that
would clash with German interests.
Churchward —who was British Consul from 1881 to 1885 —says of
the Samoans: “Their treaty relations with foreign Powers, the real
meaning of which the few who signed did not rightfully understand,
while the great majority of the nation knew nothing at/ all of their
existence until called to account for some breach of a clause in the
treaties of which they were ignorant, only served to involve them in
many more complications than ever they were in before. One
treaty has a clause whereby the Samoan Government agrees to ratify
all land transactions previous to its existence.” These land transac-
tions were mainly of a,shady character. “These treaties have never
proved of the smallest benefit to the natives; but,; on the contrary,
have from the time they were made supplied the foundation for many
an act of oppression.”
In October of 1884, when a native rising took place, the German
gunboat “Hyena” and the British “Miranda” went out together to
deal with the natives. The two flags being seen together, bound on
the same errand, it was said, could not fail to impress the Samoans.
In January of 1885, when Sir William .lervols was Governor and
Sir Julius Vogel was Prime Minister, the N.Z. Government wanted to
annex Samoa, and the Government steamer ’ “Hinemda” was held in
readiness with full steam up. The British Government, however, re-
fused permission, the Earl of Derby replying that Prince Bismarck
had threatened that colonial action would load to Geiman annexa^


tion. Churchward says: “The Germans were ready to formally annex
the whole group, and very glad they would have been of the excuse."
In April of the same year, a man arrived in Samoa, claiming to be
the accredited envoy of a group of rich merchants at Auckland. The
Samoans had recently been fined £IOO by the High Commissioner
for “riot and damage” at Magia; and the Auckland merchants’ envoy
had brought the natives a gift of £lO0 —the amount of the fine. This
because the Auckland merchants hated oppression, the envoy said.
Churchward, however, says there was a trifling condition attached
to the gift. It was that the Samoans should act as a Government,
expel the people in possession of certain lands, and put the Auckland
merchants’ envoy thereon.
The Auckland man failed in his land-grabbing venture, and he then
turned his attention to annexation by New Zealand. He organised an
agitation, and by means of outrageously misleading statements made
it appear that the Samoans were universally anxious—“to the verge
of madness” —for colonial attachment. Consul Churchward says:
“There was never in my time any movement in the smallest degree
appi’oaching a representative desire to belong to New Zealand.”
In 1885, a second petition was sent to England by Malietoa and his
chiefs asking for annexation; and, “to avoid either complications or
explanations,” the Samoan leaders determined to start a cricket
match. A Samoan cricket match is a fearsome circumstance. From
40 to 100 players may take part in it; and it may last a week or a
month. It was proposed to make this particular match last till
England’s reply was available. If the Germans demanded explana-
tions, the entire Government would be playing cricket and could not
be disturbed. The simple-minded Samoans did not know the endless-
ness of British red tape. The game began; but no one seems to know
whether it was ever ended. The fact remains that the letter to Eng-
land was never answered; and the German authorities issued an
order forbidding the King to permit cricket to be played at the seat
of Government.
The Samoan chiefs at this time firmly believed that the annexa-
tion of their islands by England would mean the ending of their
troubles. The British Consul records that he “was persecuted day
and night by deputations from the Samoan Government, but could
give them no help.” The chiefs were ready to hoist the British flag
at any moment; “but the British Consul was forced to tell them he
had no authority to accept them, and that he could discuss no German
subject with them.”
In 1886, Malietoa was deposed by the Germans, and Tamasese put
in his place. Tamasese raised his flag on January 28, 1886, styled him-
self king, and began to collect and arm a force. Weber and the
Germans were supplying him with weapons; so were the Americans;
“so, but for our salutary British law,” says Stevenson, “so would have
been the British—FOß WHEREVER THERE IS A SOUND OF BAT-
TLE, THERE WILL THE TRADERS BE GATHERED TOGETHER
SELLING ARMS.”


At last, after many vicissitudes, the Germans expressly disowned
Tamasese, and a peace was patched up, but was of short duration;
and in August of 1887, a German squadron (five warships) arrived at
Apia, “and demanded reparation for alleged damage done to certain
plantations and for an assault on a German on the Emperor’s birth-
day.” By August 24 the Germans had seized Apia; 700 men and six
guns were landed from the warships, and the German flag was hoisted
on the Government buildings.
Malietoa was fined something more chan £2OOO, and was refused
the four days’ grace he asked for to gather the money. The fine was
inflicted because the Samoans had taken food from the German plan-
tations. Schooled under a system of primitive communism, the
Samoans “could only regard as absurd the growing of food just to
send it from the land to sell it.” They naturaly helped themselves to
food from the plantations in accordance with their communistic code
of ethics.
Malietoa now fled to Afenga, and Tamasese was declared king. On
August 25, one of the German warships flew Taraasese’s colours, and
gave the “new king” a royal salute of 21 guns. The American and
English*Consuls were notified that Germany recognised Tamasese.
They replied by by proclaiming Malietoa—AND ADVISED THE
SAMOANS TO DO NOTHING.
A meeting of chiefs was now called, and they were addressed by
one Brandeis (instrument of the German firm) in this wise: “Great
are my thanks that the chiefs and heads of families of the whole of
Samoa are assembled here this day. It is strictlj forbidden that any
discussion should take place as to whether it is good or not that
Tamasese is King of Samoa, whether at this fono or at any future fono.
I place for your signature the following: ‘We inform all the people of
Samoa as follows-(l) The government of Samoa has been assumed
by King Tuiaana Tamasese. (2) By order of the King, it was directed
that a fono should take place to-day, composed of the chiefs and heads
of families, and we have obeyed the summons. We have signed our
names under this, 15th September, 1887.’ ”
Needs must under all these guns (says Stevenson); and the paper
was signed, but not without open sullenness. The bearing of Mataafa
in particular was long remembered against him by the Germans.
“Do you see the King?” said the Commodore, reprovingly. “His
father was no king,” was the bold answer.
Already villages had been burned, and it was now threatened that
war would be made on all who failed to recognise Tamasese as King.
The American and British Consuls protested against the hoisting
of the German flag, and to make the protast effective, the U.S. Con-
sul annexed Samoa by hoisting the Stars and Stripes with the Samoan
flag beneath. Both the German and American Governments ulti-
mately repudiated the action of their Consuls.
Malietoa, to save his people from destruction, at last surrendered
to the Germans, and was deported to the Cameroons. He bequeathed


the care of his country to Mataafa, to whom his (Malietoa’s) support-
ers now transferred their allegiance. Malietoa wrote a letter, full of
dignified protest and vibrating with pathos, to the English and Ameri-
can Consuls, pointing out how when he had followed their advice he
was deserted by them and left to the mercy of the Germans, and
charging them with breach of faith.
Tamasese was pliant in the hands of the Germans, and Great Bri-
tain acquiesced in the position. Robert Louis Stevenson says: “Wil-
son, the English Acting-Consul, is understood to have held strict
orders to help Germany.”
With Tamasese on the throne, and the German Brandeis behind
it, matters became more and more unsettled: and by September of
1888, German and American warships were menacing Samoa and each
other as well. Treaties were repeatedly broken, and “the harshness of
European and military rule had made Brandeis detested and Tamasese
unpopular with many.”
The disaffection of the natives became more formidable, and on
September 9 Mataafa was crowned King at Faleula. All through the
later months of 1888 and the opening months of 1889 Samoa was
violently in the throes of revolution.
Seven warships were lying in Apia Harbour in the earlier part
of March, 1889. They were the German warships Olga, Eber, and
Adler; the U.S. warships Trenton, Nipsic, and Yandalia; and the
British Calliope. _ In addition there were six merchantmen of from
25 to 500 tons, and numerous small craft. The harbour was suffi-
ciently roomy for only four large ships, according to Captain Kane,
of the Calliope.
On March 15 the barometer fell to 29.11 degrees. That was the
time to make for the open sea; but the American and German gunboats
were ready for action —ready to pour shot and shell into one another;
and all clung defiantly to their moorings. The blackness of mid-
night came with the indescribable storm of March 16. “The agitation
of the sea surpassed experience and description,” says Stevenson; and
“before night, with the exception of the Calliope, every ship and craft
had been sunk, broken upon the coral reefs, or beached.” The Calliope
steamed out to sea—averaging a mile an hour. One hundred and fifty
lives were lost.
The Samoans had the wrecked sailors at their mercy; but, instead
of attacking them, they vied with one another in saving friend and
foe alike —and sacrificed their own lives in doing so. They also re-
frained from taking any property from the wreckage.
Stevenson writes, in the “Footnote to History”: “Within the dura-
tion of a single day, the sword-arm of the two angry Powers was
broken; their formidable ships reduced to junk; their disciplined
hundreds to a horde of castaways, fed with difficulty, and the fear of
whose misconduct marred the sleep of their commanders. Both
paused aghast; BOTH HAD TIME TO RECOGNISE THAT NOT THE
WHOLE SAMOAN ARCHIPELAGO WAS WORTH THE LOSS IN


MEN AND COSTLY SHIPS ALREADY SUFFERED. The so-called
hurricane of March 16 made this a marking epoch in world history;
directly, and at once, it brought about the Congress and Treaty of
Berlin.”
Mrs. Churchill says the Apia disaster “shocked the world into a
sense of what was being done in this distant part of the world, and
saner thought felt that SAMOA WAS NOT "WORTH THE LOSS OF
LIFE.”
The three Powers now went into conference at Berlin, and the
Treaty of Berlin (or Berlin General Act, 1889) was executed. Article
I. of this Treaty declared the islands of Samoa to be neutral territory
"“in which the citizens and subjects of the three Signatory Powers
have equal rights of residence, trade and personal protection.” It
provided that the three Powers would recognise the independence of
the Samoan Government AND THE FREE RIGHT OF THE NATIVES
TO ELECT THEIR CHIEF OR KING AND CHOOSE THEIR OWN
FORM OF GOVERNMENT ACCORDING TO THEIR OWN LAWS OR
CUSTOMS. And it further provided that neither of the Powers should
exercise any separate control over the islands or in any way interfere
with the Government.
The Berlin General Act confirmed America’s exclusive right to the
coaling station in Pago Pago Harbour, in the same way that it con-
firmed similar rights of the British in Fagaloa Bay and the Germans
in Saluafata Bay. It recalled Malietoa from exile, and restored him
to the throne pending an election. At the lime the Act was drafted,
Mataafa was reigning King of Samoa, Malietoa having formally with-
drawn in favour of his greater kinsman, to whom he had given ad-
herence. It was made clear by the Berlin Conference that Malietoa’s
recognition by the Powers was only to hold good until an election
could be held.
The ink was hardly dry on the Treaty before it was broken by the
whole three Powers. The Chief Justice (a Swede named Cedarkrantz)
refused to call the election, in spite of repeated requests from the
people; and the natives then proceeded to elect a King in accord-
ance with Samoan methods. They chost Mataafa —and then war
came.
Stevenson's friend Moors, in his book, “With Stevenson in Samoa,”
blames the three Powers for the war. He says: “Mataafa sought to
bring about a settlement by peaceful means, and in that endeavour
he was supported by Stevenson.”
When Mataafa was proclaimed rebel by the Powers, Stevenson, in
the Vailima Letters, wrote: “They have shot their bolt; they have
made a rebel of the only man (TO THEIR OWN KNOWLEDGE, ON
THE REPORT OF THEIR OWN SPY) who held the rebel party in
check.”
While Mataafa was still “outlawed,” efforts to effect his capture
having failed, a British missionary approached the American Consul
•with a proposal that he (Mataafa) should be decoyed into Apia wdth


a safe conduct, and there seized by either the Malietoans or men
from the warships. The proposal was indignantly rejected by the
Consul, whereupon the missionary suggested that the Consul need
not do the dirty work—that it could be done by the Germans, or in
such a way as to make it appear that the Germans had done it.
Both Stevenson and Moors exposed the author of the “scheme,” and
both received writs for libel, but the cases never reached Court, and
the missionary was eventually dismissed or compelled to resign.
During 1892, Lady Jersey (wife of the N.S.W. Governor) visited
Samoa,'’and was, of course, officially received. She was most anxious
to meet the “rebel King,” Mataafa, and that, of course, was some-
thing not to be tolerated according to our code of warfare. However,
Lady Jersey passed herself off as “Amelia Balfour, cousin of R. L.
Stevenson,” and in this capacity was entertained by Mataafa. When
news of the incident leaked out, the Home authorities sternly re-
proved the British Consul and everybody eise concerned in the es-
capade.
On July 18, 1893, Stevenson wrote: “Sunday came the Katoomba
(Captain Bickford, C.M.G.). ... HE HAS ORDERS TO SUPPRESS
MATAAFA AT ONCE.” The reader must remember that Mataafa was
the people’s choice, and the warships of Germany and Britain were
at this period employed in preventing the people’s will going into
effect.
Mataafa succumbed to the superior war methods of his foes, sur-
rendered, and was deported to one of the Marshall Islands, together
with about a dozen of his highest chiefs. A large number of other
chiefs were thrown into jail. Mataafa’s deportation was carried out
with the consent of Britain, Germany, and the United States.
Malietoa was now permanently set up as King by the Powers, in
defiance of the natives’ wishes. The three Consuls paid him official
visits, while flags were flown and salutes fired. The people, how-
ever, refused to pay taxes, and the men-of-war were utilised as tax-
gatherers. Even then Malietoa could not collect his revenues. He
became universally detested, and in a few months Tamasese the
younger revolted in the eastern districts of Upolu.
The people having refused to pay their taxes, the Government—
run by the Chief Justice (Cedarkrantz) and the President of the
Municipal Council (Baron von Pilsach) —soon found itself in diffi-
culties. The Chief Justice and President thereupon planned a scheme
to seize the Municipal funds. Won Pilsach was treasurer as well as
President of the Council; and the first thing he and the Chief
Justice did was to abstract surreptitiously from the Municipal treasury
a sum of about £6OO, and with this they purchased the only news-
paper in the town, the “Samoan Times,” replacing the old editor with
a deadbeat, who proceeded to run the paper to suit their purpose.
Stevenson said these two gentlemen (the Chief Justice and the
President) “now behaved in a manner worthy of characters in comic
opera.” Moors describes how they behaved. Without the knowledge
of the Municipal Council, von Pilsach privately instituted a suit, in


his capacity of adviser to the King, against the Municipality to
obtain control of the funds, amounting in all to about four thousand
pounds. Chief Justice Cedarkrantz heard the case. Von Pilsach
appeared on behalf of the King; the Municipal Council was repre-
sented by—von Pilsach. The Baron argued in favour of the plaintiff;
the Baron presented the case for the defendant. The Chief Justice
listened patiently to what von Pilsach had to say on behalf of the
King; he turned to hear what the same learned counsel had to say
for the Municipality; and he then left the Court to write a decision
diametrically opposed to his own verbal dictum given at a Council
meeting a short time previously.
All this took place without a single soul connected with the Muni-
cipal Government knowing anything about it. When it was known
there was open revolt. A special meeting of the Council was held,
with Baron von Pilsach in the chair. Moors moved a motion ex-
pressing want of confidence in the President’s integrity. The motion
was seconded by almost every member of the Council. The Presi-
dent, however, refused to put it to the meeting, and abruptly adjourned
the proceedings amid scenes of wild disorder.
Stevenson and Moors now framed -a proclamation in the direction
of organising forcible resistance to the procedure of the Chief Jus-
tice and von Pilsach; but the other Municipal Councillors got cold
feet when the time for action came. Stevenson wrote to Andrew
Lang: “It is a grind to be interrupted by midnight messengers, and
pass your days in writing proclamations that are never proclamated.”
On July 1, 1893, Sir John Thurston, British High Commissioner
for the Western Pacific, issued a Queen’s Regulation “for the main-
tenance of peace and good order in Samoa.” This Regulation made
it an act of sedition to do anything by word, deed or writing to make
the people dissatisfied with the Government of Samoa—the expression
“Government of Samoa” being defined to mean “the Government
recognised as such in Samoa by the British Consular Office.” Robert
Louis Stevenson was convinced that the Regulation was aimed at
himself, because of his efforts to protect the Samoans and improve
their conditions. Interviewed by the Auckland “Herald,” he de-
scribed the Regulation as an historical curiosity. “The definition of
sedition is unique in its way,” he said. “It is seditious to say a word
likely to bring about discontent or dissatisfaction with the existing
state of affairs.” One wonders what the author of the “Vailima
Letters” would have said about our N.Z. War Regulations.
When Sir John Thurston was interviewed later by the Sydney
“Daily Telegraph” he darkly hinted that Mr. Stevenson had been,
directly or indirectly, inciting the native population or others to re-
sist the payment of their taxes. He further declared that the “un-
ceasing interference and meddlesomeness of irresponsible persons”
was making peace and good order unattainable.
Stevenson had been in the habit of visiting Mataafa at Malie, and this
fact was construed as “showing a seditious turn of mind.”


In August of 1893, Stevenson wrote in the “Vailima Letters”; “Of
course, I was very sorry for Mataafa, but a good deal sorrier and
angrier about the mismanagement of all the white officials. I cannot
bear to write about that. Manono all destroyed, one house standing
in Apolima, the women stripped, the prisoners beaten with whips,
and the women’s heads taken—ALL UNDER WHITE AUSPICES.
And for upshot and result of so much shame to the white Powers —
Tamasese already conspiring! as I knew and preached in vain must
he the case.”
In September of 1898, Mataafa was allowed to return to Samoa,
conditionally on his signing an agreement to remain at Mulinuu, and
not depart therefrom without the written consent of the Consuls of
the three Treaty Powers; that he would not encourage or participate
in any hostile action against the Government, and that he would up-
hold and support the Government of Malietoa.
Malietoa died on August 22, 1899; and Mataafa (according to the
Parliamentary Papers) does not appear to have taken any overt
steps to claim the vacant throne, but a section of the natives pro-
nounced in his favour, and announced on November 12 to the Consuls
and Chief Justice that Mataafa had been elected King. An opposing
faction disputed the election, and announced that they had chosen
Malietoa Tanu.
Now, at the fifth sitting of the Berlin Conference of 1889, Bis-
marck had made a statement to the effect that he regarded Mataafa
as ineligible for election to the Kingship because in the fighting in
December, 1888, outrages had been committed by his followers against
the German marines. A detachment of Germans had been landed
to “protect the German plantations” during a native rising, and the
Germans were attacked and defeated by the Samoans, more than 50
of the former being killed and wounded. It was alleged that the
heads of some of the slain were taken.
It is recorded that soon after the German heads were taken in
1888, Mr- Came, Wesleyan Missionary, had occasion to visit Mataafa's
camp, and spoke of the practice with abhorrence. “Misi Kane,” said
one chief, “we have just been puzzling ourselves to guess where that
custom came from. But, Misi, is it not so that when David killed
Goliah, he cut off his head and carried it before the King?”
The Chief Justice (now a Mr. Chambers) declared Mataafa ineli-
gible, and based his decision on Bismarck’s 1889 objection. He de-
clared Malietoa Tanu the elected King. “Mataafa was the one ex-
ception in the principle of the Samoans having the right to elect
their King.”
Mataafa’s supporters refused to accept the Chief Justice’s decision;
and in the conflict which followed Samoans, Germans, Americans, and
British laid down their lives.
In 1902, King Oscar, of Sweden, acting as arbitrator between the
Powers, gave an award in which he held that Great Britain and
America were liable for damage resulting from the bombardment of


Apia and neighbourhood during March and April, 1899. King Oscar
outlines the events of those months in his award, which is included
in Parliamentary Papers, 1902, No. 130. He sets forth that on
March 15, 1899, the U.S. Philadelphia and the British Porpoise
and Royalist opened fire across the town of Apia and on the land
situate in the rear of the said town, the fire being directed against the
forces of the High Chief Mataafa, the greater part of the adherents
of the newly-appointed King of Samoa, Malietoa Tanu, having in those
days been brought to Apia from different parts of the Samoan Islands
by the British and American naval commanders, landed at Mulinuu,.
and supplied by them with arms and ammunition, when actiwe hos-
tilities ensued between the Malietoans and the Mataafa party. From
the 15th March up to the 25th April the said ships frequently bom-
barded the rear of Apia as well as other localities in the island of
Upolu, and destroyed villages by landing parties, assisted therein
from March 24 by the British ship Tauranga. The British and U.S.
forces made frequent expeditions into the interior, reinforced by
Malietoa’s native forces —for the purpose of fighting and also to seize
food supplies, while in Apia itself a severe control of the street
traffic was established by the British and American military authori-
ties through the posting of sentries, with orders to allow only bearers
of passports issued by the said authorities to pass. This was done
in violation of the Berlin Treaty of June 14, 1889, which provided that
“neither of the Powers shall exercise any separate control over the
islands or the Government thereof” —in short, that the Powers could
only proceed by common accord. Ammunition was distributed to the
Malietoans from the reserve stock, which was to be kept for the use
of the Samoan Government and served out to the natives only by the
unanimous request of the three Consuls, and such distribution was
made by the British and American authorities without the consent of
the German Consul.
King Oscar says: “We have found nothing in the evidence before
us to show that the general condition of affairs was such as to render
the military action necessary for the protection of lives and pro-
perty.”
Mataafa and his people proved themselves victorious in battle;
and Malietoa, Tamasese (his principal supporter), and Mr. Chambers
(Chief Justice) took refuge on a British ship.
After various conferences between the Consuls of the three Powers,,
the Chief Justice and the President of the Municipal Council, it was
decided on June 4, 1899, to establish a Provisional Government, and a
Proclamation was issued recognising Mataafa and thirteen chiefs as
the Provisional Government, pending instructions from the Treaty
Powers.
In the meantime, a Special Commission —consisting of an American,,
a German, and a British representative—was set up to report on
Samoa. The outcome of this report was that early in 1900 the Berlin
General Act was abrogated.


Mrs. Churchill, who had no halting sentiments about the rights of
small nationalities to look after their own affairs, explains the new
development: “At last the absurd fiction of Samoan independence was
laid aside, the Powers looked fairly upon the Archipelago as some-
thing to be divided —divided into three parts because there were three
of them. This was accordingly done. To Germany was allowed Upolu,
because of the preponderance of German interests in trade and in-
habitants. Great Britain was assigned Savaii, with the statement that
it was given to the British because it was the largest; no one ven-
tured to dispute the suggestion that of a thing which has no value
it better profits to have a large parcel than a small one. To the
United States was assigned Manu'a and Tutuila. There can be no
doubt ownership of Pago Pago Harbour is the really solid value of the
whole Archipelago.”
Almost as soon as this partition had been ratified, “another agree-
ment was filed, whereby Great Britain conveyed Savaii to Germany
for similarly transferred territory in the Solomon Islands and the
extinction of German rights in the adjacent kingdom of Tonga, which
thereupon became a British protectorate. Thus,’’ says Mrs.
Churchill, “the settlement of the Samoan question availed to wipe
out the last two independent kingdoms on the face of the globe—
Samoa and Tonga.”
What strikes the reader is the way in which these territories and
peoples were bartered with little or no consideration for their own
wishes.
Since this partition, America has established a permanent coaling
station at Pago Pago, and now administers Tutuila and the Manu'a
group as a naval station under executive command of the commandant
of the station, employing the Samoan chiefs as governors of their dis-
tricts. There is no democratic rule; it is in every sense a military
administration.
Robert Louis Stevenson wrote with intense bitterness of the treat-
ment of the natives by the trading interests and by the Powers at the
back of those interests. German faults and aggressions made up the
burden of his story; but the Germans in no wise stood alone. “Three
nations were engaged in this infinitesimal affray, and not one appears
with credit. They figure but as three ruffians of the older play-
wrights. The United States have the cleanest hands, and even theirs
are not immaculate.”
Here is the root of all the trouble, as Stevenson seems to see it in
the “Footnote to History”: “There is so much copra in the islands,
and no more; a man’s share of it is his share of bread; and commerce,
like politics, is here narrowed to a focus, shows its ugly side, and be-
comes as personal as fisticuffs. Close at their elbows, in all this conten-
tion, stands the native, looking on. . . . He looks at the rude
career of the dollar hunt, and wonders. He sees these men rolling
in a luxury beyond the mere ambition of native kings; he hears them


accused by each other of the meanest trickery; he knows some of
them to be guilty; and what is he to think?”
Theodor Weber (who was at one time both head of the firm and
Consul for Samoa) did most damage to rival traders, and most har-
ried the Samoans. “And yet,” says Stevenson, “I never met anyone
who did not respect his memory.” Weber lives in Samoan song. “One
song tells plaintively, how all things, land and food and property,
pass progressively, as by a law of Nature, into the hands of Alisi
Ueba, and soon nothing will be left for Samoa.”
Out of this condition comes the shelling of villages “on very trifling
grounds by the Germans.” And we are told “the like has been done
of late years, though in a bitter quarrel, by ourselves of England.”
We read “how the Germans landed and shed blood at Fagalii”; and
are reminded that “it was only in 1§76 that we British had OIU’ own
conceived little massacre at Mulinuu.” We are told “how the Ger-
mans bludgeoned Malietoa with a sudden call for money”; and are
again reminded that “it was something of the suddenest that Sir
Arthur Gordon himself, smarting under a sensible public affront, made
and enforced a somewhat similar demand.”
And, in the “Footnote to History,” we find Stevenson exclaiming:
'“Here, then, is a singular state of affairs: all the money, luxury, and
business of the kingdom centred in one place, that place excepted
from the Native Government and administered by whites for whites;
and the whites themselves holding it not in common, but in hostile
camps, so that it lies between them like a bone between two dogs,
•each growling, each clutching his own end.”
Dr. H. I. Jensen (of N.S.W.), who visited Samoa some 13 or 14
years ago making geological researches, found the German firm quite
as powerful in Samoa as the C.S.R. Co. is in Fiji. “The German firm
makes its 50 per cent, before the smaller traders get their whack,”
he wrote in a series of articles in the “International Socialist.” Most
of the traders had faked balances and scales —and the natives knew
it, but dared not prosecute, for most of them were kept in debt by
the storekeepers. One storekeeper used to sell bags of bones to the
natives as corned beef, using the meat himslf. The natives conceived
the happy idea of paying him out by half-filling bags with cocoanut
shells and putting copra on top, and selling these to the trader as
copra.
The magnitude of the cacao, cocoanut and rubber plantations at
Samoa is shown by the following: Three British companies had an
aggregate capital of £IBO,OOO. Seven German companies aggregated
£350,000. One German plantation of 4000 acres is already tapping
:25001b5. of rubber a month. In the vicinity of Apia, land in cocoa
or cocoanuts is now worth from £SO to £6O an acre.
The Germans developed Samoa, it is true, but hundreds of thousands
of pounds of English money were sunk in the magnificent estates,
the managers of which were nearly always German. Imported
Chinamen and Solomon Islanders slaved on these estates “on contracts


of three or of five years, and at a hypothetical wage of a few dollars
a month”; and one writer declared: “It is said that primitive extra-
labour, by which the thrall’s term of service is extended, has grown
to be an abuse.” These forced labourers used to escape, and take to
the bush, where they harboured in a state partly bestial. They were
hunted down and sometimes shot.
Behind the New Zealand movement for annexation is undoubtedly
the trade incentive. In 1912 the export values from Samoa were
divided almost wholly between Australia and Germany, £ 102,223
going to the former country and £126,790 to the latter; and one
writer (Jeffery: “Samoa: Its History and Legend”) has not hesitated
to say: “Had the present war not eventuated, in a short time the
German Pacific trade would have been materially increased and ours
correspondingly decreased.”
Since our military occupation of Samoa, the imports to that coun-
try from N.Z. have risen to £56,000 in 1915, and to £71,781 in 1916.
The imports are chiefly haberdashery, kerosene, provisions, etc. r
MAINLY FROM AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND. Our local capi-
talists see in the troubled little islands a field for exploitation, and
our militaristically-minded rulers know that if they could only make
New Zealand an Imperialistic colonising agency a much stronger case
than at present exists could be made for the retention of Conscription
and a permanent militarism after the Continental idea when the war
is over. Indeed, one has only to look at the evidences of permanency
which Trentham provides to understand the things the Tories have in.
contemplation—if the people should prove unwise enough to give them
the opportunity.
It is, of course, quite understood that New Zealand is merely in
military occupation of Samoa while the war lasts. Our voice in the
matter of what is to be done with it when the war is ended will not
amount to much more than a whisper. In the meantime, it is the
German law —not British law —that we are administering at Savaii,
Upolu, and the smaller islands.
“Our” taking of German Samoa makes most interesting reading.
One of our very blatant Patriots has declared that because we “took”'
Samoa we are entitled to keep it. But did WE take it?
On August 14, one writer informs us, “the Moeraki and Monowai,
dressed in grey and altered beyond recognition, and sinking their
identity under cabalistic designations, anchored in the stream in
Wellington Harbour, and stole silently away at dawn next morning.”
The Moeraki had 25 officers, 3 nurses, and 674 other ranks; the Mono-
wai, 28 officers, 3 nurses, and 677 other ranks—l4lo in all. These
transports were convoyed by the Psyche, Pyramus, and Philomel. At
Noumea, where they arrived on August 20, they were joined by the
Australia (19,200 tons) and the Montcalm (9367 tons). On August
26 they were joined at Fiji by the Sydney and the Melbourne, each of
about 8000 tons. This formidable expedition reached Samoa on
Sunday morning, August 30. After the harbour had been swept for


mines, the Psyche entered under a flag of truce, bearing a message
from Admiral Paty demanding surrender of the territory. Dr. Schultz
(Governor of Samoa) was absent; and his deputy refused to surren-
der, but intimated that in the face of the superior force brought he
would not oppose a landing. A covering boat then landed Colonel
Logan; and next day, August 31, the British flag was hoisted. Dr.
Schultz surrendered with his officials, and is now a prisoner of war
in New Zealand.
Colonel Logan’s subsequent proclamation contains a paragraph
(clause 10) that is extremely interesting. It reads: “All officials of
the German Government who desire to continue to carry out their
functions under the present military Government must report them-
selves forthwith to the commander of the occupying force, and such
as may be retained in their employment will receive the same rate
of remuneration as was received by them prior to the occupation.’’
What shall be Labour’s attitude towards the proposal that Samoa
should be annexed to New Zealand? Is it not clearly defined in the
1917 Conference Peace resolution?
Because Socialism proclaims itself against the oppression of a race
or of a sex or of an individual, the Labour Movement may be relied on
to stand firm in its opposition to the annexation of Samoa or any
other country. It is true we do not want to see Western Samoa handed
back to Germany, notwithstanding that “our” diplomats sold —or
rather swapped—it to Germany. We do not want to see Germany
with a naval base in the Pacific; EQUALLY WE DO NOT WANT TO
SEE ANY OTHER COUNTRY WITH A NAVAL BASE IN THE
PACIFIC. We look beyond the trading interests of the handful of
economic undesirables who exploit the needs of their own and every
other country, and who want Samoa annexed because of the additional
opportunities it present/ for profiteering. We look beyond the smaller
national interests, and recognise that the future of Samoa must be
determined not from any narrow viewpoint, not even from the view-
point of the commercial or other interests of New Zealand, but from
the larger viewpoint of world interests. We maintain, what is self-
evident, that no people whatever is good enough to hold any other
people in subjection; that all peoples are capable of governing them-
selves according to their own genius and in the light of their own
historical period. We point to Fiji, which is under “our” control, and
which abundantly proves “our” inability to protect a primitive people
from the depredations of British Capitalism—Fiji, with its allotment of
two women to one man, and its legal subversion of the white code of
morals to the requirements of trade and profiteering. Let the revela-
tions made by the Rev. C. F. Andrews, M.A., who visited Fiji for the
Women’s Council of India, be read; and also the exposures contained
in the “Call of the Pacific,” by the Rev. J. W. Burton. The Australasian
“Intercollegian,” March 1, 1918, in dealing with this question, insists
that certain legislation passed by responsible Governments has led
inevitably to immoral results, and says: “The enactment of the Gov-


eminent of India, first that 33 women, and then later that 40 women
should go out to live in the crowded coolie lines in Fiji with every
100 men, was such a regulation.” What guarantee is there that we
would hold Samoa in subjection and not permit the same awful hor-
ror to develop there that was allowed to develop in Fiji? What
guarantee is there that we would not make Samoa a miniature Ireland?
We of the Labour movement look at the casualty lists—at the long
record of the men who went out in the morning of life and died
heroically, “theirs not to reason why”; we look at the maimed and
broken men and boys returning—the lads who, in the fullness of health
and strength, went forth to battle, and who come back to us physi-
cally wrecked and prematurely aged and blind and crippled; and we
do not hesitate to proclaim criminal the mere suggestion that the
future of Samoa should be permitted to prolong this mad business of
war, this wholesale slaughter of men. We insist that when the pleni-
potentiaries of Britain and her Allies meet those of the enemy coun-
tries at the Peace Conference they shall not be embarrassd with the
little demands arising out of narrow class interests that centre around
a thousand square miles of isolated territory, and that is at best a
fly-speck on the map of the world.
This is the answer, then, that the Labour movement in New Zealand
can be depended on to give to the interests that clamour for annexa-
tion. We insist on the right of every people to determine its own des-
tiny—to choose the country under whose flag it will range itself, or
to remain a separate nationality. We stand uncompromisingly frr
the principle of No Annexations —and in this we do not stand alone.
The Labour and Socialist movement of all the world stands for the
same principle. We insist that when Peace is made, the fullest rights
of internal self-government must be guaranteed to the Samoan
people—as well as to the people of all other countries. Otherwise the
Allies’ claim to stand for the rights of small nationalities would be
counted for sounding brass and tinkling cymbals. In so far as its
international relationships are concerned, we declare that the safety
of Samoa and of the World’s Democracy as well would be best served
by international organisation. This does not apply to Samoa alone.
It applies to the international relationships of all peoples. It in-
volves the destruction of Secret Diplomacy and the introduction of
daylight methods. And it leads at last to the ending of Capitalism and
its machinery of Imperialism and Militarism, with its inevitable arbi-
trament of War.
Finally, we of the Labour movement will be found to be unanimous
and emphatic in our insistence that the question of the future of
Samoa must not be permitted in any way to delay the Peace settle-
ment or prolong for a single day the present appalling slaughter of
the world’s best manhood.
“Worker" Print. 390 Wakefield St.. Wellington.
