

SANDHURST:
AS IT WAS,
AND
AS IT IS,
BY
JOHN NEILL MACARTNEY.








SANDHURST:
AS IT WAS.
AND
AS IT IS,
BY
JOHN NEILL MACARTNEY.
SADDHURST:
BURROWS AND Co., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS, BULL-ST.
MDCCCLXXXII.


SANDHUBST:
BURROWS AND CO., PRINTERS, BOOKBINDERS AND PURLYSHERS,
BULL STREET.


DEDICATED
TO
SIR BRYAN O’LOGHLEN,
BART.,
CHIEF OF THE FIRST VICTORIAN
MINISTRY,
WHO HAVE FOB THEIR MOTTO,
PEACE, PROGRESS, AND PROSPERITY,”
AND WHO ARE
“NOT FOE A PARTY,
“BUT ALL ARE FOR THE STATE."


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.—Men of the Past - - 1
„ ll.—Sandhurst as it Was ' - - 10
„ lll.’—The March of Improvements,
and Early Sandhurst Society 18
~ IV.—Our Charities and Institutions - 27
„ V.—Our Mines, and Stock and
Share Market - - 36
„ Vl.—Young Australia - - 47
„ VII.— -Our Maids and Matrons - 56
~ Vlll.—Gathered Threads and
Education - - - 64
~ IX.—Guthrie’s Pottery - 73
„ X. —Deep Alluvial Mining, and the
Diamond Drill - - 82
„ Xl.—Scenes of Digging Life - 89
„ Xll.—Our Vineyards and Wine
Industry - - - 100
„ Xlll.—Cheesemaking on Bendigo - 117
„ XlV.—Coach-building Trade on
Sandhurst - 126
„ XV.—Tanning and Currying on
Bendigo - - - 131
» XVl.—Sandhurst Foundries - - 135
Conclusion - 130


PREFACE.
return to Sandhurst, after a prolonged
absence, I was forcibly impressed with the strik-
ing improvement and beauty of our city, and,
remembering out of what rude, crude, and heterogeneous
materials such a goodly place had been formed, and,
recollecting that life’s titful fever had ended with the
great majority of its founders, and, as “ another king
had arisen, who knew not Joseph,” I thought, what a
pity it would be that these men’s names should be
allowed to sleep in cold oblivion where no mention
might be heard of them. This is one reason for writing
the following pages. Another reason for this record
is, that Sandhurst has been my happy home for the
greater portion of an eventful life, and, as the ashes of
my dear ones, and the temple of my gods, lie here,
gratitude led me to depict the place in truthful colors,
and with loving labour, and to the best of my abilities,
describe all our developed, nascent, or latent industries,
which, it is hoped, will be of a more wide-spread and
enduring nature, thus giving support to our numerous
population, who cannot all be employed in gold mining,
and (as a stranger can have no conception of our re-
sources), a description of these may not be without itsuse.


i ha vie visited the'principal vineyards, cheese-factories,
and other places of important industry, and carefully
inspected all, and have impartially described each of our
multifarious sources of employment, which will undoubt-
edly go to support a large population. lam indebted
to the courtesy of the editor of the Bendigo Advertiser
for permitting the publication of the first four chapters,
which, at the time of publication, attracted some atten-
tion, and the only adverse cricitism that appeared,
•questioning my accuracy, was the subjoined letter
signed “ Old Bendigo.” The reply to this I also
annex. Finding that the subject matter was too diffuse
the publication was discontinued, and it was decided
to publish the whole -in a concrete form. During the
progress of publication some friendly critics have been
objecting that I have been unduly partial in praising
successful men and ignoring those who bore the brunt
and labor of the day. In reply, I state that, a cursory
glance at what I have written will show that I am no
slavish sycophant of wealth, as there are some here
that the blind goddess has unduly favoured, but who,
not having made the imprint of their generosity on the
place, are unnamed, and left severely alone. Again, it
is said, that I have indulged in blarney ; this I dispute,
as words of truth are not words of flattery, and any
laudatory notices that -I have written, I truly believe
to be well-merited.
Sa»phuu6T, Fbb. Ist, 1882.


Extracted from “ Bendigo Advertiser."
JUSTICE TO ALL.
Sir.—l have read in your issue of this morning, a very in-
teresting and well-written article on the old pioneers of Ben-
digo and their doings, from the pen of our venerable and much
respected old friend, Mr. .1. N. Macartney. As it was written
from the date of 1854, I write as a ’53 man to set him right in
one mistake he has made He places our worthy Minister of
Mines at the top of the tree, which he has no right to occupy.
Mr. Burrowes was not known to fame until 1860, when he
stood for the borough council and was elected. The men who
first stood by the mining community, and gained their rights,
were Captain Harrison (1852), Captain Brown, Dr. Jones,
George Edward Thomson, Mr. Perris, or Pervars, J. E Wall,
Mr. Dixon, Captain Baker, Robert Benson, Dr. Owens, Wm.
Hopkins, E. N. Emmett, W. D, C. Denovan, James Dumphy,
and others, all 1853 men. The big anti-license meeting was
held in August of that year, on the present site of All Saints’
Church, attended by some 20,000 people. In the same year
Mr. Angus Mackay (now the Hon. A. Mackay), E. Harrison,
and R. K. Haverfield, represented the press at the meeting of
the period, and did good service both to the miners and the
government. —Yours, etc.,
19th November, 1881. OLD BENDIGO,
ANSWER TO “JUSTICE TO ALL”
Sir.—Please permit me space to briefly reply to “Old
Bendigo’s ” letter under the above heading. I have to state
that I arrived a year after the red-ribbon work, and was well
informed of all connected with it. I worked on the Land
League Committee with three of its members, whose names I
have mentioned in the first of my papers, and, with the excep-
tion of the names of Emmett, Denovan, and Owen, it would
have been little good to mention the rest. It is reported, how
true I know not, that three of the names mentioned, where
caught sending round the hat in Job’s Gully, in connection
with Red-Ribbon work. I should have had to mention the
Chinese extradition folly j this, for many reasons, I thought
better to bury in oblivion; as it is a moot and debateable point
how far the anti-license meeting affected the question, and as
the vapouring of the leaders was futile to effect the matter, as
they were overawed by a strong military force present. I,


venture the opinion that what effected the squelching of the
obnoxious license was the Eureka Stockade heroes, in Ballarat,
and the good sense and sympathy of John O’Shanassy, the
Chief of the Government Commission, who redressed the dig-
gers’ grievances. My papers all commence when sober reason
prevailed, and I only give names of tangible benefactors. In
this I am still of opinion that Mr. Burrowes holds the pride of
place, my esteemed friend Denovan I place second, not for his
red-ribbon work, but because of his being the head and front
of the first Bendigo Land League. I think lam right, but I
may be fallible. And I beg to totally decline the left-handed
compliment of being called venerable, it is entirely a misnomer.
Why I am in the full vigour of my intellect, and no cripple yet
in the race of life.—Yours, etc.,
21st Nov, 1881.
JOHN NEILL MACARTNEY.
ERRATUM.,
Page 32, line 25, rend Roman Praetorian.


SANDHURST:
AS IT WAS, AND AS IT IS.
CHAPTER I.
THE MEN OF THE PAST.
are aware that I am an old identity, and
yX one who, in the stirring, early days of Bendigo,
tried to act his part,. Having returned to
Sandhurst, after rusticating at the sea-side for the
last two years, and being so impressed with the
great improvements and the surpassing beauty of the
place, it struck me that it might not be without both
interest and profit to the present residents (I mean
those who have settled here since 1870, when the real
old Bendigo element was out-numbered by a large influx
of strangers), these, and the rising generation, may, as I
say, take interest and profit by some recollections of the
past, and contrasting their highly-favoured present
surroundings with the rude rough life and personal dis-
comforts of the forefathers of what was once a village
hamlet, and is now a stately city, and although ranking
ft


feinrd in this most highly-favoured land of Victoria,
ranks first in point of beauty, from its umbrageous
shade. All honor to the founders of such a place, and
may their memories be kept for ever green. Drawing
the line of what may truly be called the old Bendi-
gonians and conscript fathers of 1864, out of the many
-then living how few are now left to behold the greatness
of the place ? With many of those now spared their
age is like a frosty winter, but kindly. Among the few
remaining who took a prominent active part in public
life, the first that now stands in pride of place is honest
Robert Burrowes, now an Honorable, and full of wealth
and honors. The next most conspicuous individual,
now, as he was of old, is our genial, worthy Town Clerk
—his voice was once potential in the state. Next comes
ourworthycoroner, R. Strickland, full of bonhmnmie, and
■overflowing with the milk of human kindness ; and it
cannot be too well impressed on the present denizens of
Sa ndhurst, that to him, as a municipal councillor, we are
indebted for the establishment of the cattle yards, which
has been such a grand success, bringing in so large a
revenue to the city funds, under the able management of
A. M. Lloyd, a worthy old Bendigonian, still pursuing
his useful occupation. Come we next to Richard
Andrews, now happily still living, w fi 0; with ot]ierg to
mentioned by-and-bye, moulded and formed public
•opinion on a sound and healthy basis, never giving up
to pmty that which was meant for mankind. All honor
to them, and may their shadows never grow less ! Next
and conspicuous at all times, was our evergreen’ host of
the Shamrock, still like a sturdy oak, unchanged, and
able jet to buffet many a winter. Then we have


Alexander Bayne, who, for an uninterrupted period of
twenty-two years, has been actively, and most usefully,
one of the managers of our noble charity, the Bendigo
Hospital, *nd, in later times, a member of our City
Council for a long period, and once worthily filled the
high office of Mayor and Chief Magistrate. Bast,
though not least of those now living in our midst, who
acted well his part, is the present honourable member
lor Maldon, John Mclntyre, he, at the present time, is
the Rupert of Debate. I well remember some twenty-
six years since his political baptism at an open air
meeting in the Camp Reserve, held under the auspices
,of the Bendigo Land League—a political society which
arose, phoenix-like, from the ashes of the Red Ribbon
Society, James Forrester Sullivan, was the president,
W. D. C. Denovan, secretary. Harrison, and Thomson,
of Red Ribbon notoriety, were on the committee, and
Robert Benson, who was elected the Bendigo delegate
to the land convention. The meeting was held to
denounce the Haines Land Bill, which was subsequently
thrown out of the Upper House by the single vote of
John Paseoe Fawkner. At the meeting, Michie, who
was in the Haines government, was burnt in effigy. At
this meeting John Mclntyre made his first appearance
on the political stage, and the Celtic blood so effer-
yersced that he offered to lead the diggers, some
thousand strong, on Melbourne, to prevent the robbery
and spoliation of the patrimony of the people. These
were stirring times. We were then a homogeneous
people, one and indivisible ; the yield of gold was about
seven thousand ounces weekly, and black care, riding
behind the horseman, was then unknown. This was the
b 2


time when the alluvial mining was on the wane (at its
height there was fifteen thousand ounces sent down by
escort, by the week, for a long period—these figures
were given to us by Mr. Williamson, then the pay-
master. The alluvial mining, as I before stated, being
on the wane, puddling was then at the acme of its
glory ; over one thousand puddling mills were registered
and at work, and there were over three thousand horses
at work in connection with the mills. The hay and
corn trade was then a paying game, and the yield of
gold, as before stated, was seven thousand ounces per
week. Then arose the dawn of quartz-reefing, and
when Bailers ted t first struck gold in quartz, on the after
amous Victoria Hill, it was never conceived, by the most
sanguine, that quartz-reefing would ever become so
great an interest as it is. Why, even the most learned
savants gave it as their ipse dixit that gold would not
be got in quartz below the depth of three hundred feet
•and it is being got at as many fathoms.
The original extent of claim along a line of reef
was only twenty yards for two men. This was soon
found to be utterly inadequate for any successful develop-
ment. Then arose the local courts, being the first
tribunal for adjudicating on disputed claims. This
court was the precursor of our present Mining Boards,
which, in their early days, did yeoman service for the
mining interest. Conspicuous, as a chairman of the
Mining Boards, shone the indefatigable John Mclntyre,
and I well remember being present, and listening to
him, pluckily, cleverly, and successfully, confronting
and confuting that master, special pleader, and promi-
nent lawyer, Richard Ireland, on the subject matter of


leasing regulations. These had to be abandoned. Of
his subsequent career, and how he was the Whittington
of Sandhußst—being more than three times Mayor; and
how he was a dashing M.L.A, for Sandhurst; how he
was foolishly ejected by young Australia, through such
purblind folly—why, is it not all recorded in the chronicles
of the Bendigo Advertiser ? and now,, being only in
middle age, he is like Cleopatra, “ Age cannot wither,
or custom stale, his infinite variety.” Come we now to
two revered, and reverend individuals, who are still, by
the mercy of God, spared to use their long and earnest
labours in the cause of their Master, and poor, frail,
and erring, humanity, suffering, teaching, and preaching
religious instruction, which alone imparts the spirit of
self sacrifice, the great virtues, the lofty thoughts that
alone penetrate to the conscience and make life bear-
able, without a murmur against the mystery of human
existence. How few, like these two gentlemen, have
been spared and blessed to see such a full fruition to
their earnest labours. Dear old Dr. Backhaus, the
citizens of Sandhurst, one and all, esteem him highly ;
his own people have good reason to love and bless him,
for not only did he minister to a mind diseased, but he
soothed and cured many bodily ailments, being pos-
sessed of rare medical skill. Of the Rev. James Nish,
now a doctor of divinity, I may well speak with loving
regard, but as one of his least worthy members. Some
twenty-seven years ago he came to us a young man, 1
signed the call, and my youngest son was the first child
baptized by him. Through the vicissitudes of a gold-
fields’ life, I have been a poor, errant member of the
congregation. Now, in the vale of life, I see how I


have misused golden opportunities; I see how Dr. Msh
has pursued the even tenor of his way from point to
point of vantage in his church, courteous in manner,,
wise in council, being the most representative man in
the church. In this sceptical, superficial, doubting age,
he upholds the honoured standards of his church, not
with the zeal of bigotry, but on the broad platform of
brotherly love, as witness the good fight he made for the
Rev. Mr. M‘Ewan. Well, indeed, may his people be
proud of him, and well for the young and rising
members of his flock were they to make of him their
guide, their councillor, and their friend. He is yet
young in years, and may his life of usefulness be pro-
longed to a green old age.
Having thus cursorily sketched the living promi-
nent old identities of 1854, now resident in our midst,
I pass on to those now living, who are absent from us,
but who, upon the very body of the times, gave their
form and pressure, much to the benefit of all succeeding
time. We will first take Lorenzo the Superb , one
who was large in his generosity. The type of this man
is well represented by our Mr. George Lansell, who, out
of the fullness of his overflowing wealth, has given
thousands to our noble charities. May he live to a
patriarchal old age, for his own delectation and also for
the gain of the Bendigo Hospital. ’Tis passing
strange how the whirligig of time brings its revenge.
Here is the instance of a man who was looked upon as
an intolerable public nuisance, who was driven from
carrying on his trade in a central locality, and
grudgingly given a site to carry on a useful trade on the-
outskirts, who, when the wheel of fortune revolves in his


favour, forgets the past, and becomes a princely donor*.
Turn we now to another name, noteworthy in the annals
of Bendigo—the Hon. Angus Mackay. He, although
in the older time not taking an active out-door part in
the strife of public life, was better employed as the
senior partner, editor, and presiding genius, of the
Bendigo Advertiser* To him we were, and are in-
debted, for the grand work of a wholesome public
opinion ; he it was, who in troublous times educated
public opinion to respect law and order, ably advocating
the rights of labour, encouraging the development of a
latent talent that might tend to the public good, and.
giving free access to the columns of his paper for the
exposure of any real, or supposed grievance, thus
making the Bendigo Advertiser a potent power in
the State, and the most valuable press property inland,
in the colony. In the ticklish time of loyal liberalism,
when pure democracy (which means, that the voice of
the minority should be heard, as well as that of an
unreasoning brute majority, was outraged, and licence,
not true liberty, was the order of day, the Bendigo
Advertiser was consistent, never pandering, or
swerving to the current of the day. As it was in the
past, so it is at the present. The Hon. Angus Mackay
was a prominent and leading member of Parliament,
and conspicuous as a member of several strong Minis-
tries. To him, as a Minister of Mines, we are indebted
for the Mining Accident Bill, which has greatly lessened
the risk attending mining. He also was Minister of
Education in the strong Ministry which passed our
grand and beneficial Education Act, and, although Mr.,
Mackay is a very little time now amongst us, his spirit


Still animates his journal. I believe his household gods
are still amongst us, and his foot is now on his native
heath and his name it is Macgregor.
Come we now to the Honorable J. J. Casey, with
all his blushing honors thick upon him. He, also, was
a partner in the Bendigo Advertiser, taking an
active part in outside politics ; was chairman of the
Municipal Council which laid the permanent founds
tions of all subsequent improvements. During his
reign civic hospitality was inaugurated, and I well
remember meeting Butler Cole Aspinall there, who kept
the table in a roar. Alas, poor Yorick, he was a fellow
of infinite jest, and most excellent fancy. After this,
Mr. Casey was a member for Sandhurst, and subse-
quently member for Mandurang ; for years Minister of
Lands, and almost a titular king. Imbibing the genius
of his country, and being blessed with a large amount
of versatility, he qualified himself to be a well-employed
barrister, and has been a bright and shining star in all our
grand exhibitions. He was chief commissioner to the
great Paris Exhibition. He there basked in the smiles
of royal princes, and is now the head and front of the
greatest musical society in Melbourne—the Leidertafel,
So much for a Bendigo man.
We now come to the memory of one whose name
to all ages should be engraved in monumental brass, as
Sandhurst’s chief benefactor. To his teeming brain,-
fervid fancy, and artistic taste, we owe the planning of
all our leafy arbors, and sylvan retreats. It was a
saying of his, that “the groves were God’s first
temples.” He laboured in season, and out of season,
to advance the true interest of Sandhurst. He did


ibis in the face of the greatest difficulties; ignorant and
unreasoning clamour tried to asperse him, and the
passing cloud that closed his days was as a mirage of
the desert, FTo one should speak ill of the dead.
Peace to his ashes ; we shall never look upon his like
again—so much for the name of George Avery Fletcher,
In concluding this portion of the series with notable,
prominent Bendigonians, X must by no means omit the
name of J- H. Abbott, he was twice chairman of the
early municipal council, I think 185/ and 1858, he then
materially assisted to evolve order out of chaos, and
now has the high honor of being Father to Hospital
Sunday, which has so materially assisted our charities.
In concluding this portion of my subject, I wish it to
be understood that I only mention those who conspicu-
ously and beneficially stood out in bold relief, and names
of those worthy to be placed in a Bendigo Walhalla,


CHAPTER II.
SANDHURST AS IT WAS.
SAVING in the last chapter endeavoured to pay
a meed of praise to the pioneers and
founders of this flourishing city, I now
proceed to paint a picture of the past, showing out
of what rude and crude materials a stately city has
been shaped, of 28,000 inhabitants, with all the
present surroundings which make one’s life enjoyable.
How highly favored the present inhabitants are in
comparison with the meagre, uncomfortable, uninviting
and disheartening surroundings of the early days
entailing an amount of self-denial, labour and expense,
little dreamt of in these latter sensuous and luxurious
days. The City of Sandhurst is scarcely three decades,
in existence. It is about twenty-nine years since
Captain Andrew Clark surveyed the township, and for
a year or so afterwards Camp-street was in full swing.
The storekeepers and others, on being removed from
there, had the pre-emptive right to a site in the Mall,
at a low fee-simple, the great increment in the value of
land on Pall Mall giving several men handsome-
fortunes. For years the principal trade of the city has
centred there, giving the favoured individuals, the
landlords, the opportunity of extracting excessive rents.
I knew of one shop, about 16 feet frontage, in the


lower block, a poor indifferent building- of one story,
letting for £l2 a week in 1859 ; and on a twelve
months’ lease, about two years later, a mere shanty of a
place in the middle block, about ten feet frontage, for a
long period paid £8 a week. The fact was that the
tenants were so heavily handicapped they could barely
make a living. All their labour went into the insatiate
maw of the greedy cormorants ot landlords, giving
them a plethora of wealth, and, to my knowledge, there
was only one of the number who showed any consider-
ation in the way of a reasonable reduction to meet the
spirit of the times. As a class they extorted all they
could, and growled loudly at being made to contribute
a fair proportion of the municipal rates for improve-
ments. Even at the present day some few of them are
raising selfish objections to the grand, necessary, and
highly desirable improvements, of having the public
buildings erected in the reserve, opposite the centre
block. Fortunately matters are modified in a degree,
as View Point, Mitchell-strect, and Hargreaves-street,
now get a fair proportion of the trade, and the rents
now are infinitessimal in comparison to what we old
hands had to pay. Then, again, in the matter of house
rent, what a change in this respe'ct. In 1862 few
houses were to be had at any price. I paid 40s. a
week for a one-story brick five-roomed house in
M‘Laren-street. At the present time any number of
commodious houses can be had—as witness Mr. Joe
Bell’s large two-story ten-roomed house, in Forest-
street, being let for 255. a week, gas and water laid on.
In the early days such luxuries were then unknown ; as
to water, it was muddy and thick. Then we were


among the “ Great Unwashed.” Now, how changed ;;
now we are on a par with the lordly Sybarites of the
East, who make their ablutions, and even cleanse their
hands at meals,, in pellucid running water. At that
time cabs were not, and spring carts were the fashion-
able vehicles of the day. Then there was no railway to
take you swiftly and comfortably to Melbourne for I Is.
Instead of this you had to patronise Howard, or Bevan,
or afterwards Cobb and Co., if you wanted to visit the
metropolis, and the cost was £6, the Joss of a day, and
road expenses, 20s. Then there were no succulent
ribs or sirloins of beef, but the whole beast, from the
horns to the tail, was cut into- steaks - r the price of
meat was low, but the quality very tough. Potatoes-
were scarce and dear - T 2ib. loaves of bread were 18s.
per dozen ; eggs, 12s a dozen ; brandy, 15s. a bottle
bottled stout, 2s. 6d, the bottle ; and nobblers of
spirits and glasses of beer, Is. each. The bulk of the
population lived on mutton and damper, with tea made
in a billy, and no milk. Their only available means of
dissipation was a swill of hop beer—no fruit, no fish,
no oysters, no vegetables. Places of pleasure, or of
recreation, without form and void. If one ventured out
for a walk, why it was either blasting bright, or blinding
with dust storms, nothing verdant to meet the eye.
Ophthalmia then prevailed, dysentery and low colonia
fever carrying off its numerous victims. Many a
promising, gentle-nurtured and adventurous young
man. then
“ By the road side fell and perished,
Weary of the march of life.”
Even the very seasons are now changed for the better-


Twenty-six years ago we had regular and tropical
heavy rains at the beginning- of winter. From April
these continued incessantly for about two months*
Then we had a spell of glorious weather, something
like an Indian summer. Then followed another two
months of heavy rain. Everywhere there was a sea of
mud, and thig-li boots were consequently in request.
We had several destructive floods. Scarcely a winter
but some children were drowned, and Pall Mall was
near undergoing the fate of Pompeii, submerged by a
deluge of puddler’s sludge. Matters were becoming
so serious, that a new and straight channel had to be
cut to the creek, which saved all further disaster. At
the time the wind blew with hurricane force, and
caused us to think it was going to take the teeth out of
our crosscut saws. All this is so changed, and now
we are favoured with equable weather. At the time I
speak of the Camp Reserve was like the Sahara, with-
out an oasis within its confines, and Commissioner’s
Gully was a veritable valley of Hinnon, the receptacle
for all the refuse and the filth of Sandhurst. It only
wanted to be like its prototype near Jerusalem, to have
a fire constantly burning to consume the garbage
thrown without the Camp, How changed all circum-
stances and places are for the better, and the young
and rising generation should laud the gods for all their
blessings. Still, with all the discomforts, and all our
inconveniences, we old identities look back with longing
lingering love upon the past, and some of us who have
been worsted in the strife ol life, would gladly recall the
happy past. Life, though then rude, was not without
its charms. If nomadic, why it was a jolly Bohemian


existence. We were free from envy, jealousy, and
cankering care. Many a scholarly and polished
gentleman’s heart beat under the blue shirt of many a
digger. Then it was no rare thing to hear a rough,
unkempt fellow, speak from the well of English unde-
filed, in the purest Attic salt. Henry Kingsley, the
author of “ Ravenshoe,” arid “Geffrey Hamhlyn,” two
splendid Australian novels, worked on Epsom, and got
the material for his work at Mount Moliagul, near
Dunolly. On Epsom I was intimately acquainted with
a Mr. Snow. He was a bullock-driver, hut could
speak four languages, and had a brother high in office
in South Australia. At this time, Saturday on Sand-
hurst was a rare show. The diggers on that day made
full and high holiday. The Mall, from early morn
till dewy eve, and sometimes until the night, was
packed like herrings in a barrel with stalwart diggers,
bearded like the pard, and with their smart jumpers
and billy-cocked hats, looked every inch like men ;it
well reminded me of Goldsmith’s estimate of what an
Englishman was, a century ago, to watch them passing
by—
“ Pride in their port, defiance in their eyes;
1 see the very lords of human kind pass by.”
What a subject matter of regret it was to see these
noble-looking fellows applying so much hot and rebel-
lious liquor to their blood. On Saturday the numerous
public-houses did a roaring trade, mine host of the
Shamrock standing out prominent ; deservedly so, for
the able and expensive way he catered for the enjoyment
of the public; witness his grand free Music Hall, with its
then high talent, the inimitable Thatcher, the clever


Farquharson, the bell-like notes of Madame Sarah
Flower, and the then queen-like Madame Carandini,
with a host of other stars. Nothing like the “Hall” was
then in Melbourne ; it must have cost a mint of money-
weekly, but there was a grand trade doing, as it was
said that a wet Saturday made a difference in the
receipts of no less than fifty pounds for the day.
At the time I am now writing of, Commissioner’s
Gully, the upper and lower Bendigo Flat, the White
Hills, and the various gullies between, and beyond
Faglehawk, gave profitable employment to a large
alluvial mining population, the rush to Epsom attracting
a population of seven thousand. Alluvial mining was
on the decline, but the nascent industry of quartz-
mining was making satisfactory improvements, and
great things were beginning to be expected from it, C.
J. Brown hitting it heavily at Break-o’-Day, Crusoe ;
Caldwell and M‘Nair doing well at the Eagle ; several
encouraging finds on the Windmill Hill, and Baller-
stedt, the father of quartz-reefing, making good, fresh
discoveries on Victoria Hill. I wish now to call par-
ticular attention to the fact, that at the time I write of,
Sandhurst was a very small, circumscribed place, only
occupying a corner, as it were, in the great Bendigo
goldfield, the gross population of which, including
Eaglehawk, then (not, as now) a municipal borough,
also including Epsom, Huntly, the White Hills Hamlet
(then a flourishing place), and the Sandhurst borough,
was then 60,000. The area of Sandhurst, which then
got the lion’s share of the great trade of such a very
large population, was only about one-half of what it
what it now is—and the population under 10,000. In


1860 Quarry Hill and Golden Gully were annexed to
the municipality, three years subsequently, Ironbark,
and Long Gully, in 1871, It was at last erected into
a city, and can now boast of being a city with the
largest area in the southern hemisphere. It now
rejoices in an area of 7,856 square acres, or thirteen
square miles ; about eight thousand properties, mostly
houses; property to the valuation of £170,000 ;
revenue, from all sources, about £BI,OOO ; expenditure
in 1880, £33,000 ; population, 28,000, and Chinese,
584. We have over 70 miles of streets planted with
goodly trees, some of the altitude of sixty feet. Be it
noted —70 miles of trees means 35-| miles of streets.
The city, and its surroundings, are something for old
surviving Bendigonians to be proud of, whose children s
children have seen the progress, and should bless God
for it. It may not be without interest to contrast the
population of Bendigo, in 1860 and 1881. In the
former period it was about 60,000, in the present,
52,000. The alluvial mining being extinct, accounts
for the migration of large numbers of miners. The
increase in quartz-working, and other new industries, has
well sustained the population.
Before closing this portion of my series it is meet
and fitting that I should describe what an orderly, law
abiding people, we Bendigonians were. Although society,
in the early years, was in a rough, rude, chaotic state,
the person and property of all were safe from violence,
or robbery. The immunity and the security was the
remark of all strangers. For this we were indebted to
our excellent police magistrate, Lachlan McLachlan,
who very soon purged the place of all ruffianism. He


was a terror to evil doers, and his name to all ages
should be most gratefully remembered on Eendigo. In
conclusion all that I have now written will to some
appear like a twice told story. Still, I apprehend that,
to the many, it may not be without some interest, and
that it may both point a moral and adorn a tale.
The next chapter will be upon municipal improvements
from 1860, and early society on Sandhurst.


CHAPTER III.
THE MARCH OF IMPROVEMENTS, AND EARLY SANDHURST
SOCIETY.
Mf IT HOUT wielding 1 a partial or invidious pen,
begin with the Municipal Council acts
and doings, the one elected in August,
1860, being’ the Council who laid the foundation
and initiated the grand improvements since resulting 1 .
In doing so, I by no means wish to ignore the preceding
councils, but they were cabinned, cribbed, confined, by
want of money, and the Herculean task of reducing order
out of chaos, Market-square being a labyrinth of diggers’
holes, W illiamson-street almost an impassable Bog of
Allan (there was a tradition that a bullock, horns and
all, was once swallowed up there) ; tree stumps were not
unknown in Pall Mall ; I myself once came to grief and
split the knee of a certain garment on falling over a
stump in the crossing opposite Bull-street. So it will
be seen that the preceding councils had the work of
utility to do, leaving ornamental improvements for
their successors. Among the council elected in 1860
were one or two travelled Thanes, men who had seen
the world, and the glory thereof ; men of observant eye,
and some pretention to aesthetic taste. These men,
it may be, dreamt the Alnasker dream, that in this
favored southern land something might be created so
different from the clouded skies and rigors of an Arctic


clime, some thought like sunny Greece or glorious
Italy, and make this another land of the myrtle and the
vine. Thesg men may have been of the opinion, which
has since been proved a fact, namely, that the valley of
the Bendigo could be made into a valley of roses—a
veritable Yale of Cashmere. Conspicuous among these
men was the chairman, J. J. Casey, just then com-
mencing his afterwards successful public career. The
other members of the council, during my first year of
service, were Eobert Durrowcs, R. Strickland, Edward
O’Keefe, E. Garsed, J. Symonds, and myself, ; in all
there were seven. The clever and assiduous George
Avery Fletcher was town clerk. In my second, and
last year of office, Garsed and Symonds were replaced
by John Mclntyre and J. Holdsworth, he and I were
the sub-committee for the formation of the Botanical
Gardens. We also were the prominent members who
took an active part in forming the Bendigo Agricultural
and Horticultural Society, John Holdsworth offering to
pay the expense of fitting up the Market Sheds,
Holdsworth being then noted for his horticultural
knowledge. The hamlet of the White Hills was then
a prosperous place. “Ichabod” can now be written
there.
In the first year of my office, to J. Symonds and I
belong the honor of the first tree-planting. High-street
and Bridge-street being the first planted. What a
grand avenue High-street is for our now favorite driv e
to Crusoe. In my first year Eobert Strickland estab-
lished the cattle yards, and J. J, Casey, having been
elected M. L. A. for Sandhurst, resigned the chair, and
c 2


R. Sirickland was chairman. Subsequently he was
member of Parliament during Richard Heal'es’ Adminis-
tration, and passed as a barrister, so that, as we say in
Dublin, he is a member of the Devil’s Brigade, and is now
a Daniel come to judgment. In the second year of my
office Robert Burrowes was chairman ; during this period
the council got the fee-simple of the Camp Reserve.
I was put up to move the motion for it being fenced in,
and incurred tne odium of being the cause of evicting
poor people then resident upon it, although they were
well compensated. I also had the honor of naming it
Rosalind Park, which arose in this way: M’lntyre
wished to call it St. Jamos’s Park, but as he had already
the privilege of naming View Point, Charing Cross, I
thought we had enough of plagiarism, and objected to
St. James, and said why not call it Rosalind, from “ As
you like it, ” as in time the park may become a minia-
ture Forest of Arden. The council had not poetic souls
to see it, and I was pretty well laughed at, but the
press took the name up, and although it had only one
iponsor, it has become a goodly child, under the foster-
ing care of George Avery Fletcher, at first, then
Dougald Macdougall, who was the father of Lake
Weeroona. Macdougall was a good hand at getting a
fair share of Government money granted for parks and
gardens, and, having great taste, he was good at spend-
ing money. It is all now under the care of our worthy
town clerk, Mr. Denovan, who I know is alike anxious
to further beautify and adorn such a glorious reserve of
sixty-seven acres in the heart of our city, and I hope he
will see his way to bring up our present council to the


sticking point, and make them expend say £I,OOO for
a glass and iron building as a conservatory, or winter
garden, to b& placed on the flat under the hill, and on
view from the Mall. In passing, I wish to remark
what a good appointment Mr. Gadd as a curator is ?
from his Crystal Palace experience. He it is who can
make “ a thing of beauty and a joy for ever.” Just look
at his latest improvement, the fernery. It is quite
superfluous to descant further on the beauty of the Park,
it must be patent to all, and it is to be hoped that all
may duly appreciate the value, and be grateful to the
donors and originators of such an attractive resort,
with its lakes, its cricket ground, its, tennis lawn, and
its bowling-green, where our grej beards can unbend
and disport themselves. What a marvellous change
has come over the early spirit of our dream—so much
for park, lakes (with their rowing clubs), and our gar-
dens.
It now only remains to notice the improvements
in Pall Mall, and our dwellings, and public buildings,
and here it almost looks as if the enchanter’s wand had
been at work. In 1860 Sandhurst was a village of
shanties. In 1881 it is a city, with a thriving and
numerous population. The cottage homes of Bendigo
are by thousands on our streets, our ranges, our flats,
and our gullies. Every man can sit under his own vine,
and which he planted, and eat in safety, and sing the
merry songs of joy to all his neighbours. At no time
was food so abundant or so cheap. Rising a little
higher, w r e have our pretty cottage ornees, our not
unpretentious terraces, and our detached villas, where


the courtesies and amenities, and enjoyments of a
polished, civilised life, can be and are enjoyed, thus
giving a pleasure and a zest to life. Again, on con-
trasting the present aspect of Pall Mall, View Point,
and Charing Cross, with the past —lo ! what a change.
Now we can look upon rows of handsome shops, with
attractive buddings, quite equal to any part of Bourke-
street. We have in Charing Cross a bold, and fairly
classical fountain, such as Melbourne cannot show, and
in View-street we have got a palatial Masonic Hall,
the grandest in the southern hemisphere, and to all
appearance likely to remain without a compeer, to the
credit of the Sandhurst brethren of the mystic tie. ’Tis
true we are a long way behind Melbourne in the matter
of our Town Hall, but we could not be expected to
compete in this respect with the Queen City of the
South, but we can take the credit, and say that, had it
not been for the Bendigo and Ballarat gold such a
stately building as the Melbourne Town Hall would
not even yet have been in embryo ; and our own Town
Hall will be a creditable building when it is cemented
and the incongruous granite columns taken away. What
a pity it could not be done in Keen’s cement, it would
then look like Carrara marble. I now note the improve-
ments that are urgently required:—These are, that the
whole of the public buildings, in one imposing block,
should at once be commenced —without any more shilly-
shallying —opposite the Centre Block in the Mall. No
other site within the city can compare to it. The money
is about to be granted, and the delay is defrauding honest
labor of ful ! employment. There must be no more


pernicious pandering to local influence, which, in the
past, has been the bane of Sandhurst; and, to complete
the improvements, the roadway in the Mall must be
widened, and a handsome, dwarf, iron railing erected,
with bronzed spikes. The mere fact of widening the
road, will effectually, in all coming- time, prevent the
sale of the frontage to the park. Here it may not be
without interest, even in the present day, to retrace
one’s steps, and recall a memorable circumstance that
occurred under the auspices of the municipal council of
1860 and 1861. This was the opening of the railway
to Sandhurst, in 1862. Robert Burrowes, chairman of
the council, entered into the matter in a right royal
spirit. We braved the irate ratepayers,, and went in
lemons for expense. We issued invitations to the prin-
cipal Government officers, the tickets being for one
gentlemen and two ladies. The beggars, not content
with this few, brought no less than four, and some eight,
ladies. We opened an agency in Melbourne for the
sale of tickets, sold over <£1,500 worth, erected a large
weatherboard building opposite,the Town Hall (Corn
Exchange not then built), luncheon and dinner laid for
2,000 guests. Afterwards, the tables were cleared away,
and 3,000 were calculated to be at the ball. Sir Henry
Barkly, and suite, and the then Chief Secretary, Sir
John O Shanassy, came. All the drapers’ shops did a
roaring trade ; they never had such a glorious chance
before, or since, for making money. We had a detach-
ment of Melbourne Artillery, who made the welkin ring
with their salvoes. All the tradespeople on Sandhurst
contributed liberally for a free, open-air feed, to over


5,000 people. At the station, two bullocks were
roasted whole. In the railway cutting, an unlimited
supply of beer, and claret, and burgundy, was to be had
for the asking. The number of special trains Ido not
now remember, but all the then available carriages were
put under requisition. The ladies came up full-dressed,
and, as there were no beds to be had, had to sleep in
carriages. Oh, it was, as the Americans say, a rather
tall affair ; and, when the day of reckoning came, we
found, in addition to the £1,500 received for tickets,
that there was a liability of, well, up to £2,500, the
cost, in all, being about £4,000. The “ Apemantas”
of Sandhurst, Alfred England, put on his war-paint,
and served the Council with an injunction against
paying the money. But the then Council was made of
sterner stuff than to be frightened by so narrow a pro-
ceeding, and the liability was paid by the Councillors,
with impunity. So much was Mr. Burrowes thought of
for his spirited conduct, that a year or two afterwards
he was returned as a member for Sandhurst, sat for a
long period, and carried more weight in the House than
many a loquacious member. He is now Minister of
Mines, in a lasting Government. As for me, I incurred
the dire displeasure of the Loyal Liberals. Having
effectually prevented the Council Chamber from being
turned into a political arena, and also having earned the
character of being an extravagant member, and unsafe
custodian of the ratepayers money, I was relegated to
private life.
In concluding this chapter of the series of articles
with a sketch of early Sandhurst society, I shall hate


to be brief, as the materials are but scanty. Tbe then
society was very limited, but was rather refined. It
consisted of tbe wardens, tbe Government officers, the
legal fraternity,, with their families, Dr. Tierney and
his lady, and C. J. Brown and his lady. To us, old
stagers, it was a pleasurable sight to see these two ladies
display themselves so gracefully on horseback. Mr. and
Mrs. Brown left early, and made a prolonged stay in
Paris. Some years since they returned to Sandhurst,
are at present in our midst —he, poor man, a sad sufferer
from illness, and she a most loving and devoted nurse.
The history of this lady is a romance —a West Indian by
birth, she came to England when 12 years old, married at
twenty, and emigrated to Adelaide shortly after. Scarcely
settled there, when gold was discovered in Victoria, Ade-
laide was nearly deserted by its males, among these, C.
J. Brown came, leaving his young wife in Adelaide —he
was moderately successful. With a well-lined belt of
gold, he returned, and, with his wife, her sister and
brother, came overland. They were nine weeks doing
so. The ladies rode on horseback, and like young
Lochinvar, “ swam the Esk river, where ford there was
none,” —meaning the Murray. On arriving on Bendigo,
they, like the Kentuckian, had to axe the way for their
dray to Eaglehawk. It then was in the glory of its
early opening, gold being got by the pound weight.
C. J. Brown started storekeeping, Mrs. Brown, as-
sisted by her sister, bought gold (a revolver lying ready
to hand). When the gold was retained by the diggers,
to be sent down by escort, Mrs. Brown divided the
gold to each man, and she was so fastidious, that she


refused the present of many a nugget. Previous to
her advent, in some instances the diggers divided their
gold by measuring it in a soda-water bottle, the pieces
that would not go down the neck they tossed for. At
this time there were only two classes on the goldfields,
gentlemen adventurers and Vandemonians. C. J.
Brown prospered in Eaglehawk ; on subsidence of rush
he came into Sandhurst and erected the first store that had
glass windows. I well remember it, on the opposite
side of the creek to Harney’s Hotel. After that he
had the success in quartz, in Break-o’-Day.—thirty
ounces to the ton • subsequently sunk a larg’e portion
of his profits in early unprofitable quartz-mining. Mrs.
Brown arrived on Bendigo in 1852, and can claim to
be the first woman who arrived on the Bendiaro
diggings. What a strange, eventful history for a
gentle-nurtured young lady, Mrs. Brown’s is.
To show the scarcity of ladies in the early days, at
a military ball in the Camp Reserve (we had soldiert
then quartered on us), for lack of ladies, Warden
Panton, Mr. McLaughlen, Harry Skene, and J. C.
Duncan danced the Scotch reel. The only other
women on the goldfield were the diggers’ wives, who
held high jinks on Mondays, shopping being the delighs
of women. So very different now, with the grand
Masonic Concert Hall, Monaghan’s Band, and its
display of youth aud beauty.


CHAPTER IV.
OUR CHARITIES AND INSTITUTIONS,
first, our premier charity, the Bendigo
Gold District Hospital, It stands first as
one of our charities, and, from its resources,
its palatial and costly building, and from its past
history, and present beneficent influence, Sandhurst
may well be proud of such a noble institution. All
honor to those who founded such a noble charity,
and who, by their energy, self-denial, wise pro-
vision and forethought, reared such a structure for
the relief of all the accidents and ills that afflict frail
humanity. Of them, only Alexander Bayne, and John
Stewart are left, with, I believe, an unprecedented period
of unbroken service of twenty-two years. In the early
days it was considered a high honor to be elected on the
committee ; I had that honor conferred upon me, and I
can speak from experience, and say, we were a united
family. However, we had our differences, but we
washed our dirty linen at home, none of us aired our
crotchets on a pinnacle of self-isolated superiority. Of
one thing we were studiously careful, not to hurt the
feelings of self-respect of those who benefited by the
charity. All this we did from the liberal appreciation
of the outside public, unaided by Easter Fairs and
Hospital Sundays, and no royal contributions from a


Mr. George Lansell, then. What find we now—with the
bulk of the people much better off, and trebled in
numbers, without any diminution in their kindly, chari-
table feeling-, with less strain upon the resources of the
Hospital, as there is nothing like such a number of
severe accidents in the mines, owing to salutary mining
laws ? We find, in the face of a more favorable state
of things than the earlier committees had to contend
with, we find a flurried, wrangling, jarring committee,
airing some petty schemes, washing their foul linen in
public view, and blotting the fair and radiant fame of
our charity, by asking the manhood of Bendigo to sign
a degrading statutory declaration of mendicity, and, to
cap the climax of meanness, they ask the out-door
patients to pay a trifling sum for the bottles, Alas !
how low has our grand charity fallen, to have its fail-
fame so blotted ; an institution standing within ten
acres of handsome grounds, the buildings of which cost
close on £30,000, whose income and expenditure
reaches the sum of £7,000 per annum, and which has
an endowment account of close on £B,OOO. Shall such
an institution be committed to such meanness ? Perish
the thought! I feel keenly, therefore I speak warmly,
and ask if it be that there is, on the part of the com-
mittee, “ something rotten in the state of Denmark ?”
It is a great pity Mr. Howard has resigned, for he was
a capital treasurer.
Turn we now to a more pleasing subject, and let
us accord a full meed of praise to our Benevolent
Asylum. All honor to the committee there, for they
have nobly done their duty, and silently, steadily, and


most usefully proceeded on their way, successfully
meeting and combating the difficulties, attending,
relieving .deserving objects of charity on the one hand,
and checking imposition and imposture. With them
“ the quality of mercy, which droppeth like the gentle
rain from heaven,” has not been strained; what a mass
of wretchedness, and misery, and suffering, they must
have relieved in their time, for, even in this favored
land, all may at some time have to bear “ the slings and
arrows of outrageous fortune.” This noble charity
stands as a monument of the generosity of the people
of Sandhurst. A most attractive object, for all time
to come to the eye of the stranger, with its handsome
and palatial building, standing in its ten acres of artis-
tically laid out shrubberies and gardens, which would be
a grace to any nobleman’s palace. Oh !itis so dif-
ferent to the old world’s workhouse, w ith its grim and
gloomy surroundings, and its stern, harsh, and repul-
sive laws, which make distress punishable as a crime ;
while here, those who have been worsted in the battle of
life, instead of being left bleeding by the are ad-
mitted to this haven of rest, where they are lulled to
soft forgetfulness of all their defeats. Thrice happy
they ; and were it not for the stigma of being the
recipient of charity, these unfortunate, yet fortunate
ones, are, indeed, much better off, than thousands who
bravely struggle to keep themselves beyond the reach of
dependence, and, in so doing, preserve their manhood. The
buildings cost £20,000, inclusive of children’s hospital
for contagious diseases, and there is also a handsome
private residence for the superintendent and matron,


which cost £I,OOO. There is a number of the indus-
trial school children quartered here, the number at
present being seventy-five —the whole accommodation is
for one hundred and fifty. The State assists this
school by special grant. There is a notably efficient
staff of teachers, and the last report of the Govern-
ment Inspector is highly laudatory. The endowment
fund is in the satisfactory state of having over £G,OOO
to its credit. The important feature in connection with
this institution is, the out-door relief. Last year, the
sum of £1,923, for the partial relief of 230 heads of
families, was disbursed. This embraced an average
number of 700 children. The mode of relief is in
kind, those residing near being supplied from the
Asylum store, those living at a distance by order on
the nearest store. The principal parties now living
who are to be honored for fostering and rearing this
great charity are, Dr. James Boyd, George Aspinall,
and W. Skeane. Of those dead, James Forrester
Sullivan, and the zealous, hard-working, and active
secretary, James Burnside, The institution has the
rare good fortune to have the benefit of the long expe-
rience of the first-appointed superintendent and matron
Mr. and Mrs. William Dorman, who have held the
office so creditably for over twenty years, and are yet in
the vigor of their intellect and usefulness.
Having finished with our charities, I turn to other
institutions, and take the one of most antiquity—the
free and accepted Masons, Here, we Masons have
something to dilate upon. The Masonic Hall is by far
the grandest building in Sandhurst, and a fitting and


right noble home for such an Order to place their ark
in. The building is one of the pure Corinthian order,
lofty without, and spacious within ; therein is the finest
Assembly Hall out of Melbourne, I think ranking
second only to that of the Melbourne Town Hall.
What an imposing facade, with its tapering columns
rearing the graceful acanthus-leaf capitals 40 feet from
the ground. The building cost about £13,000, and
reflects the highest praise upon the Brotherhood fo r
their pluck. The Lodge-room, with its symbolic fur-
niture, charms, and makes the uninitiated wonder.
There are two lodges, one being the Golden and
Corinthian Amalgamated, the other the Zenith, in all
numbering three hundred strong. There is a lodge of
instruction. Masonry is appreciated, and well practised
in Sandhurst. There is also here a well-worked Arch
Chapter, within whose folds the present Grand Master
of Victoria received his exaltation. Though I have
sounded all the heights and depths of Primitive
Masonry, without divulging any secret, I will still say,
that any person admitted within its arena will be found
to be a better man—a better husband, father, son, or
brother—and look up to the Great Architect of this
glorious universe with more confiding love and reve-
rence. Wherever a Mason goes he will find a friend,
and its protecting aegis has alike saved from the rover
of the sea, and from the deadly ravages of war.
Besides, as the old song says—
What mortals can more the ladies adore,
Than a free and accepted Mason.
The Foresters and the Oddfellows are numerous


and prosperous with their general tents and courts, and
their commodious halls in Market-square, and Mveis
street. As benefit, sick, and burial societies, they are above
all praise. By these associations and combinations
the horny-handed sons of toil, can put on a bold tiont,
and in a great degree outface calamity and dire fate.
The various temperance societies, with the Eechabites,
(a teetotal benefit society), have a handsome hall, and a
most creditable free public library, which is well patron-
ised, and a great boon to many on Sandhurst. The
last-named society is the richest of all our local socie-
ties. These temperance organisation have done yeoman s
service to the cause of health, increase of wealth, peace,
progress, and prosperity ; mitigating the pernicious
habit of drinking—which once prevailed to such an
alarming extent upon the goldfields, and by which
many a good, tall fellow was destroyed. It were well
that “ local option,” were in force here, for it can be
but a small benefit to any one to have such a multi-
plicity of small public-houses. Diminution ol drinking
going on from day to day, a newer, purer, and better
life will arise, and crime, and illness, and suffering, will
decline, and a new era of prosperity arise. Finally, it
is to be remarked, that the members of these societies
form an unbroken phalanx, like the old Roman ae Port-
rian guards of ancient lay and story, and that their
voice is getting surely and steadily more potential in
the state.
It is to be notified that our religious edifices are
poor in structure, and it is to be hoped that all the con-
gregations, who are numerous and prosperous, will


awake to a nobler feeling, and try to emulate the early
piety and artistic taste of muck poorer people than we
have in this materialistic age, In olden time they
raised fanes Worthy of their Father and their God.
Now, with the exception of God’s favoured t e
Jews, our religious edifices are poor in the extreme,
whereas the Jews, few in number in Sandhurst, have,
out of their liberality, erected a pretty eastern-like
Synagogue.
We have a handsome building for a Savings’ Ban c,
and a worthy old Bendigonian (R. F. Howard), as
actuary. I have not the statistics at hand, but can
state that our deposits, in proportion to population, and
amounts of deposit, can contrast most favorable with
other places. Finally we have a very handsome, im-
posing building in M‘Crae-street, as our Mechanics’
Institute. The cost of the building amounted to
£B,OOO. The Library consists of 11,000 vols. The
secretary is John D. Coburn—polite and efficient.
1 may now notice a most pleasurable, profit-
able institution, that of the Easter Fair, which has
done so much to aid our charities. George Aspmall is
the only founder of it now living. Another gala insti-
tution is our Hospital Sunday; this, weather permitting,
is a most enjoyable affair. All honor to .1. H. Abbott,
its founder, a worthy Birmingham man.
Come we now to dear Old Scotia, the Land o
the mountain and the flood,” with its children of the
mist, and of the glens, famed in song and story for
being neither laggards in love, nor dastards in war—as
witness their undying valor on many a stmken e
n


Look upon theirf Jacobin loyalty to a worthless king!
Look upon the wealth of literature we owe to their
immortal dead ! Look upon their sound, shrewd
sense ! Lo fear of their being led astray by the
chimera of the baseless fabric of a visionary dream.
Well may our Scotch brethren stmt with pride behind
the St. Andrew flag, going to commemorate their
National sports on New Lear’s Day. This society was
at one time a braw institution, and is still highly credit-
able ; and it is there you will hear the skirl of the pipes
which warms the blood of the Glael. The founders of
this society now living are, Lachlan M‘Lachlan, Angus
Mackay, J. C. Duncan, John Melrose, and Hugh
M‘Coll, secretary.
Turn we now to the “ Land of the West.”
Oh, Erin, my country, how I do love you still.
They say that you are the Niobe of nations, always
in trouble, and in tears. How is it that a land should be so
which is lovely beyond description, and so surpassingly
fertile ; whose expatriated sons can make and form new
nations ; who for valour are so renowned. Look what
the Irish Brigade was at Fontenoy. Look how her
children have fought the battles of their country,
fighting like lions led by asses—as it was said in the
Crimean war; and look upon the undying genius of
Erin’s sons in the ranks of art, literature, science
and debate. How is it possible, in these latter days,
such discontent and misery should visit so fair a land-
It was not always so, for we read in the annals of the
“ Four Masters,” (an authentic book to be seen in
Trinity College, Dublin) that when other parts of


Europe were sunk in Gothic paganism and barbarism,
Ireland, which was the first Christianised, was the
home of learning, the resort of students, and an island
of saints. These were the days of the deeds of—
« Brian the brave."
And then was the time—
« When Malicha wore her collar of gold.’
And —
•« The Bed Knights their banners unfurled.”
Well, indeed, it may be said, that Ireland is a puzzle.
So we will turn to our St. Patrick’s Society, with its
Shamrock so green, on the 17th of March, with its
sports and its jollity. The founders, new living, of
this society are, Patrick Hayes, Mr. W. O’Connor, and
Edward Holton. Conspicuous among the dead is the
name of Edward O’Keefe. This society is now a
Benefit society, with numerous members, and in a good
financial position.
In dilating at such length on Scotch and Irish-
men, I by no means wish to ignore St. George, for
merry England, but these lords of creation do not
require a society to exalt their greatness. It only
remains to note the institution of Fire Brigades, which
have grown with the growth of the place ; they are
useful, active, and self-denying fellows, neither toil nor
danger daunts them in their noble efforts to save
life and property. The founders were R. Buvrowes and
T. J. Connelly, and others mentioned.
D 2


CHAPTER V.
OUR MINES AND STOCK AND SHARE MARKET.
8 MAY be permitted to remark that at one time
I was supposed to be a quasi authority in our
Mining world, and tried to hold an even
balance for the development of our mines, and the
safety of the outside speculating public. Now, as I
have returned after a long absence, it may not be un-
acceptable to take even a perfunctory bird’s-eye view
of our present state and prospects. For the purpose
of more fully elucidating the present position of our
Paramount Industry, a brief retrospective sketch may
not be without interest. From the first inception of
quartz-reefing, about 1854, up to 1862, this industry
took spasmodic jumps. At one time it was Ballerstedt,
on the Victoria Hill ; then Brown, at Break-o’-Day ;
again M c Nair and Caldwell, at the Eagle Beef, Eagle-
hawk ; and again, Buckie and others, on Windmill
Hill ; and heavier still, Sibley and Company, on the
Comet, and Latham and Watson, on the Hustler’s, the
last two firms sending in the first sensational cakes.
The interest slowly but surely progressing, about 1862
it was found that it was desirable to associate outside
.capital with local enterprise, and Fraser’s Act wag


enacted and the first Liability Companies were formed,
care being then taken that none but bona jide com-
panies were,formed. Among those then formed, to the
best of my recollection, were the Old Chum, the
Victoria Gold Mines, the Hercules, the Energetic, the
old Johnson’s, and the Catherine United, on one as-
sured line; and on the other then well-known line, the
Hustler’s were the companies known as the Comet,
the Great Extended Hustler’s and North Hustler’s ; all
of these mentioned companies making sure and certain
progress, offering a safe and honest field for investing
outside capital, aye, and getting it too, and command-
ing confidence.
In mentioning the names of private individuals who,
in the early days, got large yields, I was nearly making
the unpardonable mistake of omitting the name of
George Cooper, of the Comet, the then most liberal
master that the working miners ever had. At the
time I now write of, there were numerous private claims
then at work, yielding richly. Conspicuous among
private claim-owners was the Happy Valley “ Happy
Family,” consisting of Wells, Gibbs, Annear, Wood-
ward, Rodier, and Young ; others had been in and
had made the mistake to clear out. This combination
illustrated the fable of a bundle of sticks, “ United
we can’t be broken.” They had a united interest in
all their various undertakings, were eminently success-
ful, and now stand secure against the ills of fortune,
and the first five are, at the present day, a united band
of speculative brothers. And so our mining world
throve, prospered, and wagged, until the mining-company-


forming mania set in with such a deluge in 1870 and
1871. Then we one and all lost our heads, insanely
thought we were all upon the royal road to fortune.
It must be admitted that we got our previous fair fame
smirched by our not over particularity in floating com-
panies, not exactly on any known line of reef. Cen-
sorious, evil-speaking people, called them “bubble
companies. It may be that they were right j life with
us, in those days, was a fret, a hurry, a race, a conflict,
what with our crowded Mall, our closely-packed hotels,
our special trains for crowds of eager speculators hurry-
ing to be rich, and, what pressed heavily on the mass
of our population was, the enormous increase in the
rents of houses. The mania lasted about a year ; it
was at fever heat for about six months, and the collapse
set in early in 1873, and, with the exception of the
knowing, early birds, who hedged heavily, and secured
house or station property, few benefited compared to
the immense majority of the many thousands that
thought they were on the flood of fortune but found
themselves stranded, and their gold scrip turned into
withered fairy leaves. Yet this grand, although to
many a disastrous rush, was not without its compen-
sating lesson, for, like a tornado, it cleared the atmos-
phere of the noxious vapours that enveloped mining
enterprise ; it taught the wholesome lesson that, even in
mining, honesty is the best policy, and I question much
if ever again knavery and chicanery will be able to gull
a simple public with a flood of bogus companies. In the
interim, fiom 1873 to about 1879, quiet progress was


going on, and confidence was being restored gradually,
and is strengthened by the encouraging out-look now
a-head of us.
About a year ago the Ellenborough claim came to
the front, subsequently, other of the Eaglehawk com-
panies’ became conspicuous ; the dry bones of mining
speculation there began to be reanimated into life,
much advancing the credit of the locality. Then the
Hustler’s and Redan gave large dividends, the Con-
solidated doing splendidly, and the Garden Gully
United Company giving its regular dividends like clock-
work. It may be likened unto Poe’s river, for some
companies’ dividends may come and some may go, but
the Garden Gully dividends appear as if they would
go on for ever. At the present date the prospect and
aspect look both wholesome and encouraging, attx-act-
ing a steady flow of outside capital—as witness the
large Melbourne business—and it is not at all of a
feverish or a fitful nature. Another long dormant
company, once rich in gold, the Hercules and Ener-
getic, has come with a rush to the front, and is going
to be a good thing. The prospects of other portions
of our goldfield are of a sound and encouraging cha-
racter, without being coloured by the over-sanguine,,
and, it may be no vain or idle prediction, that ere long
we will have such a large and unprecedented state of
prosperity as has not yet been seen. So mote it be !
The present leading 1 line is the world-famous New
Chum and Victoria, extending from the Eureka Ex-
tended Company, south, to the Catherine Reef United
Company, north, a distance of four miles. The line


extends miles further, but I stop at the Catherine, as
it has yielded well in the past. This rich run of coun-
try, interlaced with lines of reefs, has been, and pro-
mises for years to be, a very Factolus, or river of gold.
The Hustler’s line is now rather quiescent. It is a
romance to read of the past of this line, with its fa-
bulous cakes and enormous dividends, giving princely
fortunes to scores • the parent shares at £2O and Pups
No. 1, at £lO 10s, Hustler’s, and North Hustler’s
companies also paying good dividends. Of the famous
Garden Gully line/ and of the first grand, big strike
of Joe Bell, and Tom Watson, it is a work of super-
erogation to expatiate on, enough to say, here is
the inexhaustible Garden Gully United, but this I
have previously dilated on, yet I here wish to add,
what an Aladdin’s cave of glittering, untold wealth
has been, and yet remains here, out-rivalling the fabled
wealth of India and Peru; and we can proudly boast
that we have a plethora of wealth, yet to be developed
amongst us, that will be beyond the dreams of avarice.
As a cognate subject to mining I musi here trea
of our Stock and Share Market, and our array of the
army of martyrs—-the brokers. And here I must walk
gently over the coals, for it puzzles the will, and
makes one pause, and think how best to treat so grave
a subject. Of this my old friends may rest assured,
that I shall nothing extenuate or set down ought in
malice—a fellow feeling makes us Wondrous kind.
Although not of them now, it was not always so. I,
like many I now see, Was a very minnow among tritons'
I, like many others now also, stood s ‘ like patience on


a monument smiling at grief,” I, like many others I
can now see around, passed the day in cold and the
night in suspense, and, sad to say, got u potted ” with
many a worthless scrip. With Lord Dundreary, I saw that
there was “ nothing in it,” and that the game was not
worth the candle, and unfeeling, impudent (it may
have been ignorant) people, called our Rialto a “ refuge
for the destitute,” or a place for the “ pickers up of
unconsidered trifles.” The grazing ground being
cropped rather close, I found out other pasturage, with
what success boots not to tell. Having in my youth
been taught “ Paley’s Political Economy,” and therein
learnt that every man who comes into this world is
bound in honor to leave it better than he found it ;
and that he only is a benefactor to his species who can
make two blades of grass grow where one only grew
before ; and that no state would thrive where all the
people were consumers, and not producers ; and it
being also impressed upon me, that an idle man s head
is the work of the now-called evil one ; and as Holy
Writ says that, if you do not work neither shall you
eat, why, I would, in all kindness, advise the three
hundred or so to pocket their pride, and take a turn at
stone-breaking—a creditable and useful employment,
as it conduces to good roads, and a peaceful serenity
of mind, as all labour is honourable.
I now turn to what should be a legitimate Stock and
Share Exchange, with its sworn brokers. It is meet
and fitting that so great an interest as our gold fields
’s, and in consideration of the very large amount of
capital that has been, and that is daily increasingly


being invested in it, that only highly-qualified and re-
sponsible men should he brokers—and brokers only.
Of course I Will be met with the cuckoo cry, “ How
are you going to prevent them jobbing ?” I reply, and
say, how is it that the London stock exchange is
above suspicion. The present government, who will
exist during the life of the present parliament (yet eigh-
teen months to run) would put a feather in their caps by
passing a “ Brokers’ bill.” No one knows better than
the present Minister of Mines, Mr. Burrowes, of the
many evils surrounding the present state of things, how
that Tammany Rings can be formed, who play°blttle-
dore and shuttle-cock with some of our best stocks, in-
flating or depressing the market, to the loss and* be-
wilderment of a duped and gullible outside public. A
body of sworn brokers, paying a heavy license of, say,
£5O, or £lOO per annum; these, with a vigilant press,'
would check malpractices and strengthen confidence,
and the minnows of the Stock Exchange would then
find more legitimate, and more profitable employment..
There would only then remain the legalised brokers, and
the money-jobbers. In bringing these remarks on this
head to a close, it is only justice to mention the name
of James Pennistan, who can fairly lay claim to be the
father of ail the brokers. He, in the early days, when
brokers were not, did most useful service to claim-
holders in acting as agent for the disposal of their part-
interest in claims. He each day rode through the gold-
field, visiting tae claims to see if his services were in
request. In 1862, he opened an office in the Mall, as a
broker; from thence, until the time of the Beehive fire,


he had almost a monopoly of the broking trade, with ex-
ception of S, P. Hogg, an auctioneer, and Michael
Leeds, dividing' the trade during a later part of the
period, the stocks of the older registered companies
passing in large numbers through his hands. In the
height of the 1871-2 rush, of course he was only
one of many leviathans. Since that collapse he has
been pursuing the even tenor of his way, and, at the
present time, still says that he can lay a friend on a
good thing. To show the necessity of legislation, and
how unsatisfactory the law is in relation to brokers and
their clients, I may refer to a recent case tried in
Melbourne County Court, where it was shown that a
broker has no remedy against his client, although the
defendant admited that he had given instructions to
buy—the grounds being, that the broker was not autho-
rised to pay for scrip on behalf of a client, and therefore
could not recover {Longden v. Foster). A Brokers’
Bill is imperatively required.
Christmas Eve, 1881. —This season of the year
has been to me rather an eventful one in my voyage
of life. Once, on Christmas eve, in Belfast, Ireland,
I had to flee from a devastating fire, which led to the
death of my mother. Again, in Belfast, within five
days of Christmas eve, pestilence swept off three menir
hers of my family in one fell swoop. Again, on the
night of Christmas eve, twenty-two years since, in the
first large fire on Sandhurst, in Williamson Street, I
was burnt out, everything being consumed. It will thus
be seen that this season of “ peace on earth and good


will to man,” has got its seamey side for me, so, as I
do not believe that there is such a thing as chance in
the mysterious government of the world, and what
we blind mortals call “ chance ” is only an unseen link
in that chain which binds every creature to the foot-
stool of his Creator, therefore I was led, as it were, to
the Beehive Exchange, last night, where I found the
Society of Brokers most uproariously happy, comme-
morating the close of a successful year’s business. I
there thought—here is an opportunity for a new and
better departure for a Christmas eve. Here was a
compelling cause to farther elucidate what I had pre-
viously written about the evil surroundings of the
Sandhurst Stock and Share Exchange, and, perforce, to
educate public opinion for the immediate necessity, crl
the re-assembling of Parliament, to pass a Brokers’ Bill,
the interests at stake being of such vast consequence.
In the brief remarks I now make I will hit right out
from the shoulder, and perhaps draw some back teeth.
I shall first remark, in further confirmation of the
necessity of sworn brokers, that, since the first part of
this chapter was written, scarce a day has passed that
has not witnessed some irregular and hanky-panky
work, in bulling and bearing the market, inflating and
depressing stocks irrespective of the true daily value of
the mine, and that the present system is most fallacious
and unreliable. It simply plays into the hands of
about less than a dozen monied men, who are members
of the Stock and Share Exchange, (the title is alto-
gether a misnomer). These ten men are an oligarchy,
and, like the Venetian council of ten, they are omni-


potent ; they also, like the Venetian, have their hench-
men, who, like the jackal, rundown the prey for the
lordly lion. These are not brokers, they are jobbers ;
men who, it is’said, care little for the development of
the mines, but whose ruling principal aim and object is,
to turn over an honest penny. Now how can any sane
man expect to get a true quotation of price from such
a muddy source? why, it is a patent fact, and often
occurs, that stock bought in the morning to Melbourne
order, before it reaches the buyer is so knocked down
in price by the evening that mining speculation is
damped, choked, and killed. I think I have irrefutably
proved that mining enterprise will never be on a stable
basis until we have a Brokers’ Bill, and the brokers
must be recommended for license as auctioneers are,
by a requisition of ten responsible householders, license
fee say £lOO per annum, their books open to both buyer
and seller, and also the Press. Then would we have true
quotations. Then confidence would be felt, and a large
influx of capital would result. Then, with a vigilant
press, with full power to at all times go down and
inspect the mines, all little family arrangements of
directors would be nipped in the bud ; so we would all
be like the Cornish parson, who was about being de-
gerted by his congregation on the announcement of a
wreck, who said:—“ Stop, brethren, let us all start
fair ” Having been Argus and Australasian reporter
for fourteen years, I know what the duties are, and can
g ay that the party filling that office now is well quali-
fied, and ought to be well paid.
In conclusion I would like to see the Hon. the


junior member for Sandhurst, take this Brokers’ Bill
up ; it would be more certain to pass than his Anti-
gambling bill. That will cure itself, but a Brokers’
Bill we must have. It is a pleasure to see Mr. Quick,
who is a young- Australian, give such good promise of
usefulness.


CHAPTER VI.
YOUNG AUSTRALIA.
“ A race from whence young Albyn come,
And the long glories of a future Home.”
“ Higher, higher, will we climb,
Up the mount of glory,
That our names may live through time,
In our country’s story,
Happy, when her welfare calls,
He who conquers, he who falls.
“ Deeper, deeper, let us toil
In the mines of knowledge ;
Nature’s wealth, and learning s spoil,
Win from school or college ; ,
Delve we there for richer gems
Than the Stars of Diadems.
“ Onward, onward may we press
Through the path of duty ;
Virtue is true happiness ;
Excellence, true beauty;
Minds are of celestial birth,
Make we, then, a heaven of earth.
“ Closer, closer, let us knit
Hearts and hands together,
Where our fireside comforts sit
In the wildest weather.
Oh, the wanderers wide who roam,^
From the joys of life, from home.”
may appear an act of gross presumption on
my part to venture on such holy ground as
the subject matter of youth and virtue ; my
excuse is, that to me there is nothing so irresistibly
alluring in my eyes as the freshness of a young and


beaming, opening, unspoilt life •, youth with its hopes,
its desires and dreams, unsullied by its contact with sin.
To a man who is advancing into the sere and yellow
leaf, if at all a lover of his kind, it gives a pleasurable,
though sad feeling, to see a joyous, heavenly-moulded
girl, with the innocency of childhood, and imprint of
divinity, stamped upon her lithe and willowey form and
speaking face ; to see her just budding into woman-
hood. One of a reflective mind will look back through
the vista of receding years, and, contrasting his owm life’s
voyage, will speculate if, in this fair being’s life, there
will be threads of gold in the warp and woof of her
web of life : and wonder if her guardian angel (one
of which is said to be assigned to each of us on enter-
ing life) is strong enough to guide her frail bark
through, the quicks and the shoals and shallows that
will be passed through. It may be a stormy life—
pray God that it may be landed in a secure haven, in
fond, strong, and loving arms, and not shipwrecked in
the sight of port. As to the sterner sex, fathers of
families, will, I can sure, appreciate any services that
even a layman may try to accomplish for the welfare
of their boys. These, and many other reasons, as
thick as blackberries in the autumn, or as leaves in
Yallambrosa, can be educed, when, not only I, but
others also, should throw ourselves into the deadly
breach, and in season, and out of season, combat and
try to stem the flood of sin and iniquity that is surely
arising in this fair land ; that is, if the young and
rising population is not turned into a truer, mope
natural, and more earnest life. These excuses are


unnecessary, and no one should say it is a quixo-i
thin- to try to do good ; even tilting at windmills has
its deeper meaning. There, my dear, young, forward
and froward, jejune precocious, superficial and aspiring
friends, as you are now in your salad days, let me try
to curb vour impetuosity, and put a wholesome drag
on your headlong career. Reminding you of the
fable of the tortoise and the hare, let slow and sure
be your matto. You are the stuff which men can be
made of. There is a grand future before you, pray
the living God that you may be found worthy of such
a glorious heritage, accompany me now, and with fond,
Jowly, earnest, and learning hearts.
“ Expatiate free o’er all the scenes of man.
A mighty maze, but not without a plan.
A wild, where weeds and flowers promiscuous shoot,
Or garden templing with forbidden fruit.
Together let us beat this ample field, _
Try what the open, what the covert yield,
The latent tracks, the giddy heights explore,
Of all who blindly creep, or sightless soar.
Eye nature’s works, shoot folly as it flies,
And catch the living manners as they rise.
where wo must, be candid where we can,
But vindicate the ways of God to man.
So, my young friends, “ come, let us reason together,”
saith the Lord, “ though thy sins should be as scarlet
they shall be as the driven snow if washed m the
blood of the Lamb of God and the Redeemer of the
world.” Can you, my dear young friends, say you are as
you ought to be, in this fast, flippant, and scoffing
age? I wish it were so, but it is not as it was in my
7 onng days, for then we had stern discipline wb,eh
fitted us to stand the buffets of a stormy life, which


effeminate lovers of pleasure would have succumbed to.
We were born, many of us at least, under stormy skies,
and in a wintry home ; few of us were born in the
purple, nay, it was homely huckaback ; to us there was
no easy, royal road to learning, without money and
without price, as you have in your noble state schools
instead of this, learning, except to the rich, was almost
unattainable to even the well-to-do middle classes.
It was of a most prefunctory and deceptive nature in the
country districts of my native land, Ireland. There
was the hedge schoolmaster, with his miserable cabin,
where the boys and girls trotted to school with their
turf and their “reading made easy”under their arm.
Some of these masters were ripe scholars, and could
teach the humanities, having risen from being poor
travelling scholars, who, for the love of learning, pur-
sued knowledge under difficulties. Then there were no
childrens’ picture-books, with their lines of beauty.
Then there were no lending libraries, or Mechanics’ In-
stitutes, with their wealth of literature, as at the present
day. Our standard works of entertainment were then
some doggerel balads, and the “history of the Irish
Rogues and Eapperies ;” a most entertaining work, but
not of a high order of literary merit. We also had
oral tradition to fall back upon, fairy stories, and such
like. Then we had no political privileges such as you
have now. We could not, nor dare not, call our soul
our own, although in secret we cherished the seeds of
liberty, to ripen in the good time coming, when our
glorious ballad poetry taught us, on the quiet—


“ That Freedom’s battle once begun,
Bequeathed from bleeding sire to son,
Though often baffled, in the end is won.”
Now, my young friends, do you not think that it may
be premature To have your Australian Native Societies,
at your unripe age. From your increasing numbers
you are an important factor in the weal or woe of your
native land. At the present it is impossible that you
can judge rightly. No matter how well you may mean,
you ought to remember that “knowledge comes, but
wisdom lingers,” and life, no matter how long, is an
unending lesson, and, at this early age, you are more
likely to be the dupes of knavery. I am very glad
that you take an interest in politics ; this you could do
without being led, like dumb, driven cattle ; and you
should remember the fact, that many of your earlier
■co-patriots, as they became older and wiser, ceased to be
Victorian Liberals, and became true liberals of the
English type, while their places in the radical ranks
are filled up by the inexperienced, the foolish, and the
feather-brained portion of the younger, who can be
swayed by blatant wind-bags. Oh, my young friends,
mark, learn, and digest this ; remember Lord Macauley s
words, in the “ Lays of ancient Rome,”
“ Then none were for a party,
But all were for the state ;
Then the rich men helped the poor men,
And the poor men loved the great.”
What a different state of things to late Victorian
feeling, with its insane and suicidal jealousy, and inter-
necine war against capital.
I now come to a very important matter, which re-
■quires careful and grave treatment: —That it is above
e 2


all things necessary that man should know himself.
In the classic days of Greece, man was defined to be
an unfledged biped, without wings ; later on he was
called a reasoning animal, and now, in this enlightened
age, be is truly called a gambling animal, to the great
gam of a class of men who do very little good for
the advancement of our young nation’s greatness, but
who fatten and batten upon the greed for gain of their
miserable dupes. These men are conspicuous by their
display of glittering gems of Golconda ; the victims
ought to know, “ that he that hasteneth to be rich will
not be innocent, and, old as I am, I yet hope to live
to see the day when the glories of the Flemington lawn
and giand stand, with the noble sport of horse-racing,
shall be flourishing without the excrescence of the
book-makers, who have been the ruin of many a happy
home. At the last cup day I observed the hurly-
burly of betting in the ring was a very tame affair to
what it once was. Sweeps have pruned the wings of
betting, but they are all equally bad, and must be ruth-
lessly put down ; not by state enactments, which will
be, if tried, found unavailing, but will effectually be
accomplished by the growing sense and wisdom of our
people. Look to the example of the noble band of
Pilgrim Fathers, who, in the face of the greatest diffi-
culties, consisting of the presence of a wily, treacherous,
and powerful foe, and a bleak and sterile soil at first
founded the great American "Republic, now the happy
homes of fifty millions of a free, a happy, and a con-
tented people. In their early history their hatred of
gambling was second only to that of witchcraft. Why.


gambling is like to an incurable cancer, which, if not
cut out by the scalpel ol the skilful surgeon, is death
to the corporeal body, and will be the ruin of the body
politic.
I have now pretty well exhausted the subject of the
vices of our youth, with the exception of the all-prevad-
ing, the mistaken, false, and injurious practice of
smoking. Indeed, the abomination of abominations \
It ruins the nerves, spoils the stomach, destioys the
teeth ; it superinduces the crime of drinking to excess ;
it is on the same disgusting level as drunkenness, and
opium-smoking, and it is a narcotic, and a deadly
poison, giving cancer to the lip, and it makes the person
and the surrounding atmosphere full and redolent with
its vile odours 4 What a miserable sight it is to see our
brats of hobble-de-hoys standing at street corners with a
dirty pipe in their teeth, and these mannikins going
unwhipped of justice.
I speak from personal experience, being at one time
a foolish believer in the solace of the seductive weed I
paid the cost of my folly by shattered nerves, and now
I am “death on the pipe.” It is now found to be
affecting the moral and stamina of the Prussian ArmVj
as absinthe is doing that of the French. The only
effectual cure for such a vice is an energetic crusade on
the part of our fair maidens, who could soon quelch the
habit, by refusing to let the light of their countenance
shine on the user of tobacco.
I am happy to give the young Australians credit for
sobriety from intoxicating drinks. This is found to be
the case where the vine flourishes in a country. As to


larrikinism, that is an excrescence that time will
eradicate, if not, the cat will cure it, as we will have
to be cruel to be kind. I also cheerfully acknowledge
that, at this early stage, there are some distinguished
members of society risen from your ranks. It has given,
us a Supreme Court judge, and the leading criminal
lawyer of the day, with many others, and, if you only
follow the advice of Wolsey, who says—
“ Be just, and fear not.
Of thyself think least.
Cherish the hearts that hate you.
In thy right hand carry gentle peace
To silence envious tongues.
Let all the ends thou aimest at
Be thy Q-od’s, thy country’s, and the truth.”
and add to this, Polonius’s advice to his son “ neither a
borrower or a lender be,” you will thus, in the good time
'oming, give the world assurance that you are men.
This paper would be incomplete were I not specially
to notice a promising, and rising, young Australian, who
alike will reflect credit on Sandhurst, and be an orna_.
ment on young Australia I refer to William Bryden
Melrose, a working jeweller, eighteen “years old, who
promises to be a Victorian Benvenatto Cellini, and, like
Cellini, not only an artistic goldsmith, but also a rare
musician. He designed and completed a very chaste
wine cup for the Sandhurst Juvenile Exhibition, for
which he got a silver medal. The cup was subsequently
exhibited in the Melbourne International Juvenile Ex-
hibition, and was awarded a first class certificate. The
bowl is of cocoa-nut, on the three divisions of which is
carved, on one, a bunch of flowers, in the second divi_
sion, a cluster of fruit, and in the third a vine branch


with cluster of grapes ; the base is also of cocoa-nut
carved, from which springs a frosted and chassed silver
vine supporting the bowl. The design and workman-
ship was solely the youth’s own, and such rising talent
ought to have a wider field to aid in developing his
latent taste and talents than Sandhurst. If I mistake
not, he will turn out to be a prosperous artist. He also
is a musical genius. Young as he is he holds the ap-
pointment of Piper to the Highland Society. He plays
on several musical instruments, and, like Black-eyed
Susan’s William, “he can play on the fiddle and dance
like an angel.” He is the eldest son of John
one of the founders of the Scottish Society, being one
office brothers, and it is a pretty sight to see the five
dressed out on New Year’s day, in their picturesque
Highland dress, in Royal Stuart’s tartan, with their
kilts, their belts, and their sporans.
My next chapter will be the second part of young
Australia, “ Our maids and matrons ”


CHAPTER VII.
OUR MAIDS AND MATRONS.
“ A perfect woman, nobly planned. ”
the cosmogany of the world, as recorded in the
(twjl book of Genesis, we are told that our great Cre-
ator rested from his labor, and on viewing the
mighty and beneficent work of his hands, pronounced it
very good, and, to complete that which was so excellent,
made his last and most superlative work, “ Eve, ” the
Mother of Mankind, to be an equal and a companion,
a pride, a solace, and a comfort to lordly man, who, we
are told
“ Was made in the image of his Maker,
God-like, erect, with native honour clad,
In naked majesty seemed Lord of all,
And worthily esteemed ;
For, in their looks, divine,
The image of their glorious Maker shone,
For contemplation He, and valor framed,
For softness, She, and sweet attractive grace,
With her beauty and submissive charms. ”
What a glorious word-painted picture is this, and,
although this is descriptive of a state of being before
sin and misery, from disobedience, entered into tbis
mundane world, bringing the tragedies of broken hearts
and ruined lives, with their attending miseries, and
blotting out all sunshine, brightness and love, which to
humanity are so sweet, so sustaining, and so good, still,
for all this, I am a believer in the perfectibility of human
kind. AB of us have the attributes of good ; they may be


dormant, lying within us, a kindly hand to a shipwrecked
erring brother or sister may make them take heart again r
and I think it neither requires one to be a pessimist, or
to wait for an utopian state of things, as we have the
means within our reach, by courageous resolution and
the aid of faithful prayer, by which mountains can be
removed, to make this world a purer, a happier, and a
better place than what it is. Look what careful train-
ing, and culture, and acclimatisation, and admixture of
different breed, does for the floral and the animal world,
giving us the graceful and swift greyhound, the fleet
courser whose speed outstrips the wind, and also gives
us the refulgent wealth of gay and rich, gaudy, floral
colours; now, when man can accomplish this in the do-
main of nature, and with his daily-increasing scientific
knowledge, and having a more ductile and pliable sub-
ject to work on in our plastic youth, there is no limit to
the improvement that can be made on our young women,
provided that they have the pride, and the ambition,
and the desire, to reach a higher status—a more grace-
ful form of physique and beauty. Observant travellers
remark, when visiting Italy or the west of England,
that it is a rarity to see a plain woman, the softness of
clime, and the beauty of the surrounding scenery, leaves
its imprint on the inhabitants ] and the same may bo re-
marked of the young ladies of Sandhurst, for, owing to
our beautiful parks, and the long vistas of leafy verdure,
with the bracing air, and the abundant, nutritious food
they get, we can now boast of an array of youth and
beauty not second to the Block, in Melbourne. Some
few evenings since I saw, when shopping, a young lady,


“ oh, she was divinely tall! and most divinely fair ! ”
with a face that Phidias would have loved to sculpture.
Then, did we not send four of our Sandhurst belles to
grace the Plemington grand stand and lawn on the last
Cup day, who, by their conspicuous charms, got their
names enrolled on the pages of the Bulletin; and
here I may remark, what a pleasing, and what a striking
change my two years’ absence has made in the aspect
and appearance of our young ladies; although an old
identity they have grown out of all knowledge ; I left
them children, they are now grown into graceful woman-
hood.
It may appear a sublime piece of folly for one who, like
me, has seen over twelve lustrums, to speak of youth
and beauty, but what says the poet, Dryden—
“ Although I am dead to ladies’ love,
The power of beauty still enthrals me.”
I am an'earnest advocate for a joyous, sunny, rational,
improving life, I am all there for “ cakes and ale, and
ginger in the mouth, hot, too,” and dislike, with Caesar?
“ She who loves no plays, nor hears, nor gives no music,
Seldom she smiles, or smiles in such a sort
As if she mocked herself, and scorned her spirit
That could he moved to smile at anything.”
No, I believe in their reading sound works of fiction,
not sensational, but a good course of Dickens, Sir Wal-
ter Scott, and other sound writers among lady authors,
Mrs. Emily Warboise and Mrs. Oliphant. Novels of
the first-named are above all praise. If they were wise
they would, or should, make Shakespeare a critical study ;
his writings are for all sorts t and conditions of mankind
not for an age, but for all time ; his works are a library


within themselves ;by studying the characters—that of
Miranda, in “ The Tempest,” Viola, in “ Twelfth Night,
sprightly, witty, and vivacious Rosalind, in A.S You
Like It,” the noble bearing of Hermion, in the “ Winter’s
Tale ” the spotless purity and confiding, wife-like reliance
on her absent lord of Imogen, in “ Cymbeline this is
the finest creation of what a woman should be and
many other characters which, if space permitted, I could
carry out, like Banquo’s ghost;, to “crack of doom.”
Tell me not of the great thing it is to matriculate, and
the sweet lady graduates. In my young days these were
called “ Blue Stockings,” a class that were the hetenoir
of us young men, who, in those days of darkness, had
for our only books’, the ladies’ looks, and folly was not
all this taught us. Then they (the young ladies) were
totally ignorant of the anatomy of the human frame ;
they would have been appalled if a Miss Dick, or a Miss
Moon, would have shown how wonderful and fearful a
thing the human body is ; a little knowledge is a dan-
gerous thing, and sometimes it leads to prurient feeling.
So ignorant were the young ladies at this time that they
actually did not know that they had a liver, so liver-doc-
tors, like those they have now in Melbourne, were then
unknown, and as to nerves, with their accompanying
hysteria and other ailments, these also were unknown.
I would say with the old woman who, a short time since,
exclaimed, “Bother the fellow who invented nerves.”
In my early days, Boe ian as they were, the only struc-
ture they understood about their mechanism was, that
they had ardent, fond, loving, trusting, warm-beating
hearts, and I question if the march and development of


civilization has, in these latter days, improved in this
respect, to compensate for their lack of knowledge in
the fine arts and veneering, and being unable to do
crewel and macrema work ; they were good mothers,
who taught their children to fear the Lord, to reverence
old age, to love and obey their parents, and to be self-
reliant in their day and in their generation ; there were
no effete fribbles raised then. These women also were
good housewives, given to hospitality, and not to gadding
and shopping. Now, what this young country wants is,
a copy of a genuine English matron, all of the English
Style, with superadded onto, in this glorious land of the
Sunny South, which one, glad and fair, with the possi-
bilities of life to come, golden with the day-dawn, the
joys of sense and soul, that gives to earth that Paradise
her first sin lost; then woman will be like a crystallized
rainbow, an entire and perfect chrysolite.
“To dance and flirt, and be admired,
What sweeter Joys could be desired.”
And even this will be a good preparation for wifehood,
as all the accomplishments blended into a harmonious
whole will make them all the more fitting to be mothers
of the modern Gracchi, and, like the noble Roman
woman, Cornelia, when, outshone by the glittering
gauds of Ind, she pointed to her sons, and said, “ These
are my jewels.” Then, our girls, from such mothers,
will have subdued and perfect taste, devotees of nature,
with no weak points in their armour, no mawkish pride,
but open, joyous, "frank, and honest, to the core. And
thus they will learn the world’s lessons, and the promise
of their youth will be realised in their womanhood, then,


assuredly, the Prince will come, for :
“ In peace, lore tunes the shepherd’* reed 5
In war, he mounts the warrior’s steed ;
In halls, in gay attire is seen ;
In hamlets, dancing on the green.
Lore rules the camp, the court, the grove,
For love is heaven, and heaven is love.”
But, in this matter of fact, sober and prosaic age, it
must be no more hot haste and foolish affection ; real
esteem, without an overpowering current of love, is
a pretty good foundation to build upon. January and
May must not be mated, neither must Caliban be forced
on youth and beauty, and both contracting parties must
be sound in wind, body and limbs : no nearness, or
consanguinity of blood should be permitted, and prudence
requires that there should be moderate means to start
with, as, I can assure you that, “ love in a cottage ”
means dust and ashes. Now, if all these preceding
conditions are adhered to, why there will be no more
unhappy homes, miserable wives, and neglected children.
[t is the duty of every man when he reaches the age
of twenty-six years (if in an assured position by which he
can keep himself) to marry. A wife will not cost more
than he would otherwise spend, and he owes a duty to
society to give it hostages. The sanctity of married
life is a glorious thing, good alike for purse and person,
and a life of celibacy is neither good for body or for soul,
and bachelors in a new country should be heavily taxed
for their selfishness. Before passing from this part of
ray subject, I wish to record a historical fact, that
Frederick the Great, the famous Prussian King, passed
an edict that all the tall women in his kingdom should
present themselves at court ; they did so, and were


married to his Grenadier Guards, with the most happy
results.
I could dilate on the subject of woman from early
morn to dewy eve. Without woman, we, in our boasted
superiority, would be nowhere. If there is a bad woman
there is a bad man at the bottom. Why, when they
are young, they are like potters’ clay in the hands of a
right-minded man, and “ although their bodies are soft,
and smooth, and weak, and although they are unapt to
toil and labour in the world, it is that their soft con-
dition, and their hearts, should well accord with their
external parts ; ” and, although they are thus, they are
superior to man, with all his boasted prowess ; without
them the world would be a sunless Sahara and man
would be likes the brutes that perish ;as Sir Walter
Scott sings :
“ Oh, woman, in our hour of ease,
Uncertain, coy, and hard to please,
And variable as the shade
By the light of quivering aspen made;
When pain and anguish wring the brow,
A ministering angel, thou.”
Look to those angel-like ministers of grace, the self-
denying and heroic sisters of charity, that brave pesti-
lence, and even death itself, almost over all the world,
irrespective of birth or nationality. How sad would the
fate of many a stricken traveller in many a foreign land
have been without them. All honour to them, and
may the choicest blessings of heaven fall upon them.
Then again, look upon gentle-nurtured ladies, banding
themselves, and coming into contact with sin and suffer-
ing, to rescue fallen women, and put them in a new
path of hope and duty. Look upon our Childrens


Hospitals, with their loving care of sick and helpless
infancy. Look upon our Dorcas societies, and the
good they do in the way of relieving modest destitu-
tion; people who are ashamed to beg. And again,
look upon Florence Nightingale and her band of
trained nurses at the Crimean War ; and look upon the
noble array of American ladies who, in the late Civil
War, ministered alike to the necessities of both Federal
and Confederate.
“ In the lost battle, borne down by the flying,
Where mingles war’s rattle with groans of the dying.’'
Why man, proud man, must lower his crest, and pale
his ineffectual fire, before our womankind ; and may
they for ever bloom, like sweet roses on a summer
day.


CHAPTER VIII.
GATHERED THREADS, AND EDUCATION.
drawing these papers to a conclusion, I wish to
remark that, as I have drawn solely from my
memory, it may be that I have forgotten to note
some praiseworthy person or thing, if so, the neglect is
unintentional on my part. One such case I now re-
member, and I am glad to be in time to remedy the
omission. In speaking previously of the former utter
absence of places of amusement, with the exception of
the Shamrock, I forgot Herr Kraamer’s Sydenham Gar-
dens, which, at a very early date in the history of Ben-
digo, were established at the junction of Ironbark and
Long Gully with the Bendigo Creek, This garden,
then secluded in the bush, but now within the precincts
of the city, was a very pretty place, with its fruits and
its flowers, to spend a harmless, continental Sunday
afternoon in, where our Teuton friends—r-the grave and
kindly Germans—came out strong. There many a
pretty fraulein was to be met with, and saur-kraut could
be had for the ordering. Many a pleasant visit I paid
there, and many a bouquet of flowers I bought, and it
was such a pleasure to meet the honest, kindly, German
faces there. The Gardens are a pretty place to visit yet,
but not such a resort as they once were, owing to the
attractive Botanic Gardens, which then were not. Hen 1


Kramer, with his genial countenance, is still with us,
and can be justly placed as a worthy old Bendigonian.
Speaking of the Germans reminds me of the poec
laureate’s welcome to the Princess Alexandra, “ for
Celt, and Saxon, and Dane, are we.” This mixing
of races makes the indomitable English breed, so thib
leads me to remark that we Victorians should even he
an improvement on the English, for not only Celt,
Saxon, and Dane, but also French, and Teuton, are we.
So that, in addition to the sterling qualities of the
English, we have the witty, sprightly, and graceful-
giving blood of the French ‘5 and also the steady, plod-
ding, and methodical-reasoning blood of the German ;
a compound that ought to form the basis of a giand
nation. I may here note, that we have a highly re-
spectable and numerous Deutsche Verein Society, well
in funds, who keep up the memory of “Fader Land
with their fine library of 3,060 German works.
Another rising society that may be classed as an
Institution, is now to be noticed and that is, Monaghan’s
Popular Concerts, in our grand Masonic Assembly
Room. On the first of December I was present, and
there was a large and fashionable audience, greater than
any that had yet been there, and, if the popularity of
this society goes on increasing as it is doing, the Hall
will not hold the increasing numbers, although it is
capable of seating about seven hundred. The music
given at these concerts is of a high-class character, not
perhaps of the high-class aesthetic, Wagner’s style, but
of the preferable, soul-satisfying, humanising, and in-
spiring music of the light of other days. Mr. Monaghan
r


(an Irish name) must surely be a lineal deseendent of an
ancient Erin’s bard, who could “ waken to laughter,
and melt into smiles and tears. ”
What a glorious thing the gift of song is. It was
once remarked by one of our greatest statesmen, who
said, “ give me the making of the songs of a country,
and let who like make the laws. ” Wluit an important
part music has played in the history of the world since
that old worthy, Tubal Cain, took to making musical
instruments. We read how Orpheus, with his lyre,
melted the hearts of trees and rocks ; how the sweet
singer of Israel praised the Lord and inspired his
people ; how Miriam struck “ the loud timbrel o’er
Egypt’s dark seahow, in the dark days of captivity,
they “ sang the songs of Zion while weeping by the
waters of Babylon again how, in later times, even
during the reign of Paganism, the fiery Norsemen, the
the children of their god Thor, or Odin, those vikings
of the sea, had their bards and scaulds to commemo-
rate their heroes who were worthy to enter Walhalla.
Coming down to latter times, see what Burns did for
Scotland, and the ballad music did for Ireland ; why?
even during the time of the young Ireland party, the
spirit of the national songs, that were written to further
that cause, made sober reason in love with treason, lor
then, who feared to speak of “ ninety eight,” and did
not our hearts warm to “ the wearing of the green.”
Now, what a pleasure it is to know that our young
■people are such ardent lovers of music. Ballarat is the
home of song, it has given to the lyric stage a gifted
Alice Rees, and an Ada Willet, as a pianist. Look at


Melbourne, with its Lucinda Blackham, and a host of
rising talent. In time we will he able to export prima
donnas, without having to go for them to the land of
song, Italy. And coming to our own dear city, why,
have we not our Nightingales, whose talents will have
to he drawn out, as they cannot be allowed to lie dor-
mant. Then, look what an immense number of music
shops there are in Melbourne, and all inland towns.
Why, there is scarcely a modest home, pretending to
any degree of comfort, hut has its piano; why I do
believe pianos are more numerous than sewing machines.
Also, in one of our kindred fine arts—painting, rich
promise is being given that we will have our Australian
Rosa Bonheurs, as witness our Miss Thomas, at Rome,
and our Miss Livingstone, at home, and many other
earnest, promising, and industrious students ; anil the
time will come when we will have an Australian School
of Arts.
In closing my remarks about music and musical
societies, I have to state that Monaghan s is a string
band, which embraces all the instruments necessary to
make a complete band. It has been formed for about
five years, has been often profitably employed at our
public assemblies, is quite equal to Zeplin s band, in
Melbourne, and this is the second series of concerts,
which are growing more and more popular. Mr Mon-
aghan is not yet 27 years old ; he ir A young Mozart,
and reflects honour on both young Australia and the
district.
I may here remark, before passing on, so as to illus-
trate our changed position, that the ground whereon
f 2


Bush’s stores are now built, in Williamson street,
twenty-four years since, when bought, was looked upon
as the unclaimed bush, and such a long distance from
the Mall, where all trade then centred ; and it is to be
remarked, that Bendigo has been a good mother to him
as well as others who never ran away from her protect-
ing arms, and Mr. Bush, who is a genuine old Bendigo-
nian, now reaps the reward of his fidelity in having
the best grocery trade in the district.
I now pass on to our educational status, and, in this
respect, I think we can justly say that we are no lag-
gards in the race for life. We have, within Sandhurst
proper, ten State Schools, that in Rosalind Park, a
very large, costly, and handsome building, in the old
English half-Tudor style of architecture, and can accom-
modate one thousand children. It has, at the present,
over eight hundred on the books, so it will be seen that
we are well in the front in the way of having absorbed
a large proportion of the million-and-a-half sterling
that a generous and liberal-hearted people have ex-
pended within the last seven years for the erection of
suitable school buildings, and we also absorb a goodly
proportion of tbe more than half-a-million of money,
being one tenth of the entire revenue of the state,
which is expended yearly in giving a sound and lib-
eral education to our youth. The school in the
park has, for head master, Mr. Cook, who has under
him an able staff of teachers. This school ranks high
for the number of its pupils who have successfully
matriculated. Just for a moment pause, and look upon
the present and the past; on the one hand we look


upon the goodly eight of a free and non-sectarian system,
on the other, the objectionable denominational plan of
instruction. Education is as free as the air we breathe
to all, and without the jarring wrangle of contending
creeds. After all, it must be admitted that religion is
an accident of birth ; children are generally of the church
of their fathers. Differ as we like, and travelling by
different roads,.we all have to enter by a common gate ,
and as,
“ Who shall decide when doctors disagree,
And soundest casuists doubt, like you and me.
All discord, harmony not understood,
All partial evil, universal good
And spite of pride in erring reason’s spite,
One truth is clear, whatever is, is eight.”
The kingdom of heaven is like an army with banners
this means, that as an army is composed of various
cohorts, squadrons, and regiments, each having a distinc-
tive blazon, or banner, each fighting for a common
object, so the Church of Christ is composed of various
denominations, fighting unitedly against Satan and his
mighty hosts, who are ever advancing to spread sin and
desolation over, what ought to be a, smiling world.
We are told that a remnant of alii will be saved, there-
fore, why should we have a war of creeds-. Our grand
school system must be upheld at all and every hazard,
and must not be tinkered or meddled with to please
any sect or party. It is. false- to call it godless, its
books contain the purest moral teaching. The proper
place to teach religion is at the mother’s knee. In
more illiterate days than these are,, mothers taught
their children reverence, hope, love and fear. Why
cant’they do it now? This, with the clergyman, and


Sunday school, and regularity in going to church,
ought to make them Christians, and throw dogmatic
teaching to the seven winds of heaven. Nobody wants
the clergy in schools, save they themselves, to further
class interest. Let them only recall the time, not so
very long since, when we were oppressed with two
conflicting systems, that of the national, and that of the
denominational systems, with their dual staff of officers,
and, for the numbers of children then benefiting, a more
costly system. Now we have sound teaching ; then,
we had no satisfactory results, results as we now have,
some now being as high as ninety per cent, Oh, no,
Messrs, the clergy, do your duty to your God, and to
your people, nobly, but touch not the sacred system
which we have built up at such cost amongst us, or
alter that which is so good, to please either priest or
party.
To also further show how anxious we Bendigonians
were that our children should have every chance in the
race of life, and that there would be no more “ chaw-
bacons, ” or that our children would not be handicapped
with a British load of ignorance, and to please the sus-
ceptibility of our well-to-do middle class people, who
objected to a pauper education (as they foolishly called
the then untried system of free, compulsory, and secular
education), and these people having been in the habit of
sending their boys to grammar schools, in Melbourne
and elsewhere, to the impoverishment of the district,
and the doubtful moral improvement of our boys when
freed from parental control, a movement was initiated
here and a High School, in the centre of Rosalind


Park, wa& established by our Council. The prominent
leading men, then in the Council, who ably furthered
this movement, were the then chairman, JDougal Mac-
dougal, the clear-headed George Aspinall, and Robert
Clark, who had then risen to popularity as the champion
of the eight-hours system. (I may here note, that the
career of R. Clark ought to be a lesson, and an
incentive to young Australia, for here is an instance
of a forking miner rising, by sheer force of character,
to be an honourable, and for years a member of Parlia-
ment). George Avery Fletcher also ably assisted to
get this school erected. The first master was the Rev.
J. S. Moir, a ripe scholar, and a Christian gentleman.
He got into difficulties with the Council, who wanted
to secularise the school. He had a seveie personal
bereavement, grief shook his intellect, and he died,
regretted by all. The school is now leased by Mr.
John Slack, Mr. Moir’s head assistant. Under Mr.
Slack’s able management this school has become a
great success. In addition to the principal, theie aie
five gentlemen teachers, two ladies teachexs, two draw-
ing masters, one music master, one lady ditto, and one
drill master. Besides the boys school, there is a high
school for young ladies. There are one hundred-and-
thirty boys on the books, and ninety girls, in all 220.
This school, for moderate charges, puts a boy through
an excellent curriculum, including first year’s work in
University for a 8.A., or for civil engineering, and, in
point of numbers, it stands conspicuous for the larg e
proportion who matriculate.
In writing these papers I have tried to be as little


of an egotist as I possibly can, so I hope that I may
be pardoned for self-laudation in the matter of further-
ing the cause of education in our midst, in 1858.
Having made a special study of the subject, I spoke to
Mr Howard, our then sitting member, to move in the
matter, who replied, it was impossible to do so, because
of clerical opposition. I then, being the first on Sand-
hurst who had the courage of his opinion, wrote in the
press on the subject, and subsequently, to the best of
my ability, tried all I could do to promote the erection
of tue High School. This will be seen in the pages of
the Bendigo Advertiser. By doing so I incurred
clerical displeasure ; this was one of the causes of ray
rejection at the Council Election in 1863. Unfortunately
for my success as a public man, I did not quite under-
stand circular sailing, and was a miserable hand at
being politic ; enough, however, thank Cod that I have
lived to see the success of free, compulsory, and non-
sectarian education, and also to see the High School
flourishing—and may it become, if even in a remote de-
gree, another Rugby, or Harrow-on-the-Hill.


CHAPTER IX.
gathered threads (continued)
SiEETDIGO’S second; great industry—Mr. D;
Guthrie’s Pottery at Epsom.. The potter’s
art was known to the early Egyptians long
anterior to the founding of Rome by Romulus, and the
potter’s wheel is the same at the present day as it was
in the days of Job. The first people who developed
beauties in the fictile arts were the inhabitants of the
twelve cities of Etruria, a powerful people before ancient
Rome rose to greatness. These people were of Greek
origin, which accounts for their polish and progress in
the fine arts. The Etruscan pottery was carried on by
them with so much attention that it reached perfection
and the potter was raised to the dignity of an artist.
These people have never been surpassed to the present
day, and an Etruscan vase, with its lines of beauty, and
its rich embelishment, is the most glorious thing ever
moulded by the hands of man, or manufactured by the
potter. Descending on the stream of time, we find, in
mediaeval ages, that in many parts of Germany royal
princes founded potteries, and that the kings of France
made it a royal manufactory ; as witness Sevres, with its
multitudinous objects of priceless gems of art. Then
look at England, with its Worcestershire and Stafford-
shire productions, aud its exquisite Wedgwood ware,


with their endless variety of the common, but useful,
articles, up to the most exquisite and dainty tea and
coffee services, the gorgeous dinner service, the artistic
Parian works of art, the imposing and story-telling
vases, and the numerous adjuncts for the toilet table,
all of these tending to lap the Sybarite, or the sensuous
lady, into soft Elysium, thus adding, as it were, to the
poetry of existence.
“You may break, you may shatter
i'he vase as you will
But the scent of the attar
Will cling, to it still.”
Then to think what a blessing old broken china, earth-
enware, and articles of bric-a-brac are to ennuied and
blase favorites of fortune; who spend fabulous sums on
old cracked tea-pots. To me, nothing was more in-
teresting (save the glorious pictures) in our late Grand
International Exhibition, than the inspecting and ad-
miring study of the various nations’ exhibits of the
ceramic and fictile arts. It' speaks well for us as a
young nation that we have such a great love for these
most beautiful things, and those who can afford it are
not niggard in spending money over them. Proud as
we ought to be of this, we ought to be prouder still to
know that we have an old Bendigonian, a Glasgow chiel,
amongst us, who is a Victorian “ Wedgwood,” and one
who is going to do for Victoria what Wedgwood did
for England.
And this brings me to describe Mr Guthrie’s Epsom
Pottery, which, like the grain of mustard seed, had a
small beginning, but is now arrived at large dimensions,
and is destined to further greatness. I have known


Mr Guthrie for twenty-two years, and knew him to be a
large manufacturer of useful articles, but, as he is a
man of quiet and retiring habits, I little thought that
there was the’skillcd analyst of clays, and the soul of an
artist within his quiet exterior. From circumstances
beyond my control I had not visited the Pottery for six
years, but it having been reported to me that Guthrie’s
progress was wonderful, and being anxious in these
papers to record all that would redound to the credit of
the district, I visited the Pottery, saw Mr. Guthrie, and
got into a state of wrapt astonishment at what I saw.
I will now try to give a description, but I fear a very
faint and very imperfect one. To enumerate and de-
scribe one-tenth of the useful and elegant articles he
makes would take up the whole page of a newspaper,
I therefore am, of necessity, confined to sketching the
most salient objects of works of art. As to the full re-
sources of the Bendigo Pottery, I must leave it for the
inspection of the visitors, assuring them that a visit will
amply repay the trouble, as there are many pretty objects
of both adornment and utility, that can be had ridicu-
lously cheap, Mr. Guthrie not refusing to sell small lots
to visitors.
The most striking thing, that at once caught my eye,
was an elegant terra-cotta fountain in the Corinthian
style of architecture. It stood about thirteen feet high,
the plinth, a five feet base, with three graduated, fluted
columns, and three graduated basins. This, as a work
of art, is worthy of all praise. It is made to the order
of the Echuca Town Council, and is of the value of £SO.
What a grand thing it is to be made out of Epsom clay !


Another striking object was a handsome majolica vase,
standing about thirty inches high, with raised ivy leaves,
and twisted rustic handles ; this is all made of Epsom
clay, the colors imparted and blended in a highly artistic
manner. On asking the price I was astounded at its
moderation, so much so that I decline to state it. What
a very handsome pair of vases for a gentleman’s terrace
they would make. Mr. Guthrie can make these to any
size, and any design, either in terra-cotta or majolica.
A set of fruit-stands, with plates and cheese-covers to.
match, with a lovely pattern of raised autumn vine-
leaves, was sweetly pretty, the various autumn tints on
them were so true to nature; these, with compotures
and plates to match, handsomely designed three-gallon
filters (a noble ornament for a hall), spittoons for a
lordly smoker, an endless variety of bric-a-brac, chimney
table, and toilet ornaments, all in majolica,—all these
made of a mixture of Epsom clay and Lai Lai kaolin—
and so finished, and so colored, as to defy any but a
connoisseur to tell that they are not the imported article ;
and yet they are sold at such infinitesimal prices compared
to what the retail shops charge in Melbourne, for not
more choice goods, so that it would be a paying game
even to incur the expense of a railway, trip to Sandhurst,
when they not only would see our pretty City but
put money in their pockets, that is, if they are going
to embellish their dwellings.,
1 was both surprised,, pleased,, and gratified, to see Mr.
Guthrie in such an advanced stage of progress. He is.
also making most excellent white-ware, of all required!
kinds., I had almost passed unnoticed a thing of rare


beauty, a vase, as a flower stand, supported by three
dolphins ; I also saw two Parian flower-vases, one with
raised cut flowers, quite true to nature ; another vase was
coated with hoary moss. These were Etruscan-shaped,
and such pretty gems. Mr. Guthrie’s speciality, until
of late, was glazed and plain brown stone-ware ; he must
have made millions of tea-pots ; mind, these are both
useful and pretty, knocking the importation of Britannia
metal and block tin tea-pots “ into a cocked hat.” In
the manufacture of these pots one sees the division of
labour carried on to great perfection. It is highly
interesting to watch mere boys manipulating the ductile
clay, one fellow making spouts, another a handle,
another a lid, a knob, or so on ; and these tea-pots are
now assuming pretty forms. The run of brown ware
comprises every imaginable article required by man,
flower-pots of all sizes, drain pipes, from 18 inches to
3 inches, worms for distilling acids, acid jars, churns,
butter jars, baking dishes, &c., &c.
'On finishing up the inspection of the place (it being
a very hot day, and I felt rather tired), I asked Mr.
Guthrie did he think he would tackle porcelain ; he an-
swered that “ he thought not, as he had done enough.”
I replied, “ hoot, mon, ye didna think, twa years ago,
ye would hae ventured on majolica,”—in my mind a more
difficult thing than to make an eggshell of a teacup, and
I told him that, “with his scientific knowledge, he was
bound to discover a solvent for our millions of tons of
quartz tailings, which, in his hands, would be yet as
plastic as the pottters’ clay ;” so I rather think that, in
time, he will “ cotton ” to the porcelain in his quiet way


The works, and extensive store-rooms (filled to repletion
with goods), stand on two acres of ground. The build-
ings, plant, moulds, etc., cost over £IO,OOO ;so perfect
and complete is this place that Mr. Guthrie was offered,
and refused, £IB,OOO for it. There is a4O horse-power
steam-engine, the number of hands employed is sixty-
five, with wages from 10s. to £4 a week, the fortnightly
wages, including firewood, average £250. There are
two packers, and four carts and carters, constantly em-
ployed taking the goods to the Sandhurst station.
Mr. Guthrie, offered to guarantee the Government
£1,200 a-year if they would give him a siding, but,
owing to the gradient here on the Echuca line, it was
at first refused, but, owing to our representative, Mr.
Burrowes, this is to be done. He has one agent in
Sandhurst, and one in Melbourne, but the great bulk of
his goods are sent direct from the works to the various
customers. Mr. Guthrie has at various times success-
fully defeated a combination of Melbourne importers
and potters. There is nothing like such an extensive
pottery establishment on this side the line. This indus-
try was started by him 28 years since, in a small way,
at Pottery flat. Shortly afterwards he bought 4| acres
here in Epsom proper, where the place gradually grew,
and he has now, in all, 50 acres of purchased land with
a suitable clay bottom, and also, in addition, an unfail-
ing supply of pipe-clay. Mr. Guthrie has lately pur-
chased five acres at Lai Lai, Ballarat way, all excel-
lent kaolin land (decomposed granite), and he has also
leased 60 acres of land which will give him an unfailing
supply of felspar. The works could be extended, and


no doubt they will be, as Mr. Guthrie is only yet in
middle life (barely 50 years old) so there is no telling
what limit these works may not yet reach. He is a
man of exquisite taste, thoroughly practical, a native of
Glasgow, brought up to be a potter. Here is something
.for Bendigo to boast of, both as to man and place.
On driving back to Sandhurst, I was forcibly and
sadly impressed by the desolate and weird look of the
White Hills, Epsom, and Lower Bendigo Flat diggings,
when I called to recollection the busy scenes enacted
there in past days, and seeing here and there a green
.oasis, with its trailing vines, standing in a sea of barren-
ness, and remembering the countless hosts of despairing
poor at home, whose earth-hunger could here be satisfied,
•and who could turn this wilderness into a Paradise,
planting it with the olive and the vine, the products
from which would have a world-wide market; that here
was a field for Plutonic and plethoric wealth, to be ex-
ercised beneficially, and philanthropically, and safely on,
in forming companies. The land could be got for a
song, and to form olive and wine companies would be
safer than forming Fijian cotton companies, for here
there is neither cyclone, hurricane, nor tornadoes.
December 9th. —Finding it necessary to again visit
Epsom to learn more particulars of Mr. Guthrie’s pot-
tery-ware, especially to get well informed of the modus
operandi of making majolica, and to see what his inten-
tions were about going in for dinner ware, I found
Mr. Guthrie absent, but profitably employed myself until
that gentleman’s return, I first inspected the putting
on of the majolica colours. The party in charge only


six months out from Staffordshire, and who comes from
Etruria (the place named and founded by Mr. Wedg-
wood), was singularly intelligent and communicative.
He was very quick at putting on the colours, and had a
lot of nice things ready for firing. He explained that
dinner-ware was easily made, and that a printing press
was coming out from home hy which the dinner services
could be embellished, and that among the extensive
stock of moulds they had some for very choice dinner
services. I further inspected some rich specimens of
majolica which had escaped me on my first visit.
Among other things, rustic fern-pots, and wicker flower-
pots, with terra-cotta pots for table decoration. I then
was passed on to the head man—the modeller. I found
him engaged in decorating two very large-sized majolica
vases, and two jardinieres to match, which were being
made to the order of Mr, Grimwade, the wholesale drug
gist in Melbourne. These were grand terrace vases,
and the lot cost £5O, This man appeared to be the
principal artist; he, also, is from Staffordshire, and was
very communicative. Prom what little I saw, working
in clay, as a potter, seems to me to brighten the intellect.
This man’s w T age at home was £3 a week, here, wages
are £4 a week, house rent nil, beef and mutton not a
fourth of what it costs at home, so that he can save
three times the amount of money that he could at home.
Mr. Guthrie has been extremely fortunate in getting
skilled artists. The large number of boys he has in his
employ look intelligent, and he has several lady artists
at his command, when they are required, for hand paint-
ing. I forgot to say that Mr. Guthrie made a very


large display of his wares at our great International
Exhibition, had honorable mention made of some, got
a third award for others, and his agent in Melbourne
got a gold medal for his filters ; so X think this was a
remarkable success for a Bendigo man to make in com
peting against the whole world.
Mr. Guthrie tells me that he has now got a solvent
for quartz tailings. His place is to be called the u Bnn
digo Etruria,” no more the Epsom Pottery.,


CHAPTER X.
DEEP ALLUVIAL MIKING, AND THE DIAMOND DRILL.
Deep Alluvial Mining is appa-
rently dead, and not as it once was in Lower
Huntly, and what it promised to be in the
Bagshot paddock, ten years since, I venture to say it is
not yet dead, but only sleepeth ! These papers would
be very incomplete without noticing what, at no distant
time to come, is bound to he a strong aid and prop to
our Gold Industry, and give employment to hundreds,
as it once did, when Epsom and Lower Huntly had a
numerous and thriving population. As a proof that
the place is not in a moribund state, Miss Bracher, the
highly intelligent lady teacher of the Huntly state
school, tells me they have an average of near two hun-
dred scholars, children, I apprehend, solely of miners,
as, to my knoAvledge, very little other industry is fol-
lowed there, it being too distant from the Epsom
Pottery works. Miss Bracher, who is an aspiring
young lady, well qualified to fill any grade in a more
numerous school, says she is being handsomely paid, as
the results are over ninety per cent, and she is certain
that the numbers will increase. To show that there is
till faith in the mining capabilities of the place, a most
jpectable company (so far as prospector’s names go)


has been successfully floated, called “ Britt’s Freehold
Company,” to work 160 acres of promising ground
distant about twelve miles from Sandhurst. Let me
remark, I have no private interest to subserve in puffing
this or any other company, I have not a brass farthing
in mining, and am likely to remain so, and, on the
principle once enunciated by Mr Graham Berry, that
“ Gentlemen who had no vested interest in the State
were the best hands at governing a Country,” why
should not I, who have not a cent in mining, and one
who is solely influenced by the public good, be able to
speak ex cathedrd on the subject.
What deep alluvial sinking on the Bendigo Gold-
field {I mean at this part of it) once was, and to ac-
count for the present depression, I shall no w attempt
to show, and, to properly elucidate the facts, I shall
quote from the u Bendigo Gold-fields Registry ,” a
Work published by me in 1871 (a work that, at the
time, attracted some attention), and the remarks therein
contained, in respect to the Garden Gully United
Company, have turned out to be literally true. This
book was published just at the beginning of the big
rush, in 1871; the following is what was written:—
“ The Lower Huntly deep alluvial mines, in full and
profitable work for the last ten years, are a well-known
■continuation of the Bendigo Fiat, White Hills, and
Epsom leads, being the northern outlet of the Bendigo
gold-fields, or main diggings ; it is also noticeable,
that the drainage, or wash, from the Eaglehawk divi-
sion, joins here, at the junction of the Iron Stone Hill.
The whole lead has been rich long after the first few
g 2


years of alluvial success. The White Hills, and
Epsom, gave fair employment to thousands. It will
be remembered that the shallow alluvial diggings of Ben-
digo were the richest known, and that their wealth
•was distributed by the action of water, the fact being
proved by the increased fineness of the gold. This
past knowledge, and also the increasing depth as the lead
progresses, united to the coarser nature of the gold in
the last two opened claims, affords the encouraging hope
that the lead will yet be successfully traced for miles,
and, although this particular portion of the district
may fall far short of rivalling Ballarat, there are many
virgin claims on and below this Bagshot Company’s
ground ready to woo the embraces of capital and
labour with smiling promises of success.” Now, after
the lapse of ten years, and in the face of dullness and
disappointment, I do not for a moment regret having
written as I did ; my reasons for thus boldly say-
ing so are, that after the collapse, in 1873, owing to the
serious losses a too-credulous, outside-speculating public
had sustained, by floating bogus companies, capital
fought shy of touching any portion of our gold-field,
and the alluvial companies suffered, although they were
not in the swim. They got starved out for want of
capital, and the increasing influx of water (owing to the
increasing depth of claims) made it next to impossible
to carry on mining successfully, so that, in fact, the
ground is not tried. This, I think, is a satisfactory
answer in reply to those who say that deep alluvial
mining is defunct on Bendigo, Again, further know-
ledge has of late years been acquired, that other sources


of gold supply may have been at work here, as the
Kamarooka reefs are at no great distance. These, at
one time, paid well, and are now being energetically
worked. Golden stone has been broken at Goornong.
Known reefs exist in Andrew O’Keefe’s and Joseph
Bell’s ground ; also, from the contour of the surround-
ing country, it is almost certain that there has been a
heavy denudation of the country around, and a breaking-
up of reefs, as shown by the quarts debris lying about;
and also, it is now ascertained, that the celebrated
Malmsbury basaltic formation trends in this direction,
and, as the basalt formation begins within five miles of
Britt’s Freehold, why may not another Ballarat be
there also ; excellent kaolin is got in Britt’s Freehold.
If such a prospect was so near to Ballarat it would
soon be eagerly jumped at, but mining speculators here
are so intent on turning over an honest penny, in
jobbing in quartz shares, that they can’t see anything
in alluvial. Query—l wonder if these jobbers really
help to develope and open up our mines ? Cui bona 1
Having said my say about alluvial mining,.! now
turn to the diamond drill, and, like the man in “ Bleak
House,” “want to know,, you Anew ” how it is—after
such a great flourish of trumpets, and well-spent money l
on the part of our School of Mines,, ami after the suc-
cessful development made by a diamond drill on the
ground of the G. G. Consolidated Company, Golden
Gully, which has increased the value of its stock over
£20,000, and led to a large mining revival in Golden
Gully stocks,— that now we hear nothing of diamond


drills, and all our well-meant intentions and efforts have
been a thing of naught.
This state of things is unpardonable, the more so,
as the merits of the diamond drill, and the great aid it
is to successful and economical mining, is beyond dis-
pute, and numbers of them should be at work upon our
mines in the present day to develops -our undoubtedly
concealed riches. What a pity that our School of
Mines should have- sunk into such an apathetic state,
and allow the good work, so well commenced, to lan-
guish. I hope that the School of Mines is not wearied
in well doing, or either Mr Alexander Bayne, who is
the president,—a gentleman who has such a large
Tested interest in the district, and who has so credit-
ably been identified with public life on Sandhurst; aye,
and one to whom it would be a bagatelle to supply
from his private funds, one, two, or more of these
splendid adjuncts to mining. Why, by doing so Mr.
Bayne would perpetuate his name to all ages, and out-
shine the princely Lansell, Knowing Mr. Bayne so
well, I know he will pardon me in venturing on these
few remarks. Perhaps the delay in the School of
Mines is only caused by waiting for the arrival of the
successor of Mr. Mica Smith.
Before my return to Sandhurst I had read of a com-
pany being formed to make diamond drills and hire
them out; this would be much better than going, hat
in hand, to government, for the loan of that which we
can, should, and will, of necessity, produce ourselves.
Why, it will only take the matter of two thousand
pounds to complete one, with compressors and all com-


plete. Thia would at once be hired, and others would
soon be needed. Such a company would be a paying
affair, and Mr Davidson, the legal manager, would
make an energetic and successful secretary, from his
intelligence and force of character.
I shall now describe what the diamond drill has done,
and is doing in many parts of the world where mining
has been carried on with rich results. Quoting from
an interesting report of our School of Mines, based on
the information contained in the report of our able
delegate, G. Thureau (who, I am happy to know, holds
now the lucrative appointment, under the Tasmanian
Gdverment, of Inspector of Mines), it says, “ we have
all been made familiar with the name of the diamond
drill, but few amongst us can realise the remarkable
results that may be readily and inexpensively obtained
through its use. It is well known what its extended
use has accomplished in America, and how a similar
method of application to our mines would hasten the
development of our mineral resources.. The drill em-
ployed here, on the G.G., was a government one, which s
can only work on the surface, if such important results
can be obtained by the use of a vertical drill, how much l
more important are they likely to be when the drill is
taken down into the mine and a drill put in
the cores showing at once the strata.. This is exactly;
what they have been doing in. America, with such/,
astounding results, thus saving us much useless work
by enabling us. to feel our way inexpensively, before
entering on extensive excavations.. It is to be hoped;
that,, ere long, these diamond drills will be quite com-


mon amongst us 5 their general use will most undoubt-
edly make mining a much more stable industry than it
is at present, and when the diamond drill comes to be
considered as one of the miner’s necessary tools, the
way will have been opened to a prosperous future.”
Mr. A. J. Severance, of San Francisco, says that
the diamond drill has played a very important part in
developing the mineral wealth of the West, the first
great treasure house that was known as the Consoli-
dated Virginian, and the Californian Bonanzas, which
have yielded over twenty-two millions. One of the
mine-owners told Mr. Severance that the diamond
drill had been worth, to him, one million sterling; so,
hearing and knowing this, we must be up and doing..
I here note, that the Whipstick may now be considered
as connected with the continuation of the deep alluvial
sinking in the Bagshot paddock. It also lies north,
from fifteen to twenty miles from Sandhurst. Here
we have a veritable terra incognita, which, if properly
exploited, may be found to be another Elderado. It
has for years attracted a migratory population, by a
fitful success in alluvial mining, Some good nuggets
have been got there, but the great drawback has been
the want of water. Reefing enterprise is now being at-
tracted there.


CHAPTER XI.
SCENES OF DIGGING LIFE.
light of other clays, how faded ! December
7th, Jupiter Flavius being in the ascendant,
and this debaning me from going to inspect
the vineyards at htrathfieldsave, I am confined to my
comfortable lodgings in Forest Street, so, to fill up an
idle morning, I will conjure up some scenes of diggers’
life, early in 1854, and contrast it with the effete
civilised life of the present day. lam the more in-
clined to do so as Christmas is approaching, and it
promises to be a wet one, like what Christmas often
was twenty-seven and twenty-eight years ago. Then
the place was heavily timbered ; now, it is denuded of
its trees, thus the rainfall has of late been infrequent,
the weather bright, dry, and pleasant, and, owing to
our extensive system of railways, and the liberality of a
paternal government in granting cheap fares (return-
tickets lasting over thirty days), say, from this to
Melbourne, a distance of over a hundred miles, first
class 20s, second class 12s, regular interchanging of
visits all over the colony takes place, and pic-nics are
the order of the day, so, if we have a wet Christmas,.
heaven help the multitudinous number of young ladies
who will have to put away their bravery in lavender,


if this sultry, electric-charged, and uncertain weather
does not change within, a fortnight.
I now write in a. snug: bedroom, with all the means
and appliances for correspondence and comfort. Al-
though I am not like that recorded Sybarite who could
not sleep on his bed of rose-leaves, because they were
crumpled, yet I do sleep on a feather bed and like it
much. How different to the oldfen times ? Let us take
a highly-favoured diggers’ locality of those days, the
Junction Camp, near Jackass Flat, Mr.,. Dowling police
magistrate there. This,, then, was,, even a more
favoured locality than the Camp at Sandhurst, with the
uninviting Camp-street in full swing,, Sydney Flat being
the ultima thide of the Bendigo diggings, to the north
Eaglehawk Gully, which was so rich, then working
down to Epsom at the Junction. Camp,.
Mr. Dowling was very popular, and the diggers were
well off for water there,, as the leading men had contri-
buted either money or labour to sink a. well, so they had
good water there, whereas, in. other parts of the gold-
field, water was sixpence a bucket, and living was inor-
dinately high, carriage, in the winter, being over one
hundred pounds per ton from Melbourne. The spicy,
diggers’ tents, then, were made of, two upright limbs of
trees, each with a fork to held the ridge-pole, the tent
was thrown over this and pegged into the ground. In
a high wind, it not unfrequentlj happened that the oc-
cupant would awake and find he was sleeping under the
canopy of glittering stars. The ordinary bed then, was
the cold ground; like a soldier, wrapped in his martial
cloak, the digger was rolled in his blanket, but he was
better off than the soldier, for he had a comfortable biL


let of wood under his head for a pillow. Sometimes,
when a tree was felled, he had the chance of some gum
leaves to level the stony-ridged ground, and, oh, what
rare fortune it was to pick up a flour-bag, for then,
with the aid of four forked sticks, and two straight pieces
of wood, a few tacks, and a tomahawk, one could have
the luxury of a stretcher. The crosscut saw gave us
stumps for seats ; a higher one of these, with an in-
verted gold-washing dish for a table-top, served for a
writing desk, or at night, by the aid of a sixpenny sperm.
served for a card table. Many a stiff game of euchre
was played there, and, at that time, we did not exactly
play for love, a digger’s life being a gambling one. At
this time Bret Harte and his Heathen-Chinee tricks
with the bowers were not known, we played on the
square, and when we lost forked out like bricks. In the
chilly evenings we had roaring log fires at the opening
to the tents, where many a good yarn was told, and
there was camaradie of goodfellowship by which many
an unfortunate wight was “ laid on ” to a good patch.
This was in the Marco Polo and Eed Jacket clipper
time, with their seventy-five days’ passage from Eng-
land, and letters from home only ten weeks old. At
that time the cry, “ Unlock the lands,” had just arisen,
and the prevailing feeling among the digging commu-
nity, a longing, lingering looking back to the flesh-pots
of Egypt, and a yearning to quickly make their pile and
u hook it” off by the first clipper that was going with
a wet sheet and a flowing sea homeward bound for
merry England. In this way the country got depleted


of untold gold ; at this time alscj. even the unsuccessful
digger never wanted, as the- diggers- were no niggards-
with their helping hand, and nearly every gully was a
Tom Tiddler’s ground, where,- with little trouble, a
pennyweight could be picked npi Life then was not a
hopeless thing,, and we were hired! on by golden expec-
tations, as man “never is, but always to be blessed.
At this time we had no women amongst us,, and when-
the first woman put in an appearance-on.Cbmmissioner’a
Gully, the men came up out of their holes to view their lost
Peri. And so we plodded, on until we have- reached the
present humdrum, life, with all its- prim- formalities. To-
rn any, even now, the romance-of the former life yet lin-
gers in their memory, and my friend, the portly hatter
now in the Mall, Mr. Hill, will bear mo-out,. He, at
the time I speak of, was a. slim-, sprightly, and youthfu
storekeeper at the Junction. Camp,- But I must stop—
bother the rain, it has been, coming- down without inter-
mission for ten hours, and no appearance of, it ceasing-
A poor look-out for Christmas,., and alas, and a-lack-a-
day (I wish I had the darlings and the-rupees), what
will wo do, for Monaghan’s Concert is on to-night ?. and
my old friend, William Brown, is to delight us with his-
sw'eet tenor voice.
I will now continue this paper with some- interesting
episodes in early digging life on Bendigo, which may be
interesting and amusing. Early in 1852, just before
the first gigantic rush to Mclvor, the whole of the
seven White hills were in full work, and the Epsom
Racecourse was occupied by the first rush, when over
fifteen thousand diggers were employed on Lower Ben-


digo Flat, Commissoners’ Gully, Epsom Racecourse and
the whole of the White Hills (which resembled ant
hills with their teeming numbers). Large quantities of
gold were being daily got and miners were jocund and
content. Other parts of the goldfield were equally as
crowded and prosperous. But, speaking of the White
Hills and Flat diggings alone, from the site of the
Catholic Chapel to where the Wellington Hotel now
stands, the diggers’tents resembled those of a serried
and invading army, while the ground was pretty thickly
timbered, and Alpine thunder storms were frequent—
M When Alps spate to Alps,
and Jura answered Jura.”
Thunder storms, of late years, have been infrequent
and of a mild character, but, while I now write, Dec. sth,
a wretched hot wind and a sirocco of a dust-storm has
culminated into an elemental strife, and Heaven s loud
artillery shakes one’s nerves., as peal upon peal rattles
with such deep intensity, and the air is lurid with the
lightning eurruscating over the arc of Heaven, and,
although we have the warfare of the elements, and the
crash of riven clouds, we want the sublimity of the bend-
ing trees to mark nature’s wrath, and man’s puny op-
position.
Now I have to stop, as the intensity of the thunder
peals are moderating, but the flood-gates of Heaven are
opened, and a deluge is on. Verily it is now as it was
in the olden time, and not as it has been in latter times.
It is my private opinion we have had enong’h of it, for
it has spoiled my going out to a pleasant party, and
» nice quiet game of euchre. But, “ what’s the odds,”


let us be happy, as it is like what life was in the dear
olden days. This digression! Well, I now ask pardon
for it, and stick to my text, to describe a very remark-
able man, and a very elegant place for the then rude style
of primitive building. This was Mr Lester, and hia
barber’s shop, at the place where Plumridge street now
is (the White Hills not then having been surveyed).
Mr Lester was a prime favourite with the gentlemen of
the camp, and, after the day of the first Bendigo Paces,
he gave a grand champagne supper to all the camp offi-
cals who did not see anything wrong in Mr Lester
ministering to the bibulous wants of the diggers, as well
as reaping their chins. Why should he not “ pan off ”
their gold in brandy ; that stern Ehadamanthus, Mr
McLaughlin, sent the übiquitous Sergeant Richards—
there was nearly some trouble! Mr Lester, who we could
ill spare, as there were none like him, left, after a three
years’ prosperous shaving trade, and transferred the
light of his countenance to Ballarat, where he keeps the
best-ordered hotel in the colony. He is a universal fa-
vourite, and ought to have stopped here, but, although
he is in Ballarat, we claim him as a Bendigonian. Mr
Lester I have the pleasure of personally knowing, and
esteeming, and he will, I hope, pardon the recalling of
these pleasant reminiscenses of a ple tsant past.
About the end of 1852, the first monster rush to
Mclvor took place, when upwards of forty thousand
people left Bendigo in one day. The road to Heatheote
was so thickly lined with the diggers that one could
have almost walked upon their heads. This rush was
not of a lasting character, but many of the diggers


settled in Heathcote, which is a pretty place, at the foot
of the grand Mount Ida. Many did well, and here the
well-known and popular honiface of the Melbourne
Athen aeum*, and the Esplanade Hotel, St Hilda, made
the nucleus of his fortune. The bulk of the diggers
soon returned to Bendigo, but, from time to time, many
other large rushes seriously affected Bendigo, such as
the Fiery Creek rush (now Stawell), the Ararat rush,
and then the Hew Zealand rush (which permanently
drew away a large number of our population), yet,
strange to say, what with our new industry—reefing—
and the return of many of her truant sons, Bendigo has
held on her prosperous course, and has been a
good nursing mother to her returned, errant children.
About the end of 180$ I think, our first-appointed
home Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, visited Bendigo.
He was a fine, genuine salt ; his bluff, sailor manners,
made him at first popular with the diggers, and above
ten thousand met him at the Big Hill. Despite his
remonstrance, they took the horses out of his carriage,
and, as matters turned out, made themselves asses, by
dragging his carriage from the Big Hill into Sandhurst.
Subsequently, when the diggers mutinied against the
obnoxious license-tax, he lost all his popularity by his
quarter-deck austerity. He died of heart disease, and
lies buried in the Melbourne cemetery.
About this time occured the memorable wreck of the
Schomberg, under Capt. Forbes, who vowed to make
the passage from England in sixty-five days. Wo
have now so bridged the ocean that thirty days (which
will now soon be accomplished) does not seem the acme


of absurdity. Strange to say, we have the ship’s bell
of the Schomherg on Sandhurst, for it is this that calls
the Presbyterians to worship. Mr. La Troba, our first
Lieutenant-Governor after our separation from Sydney,
was said to be the school-master who was mixed up in
Queen Caroline’s trial.
To close these reminiscences (which could bo carried
on in extenso), I will narrate an amusing incident that
occured in those digger’s-hunting days. Early in
1854, two well-known diggers, John Murphy, and Gar-
rett Brennan, ware rounded-up by the police on Jackass
Flat, and taken before Mr Dowling, at the Junction,
their offence being, not having their license upon them.
Although they had paid for the same, Murphy, who was
a droll dog, a rough Irish diamond, requested to see
“his honour’s riverince,” Mr Dowling replied, well,
my man, lam who you want.,” Murphy then asked,
“ Would your honour’s riverince order that fellow (point-
ing to the policeman on guard at the door of the marquee)
to fire on a fellow who had paid for his license, and had
left it in his tent, if he ran away after being rounded
up by the perlice.” Mr. Dowling replied “ certainly not,”
then Murphy exclaimed, “ Then by jabers I am off,”
knocked over the police guard, jumped the picket fence,
and skedaddled like a greyhound into the bush. Mur-
phy, poor fellow, some months afterwards dropped
down dead in Macpherson’s sale yards. Brennan,
having proved that he had paid for a license, was dis-
missed with a reprimand. His face was known at all
our meetings, in the olden time. He got appointed
sexton to the White Hills cemetery, and is not long dead.


My informant, Mr. W. Robe, who is a singularly well-
informed man, brimful of information, was among the
early arrivals. He never left the district, and is about
66 years old, and, like many other old Bendigonians
who have a history connected with their lives, he has
played many a part in the district. He is a Londoner,
began life as a sailor, first visited Australia in 1833,
under Sir Charles Fitzroy, as sailing-master’s mate, has
been employed on the slave coast, and Persian Gulf,
slave capturing, has done a little free-trading on the
quiet, passed through strange vicissitudes, learned his
knowledge of gardening first from Vassie Symonds
(who was well known in the palmy days of the Hamlet
of the White Hills), and Robe is now a skilled gardener
for Mr. J. K. Smith, chemist, at his charming resi-
dence on the range at Kangaroo Flat.
I remark that, during the last few days, we have had
a run of most extraordinary weather, and it is doubtful
whether the oldest inhabitant, if he were appealed to
on the subject, could recollect such a season as we are
getting. Tempests, and electric-storms, with destruc-
tive hailstones, alternating with a beautifully mild day*
Mr. Bell, a squatter, while driving home from Ballarat,
was killed by lightning, two other men were killed, and
a young lady at Talbot was stricken down, and, although
still alive, is suffering from paralysis. The storms
over many parts of Bendigo were most destructive ;
happily no lives were lost.
Again another prominent old Bendigonian has passed
away, “ the golden bowl has been broken, and the silver
cord has been snapt,” and no more will the portly form


or genial face of W. P. Neal be seen wielding the
hammer in the rostrum at Maopherson’s sale yard, alike
with credit to himself and to the satisfaction of hia
numerous clients. Never more shall we look upon his
like again. He was a pillar of the state on Bendigo,
and we could have better spared a better man.
Few of the Tillage Forefathers are now left amongst
us ; the grim spectre has been reaping the harvest of
death within our midst, shorlly we will be able to count
them on our fingers. I wonder if I will be left like an
ancient mariner, or, like “ the last rose of summer, left
blooming alone.”
In speaking of this strange, unpleasant, and thun-
derous weather, reminds me of a curious circumstance
that occured in 1856, twenty-five years ago. Lola
Montez, the once chere ami of Bavaria’s royal king,
who, after being driven out of the country by an out-
raged people, when continental thrones were shaken to
their centres, in 1848, by the up-rising of a down-trodden
people, Lola took to the stage, and Australia’s gold
attracted her here. She found her way to Sandhurst,
and, being a plucky one, she was playing a piece ex-
pressly composed for her. It comprised the leading
incidents of her life, and was called the “ Little Devil.”
l Onr theatre then was the Haymarket, part of the pre-
sent Criterion Hotel. One night, during her perform-
ance (the house being well filled), the theatre was
struck with lightning, and some of the hoards on the
stage were riven asunder, Lola, nothing daunted, faced
the audience, and smilingly said, “ Upon my word, I
have often played the “Little Devil,” but it was reserved


that Sandhurst should do me the honour to supply the
real article, with rather too much intensity.” On these
boards the gifted, and ever-to-be-la men ted, Gustavus
Vasa Brooke, made his debut before a Bendigo audience.
1 paid 4s for standing room in the pit. Some years
after (I do not remember how long) J. H. Abbott
leased Joskey’s large store, and built the very pretty
Lyceum Theatre, and it was for years the home of the
lyric, and the mimic stage. I saw Brooke, on his
after-repeated visits, often there with many other stars
of magnitude, and I also saw some good amateur
theatricals strut and fret their hour upon the same
stage, and even now can recall, with pleasure, two
grand performances of Bob Roy, Angus Mackay making
a grand Rob Roy, inimitable John Mclntyre a capital
Baillie (ma conscience), Cameron, the station master,
and Wm. Brown, making capital Francis Osbaldistona,
and Mrs Groman, a melodious I)i Vernon. I have also
seen a capital rendition of Still Waters,” with J. A C.
Helm, gentleman, barrister-at-law, as John Mildmay.
A time came when the stage fell upon evil hours, and
the Lyceum Theatre was bought by Moore Brothers,
and converted into the Lyceum Stores. Then, in the
flush of success of the mining rush of 1871, our present
pretty bijou of a theatre, the Royal Princess, was
•erected by a company, but it has not been a profitable
spec, for all the admitted fact that we citizens of Sand_
hurst are both lovers of music, and admirers of the his-
trionic art; as witness our capital amateurs, the “ Pick-
wick club,”
mi


CHAPTER XII.
OUR VINEYARDS AND WINE INDUSTRY.
“ Fill the bumper fair,
Every drop we sprinkle
O’er the brow of care.
Smooths away a wrinkle.
Wit’s electric flame
Ne’er so swiftly passes
As when through the frame
It shoots through brimming glasses.”
wines of Asia were noted in remote anti-
quity. Why Noah, shortly after leaving the
Ark, got disguised in liquor ; and we read
that, when King Ahasuerus got in his wine cups, he
commanded Queen Vashti to appear before him, thus
bringing Esther forward, and materally benefiting the
Jewish nation. We read, in the mythological age of
’Greece, how that jolly god Bacchus sat astride his cask
and made everyone happy ; and also how, in the days
of Rome’s greatness, they filled the Falerian cup and
poured libations to their gods. In mediaeval ages,
Burgundy was the oldest wine-producing country in
Europe, and from thence the vine was distributed
through France and Germany, and Burgundy was the
standard wine on the table of the nobles. Later on we
read of Lachryma Christ! (the Tears of Christ). So
valuable is this wine that it is worth its weight in gold.
The place that was then held by Burgundy is now


completely unsurped by the sparkling Champagne, and,
so great is the production of this favourite wine, that it
amounts to seven hundred thousand hectolitres (a
hectolitre is 22 imperial gallons) in all, —over the enor-
mous sum of fifteen million imperial gallons !—Eheims
and Eperney sending the best brands. It is a very
difficult matter to arrive at the quantity imported into
Victoria, but it is a patent fact that our country is
being depleted, unnecessarily, of an immense amount of
wealth (the diggers at one time played nine-pins' with
full champagne bottles—they don’t do that now), which
ought never have been permitted to have left the coun-
try, and which would not have done so had it not been
for the incubus of fashion, and the vulgar display of
wealth. It is a well-known fact, that there is no after-
drink sickness so bad as that after a big bout of cham-
pagne. Oh, the nausea, and the splitting head-aches,
are a caution. For invalids it is good in small quanti-
ties, but other wines are equally good, so I would say
that the custom of champagne drinking will be more
honoured in the breach than the observance, and, by
confining one’s-self to the vin de pay, we will display
true patriotism.
Experts say that we, in Victoria, have as good cham-
pagne ground as they have in the Champagne (an an-
cient province of France), and that, in time, we will
produce it within ourselves, as witness Mr. Fallon, on
the upper Murray, and Dr. L, L. Smith, who have made
a commencement, so there is no reason why Victorian
wines should not supply all our Victorian wants. The
value of an acre of vines in the Champagne is over one


thousand pounds—it hag been sold for that amount.
Just think of that, you Emu Creek and Strathfieldsaye
vineyard-owners. Lucky fellows !
The same remarks that have been made on the cham-
pagne, apply, even with more telling force, to the vintage
of the Medoc. In Victoria we have more suitable land
for vine-culture than they have on the Gironde, and we
ought to bo able to dispense with importing Lafitte,,
Chateaux-Margeaux, and all other of the lower classes
of Claret. It is asserted that a large portion of these
wines, said to be imported, are of Victorian produce,,
put into foreign-shaped bottles, with showy labels. Our
lithographers are good hands at fac-similes. It is well
known that a clever chemist, as a wine doctor, can not
only sophisticate inferior wines, but that he can and
does produce all manner of wines (I mean pseudo wines),
without having a drop of the juice of the grape in it.
Why, I need only instance the fact of the Portugal and
Spanish wines, Port and Sherry. More of those enter
the port of London alone than is exported from Oporto
and Xeres; therefore, better would it be to shun all
foreign compounds, and stick to our own Australian
wines, for we have a wide choice of pure wines. We
have Sydney and Adelaide of a high quality • of Victo-
rian wines we have the St. Hubert on the Yarra, Messrs
Piowan and Castalla winning the German Emperor’s
£I,OOO prize for their wines, and the German Commis-
sioner had the discernment to decide that our wine in-
dustry was the paramount one of the Colony of Victoria.,
We have also the wines of Mr. Dans, of the Xarvino
Vineyard, Moonee Ponds, Melbourne, also the Goul-


bourn valley, and lastly, have we not got our Ben-
digo wines, wliicli for purity, bouquet, and health-
giving, restorative qualities, joined with cheapness, rank
second to rione, as recorded by many a well-contested
wine exhibition in London, Paris, Vienna, and Phila-
delphia.
OUB BENDIGO WINES.
On the Emu creek, Albert Bruhn has one of the
largest vineyards in the Sandhurst district. He has 41
acres of freehold ; of this he has 27 acres under vines,
and is annually planting out and increasing the extent
of his vines. In. whits wines ha makes Verdcilho,
Reisling, and Chasselas in red wines, Hermitage and
Carbinet. His gross produce, in a favorable season, is
about one hundred hogsheads, or from three to four
hogsheads to the acre ; gross money value of 27 acres
of vines, about £1,200. Mr. Bruhn does a large trade
with Melbourne, Ballarat, Eehuca, and all over the co-
lonies. Ha has also opened a regular trade with Eng-
land and Germany, and the demand for his wine is
largely in excess of what he can supply. He also buys
largely of both grapes and wine grown in the district..
This, for small growers, will be ultimately found to bo 1
the prevailing rule, for it will insure the production of
mature wine, by passing through the hands of an ex-
perienced. wine-maker who has the means and appliances
to treat the wine in a skilful manner. The late Mr. F.
C. Klemm did good service when the Bendigo wine trade
first started, and, had he been spared, he would have
lent valuable assistance, in placing the Bendigo wine


industry in the way to that prominent position which it
is yet destined to reach. Mr. Bruhn’s vineyard was
started in 1856, and his trade has been steadily and
yearly increasing. The present gross annual amount of
his trade is £B,OOO. Mr. Bruhn’s outside buying of
vineyard produce will show that the cultivating of the
vine, even in small holdings, will be a far more certain
and secure industry than farming in a small way. This
is forcibly impressed on one, as this last season has been
a disastrous one to the farmers, owing to drought, where-
as, on the other hand, there will be a glorious vintage.
Mr. Bruhn has extensive cellarage, and all the means
and appliances for doing an enormous trade. His
bottling is very attractive, being nicely labelled and cap-
suled, He showed me twenty-seven gold, silver and
bronze, medals, awarded at the various Exhibitions; as to
certificates, he has them without number, and he has
one valuable award in the shape of a gold cup his
Verdeilho beats the best imported sherry.
The members of the German Commission to our late
Intercolonial Exhibition, on their return to Berlin, took
a large quantity of Bruhn’s wine with them, when
there was a banquet given to them, at which these
wines were freely drank, and met with large appreciation
A. handsome testimonial, in the form of an acrostic, was
sent to Mr, Bruhn. This I intended to have printed
here, but the omission is the fault of Mr. Bruhn. I
also saw a flattering testimonial to him from London.
Mr. Grosse, the celebrated wood-engraver, in Mel-
bourne, has a nice vineyard of twenty acres, next to
Bruhn’s. He has opened a wine cellar in Collins street,


Melbourne, where his wines are well and favourably
known, and meet with a ready sale.
Mr. E.W.Fox, next Grosse’s, has seventy-three acres
of freehold,’all suitable for wine-growing. He has 18
acres under vines, 12 acres in lull bearing. He intends
planting the whole of his freehold with vines ; at the
present, with his own produce, and what he buys, he
makes seventy hogsheads in the season. He buys
largely of new-made wines, from the small vineyards,
for the purpose of blending and maturing the wines,
and keeping up a full supply. He makes Port, Mus-
cat, Claret, Carbinet, Hermitage, Burgundy, Mataro,
Frontignac, Tokay, Yerdeilho, Madeira, Reisling, Hock,
Chasselas, and Pedro Xirnines. Fie is alone in making
such a variety of wines, yet they all are of a high stand-
ard, and he has successfully carried off numerous medals,,
certificates, and money prizes, in the great number of
shows at which he has exhibited. He does a large
trade all over the colonies, and states that the demand
is greater than he can supply. His premises contain
extensive cellarage, and his bottling and capsuling
make the wine attractive-looking. Prices range from
15s to 42s per dozen—wines all pure juice of the grape.
Mr. Fisher comes next, with his popular vineyard of
twenty acres of vines. He has been a very large prize-
taker at all our principal Exhibitions, and his wines are
of a very high grade ; some experts say that his wines
are the best of the day, but, where so many super-
excellent wines are, it is a most difficult matter to give
the pre-eminence to one. One thing I have felt
gratified to see was, that there were no petty, jealous


feelings among the viniculturists, the success of one
was the gain of all. It appeared as if the generous
nature of their produce brings on a generous spirit of
rivalry ; envy to them is unknown, and most certainly
the old adage, of two of a trade never agreeing, does
not apply to wine-growers. They have an associate
society which looks well after their joint interest,
and the knowledge of anything to further the interest
of the Bendigo wine trade is freely communicated to
each and every member of this industry. It is, as it
were, an infant Hercules, and will, even before its adoles-
cence, strangle the hydra-headed demon of drunken-
ness caused by deletrious, hot, and rebellious liquor being
added to the blood ; not genuine gin, whiskey, or
brandy, but obnoxious silent spirit, which is now being
manufactured openly, as well as on the quiet, in large-:
quantities, and chemically made to represent mature
spirits. This is the stuff that maddens and. destroys
both soul and body. This, our wine industry will, as 1
say, effectually stop, as soberity is the rule in all wine
countries.
On the opposite side of the Emu Greek to Mr,
ihuhn’s, is the vineyard of Mr, Carl Pohl, where we see
care, science, and assiduous study, with ample means,
combined to make success complete, Mr. PohTs object
being a high standard of quality and not quantity.
His vineyard is seven miles from Sandhurst, in the
valley of Emu Creek, the country about is pretty, and.
well worthy of a visit, and, as Mr. Pohl is full of kind,
German hospitality, the visitor, if with an unvitiated
palate, has a treat before him as to the two senses of


taste and smell. His wines, for bouquet and mellow-
ness, meet with a connoiseur’s unqualified approbation.
In red wines he produces Carbinet and Hermitage; in
white wines, Verdeilho, and Reisling, and in all four
wines ho has been eminently successful. In a good
season an* acre of Verdeilho grapes makes one-and-a-
lialf hogshead. Having capital he can afford to hold
his wines, and prefers selling not under five years. His
wine then is throughly mature, and he readily gets two
guineas a case for it. This is the most expensive wine
he sells. When decanted it stands good for a week..
Calculating the acre at one-and-a-half hogshead, this
will be over eighty-one gallons, while the money value
of this acre of vines will be £35, from which will have
to be deducted rent, wages, and interest of money.
Further on I will show what less mature wine, sold in
bulk, pays an acre, at least to Mr Pohl. His Carbinet,
at five years old, ranks equal in value to Verdeilho ; his
Reisling grapes produce three hogsheads to the acre.
This wine is of good color, and fine bouquet, and is
sold in bulk, at three years, from 4s to 6s per gallon.
Mr Pohl, finding his land pre-eminently suited for the-
Hermitage grape, is making this a speciality, as he has
been more successful, in all the large Exhibitions, in
getting an excess of prizes for this particular wine.
At the Pads Exhibition, 1870, it was classed equal to
the best Bordeaux. The yield per acre, for Reisling,
and Hermitage, is about three hogsheads. Taking the
average price, selling both wines in bulk, at 5s a gallon,,
when three years old, the value per acre would be over
£4O ; if these wines were bottled, and kept for 5 years,.


£6O. Mr Pohl only competes at large Exhibitions, and
has been highly successful at Loudon, Paris, Vienna,
Philadelphia, Sydney, and the late International Mel-
bourne Exhibition. At this last-named there were
twenty-five first-class awards given for wines, nineteen
of these went to France, and six to Germany ; none
came to Australia, our wines not having the continental
lightness. In the second class, there were only seven
awards came to Victoria, Pohl one, Bruhn one, and
Grieffenhagen one, being three for Bendigo, and three
to Rowan and Castella, of the St. Hubert vineyard, on
the Yarra. These gentlemen got the German Empe-
ror’s £IOCO prize, not fur the superiority of their wines
over the Bendigo wines, but because, in addition to
their intrinsic value, the St. Hubert vineyard was the
most extensive, employing the largest number of hands,
and was favoured with the able management of a skilled
vigneron like M. Castella ; so that St, Hubert’s now
represents what will be one of Victoria’s great industries.
The reader will please, like Capt Cuttle, “ make a note,”
that our Bendigo wines rank with the first in Victoria.
Mr. Pohl has fourteen certificates of merit, and seven
handsome bronze and silver medals, awarded to him at
the various Exhibitions. He throughly understands
the wine-making, his cellar arrangements are perfect,
he does not fortify his wines, as they are naturally too
strong, and he has 150 acres freehold, only ten under
vines, twenty years planted, but he is planting out
annually. About fifty acres of his land is suitable for
vine-growing.
On the Sheepwash Creek, Mr. Deravin has a fifty-three


acre freehold, only two acres in vines, but he intends all
for a large vineyard. Here also is Mr. Meyer’s location,
who now owns Lorridan’s original vineyard, of twenty-
five acres. He was very successful in the late Inter-
colonial Exhibition in Melbourne, obtaining six certi-
ficates of merit for six exhibits. He makes sixty
hogsheads of wine in the season. There are several
other small vineyards on the Sheepwash Creek.
Mr Grieffenhagen, on the Axe Creek, distant nine
miles from Sandhurst, has the most extensive vineyard
in the Bendigo district. This property, of 300 acres,
is most beautifully situated, and well repays the trouble
of a visit. At present there are thirty acres under vines
and this is being added to yearly. One hundred and
fifty acres of this land are suitable for vine planting, and
it is intended to have the vineyard of this extent. In
anticipation of this there has been built the largest and
finest cellars in the southern hemisphere. These are
hewn out of the solid rock. Starting from the basement
story, the first floor is nine feet high to spring of arch,
to top of arch thirteen feet six inches ; size of cellar,
one hundred feet by twenty-six feet. This is for casks
containing five hundred gallons each, for storing ma-
tured wines ; storage capacity 25,000 gallons. The
second floor is 10 feet high, 100 feet by 26 feet surface.
This is where young wines are stored. These two
stories are under ground. The third story is above
ground, where there are two wire-presses, and all the
means and appliances for crushing, fermenting, and
distributing the wine to the various cellars. The vines
are planted in rows seven feet apart, and five feet, in


drills, all staked, so that the ground can be worked with
horse power and thus save manual labour. The ground
is all thoroughly trenched, from two to three feet deep,
and is manured every year. In red wines, Carbinet,
Hermitage, and Burgundy, are made, the last-named a
prime speciality; in white wines, he makes Verdeilho,
Reisling, and Chasselas. In a moderately-good season
the gross produce of wine is one hundred and twenty
hogsheads, for which he finds a ready sale, having large
buying customers in Germany, where his wine is highly
prized. He lias exhibited in London, Paris, Vienna,
Philadelphia, Sydney, and the International Exhibition,
Melbourne, and obtained several medals, also a large
number of certificates. Only two medals came from
Vienna to Victoria, of which he obtained one. In ad-
dition to the vineyard, there are ten acres of an orchard,
and Mr Grieffenhagen produces some choice fruit, so
that, altogether, there is a large, and a profitable trade
done here. He has a handsome champion silver cup,
18-inches high, awarded for wines, also several
'daret jugs.
Proceeding down the Axe Creek, towards the Cam-
paspe river, we come to the vineyard and orchard of
Thomas Craike, who, although not so prominent as
•others are as wine-growers, yet produces some most ex-
cellent wine. He has eight acres under vines, and is
increasing his vineyard area. At the present time he
stands pre-eminent as a fruit-grower, and makes his
orchard-produce a specialty. In addition to the many
prizes he has taken at local and district shows, he was
-awarded, at the International Melbourne Exhibition,


eleven first orders of merit, two second, and three
third orders of merit. He realizes about one thousand
pounds a year. It is Mr. Craike’s intention to send a
large consignment of this season’s produce home, both
frozen and preserved fruit. He has erected a steam-engine
for pumping from the river, and, by irrigating from this,
he expects a large increase in his yield. There is a
splendid show of oranges.
Next on the Axe Creek comes Thomas Strachan’s fine
orchard of 20 acres. Ha has been one of the most
successful growers of fruit, and he has given great atten-
tion to the drying of fruit, and has succeeded admirably,
as witnessed by numerous prize awards.
Come we now to the valley of the Bendigo Creek,
which, for years past, has been celebrated for the pro-
duction of table grapes. Mr. Panton’s garden, at Epsom,
under the management of M. Bladmire, was a grand
success at one time. Subsequently M. Bladmire estab-
lished a large vineyard at Huntly, which is now in the
possession of Mr. Ruedin, Here a large amount of
wine is made. As Mr. Ruedin was absent when I
visited the place I could not get particulars.
I next called and inspected W. Delbridge’s Bellevue
"Vineyard, Epsom. He has 13 acres freehold, six acres
-■of this under vines, annually adding to and planting
out. He has eight thousand vines, of forty different
kinds, and five hundred fruit trees. He makes white
and red, Hermitage, Chasselas, and Frontignac. His
produce is twenty hogsheads per season, of which his
white Hermitage is a speciality, while his other wines
are very fine, sound, and mellow, good colour and fine


bouquet. He states he sells none under five years old,
the average price in bulk being 7s. a gallon, bottled,
20s. a dozen ; the demand, he remarked, is greater than
he can supply. He has got several local exhibits and
medals. A severe domestic affliction prevented his
exhibiting wine in the late Intercolonial Melbourne
Exhibition. Mr, Bosisto, one of the Commissioners,
with Mr. Thompson, assistant secretary, came up here
about fruit, and both were surprised at the fine quality
of his wine. Mr. Helbridge made very large exhibits
of fruit at the Intercolonial Exhibition, obtaining five
orders of merits, and one five-ounce silver medal, for five
exhibits of wine and table grapes. His Excellency, the
Governor, was pleased to say that he never saw such a
fine collection of grapes. In peaches, apricots, cherries,
plums, apples and pears, in addition to table grapes,
none can excel him. All his choice fruit goes to the
crack Melbourne fruit shops. I saw some bunches of
grapes over two feet long, which, I was told, would,
when they came to maturity, weigh eight pounds each.
These were Epsom seedlings.
As far as practicable, to give some idea of the extent
and resources of the Bendigo wine trade, which will in
time assume large dimensions, I visited F. K. Shaw’s
vineyard, at Goornong, This gentleman has four hun-
dred and forty acres, freehold, and has a nice brick
house. He combines wine-making, fruit-growing, and
dairy-farming. He, and his large family, are a busy lot.
The eldest daughter is an accomplished dairy maid.
She showed me a handsome silver tea and coffee service,
that she had won twice in succession at the agricultural


show, for the excellent quality of her butter. About
thirty cows are being milked, and most of the butter
goes to Melbourne. One hundred and twenty acres
of this freehold is suitable for viniculture. At present,
owing to the scarcity of labour, he has only eight acres
of vines, all full-bearing, about half pi an ted these twenty
years. Mr. Shaw has departed from the usual custom
of staking, and is trellising the vines on wire. They
are set widely apart, so that horse-power can be em-
ployed, he says that, by trellising, he gets a much larger
crop. Certainly the vines treated in this way appeared
to me to be more luxuriant than those trailing from a
single stake. He is yearly adding to his vineyard, and
now has twenty acres in all under vines. All these will
be in full bearing within the next two years. There are
six acres of orchard, some planted from ten to twenty
years. Experience here shows it desirable that orchards
should be replanted every fifteen years, as it is found
that, owing to the prolific nature of the trees, they get
exhausted in that space of time. Mr. Shaw is singu-
larly intelligent, and has made horticulture a special
study. He plants so as to bring his trees in rotation.
In wines, he makes Hermitage, Chasselas, and Ver-
deilho. In a moderately-good season he makes sixteen
hogsheads, his wine being highly prized, and all ab-
sorbed by private orders, the supply being far short of
the demand ; he has large cellarage, the capacity being
4,000 gallons. The yield of fruit is large, and of a
superior quality ; it is disposed of in Melbourne, Echuca,
and Daylesford. Mr. Shaw exhibited in Melbourne, in


1878, only one sample, and got both a medal and certi-
ficate. He has several other medals and certificates.
In the coming time this will be a very large and im-
portant vineyard.
Having described the principal vineyards, it only now
remains to describe Mr. J. itahland’s large plant for the
making of wines. This is situated in King street,
Sandhurst. He is not a grower, but is a large buyer of
grapes, and, having so many different localities to draw
supplies of grapes from, has such a variety that he
makes Verdeilho, Chasselas, Hermitage, Carbinet, Bur-
gundy, Mataro, Reisling, and Frontignac. He gets large
quantities of Muscat grapes from Bullock Creek and
Marong, the soil there being suitable for that grape
Mr. Windsor growing remarkably-fine Muscatel table
grapes. Mr. Kahland’s place shows what steady industry
will accomplish. About eighteen years since, half an
acre of a worked-out puddlcr’s claim was taken up
under miner’s right, on upper Bendigo Flat, by the
father of the present proprietor. At that time the Flat
was not surveyed in streets, and this ground was then
inaccessible, being surrounded with dangerous holes.
There was a slab hut, and the ground was roughly
fenced in, levelled, and planted with vines, and, from
this small beginning, German thrift and industry has
made the present prosperous place. Bendigo Flat then
was a deserted, weird, and desolate place, having been
washed down to the bed rock by puddlers. Subse-
quently the streets were surveyed, and now they are
lined with comfortable, pretty cottages, streets formed,


and planted with trees, so that Mr Kahland’s nice house,
and commodious premises, are now in a thriving city.
He will make, in all, about seventy hogsheads of wme
this season, all’ from bought grapes, thus distributing
an amount of money which, to the small growers, is
most useful. He exhibited at the Melbourne Inter-
national Exhibition, and got eight prizes out of nine
exhibits, also two prizes at Ballarat. He has seiera
certificates, 6 silver medals, and 2 bronze medals. His
wines are rising into favor, and the demand is nearly
equal to the supply. He docs a very large wine-
vinegar trade, quite equal to Cross and Blackwells
London vinegar, so we can shut that out of the market
and make our own pickles too, in time being self-
supplying in every particular.
Having given a description of the prominent vine-
yards, I trust I may have given a favourable opinion
of the resources and capabilities of the Bendigo district
to become a very large wine-producing country. Now,
our viniculturists have got the means and the knowledge
of sending first-class wines into the market, and, thanks
to the several Exhibitions, our wines are getting into
wide repute, so that we will have the whole world for
customers, and, if we continue on as we are now doing,
there will be no limit to the extent of our wme trade,
and, in time, it will be our chief stand-by industry,
from the Big Hill to the Murray. The water-shed of
the valley of Bendigo, with all its tributary creeks, and
ranges and valleys is adapted for the cultivation of the
vine, the orange, the lemon, the citron, and the olive.
i 2


So that, in time, this ground alone will carry a million
of a population. We can, and we will, produce all the
oranges and lemons needed for our consumption, thus
keeping a large amount of money in the district.


CHAPTER XIII.
CHEESE-MAKING ON BENDIGO.
as one will, and reason as one may,
“ man is the child of destiny,” and inexorably
*■ bound to the adamantine chain, and curren
of events, with which an omnipotent, and all-wise, and
an omniscient Providence shapes our ends. At the
same time that I hold these views I also believe that it
is a man’s duty to so order his ways, and so strive to
improve his position, by wisely and usefully employing
whatever talents he may be possessed of, so that he may,
as it were, in his progress through life, add another
stone to the cairn of civilisation, and leave the issue of
life or death in the hands of the great I AM.
My life, in a degree, examples this. On New Year’s
eve, 1881, I was rusticating at the sea-side, at the foot
of Mount Eliza; I was then leading a useless, hopeless
idle, and dependent life, eating my heart out, as, to me,
life without progress is death. At a ball at Frankston,
I danced the New Year, 1881, in, and had for a partner
a Miss Hoskens, of Sandhurst. Another change in the
kaleidoscope shows me, at the end of the year, again a
resident of Sandhurst, full of renewed hope and energy,
and trusting to be of some slight use in writing these
annals of dear old Bendigo.
New Years’s eve of 1881, saw me dancing out the old


year with a Bendigo lady; hew Year’s eve, 1882,
found me in company with Mr. Andrew O’Keefe and
his lady, driving through a glorious, moonlit bush, behind
a pair of splendid bays, doing their ten miles an hour.
Thus 1882 was ushered in. I wonder if this is an omen
of a pleasant, prosperous year. Let us trust that such
will be the case. I may remark that there is every out-
side evidence of a flood of prosperity, as the year opens
well, and the revenue largely exceeds expectations. The
railway receipts are larger than in the Exhibition year,
and, for the first time, the revenue from that source ex-
ceeds the payment of interest and working expenses.
Mining is undoubtedly in the ascendant, and the
ominous, threatening weather, of a few weeks back,
having cleared off, we have grand Queen’s weather, and
an enormous increase in the numbers participating in
our holiday Saturnalia. I question if we are not carrying
this pleasure-making business to too great excess; even
the time lost in the aggregate tots up to a big figure.
I write this at Adelaide Vale, in a handsome cottage
or nee, commanding an unparalleled, romantic view of
wide extent. The house is of recent erection, handsome-
and commodious, built of freestone, and, with surround-
ing buildings, occupies four acres of ground. It is-
built on the crown of the hill, the slopes planted with
vines, of about two acres extent; six acres of the flat
are fenced in an I planted as an orchard and garden,
which is irrigated by a centrifugal pump. The country
is beautifully undulating, and the grounds surrounding
the homestead could be made most charming, but Mr,
O’Keefe, although a large employer of labour, and a


man of taste, as evinced by a large expenditure on oil
paintings, prefers practical and profitable farming to
ornamental landscape gardening, for the present.
The special industry carried on here is Cheese-making,
which has for several years, been most successfully pro-
ceeded with, and his cheese has been, and now is, a
prime favourite. This, I believe, is the largest cheese
dairy in Victoria (X don’t mean a cheese factory). A.ll
the milk used is the produce of his own herd, the ori-
ginal number of which, on first starting cheese-making,
was 300 head, now increased to 900 head, at present
milking 300 cows night and morning. Owing to the
unusually dry season he is only making, at the present,
2001 b per day. He has made as much as 600 pounds
average per day of cheese, in a good season, one-and-a-
half ton per week. This, at the present low price of
6d per lb. amounts per annum to £4,368. Until about
eighteen months back the lowest price this cheese brought
was 9d. per lb. To show what a large past profit has
been made on the making of cheese—a gallon of milk
costs three pence, this makes 12ozs of cheese, the whey
feeding the pigs, counts as another 2ozs., so that, even
at the present low price, there is three pence per lb. of
profit. So it will be seen that, when 9d. was the selling
price, what a coining of money it must have been. The
number of pigs, of all sizes, I saw running about, would
have been hard to count. The cheese dairy is about a
quarter of a mile from the homestead. It is a substan-
tial stone building, with stone floor and cement skiiting,
so as to prevent all vermin getting in. There are three
vats, and presses of various sizes, from Stilton upwards.


The plant is a very complete one, costing, with buildings
and large cow-sheds for milking, about £3,000. The
foreman (a half-brother to Mr. O’Keefe), is Martin
Slevin, a highly-qualified cheese-maker, who gained his
first experience in Kew Zealand, and subsequently in a
large Victorian cheese factory. The modus operandi
of making cheese is very interesting ; it is the same as
that adopted in America. The yat is surrounded with
hot water; the evening’s milk, when the morning’s milk
is added to it, has a thick body of cream, and it requires
care and skill to thoroughly break this up and blend it
with the new milk. When this is accomplished, the
temperature being at 110 degrees, the rennet is added,
and the coagulation has to be carefully watched and
moved, and this, which is called the “ cooking,” lasts
for about two hours, then the curd is properly formed,
and the lacteal acid begins to be developed. After this
the whey is run off by a syphon, the curd is then re-
moved to a straining vat, where it is salted, and, when
cold, pressed into the various sizes, the whole process
occupying twenty-four hours, whereas, in the English
method, no artificial heat being used, the making of a
cheese takes a week. Mr. O’Keefe’s cheese meets with
ready sale, and for a long time, had the command of the
market. He has been awarded several trophies, medals,
and prizes, at the various Agricultural Shows. At the
Exhibition in Melbourne, in 1876, ho got first prize.
Of men and boys he employs thirty-five hands at
Adelaide Vale, these, in addition to milking and cheese-
making, are employed in raising large quantities of farm
produce. His annual wages in connection with this


place, amount to about £2,000 a year. No milk is
bought here, only making from his own herd, thus en-
suring uniformity in the cheese. The extent of the
Adelaide Vale estate is 4,800 acres. The Campaspe
.river intersects it, with a river frontage, on one side, of
three miles, on the opposite side, of two miles. A large
portion of the ground is heavily, timbered and there are
some giant trees along the banks of the river. There is
a twenty-five horse-power steam engine for pumping and
irrigating about 60 acres, which have been laid down in
English grasses and lucerne. There is also a small
engine for crushing grain, and a five horse-power engine
for chaff-cutting. Mr. O’Keefe, at one time, had large
contracts for supplying the Melbourne ’Bus Company
with chaff. This property was bought from the late
John Harney, in 1869, by the late Edward O’Keefe, for
the sum of £II,BOO. He was one of Bendigo’s old
prominent identities, first as a puddler, then as a muni
cipal contractor, then as a municipal councillor for the
long period of eight years, also as chairman of the
fighting mining board, in Tom Carpenter’s days, and
lastly as a large Government contractor for the railways
and waterworks. By his shrewdness and force of cha-
racter he accumulated a fortune, leaving his family well
off. His mantle has fallen upon an equally versatile
and energetic man in the person of his only son, the
present proprietor, who, in addition to the Adelaide Yale
estate, has bought the Kimbolton property, 3,800 acres,
with 6,000 sheep, for the sum of £25,000; his clip,
lately sold, averaged over five pounds a head, for which
he got a tidy cheque. Andrew O’Keefe is a thorough


go-ahead colonist. Altogether he has £46,000 invested,.,
and is bound to be a rich man. The drive from Ade-
laide Yale to Kimbolton, fourteen miles, is a most in-
teresting one; it is chiefly through the valley of the
Campaspe, where the Axe Creek falls into the Cam-
paspe, forming a natural delta and deep gorge, with
hi.uh surrounding cliffs. Here, very little engineering
skill, and very little money, would be required to form a
large reservoir, by which a great extent of country, down
to the Terricks, could be irrigated. The banks of the
Campaspe, unsuited for agriculture, are well adapted to
the growth of the vine. As Hr. Backhaus holds a
principality here, and is a very Midas in respect of
wealth, he ought to settle large numbers of his country-
men in the neighbourhood, who, by German skill and
thrift, would flourish.
I recently visited Michael Burke’s cheese factory, at
Woodstock on the London, county of Bendigo. He
has sixteen hundred acres of a freehold, and has built a.
handsome brick homestead in the centre of his property.
He has fenced in seven acres, two acres for an orchard
and olive plantation, two acres of vines, and three acres
in the centre for landscape gardening and shrubberies,.
the whole being artistically laid out. A large amount
of money has been, and is being, expended here. Ad-
joining is a large granary, with a storage capacity of.
8000 bushels. Underneath, and surrounding this, are
the farm out-houses and chaff-cutting machinery ; there
are also extensive milking-sheds, with a well-arranged
system for artificial feeding. During the dry season,
the expenditure on homestead, granary, out-buildings,


garden, planting trees, etc., has been three thousand
pounds. The country here is champaign, very little
undulating, rich chocolate soil, a fine wheat-growing
country. The value of land here, with ordinary im-
provements, is about £i an acre. Mr. Burke’s land
is used for both grazing and farming, and the average
yield, for the last fifteen years was twenty bushels to
the acre. In a very favourable year he has had as
much as a 1000 bags of wheat. This last has been a
most disastrous season, owing to the prolonged drought,
in many instances the return not equalling the seed
put into the ground. Mr. Burke has suffered so much
that he is prepared, and willing to pay, £2OO h year for
a water supply for irrigation purposes. This would
represent a capital value of £SOOO invested for water
works. Others here about would do the same. There
are numerous creeks available for conserving water,
which would cast abundance over a smiling land. Mr.
Burke combines farming with cheese-making and bacon-
curing. His cheese factory is two miles from his
homestead, the buildings are extensive and admirably
arranged, there are three vats and tw- nty-one presses,
and facilities for making.one thousand pounds of cheese
per day, if the necessary supply of milk could be got.
Owing tq the scarcity only two hundred pounds per
day is now being made. In a moderately good season
he has made over six hundred pounds per day. His
cheese is a prime favourite, and sells all over the
colonies, and he has a good sale in Melbourne, but his
chief trade is done in Sandhurst, where he supplies


seventy-one stores, tlie lowest price being 6d per ib,
gross trade in 18S0 was £4300, but of this he paid
£1639 for milk, and, in addition, milked one hundred
of his own cows. At the factory there are extensive
milking sheds, having a large extent of roofing. He
has built a spacious water tank, at the cost of £250,
so he has an ample supply of water distributed all over
the premises. The gross capital employed on farm
and factory is £IO,OOO. He has a public-house and
store, and employs fifteen men, while his annual profits
are over £IOOO a year. He is a thoroughly practical
cheese-maker, and scientific farmer, also an ingenious
mechanic, with the organs of construction and order
largely developed. He is a self-made man, and is on
the flood of fortune. The system of making cheese
here is the same as that previously described in Mr.
O’Keefe’s. Mr. Burke has been eminently successful
in competing at the various Agricultural Shows, and
has four gold, four silver, and one bronze medal,
several money prizes and certificates, and, at the late
Melbourne International Exhibition, for one ton of
cheese exhibited as a trophy, he got first prize, a cer-
tificate, and a very large silver medal. This against all
the world. There were nineteen colonial, and two foreign
competitors. In bacon he was equally successful, get-
ting two first-class awards, for his bacon is really prime,
being fed exclusively on whey.
There is a third cheese factory started on Bendigo
about six months ago. This company consists of six
shareholders subscribing £IOO each, and the scene of


operation is at Newbridge. For the last four months
they have been making three hundred pounds per day,
and they depend altogether on bought milk, paying 3Ad
per gallon. This company is expected to be a remu-
nerative one.


CHAPTER XIV.
THE COACH-BUILDING TRADE IN SANDHURST.
like the growth and improvement in our
city most forcibly shows what rapid and vast
strides civilisation has taken here, for it is
an indisputable fact that coach-building, like any of
the kindred fine arts, can only take root and flourish
where people get polished and prosperous. Ten years ago,
before the advent of Stoneman, and Pickles and Sons,
a party who wanted a light, strong, elegant buggy, had
to go to buy in Melbourne, and many hundreds of pounds
were paid by Sandhurst men for Abbott’s American
buggies, this money not only being lost to Sandhurst
but lost to the colony of Victoria, the only ones gaining
being the importers. At this time Harry Haisman, Isaac
Lloyd, and Pat Flood, were making good, substantial,
useful waggons and spring carts, and each doing a pro-
sperous business. Such was the state of matters when
the fitful, feverish, but transient flood of mining pro-
sperity, visited us in 1871 and 1872.
Our then prosperous state induced, in the first in-
stance C. L. Stoneman to settle in our midst, and very
shortly after, Pickles and Sons came and built their pre-
sent very large premises in Williamson street, where also
Stoneman has his factory. Both of these firms are all-
round tho i oughly practical men, who, by their quali-


fications and energy, have completely revolutionised the
coach-building trade here, turning out vehicles of every
description, with the exception of landaus, broughams,
barouches and chariots, which also could he made if there
was any demand for them. The various traps made
here, both for style, finish, and price, can bear comparison
with those made in any other part of the colony, not
even excepting Melbourne. This business has progressed
most favourably during the last decade, and the skill
and energy of our local builders has most effectually
dispelled and dispersed local prejudice in favor of
Melbourne work, as what we require can be made and
supplied here, to please the most fastidious.
The principal firms are, Messrs. Pickles, Stoneman,
Haisman and Mappin. There are also several extensive
wheelwrights.
Messrs. Pickles and Sons stand at the head of
this industry, both in respect to extent of establishment,
means and appliances for doing a large trade, and to the
fact of their getting much more than the lion’s share of
the business. This is the largest and most complete
carriage works in Australia, and they are on the most
approved American plan. The show room, fronting to
the street, is large, and well lighted, not overcrowded
with vehicles. As the demand is so large, only a light
stock can be kept on hand. The next compartment in
the building is the painting and finishing room ; this
is "well filled with traps or parts of traps, in their various
stages. They have some artistic painters, who can do
■armorial bearings. The remainder of the building,
fully one half, contains the workshops, where there are


six fires and a large space for the body-makers. There
are all manner of labor-saving machines, driven by a
twelve-horse steam engine ; a planing machine, mor-
tising ditto, and an endless saw, with adjusting table, by
which various parts of the wood-work can be cut to any
angle. These saws, which rip up the stuff like light-
ning, were only introduced into Victoria at the late
International Exhibition. There are also several other
machines, too tedious to describe. The division of
labor here reaches perfection, and it was interesting to
see the soldier-like regularity with which the men, on
their return from dinner, dropped into their respective
places. Messrs Pickles, in their speciality of buggies,
waggonettes,and business-waggons, do a very large trade
all over the colonies. To show the large business they
are doing, the following answers to queries, by the Royal
Commission on the tariff, will show:—They circulate
annually in wages, £4,000, to this must be added the
large amount of labor executed by machinery (no other
factory has so much, at least in Victoria). They pay
annually to the customs, £1,500 duty on raw materials
which cannot be produced in the colony. The total
value of their plant is £B,OCO ; value of the machinery
employed, £2,000, and they employ fifty-two hands, so
distributing £4,000 in wages. Their output of buggies
is eight per week, in addition to a large jobbing trade.
At the present they are taxed to their utmost resources
and cannot supply the demand. Prices range from
£34 for a substantial farmer’s waggon, up to elaborately
finished stanhope phaeton, at £l7O. In the show-room
I saw an exquisite bijou of a lady’s pony carriage,.


made to the order of Mrs, J. H. Abbott. It has wire-
woven seats, and backs painted straw color, the body
lake, relieved with picked out fine Vermillion lines*
This is only one of several specialities of Messrs Pickles,
and they have made several of these for Sydney. They
have been very successful in exhibiting and competing
at various agricultural shows. They have obtained
several gold and silver medals and cups, also a number
of certificates, in all they hold 400 prizes. George
Pickles, one of the sons, is the presiding genius of the
factory, as his father has given oyer the management to
him, the father’s time being fully occupied with mail
contracting, and the supervision of a large posting and
livery-stable business, and the management of the coach
factory could not be in more competent and energetic
hands than that of George Pickles, who, although only
twenty-six years old, has his head screwed on in the
right manner. He is a young Australian, and destined
to succeed in the race of life, as he is an excellent trades-
man, and a first class body-maker.
Here it is right and proper to add, and give credit
where credit is due, as in this instance, to Mr. G. F.
Pickles, senr., the head of the firm, to whom belongs
the credit of founding this factory, who, by his ability,
energy, and pluck, has surmounted all difficulties.
Charles L. Stoneman comes next. He is a first-class
tradesman, and has had large experience in, and could
execute any, of the highest class work. He turns out
splendid buggies, and is doing a prosperous trade. He
makes very little show, as the ground on which his factory


stands is the property of two landlords who will not give
terms for improvement.
Harry Haisman, a very old Bandigonian, who has
prospered well, lias a large establishment, and a good
show room. He does a large, paying business, and he
turns out creditable work, and has been a prize-taker at
our shows.
Lastly, Mr. Mappin, who learned bis business on
Sandhurst, and has recently commenced business, is
a clever, thoroughly practical coach-builder, one who
will, in time, succeed. He is a nephew of Mappin, the
great London cutler.
It only now remains to note, and I do this at the
joint request of all the coach-builders here, who wish
it to be known that they are over-protected, and that,
if the raw material which cannot be produced here was
admitted free, they would not require a duty put on im-
ported carriages, as they can compete against the world
—at least such is the Sandhurst men’s opinion.


CHAPTER XV.
TANNING AND CURRYING ON BENDIGO.
“There is nothing like leather.”
history of the tanners’ art extends back to
the most remote ages, primitive man using
leather for clothing, skins of animals being
then the only available material; this, on drying, would
become hard and homey, and, on exposure to moisture,
would get putrid, co that the art of restoring, or giving
suppleness to skins, must have been known at a very
early stage in the history of civilisation. One thing is
clear, the tanners’ art must have been known to the
early Saxons, for the word “leather” is taken from
their word, “ lithe,” which denotes the quality of supple-
ness, and, strange to say, little more is now known of the
process of tanning than what was known centuries back ;
and we know for a fact, that the children of Israel
knew and practised the art, as we read of Paul, on his
way from Damascus, stopping at Joppa, in the house
of Simon a tanner. With this prelude I shall now de-
scribe one of Bendigo’s large industries.
The Edinburgh Tannery, on the Sheepwash creek,
distant five miles from Sandhurst, was originally started
by Goudge and Sibley, and, on the death of Mr. Goudge,
the place was worked with considerable sucess by Messrs
Lambert and Sibley. On the death of Mr. Lambert,
the property was put in the market, and purchased, in
k 2


1878, by Messrs J.H. Abbott and Co., the firm consist-
ing of Mr. J. H. Abbott, and Mr. R. H. S. Abbott,
who have enlarged and rebuilt the yards, and substituted
new, more powerful, and improved machinery. As the
modus opernndi of tanning is so well known it is
unnecessary to describe it, suffice to say, that they have
complete means and appliances to turn out from 300
to 400 finished sides per week, principally mill-belting,
harness, and shoe and sole leather.
For the present, the lighter description of fancy
leather, such as morocco, and other leather required by
the upholsterer, the coach-builder, or the book binder,
is not produced here, but, as a new splitting-machine
has been indented from England, this can be added to
their present large trade. Besides supplying the local
market with harness leather, they send large quantities
into Riverina ; almost all the boot, shoe, and sole leather
required for the large trade done in Sandhurst and the
surrounding district, is manufactured here, besides, there
are over 4000 sides annually shipped to London, which
meets with a ready sale, and commands the highest
price.
The old six-horse steam engine has been replaced
by one of the most recently-constructed and compact
eighteen-horse power horizontal engines. There is a
tubular boiler, so constructed as to burn spent tarn
this effecting a very large saving in firewood. The
machinery for grinding the bark is all of the most modern
pattern, the old slow-going coffee mill, for grinding bark,
has been superseded by the chopper and the disintegrator,
which makes 2400 revolutions in a minute, grinding


the bark into powder, thus getting the essence to act at
once, and shortening the period of tanning. Tanning
and currying is carried on in all its branches,. There is
a powerful striking, and also a powerful rolling machine,,
driven by steam, engaged to do the work ten times
more speedily and effectually than the old hand processes.
The works stand on ten acres of ground, the freehold
consisting of seventy acres, sixty acres of which are
used for a catchment area and the conservancy of water.
There are two large dams, with an unfailing supply,,
which is reticulated over all the works. The waste pro-
ducts are all profitably utilised, the hair being washed and
prepared for plasterers’ and upholsterers’ work ; from the
fleshings, oil and grease is obtained; the roundings of
the hides and pieces are made into glue, and the spent
lime and tan are sold to the vineyard proprietors, as
they make excellent manure for the vine-grower..
The divison of labour, system of working, and the
perfect economy displayed in each department, reflect
the highest credit on Mr. Abbott, under whose sole
and able management the trade has so largely and rapidly
increased. The total capital invested is £12,000, the
number of hands regularly employed is twenty-five,,
wages distributed yearly £2,000, and the cost of bark
used in the year, £2,000. The drive from Sandhurst
is interesting, and the situation of the works highly
picturesque, while, from the extent of the buildings, and
the numerous workmen’s cottages, the place resembles
a village.
Un returning to Sandhurst I visited their newly-
built, handsome, and commodious warehouse, erected


at the cost of £l,OOO, in Market square. Here there
is always kept on hand a large stock of leather, and
grindery, to supply local wants.
To demonstrate the superior quality of their products,
I may state that, at the late Melbourne International
Exhibition, they were awarded one second order of merit
for shoe leather, third order of merit for saddlery and
belt leather, and one order of merit for sole leather;
also a silver medal, at the Bendigo Industrial Exhibition
1879, for excellency in harness and shoe leather; another
silver medal and two gold medals from the Bendigo
Agricultural and Horticultural society, for their collec-.
tion of leather and mill-belting.
Messrs. Abbott also, carry on an extensive boot and.
shoe factory in the rear of their retail establishment*
Pall Mall, and they are the only firm using the newest
machinery for pegging and rivetting. Here they em-r.
ploy about thirty hands.


CHAPTER XVI.
SANDHURST FOUNDRIES.
BENDIGO being the premier and metropolitan
gold-reefing district of Victoria, requires a
very large amount of all descriptions of ma-
chinery, and, following the invariable rule of commerce,
that wherever there is a demand a supply will follow,
we have in our midst several first-class foundry estab-
lishments, and statistics show that there is over a
million-and-a-half sterling invested in mining plant
here, the deeper [working, the amalgamating of com-
panies, the replacing of worn-out or unsuitable ap-
pliances, with the wear and tear and repairs to machi-
nery, causing a large amount of foundry-work, while the
wages, in the aggregate, amount to a goodly sum.
Previous to 1856 we had no foundries, and a large
portion of our machinery required, up to 1862, was
made, either- in Castlemaine, by Vivian and Co, or
Horwood and Sen, or in Melbourne, by Fulton Brothers,
one of whom lost his life during the erection of the
Hercules company’s plant, on the Victoria reef, Long
Gully.
How changed all this now, as we not only have, for
the last fifteen years, been supplying all our own large
machinery, but outside and foreign orders also, as well
as executing large Government contracts for our rail-
ways. Horwood and Sons’ foundry, in Vine street, is the


widest-established here (1856), and it is said to he the
most complete plant in regard to extensive finishing
machinery. This firm have done a large business, and
at present are full of work, and are executing a large
Government contract for locomotive cylinders. Mr.
Horwood being absent I did not ask for particulars.
The Victoria Foundry, Golden Square, is a very
large and flourishing establishment. The present pro-
prietors are Messrs. Harkness and Co. This foundry
was commenced in 1852, by four practical workmen
Isaac Irwin, Andrew Espie, James Braddish, and'
Thomas Arundel, it being the second foundry started
on Bendigo, It began in a small way, in a slab
building, 50 ft by 16 ft. This was the time that steam-
puddling machinery had a brief trial, but, it not being
found to answer, was abandoned, at considerable loss.
The firm prospered, as Isaac Irwin was both clever and
popular. There have been several changes in the firm,
and in 1870 the firm consisted of Ruddock and
Harkness. During the Port Darwin rush this firm
made several crushing plants for that distant locality.
At the time of the mining mania rush, of 1871-72,
there was a large demand for mining machinery, and
this firm erected several large plants, their business
prospering and greatly increasing. When the collapse
set in, in 1878, Mr. Ruddock went out of the firm,
and Mr. Robert Lisle, of Sheepshead, joined Mr. Hark-
ness, and this is the partnership at present existing.
Owing to the temporary check given to the development
of the mines, the demand for mining machinery was
checked, and Mr. Harkness then struck out into a new


line, and went in heavily for Government contracting.
He has since supplied large quantities of rolling-stock
for our railways, one contract being for £24,000. These
contracts were- carried out to the satisfaction of all
parties. Owing- to these contracts the works had to be
considerably enlarged,, and now, with the manufacturing
sheds, occupy three acres of ground. They possess
extensive machinery, capable of doing any kind of
work. They have three steam-engines,, with an aggregate
of forty-horse power,, and the value of their plant is
£9OOO. They employ seventy hands, and distribute
£7,000 a year in wages. In addition, firewood costs
£4OO a year. This firm has erected many of the largest
mining plants on this gold-field, also both in and out of
the colony, and has executed, and is now executing
large orders for Mitchell’s rock-boring machinery. Mr.
Harkness asserts, from results already given, that this
will supersede all other drills. Mr. Mitchell, who is
engineer to the Catherine Eeef United Company,
Eaglehawk, is an ingenious mechanic, and has expended
a large amount of money in perfecting this patent, for
which he well deserves success. Messrs Harkness state
that they are full of orders, and that the year opens
With every promise of prosperity. They are so full of
work that they are erecting additional premises, 74 feet
by 40 feet.
The next large foundry on Sandhurst is that of
Messrs Roberts and Sons, in Wills street. This has
been a very large, busy, and prosperous place for years
domg a large amount of wort. They have erected many
large crushing plants, and have executed several large


Government contracts in connection with the railways,,
making turn-tables, water-tanks, etc. They are now-
making complete steam-engines, with exception of the
shafting, being at the present time so full of work and
so busy, that Mr. Roberts, senr., could not spare the
time to give detailed particulars. This does not so.
much matter, as the description of the Victoria Foun-
dry will, in a degree, fit in here. It is a great pity
that they are so circumscribed in ground. This fine
establishment has grown to its present large dimensions.
from a small place, with a very small steam hammer.
Lastly, there is the Central Foundry, in Iron Bark,
where a large trade has been done, but, owing to the
ill health of Mr. Osborne, I could not get particulars.
Finally, Mr, W. H. Mitchell, lately of the Central,
Foundry, has joined Mr. Hay, the agricultural imple-
ment maker, of Elizabeth-street, Melbourne, and they
have opened a factory in Bridge street, so that, in the
coming time, all farming wants will be locally supplied.
At the present time, Mr. Leslie, of Marong, is making
champion ploughs, thus it well be seen that our progress,
in making machinery is highly satisfactory.


CONCLUSION.
gIS drawing these papers to a conclusion, it may
not be without point, interest, and benefit to
the progress of our young nation, to briefly
allude to the rapid strides science has been making
during the last half century, thus given all nations an
onward, and upward impetus, in the march of life, and
thereby peculiarly favoring the advance of civilisation
in this young and highly-favoured country. How
immeasurably superior are the opportunities of the young
people of the day to what they were in my young days;
why, we were then, comparatively, little better than
Goths and Yandals ; ours was a grim, and matter-of-
fact life ; no joyous and grateful existence like that the
youth of the present time may delight in. From Monday
morning, until Saturday night, was one unceasing grind ;
no eight-hours labor ; nay, we were lucky if we escaped
out of the collar under twelve hours, with an intermission
of an hour for meals, and, oh, sacre ! if such a thing
as a Wednesday half-holiday had been mooted, the
heavens would have fallen ; so it will be seen that we had
no time for either recreation or improvement; the only
advantage this gave us was that it taught us the virtue
of Spartan endurance, and to be content, without being
devotees of pleasure. Thus we were enabled to go out
into the world as pioneers of new states, and make the


rough places smooth for the good, easy, pleasure-loving"'
people of the present day.
Within the last fifty years the British Association
saw the light, and, during- this time, its learned savants
have devoted loving labour for the purpose of dis-
seminating information, which has materially amelio-
rated the condition of mankind. It has given us a
Doctor Tindall at home, a Professor Ellery to Victoria,
and an Edison to America. It has given us the
Telegraph, by which we circle the world with an iron
band, and, as Ariel says, “ I drink the air before me,
and return, or e’er your pulse beat twice thus uniting
all nations in the bonds of amity and peace. Science
almost controls the elements, foretelling the storm, the
cyclone, or the tornado, so that we can safely run under
bare poles. Science has extirpated, or mitigated
disease, it has given us the Sewing Machine, and nu-
merous other labor-saving appliances ; it has given us
the Telephone; look what it has achieved in Electricity !
In fact, there is no knowing what its further beneficent
sway may be developed to. From the Electric Con-
gress, now sitting at Paris, we lately read how light-
ning can be bottled and used as motive-power, as in
running a railway train by it, or for propelling ships, and
we shortly hope to be Icarus-like, and fly by its aid.
The electric light is gradually superseding gas ;we can
cook by it, and it is being made to subserve the growth
of plants and flowers.
It will be interesting to read what I will now quote
from a work written by Lord Bulwer Lytton, about
fifteen years since, in one of his latest works “ The


doming Race.” This, at the time it was written, was
supposed to be the hallucinations of a mystic, visionary
dreamer, and never to be available for practical applica-
tion ; how mistaken were the critics of the day stern
facts and realities now show. Lord Lytton, in speaking
of the permeating fluid, the electric current, which the
coming race called “ Yirl,” says: “ This fluid is capable
of being raised and disciplined into the mightiest agency
over all forms of matter, animate, or inanimate ; it can
destroy like a flash of lightning, yet, differently applied,
it can replenish, and invigorate life, heal and preserve.
On it they chiefly rely for the cure of disease, or rather,
for the enabling the physical organization to re-establish
the due equilibrium of its natural powers, and thereby
to cure itself; by this agency they rend a way through
the most solid substances, and open valleys for culture
through the rocks of their subterranean wildernesses.;
from it they extract the light which supplies their lamps,
finding it steadier, softer, and healthier, than the other
inflammable materials they had formerly used.” It goes
on further, and says, of this powerful agent, “ That it
was chiefly remarkable for its influence upon social
polity, as it brought the art of destruction to such per-
fection that all wars had to cease. It taught them
that, even in politics, republican writers had agreed
that a benevolent autocracy would insure the best ad-
ministration if there were any guarantees for its con-
tinuance, or against the gradual abuse of the powers
accorded to it. These people had a pithy saying, ‘no
happiness without order, no order without authority,
no authority without unity;’ happiness is the end at


which they aim, not as the excitement of the moment,
but as the prevailing condition of their entire existence;
and regard for the happiness of each other is evinced
by the exquisite amenity of their manners. They held
that, ‘ the primary condition of mortal happiness con-
sists in the extinction of that strife and competition
between individuals, which, no matter what form of
government is adopted, renders the many subordinate
to the few, destroys real liberty of the individual what-
ever may be the nominal liberty of the state, and annuls
that calm of existence Without which felicity, mental
or bodily, cannot be obtained a life gladdened by the
untrammelled interchange of gentle affection, in which
‘ the moral atmosphere utterly kills hate, and vengance,
and strife, and rivalry/ in fact, ‘ The Coming Race *
are to be a wonderful race and bound to sUpplant all
the inferior faces now existing.
I wonder if such a descriptive stats of manners, and
of a high standard of excellency, could be made to
dove-tail into and fit oUr clever coming race of Young
Australians! Why not? Now, as we have ample
space and verge enough, exploration having dissipated
the terrors of the dread interior, uncounted millions of
acres of good land have been discovered, suitable for
man and beast, so that Australia, in the good time
coming, will absorb tens of thousands of the struggling
poor in the old country, and Australia, with her wool,
and her frozen meat, will clothe and feed all Europe,
and, although we have not the roar of the cataracts, nor
the loud murmuring of the matchless rivers of America,
We will have our thousands of miles of iron roads from


coast to coast of our great island-continent. Then, our
petty, disintegrated states, will be federated into a great
and harmonious nation, and, although Victoria is the
smallest, in ares, of all the Australian states, it (like
Athens, which had only twenty thousand free citizens,
and was regarded by the mightiest nations as a supreme
guide), ought to lead the way in clearing off all
-obstacles to Federation, as, although we are the least,
we are the wealthiest, most prosperous, and most
productive.
The difficulties attending Federation, although great,
are not insurmountable, and it is quite possible to bring
them within the domain of practical politics. Despite the
past differences between the Southern and the Northern
States (caused by slavery), America would not have
been the powerful nation she now is if she had not had
the power of federating new States as they were reclaimed
from the wilderness, and joined on to the original thir-
teen States ; and Free Trade and Protection, as respec-
tively adopted by the different States, does not hinder
America’s onward progress. Free Trade in Sydney,
and Protection in Victoria, should not be a barrier to
Australian Federation.
Notwithstanding the few hitches and difficulties
that have attended the Canadian Grand Dominion,
Federation is acknowledged to be a grand success.
Lord Dufferin, who effected that, is now ambassador
at Constantinople. When our present governor’s time
is up, he should replace him. He is a king among
his fellows, and he ought to have full power to make
a new distribution of our boundaries. What an anomaly


it IS to see the golden colony of Victoria so circumscribed,
while Queensland, South Australia, and Western Aus-
tralia, have such a vast and almost boundless extent of
land, which, under existing circumstances, cannot be
utilised for centuries to come. Once the question of
boundaries is adjusted, Lord Dufferin would soon carry
out an equitable Federation, and the Australian
dominion, including iNew Zealand, and the Pacific
Islands, would make a new and a greater Britain,
another appanage for a Scion of Royalty. Prince
Leopold, who is said to be both, learned and good,
would make a suitable vice-regal governor, and thus
change our silken ties into hooks of steel, to grapple
more securely to our dear old mother, England. Then,
all foolish opposition to immigration, on the part of
our artisans, would cease, as little care would be re-
quired to prevent the pressure of population in such a
vast productive domain. Then, we should be able to
receive countless thousands of the suffering poor from
home ; and this should be an Imperial Government
emigration, which would relieve all misery, destitution,
discontent, and over-crowding in the mother country.
This should be a charge on the Imperial Exchequer,
and is a far more urgent and imperative one than giving
the West Indian planters twenty millions to free black
slavery, whereas white slavery, at home, is worse in a
thousand decrees.
Federation accomplished, and a largely increased
population established here, the distance from our nor-
thern coast to Asia being so short, we should soon have
the civilization of the West returned to its cradle in the


East. Then the waste and the desolate places there will
rejoice and blossom like the rose, our children’s children
will see it and bless God. Then—
« Holy, Holy, Holy ! Lord, Hod Almighty,
All Thy works shall praise Thy name
In earth, and sky, and sea.”
finis.


Sandhurst:
Burrows and Co., Printers and Publishers,
14, Bull Street.








