

.
'
/
(
.


cS fC y
/ H
ceo 5f>35
E. FRANKLIN TREGASKIS


'
'
.
.
,
■
'
- y T*" '
, ,
.




-v!
Ik jBi-x sv,
\ v = / r ' tk VV / -* .
\ / f v ■- \ v V \v - _ _ _: ; »> -.
5t "" • f ' MAT. ■


ANTA CLAUS'
MESSAGE:
A CHRISTMAS STORY
FRANKLIN TREGASKIS
AUTHOR OF
"BOYSIE IN THE BUSH,"
"SANTA CLAUS' MESSAGE"
ETC.
COPYRIGHT
1921
PRINTED BY T. J. HIGHAM
BUCKBURN, VICTORIA
AUSTRALIA


Fro 77i


Santa Claus' :
H Christmas ©tor?.
TWENTY-FOOT was an almost
deserted mining camp, and pre-
sented the desolate appearance of
such localities: A wide valley,
honeycombed by old workings, and strewn
with debris. On one side stretched miles
of barren rang'es, denuded of heavy trees,
which had been felled to feed the boilers
and timber the underground workings
when some of the quartz reefs had been
developed, after the alluvial gold had been
won. These also had petered out. On
the other side of the valley were farms,
for here rich volcanic soil overlay the
Silurian formation. Consequently, there
was still a small population in the dis-
trict, which accounted for the survival of


a place of worship, a State school, general
store, blacksmith's shop, and, on a side
road, a coffee palace. There were only
two men here now seeking gold, or
fossicking, as it is called. One was a relic
of the sixties, known behind his back as
Bushranger Bill, or 8.8., who, needless
to say, had never followed that occupa-
tion, and probably, had he visited the
barber (who was also the local black-
smith) more regularly, would never have
been so designated. The second fossicker
was a man of different stamp. With his
family, he lived about a mile above the
township, at the head of the gully, in a
comfortable, though small, cottage, sur-
rounded by a garden. He had brought his
young wife here in the early seventies,
just after the volcanic land had been made
available for selection, but too late to
secure a holding, and here he had re-
mained, digging, with varying results.
When there was enough rain, he sluiced
the old workings, and, with the aid of one


of the defunct companies' dams, could
win gold during several months of the
year. During the dry spells lie sought old
tailings and headings among the
abandoned holes, and had them carted to
the sluice boxes. It was a precarious
existence (I use the word purposely).
Still, to him, the life presented a certain
fascination, and occasional "Windfalls"
lured him on.
At the time of which I write, funds were
very low—in fact, there were none. It
had been a dry winter, the wash dirt put
through was poor, and only a portion had
been treated, for Hampton had not been
able to sluice since August, and now, near
the end of December, rain looked as far
off as ever. Troubles seldom come
singly. The local storekeeper had died
recently, and his successor, who decided
to run the business on city lines, dis-
couraged long* credit. Formerly, the
family had the necessaries of life assured,
for the old storekeeper knew that when


CLAUS' MESSAGE
the dirt paid, his account had been
squared ; but this stranger had intimated
that unless a payment was forthcoming
the account would be closed. There were
now three children. The eldest, about ten
years, was named Hope. Some of the
schoolgirls, whose parents were in com-
fortable circumstances, sometimes called
her "The folorn Hope"—but this is
Christmas time; we will not recall slights
nor unkindness now. The other two were
twins —Grace and Joy. The eldest child
was robust and dark, like her father; the
twins were fair, and resembled the mother,
but had short golden curls, like spiral
springs. They were about seven years
old.
It was within a few days of Christmas,
and the parents were talking over ways
and means. "We must have some extra
things for the children," the mother said.
She had an anxious, but not unhappy, ex-
pression. Her life for years had been one
long struggle to make ends meet. There


had always been sufficient food, though of
the plainest, sometimes even making a
meal of goat's milk and potatoes. At
times, for days their larder knew no
butcher's meat, when her husband chanced
to shoot a rabbit or other game. It was
providing clothes and shoes for the chil-
dren which was the great burden, so that
she could send them suitably clad to
school. What had gone to her heart most
was keeping Hope, at times, from Sunday
school, because of her shabby boots.
How often had she washed and ironed the
children's clothes, and mended their much-
worn socks, after the little ones were
asleep! Still, through it all, she was not
unhappy. "I've these miniatures of my
grandparents, in a gold frame. It could
be sold for a good sum. Mr. Stowman
would buy it at any time. Leave that at
the store for security, and take the letter,
too, stating its value. Mr. Douglas does
not know us yet."
The husband pressed his hands over his


face. His voice, though strained, was
gentle.
"I never expected to bring you to this,
Jessie. We should have left this life
long ago, but those rich patches in the
old workings drew me on. This must
end it. When there is water enough, and
I've cleaned up, I'll take a position in
Sydney."
"I've been very happy here, more so
than many of my companions in the old
life. I realise this when reading between
the lines of their letters," replied the wife.
So the miniatures found their way into
the Douglas safe, and the good business
man said, in his most oily manner: "Of
course, we respect your word, Mr. Hamp-
ton, and, looking over the old ledgers, I
find you have always paid up. Still, you
won't object to my getting confirmation
of Mr. Stowman's letter? Business is
business, you know.
8.8. had visited the "Corfie Palis," as
the sign announced it, a place which much


belied its name, for it did not resemble
a palace in any land. It was built of gal-
vanised iron and stringy bark, and coffee
was never seen on the premises. There
was a tradition that a traveller could pro-
cure a cup of tea, if he waited long
enough. They certainly dispensed hop
beer, and other liquid refreshment.
8.8. was on his way home (it was two
days before Christmas), and sat down to
rest on an old red gum log on the hill-
side, which had proved too tough to split,
and too heavy to cart away. Many a
camp fire had been lighted against it, in
years gone by. Now the bracken fern
provided, on one side, a soft bed, and
some dogwood scrub, a shield. As this
looked inviting, 8.8. sought repose.
It was now evening. The lingering-
rays of the sun streaming over the
western hills made even the score-lined
gullies and unsightly mullock heaps, with
their undergrowth fringes of green, things
of beauty. Ihe three children were seek-


ing a stray goat, and chanced to sit on the
old log to rest. "We are going to have a
lovely Christmas," said Joy; "roast beef
and plum pudding, and almonds and
raisins."
8.8. thought he heard voices. He had
heard and seen many strange things in
the bush, after drinking hop beer and
other beverages at the coffee palace.
"I think I'd rather do without them,"
replied Hope, who was sedate beyond her
years. "Perhaps I should not tell you
that mother sold those pictures in the
gold frame to buy us clothes and things."
"Of course, pictures are very pretty,"
assented Joy, "but something nice to eat is
much better; and they are real raisins,
too, like mother used to have in England
—not the sort you put in puddings, but
hanging on stalks; and the almonds are
a lot nicer than the nuts we get out of
jam."
"I wonder what Santa Clans will bring
us this year?" said Grace.


"My sock's not very big," remarked
Joy; "I'd like to hang up a sugar bag,
only it would look greedy."
Joy like da lot, poor child!
Oh! you girls whose every wish has
been granted, whose every fancy has been
gratified, have you any thought for your
poorer sisters, whose lives are so re-
stricted, yet they are thankful for so little,
and through it all are good and happy?
We hope so!
The children ran off, chasing each other
round the deserted holes and heaps. 8.8.
sat up and looked after them. Having
worked as a "hatter"* for so many years,
he had contracted the habit of voicing his
thoughts. "Poor little beggars! And the
old man is too proud to take a fiver!"
8.8. always had gold. He was still
watching the children fading in the dis-
tance, when he struck his hands together.
"I've got it! I'll salt his claim. He'll
A gold digger who works by himself.


never find out its Bendigo gold. He
doesn't know the game."
There is an unwritten law, strictly
observed among the diggers, that no man
shall go down the shaft of another, with-
out invitation; and to do so at night dur-
ing the "rushes" was carrying one's life
in one's hand; and 8.8. was aware of this.
Just after midnight 8.8., dressed in a
digger's woollen jumper, which hung
down to his knees, a woollen mufifler right
up to his chin, and a felt hat, with a crown
pushed up like a cone, appeared about a
quarter of a mile from Hampton's home.
There was a slight surface depression
here, which seemed to indicate a "gutter''
below. Several holes had been sunk
along it years before, without payable
results. 8.8., who was an authority, had
told Mr. Hampton that he thought the old
workings were not worth spending time
on.
8.8. looked warily round, on emerging
from the scrub, then cautiously ap-


proached, and, after a casual glance at the
windlass, seized the rope and disappeared.
The shaft was only about 18 feet deep. A
drive ran in for some distance from each
end along the gutter. 8.8. produced a
candle, and examined the workings, then
drew a tin containing gold dust from his
pocket. He paused, again studied the
strata and slate underfoot, then tested it
with a pick. Now, 8.8. was a geologist—
of a sort. He had not learned the science
by correspondence, but by working on
most of the alluvial fields in the "rush"
days. The candle burned down almost to
the clay, as he hesitated. Then he re-
marked: "False bottom, like the Mclvor
lead," and returned the gold to his pocket.
Taking a length of broken board, he wrote
on it with a piece of pipe-clay, and drove
the sharp end into the floor, at the
entrance to one of the drives, remarking :
o
"If he gets nothing out of it, I'll salt his
show later." • Although he could read
print, 8.8. did not profess to be able to


write —in fact, he used to sign for his
miner's right with a cross—so the spell-
ing presented difficulties, in particular the
word "father."
Although 8.8. believed his nocturnal
visit had been unobserved, he was
mistaken, for a small white-robed figure
had been standing at a window, looking
toward the ranges, just made discernable
by the rising moon. She noticed someone
emerge from the saplings, and approach
the claim. Hope neither spoke nor moved,
but gazed, spell-bound. Yes, it was
Santa Claus! She could see the hoar frost
sparkling all over him. (In the dryest
season, at that altitude, there is a heavy
dew, so on every minute hair of the
digger's clothes, and every hair of his
whiskers, glistened a particle of moisture.)
Strange he should come a night too soon,
and not to the house, she thought, as
8.8. disappeared down the shaft. Her
eyes never left the spot. Then, after what
seemed a long time, the figure reappeared,


crossed the flat, and was enveloped in the
foliage. But, in the broad light of day,
Hope was not quite sure that the whole
occurrence was not a dream, so, being a
reserved child, she held her peace.
During breakfast the father said: 'TU
not go to work to-day, as there are
several things about the place that require
seeing to. I'll just bring home the tools
and windlass rope."
"Couldn't we get them for you?" en-
quired Hope.
"Be careful of the twins, then, and on
your return you can help me with the
pudding," said the mother.
"I'll go down the shaft and put the
tools in the bucket, one at a time, and
you two can wind them up. Mind you
both don't let go the handles at the same
time," cautioned Hope.
Many a shaft had she descended, tor,
by swinging the rope from side to side,
she could reach the footholes made in
either side of the shaft, with her toes, but


A Q X M
SANTA CLAUS' MESSAGE
not without the aid of the rope. When
her eyes became accustomed to the sub-
dued light, she saw the message:
So it was not a dream, after all. She
was far from an excitable child, but her
heart beat faster, as she determined to
test the value of the message. She
quickly ascended, and lowered the twins,
and then set to work, meanwhile telling
her sisters of the visitor.
"Is that the way to spell it?" enquired
Grace.
"We must not make remarks about kind
friends," admonished Hope. "Santa
Claus is very, very old, and perhaps they
spelled that way when he was a boy in
the Reindeer country."


"Of course," agreed Joy. "Did you see
the sledge and reindeer?"
"No; I think he must have left them
on the back track," she replied.
"Perhaps he got bogged. Pointer's
father did last winter," put in Joy.
"Not this weather," said Grace.
"Besides, reindeers are very strong.
Think what big horns they have."
"Well, I expect he just put on their
nosebags, with moss in them, and gave
them a rest. I'm sure he is a kind man,
for he loves children, and I believe he put
some gold here for us to buy things for
mother. Now you can tell that horrid
Mabel that you have seen Santa Clans.
She said it was all made up." This from
Joy.
The slate floor was only a couple of
inches in depth ; then came some rubble
"headings." These Hope put carefully
aside. Then came the wash dirt. She
understood enough of the art to seek here
for the gold, so, taking a double handful,


SANTA CLAUS' MESSAGE
and spreading it on the notice board, she
examined it, in the lightest position, under
the shaft. Joy was the first to cry
"nugget." The children had often seen
such when the father had been "cleaning
up" the sluice boxes. As they spread and
re-spread the wash, each particle of gold
was deposited in a pannikin. Just as the
first lot of wash was being scraped into
the bucket, a voice called out: "Below,
there! Are you stealing your father's
gold? I'm coming down."
"We don't want you! Go away!"
shouted Hope. Then, putting the
pannikin in the hole she had dug, she
whispered to the twins: "Go and sit
there, and don't move for anything."
"I'm not frightened of girls. I'm com-
ing down, anyway." The speaker, Master
Pierpoint, a boy of about twelve, evidently
led the simple life, judging by his apparel,
which consisted of a striped blue cotton
shirt, rather small, cut-down moleskin


pants, much too large, and one hayband
suspender.
"Now, Pointer, if you do I'll hit you
with this board, so there."
A body obstructed the light, then two
bare legs appeared overhead. Hope made
two vigorous blows with the board.
There was a yell, "You've broken my
little toe," followed by several more yells
as the legs rapidly vanished. "You spite-
ful, black-eyed, turned-up-nose native cat!
Oh, my toe! I'll get square with you, and
you two grinning, curley-headed little
bandicoots." Pointer's natural history
must have received a bump, also.
On landing, he took the peg out of the
windlass, revolved the barrel, so that the
rope ran out and fell down the shaft.
"Now you can stop down there until you
starve," he yelled down to them, and
limped away.
"I'll tell father what he called us," said
Grace, who was sensitive. "We can't
help our hair being curly. And how are


we to get up, Hope? Daddy will come for
us, and we must not tell tales unless he
asks us about the rope. Boys are all like
that; they can't help it."
"I'm glad I won't grow up into a boy ;
aren't you, Grace?" said Joy, with fervor.
"While we are waiting for father we
will pick out all the gold we can," said
Hope."
So they set to work, unmindful of the
passage of time.
"This is all our gold, because we found
it," said Hope; and we will give it all to
mother, just as father does, except what
we keep to buy them presents. Now, each
choose. Joy first, because she is the
youngest."
It is remarkable the capital Joy made
out of such a short period. She never
allowed anyone to overlook the fact.
"I'll choose a new frying pan, because
ours has a crack in it, and, if I can have
two 'goes,' a side of bacon."
"I'll buy a strip of carpet for mother's


bedside, and two glass dishes to put jam
in, instead of saucers," said Grace.
"I'll get her a piano to play on and
teach us, and a silk dress like Airs.
Brown's, only more rustley," chose Hope.
And Daddy, we will buy him a box full of
old books; he likes the smellie sort, with-
out pictures in them."
"I think we should buy him something
nice to eat; chocolates and dates; they
smell so nice," said Joy.
"No!" replied Hope, with decision;
"men don't care what they have to eat as
long as there is enough of it." Joy
heaved a sigh. "Glad I'm not going to be
a man. \\ ill we be allowed to buy any-
thing for ourselves?"
"Certainly not! Nice people don't buy
themselves presents." Joy heave 1
another long-drawn sigh.
They were so engrossed in picking out
small nuggets, from the size of irregular
peas to large pins' heads, that their
father's voice, "Below there," quite


startled them. "All's well," replied Hope;
"I could not climb up."
"Your mother became anxious. Nice
diggers you'll make, letting your rope
free," he said, as he descended by the foot
holes. "We have a Christmas present for
mother," said Hope. "Just feel the
weight," as she held a half-filled pannikin
toward him. At first he could not see
clearly in the subdued light, for the day
was cloudy, and most of the particles of
gold were covered with clay. Still, a few
shone brightly. Then all the blood
seemed to rush to his heart, then surge
back again, and throb at his temples. He
leaned against the wall, and for a few
seconds gasped for breath and could not
see clearly. Had the dreams of years come
true? Had success crowned his efforts at
last? Still, he said never a word.
Hope, aided by Joy, told the story.
"And this is the board, Daddy, with the
writing on it." He had not touched the
pannikin, but examined the board care-


fully; there was nothing visible. He pro-
duced a candle and matches from a tin
box; not a sign of a letter. At first, while
the children were speaking, he thought it
might have been 8.8., but recollected that
he could not write. No! It must have
been a dream, and that conclusion was
adhered to.
"I think it was God sent him, because
mother is so good," said Grace, who was
devout.
"I believe He did," replied the father,
earnestly.
"Now, children, you must hurry home
and help your mother.''
"Oh ! do 'wind' us up," requested Toy.
It would have been much quicker to have
carried each up on his back, but he made
a large loop at one end of the rope,
climbed up, and attached the other end to
the windlass. Then, Hope put Joy first—
being the younger—into the loop, tucked
her clothes under her, and the father
slowly 'wound' her up. As he landed


each twin, he looked into her eyes and
said, "Daddy's girl," and each daddy's girl
bored her curly head into his chest, as
evidence of her affection. Those two
were doubly dear to their parents; for
some time previously when that scourge,
diphtheria, swept through the district, it
carried their little brother in its train, and
for many anxious days the parents were
afraid that the twins would follow, and
they were so like their mother. With
the assistance of the rope, Hope soon
appeared.
"Now, not a word to your mother until
dinner time. Come and call me, and bring
the barrow and two sugar bags for the
wash dirt in the bucket."
Here in parentheses we state : (Although
the false bottom ran for some distance
along the lead, the rest of the wash was
scarcely worth sluicing.) 8.8. had uncon-
sciously driven in the board just over a
rich pocket. Still there was gold enough
to buy a grazing farm on the rich volcanic


land, and when the rains came in Feb-
ruary and March, with B.B's. assistance,
the accumulated wash was sluiced, and the
returns provided funds to purchase stock.
8.8. would not accept wages, but the
lease of the dam was transferred to him.
and he had the use of the races and sluice
boxes; but he would pay rent for the
cottage, so every fortnight he called at
the farm, and placed two shillings on the
kitchen table.
The last time I heard from there, the
family were living in comfort, and 8.8.
—well, he was the same old 8.8. Now
we must return.
There was one member of this family
who never forgot that Christmas morning,
who laid and watched the daylight break
over the eastern mountains, and listened
to the magpies welcoming the coming day.
Gradually the sun appeared, his shading
beams turning every dewdrop on leaf and
fern into a matchless gem. Even the un-
sightly "mullock" heaps shared in the


splendour, and reflected hues of purple
and of gold as if kind nature, forgiving:
' * o o
man's wantoness, were endeavouring to
"cover transgressions with love," and as
the children, in tune with the Angelic
Choir on this glad Christmas morning,
chanted
"Hark! the Herald Angels sing,
Glad tidings of our New-Born King."
it found an echo in each grateful heart,
but with a sweeter melody in the mother's,
as she realised that the struggle to pro-
vide for her little brood was at an end.
And I trust the reader and the writer will
hear that same glad song, and each heart
will echo the message,
"On earth peace, goodwill to men."


♦
.
.
.
»
.
.
