





SARA NAPOGI
(DAY BY DAY.)
Translated by REV. OSCAR MICHELSEN.
IN THE LANGUAGES OF
TONGOA, NEW HEBRIDES,
AND ENGLISH.
Puncbin:
J. Wilkie & Co., Printers and Publishers, Princes Street.




SARA NAPOGI
JANUARY 1
Tnga tape lua sara naleo maclaga,
doro e ega toko, go namarinaleosaana
waina e puluti kasua ki-gida, go tnga
popo-soki sava na-sava-pivikapaana, waina
e pei tea toroana e doko ki vea ki-gida (go
tnga) to 1010 paki Yesu.
Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which
doth closely cling to us, and let us run with patience
the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus. —
Hebrews xii., 1, 2.
E doro nalegaana vaou e doko na-
golegu e pei nasamasamaana paki Supe
Mgida, euga lapa punusi-a, po rnatakn,
go euga wo pavatu Yehova.
He hath put a new song in my mouth, even
praise unto our God; many shall see it, and fear
and shall trust in the Loan.—Psalm xl., 3.


Pa kasua po piviari pia; pa ta mataku,
go nigo pa ta pilaki: nalakena Yehova
Supe anigo e sikoti ko paki sara tokora
waina pa vaki asa pano.
Be strong and of a good courage; be not
affrighted, neither be thou dismayed : for the Loan
thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.—
Joshua i., 9.
Supe waia e pei Supe anigida paki
ragi vatoko : nae ega vei tea maraki-gida
(sara ragi) pa-pa-pa namateana.
This God is our God for ever and ever; he will
be our guide unto death.—Psalm xlviii., 14.
Ku ko da umai paki namaromaroana
go paumaso, waina Yehova Supe anigo e
dua mu asa.
Ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the
inheritance which the Loan thy God giveth you.—
Deuteronomy xii., 9.


Naata waina e doko malo ni paia ki
Tea ni Elagi man ego wo toko melu ni Tea
Kasua man.
He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most
High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.
—Psalm xci., 1.
Dakiusi waina nakoroatelagi maga e
paki lagi liu maramana, napua aginau
maga ma e liu napua animu maga, go
namidodoaana aginau maga e liu nami-
dodoaana animu maga.
As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are
my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts
than your thoughts.—lsaiah lv., 9.
Tea maga waina eu atae nagisama
euga wo pavatu ako; nalakena nigo,
Yehova, ku da doropusi tea maga waina
eu laga ako eu madoko.
They that know Thy name will put their trust
in Thee; for Thou, Loan, hast not forsaken them
that seek Thee. —Psalm ix., 10.


Sei e mari atae noa, kinau a (dumagu)
mari napopogu e pia, a dautau ki namari-
nalosaana aginau ?
Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I
am pure from my sin ?—Proverbs xx., 9.
Yehova e pitua ki namanumatuaana ;
naataeana go namidoakiataeana e melu
nagolena umai.
The Loed giveth wisdom; out of his mouth
eometh knowledge and understanding.—Proverbs
ii., 6.
Tuga lo usiui po mari dogo napua
anigida maga, go tuga moro dumagida
doa-gida paki Yehova. Tuga tape dakati
napopogida ma narugida paki Supe waina
e doko nakoroatelagi.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again
to the Loed.
Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto
God in the heavens. —Lamentations hi., 40, 41.


Kuga tumamu midoaki potae mu ku
mate paki namarinaleosaana, ma ku mauri
paki Supe doko Kristo Yesu doko.
Reckon ye yourselves to be dead unto sin, but
alive unto God in Christ Jesus. —Romans vi., 11.
Yehova e pe ta tavagi nasuma tea
maga waina eu posiwosi asa eu pe wosi-
wosi moli: Yehova e pe ta lo parati ki
natokoana tea 10-goro e pe leleo moli.
Except the Loud build the house, they labour in
vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city the
watchman waketh in vain.—Psalm cxxvii., 1.
Yehova e pei nakasuaana go taleva
aginau; napopogu e pavatu asa go a pei
tea silaeana : nalakena wanagoe napopogu
e laelaea lapalapa; go aga samani a ki
nalegaana aginau.
The Loud is my strength and my shield; my
heart hath trusted in Him and I am helped : there-
fore my heart greatly rejoices, and with my song will
I praise Him.—Psalm xxviii., 7.


Yehova ega wo dua natamoli aneana
nakasnaana;
Yehova ega wo sau pia ki natamoli
aneana dua-ra natamateana.
The Lobd will give strength unto his people;
the Lobd will bless his people with peace. —Psalm
xxix., 11.
Kuga 1010 paki-nau, go kuga vei tea
moutiana, sara namata pagona ni mara-
mana: nalakena kinau a pei Supe, go tea
pota e dika.
Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of
the earth : tor I am God, and there is none else.—
Isaiah xlv., 22.
Namauriana animu e pei nasava ?
Nalakena ku pei toro sikai, waina e pisi-
goro ragi kiki, go e moro nunu pano.
What is your life? For ye are a vapour, that
appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away.
—James iv., 14.


Nigo pa ta mataku, nalakena kinan a
sikoti ko; pa ta maga pa, nalakena kinan
a pei Snpe anigo. Kinan aga meri ko pa
kasua ; io, aga wo silae ko; io, kinan aga
wo silae ko sake ki naru ni matua ni
namarinaleoleanaana aginan.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not
dismayed, for lam thy God. I will strengthen thee;
yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with
the right hand of my righteousness.—lsaiah xli., 10.
Kinan a pei Yehova Snpe anigo, Tea
Tapu ni Israel, tea manman anigo . . .
Kinan, io, kinan a pei Yehova; go tea
manman pota e dika, kinan masikinau.
I am the Loan thy God, the Holy One of Israel,
thy Saviour ... I, even 1, am the Loan; and
beside me there is no Saviour.—lsaiah xliii., 3, 11.
Kn da atae napatoko-mn e pei tempel
ki Natana Tapn waina e doko mu doko ?
Know ye not that your body is the temple of the
Holy Ghost, which is in you ? 1 Corinthians, yi., 19.


Sei e pataka ni naleo maga waia ? a
mart atae mari sara naleo nalakena nae
waina e mari an a casua.
Who is sufficient for all these things?—
2 Corinthians, ii., 16.
I can do all things through Him that
strengtheneth me.—Philippians iv., 13.
Nalakena e one asa one naga tnga
mama sna pei tea mari-pakasakiana narae
ni toko navasapotaeana ki Kristo, naga sara
natamoli euga tape naleo maga waina en
pei tea mariana napatokona, pataka ni tea
waina e mari a, e pe vei tea wia kita tea
sa.
For we must all be made manifest before the
judgment seat of Christ, that each may receive the
things done in the body, according to what he hath
done, whether (it be) good or bad. —2 Corinthians
v., 10.
Aga midoaki nsiusi navasapiseikiana
maga anigo.
Nanoasokisokiana anigo maga ma e
pei nalaelaeaana aginau go notamoli pasa
aginan maga.
I will meditate in thy precepts.—Psalm cxix., 15.
Thy testimonies also are my delight (and) the
men of my counsel. —Psalm cxix., 24.


Nimu waina ku matau ki nagisagu elo
ni namarinaleoleanaana ega wo manimu
sake, go namaripauriana e doko navaruna
maga.
Unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise, with healing in His wings.—
Malaohi iv., 2,
A da malieri nardgorogoana wia,
nalakena waia e pei nakasiiaana ki Supe
paki namoutiana ki sara (natamoli) waina
en saralomau.
lam not ashamed of the Gospel: for it is the
power of God unto salvation to every one that
believeth. —Romans i., 16.
Nimu seara ku pe tika namanuma-
tuaana e pia ega tatago paki Supe, waina
e pitua ligaliga, ma e da pasa te navatuna
asa, go ega wo pei tea vituakiana paki nia.
If any of you laeketh wisdom let him ask of
God, who giveth to all liberally and upbraideth not;
and it shall be given him. —James i., o.


Pa mari navasaana ni nagolegu go
namidoakiusinsiana ni napopogu ega vei
tea citafnatakiana naraema, 0 Yehova,
vatnlaketoko aginan go tea taulua au.
Let the words of my mouth and the meditation
of my heart be acceptable in Thy sight, 0 Loan, my
Book and my Redeemer.—Psalm xix., 14.
Pa mari tea maga waina eu dodumi
a euga takiusi elo, ragi waina e dave pano
nakasuaana aneana.
Let them that love Him be as the Sun, when he
goeth forth in his might.—Judges v., 31.
(E pia) sara natafnoli ega rogo fnara-
verave, ega vnrasa pasa, ega vurasa maeto:
nalekena namaetoana ki natafnoli e da
posi namarinaleoleanaana ki Supe.
Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak,
slow to wrath: for the wrath of man worketh not
the righteousness of God.—James i., 19, 20.


Te natamoli e mari sa doro te lake
tano pota ma tea waina e pel tea doro-
suaana, waina e pei Yesu Kristo.
Other foundation can no man lay than that
which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. —1 Corinthians,
iii., 11.
Yehova, malipogi pa wo dogo nada-
leogu: malipogi aga wo tawonaki doro
natapasavasaana aginau naraema, go aga
wo do logoro.
O Lokd, in the morning shalt Thou hear my
voice; in the morning will I order my prayer unto
Thee, and I will keep watch.—Psalms v., 3.


FEBRUARY 1
Naata waina e pavatn nasogolapaana
aneana ega wo dowo: ma tea leana ega wo
dapanupanu dakinsi naulu nakau mala-
kesa.
He that trusteth in his riches shall fall, but the
righteous shall flourish as the green leaf. —Proverbs
xi., 28.
Tagona sikai e doko waina eu dumada
punusi ra eu leana, ma eu (ko) da pei tea
saruweana ki naloa adeara.
There is a generation that are pure in their own
eyes, and (yet) are not washed from their filthiness.
—Proverbs xxx., 12.
Nagoroi sikai waina (namariana
aneana) e pia sua, sei mari atae pa-sai a ?
E pei na lo kasua liu rupi, Napopo ni
anatuna e pavatn asa.
Anatuna e pei tea ataena namata (na-
tokoana) ragi waina e sari tea matua ni
navanua doko.
A virtuous woman : who can find her? Por her
price is far above rubies. The heart of her husband
trusteth in her.
Her husband is known in the gates, when he
sitteth among the elders of the land.—Psalms xxxi.,
10, 11, 23.


Yehova e pei namarama go namou-
tiana aginau; aga matau ki sei ? Yehova
e pei nakasuaana ni namauriana aginau;
aga matau ki sei ?
The Lord is my light and my salvation ; whom
shall I fear ? The Lord is the strength of my life ;
of whom shall I be afraid.—Psalms xxvii., 1.
Ragi waina a midoaki nakoroatelagi
anigo, nawosiana ni nakinima maga,
atelagi go masoe maga, waina ku dawonaki-
da;—natamoli e pei nasava, waina ku
midoaki nia ? go natamoli natuna, waina
ku umai punusi a ?
When I consider Thy heavens, the work of Thy
fingers, the moon and the stars, which Thou hast
ordained ; What is man, that Thou art mindful of
him? and the son of man, that Thou visitest him?
Psalms viii., 3, 4.
Supe e dugoro tea popo vaki lagi, ma
e dua tea popo vaki tano nasaupiaana.
Pa dodumi au, 0 Yehova, nalakena
a manainai.
God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the
humble. —James iv., 6.
Have mercy upon me, 0 Lord, for I am weak.
—Psalms vi., 2.


Te natamoli e maro pa waina e da
surata navasapiseikiana ki natamoli sa,
go waina a da lawo du napua ki tea mari-
naleo sa, go waina e da doko toko ki tea
sandoa pasa saki. Ma nalaelaeaana aneana
e doko natipakiana aneana aleati go pogi.
Blessed is the man that walketh not in the
counsel of the wicked, nor staudeth in the way of
sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But
his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in His
law doth he meditate day and night.—Psalms i., 1, 2.
Ega wo dakinsi nakan sikai waina eu
lawo e e doko pisari noai sara, waina e dawi
ki nawana ragi kakana, go nauluna mega
ta mamisi, go sara naleo waina e mari a
ega wo nunu pia.
He shall be like a tree planted by the streams of
water, that bringeth forth its fruits in its season,
whose leaf also doth not wither; and whatsoever he
doeth shall prosper.—Psalms i., 3.
Tea sa eu da dapala nogoe; ma eu
dakiusi napolagana, waina nalagi e sui diri
ki-nia. Nalakena wanogoe tea sa ega da
lawodu navasapotaeana, kita tea marinalo
sa nasaisaiana ki tea leana maga.
The wicked are not so; but are like the chaff
which the wind driveth away. Therefore the wicked,
shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous. -Psalms i., 4, 5.


Yehova e atae napua ki tea leana, ma
napua ki tea sa ega wo nunu.
The Lord knoweth the way of the righteous;
but the way of the wicked shall perish.—Psalms i., 6.
Kuga laelaea Yehova sara ragi: a
moro noa, Kuga laelaea.
Nalaelaeaana ki Yehova e pei na-
kasuaana animu.
Rejoice in the Lord alway; and again I say.
Rejoice.—Philippians iv., 4.
The joy of the Lord is your strength.—
Nehemiah viii., 10.
Nalakeina lam waina e doko rhaleoputo
xii toko tapu ega wo pei tea lo parati ki-da,
go ega wo damaraki-ra paki namata noai
ni namauriana; go Supe ega wo kasi lua
sara naririmata ni namatada.
For the Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall be their shepherd, and shall guide them
unto fountains of waters of life ; and God shall wipe
away every tear from their eyes.—Revelation vii., 17.


Na'ata waina e sapuraki sikasikai ega
wo lolovae sikasikai; go naata waina e
sapuraki pia ega wo lolovae pia.
He that soweth sparingly shall reap, also
sparingly ; and he that soweth bountifully shall reap
bountifully.—2 Corinthians, vi.
Kuga tumamii dape parati ki mu doko
nadodumiana ki Supe doko, go kuga to
logoro nadodumadagaana ki Nawata Yesu
Kristo paki namauriana vatoko.
Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for
the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
life.—Jude xxi.
Pa mari tea maga waina eu dodumi
nagisama euga toko ako laelaea, nala-
kena nigo pa wo sau pia ki tea leana :
0 Yehova, nigo pa wo daliviri-goro e
dakiusi taleva sikai.
Let them . . that love Thy name be joyful
in Thee; for Thou wilt bless the righteous : 0 Loan,
Thou wilt compass him about as with a shield.—
Psalms v., 11, 12.


Naata waina e midoaki paro ki na-
vasaana e piragi namarisakiana timai
dumana paki nia; ma tea waina e matau
ki natipakiana ega wo dape namoriana.
Whoso despiseth the word bringeth destruction
to himself: but he that feareth the commandment
shall be rewarded.—Proverbs xiii., 13.
Te natamoli e maro pa waina Supe
e pasa doa e, nalakena wanogoe pa ta
midoaki paro ki navaratiana ki tea kasua
man.
Happy is the man whom God eorrecteth ; there-
fore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty.
—Job v., 17.
Navasataraana manainai e pna doa
namaetoana; ma navasaliliuana e loaloa
namarita.
A soft answer turneth away wrath; but a
grievous word stirreth up anger.—Proverbs xv., 1.


Te natafnoli e mari atae dape nakapu.
paki narnfnana go sugoro aneana e pe ta
dapara ? Kita te nata e mari atae surata
namclevara vavaga go natuana e pe ta
aso kita ?
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his
clothes not be burned ?
Or can one walk upon hot coals, and his feet
not be scorched?—Proverbs vi., 27, 28.
Pa tapetape Yehova ki tea waina ku
peani a, go ki tan matua ni sara nata-
wiana anigo ni vanua.
Honour the Lord with thy substance, and with
the firstfruits of all thine increase.—Proverbs iii., 9.
Kapopo ni nawota e doko naru ni
Yehova dakiusi napna maga ni noa: e
dape doa e paki te tokora waina nae e
masauna.
The king’s heart is in the hand of the Lord as
the watercourses: He turneth it withersoever he
will.—Proverbs xxi., 1,


Tea sigisigileo e pei tea soliana ki
nawosiana ni naruna maga.
The wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands.—Psalms ix., 16.
Yehova e leana; e dodumi naleanaana:
go tea leana ega wo punusi namatana.
The Loed is righteous; He loveth righteousness;
the upright shall behold His face. —Psalms xi., 7.
Yehova e doko tempel tapu aneana;
Yehova, toko tapu aneana e doko nakoroa-
lelagi; Namatana e punusi, nawili nama-
tana e mari dogo, natamoli natuna maga.
The Loed is in His holy temple ; the Loed, His
throne is in heaven! His eyes behold, His eyelids
try, the children of men.—Psalms xi., 4.
Pa lo parati ki-nau dakiusi atolu
mata; pa tasuru ki-nau melu ni navaruma.
Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under
the shadow of Thy wings.—Psalms xvii., 8.


A malamala mein napele ni tete umai,
go aga wo moro malamala lilin pano :
Yehova e pitua, go Yehova e dape lua;
nagisa ni Yehova ega vei tea vasamata-
kiana.
Naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and
naked shall I return thither : the Lord gave, and the
Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the
Lord. —Job i., 21.
Tea maturu, pa tuleana, pa soso Supe
anigo.
Knga tape Ina tea sa ni namariana
animu maga naraegu; knga makoto mari
tea sa; knga vei tea viseikiana mari tea
wia.
Sleeper, arise, call upon thy God.—Jonah i., 6.
Put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes; cease to do evil: learn to do well.—
Isaiah i., 16, 17.
Yehova e pia, e pei malo navavatuana
naleatia na riesokiana; go e atae tea maga
waina en pavatn asa.
The Loan is good, a stronghold in the day of
trouble; and He knoweth them that put their trust
in Him.—Nahum i., 7-


Kuga midoaki napua animu maga:
ku sapuraki lapalapa, ma ku daua ki kiki
paki nasuma ; ku ganikani ma ku da dape
tea waina e pataka mu. Ku munu ma ku
da piu; ku surd sugoro, ma nimu seara ku
da pivitunu; go tea waina e pusiwosi raki
namoriana e dape namoriana paki nala
sikai waina e masai. Yehova ni Nalapaana
e noa dapala nea e naga: Kuga midoaki
napua maga animu.
Consider your ways: Ye have sown much, but
bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough ; ye
drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye clothe you,
but there is none warm ; and he that earneth wages,
earneth wages to put it into a bag with .holes. Thus
saith the Loan of Hosts: consider your ways.—
Haggai i., 6, 7 (see March 8).


MARCH 1
Natamoli waina e pei tea tapeana ki
nagori e pei tea ni naleatia pisa man, go e
pura ki nariesokiana. E poka piri dakiusi
navuma nakau sakai, go e moro mamisi;
go e sava dakiusi meluna sikai, go e da do
doko.
Man that is born of a woman is of few days,
and full of trouble. He oometh forth like a flower,
and is withered: he fleeth also as a shadow, and
continueth not.—Job xiv., 1, 2.
Tu pe mauri doko, tu pe magi Nawota
mauri doko: kita tu pe mate, tu pe magi
Nawota mate; tea waina tu pe mauri kita
tu pe mate, tu pei tea ki Nawota.
E pei maladigi waina sara naleo tega
nou: tea waina kuga midodoa po logoro
pia ki natapasavasaana.
Whether we live, we live unto the Lord : or
whether we die, we die unto the Lord. Whether we
live, therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s.— Romans
xiv., 8.
The end of all things is at hand: be ye there-
fore of sound mind, and be sober unto prayer.—
1 Peter, iv., 7.


Sei e pe mari sa ki mu, ragi waina
ku pei popo vivitunu mari tea wia.
Who is he that will harm you, if ye be zealous of
that which is pood.—l Peter, iii., 13.
Sara nalalauna (pota) waina nigo ku
pasa dawona ki-da, euga wo umai po lotu
naraema, Nawota; go euga wo samani
nagisama. Nalakena nigo ku pei tea lapa
go ku do mari tea ni namagaana maga :
nigo ku masikigo pei Supe.
All nations whom Thou hast made shall come
and worship before Thee, 0 Loan ; and they shall
glorify Thy name. For Thou art great, and doest
wondrous things; Thou art God alone.—Psalms
Ixxxvi., 9, 10.
Pa ta pasa pia wia ki-nau, tea kokona
ki-nau: ragi waina ape rowo, aga wo
moro du leana; ragi waina a pe toko
namaligo, Yehova ega wo maginau pei
nasulu sikai.
Eejoiee not against me, 0 mine enemy : when I
fall, I shall arise ; when 1 sit in darkness, the Loan
shall be a light unto me.—Micah vii., 8.


Naleatia warua ki Yehova e pei mala-
digi, e pei maladigi go e do sava casua
(umai) —e pei nadaleo ni naleatia ki
Yehova. Natamoli casua ega cai lapa ragi
wanogoe.
The great day of the Loed is near; it is near
and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the
Loud. The mighty man orieth there bitterly.—
Zephaniah i., 14.
Yehova (Nawota) ni nalapaana e noa
dapala nea, e naga. Ega wo lolomana
naleatia maga wanogoe, naga natamoli
rualima ni navasaana ni sara nalalauna
pota maga euga wo dape parati ki, io, euga
wo dape parati ki narerevu ni sugoro ki
naata waina e pei Yu, po noa, Au masauna
naga tuga marua pano, nalakena au dogo
Supe e sau pia ki mu.
Thus saith the Loed of Hosts : In those days it
shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out
of all the languages of the nations, shall even take
hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying: We
will go with you, for we have heard that God is with
you.—Zechariah viii., 23.


Yehova (N-awota) ni nalapaana e pasa
dapala nea, e naga, Natamoli waia eu noa,
E da pei ragi waina nigida tuga umai, ragi
waina tu pe wosi nasuma ki Yehova. Ragi
wanogoe navasaana ki Yehova e umai pae
proveta Haccai, e naga, E pei ragi waina
nimn kuga toko nasuma waina eu duki
goro napapa asa (ega wia) go waina
nasuma waia e ko sa doko, kita ?
Kuga sake pano paki tava, po pati nakau
umai, po posi nasuma.
Thus speaketh the Lord of Hosts, saying : This
people say it is not time for us to come, the time for
the Lord’s bouse to be built. Then came the word
of the Lord by Haggai the prophet, saying; Is it
time for you yourself to dwell in your ceiled houses,
while this house lieth waste ? . . . Go up to the
mountain, and bring "wood, and build the house
Haggai i., 2,3, 4, 8 (see February 29th).
Pae namata ni elo sake paki elo musu
nagisagu ega wo parua maleoputo ni
nalalauna pota maga.
From the rising of the sun even unto the going
down of the same My name shall be great among the
Gentiles. —Malachw,, 11.


Nae e da mari a paki-gida pataka ni
namarinalosaana anigida maga go e da
mori-gida pataka ni namaritageleana
anigida maga. Nalakena dakiusi waina
nakoroatelagi e doko paki elagi uvea ki
maramana, nadodumadagaana aneana e
lapalapa paki tea maga waina eu matau
ki-nia e dapala nogoe. . . E atae nala-
kena kaka-gida; e atae tu pei namotamota
ni natano.
He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us after our iniquities. For as the heaven
is high above the earth, so great is His mercy toward
them that fear Him. . . . For he knoweth our
frame ; he knoweth that we are dust. —Psalms ciii.,
10, 11, 14.
Pa leo usiusi an, 0 Supe, po atae
napopogu: pa mari dogo au po atae nami-
dodoaana aginau maga; go pa lo atae,
masa te napua ni napoposaana e pe toko
au, go pa tamaraki au napua vatoko.
Search me, 0 God, and know my heart: try me
and know my thoughts ; and see if there be any way
of grief in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.
—Psalms cxxxix., 23, 24,


Kuga leo, namele-aru ni Yehova a da
puru, waina e pe mari sa mouti asa ; go
nadaligana e da pono waina e pe mari sa
dogo asa: ma namaritageleana animu
maga. en potae mu ma Supe animu, go
namarinalosaana maga animu e maninu
dasuru ki namatana, go e da masauna ega
rogo asa.
Behold the Lord’s hand ia not shortened that it
can not save ; neither his ear heavy, that it can not
hear: but your iniquities have separated between
you and your God, and your sins have hid His face
from you that He will not hear. —lsaiah lix., 1, 2.
Yehova e noa, Kinau a pei Supe doko-
maladigi go a da pei Supe doko uvea,
kita ? Yehova e noa, te naata e mari atae
dumana dasuru ki-nia malo loku maga
naga aga ta punusi a, kita ? Yehova e
noa Kinau a da paka vuro nakoroatelagi
go maramana, kita ?
Am I a God at hand, saith the Loan, and not a
God afar off? Can any hide himself in secret places
that I shall not see him ? saith the Loan. Do not
I fill heaven and earth ? saith the Lord.— Jeremiah
xxiii., 23, 24.


Kuga ta pilake kite navatuna; ma
tea ni sara naleo kuga noasai namasauana
animu paki Supe pae natapasavasaana go
natatagoana go kuga vasa mataki, go
natamateana ki Supe, waina e liu sara
namidoakiataeana ega wo dape parati ki
napopomu go namidodoaana animu doko
Kristo Yesu doko.
In nothing be anxious; but in every thing by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your
requests be made known unto God. And the peace
of God, which passeth all understanding, shall guard
your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus.—
Philippians iv., 6, 7.
Nadodumiana go nalomauana ero
dufnada suara ; naleanaana go nata-
mateana ero dumada dimoli-ra.
Supe e sara lua nakokonaana ki
maramana go tea aneana e doko Kristo
doko.
Mercy and truth are met together ; righteousness
and peace have kissed each other.—Psalms Ixxxv., 10.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself.—2 Corinthians, v., 19.


A atae, Yehova, navasapotaeana anigo
maga e leana, go ku parati au nama-
sokoana.
E pia ki-nau a pei tea varatiana ; naga
aga vei tea vasapiseikiana ni navasada-
wonakiana anigo maga.
Eagi waina a ko da pei tea varatiana
apa sapo; ma ragi waia a dape soki
navasaana anigo.
I know, 0 Loed, that Thy judgments are
righteous, and that in faithfulness Thou hast afflicted
me.—Psalms exix., 75.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted ; that
I might learn Thy statutes.—Psalms exix., 71.
Before I was afflicted I went astray; but now I
observe Thy word.—Psalms exix., 67.
Supe aginau ega tua mu navaka-
vuroana ni sara naleo waina e pia ki mu,
e pataka ni nasogolapaana aneana waina
e doko nawarawaraana, e doko Eristo Yesu
doko.
My God shall fulfil every need of yours according
to His riches in glory in Christ Jesus.—Philippians
iv., 19.


Navaratiana malaolao anigida, waina
e doko puru, e do manigida posiwosi
sokari po sokari liu namadagaana ni
nawarawaraana vatoko, ragi waina tu da
to 1010 paki te navatuna seara waina e pei
tea vunnsiana, ma tu 1010 paki navatuna
seara waina en da pei tea vunnsiana mau.
Our light affliction, which is for the moment,
worketh for us more and more exceedingly an eternal
weight of glory ; while we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen.
—2 Corinthians, iv., 17, 18.
Ku marua sua pei namarama natuna
maga, go aleati natuna maga: nigida tu
da pei tea ni pogi, kita tea ni namaligo;
nalakena wanogoe tuga ta maturu, dakiusi
waina tea pota maga eu do mari a, ma tuga
leleo doko po pei popo marama.
Ye are all sons of light, and sons of the day : we
are not of the night, nor of darkness ; so then let us
not sleep, as do the rest, but let us watch and be
sober.—l Thessalonians v., 5-6.


Waina ku da punusi ma ku dodumi a ;
ku da punusi a ragi waia, ma waina ku do
saralomau asa, go ku laelaea lapalapa ki.
nalaelaeaana waina e pei tea noasaraviana
go e pura ki nawarawaraana (nalakena) ku
dape sua dotowo ni nasaralomauana animu,
(waina) e pei namoutiana ni natamu.
Whom not having seen ye love; on whom,
though now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
greatly with joy unspeakable and full of glory :
receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your
souls.—l Peter i., 8-9.
E pia ega tatago ki nasaralomauana,
ega ta pa-pitua kite navatuna ; nalakena
naata waina e pa-pitua ki e dakiusi napeao
ni natasi waina nalagi e capasi a go e
parivari ki nia. Nalakena natamoli wano-
goe ega ta midoaki nia naga ega tape te
navatuna ki Nawota.
Let him ask in faith, nothing doubting : for he
that doubteth is like the surge of the sea driven by
the wind and tossed. For let not that man think
he shall receive anything of the Lord.—James i., 6-7.


Nasaralomauana e pei nanoasokiso-
kiana ni navatuna wia seara waina eu
logoro asa, naviseikiana ni navatuna seara
waina eu da punusi a mau.
Navatuna niaga waina namata (nata-
moli) e da punusi a, go nadaliga (natamoli)
e da dogo e, go waina e da paki lina te
napopo natamoli, navatuna maga waina
Supe e magi tea maga waina eu dodumi
a, e madeara mari mataki nia. Ma Supe
e pisei ki-gida asa pae Natana.
Faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the
proving of things not seen.—Hebrews xi., 1.
Things which eye saw not, and ear heard not,
and which entered not into the heart of man, what-
soever things God prepared for them that love Him.
But unto us God revealed them through the Spirit.—
1 Corinthians ii., 9-10.
Elo anigo ega wo da moro musu, go
atelagi anigo ega wo da pano : nalakena
Yeliova ega wo pei namarama vatoko
anigo, go naleatia maga ni natagiana anigo
ega wo makoto. Glo natamoli anigo marua
sua euga wo leana.
Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall
thy moon withdraw itself : for the Lord shall be
thine everlasting light, and the days of tby mourning
shall be ended. Thy people also shall be all righteous.
—lsaiah lx,, 20-21.


E dimoni namateana e doko man, go
Yehova Supe ega wo kasi lua naririmata
ni sara namatada; go ega wo dape lua
namaliereana ki natamoli aneana pakasa
ki maramana mamau : nalakena Yehova e
noa sua e.
He hath swallowed up death for ever; and the
Loud God will wipe away tears from all faces ; and
the reproach of His people shall He take away from
off all the earth ; for the Lord hath spoken it. —Isaiah
xxv., 8.
Euga wo da moro dogo nadaleo ni
natagiana asa, kita nadaleo ni nakaiana.
Tea tauluaana ki Yehova euga wo
liliu, go euga wo umai paid Sion, euga to
lega ; go euga wo suni nalaelaeaana vatoko
ega to napauda: euga wo pasai napopo-
inalaolaoana go nalaelaeaana' go napopo-
madagaana go namarousuana euga wo
sava pano.
The voice of weeping shall be no more heard in
her, nor the voice of crying.—lsaiah Ixv., 19.
The ransomed of the Lord shall return and
come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy
shall be upon their heads : they shall obtain gladness
and joy ; and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
Isaiah xxxv., 10.


Aga wo perisi lua-ra ki nakasuaana ni
morn ovaki; aga wo daulua-ra ki nama-
teana: Namateana, na-mari-datiratiraana
<v
anigo wai ? Morn ovaki, namarisasakiana
anigo wai ?
I will ransom them from the power of the grave ;
I will redeem them from death ; 0 death, where is
thy plagues ? 0 grave, where is thy destruction ?
Hosea xiii., 14.
Nalakena ku pei tea verisiluaana ki
namarinalosaana, go ku po pei naviti ki
Supe, ku peani nawana animu paki na-
marinaveiteatapuana, go dotowo (kakana)
e pei namauriana vatoko. Nalakena na-
moriana ni namarinalosaana e pei na-
mateana ; ma navituamolikiana ki Supe e
pei namauriana vatoko, doko Kristo Yesu
Nawota anigida doko.
Being made free from sin, and become servants
to God, ye have your fruit unto sanctification, and
the end eternal life. For the wages of sin is death ;
but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus
our Lord. —Romans vi., 22-23.


Kristo e peresilua-gida paki naveitea-
veresiluaana, nalakena wanogoe kuga va
kokonaki kasua go kuga ta moro gona ki
nakau tuputo ni naveinavitiana.
Nalakena, ku pel tea sosoana paki
naveiteaveresiluaana, taigu maga, ma kuga
ta mari naveiteaveresiluaana animu ega vei
napua ki napokasi, ma kuga tumamu
manimu pei naviti maga pae nadodumiana.
For freedom did Christ set us free ; stand fast
therefore and be not entangled again in a yoke of
bondage.
For ye, brethren, were called for freedom ; only
use not your freedom for an occasion to the flesh, but
through love be servants one to another.—Galatians
v., 1, 13.
Ma Supe ni natamateana, . . ega
mari mu kuga matua sara nawosiana wia,
naga kuga mari namasauana aneana, nae
e do posiwosi napalau-gida tea waina e pei
tea citamatakiana namatana, pae Yesu
Kristo.
The God of peace .... make you perfect
in every good thing to do His will; working in us
that which is well pleasing in His sight, through
Jesus Christ.— Hebrews xiii., 20-21.


Kinau a pei Yehova Supe animu;
kuga surata navasadawonakiana aginau
maga, go kuga tape soki navasapotaeana
aginau maga, po mari ra: go kuga tapu-
goro sabata aginau maga; go ega vei tea
ataeana kakagu go kakamu, naga kuga
atae kinau Yehova a pei Supe animu.
X am the Lord your God ; walk in my statutes,
and keep my judgments, and do them : and hallow
my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me
and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord your
God.—Ezekiel xx., 19-20.
Tea Maumau anigida, Kristo Yesu,
waina e mari pueli ki namateana, po pati
namauriana go na-vei-waina-e-pe-ta-sa-ana
e doko lina pae narogorogoana wia.
Kinau a pei namoroduleanaana go
namauriana.
Our Saviour, Christ Jesus, who abolished death,
and brought life and incorruption to light through
the gospel.—2 Timothy i., 10-11.
I am the resurrection and the life. —John xi., 25.


APRIL 1
Namariana animu e pe vae napokasi,
kuga wo mate lomau ; ma kn pe to punue
namariana ni napatokomu ki natana kuga
wo mauri. Nalakena tea maga waina eu
pei tea tamarakiana ki Nata ni Supe eu pei
Supe natuna maga.
If ye live after the flesh ye must die ; but if by
the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of tbe body ye shall
live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
these are the sons of God.—Romans viii., 13-14.
Natana e pasa sokisoki ki natagida, e
naga tu pei Supe natuna maga : go tu pe
vei natuna maga, tu pei tea maga waina
euga wo dape paumaso ; tuga tape a ki
Supe, go nigida ma Kristo tuga marua
dape a ; waina e pe tapala waina nigida ma
nae tu marua dogo kite e sa, naga nigida
ma nae tuga moro marua pei tea sama-
samaniana.
The Spirit Himself beareth witness with our
spirit that we are the children of God: and if
children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ; if so be that we suffer with Him, that
we may be also glorified with Him.—Romans viii,,.


Snpe e pe silae-gida, go sei e pe
tugoro-gida ? Nae waina e da mouti
Natuna aneana, ma e manigada, marua sua
pitna ki nia, e pe tapale sava waina e pe wo
ta moro dna-gida sara naleo e pe sikoti a?
If God is for us, who is against us ? He that
spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us
all, how shall He not also with Him freely give us all
things ?—Romans viii., 31, 32.
Yehova ega vasa mata ki-go po lo
parati ki-go:
Yehova ega mari namatana ega mara-
ma paki-go, po sail pia ki-go :
Yehova ega tape dakati namatana
paki-go, po dua ko natamateana.
The Lord bless thee, and keep thee :
The Loed make His face to shine upon thee, and
be gracious unto thee :
The Lord lift up His countenance upon thee,
and give thee peace.—Numbers vi., 24-26.
Pa leo a dipaki agelo sikai e pea kigo,
ega lo parati ki-go napua, go ega vuati ko
paki tokora waina a manigo mari mataki
nia.
Behold, I send an angel before thee, to keep
thee by the way, and to bring thee into the place
which I have prepared.—Exodus xxiii., 20.


Kuga vasa mataki Yehova, kuga soso
nagisana;
Kuga noa sai namariana aneana
maleoputo ni natamoli maga.
Kuga lega ki nia, kuga lega nasama-
samaniana paki nia.
Kuga vasa ki sara nawosiana ni
namagaana aneana maga.
O give thanks unto the Loed, call upon His
name;
Make known His doings among the peoples.
Sing unto Him, sing praises unto Him ; talk ye
of all His marvellous works.—l Chronicles xvi., 8-9.
E pia napopo ni tea maga waina eu
laga Yehova euga laelaea.
Kuga laga Yehova go nakasuaana
aneana; kuga ta makoto laga namatana.
Kuga midoaki nawosiana ni nama-
gaana aneana maga.
Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lobd.
Seek the Loed and His strength ; seek His face
evermore.
Remember His marvellous works that He hath
done.—l Chronicles xvi., 10-11.


Yehova e pei tea loparati ki-nau; aga
ta tika kite navatuna.
E mari an a maturu namenau ma-
lakesa;
E damaraki au paid noa ni namaro-
maroana maga.
E mari panri ki natagu :
E puati au pae napua ni namarinalo-
leanana nalakena nagisana.
The Lord is my shepherd ; I shall not want.
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures:
He leadeth me beside the still waters. He
restoreth my soul:
He guideth me in the paths of righteousness for
His name’s sake. —Psalms xxiii., 1-3.
Eagi waina ma a pe surata napalea ni
melu ni namateana,
Agata matau kite navatuna sa seara;
nalakena nigo ku sikoti au ;
Tiko go nakau anigo, ero mari paka-
vakale au.
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death,
I will fear no evil; for Thou art with me ;
Thy rod and Thy staff, they comfort me.—Psalms
xxiii., 4.


Ku maginau mari mataki tebel (kani-
kani) sikai narae ni tea kokona ki-nau
maga;
Ku sasaru ki napaugu ki naroro, go
lasa munu aginau e pura lipa.
Kawiaana mau go nasaupiaana eroga
capasi au sara naleatia ni namauriana
aginau.
Thou prepares! a table before me in the presence
of mine enemies ;
Thou anointest my head with oil and my cup
runneth over.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all
the days of my life :
And I will dwell in the house of the Lord for
ever.—Psalms xxiii., 5, 6.
Pae ragi tuai pa-pa-pa natamoli eu da
dogo go eu da atae ki nadaligada, kita
namata (natamoli) e da punusi te Supe
kerua kakama, waina e magi tea maga
waina eu logoro asa e madeara mari (tea
tapalenogoe).
From of old men have not heard nor perceived
by the ear, neither hath the eye seen a God beside
Thee, which worketh for him that waiteth for him.—
Isaiah Ixiv., 4.


Nabuku kite naata ega ta ovi mu doko,
ma waina kuga tumamu dodumi mu:
nalakena naata waina e dodumi tea ni
fnaladigi ki-nia e paka vuro nadaleona
tapu. Nalakena tea waia, Pa ta marijiele,
Pa ta mari punue, Pa ta panako, !Pa ta
matagoro, kita te natipakiana pota sikai e
pe toko, e pei tea saisaikiana navasaana
waia, Pa dodumi tea ni maladigi kigo ega
dakiusi waina ku dumama dodumi ki.
Owe no man anything save to love one another :
for he that loveth his neighbour hath fulfilled the
law. For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, thou
shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not
covet, and if there be any other commandment, it is
summed up in this word, Thou shalt love thy neigh-
bour as thyself.—Romans xiii., 8-9.
Tea waina, namaromaroana sikai ni
sabata e ko magi natamoli ki Supe doko.
Nalakena naata waina e sili namaromaro-
ana aneana, nae ma e maromaro ki
nawosiana aneana, dakiusi waina Supe e
maromaro ki nawosiana aneana. Tea
waina, tuga toko raki parati ki nia naga
tuga sili namaromaroana wanogoe.
There remained therefore a Sabbath rest for the
people of God. For he that hath entered into his
rest hath himself also rested from his works, as God
did from His. Let us therefore give diligence to
enter into that rest.—Hebrews iv., 10-11.


Namata noai namanriana e doko
kiama doko :
Auga wo punnsi namararna e doko
namarama anigo doko.
Pa ta makoto ki nadodumadagaana
anigo paki tea maga waina eu atae ko;
Go naleanaana anigo paki tea popo
leana maga.
With Thee is the fountain of life
In Thy light shall we see light.
0 continue Thy lovingkindness unto them that
know Thee ;
And Thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
Psalm xxxvi., 9-10.
Nalakena kasua ki Supe e pa koko-
naki, e peani namidiri-paratikiana waia.
Nawota e atae te aneana maga : go,
Sara natamoli waina eu soso nagisa
ni Nawota euga meludna ki namaritage-
leana.
The firm foundation of God standeth, having
this seal,
The Lord knoweth them that are His; and,
Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord
depart from unrighteousness.—2 Timothy ii., 19.


Namatau-ki-Supe-ana e pia ki sara
naleo, nalakena e peani naveanoapara-
tikiana ni tea ni namauriana waina e doko
ragi waia go ni tea waina ega wo lolomana.
Godliness is profitable for all things, having
promise of the life which now is and of that which is
to come.—l Timothy iv., 8.
Tu logoro nakoroatelagi vaou maga,
go maramana vaou, waina namarinalo-
leanaana ero doko asa doko, e pataka ni
naveanoaparatikiana aneana.
Tea waina, tea dodumiana maga,
nalakena ku logoro tea maga waia, kuga
toko raki parati ki-nia naga kuga vei tea
vasaiana kuga toko natamateana doko,
navekerago go tea vasatipaana ega tika
naraena.
According to His promise we look for new
heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteous-
Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for these
things, give diligence that ye may be found in peace,
without spot and blameless in His sight.—2 Peter iii.,
13-14.


Nadodumadagaana anigo, Supe, e pia
Go natamoli natuna maga eu sili
melu ni navaruma maga.
Euga wo piu pia ki namuta ni nasuma
anigo.
Go nigo pa wo mari-ra euga munu
noai sara maga ni nalaelaeaana anigo
maga.
How precious is Thy lovingkindness, 0 God!
And the children of men take refuge under the
shadow of Thy wings.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of Thy house ;
And Thou shalt make them drink of the river of
Thy pleasures.—Psalm xxxvi., 7-8.
Kuga tuleana, go kuga main pano;
nalakena tea waia a da pei malo namaro-
maroana animu.
Nalakena tu da peani natokoana sikai
tokoro waia waina ega wo doko, ma tu
laga tea waina ega lolomana.
Arise ye, and depart; for this is not your rest.—
Micah ii., 10.
For we have not here an abiding city, but we
seek after (the city) which is to come.—Hebrews xiii.,
14.


Kuga vei sail pia dumamu paki mu,
kuga vei popo manainai, dumamu manimu
midoaki korokoro ega takiusi waina Supe
ma e manimu midoaki korokoro doko Kristo
doko.
Tea waina, kuga vei tea wosi' oli
Supe, pataka natuna nadodumiana maga ;
go kuga surata nadodumiana, dakiusi
waina Kristo ma e dodumi mu po dumana
manigida pitua ki-nia, navituaana go
naviriana sikai paki Supe.
Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted,
forgiving each other, even as God also in Christ
forgave you.—Ephesians iv., 32. wi?
Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved
children; and walk in love, even as Christ also loved
you and gave himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God.—Hebrews v., 1.
Kuga rogo parati ki tea maraki mu,
go kuga toko etano ki-da: nalakena eu
magi natamu do logoro, dapala tea waina
euga wo noa sai nawosiana (adeara), naga
euga mari tea wanogoe ki nalaelaeaana, go
ega ta pei tea ni napopomadagaana.
Obey them that have rule over yon, and submit
(to them); for they watch in behalf of your souls, as
they that shall give account; that they may do this
with joy, and not with grief.—Hebrews xiii., 17.


Kuga vei popo soki, taigu maga, pa-
pa-pa Nawota ega wo umai. Kuga leo tea
wosiwosi natano e do logoro nawana wia
ni natano, e pei popo soki asa, pa-pa-pa e
dape usa vea go usa e doku. Nimu ma
kuga vei popo sold; kuga mari sokisoki
napopomu.
Nawa ni Natana e pei nadodumiana,
nalaelaeaana, natamateana naveipoposo-
kiana naveisaupiaana, nawiaana, navei-
teasaralomauana, namatemateana, nadu-
manasokiaana.
Be patient, brethren, unto the coming of the
Lord. Behold the husbandman waiteth for the
precious fruit of the earth, being patient over it, until
it receive the early and the latter rain. Be ye also
patient; stablish your hearts. —James v., 7-8.
The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
meekness, temperance.—Galatians v., 22, 23.
Yehova e da doro nadodumiana aneana
e doko mu, kita e matadoa mu nalakena ku
lapa liu te nalalauna pota seara ; nalakena
nimu ku pei tea visa mau ni sara nala-
launa; ma nalakena Yehova e dodumi mu.
The Lord did not set His love upon you, nor
choose you, because ye were more in number than
any people ; tor ye were the fewest of all the peoples :
but because the Lord lovelh you.—Deuteronomy vii.,
7-8.


Kafiopomu ega ta puka dumamu paki
mu. Nalakena sei e mari ko ku pei tea
mamau ? go ku peani nasava waina e da
pei tea vituakiana pa-ki-go ? ma e pe vei tea
vituakiana pa-ki-go ecasana ku mari
madaga, dakiusi waina e pe ta pei tea
vituakiana pa-ki-go man ?
No one of you be puffed up for the one against
the other. For who maketh thee to differ? and
what hast thou that thou didst not receive ? But if
thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou
hadst not received it ?—1 Corinthians iv., 7.
Te natamoli e pei tea vasamatakiana
waina e matau ki Yehova, waina e surata
napua aneana maga.
Nalakena pa wo gani nawosiana ni
namelearuma maga :
Pa wo maro pa, go pa wo doko pia.
Blessed is every one that feareth the Loud, that
walketh in His ways.
For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands
Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with
thee.—Psalms oxxviii., 1-2.
Ku da dape nata ni naveinavitiana
naga kuga moro mataku; ma ku dape nata
ni na-vei-namatapisuana, go tu pae asa
soso Abba, Popo aginami.
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again
unto fear; but ye have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. —Romans viii., 15.


Pa kita mataki Yehova; Go nae ega
wo dua ko nalogoroana ni napopoma.
Pa mari napua anigo ega toko narn ni
Yehova ... go nae ega wo mari
naleanaana anigo ega tave umai dakiusi
namarama.
Pa toko dorogo narae ni Yehova, go
pa poposoki logoro asa.
Delight thyself in the Lord ;
And He shall give thee the desires of thine
heart. Commit thy way unto the Lord . . . and
He shall make thy righteousness to go forth as the
light. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for Him.
—Psalms xxxvii., 4-7.
Tn surata napokasi (ma) tu da mari
navakalo pae narokasi (nalakena nali kau
maga ni navakalo anigida eu da pei tea ni
napokasi, ma eu casua narae ni Supe [po
pei] tea sapuraki malo navavatuana maga)
eu sapuraki namidodoaana maga, go sara
naleo waina e paki lagi, waina e dumana
dape a sake daiau naatae-SuTe-ana, go e
soli parati ki sara namidodoaana paki
nadogoparatiki-Kristo-ana.
We walk in the flesh, (but) we do not war
according to the flesh (for the weapons of our warfare
are not of the flesh, but mighty before God to the
casting down of strongholds) easting down imagina-
tions, and every high thing that is exalted against
the knowledge of God, and bringeth every thought
into captivity to the obedience of Christ.—2 Corin-
thians x., 4-6.


Te naata e pe ta peani Nata ni Kristo,
naata wanogoe e da pei te aneana man.
Go Kristo e pe toko mn doko, napatokona
e mate nalakena namarinalosaana, ma
natana e pei namauriana nalakena namari-
naloleanaana.
If any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of His. And if Christ is in you, the body is
dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of
righteousuess.—Eomans viii., 9-10.
Yehova Snpe animu e mari dogo mn,
naga, ega atae masa ku dodumi Yehova
Snpe animu ki napopomu maman go ki
natamn maman. Nimn kuga surata dausi
Yehova Snpe animn, go knga matau ki
nia go kuga tape soki natipakiana aneana
maga, po dogo parati ki naleona, go kuga
naneana suasua, go kuga vuluti a.
The Loud your God proveth you, to know
whether ye love the Lord your God with all your
heart and with all your soul. Ye shall walk after
the Lord your God, and fear Him, and keep His
commandments, and obey His voice, and ye shall
serve Him, and cleave unto Him.—Deuteronomy
xiii., 3-4.


MAY 1.
Ma Nata ni tea waina e sike Yesu e
melu dua ki tea mate e pe vei tea toko
napalaumu, nae waina e sike Kristo Yesu
e melu dua ki tea mate mega wo paka
mauri ki napatoko tea wo mate animu
maga nalakena Nata ni tea waina e pei tea
toko napalaumu.
But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus
from the dead dwelleth in you, He that raised up
Christ Jesus from the dead shall quicken also your
mortal bodies through His Spirit that dwelleth in
you.—Romans viii., 11.
Supe e mari nadodumiana aneana
paki-gida e pei tea ataeana ki tea waia,
waina ragi waina tu ko pei tea mari nalosa,
Kristo e manigida mate. Ragi waia, waina
tu pei tea mariana tu leana ki nadana
aneana, tuga wo lapalapa liu-sa pei tea
moutiana ki namaetoana ki Supe nalakena
nae.
God oommendeth His own love toward us, in
that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
Much more then, being now justified by His blood,
shall we be saved from the wrath of God through
Him.—Romans v., 8-9.


Yehova e popogoro pia, go e pei sau
pia, e da maeto maraverave, go nadodnmi-
moutiana aneana e lapalapa.
Ega wo da parati doko man doko; go
namaetoana aneana mega wo da doko man.
The Lokd is full of compassion and gracious,
Slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.
He will not always chide ;
Neither will He keep His anger for ever.—Psalms
ciii., 8-9,
A pei tea dnri punneana sikoti Kristo,
ma a mauri doko; eda inoro pei kinan,
ma Kristo e mauri doko an doko: go tea
waia waina a mauri doko napokasi doko
ragi waia a mauri doko nasaralomauana
paki Snpe K a tuna doko, waina e dodnmi
an, po dumana maginan pitua ki-nia.
X have been crucified with Christ; yet I live ;
no longer I, but Christ liveth in me : and that which
I now live in the flesh I live in faith, which is in the
Son of God, who loved me, and gave Himself up for
me.—Galatians ii., 20.


Ma nalakena nimu ku dape kovae na-
rogokiteesaana maga ki Kristo, kuga
laelaea ; naga kuga moro laelaea ki nalae-
laeaana lapa ragi waina nasamasamaana
aneana ega wo doko lina.
Inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ’s suffer-
ings, rejoice; that at the revelation of His glory also
ye may rejoice with exceeding joy.—l Peter iv., 13.
Ku pe vei tea vasasakiana nalakena
nagisa ni Kristo, ku maro pa, nalakena
Kata ni nasamasamaana go ni Supe e doko
mu doko.
If ye are reproached for the name of Christ,
blessed are ye ; because the (Spirit) of glory and the
Spirit of God resteth upon you.—1 Peter iv., 14.
A dodumi Yehova nalakena e dogo
nadaleogu go navavaraniana aginau maga.
B da ki nadaligana paki-nau, nala-
kena wanogoe aga wo do pioso paki nia
ragi waina a ko mauri doko.
I love the Lokd because He hath heard my voice
and my supplications.
He hath inclined His ear unto me, therefore
will I call upon Him as long as I live.—Psalms cxvi.,
1-2.


Kuga mata-matua mari natipakiana ni
navasasokisokiana . . . waina kuga
doclumi Yehova Supe animu, po surata
sara napua aneana maga, po dogo parati
ki natipakiana aneana maga, po puluti a,
po maneana suasua ki napopomu mamau
go natamu mamau.
Take diligent heed to do the commandment of
the law to love theLouD your God, and
to walk in all His ways, and to keep His command-
ments, and to cleave unto Him, and to serve Him
with all your heart and with all your soul.—Joshua
xxii., 5.
Ka-vasa-lokutaki-ana ki Yehova e pei
tea ki tea maga waina eu matau ki-nia;
Go nae ega wo pisei ki-da navasasoki-
sokiana aneana.
Tea rogo lagi e pei tea karaicitasaana
ki Yehova ; ma na-vasa-lokutaki-ana
aneana e pei tea ki tea leana maga.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear
Him;
And He will shew them His covenant. —Psalms
xxv., 14.
The perverse is an abomination to the Lord :
But His secret is with the upright.-Proverbs
iii., 32.


Natugu, pa ta midoaki moli ki na-
varatiana ki Nawota;
Go pa ta pei popo mate ragi waina e
pasa doa ko;
Nalakena naata waina Nawota e
dodumi a e parati a.
Go e pivisi sara natuna waina e puati
My son, regard not lightly the chastening of
the Lord, nor faint when thou art reproved of Him ;
For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and
scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.—Hebrews
xii., 5-6.
Eu da atae napua ni natamateana, go
naleanaana e dika nasurataana adeara;
eu madeara mari napua tagele maga;
naata waina e surata asa e da atae nata-
mateana.
The way of peace they know not; and there is
no judgment in their goings : they have made them
crooked paths; whosoever goeth therein doth not
know peace.—lsaiah lix., 8.
Nagoroi e mari atae malio ki pipia
susu aneana, naga waina e pe ta dodumi
natuna ni napelena, kita ? 10, nara eu pe
malio ki, ma kinau aga ta malio kigo mau.
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she
should not have compassion on the son of her
womb ? Yea, these may forget, yet will I not forget
thee.—lsaiah xlix., 15.


Supe waina e pei tea ni saupiaana lapa,
nalakena nadodumiana lapa anaena waina
e dodumi-gida asa waina ragi waina tn ko
mate nalakena nasasapoana anigida maga, e
paka manri kigida sikoti Kristo (ku pei tea
moutiana nalakena nasaupiaana) go e sike
gida sikoti a, go e mari gida to toko natano
sikoti a tea ni nakoroatelagi maga, doko
Kristo Yesu doko: naga ragi ni tagona
maga waina euga wo nmai ega visei ki
nalapalapaana liu ni nasaupiaana aneana
ki nadodumiana paki gida doko Kristo
Yesu doko.
God being rich in mercy, for His great love
wherewith He loved us, even when we were dead
through our trespasses, quickened us together with
Christ (by grace have ye been saved), and raised us
up with Him, and made us to sit with Him in the
heavenly (places), in Christ Jesus : that in the ages
to come He might shew the exceeding riches of His
grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. —
Ephesians ii., 4-7.
Nalakena ku pei tea moutiana nala-
kena nasaralomauna, e pei nasaupiaana;
go e da pei tea waina ku dumamu mari a :
e pei navituamolikiana ki Supe ; e da pei
tea ni namariana maga, naga te naata ega
ta dumana samani a.
For by grace have ye been saved through faith ;
and that not of yourselves : (it is) the gift of God: not
of works, that no man should glory.—Ephesians ii., 8-9.


Nalakena tu pei tea wosiana aneana,
(tu pei) tea vasa-dawonakiana paki nawo-
siana wia maga, waina Supe e pea
mari mataki-nia naga tnga surata asa.
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus for good works, which God afore prepared that
we should walk in them.—Ephesians ii., 10.
Te nasurueana e da pa-pa-rati ki mu
ma tea waina e pataka ni natamoli; ma
Supe e pei lomau, waina ega ta suasua naga
kuga vei tea surueana liu tea waina ku
patakana, ma ega wo mari malo masai
mega sikoti nasurueana.
There hath no temptation taken you but such as
man can bear ; but God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able ; but
will with the temptation make also the way of
escape. —1 Corinthians x., 13.
A noa-sai nasasapoana aginau maga:
go aginau e doko mau
naraegu. ... Pa moro dua au nalae-
laeaana ni namoutiana anigo.
I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is
ever before me. . . .
Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation.—
Psalms li., 3, 12.


Nawota o, pa mari sai nagogogu ; go
nagolegu ega laga lua nasamasamaana
anigo. Nalakenakuda cita mataki naviriana
. Naviriana maga ki Supe e pei
natana waina e mawora.
O Loed, open Thou my lips ;
And my mouth shall show forth Thy praise.
For Thou delightest not in sacrifice ; . . the
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit.—Psalms li., 15,
16, 17.
Laion vusavusa maga eu tika ki
nakaniana, go eu pitolo.
Ma tea maga waina eu laga Yehova
euga wo da tika kite navatuna wia seara
mau.
The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger; but
they that seek the Lord shall not want any good
thing.—Psalms xxxiv., 10.
Te natamoli e maro pa waina nava-
sapoana aneana e pei tea midoakikorokoro-
ana, waina namarinalosaana aneana e pei
tea kovagoroana. Te natamoli e maro pa
waina Yehova e da midoakinamaritageleana
aneana dipa e, go waina te nasalisaliana
seara e da doko natana.
Blessed is he whose trangression is forgiven,
whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Loed im-
puteth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no
guile.—Psalms xxxii., 1, 2.


Pa mouti namenama ki tea sa, go
nagogoma ki navasasalisaliana, Pa melu
dua ki tea sa, go pa mari tea wia ; Pa laga
natamateana go pa to capasi a.
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from
speaking guile.
Depart from evil and do good; seek peace and
pursue it.—Psalms xxxiv., 13, 14.
Navaratiana maga ki tea leana eu
lapa: Ma Yehova e pua lua e ki tea lapa
kakada.
Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but
the Loed delivereth him out of them all.—Psalms
xxxiv., 19.
Kuga ta salisali dumamu paki mu:
nalakena ku sawo lua natamoli tuai go
namariana aneana, go ku suni natamoli
vaou, waina e do pei tea vakavaoukiana
paki naataeana pae laiknes ni tea waina e
dawonaki nia.
Lie not one to another ; seeing that ye have put
off the old man with his doings, and have put on the
new man, which is being renewed unto knowledge
after the image of Him that created him.—
Colossians iii, 9, 10.


Aga laelaea lapalapa Yehova, Natagu
ega midiraki Supe aginau; nalakena nae e
kulugoro au ki sugoro ni na moutiana
maga, e sugoro au ki koti ni namarinalo-
leanaana.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall
be joyful in my God ; for He hath clothed me with
the garments of salvation, He hath covered me with
the robe of righteousness.—lsaiah Ixi., 10.
Yehova, au noasai na sigisigileoana
aginami, go namaritageleana ki tamagami;
nalakena au mari e sa paki-go.
We acknowledge, 0 Lord, our wickedness, and
the iniquity of our fathers: for we have sinned
against Thee. —Jeremiah xiv., 20.
Pa lo patoko natamoli mari-pia-sua,
go pa lo sokisoki tea leana.
Nalakena ragi edaku ni natamoli wa-
nogoe e pei natamateana.
Ma tea sasapo maga, nara euga wo
marua pei tea maripuelikiana :
Eagi edaku ki tea sigisigileo ega wo
pei tea maricotoviana.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright;
for the latter end of (that) man is peace.
As for the transgressors, they shall be destroyed
together; the latter end of the wicked shall be cut
off.—Psalms xxxvii., 37, 38.


Namoutiana ki tea leana maga e pae
Yehova. Nae e pei malo navavatuana
adeara ragi ni naveikalanaana. Yehova e
silae ra po mouti-ra.
The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord.
He is their strong hold in the time of trouble.
The Lord helpeth them and rescueth them.—
Psalm xxxvii., 39, 40.
Knga ta gona na-dodumi-mone-ana;
kuga marita-soki ki tea waina ku peani a;
Nalakena nae e noa sua e, aga wo da
doro-dua ki-go man.
Nimu ku pei tea dauluaana ki naulu
lapa: nalakena wanogoe kuga samani
Supe ki napatoko-mu.
Be ye free from the love of money; content
with such as ye have : for Himself hath said, I will
in no wise fail thee.—Hebrews xiii., 5.
Ye were bought with a price: glorify God
therefore in your body.—l Corinthians vi., 6, 20.
Go Yob e noa, A malamala melu
napele ni tete umai, go aga wo moro paki
asa malamala liliu pano : Yehova e pitua,
Yehova e dape lua; nagisa ni Yehova e
pei tea samasamaniana.
And Job said : Naked came I out of my mother’s
womb, and naked shall I return thither; the Loan
gave, the Loan hath taken away; blessed be the
name of the Loan.—Job i., 21.


Yehova Supe e noa dapala nea,
Kuga leo tea suasua aginau euga wo
laelaea, ma nimu kuga wo malieri: kuga
leo, tea suasua aginau maga euga wo lega
ki nalaelaeaana ni napopoda, ma nimu kuga
wo cai ki nasusueana ni napopomu.
Thus ,saith the Lord God . . . hehold, my
servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed.
Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart,
but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart.—lsaiah Ixv.,
13, 14.
Satan e pokati Yob ki natoputopuana
waina e pitunu sa asa. . . Eagi wanogoe
anagoroi e noa ki nia ... pa vasa-
karaikita Supe po mate. Ma e noa ki nia,
e naga, Nasava ? tuga tape tea wia ki naru
ni Supe, go tuga ta dape tea sa, kita ?
Satan . . . smote Job with sore boils. . .
Then said his wife unto him . . . renounce God
and die. But he said unto her: What? shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil ? —Job ii., 7,9, 10.


JUNE 1.
Tamana . . waina e monti-gida tu
mein dua ki nakasnaana ni namaligo, go e
pna daletaleva ki-gida paki namarakiana
ki Natn ni nadodumiana aneana.
The Father . . . who delivered us out of
the power of darkuess, and translated us into the
kingdom of the Son of His love.—Colossians i., 13.
Apraham e pae nasaralomanana, ragi
waina e pei tea sosoana, e dogo parati ki
po mein pano paki tokora sikai, waina e
pei tea waina (e pei tea lagasaiana naga)
ega tape a ega (maneana) pei panmaso
sikai.
By faith Abraham, when he was called, obeyep
to go out unto a place, which he was to receive for
an inheritance.—Hebrews xi., 8.
Nawarawaraana ki Yehova ega wo pei
tea vua-lagati-ana, go sara napokasi euga
wo mama pnnusi-a; nalakena nagole ni
Yehova e noa sna e.
The glory of the Loan shall be revealed, and all
flesh shall see it together : for the mouth of the
Loan hath spoken it. —lsaiah xl., 5.


Natamoli vea Atam e pei natana
mauri sikai. Atam, tea edaku, e po pei
natana sikai waina e pitua ki namauriana
, . . natamoli vea e pei tea ni natano,
e pei natano : natamoli kerua e pei tea ni
nakoroatelagi.
The first man Adam became a living soul. The
last Adam became a life-giving spirit. . . . The
first man is of the earth, earthy ; the second man is
of heaven.—l Corinthians xv., 45, 47.
Dakiusi waina tu pea pilaki melu ni
tea ni natano, ega tapalanogoe tuga wo
moro pilaki mein ni tea ni nakoroatelagi.
As we have borne the image of the earthy, we
shall also bear the image of the heavenly.—
1 Corinthians xv., 49.
Namaetoana e dape dakati naviliana
maga: Ma nadodumiana e covagoro sara
nasasapoana maga.
Hatred stirreth up strifes ; but love covereth all
transgressions.—Proverbs x., 12.
r s '"w Pa ta laelaea ragi waina tea kokona
kigo e dowo; Go napopoma ega ta midi-
raki ragi waina e dapilagona.
Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let
not thine heart be glad when he is overthrown.—
Proverbs xxiv., 17.


Euga vataka ni tea waina sara naata
kakamn e dape navituaana sikai, kuga
tumamu manimn suasua asa, e pataka ni
tasiga wia waina eu dape parati ki nasau-
piaana lapa ki Supe.
According as each hath received a gift, minister
it among yourselves, as good stewards of the mani-
fold grace of God.—l Peter, iv., 10.
Knga vei popo wia dumamu paki mu,
popo dodumi, do dumamu manimu
midoaki-korokoro, ega dakiusi waina Supe
e manimu midoaki-korokoro doko Kristo
doko.
Be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted,
forgiving each other, even as God also in Christ
forgave you.—Ephesians iv., 32.
Tea waina, ku pe vei tea sikeana sikoti
Kristo, kuga laga naleo maga waina e doko
nakoroatelagi, tokora waina Kristo e doko
asa, e doko natano naru ni matua ni Supe
doko.
If then ye were raised together with Christ, seek
the things that are above, where Christ is, seated on
the right hand of God.—Colossians iii., 1.


Yehova e maraki; natamoli maga
euga rurururu ; e pagi kerup maga doko ;
maramana ega varivari.
The Lokd reigneth ; let the peoples tremble : He
sitteth upon the cherubim ; let the earth be moved.
—Psalms xoix., 1.
Yehova e pei tea warua Sion; go e
doko elagi ki sara natamoli maga.
E pia enga samani nagisama waina
e parua go e pei tea ni namatakuana.
The Loud is great in Zion; and he is high
above all the peoples.
Let them praise Thy great and terrible name.—
Psalms xcix., 2, 3.
Tuga logoro nalogoroana wia go
navisigoroana ni nawarawaraana ki Supe
warua go tea Maumau anigida lesu Kristo.
We should . . . look for the blessed hope
and appearing of the glory of our great God and
Saviour Jesus Christ.—Titus ii., 13.
Kuga kasua, go napopomu ega viviari,
nimu tea lapa waina ku logoro paki Yehova.
Be strong, and let your heart take courage, all
ye that hope in the Loud. —Psalms xxxi., 24.


Nadodumiana anigo e lapalapa pa,
waina ku daua ki-nia e doko raki tea maga
waina eu matau ki-go, waina ku magi tea
maga waina eu matau ki-go ku madeara
posi sua e e doko.
Oh, how great is Thy goodness, which Thou hast
laid up for them that fear Thee; which Thou hast
wrought for them that put their trust in Thee.—
Psalms xxxi., 19.
Tea waina kuga vei popo vaki tano
melu ni naru kasua ki Supe, naga nae ega
tape dakati mu ragi kakana.
Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty
band of God, that he may exalt you in due time. —
1 Peter v., 6.
Eu sigisige a, go eu mari sa ki popo
tapu aneana, nalakena wanogoe e dumana
doa e po pei tea kokona kida, go nae e
meri-meri dipa-ra.
They rebelled, and grieved His holy spirit,
therefore He was turned to be their enemy, and
himself fought against them. —Isaiah Ixiii., 10.


Napua ki tea leana e dakiusi namara-
ma ni namakotokotoana. E do marama
go e do marama pa-pa-pa e pei aleati
matua.
The path of the righteous is as the light of
dawn, that shineth more and more unto perfect day.
—Proverbs iv., 18.
Tn mania sna po dakiusi naata sikai
waina tea sa e puluti a, go sara namari-
naloleanaana anigida maga e dakiusi sugoro
sikai waina e loa: go tu marua sua do
mamisi dakiusi naulu nakau.
We are all become as one that is unclean, and
all our righteousnesses are as a polluted garment;
and we all do fade as a leaf.—lsaiah Ixiv., 6.
Ku loloso, ku pei tea tapugoroana
ku pei tea marileanakiana nagisa
ni Nawota Yesu Kristo og Nata ni Supe
anigida.
Ye were washed, . . ye were sanctified, . .
ye were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and in the Spirit of our God. —1 Corinthians
vi., 11.


Kuga vei lake tika ni tea sa, go knga
vei tea meme, Supe natuna maga waina
navekerago ega ta puluti mu maleoputo ni
tagona tagele go popo ragoragoa, maleo-
puto ni waina eu punusi mu ku dakiusi
nasulu maga waina eu doko maramana.
Blameless and harmless, children of God with-
out blemish in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation, among whom ye are seen as lights in the
world.—Phillppians ii., 15.
Eagi namaetoana kiki a dasuru ki
namatagu paki-go—e pei ragi nawilima-
taana sikai; ma aga wo dodumi ko ki
nasaupiaana vatoko, Yehova tea daulua ko
e noa e.
In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a
moment: but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, saith the Loan thy Redeemer.—
Isaiah liv., 8.
Supe e da dua-gida nata ni namata-
kuana; ma (e dua-gida) tea ninakasuaana
go nadodumiana go napopo-suasua-ana.
God gave us not a spirit of fearfulness, but of
power and love and discipline.—2 Timothy i., 7.


Sei e pei tea waina e pasa, go e lolo-
mana, ragi waina e da pei tea waina
Yehova e dipaki nia ?
Who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass,
when the Loud commandeth it not ?—Lamentations
iii., 37.
Nigo ku disu paki maladigi naleatia
waina a pioso paki-go : nigo ku noa, Pa ta
mataku.
Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon
Thee; Thousaidst: Fear not. —Lamentations hi., 57.
Naga ega mari tea waina e peani
nakasuaana ni namateana ega vei tea moli
nalakena namateana, waina e pei tiapolo.
That through death He might bring to nought
him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.
—Hebrews ii., 14.
Aga laelaea Yehoya, aga midiraki
Supe ni namoutiana aginau.
Yehova, Nawota e pei nakasuaana
aginau.
I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation.
Jehovah, the Lord is my strength.—Habakkuk
iii., 18, 19.


Kuga to pia pa-pa-pa kuga wia sua,
kuga vei tea vasavakavakaleana; napopomu
ega vaka sikai man; kuga vei natamate
dumamu paki mu: go Supe ni nadodumiana
go ni natamateana ega wo sikoti mu.
Be perfected ; be comforted ; be of the same
mind ; live in peace ; and the God of love and peace
shall be with you.—2 Corinthians, xiii., 11.
Nimu , . . ku pei tea tavagiana
dapala vatu mauri maga, nasuma ni
natana, naga kuga vei na-vei-tea-viri-ana
tapu, naga kuga vitua ki navituaana ni
natana waina e pei tea cita mataki Supe
pae Yesu Kristo.
Ye ... as living stones, are built up a
spiritual house, to be a holy priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ.—l Peter ii., 5.
Ku da atae naga nimu ku pei tempel
dapu ki Supe, go naga Nata ni Supe e doko
mu doko, kita ? Te naata epe mari sa sa
ki tempel ki Supe, Supe ega wo mari sa sa
ki naata wanogoe.
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and
(that) the Spirit of God dwelleth in you ? If any
man destroyeth the temple of God, him shall God
destroy.—l Corinthians iii., 16, 17.


JULY 1.
Kuga noa sai mamarinalosaana animu
maga dumamu paki mu, go kuga dumamu
manimu dapasavasa naga kuga vei tea
maripauriana.
Confess . . . your sins one to another, and
pray one for another, that ye may be healed.—James
v., 16.
Seve Supe e doko nakoroatelagi kita
maramana waina e mari atae mari pataka
ni namariana anigo, go pataka ni nawosi-
ana kasua anigo maga.
What god is there in heaven or in earth, that
can do according to Thy works, and according to
Thy mighty acts. —Deuteronomy iii., 24.
Paia maga e pei tea ki Yehova Supe
anigida : ma tea maga waina e pei tea
lagasaiana e pei tea anigida.
The secret things belong unto the Lord our
God: but the things that are revealed belong unto
ns.—Deuteronomy xxix., 29.


Dakiusi nae waina e soso mu e dapu
nimu ma kuga tapu sara napua ni na-
mauriana animu.
; ,'l_ As He which called you is holy, be ye yourselves
B'B?i> also holy in all manner of living.—l Peter i., 15.
Nimu ku pei nalalauna tapu, natamoli
waina e magi Supe pei tea veaniana, naga
kuga laga sai nawialiuana maga ki tea waina
e soso mu melu dua ki namaligo po paki
namarama aneana waina e pei tea ni
namagaana.
Ye are ... a holy nation, a people for
(God’s) own possession, that ye may show forth the
excellencies of Him who called you out of darkness
into his marvellous light.—l Peter ii., 9.
Te naata e maro pa waina Supe ki
Yakop e pei tea silae a, waina nalogoroana
aneana e doko Yeliova Supe aneana: waina
e mari nakoroatelagi go maramana natasi
go sara naleo waina e doko ara.
Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his
help, whose hope is in the Loan his God.
Which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all
that in them is.—Psalms cxlvi., 5, 6.


Sara naleo e pei tea aninrn ; e pe vei
tea ni ragi waia, kita waina ega wo umai;
tea lapa eu pei tea aninrn; go nimn ku pei
tea ki Kristo ; go Kristo e pei tea ki Supe.
All things are yours; whether . . . things
present, or things to come; all are yours; and ye
are Christ's; and Christ is God’s. —1 .Corinthians
iii„ 21, 22, 23.
A dodumi ko ki nadodnmiana vatoko ;
nalakena wanogoe a puati ko ki nadodumi-
saupiaana.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love;
therefore with loving kindness have 1 drawn thee.—
Jeremiah xxxi., 3.
Supe e mouti-gida, po soso-gida ki
naviosoana tapu, e da pataka ni nawosiana
anigida maga, ma e pataka ni naveamidoa-
kisokisokiana go nasaupiaana aneana.
God . . . saved us, and called us with a
holy calling, not according to our works, but accord-
ing to his own purpose and grace.—2 Timothy i., 9.


E 1010 siwo pae navakilagiana ni na-
suma dapu an ean a ; Yehova e 1010 punusi
maramana pae nakoroatelagi, naga ega
rogo namarousuana ki tea naaga waina eu
doko lokap ; go naga ega veresi tea maga
waina eu pei tea vasaparatikiana naga euga
mate.
He hath looked down from the height of His
sanctuary; from heaven did the Loed behold the
earth; to hear the sighing of the prisoner; and to
loose those that are appointed to death. —Psalms cii.,
19, 20.
E pua lua au a melu dua ki moru sa
sikai (go) ki lepa sa, go e doro natuagu e
doko vatu lake toko.
He brought me up . . . out of an horrible
pit, out of the miry clay ; and he set my feet upon
a rock. —Psalms xl., 2.
Kuga laga kuga vei natamate nimu
ma sara natanioli go na-vaka-vei-tea-tapu-
ana, waina naata waina e pe tika asa ega
wo da punusi Nawota.
Follow after peace with all men, and the
sanctification without whicu no man shall see the
Loud. — Hebrews xii., 11.


Pa logoro pia naga pa ta malio ki
Yehova Supe anigo . . go ku pe wo noa
napopoma, nakasuaana go namarimatua-
ana ni narugu e dua au nasogolapaana
waia.
Beware lest thou forget the Lobd thy God
and thou say in thine heart: My power and the
might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.—
Deuteronomy viii., 11, 17.
Pa midoaki Yehova Supe anigo nala-
kena e pei nae waina e dua ko nakasuaana
waina ku mari atae pa parati ki nasogola-
paana asa.
Thou shalt remember the Lobd thy God, for it
is He that giveth thee power to get wealth.—
Deuteronomy viii., 18.
Go ega wo lolomana, ku pe malio ki
Yehova Supe anigo kuga wo mate lomau.
And it shall be, if thou shalt forget the Lobd
thy God, ye shall surely perish.—Deuteronomy yiii.,
19.


Nadaligama maga ega wo dogo nava-
saana sikai pae natakuma, ega wo noa,
Tea waia e pei napua, kuga surata asa;
ragi waina ku dumamu doa mu paki matua
go ragi waina ku dumamu doa mu paki
mau.
Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying: This is the way, walk ye in it; when ye
turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.
—lsaiah xxx., 21.
Euga wo da masau mamarama ni
lamu kita namarama ni elo ; nalakena
Nawota Supe ega wo dua-ra namarama: go
euga wo maramara paki sara tago-tagona.
They need no light of lamp, neither light of the
sun ; for the Lokd God shall give them light: and
they shall reign for ever and ever.—Revelation xxii., 5.
Eagi waia mamoutiana, go nakasua-
ana go namarakiana ki Supe anigida e
umai; go naveinawotaana ki Kristo aneana.
Now is come the salvation, and the power and
the kingdom of our God, and the authority of his
Christ.—Revelation xii,, 10.


Nalakena tea vasa dipa taigida maga
e pei tea nadikiana paki tano, nae waina
e do pasa dipa-ra narae ni Snpe anigida
aleati go pogi.
For the accuser of our brethren is cast down,
which accuseth them before our God day and night.
—Bevelation xii., 10.
Go en mari matua ki nia nalakena
nada ni Lam, go nalakena navasaana ni
nanoasokisokiana adeara, eu da dodumi
namauriana adeara man (e dapalanogoe)
pa pa pa namateana.
And they overcame him because of the blood
of the Lamb, and because of the word of their
testimony ; and they loved not their life unto death.
—Revelation xii., 11.
Sei ega vasa dipa tea matadoaana ki
Snpe te navatuna seara ? E pei Snpe
waina e mari gida tu pei tea leana; sei ega
tipakotovi-gida ?
Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s,
elect? It is God that justifieth ; who is he that
condemneth? —Homans viii., 33.


E pei Kristo Yesu waina e mate, kita a
pe noa, waina e pei tea sikeana mein dna ki
tea mate, waina e doko naru ni matua ni
Supe doko, waina e moro manigida do pasa
korokoro pavarani.
It is Christ Jesus that died, yea rather, that was
raised from the dead, who is at the right hand of God,
who also maketh intercession for us.—Eomans viii.,
Naata waina e midoaki parati ki nava-
saana ega wo pasai tea wia, go naata waina
e pavatu Yehova e maro pa.
He that giveth heed unto the word shall find
good ; and whoso trusteth in the Lord happy is he.—
Proverbs xvi., 20.
Yuta natuna maga en mari matua,
nalakena eu pavatu Yehova, Supe ki
tamada maga.
The children of Judah prevailed, because they
relied upon the Lord, the God of their fathers.—
2 Chronicles xiii., 18.


Supe e pei malo sili go nakasuaana
anigida, e pei nasilaeana maladigi ragi
waina tn doko malo wono.
God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble. —Psalms xlvi., 1.
Kuga umai bunusi nawosiana maga
ki Yehova, . . . . E mari nava-
kalo maga e makoto pa-pa-pa namata
pagona maga ni maramana; E pori nasu,
go e da cotuvi naiyo.
Come, behold the works of the Lord.
He maketh wars to cease unto the ends of the
earth; He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear
in sunder. —Psalms xlvi., 8, 9.
Th pe malio ki nagisa ni Supe anigida;
kita to pe sai ki narugida paki Supe pota ;
Supe ega ta leo laga pa sai a kita ? Nala-
kena e atae paia maga ni napopo (gida).
If we have forgotten the name of our God, or
spread forth our hands to a strange God; . . .
shall not God search it out ?
For he knoweth the secrets of the heart.—
Psalms xliv., 20, 21.


Kinau, io, kinau a pei tea waina a casi
lua nasigisigileoana anigo maga nalakena
nagisagu ; go aga wo da midoaki namari-
nalosaana anigo maga man.
I, even I am He that blotteth out thy trans-
gressions for mine own sake; and I will not remember
thy sins.—lsaiah xliii., 23.
Supe vatoko, Yehova, tea vasadawo-
naki namatapagona maga ni maramana,
a da do manainai go e da mawosa.
The everlasting God, the Loud, the Creator of
the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary.
—lsaiah xl., 28.
Nae e dua tea manainai maga
namariataeana; go naata waina e dika
namarimatuaana e maneana sokari na-
kasuaana.
He giveth power to the faint; and to him that
hath no might heincreaseth strength.—lsaiah xl., 29.
Yafiopovakilagiana ki natamoli ega wo
pei tea mariana ega vaki tano : go Yehova
ega wo masikinia pei tea dapedakatiana
naleatia wanogoe.
The haughtiness of men shall be brought low,
and the Loud alone shall be exalted in that day.—
Isaiah ii., 17.


AUGUST 1.
Tekel; ku pei tea totowokiana skel,
go eu lo potae ko ku malaulau.
Yehova e pei Supe ni naataeana, go
nae e dotowo namariana maga.
Tekel : thou art weighed in the balances, and
art found wanting.—Daniel v., 27.
The Lord is a God of knowledge, and by Him
actions are weighed.—l Samuel ii., 3.
Nawota sikaimau, nasaralomauana
sikaimau, navaptisoana sikaimau, Supe
sikaimau go Tama ni tea lapa, waina e
dapau tea lapa, go e doko usuraki tea lapa,
go e doko sara naleo lapa.
One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and
in all.—Ephesians iv., 5, 6.
Ku pe sua pulok Id tea kokona kigo
kita ase aneana waina e pa sasapo pa moro
copasi a liliu ega vunusi a, ega vei lomau.
If thou meet thine enemy’s ox orchis ass going
astray thou shalt surely bring it backno him again.
—Exodus xxiii., 4.
Ku datago go ku da dape a, nalakena ku
datago sapona (ku datago) naga kuga mari
a ega vei tea ni namasauana maga animu.
Ye ask, and ye receive not, because ye ask amiss,
that ye may spend it on your pleasures.—James iv., 3.


Pa ta dausi tea lapa (waina eu pano)
naga euga man tea sa.
Naata waina e masauna naga ega vei
maramana tana ri sikai e dumana mari a e
pei tea kokona ki Supe.
Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil. —
Exodus xxiii., 2.
Whosoever . . . would be a friend of the
world maketh himself an enemy of God.—James
iv., 4.
Yehova, ku 1010 sua usiusi an go ku
atae an.
Ku atae natokonatanoana aginau, go
natuleanaana aginau, Ku midoaki atae
namidodoaana aginau maga paid uvea.
O Lord, Thou hast searched me, and known me.
Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising,
Thou understandest my thoughts afar off. —Psalms
cxxxix., 1, 2.
Yehova e mari sokisoki toko tapu
aneana nakoroatelagi; go namarakiana
aneana e maramara tapau tea lapa.
The Loed hath established His throne in the
heavens ; and His kingdom ruleth over all. —Psalms
ciii., 19.


Nasaupiaana nadodumiana go nata-
mateana waina e pae Supe Tamana go
Kristo Yesu Nawota anigida.
Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father
and Christ Jesus our Lord. 1 Timothy i., 2.
Kuga lavulavu ki nasaupiaana go
naataeana ni Nawota go tea Maumau
anigida Yesu Kristo.
E pia nae ega veani nasamasamaana
ragi waia go ega tu mau du. Amen.
Grow in grace and knowledge of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be the glory both now
and for ever, Amen.—2 Peter iii., 18.
Natamoli waina e pa sai namanuma-
tuaana e maro pa, go natamoli waina e
dape parati ki namidoaki-ataeana; nadape-
paratikiana kakana e pia liu silver, go
narogoviana kakana e pia liu colt.
Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the
man that getteth understanding.
For the merchandise of it is better than the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than
gold.—Proverbs iii., 13, 14.


Supe aginau e noa naga tea sigisigileo,
maga eu dika natamateana.
There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.
—lsaiah Ivii., 21.
Yehova e noa dapala nea, Natamoli
manumatua ega da pasa samasamamani a
nalakena namanumatuaana aneana, go tea
marimatua ega da pasa samasamani a
nalakena namarimatuaana aneana; ma
naata waina e pasa samasamani a ega vasa
samasamani a nalakena tea waia, waina e
midoaki atae po atae an, naga kinau a pei
Yehova.
Thus saith the Lord : Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man
glory in his might: but let him that glorieth glory
in this, that he understandeth and knoweth Me, that
I am the Lord.—Jeremiah ix., 23, 24.
Kristo Yesu waina e manigida pei tea
mariana e pei namanumatuaana waina e
pae Supe umai, go namarinaloleanaana, go
navaka-vei-tea-tapu-ana, go na dauluaana.
Christ Jesus who was made unto us wisdom
from God, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption.—l Corinthians i., 30.


Yehova ega vei tea vasamatakiana
waina e doro tea dapala waia e
doko napopo ni nawota naga ega man
nasuma ki Yehova ega vei tea lomatakiana.
Blessed be the Loed . . . which hath put
such a thing as this in the king’s heart to beautify
the house of the Lord.— Ezra vii., 27.
Yehova ega wo da doropusi natamoli
aneana euga madoko nalakena nagisana
warua aneana; nalakena Yehova e ma-
sauna naga ega marl mu kuga maneana
pei nalalanna sikai.
The Lord will not forsake His people for His
great name’s sake ; because it hath pleased the Lord
to make you a people unto himself.—l Samuel xri., 22.
Eagi waina a pasai tea waina natagu
e dodmni a; a pua parati ki nia go a da
snasua ega vano mau.
When I found Him whom my soul loveth, I held
Him and would not let Him go.—The Song of
Solomon, iii., 4.


Sei e doko elagi waina (eu pe noa) e
dakiusi Yehova ? Sei e doko maleoputo
ni natu ni tea mari matua maga waina e
dakinsi Yehova ?
Who in the skies can be compared unto the
Lobe ? Who among the sons of the mighty is like
unto the Lobe? —Psalms Ixxxix., 6.
X aniariana ki Snpe paid mu e dakiusi
tea vaki natuna maga ; nalakena seve na-
tuna e doko waina tamana e da parati a ?
Ma ku pe dika navaratiana . . . ku
pei natuna rau maga go ku da pei natuna
maga mau.
God dealeth with you as with sons; for what
son is there whom his father chasteneth not? But
if ye are without chastening, . . . then are ye
bastards and not sons.—Hebrews xii., 7, 8.
A pe vei tea toko raki namata ni
nasuma ki Supe aginau, a pe masauna pia
liu naga waina a pe vei ata toko ni tapau-
pau maga ni nasigisigileoana.
I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of
my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.—
Psalms Ixxxiv., 10. >


Yehova Supe e pei elo go e pei taleva :
Yehova ega wo pitna ki nasaupiaana go
nasamasamaana. Ega wo da mouti te
nalo wia seara paki tea maga waina en
surata leana.
The Loud God is a sun and a shield : the Lord
will give grace and glory. No good thing will He
withhold from them that walk uprightly.—Psalms
Ixxxiv., 11.
Sara natamoli waina eu pei popo-
vakilagi e magi Yehova pei tea karaicita-
sakiana.
Kinami au pei natano, go nigo ku pei
tea wosi lasa ni natano; go kinami au
mania sua pei nawosiana ni namelearuma.
Every one that is proud is an abomination to
the Lord, —Proverbs xvi., S.
We are the clay, and Thou art the potter; and
we all are the work of Thy hand.—lsaiah Ixiv., 8.
Euga wo soso nagisagu go kinau aga
wo dogo-ra : Aga wo noa, Eu pei natamoli
aginau; go nara euga wo noa, Yehova e
pei Supe aginau.
They shall call on My name and I will hear
them. I will say: It is my people ; and they will
say : The Lord is my God. —Zechariah xiii., 9.


Sei e pei Supe sikai dakiusi ko waina
e midoakikorokoro nasigisigileoana.
Nigo pa wo nadi ki sara namarinalosa-
ana adcara paki natutumoruana ni natasi.
Who is a God like unto Thee that pardoneth
iniquity.
Thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of
the sea.—Micah vii., 18, 19.
Nadodumiana e casua dakiusi na-
mateana; . . . Noai tapa e mari sa
pue punue nadodumiana, go natape maga
eu man sa sua punue asa.
Love is strong as death ; . . . Many waters
cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it.
—The Seng of Solomon, viii., 6, 7.
A pavarani mu . . . taigu maga
kuga toro napatokomu maga ega
vei navituaana mauri sikai, ega tapu, tea
citamatakiana narae ni Supe.
I beseech you . . brethren . . to present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to
God.—Romans xii., 1.


Eagi waina e pae tava siwo umai.
Moses e da atae nawili ni na-
matana e laga nalakena ero dumada pasa
paki-da.
When He came down from the mount
Moses wist not that the skin of His face shone by
reason of his speaking with Him.—Exodus xxxiv., 29.
A dogo dakiusi e pe vei nadaleo ni
nalapaana lapa sikai, go e dakiusi nadaleo
ni noai la-pa, go e dakiusi nadaleo ni tavae
matua maga, e noa Haleluya : nalakena
Nawota Supe anigida, tea Kasua mau, e
maramara.
I heard a voice as it were the voice of a great
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as
the voice of mighty thunders, saying : Hallelujah:
for the Loan our God, the Almighty, reigneth.—
Revelation xix., 6.
Seara eu pavatu karte maga, go seara
(eu pavatu) horse maga: Ma nigida tuga
wo noa nagisa ni Yehova Supe anigida.
Some trust in chariots, and some in horses ; but
we will make mention of the name of the Loed our
God. —Psalms xx., 7.


Eagi waina napua ki natamoli sikai e
pei tea citamatakiana ki Yehova, E mari
tea kokona ki-nia ma eu pei natamate
paki-nia.
When a man’s ways please the Lord, He maketh
even his enemies to be at peace with him.—Proverbs
xvi., 7.
Napopo ni natamoli sikai e midoaki
dawonaki napna aneana: Ma Yehova e
midoakisoki navasiana aneana maga.
A man’s heart deviseth his way, but the Lord
direeteth his steps.—Proverbs xvi., 9.
Knga sie porae napopomu, ma kuga
ta (sie porae) sngoro animn go kuga tu-
mamu doa mu paid Yehova Supe animn.
Bend your heart, and not your garments, and
turn unto the Lord your God.—Joel ii., 13.


SEPTEMBER 1.
Go a punusi melu ni wodo ni naviri-
ana nata ni tea maga waina eu pei tea
woka-punueana nalakena navasaana ki
Supe. ... Go sngoro dare sikai e
pei tea visarakiana sara sarara.
And I saw under the altar the souls of them
that had been slain for the word of God. . . And
there was given them to each a white robe. —
Eevelation vi., 9, 11.
Yehova e noa, a atae namidodoaana
maga aginau waina a midoaki nia paki
mu, e pei namidodoaana ni natamateana
go e da pei tea ni namarisakiana.
I know the thoughts that I think towards you,
saith the Loan; thoughts of peace and not of evil.—
Jeremiah xxix., 11.
Yehova e noa, Ma kuga umai, tuga
vusumaki; namarinalosaana animn maga
eu pe dakiusi skarlet ma euga wo dare
dakiusi sno, eu pe miala dakiusi krimson
ma euga wo dakiusi namau ni sipesipe.
Come now, and let us reason together, saith the
Loan ; though your sins be as scarlet they shall be
as white as snow ; though they be red like crimson,
they shall be as wool.—lsaiah i., 18.


Kuga wosiwosi tea ni namoutiana
animu ki namatakuana go narururuana,;
nalakena e pei Supe waina e posiwosi
napalaumu naga kuga masauna go naga
kugu wosiwosi tea ni namasauana wia
aneana.
Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling ; for it is God which worketh in you both
to will and to work, for his good pleasure.—
Philippians ii., 12, 13.
Yehova, nigo ku maginami pasa
dowonaki natamateana : nalakena nigo ma
ku maginami posiwosi sua sara nawosiana
aginami maga.
Lokd, Thou wilt ordain peace for us : for Thou
hast also wrought all our works for us.—lsaiah
xxvi., 12.
Pae naleatia vea waina ku doro na-
popoma e para ki namidoakiataeana, go ku
dumama doro ko paki tano narae ni Supe
anigo, navasaana maga anigo pei tea
dogoana.
From the first day that thou didst set thine
heart to understand, and to humble thyself before
thy God, thy words were heard.—Daniel x., 12.


Tea Yaki lagi go ni Namasua waina e
pei ata toko ni malo vatoko, waina nagi-
sana e pei Dapu e noa dapala nea : Kinan
a doko tokora waina e paki lagi go e dapn,
go a moro doko sikoti naata waina napo-
pona e pei tea woriwornsiana po paki tano.
Thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is holy: I dwell in the high
and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit.—lsaiah Ivii., 15.
Yehova e pei tea vakilagi, ma e
midoaki tea popo yaki tano : ma tea popo
vaki lagi e atae a pae uvea.
Though the Loan be high, yet hath He respect
unto the lowly : but the haughty He knoweth from
afar. —Psalms exxxviii., 6.
Kristo e mate go e moro manri naga
ega vei nawota Id tea mate maga go tea
manri maga.
Christ died and lived (again) that He might be
Loan of both the dead and the living.—Eomans xiv., 9.


David e noa naga, Yehova e pei vatu-
lake toko aginau, go malo vavatuana
aginau, go tea mouti an; io, tea aginau;
Supe ni vatulake toko aginau, aga do
pavatu asa.
David . . . said : The Lord is my rock, and
my fortress, and my deliverer.—even mine;
The God of my rook, in Him will I trust. —
2 Samuel xxii, 1,2, 3.
Aga wo soso Yehova, waina e pia ki
nasamasamaniana: Go aga wo pei tea
moutiana ki tea kokona ki-nau maga.
I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be
praised; so I shall be saved from mine enemies.—
2 Samuel, xxii., 4.
Sara naleo tea mariana ki nakasuaana
anigo waina e doko sisi naruma, pa mari
a; nalakena te nawosiana, kita namidoaki-
ataeana, kita naataeana, kita namanuma-
tuaana seara a da doko malo ni namateana
waina ku do para ki-nia pano.
Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy
might; for there is no work, nor device, nor know-
ledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest.
—Ecclesiastes ix., 10.


Euga wo noa auponaga : Naleanaana
go nakasuaana e doko Yehova masikinia:
io, euga wo umai punusi a, go tea lapa
waina napalauda e soro ki namaetoana
dipa e euga wo malieri.
Only in the Lord shall one say of me, is
righteousness and strength : even to Him shall men
come, and all they that were incensed against Him
shall be ashamed.—lsaiah xlv., 24.
Pa ta noa ki tea ni maladigi kigo, Pa
vano, go pa moro umai, go matamai aga
wo dua-ko ; ragi waina ku peani a e doko.
Say not unto thy neighbour: Go, and come
again, and to-morrow I will give thee, when thou
hast it by thee. —Proverbs iii., 28.
Natagu e logoro Yehova lapalapa Hu
waina tea vavai e do logoro aleati.
My soul looketh for the Loud, more than
watchmen look for the morning.—Psalms oxxx., 6.
Supe vatoko e pei malo atatoko anigo,
go naru vatoko e doko melu kakana.
The eternal God is thy dwelling place, and
underneath are the everlasting arms.—Deuteronomy
xxxiii., 27.


A dodumi navasadawonakiana anigo
pa! E pei namidoakiusiusiana aginau
naleatia mamau. Natipakiana anigo maga
e mari an a midodoa liu tea kokona
ki-nau maga.
Oh how love I Thy law! It is my meditation
all the day. Thy commandments make me wiser
than mine enemies.—Psalms cxix., 97, 98.
Nalakena tu peani nalagasaiana maga
waia, tea dodumiana ri, tuga dumagida
mari-gida tuga tautau ki naloa ni napokasi
go ni natana, tuga mari naveiteatapuana
ega wia sua doko namatauki-Supe-ana
doko.
Having . . . these promises, beloved, let us
cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.—
2 Corinthians, vii., 1.
Pa ta dua au natikaana kita nasogo-
lapaana; pa vakale au ki navinaga waina e
patakagu:
A pe viu po pasagoro-ko, po noa,
Yehova e pei sei ?
Give me neither poverty nor riches: feed me
with the food that is needful for me ; Lest I be full
and deny thee and say: Who is the Lord ?—Proverbs
xxx., 8, 9.


Kuga ta dape dakati napatina animu
pakilagi; kuga ta pasa kau daleo casua.
Nalakena nadapedakatiana e da pae ist,
kita west, go e da pae south umai. Ma
Supe e pei tea vasapotae : Nae e doro sikai
paki tano po dape dakati tea pota.
Lift not up your horn on high; speak not with
a stiff neck. For neither from the east, nor from
the west, nor yet from the south cometh lifting up.
But God is the judge : He putteth down one and
lifteth up another.—Psalms ixxv., 6,6, 7.
Eagi wanogoe David e noa ki tea ni
Yilistia, e naga: Nigo ku umai sua au, ku
dape lova, go naio varau go naio puru:
Kinau a dave umai sua-ko nagisa ni
Yehova ni nalapaana, Supe ki navara
navakalo ni Israel.
Then said David to the Philistine : Thou comest
to me with a sword and with a spear, and with a
javelin : but 1 come to thee in the name of the Loan
of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel. —1 Samuel
xvii., 45.
Yehova e da mouti ki lova go naio:
nalakena namarimatuaana e pei tea ki
Yehova.
The Loed saveth not with sword and spear : for
the battle is the Loed’s. —l Samuel xvii., 47.


Nimu kuga wo da merimeri navokalo
waia : kuga dumamu dawonaki mu, kuga
toko dorogo po punusi namoutiana ki
Yehova.
Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set
yourselves, stand ye still and see the salvation of the
Lord. — 2 Chronicles, xx., 17.
Yehova ni nalapaana e noa, Ega ta pei
tea mariana ki naveinawotaana kita naka-
suaana ma ega vei tea mariana ki natagu.
Not by might, nor by power, but by My spirit,
saith the Lord of hosts.—Zechariah iv., 6.
(Namanumatuaana e noa), Te natamoli
e maro pa waina e dogo au po do logoro
namata aginau maga sara napogi.
(Wisdom says) Blessed is the man that heareth
me, watching daily at my gates.—Proverbs viii., 34.
(Namanumatuaana e noa), Naata
waina e pa sai au e pa sai namauriana, go
ega wo peani nasaupiaana ki Yehova. Ma
naata waina e dape pele au e dumana mari
tagele paki natana: tea lapa waina eu
piloso au eu dodumi namateana.
(Wisdom says) Whoso findeth Me, findeth life,
and shall obtain favour of the Lord. But he that
misseth Me wrongeth his own soul; all they that
hate Me love death.—Proverbs viii., 35, 36.


Kinau a sikoti mu . . go natagu
e pei ata-toko sikoti mu : kuga ta mataku
mau.
lam with you . . . and My spirit abideth
with you ; fear ye not.—Haggai ii., 4, 5.
Napua maga ki Yehova e leana, go tea
leana maga euga wo surata asa; ma tea
mari tagele maga euga wo dowo asa.
The ways of the Lord are right, and the just
shall walk in them ; but transgressors shall fall
therein.—Hosea xiv., 9.
Naata waina e pei manumatua ega wo
midoaki parati ki tea maga waia, go euga
wo midoaki nasaupiaana maga ki Yehova.
Whoso is wise shall give heed to these things,
and they shall consider the mercies of the Lord. —
Psalms cvii., 43.
Sara navaratiana eu da punusi a e pei
nalaelaeaana ragi kakana, ma napoposa-
ana: ma ragi e doku e magi tea maga
waina eu mari pitipatipa asa e madeara
taua ki nawana ni natamateana.
All chastening seemeth for the present to be not
joyous, but grievous; yet afterward it yieldeth
peaceable fruit unto them that have been exercised
thereby.—Hebrews xii., 11,


OCTOBER 1.
Mmn kn atae nasaupiaana ki Nawota
Yesu Kristo, waina e pei sogolapa, ma
nalakena nimu e po pei tea tika, naga
nimu kuga sogolapa nalakena naveiteatika-
ana aneana.
Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that though He was rich for your sakes He became
poor, that ye through His poverty might become
rich. —2 Corinthians, viii., 9.
A pasa maraverave po naga, a pei tea
mariana a makoto punusi naraema; ma
nigo ku dogo nadaleo ni navavaraniana
aginau ragi waina a cai paki-go.
I said in my haste: 1 am cut off from before
Thine eyes ; nevertheless Thou heardest the voice of
my supplication when I cried unto Thee.—Psalms
xxxi., 22.
Tuga ta mamale mari tea wia, nala-
kena tu pe ta do manainai asa go ragi
kakana tnga wo lolovae.
Let us not be weary in well-doing : for in due
season we shall reap if we faint not.—Galatians vi., 9.
Knga Yuvurogo mari tea wia sara ragi
dumamu paki mu, go paki sara natamoli.
Alway follow after that which is good, one
toward another, and toward all.—l Thessalonians
v., 15.


Kuga laelaea sara ragi; kuga ta
makoto dapasavasa; kuga yasa dodumataki
nalakena sara naleo: nalakena tea waia e
pei namasauana ki Supe doko Kristo Yesu
doko.
Eejoice alway ; pray without ceasing ; in every
thing give thanks ; for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus.—l Thessalonians v., 16.
Kuga ta soki pueli ki Natana;
kuga mari dogo sara naleo; kuga tape
parati ki tea waina e pia; kuga matau ki
namarinalosaana —sara napua kakana.
Quench not the Spirit; . . prove all things ;
hold fast that which is good ; abstain from every
form of evil. —1 Thessalonians v., 19, 20, 21, 22.
Napua ki Yeliova e magi tea leana pei
malo navavatuana ; ma e maga tea maga
waina eu posi nasigisigileoana e madeara
pei namarisakiana.
The way of the Loed is a strong hold unto the
upright; but it is destruction to the workers of
iniquity.—Proverbs x., 29.


Supe sikaimau e doko, go tea sikaimau
e pei tea vasa corokoro Supe ma natamoli
(Nae ma e pei) natamoli, Kristo Yesu,
waina e dumana pitua ki nia e magi tea
lapa pei natauluaana.
There is one God, one mediator also between
God and men (himself) man, Christ Jesus, who gave
Himself a ransom for all.—l Timothy ii., 5, 6.
Eu da dape parati ki navanua ki lova
adeara po peani a asa, go e da pei adeara
naruda waina e mouti-ra : ma e pei anigo
namelearuma, go namarama ni nama-
tama.
They got not the land in possession by their own
sword, neither did their own arm save them : but Thy
right hand and Thine arm, and the light o£ Thy
countenance. —Psalms xiiv., 3.
Nasigisigileoana aginau maga eu pa
parati ki-nau, go a mari sa 1010 sake asa;
eu lapa liu napati nalolugu, go napopogu e
mate.
Mine iniquities have overtaken me, so that I am
not able to look up; they are more than the hairs of
mine head, and my heart hath failed me.—Psalms
xl., 12.


Kinau, io kinau a pei tea waina a pasa
pakavakale ko : nigo ku pei sei, waina ku
matau ki natamoli sikai waina ega wo
dakiusi namenau ; go ku malio ki Yeliova
tea Yasadawona ki-go, waina a pelesi
nakoroatelagi, go a doro nalakena ni
maramana.
I, even I am He that eomforteth you : who art
thou, that thou art afraid of a man that shall die,
and the son of man which shall be made as grass;
and hast forgotten the Loan thy Maker, that stretched
forth the heavens, and laid the foundation of the
earth. —Isaiah 11., 12, 13.
Kuga kasua go kuga viviari, kuga ta
mataku, go kuga ta matau ki-da : nalakena
Yehova Supe anigo, e pei nae waina a
sikoti ko pano; nae ega wo da sali ko, go ega
wo da doropusi ko madoko.
Be strong and of good courage, fear not, nor be
affrighted at them: for the Loed thy God, He it is
that doth go with thee: He will not fail thee nor
forsake thee.—Deuteronomy xxxi., 6.
Nigo ku pei malo kuru aginau; nigo
pa wo mouti au ki nariesokiana; nigo pa
wo daliviri-goro au ki nalegana maga ni
namoutiana.
Thou art my hiding place; Thou wilt preserve
me from trouble ; Thou wilt compass me about with
songs of deliverance.—Psalms xxxii., 7.


Tuga tape soki casua nanoasaiana ni
nalogoroana anigida naga ega ta parivari ;
nalakena nae waina e lagasai e pasa ma-
soko: go tuga tumagida midoaki-gida po
duniagida soki-gida nadodumiana go na-
wosiana wia maga.
Let us hold fast the confession of our hope that
it waver not; tor He is faithful that promised; and
let us consider one another to provoke unto love and
good works. —Hebrews x., 23, 24.
A diti patua paki Tamana . . naga
ega sau pia tua mu, e pataka ni nalapaana
ni nawarawaraana aneana, naga kuga vei
tea silaeana ki nacasuaana pae Natana
aneana, naga Kristo ega vei atatoko na-
poponm nalakena nasaralomauana.
I bow my knees unto the Father . . . that
He would grant you, according to the riches of His
glory, that ye may be strengthened with power
through His Spirit . . . that Christ may dwell
in your hearts through faith.—Ephesians iii., 14,
16, 17.
Nimu sei waina e pei manu matua po
mikoaki atae ? Ega visei ki nawosiana wia
aneana ega toko napopovakitanoana ni
namanumatuaana.
Who is wise and understanding among you ? Let
him show by his good life his works in meekness of
wisdom.—James iii., 13.


Naga nimu ma tea tapu lapa kuga
casua po midoaki atae naweleweleaana, go
navarauana, go navakilagiana go nadutu-
moruana, go naga kuga atae nadodumiana
ki Kristo, waina e liu namidoakiataeana,
naga kuga vura paki navuraana ki Supe.
To the end that ye . . . may be strong to
apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth
and length and height and depth, and to know the
love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye may
be filled unto all the fulness of God. —Ephesians
iii., 17, 18, 19.
Natureae ega mari napua aneana ega
tautau ki nasava ? Ega midoaki parati
ki-nia pae navasaana anigo.
A laga ako ki napopogu mamau : Pa
ta suasua ago surata pa sapo fnelu dua ki
natipakiana anigo maga.
Wherewithal! shall a young man cleanse his
way ? By taking heed thereto according to Thy
word.
With my whole heart have I sought Thee : 0 let
me not wander from Thy commandments. —Psalms
oxix., 9, 10.


Namelegu e pa paratiki pia ki nava-
meleana aneana ; a dape parati ki napua
aneana go ada dawasi. Ada melu dua ki
natipakiana ni nagogona a daua ki navasa-
ana maga ni nagolena, a mari casua pia
asa liu waina a daua ki navinaga silae
aginau.
My foot hath held fast to His steps; His way
have I kept and turned not aside. I have not gone
back from the commandment of His lips ; I have
treasured up the words of His mouth more than my
necessary food.—Job xxiii., 11, 12.
Yehova, Supe aginau nawosiana ni
namagaana waina ku mari a eu lapa pa, go
namidodoana anigo maga paki garni: eda
pei tea mari-atae-ana doro dawonaki-da
naraema ; a pe masauna noa sai po pasa
asa eu pe lapa liu waina a pe mari atae
peve parati ki-da.
Many, 0 Loed my God, are the wonderful works
which Thou hast done, and Thy thoughts which are
to us-ward : they cannot be set in order unto Thee ;
if I would declare and speak of them, they are more
than can be numbered. —Psalms xl., 5.


Go David e noa . . . e naga,
Eagi waia tuga rowo paki narn ni Yehova ;
nalakena nadodumiana aneana e lapalapa :
go tuga ta dowo paki naru ni natamoli.
And David said ... let us fall now into the
hand of the Lord ; for His mercies are great: and
let us not fall into the hand of man.—2 Samuel
xxiv., 14.
Namanumatnaana waina e pae lagi e
pea madn, go e damate, e matemate, e
suasna pia, e pnra ki nadodumiana go
nawana wia maga.
The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be intreated, full of mercy
and good fruits. l —James iii., 17.
Aga wo puati tea mata kesa maga pae
napua matua waina eu da atae a ; aga wo
damaraki-ra pae napua waina eu da atae
a: aga wo mari namaligo ega vei nama-
rama naraeda, go malo tagele maga euga
leana. Aga wo mari tea maga waia go aga
da doropusi ra euga madoko.
I will bring the blind by a way they know not;
in paths that they know not will I lead them ; I will
make darkness light before them, and crooked places
straight. Theee things will I do, and will not forsake
them.—lsaiah xlii, 16.


Kuga tapasavasa doko Natana Tapu
doko, kuga dumamu dape parati Id mu
doko nadodumiana ki Supe doko, po do
logoro nasaupiaana ki Nawota anigida
Yesu Kristo paki namauriana vatoko.
Praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in
the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto eternal life.—Jude xx., 21.
Naata waina e daki dorogo au ega wo
doko malo tugoroana, go ega wo doko
dorogo ega ta matau ki tea sa.
Whoso hearkeneth unto Me shall dwell securely,,
and shall be quiet without fear of evil.—Proverbs
i., 33.
Naata waina e kisi dogo mu e kisi-
dogo atolu ni namatana. Nalakena, pa
leo, aga wo parivari ki narugu namasuada,
go euga wo pei natapepavakotoana ki tea
maga waina eu madeara suasua.
He that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his
eye. For, behold, I will shake mine hand over them,
and they shall be a spoil to those that strved them.
—Zechariah ii., 8, 9.


Supe ega vei tea vasamatakiana, nala-
kena nimu waina ku pea pei naviti maga
ni namarinalosaana, ku po dogo parati ki
ki napopomu ki naviseikiana waina ku pei
tea moutiana paki asa ; go nalakena ku pei
tea veresi-lua-ana ki namarinalosaana ku
po pei naviti maga ni namarinaloleanaana.
Thanks be to God, that whereas ye were servants
of sin, .ye became obedient from the heart to that
form of teaching, whereunto ye were delivered ; and
being made free from sin, ye became servants of
righteousness.—Romans vi., 17, 18.
Napopo ni Yehova e liko tea maga
waina eu matau ki nia—tea maga waina
eu logoro nasaupiaana aneana.
The Lobe taketh pleasure in them that fear
Him, in those that hope in His mercy. —Psalms
cxlvii., 11.
Moses e noa, Pa visei ki-nau, a pava-
rani ko, nasamasamaana anigo. . . Go
e noa, ku mari sa punusi namatagu : nala-
kena natamoli ega wo da punusi au po
mauri.
Moses said : Show me, I pray Thee, Thy glory.
. . . And He said ; Thou oanst not see my face :
for man shall not see Me and live.—Exodus xxxiii.,
18, 20.


A punusi Nawota e doko toko tapu e
paki lagi po pei tea dapedakatiana. . .
Seraf maga eu doko namasuana . . go
sikai e pioso paki kerua e naga, Tea tapu,
tea tapu, tea tapu Yehova ni nalapaana
maga : maramana mamau e pura ki nasa-
masamaana aneana.
I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and
lilted up. . . . Above him stood the seraphim
. . . and one cried unto another, and said : Holy,
holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is
full of His glory.—lsaiah vi., 1,2, 3.
Pa ta disugi koi tuai maga; go pa ta
soka vikoro roara maga ki natuna malepu
maga.
Remove not the ancient landmarks; and enter
not into the fields of the fatherless.—Proverbs
xxiii., 10.


NOVEMBER 1.
Ku punusi natamoli e pei tea mari-
leanakiana ki nawosiana, go e da pei
nasaralomauana masikinia. . . . Nala-
kena dakiusi waina napatokona waina e
dika ki natana e mate, e dapale nogoe
nasaralomauana waina e dika ki nawosiana
e mate.
Ye see that by works a man is justified, and not
only by faith. . . . For as the body apart from
the spirit is dead, even so faith apan from works is
dead.—James ii., 24, 26.
Natana e silae namanainaiana anigida,
nalakena nigida tu da atae dapale waina e
one gida one naga tuga tapasavasa, ma
Natana e dumana manigida pasa korokoro
ki namarousuana waina e pei tea noa
saraviana.
The Spirit . . . helpeth our infirmity, for
we know not how to pray as we ought; but the Spirit
Himself maketh intercession for us with groanmgs
which cannot be uttered.—Romans viii., 26.
Go Hesekia e dape leter ki naru ni tea
tipakiluaana, go e peve a : go Hesekia e
sake pano paki nasuma ki Yehova, go e
pukesi a narae ni Yehova.
And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand
of the messenger, and read it; and Hezekiah went
up into the house of the Loud, and spread it before
the Lobd.—lsaiah xxxvii., 14.


Go ega wo lolomana pea ki waina eu
pioso, kinau aga wo pasa dara, go ragi
waina eu ko do pasa, kinau aga wo dogo.
And it shall come to pass that, before they call,
I will answer, and while they are yet speaking, I will
hear.—lsaiah Ixv., 24.
Pa midoaki nia napopoma, dakiusi
waina natamoli e parati natuna, e dapale
nogoe Yehova Supe anigo e parati ko. Go
nigo pa tape parati ki natipakiana maga ki
Yehova Supe anigo, naga pa surata napua
maga aneana, po matau ki-nia.
Thou shalt consider in thine heart, that, as a
man ehasteneth his son, so the Lord thy God
ohasteneth thee. And thou shalt keep the command-
ments of the Lord thy God, to walk in His ways,
and to fear Him.—Deuteronomy viii., 5, 6.
Nae e pisei ki-go, natamoli, tea waina
e pia ; go Yehova e dipa ki-go pa mari
nasava, ma tea waia naga waina pa mari
leana, pa masau lapalapa mari nadodumi-
ana, go pa surata sikoti Supe anigo ki napo-
povakitanoana.
He has showed thee, 0 man, what is good; and
what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God. —Micah vi., 8.


Te naata e pe vei tea va-paratikiana
te namarinalosaana, nimu waina napopomu
e pei tea ni Natana, kuga vua doa tea
dapale nogoe ega liliu, kuga man a ki
napopo-matemateana; go pa dumama 1010
paki-go: nigo ma ku pe wo pei tea
surueana. Kuga tumamu manimu dape
pioli natapetapeana animu po paka vuro
natipakiana ki Kristo asa, e dapale nogoe.
If a man be overtaken in any trespass, ye which
are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of
meekness; looking to thyself, lest thou also be
tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so
fulfill the law of Christ.—Galatians vi., 1, 2.
Go Samuel e noa, Supe e cita mataki
navituaana nataparakiana go naviriana e
lapalapa dakiusi narogoparatikiana ni
nadaleo ni Yehova, kita ? Pa leo, narogo-
paratikiana e pia liu naviriana, go nata-
kitorogoana e pia liu namuta ni ram.
And Samuel said; Hath the Lord as great
delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in
obeying the voice of the Lord ? Behold, to obey is
better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of
rams.—l Samuel xv., 22.


Nawota ega wo pna lua an ki sara
uawosiana sa, go ega wo mouti au paki
namarakiana ni nakoroatelagi aneana : e pia
nae ega vei tea samasamaniana ega tu
man du. Amen.
The Lord will deliver me from every evil work,
and will save me unto His heavenly kingdom: to
whom be the glory for ever. Amen.—2 Timothy
iv., 18.
Kinau ada malieri; nalakena a atae
tea waina a saraloman asa, go a atae
parati ki-nia e man atae pavaegoro tea
waina a doro e e doko naruna.
lam not ashamed; for I know Him, whom I
have believed, and am persuaded that He is able to
guard that which I have committed unto him ?
2 Timothy, i., 12.
Knga takitorogo taigu dodumiana ri
aginau maga ; Supe e da matadoa tea
maga waina eu pei tea tika ki naloriki
maramana waia euga sogolapa ki nasara-
lomauana, go euga vei tea dape paumaso
ni namarakiana waina nae e laga sai ega
tua tea maga waina eu dodumi a, kita ?
Hearken my beloved brethren: did not God
choose them that are poor as to the world to be rich
in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which He promised
to them that love him ? —James ii., 5.


Nawota anigida Yesu Kristo, nae, go
Supe Tamagida waina e dodumi-gida po
dua-gida navasa-pakavakaleana vatoko go
nalogoroana wia nalakena nasaufuaana ega
vasavakavakale napopomu po mari soki-
soki-ra sara nawosiana wia go sara
navasaana wia.
Our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, and God our
Father which loved us, and gave us eternal comfort
and a good hope through grace, comfort your hearts
and establish them in every good work and word. —
2 Thesalonians ii., 16, 17.
Namarakiana ki Supe e da pei
nakaniana go namunuana, ma e pei nama-
rinaloleanaana go natamateana go nalae-
laeaana doko Natana Tapu doko.
The kingdom of God is not eating and drinking,
but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy
Ghost.—Romans xiv,, 17.
Aga samani ko, 0 Nawota Supe
aginau, ki napopogu maumau; go aga
dape dakati nagisama ega tu mau du.
Nalakena nadodumiana anigo paki-nau e
lapalapa go ku mouti natagu ki slieol etano.
I will praise Thee, O Lord my God, with my
whole heart; and I will glorify Thy name for ever-
more. For great is Thy mercy toward me, and Thou
hast delivered my soul from sheol beneath. —Psalms
Ixxxyi., 12, 13.


Nae e magi tea leana daua id na-
manumatuaana wia, e magi tea maga
waina eu surata napoposikaimauana e
madeara pei taleva sikai, naga ega vavai-
goro napua maga ni navasapotaeana po
dape parati ki napua matua ki tea tapu
aneana maga.
He layeth up sound wisdom for the upright, He
is a shield to them that walk in integrity, that He
may guard the paths of judgment and preserve the
way of His saints.—Proverbs ii., 7, 8.
Nimu sara naata kaka-mu ega ta 1010
paki nalorika maga aneana, ma sara naata
kaka-mu mega (lolo) paki naloriki maga ki
tea pota. Popo waia waina e doko Kristo
Yesu doko mega toko mu doko.
Look not each of you to his own things, but
each of you also unto the things of others. Have
this mind in you which was also in Christ Jesus.—
Philippians ii., 4, 5.
E magi tea lapa mate, naga tea maga
waina eu mauri euga ta dumada madeara
mauri, ma magi nae waina e madeara mate
po moro duleana.
He died for all, that they which live should no
longer live unto themselves, but unto Him who for
their sakes died and rose again.—2 Corinthians v., 15.


Nimu tea lapa kuga vei popo sikaimau,
popo-dogo-ki-te-e-sa sikoti, popo dodmni
taigida maga, popo pakavakale, popo paki
tano; kuga ta datagi liliu dipa tea sa.
Be ye all likeminded, compassionate, loving as
brethren, tenderhearted, humbleminded, not rendering
evil for evil. —1 Peter hi., 8, 9.
Nimu sei waina ku matau Id Yehova,
waina ku dogo parati ki nadaleo ni tea
suasua aneana ? naata waina e surata
namaligo, go e dika nasulu, e pia ega
vavatu nagisa ni Yehova.
Who is among you that feareth the Loan, that
obeyeth the voice of His servant ? He that walketh
in darkness and hath no light, let him trust in the
name of the Loan.—lsaiah 1., 10.
Supe e matadoa mu pae ragi vea mau
paki namoutiana, doko namarinaveiteatapu-
ana ni Natana doko, go natapesokiana ni
nalomauana.
God chose you from the beginning unto
salvation, in sanctification of the Spirit and belief of
the truth.—2 Thessalonians ii., 13.


E soso mu pae narogorogoana wia
aginami, naga kuga tape nasamasamaniana
ni Nawota anigida Yesu Kristo.
He called you through our gospel, to the obtain-
ing of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.—
2 Thessalonians ii., 14.
Dakiusi waina Ist e doko uvea ki west
e dape lua namarinalosaana anigida maga
paki uvea ki-gida e dapale nogoe. Dakiusi
waina tamana e dodumi natuna maga, e
dapale nogoe Yehova e dodumi tea maga
waina eu matau ki-nia.
As far as the east is from the west, so far hath
He removed our transgressions from us. Like as a
father pitieth his children, so the Loan pitieth them
that fear Him. —Psalms ciii., 12, 13.
Tea ni nadodumi-taigida-ana e da pei
tea waina nimu ku maligo asa naga te
naata e pe midiri noa ki mu asa : nalakena
nimu ku pei tea viseikiana ki Supe naga
kuga dumamu dodumi mu.
Concerning love of the brethren, ye have no
need that one write unto you : for ye yourselves are
taught of God to love one another.—l Thessalonians
iv., 9.


Yeliova Supe animu waina e surata
pea ki mu, nae ega wo manimu pivimeri,
ega vataka ni sara naleo waina e manimu
mari a Ecupt narae ni namata mu.
The Lord your God who goeth before you, He
shall fight for you, according to all that He did for
you in Egypt before your eyes,—Deuteronomy i., 30.
Pa toro natapetapeana anigo ega toko
Yehova doko, go nae ega wo silae ko : nae
ega wo da suasua tea leana ega varivari te
ragi seara man.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and He shall
sustain thee : He shall never suffer the righteous to
be moved.—Psalms lv., 22.
Kuga laga Yehova, nimu tea popo
matemate lapa ni maramana, waina ku
mari navasapotaena aneana maga, kuga
laga namarinaloleanaana; kuga laga na-
popomatemateana.
Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth which
have wrought His judgments, seek righteousness;
seek meekness.—Zephaniah ii„ 3.


Ragi nariesokiana eu pioso paki
Yehova, go nae e mouti-ra pakasa ki malo
wono adeara maga. E dipaki lua nava-
saana aneana po mari pauri-ra.
They cry unto the Loud in their trouble, and He
saveth them out of their distresses. He sendeth
His word and healeth them. —Psalms ovii.,T9, 20.
Natamoli eu pe samani Yehova nala-
kena nadodumiana, go nawosiana ni
namagaana aneana maga paki natamoli
natuna maga e pe wia !
Oh that men would praise the Loud for His
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children
of men ! —Psalms cvii., 8.
Kinau a da pasa lokutaki, tokora
sikae ni navanua ni namaligo ; a da noa
ki nawora ni Yakop, kuga laga moli ki-nau.
I have not spoken in secret, in a place of the
land of darkness ; I said not unto the seed of Jacob:
seek ye Me in vain.—lsaiah xlv., 19.
£a vioso paki-nau naleatia ni narie-
sokiana ; kinau aga wo mouti ko, go nigo
pa wo samani au.
Call upon me in the day of trouble ; I will
deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.—Psalms 1., 15.


DECEMBER 1
Elo ega ta moro pei nasulu anigo
aleati; go namarama ni atelagi ega ta
moro lagati ko : ma Yehova ega wo ma-
nigo pei nasulu vatoko.
The sun shall be no more thy light by day ;
neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto
thee : but the Loan shall be unto thee an everlasting
light.—lsaiah lx., 19.
Pa visei ki-nau napua matua anigo
maga, 0 Yehova: _pa vasapisei ki-nau
napua maga anigo. Pa tamaraki au nalo-
mauana anigo, go pa vasa-pisei ki-nau ;
nalakena nigo ku pei Supe ni namoutiana
aginau; a doko raki-go naleatia mamau.
Show me Thy ways, O' Lord; teach me Thy
paths; guide me in Thy truth, and teach me; for
Thou art the God of my salvation; on Thee do I
wait all the day.—Psalms xxv., 4, 5.
Namatakuana ki tea sigisigileo ega wo
pa parati ki-nia : go nalogoroana ki tea
leana ega wo pei tea vituakiana paki nia.
The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon Him;
and the desire of the righteous shall be granted.—
Proverbs x., 24.


Nae e pe mari punue an—kinau aga
toko raki nia : ma aga tape parati ki napna
aginan maga ega dapale nea doko naraena.
Though He slay me, yet will I wait for Him :
nevertheless I will maintain my ways before Him.—
Job xiii., 15.
Naf okasigu go nafiopogu e pe da moro
silae an: ma Snpe e pei nakasnaana ni
napopogn go panmaso aginan ega tn man
du.
My flesh and my heart faileth ; but God is the
strength of my heart and my portion for ever.—
Psalms Ixxiii., 26.
Nawota e noa ki-nan, Nasanpiaana
aginan e patakama pia; nalakena naka-
suaana aginan e pei tea mariana e matna
doko namanainaiana doko. Nalakena
wanogoe a masauna aga vasa lagi nama-
nainaiana aginan, naga nakasnaana ki
Kristo ega toko an.
The Lord said unto me, My grace is sufficient,
for thee ; for My power is made perfect in weakness.
Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my
weakness, that the strength of Christ may rest upon
me.—2 Corinthians xii., 9.


Eagi waina tn dogo napatokogida e
pei kiagida, tu pueli ki Nawota . . ma
tu moro masauna naga tuga vueli ki napa-
tokogida po dogo tu doko kiagida ragi
waina to sikoti Nawota doko.
Whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord. . . . We are willing
rather to be absent from the body and to be at home
with the Lord.—2 Corinthians v., 6-8.
An rogorogo ki Kristo tea turiana
waina e magi Yu pei tea tapilagonaana, go
e magi nalalauna pota maga pei navasa-
paka-malamalaana: ma e magi nara
waina eu pei tea sosoana, Yu kita tea ni
Heles, Kristo e pei nakasuaana ki Supe,
go namanumatuaana ki Suf e.
We preach Christ crucified, unto Jews a stum-
bling block, and unto Gentiles foolishness : but unto
them that are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ
the power of God and the wisdom of God.—
1 Corinthians i., 23-24.
Go e dapale nogoe tuga wo sikoti
Nawota doko mau doko. Kalakena wano-
goe kuga tumamu pasa pakavakale mu ki
navasaana maga waia.
And so shall we ever be with the Lord. Where-
fore comfort one another with these words.—
1 Thessalonians iy., 17, 18.


A gona namasova ni tea rua waia a
masauna naga aga vano po doko sikoti
Kristo ; nalakena tea wanogoe e pia liu sa
pa: ma a pe toko napokasigu epe moro
manimu pia liu sa.
I am in a strait betwixt the two, having the
desire to depart and be with Christ, for it is very far
better: yet to abide in the flesh is more needful for
your sake.—Philippians i., 23.
Au dika nakasuaana dipa taua lapa
waia waina e do umai dipa garni; go au
da atae tea waina auga maria: ma
namata-gami e doko ako doko.
We have no might against this great company
that cometh against us ; neither know we what to
do: but our eyes are upon Thee.—2 Chroniclesxx., 12.
Yehova, e pei nae waina e surata pea
kigo'; nae ega wo sikoti ko, nae ega wo da
sali ko, go ega wo da doropusi ko, pa ta
mataku, go pa ta matau kite navatuna
mau.
The Lord, He it is that doth go before thee; He
will be with thee, He will not fail thee, neither
forsake thee: fear not, neither be dismayed.—
Deuteronomy xxxi., 8,


Nasurataana ki natamoli (leana) e pei
tea mari-sokisokiana ki Yehova; go e
laelaea napiia aneana. Epe rowo, ma ega
wo da dowo doko mau : nalakena Yehova
e do silae a ki namelearuna.
A righteous man’s doings are established of the
Lord ; and he delighteth in his way. Though he
fall, he shall not be utterly cast down : for the Lord
upholdeth him with His hand.—Psalms xxxvii., 23,24.
Navasamatakiana go navasasakiana e
melu nagole sikaimau umai. Taigu maga,
e ta pia tea maga waia ega dapale nogoe.
Noai putoputo e lua noai mami go noai
kokona e melu namata sikaimau, kita ?
Out of the same mouth cometh forth blessing
and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not
so to be. Doth the fountain send forth from the
same opening sweet water and bitter ?—James iii.,
10, 11.
Navituaana ki tea sigisigileo e pei
teakaraicitasakiana ki Yehova. Ma nata-
tagoana ki tea leana e pei nalaelaeaana
aneana.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to
the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is His
delight.—Proverbs xv., 8.


wo doko ara doko . . . . go aga wo
pei Supe adeara, go nara euga wo pei nata-
moli aginau.
We are the temple of the living God; even as
God said : I will dwell in them . . . and I will
Supe e da pei natamoli waina e pe
salisali; go eda pei natamoli natnna waina
epe midoaki piri: nae epe noa e, go epe
da maria, kita; go e pe vasa te navatuna
go e pe ta mari a ega tapale nogoe, kita ?
God is not a man that He should lie; neither
the son of man, that He should repent. Hath He
said, and shall He not do it? Or hath He spoken,
and shall He not make it good ’—Numbers xxiii., 19.
Nigida tu pei tempel ki Supe mauri;
e dakiusi waina Supe e noa e, e naga, Aga
be their God, and they shall be My people —
2 Corinthians vi., 16.
Te nalalauna kita te namarakiana
waina eu da masauna naga euga maginau
suasua euga wo nunu; io, nalalauna maga
wanogoe euga wo siri pueli.
The nation and kingdom that will not serve Thee
shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly
wasted.—lsaiah lx., 12.


A pavarani mu, taigu maga, kuga to lo
patoko tea maga waina eu mari natamoli
eu dumada potawotae-ra go waina eu pei
nalakena maga ni natapilagonaana. . .
Nalakena tea maga waina eu dapale nogoe
eu da magi Nawota Kristo suasua mau.
I beseech you, brethren, mark them which are
causing the divisions and occasions of stumbling.
. . . For they that are such serve not the Lord
Christ.—Eomans xvi., 17, 18.
Ega wo lolomana te tokora waina eu
pea noa ki-da, Ku da pei natamoli aginau,
tokora wanogoe euga wo soso-ra ki Supe
mauri natuna maga.
It shall be, that in the place where it was said
unto them : Ye are not My people ; there shall they
be called sons of the living God. —Eomans ix , 26.
Nagogo ni nalomauana ega wo pei tea
toro-laketokoana doko mau doko: ma
namena salisali e doko ragi kiki sa.
The lip of truth shall be established for ever:
but a lying tongue is but for a moment. —Proverbs
xii., 19.


Pa mari sokisold tea ni waina pa sna
Supe anigo.
Prepare to meet thy God.—Amos iv., 12.
Yehova ega wo ororo pae Sion umai,
po pitna ki nadaleona pae Yerusalem umai,
go maramana ega wo parivari : ma Yehova
ega wo magi natamoli aneana pei malo
kokonagoroana sikai.
The Lord shall roar from Zion, and utter His
voice from Jerusalem, and the earth shall shake : but
the Lord will be a refuge unto His people.—Joel iii.,
16.
Pa vavatu Yehova ki napopoma ma-
rtian, go pa ta do kokonaki namioakiatae-
ana anigo : Pa noa-sai a sara napua matua
anigo maga, go nae ega wo pisei ki-go
napna anigo maga.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean
not upon thine own understanding. In all thy ways
acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy paths.—
Proverbs iii., 5, 6.


Knga tugoro Satan, go nae ega wo
sava dna ki mu pano. Kuga risu paki
maladigi ki Supe go nae ega wo disu paki
maladigi ki mu.
Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
Draw nigh to God, and He will draw nigh to you.—
James iv., 7, 8.
Tuga ta moro dumagida pasa potae-
gida: ma e pia kuga vasa potae tea waia
naga waina te naata ega ta doro natapila-
gonaana ega toko napua ki taina, kita te
nalakena waina e pe rowo asa.
Let ns not . . judge one another any more:
but judge ye this rather, that no man put a stumbling-
block in his brother’s way, or an occasion of falling.
—Romans xiv., 13.
Tea dodumiana maga, kuga midoaki
navasaana maga waina apostolo maga ki
Nawota anigida, Yesu Kristo eu noa e,
dapale waina eu noa ki mu, Eagi e daku
tea vasa saudoa seara euga wo doko, waina
euga wo surata namasauana ni namalio-ki-
Supe-ana adeara.
Beloved, remember ye the words which have
been spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ; how that they said to you : In the last time
there shall be mockers, walking after their own
ungodly lusts. —Jude 17, 18.


Napopo-vakilagi-ana e pea ki waina
ega wo sua namarisakiana, go napopovuka-
ana e pea ki narowoana. Te naata epe vei
popovakitano po sikoti tea dika ki naloriki,
tea wanogoe e pe wia liu waina e pe tape
namagovae ni natapevavakotoana ki tea
popovakilagi.
Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty
spirit before a fall. Better it is to be of a lowly
spirit with the poor, than to divide the spoil with the
proud.—Proverbs xvi., 18, 19.
Aga vioso paki-go pae namata pagona
ni maramana, ragi waina napopogu e pei
tea muagoroana. Pa vuati an paki vatu-
lake-toko waina e liu au paki lagi.
From the end of the earth will I call unto Thee,
when my heart is overwhelmed. Lead me to the
rock that is higher than I. —Psalms Ixi., 2.
Maramana mamau ega wo lotu ki-go,
go euga wo lega samani ko; euga wo lega
samani nagisama.
All the earth shall worship Thee, and shall sing
unto Thee; they shall sing to Thy name.—Psalms
Ixvi., 4.


Supe ega dodumi-gida po sau pia
ki-gida, po mari namatana ega marama
paki-gida; Naga napua anigo ega vei tea
ataeana maramana ; namoutiana wia anigo
maleoputo ni nalalauna pota maga.
E pia natamoli maga euga samani ko, 0
Supe ; e pia sara natamoli euga samani ko.
E pia napopo ni nalalauna maga ega wia
po lega ki nalaelaeaana: nalakena nigo pa
wo pasa potae natamoli maga ki naleana-
ana po maraki nalalauna maga waina eu
doko maramana.
E pia natamoli maga euga samani ko, 0
Supe, e pia sara natamoli euga samani ko.
Navanua e pitua kinatawiana aneana :
Supe, io, Supe anigida ega wo pasa
mataki-gida.
Supe ega wo pasa mataki-gida; go sara
namata pagona maga ni maramana euga
wo matau ki-nia. Amen.
God be merciful unto us and bless us, and cause
His face to shine upon us; that Thy way may be
known upon the earth; Thy saving health among
all the nations
Let the peoples praise Thee, 0 God; let all the
peoples praise Thee.
O let the nations be glad and sing for joy : for
Thou shalt judge the peoples with equity, and govern
the nations upon the earth.
Let the people praise Thee, 0 God; let all the
people praise Thee.
The earth hath yielded her increase; God, even
our God, shall bless us.
God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth
shall fear Him. -Psalms Ixvii.


NALEQAANA
TOQOA.


NALEQAANA NI TOQOA
JESUS SAVES,
A dogo nadaleo—
Yesu e mouti-gida!
Go pa moro noa sai;
Yesu e mouti-gida !
Pa ko pa dogodogo
Paki sara nauri, o ;
Nara ma euga dogo,
Yesu e mouti-gida.
Ega vae napeao—
Yesu e mouti-gida;
Tea taparo euga atae,
Yesu e mouti-gida.
Sara nauri kuga wo
Sokari nadaleo
Usuraki tokora—
Yesu e mouti-gida!
Ki namariana sa
Yesu e mouti-gida.
Go ki navaratian’
Yesu e mouti-gida.
rogo popo sa,
Pa ko moro lega pa:
Yesu mari matua :
Yesu e mouti-gida!


4. Sara natokoana,
Yesu e mouti-gida !
N amarimatuana —
E pitua moli ki
’Manriana vatoko:
Tuga more laga na ?
Yesu e mouti-gida!
SWEET SAVIOUR, BLESS US.
1. Yesu pa sau pia ki-nau ;
fa toko napopogu du.
A dogo a maladi sa ;
Pa mari a ega wia.
Pa marama lagati au,
Aga to para ki-go pa.
2. Namariana agin.au
Go namidodoana ma
E pei namanainaiana mau,
Go nigo ku atae a.
fa marama &c.
3. fa midoakikorokoro
Namarinalosaana;
Pa tape napopogami,
Go pa vakatarumi ra.
Pa marama, &c


4. Popo tamate, go ega
Yura ki nadodumian’,
Pa tua puti garni a’:
Auga vataka kiama.
Pa marama, &c.
5. Tagami ri au soso mu,
Tuga mamau do Yesu du ;
Naleatia ki Nawota
E do paki maladigi.
Pa marama, &c.
I'VE FOUND A FBIEND, 0 SUCH A FBIEND
1. Yesu e pei Tagu ri
E pea pa-sai au,
E suli parati ki-nau
Ki nadodumiana,
Go aga wo do asa du:
E pei na lo vatoko ;
A doko pia naruna,
Go ega ta makoto.
2. Yesu e pei Tagu ri,
E maginau mate;
E da dumana mouti a,
Ma e dua au asa.
Kinau go sara na 10,
Waina e liko au,
E pei te’aneana, go
Ega tapale doko.


3. Yesu e pei Tagu ri,
Go nae e pei Nawota ;
Ega wo lo p’rati ki-nau
Namalasi matua.
Go a punusi uvea
Nasulu ni kiana,
Waina ega silae au
Melu namateana.
4. Yesu e pei Tagu ri,
Go e pei Sau pia ;
E do pasa pisei ki-nau
Namarimatuaana.
Go sei ega mari au
Aga wo 1010 pota :
Nakokoro daliviri
E pei Nawota Yesu.
JESUS, THE VERY THOUGHT OF THEE.
1. Yesu a laelae ako pa,
Elo ni natagu.
Go ega wo pia liu
Doko sikoti ko.
2. Te napopo e mari sa
Pa sai te nagisa,
Waina e pia dapale
Te anigo, Yesu.
3. Nalog’roana sikaimau
Ki tea leana;
Go agi tea manainai
Ku pei nakasuan’.


4. Ma tea waina eu pa-sai
Nadodumiana
Kara maskida atae a;
Yesu nalakena.
5. Yesu pa maginau pei
Namaropaana
Sara napogi ragi wai
Go ega tu mau du.
JESUS, I WILL TRUST THEE.
Tune : Kirkehlokken, No. 1
1. A pavatu ako,
Yesu Kristo ri
Tea mari pauri,
Pa ko vauri au.
2. A pavatu ako,
Tea dodumi;
Ku dodumi lepro:
Pa dodumi au.
3. A pavatu ako
Ku pasa pia
Aga toko dogo:
Do natuama.
4. A pavatu ako ;
Ku pe ta karai
Naata wain’ e sili
N’da ni Kalvari.


SAVIOOB, THY DYING LOVE.
Church Praise,
1. Ku mate oli an,
Yesu tagu ri;
Go aga mouti na’
Ma a dua ko.
Go napopogu
A moro dape a,
Doro e naraema,
Po dua ko a.
2. Nasaralomauan’
Kiki aginau
E pavarani ko,
Yesu aginau:
Pa ko silae au
Manigo noa sai
Nadodumiana
Lapalapa.
3. Yesu pa tua au
Napopo lomau,
Naga sara napog’
Ega vunusi
Nawosiana ni
Nadodumiana
Waina a manigo
Moro mari a.


4. Ku pea dua au
Sara naleo
Waina e silae au
Pa-pa’ masoso :
A pavarani ko,
Pa silae natagu
Aga samani ko
Ega tu ruau du.
TILL HE COME. Sanhetj,
A dua mu napatokogu
Waina e manimu mawora
Go nadagu waina e ma
Manimu e doroa.
Kuga kani, kuga munu,
Po midoaki-nau asa.
Kuga toko mari a
Pa-pa-pa aga umai.
Eagi kiki e ko do
Go aga wo sua mu
Ku pe tagi, ku pe kai,
Ma aga wo moro umai.
Eagi kiki kuga ko
Maginau noa sai
Namateana aginau
Pa-pa aga wo moro umai ;
Go kuga to surata
Naraegu natamateana.


4. Napopouru maligo
Go nasusneana
Sara nasasana’na
Go namateana ma
Tulutaki noa sai
Pa-pa aga moro umai.
(From Psalm xcvii.)
1. Yehova, Supe warua,
Nawota sikaimau;
Go sara nauri lapa o,
Kuga to laelaea.
2. ’Popouru go namaligo
E maligoro e
E pagi toko tapu rd
Naloleana’na.
3. Nakapn warua sikai
E pea ki nia
Po gani tea walu sa
Ki nia, puti ra.
4. Namalieriana sa
Ega wo darui a
Tea vavavatu itolo
Go wain’ e mouti a.
5. Seara wain’ eu to lotu
Ki vatu go nakau
Euga wo malieri sa
Po dakiusi ra.


6. Nimu waina ku dodumi
Nawota Yehova,
Kuga karai namaligo
Po toropusi a.
7. Nimu waina ku leana
Kuga to laelaea;
Kuga samani Yehova
E palu-goro mu.
1. Tuga mamau lega,
Haleluya, Amene !
Yesu anigida
Haleluya, Amene !
Tuga samani a
Ki napopogida
Po doko naraena
Haleluya, Amene !
2. Tu saisai ragi ri,
Haleluya, Amene!
Tuga lega lagi:
Haleluya, Amene.
Yesu e dodumi,
Go e pitana ki,
B pei tagida ri,
Haleluya, Amene.


3. Elagi kiana,
Haleluya, Amene!
Moro samani a :
Haleluya, Amene.
Tuga wo lega pa,
Po doko laelaea
N amoromau ria,
Haleluya, Amene.
( Language of Emae.J
Tn pimi rorogo,
A Yesu atatu
Plaleluya, Amene!
Haleluya, Amene.
Tu rorogo narae
Navorogo tapu
Kia Yesu Kristo
Haleluya, Amene.
Aturoto mama,
Yesu manatua
Haleluya, Amene !
Haleluya, Amene.
Atuarild ni
Ma atuta kaga
Tu ru iateia T t i i »
Haleluya, Amene.
Ma turaga titi, rr i i v
~ ? Humnvfi Am pi
Plaleluya, Amene !
Yesu ka po numai
Haleluya, Amene.
Ko vuti atatu
Ki yona iruga
Tu novo leleva
Haleluya, Amene.




YAU
TASIKO.


YAU NA TASIKO.
COME
HOLY SPIRIT, HEAVENLY DOVE.
Leme na peni, Nununa Wa,
0 imi pu memi;
0 iori kapi wa soma
Sne memi manini.
Nasitomena samemi
Sipa namarena,
Ana soma ani memi
Kevin pania.
Nunn nakakawaena,
0 imi naga ni,
0 tawoni e snememi
Kasitomena wa.


HE LEADSTH ME.
Purari nu ni dapa wo,
Nasitomena na peni—
Koine ni yo pinnia
Lima ni De purari nu.
Purari nu ! purari nu !
Purari nu ni limana
Ne eno rana ruruia
Miasia ni limanaga.
Napogi tai pe pogena,
Napogi tai sipa Eten,
Si mono, po si keviu,
Ana limana pure nu.
Purari nu! &c.
Limau e teke soma,
Ne igileni re poli,
A sneu taga e sulau
Miasia ko o pure nu.
Purari nu ! &c.
Na pa sau yumena wisi,
Namara mene miasia ko,
Ne pe marau namarena—
Te isio kome Yortan.
Purari nu ! &c.


JUST AS I AM.
Sipa ne nsu, limauga,
Ana tama, naga taga,
A nage ko o pio nu
Yesu Kristo, ne imi! ne imi!
Sipa ne nsu, pilu pinu
Ne ntapa re ke lua tai;
0 uia nu oa tama,
Yesu Kristo, ne imi! ne imi!
Sipa ne nsu : sneu pige,
Lomopou pe namara,
Yanua pe marauena—
Yesu Kristo, ne imi! ne imi!
Sipa ne nsu —ne pe pili,
Ne nana, a ne pe kewe :
Koga tapa malia nu,
Yesu Kristo, ne imi! ne imi!
Sipa ne nsu—o kusi nu,
0 ure kurena na nu,
Miasia ne piawe ko,
Yesu Kristo, ne imi! ne imi!
Sipa ne nsu—snema taura
Tapa ni vani ani nu.
Nee esoma e sike po,
Yesu Kristo, ne imi! ne imi!


0 HAPPY DAY.
Lipae wo, ne pileile ko,
Yesu naemareni nu!
Sneu kekara pania,
Ne isa suli pinuia.
Lipae wo, lipae wo,
Na pa Yesu kutari nu
Piani nu nalenena, ;
a nake
karena lina ;
Lipae wo, lipae wo,
Yesu kutari nu.
na pa
fisi, me tapa pinuia—
Ne pe se Yesu sauria ;
Pure nu, ne tamania,
Pulugo wa purari nu.
Lipae wo, &c.
Ne pisa ani ko, sneu:
0 su laga Supe seta,
0 pe eno re tani tna;
Na o pinuia pe sena.
Lipae wo, &c.
Peni mava loge pinu
Naisaarena na sneu;
Loge si pogi pinuia
Eno eno ne teke ea.
Lipae wo, &c.


JESUS IS COMING.
Yesu e imi! te kakara !
Imi penoni se yolei lala ;
Imi a e nakusikusena ;
Yesu seta imi sna.
Yesu e imi, e imi sina.
Yesu e imi sina
A io kakawa yo piuuia
Yesu e imi sina.
Yesu e imi; a mali s’na ;
A nagalaga a iyewali-la ;
Ta lua ita pa mava pu-na :
Yesu e imi si na.
Yesu e imi, &c.
Yesu e imi ni se yokei;
Tapa namara e wisi ruwi
Te ie kona re, te tagi re :
Yesu e imi sina.
Yesu e imi sina.
Yesu e imi; pisa pa ea :
Ai a pe naileilena sena,
Nage a karakaravani a ;
Yesu e imi sina.
Yesu e imi, &c.


THEME IS LIFE FOB A LOOK.
0 kara naga ni pena Yesu Supe,
Naga fa teke laid pepe ;
liiiekei piowa, o kara ani a.
A o e naemarenena.
0 ka-ra ni-a,
0 kara nage pa teke laki pepe ;
0 e naemarenena.
Miasia ya teke yo ne nage ?
Ana soma piowaena,
Miasia ya tana kiriri ?
La mara na na’ pa teke e ko.
0 ka-ra ni-a, &c.
Soma yumena wo sipa re poli,
Ana Ta pe nakopapaena.
0 ligani soma napiowaena
Teke na pa tawoni tana.
0 ka-ra ni-a, &c.
0 iawe na pa De pisa snlia :
Nayumena teke naga re,
Miasia ni Yesu tapa pinu ;
Ko o pe eri kurena wo.
0 ka-ra ni-a, &c.
Ne nage erero, o kusi tani a
Namalena nape sike po.
0 kilia po o mare tetea,
Miasia Yesu mali.
0 ka-ra ni-a.


I HEAR THE SAVIOUR SAY.
1. Ne nloge Yesn pisa,
0 pe kakawa re :
Na melolo o imi;
Na o pinu pe esau.
Yesu su o nu,
A ne pe sena;
Ne pe na piowaena;
Tapa nu m’yuwowo.
2. Nakakawaena
Soma taga tapa
Kilia kusi lua
Sne kakawa tani nu.
Yesu su o nu, &c
3. Ne pe sau re uri wo,
Nage ne uli ko ;
Ana ko o ke nunu
Tama wo na Kalvari.
Yesu su o nu, &c
4. Na pa ne supulu si,
Pene namarena;
Ton kuluwai sna
Ani Naemareni nu.
Yesu su o nu, &c.
5. A na’ pa ne su mara
Na Yesu pa mava,
Ne koani pararia
Sau a sike po lana.
Yesu su o nu, &c.


I LOVE TO THINK OF TEE HEAVENLY LAND.
1. Ne sitomali kawa ni
Yo wo se agelo wa.
Puruvanua na pa Yesu
A se yolaei teke ea.
Ita isio Yesu, Ita isio pan
Ita isio Yesu te sike po sena.
2. Ne sitomali kawa ni yo
Se Naemareni nu;
A myawa pania ani a,
A snela a nteke ea.
Ita, isio Yesu, &c.
3. Ne sitomali kawa ni yo
Seni eri wa sena,
Mela sumari pe maeyai re;
Sne o sela taga.
Ita isio Yesu, &c.
4. Ne sitomali kawakawa ni
Yo na isapaena.
Ne sigi a, ne tagi a,
Sneu nteke po ea.
Ita isio Yesu, &c,


I HEARD THE VOICE OE JESUS SAY.
1. Ne loge to na Yesu pe,
0 imi pu ni nn ;
Yopoma myawa fiama e
To vaeri eren.
Ne pirai, ne piewali
Yo na mapiena
Ne mnea, a nteke pa,
Ne kale si na ya ?
2. Ne nloge to na Yesu pe,
Ne nla kurena ani;
Namosua, ko o tapa,
0 muni wi mali.
Ne pimi, a ne muni po
Na wi la-namalena
Ne mosukari nu re si
Miasia ne nage.
3. Ne nloge to na Yesu pe,
Nu ne telani li ko,
0 isu nu a som’ lipae
E mararavaga.
Ne pisu ia a ne mali
Sau erue a dae,
A ne iaeli rana po,
Eno n’eno sena.


STANDING BY A PURPOSE TRUE.
1. Te kutari togi wo,
Te logo to ni De;
Te yawa na luaga,
Yevesia se Tanie].
Te sipaga Taniel
Na pa taga su
Te kutari togi wo,
T’isa suli a.
2. Li kakawa a nloru ;
A marau taga,
Po ni-la a alio a
Yevesia se Taniel.
Te sipaga Taniel, &c.
3. Eri urimi moki
A miali owe;
A sira pa marana
Yevasia se Taniel.
Te sipaga Taniel, &c.
4. A isiri pogarupa
Na lologena wo;
Te me Satan narau na
Vevesia se Taniel.
Te sipaga Taniel, &c.


J. Wilkie & Co., Printers, Princes Street, Dunedin, N.Z.




