

000000000000000000
(gl
3000000000000000000
SABAH BEBNHABDT
An Illustrated Memoir,
AUSTIN BRERETON.
000000000000000000
00000 0000000000000


NORTHEY, SIDDELEY
AND COMPANY,
Machinery Merchants k Importers,
334 TO 352 QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE
(Near Latrobe Street}
Portable Engines all sizes, new and second-
hand, always kept in stock.
VERTICAL ENGINES & BOILERS COMBINED
SOLE AGENTS FOR
Semi-Portable Engines bj Wm. Sisson & Co.,
The most compact Engines imported, suitable for Driving
Cream-separators, Chaff-cutters, Saw-benches &c.
Cornish Flue, Multitubular, and Vertical
Boilers, new and second-hand.
Saw-mill Gear and Complete Plants for
Sale or Hire.
TERMS LIBERAL.
SMALL DEPOSIT & MONTHLY PAYMENTS.


Telephone 117.
Established 1872.
- T JEE IE
MUTUAL STORE
LIMITED,
FLINDERS STREET, MELBOURNE,
(Temporary Premises) Opp. the Railway Terminus.
Visitors to Melbourne and Residents are now able to
purchase all Household Requirements under
One Roof!
The General Public are supplied upon the same ad-
vantageous terms as shareholders-
Gentlemen’s Mercery
Furniture and Carpets
Linoleums
Grocery
Dressed Provisions
Poultry and Game
Wood and Coal
Grain and Produce
Drapery—General and Family
Dressmaking
Wines, Beers, Spirits & Liqueurs
Stationery
U nderclothing
Silks and Dresses
Hosiery and Gloves
Manchester
Fancy Goods
Ironmongery
Electroplate
Haberdashery
China
Boots and Shoes
Woollens and Tailoring
Glass
STABLES-PARK and
MILLSWYN
STREETS, SOUTH YARRA.
Horses taken in at Livery and Bait. Grain,
Horsefeed,
etc., at market prices. Weight and quality
guaranteed. Well-appointed Landaus, Broughams, Victorias, Waggonettes, etc., are available for theatres,
concerts, dinner parties, afternoon calls, shopping, etc. Tariff for hiring by the hour, day or week, ac-
cording to district, to he obtained at the Mutual Store or Stables.
Orders delivered daily by the Mutual Store Express Vans. Country Orders
receive special attention.
A Discount of 3 per cent, is allowed to all Cash purchasers who take
away their own Goods.
OPEN TO THE PUBLIC FOR CASH PURCHASES.
A. HORTON-CRUNDALL
Chemist (la|.) }
Late of London, Paris, Brussels, etc.,
FLINDERS STREET, MUTUAL STORE BUILDING.
MELBOURNE.


From a Photograph by Nadar, Paris.
ELECTRIC PHOTO-ENG. CO. SYDNEY.
MADAME SARAH BERNHARDT.


ROBERTSON & MOFFAT.
♦•••t
FIRST-CLASS
g)
w
ft
FURNITURE,
WARNER’S
is—
THE ONLY CURE FOR KIDNEY DISEASE!
WHY, after years of Phenomenal Success, does it still continue to
be THE ONE MEDICINE sought after for the cure of Kidney,
Liver and similar Diseases?
The answer is:
BECAUSE IT DOES EXACTLY AS
REPRESENTED!
It is made, on honor, of the best ingredients obtainable. Ic has stood
the test of time, and cures permanently, after Physicians
have given up all hope.


By Special Appointment to The Earl of Ropetoun, G.C.M.G
A. E. ILLINGWORTH,
FURNISHING IRONMONGER.
Hi SWAISTOI ST., MELBOURNE (opp. Taws Ball).
The Popular House for
CLARKE’S FAIRY LAMPS from Is. Each;
PYRAMID CANDLES, Is. Box;
and BABIES’ FOOD WARMERS.
iST LAMPWARE! LAMP WARE !!
Bronze and China Table Lamps from 3s. 6d. Each;
Hall and Hanging Lamps from 7s. 6d. Each;
Hand Lamps, Assorted Colours, Is. Each
CANDLE and LAMP SHADES, a Large Variety.
OUR SPECIALTY—
Silver-Plated Goods and Cutlery, Wedding and Birthday Presents.
FO TIOE.
ASK FOR
TAMES DICKSON CO.’S
U CELEBRATED
Crated Waters, Cordials, Syrups,
Lime-Juice, & Malt Vinegars,
As they are GENUINE, and far Superior to the Cheap and Useless
Trash generally forced in this Market.
CAN BE OBTAINED FROM ALL RESPECTABLE GROCERS, fc.
ADDRESS;
26 to 32 FRANKLIN STREET EAST,
MBLBOUBNE.


SARAH BERNHARDT
A Biographical and Critical Sketch
Austin Brereton
MARCUS & ANDREW, Publishers, IS Bridge Street.
1891.


Works by the same Author:
Henry Irving - .
A Biographical Sketch. Illustrated by Edwin Long, R.A.,
J. A. McNeil Whistler, J. Fulleylove, Mrs. Allingham,
Val Bromley, Alf. P. Tilt and Frkd. Barnard.
Some Famous Hamlets.
A Record of all the Chief Actors of Hamlet from Burbage to Fechter.
Dramatic Notes.
An Illustrated Critical Record of the London Stage from 1880 to 1886.
Shakesperean Scenes and Characters.
Descriptive Notes on the Plays and on the Principal Shakes-
perean Players, from Betterton to Irving. Illustrated by Thirty
Steel Plates and Ten Wood Engravings, by Solomon Hart, R.A.,
Frank Dicksee, A.R.A., Fred. Barnard, C. Green, Val
Bromley, H. C. Selous, J. D. Watson, M. E. Edwards, and
others.
“Romeo and Juliet’’ on the Stage.
(1662 — 1890).
With Portraits of Mrs. Potter as Juliet, and Mr. Kyrle Bellew
as Romeo.


PREFACE.
My object in issuing this memoir has been twofold.
In the first place, there is a natural desire on the part
of the public to learn something of the career of every
artist ivho visits this country. That desire is intensified
when the artist is so illustrious as Sarah Bernhardt.
Her name, at least, is familiar to the play-goers of
Australia, although she has not yet acted here. But
her achievements are not so well-known. She is the
heroine of a thousand and one anecdotes, some of them
questionable, few of them true. It is no secret that, at
one time, in order to familiarise herself with the idea of
death, she adopted the gruesome plan of sleeping in a
coffin. As to her stage-life, however, but scant inform-
ation has, as yet, been published. The biographical
dictionaries contain but superficial accounts of the
greatest French actress since the days of the “ divine
Rachel.” Hitherto, no fair , unprejudiced, and, so far
as may be, comprehensive memoir of this famous player,
has been penned. In making the attempt to supply this


want, my path has been beset with difficulties which , I
am vain enough to think, have been surmounted. When,
in 1883, I had the honour of sketching the life of Henry
Irving, prior to his first visit to America, abundance of
material was at my command. The difficulty then was
not so much what should go into the book but what
should be left out of it. Moreover, if there was any
doubt as to a date , if any statement of fact wanted
amplification, the actor-manager was at hand to supply
the requisite information. In the present case, the
difficulty has been reversed. There is no book, no
magazine, no newspaper, within my knowledge, in which
an exhaustive article on the accomplishments of Sarah
Hernhardt is to be found. The Public Library here,
thanks to the never-failing courtesy of Mr. Robert C.
Walker, has been ransacked, but without avail. In
anticipatioyi of Madame Hernhardt's visit, I sent to
London some months ago for anything that could
possibly be of use to me in the ivriting of a memoir, but
to no purpjose. Fortunately , my own dramatic library,
and my personal experience of the stage , have enabled
me, as I hope, to relate, clearly and concisely, the
histrionic career of the noted tragedienne.
My second object in writing this memoir was born
of the wish to pay a tribute, not, I trust, entirely
unworthy, to the genius of an actress who has afforded
me, in common with many others , profound pleasure. In
the pursuit of my duties as a dramatic critic in London,


it was my good fortune to witness the most important
events of the Stage during several notable years.
Treasured in my mind is the recollection of Sarah
Bernhardt in the majority of her foremost characters.
I have seen her in “ Phedref in “ Adrienne Lecou-
reur,” in “Frou-Frou,” in “La Dame aux Cornelias,”
in “Fedora,” in “ Theodora;” also, in Lady Macbeth
and other characters. It ivill thus be gathered that I
have not written about her in ignorance. In some cases,
I have relied upon the judgment of others, and, where
an opinion is quoted, care has been taken to verify
the expression. My work has been a labour of love %
No pains have been spared in order to obtain correct-
ness as regards facts.
lam particularly proud of the illustrations which
accompany the memoir. They mark, as I venture to
think, a decided advance upon anything that has yet
been done in Australia in a cheap publication. They
have been selected with the view of giving strangers
to the art of this incomparable actress an idea of
her appearance at various times and in different
dresses. The portraits of Madame Bernhardt, as she
appears in her studio, and as she is seen in “ Buy Bias ”
one of her earliest successes —were taken, in Paris ,
in 1879; that of her in “Be Passant” was made, a
year or tivo later, in London ; while that of her as
Theodora was done, recently, in New York. The
frontispiece represents the gifted, actress as she now is.


It is from one of the last photographs of her. For
the use of this photograph , and that of the actress as
Theodora, I am indebted to the courtesy of a friend.
At some pecuniary risk, I have had the pictures
separately printed , 071 the best paper obtainable , in
preference to having them worked-in with the text, more
justice being thus done to the engravers and printers, as
well as to the original.
In conclusion, I may add, that those who seek for
any gossip concerning the domestic affairs of the actress,
will not find it here. T hold it an impertinence for any
individual to attempt to pry into the private life of an
artist. On the other hand, those who are desirous of
reading an honest account of her stage-career, will not,
I trust, be altogether disappointed in this biographical
and critical sketch.
A. 73.
Lavender Lay, Sydney.
19 th May, 1891.


SARAH BERNHARDT.
THE name of Sarah Bernhardt will he handed down,
in the theatrical chronicles of the future, in con-
nection with the great actresses of the French stage.
Sixteen years since, the gifted, versatile, and famous
woman who is about to visit Australia, established her
right to rank with Adrienne Lecouvreur, Hippolyte
Clairon, and Rachel Felix. From the time when she
first played Phedre, Sarah Bernhardt has held undis-
puted sway as the foremost tragic actress of the entire
European and American, as well as of the Parisian
stage. Her genius has astonished and delighted count-
less thousands of playgoers throughout the civilised
world. Her eccentricities have been deplored and have
caused her to be ridiculed, but her supreme power as an
actress has never been disputed. Even her enemies are
bound to admit her genius. Her talents are diversified.
Had she chosen, she could have been great in sculpture
and painting, although, perhaps, not so great as she is
on the stage. “ Sprung,” like Rachel, “ from the blood
of Israel’s scattered race,” there is another similarity
between these noted actresses. Rachel, the recipient, at
the outset of her career, of unlimited eulogy from Jules
Janin, subsequently suffered severely from his powerful
pen. Sarah Bernhardt, who was “discovered,” so to
speak, by the eminent critic, M Francisque Sarcey,
found herself, when in the height of her fame, the object
of his merciless censure. “ Next to the pleasure of run-
ning a man down,” wrote Thomas Moore, “the critics like
nothing so much as the vanity of writing him up ; but
once up, and fixed there, he is a mark for their arrows
ever afterwards.” No actress has been more praised


than Sarah Bernhardt, and she lias had the strength of
purpose to combat the attacks which are inseparable
from a public calling. “My theory of life,” she once
said, “is represented by the word ‘will/ just as my
theory of art is represented by the word ‘ nature.’
‘ Quand rneme’ is my device ” She has acted up to her
motto, and she has won the light. The applause of
Europe and America, and the praise of such men as
Victor Hugo and Matthew Arnold, form compensation
enough, and to spare, for the petty annoyances with
which success, in all walks of life, is invariably
accompanied.
The interesting story of her entrance to that historic
school of music and declamation, the Paris Conservatoire,
has been related by M. Sarcey. The jury, headed by
the veteran composer, Auher, had assembled with
due gravity in order to judge the new applicant for
admission. Accompanied by her mother, the candidate,
a slim and intelligent-looking girl, appeared. It is
the practice for would-he pupils to recite a passage
from the classic tragedies on such occasions. The new
comer was not prepared with any speech of the kind ;
fortunately, however, she knew Lafontaine’s fable of the
“Two Pigeons,” which she proceeded forthwith to deliver.
No sooner had the lines:
Deux pigeons s’aimaieut d’aiuour tendre,
L’un d’eux, s’ennuyanfc an logis—.
left her lips, than Auher interposed. “ Enough,” he said,
“come here, my child, I want to speak with you.” With
gleaming eyes, and with a self-possession so remarkable
that the jurors were compelled to smile, the aspirant
approached. “Yourname?” “Sarah Bernhardt.” “A
jewess?” “By birth, oui, monsieur; hut I have been
trained as a Christian,” “You recite very prettily,” said
the composer of “The Bronze Horse,” “and will he
admitted.” So it came about that the fable of the
“ Two Pigeons,” which she was afterwards to repeat
with ineffable charm in “ Adrienne Lecouvreur,” thus
early stood her in good stead, and Sarah Bernhardt,
in the year 1858, was admitted to the Conservatoire.
Before proceeding further with this narrative, it should




From a Photograph by Sarony, New York.
ELECTRIC PHOTO-ENG. CO. SYDNEY.
MADAME BERNHARDT IN “THEODORA.”


be remarked that the parents of the future actress were
in comfortable circumstances. Her mother was a Dutch
Jewess, her father was a Drench lawyer. Born in Paris,
on October 22, 1844, she passed much of her childhood
in Holland, with her grandfather, an optician of
Amsterdam. She was educated at the college of Grand
Champ, Versailles, “one of the most aristocratic esta-
blishments of the kind in Prance,” where, thanks to
ability uncommon in one of her age, she quickly outshone
her companions. It is said, with what truth I know
not, that she was expelled four times for offences, trivial
in themselves, but against the rules. It is certain,
however, that when she ultimately left the convent her
intelligence had gained her many honors. Happily
for the stage, her studies did not entirely claim her
attention in these early days. “ I intend/’ she once
said to the principal of the convent, “to be a nun, if,”
she added, after a moment’s pause, “ I cannot be an
actress at the Comedie Pranyaise.” Fortunately, her
friends, who resided in the Hue St. Honore, the birth-
place of Moliere, were enabled to send her to the
Conservatoire, with the result already noted.
We now come to the actual commencement of her
stage career. Aided by the instructions in declamation
which she received from MM. Provost and Samson,
at the Conservatoire, she obtained, in 1861, a second
prize for tragedy, and, in 1862, a second prize for
comedy, thus becoming entitled to a debut at the
Theatre Prancais. Naturally enough, she accepted the
opening, and so, as another writer has observed, she
“ passed, at one bound, from school to the first theatre
in Europe.” She selected the characters of Iphigenie
in llacine’s tragedy of that name, and the blind heroine
of Eugene Scribe’s comedy, “Valerie,” and made
her first appearance on the stage on August 11, 1862.
The debutante w r as well received by the press, one
paper drawing particular notice to her performance,
describing her as “pretty and elegant,” and especially
praising her perfect enunciation. Her success provoked
the jealousy of older actresses, and, after playing some
other parts at the Theatre Prancais, she left that far-famed
house in disgust. She then went to the Gymnase Theatre,


where she fared little better. She was allowed to appear
only on Sundays. Her stay there was brief; it was
abruptly terminated by the actress, who, on the day fol-
lowing the representation of a new piece, “ Tin Mari qui
Hance sa Femme,” by the old play-wright, Eugene
Labiche, quietly quitted Paris.
On leaving the city of her birth, she made a tour
through Spain. Returning to Paris, she did not disdain
to appear as a fairy, tine Princesse Desiree,in a spectacular
piece, “La Biche aux Bois,” at the Porte St. Martin
Theatre—the scene, in after years, of her splendid suc-
cesses in “Theodora,” “Jeanne d’Arc,” and other dramas.
An engagement at the Odeon Theatre—a house fostered
by the Government as a training-ground for the Theatre
Francais —came next. But it was not easily secured.
Thus early in her career, that indomitable perseverance
which is one of her chief characteristics, became manifest.
She had hitherto failed on the stage, and it was with
difficulty that she could obtain a hearing. She implored
M. Fuquesnel, the manager of the Odeon, to give her a
chance, “ They have turned me away everywhere, but
try me. I assure you that there is something here,” she
said, striking her breast. It is to M. DuquesneTs credit
that he did not refuse this supplication The battle was
hard, and the new aspirant for histrionic honors had, in
common with the majority of other artists, to bide her time.
She became a member of the Odeon company in January,
1867. Her first part at the Odeon was Armamle in
“ Les Femmes Savantes.” She then played in various
sensational dramas, including “Le Frame de la Hue
de la Paix>” “Les Arrets,” and “Le Batard.” Her
Sylvia in “Le Jeu de I’Amour et du Hasard ” was
favourably reviewed; but her first success of par-
ticular note was made, in February, 1868, in a
revival of Furnas’ drama, “Kean; ou Fesordre
et Genie.” In M. Andre Theuriet’s one-act play,
“Jean Marie,” her emotional power made an ex-
cellent impression. This poetical little piece tells the
simple story of a woman who, believing her sailor
lover to be dead, consents to wed an old man who has
befriended her family and for whom she entertains no
feeling save that of respect. Jean Marie, her sailor


lover, returns, and Therese lias to decide between the
two. Eventually duty conquers passion and Jean Marie
departs, Therese knowing that she will never again see
the man who possesses her heart. “Jean Marie” lias
been often given by Sarah Bernhardt, both in London
and Baris. Her rendering of the simple Breton peasant
is deeply touching.
Two years after her first appearance at the
Odeon, she played Zanetto in M. Eran§ois Coppee’s
charming duologue, “Le Passant,” a graceful little
piece in which she was frequently seen when, a few
years later her fame was firmly established. A per-
formance of Cordelia, in a translation of “ King Lear,”
added to the good opinion already formed of her acting.
Then came the Eranco-Prussian war of 1870-71, when
she headed an ambulance corps and did many a good
deed for her fellow-countrymen. On the restoration
of jieace, her conspicuous acting ability once more at-
tracted attention. As the Queen, in “ Buy Bias,” she
firmly established herself with the play-going public
and the discriminating press. This, her first great
triumph, occurred in 1872 Victor Hugo’s tragedy is
intimately associated with the name of Sarah Bernhardt.
It was through her that it was acted at the Odeon after
its long banishment from the stage, and it was for her
that, in 1879. it was again revived at the Theatre Erancais.
“ Ruy Bias,” it may be proper to state in this place,
was first produced at the Theatre de la Renaissance, on
November 8,1888, with the great actor, Erederic Lemaitre,
as its hero. The Queen was acted by Madame Louise
Beaudoin, whose name is otherwise unknown to fame.
The classic drama which, for the time being had been
overthrown by Victor Hugo in 1880, with “ Hernani,”
received another blow in “ Ruy Bias,” which followed
the same writer’s “Marion Delorme,” “Le Roi s’Amuse,”
“ Lucrece Borgia,” “Marie Tudor,” and “Angelo.”
During the Second Empire —-1852-70 —“ Ruy Bias ” was
forbidden to the stage. The undoubted hit which Sarah
Bernhardt made in this play at the Odeon led to her en-
gagement at the Theatre Erancais, which she re-entered
on November 6, 1872, in the drama, by the elder Dumas,
“ Mademoiselle de Belle Isle.”


From, a year or two after this time, until 1880, when
the great actress broke her engagement at the Fran cats, her
career at the chief theatre of Paris was one of magnificent
achievement, marred only by the envy of her associates.
Assailed on all sides by malice, the young actress,
imbued with the knowledge of her own ability, strug-
gled on, and waited, fully equipped for the oppor-
tunity which she felt would, sooner or later, occur. That
opportunity came within two years of her reappearance
with the Comedie Frangaise. On March 23, 1874, “Le
Sphinx,” a four-act drama, in prose, by M. Octave
Feuillet, was presented. M. Feuillet is known to English
and American playgoers by his “ Tentation,” the original
of Dion Eoucicault’s “Led Astray,” and his “ Pomance
of a Poor Young Man,” which has been adapted by
Dr. Westland Marston, the late John Oxenford, and
Mr. C. F. Coghlan. The “ Sphinx ” does not represent
M. Feuillet at his best, but it contains two female
characters which lend themselves very readily to the art
of the actress. The author was fortunate in having
Mdlle. Sophie Croizette and Sarah Bernhardt for his
interpreters of these parts. Mdlle. Croizette, playing
the part of a guilty wife who, in the end, poisons-
herself, gained notoriety by an extremely sensational
death scene. But the artistic success of the play was
secured by the younger actress, whose mingled grace and
force, as an injured wife, placed her on the high road to
success. Her fire and power, the mobility of her figure,
her wide range of expression, and, above all, the music
of her voice, had already gained her distinction. The
versatility of her acting at this period was shown when,
on July 22, 1873, a bright, fantastic, one-act comedy,
“ Chez FAvocat,” by Paul Ferrier, was brought out.
In this, she played a wife who unexpectedly meets her
husband in a lawyer’s office whither they have each
come to enquire about a separation. Her acting was-
singularly witty in this part. The fineness of her insight,
the grace and movement with which she clothed her
words, gave delicious point to the dialogue which fell to
her share. Her performance of Berthe de Savigny, which
she afterwards repeated in London with marked success,
further advanced her reputation at the Theatre Francais


as an actress of rare intelligence, great power, and
marvellous grace.
So favourable was the impression made by Sarah
Bernhardt in “Le Sphinx,” that revivals of the classic
tragedies were immediately projected for her. The
opening thus presented was eagerly seized upon. In
Voltaire’s powerful tragedy, “Zaire,” she first proved
herself worthy to fill the place left vacant on the tragic
stage by the death of Rachel. But it was reserved for
Phedre, the character in which Rachel reached the
height of her greatness, for the young actress to equal,
although it was not in her power to eclipse, the supreme
efforts of her predecessor. “Phedre,” the tragedy by Jean
Racine, was produced by the Comedie Prancaise on Jan-
uary 1,1677. The foremost exponent of this terrible re-
presentation of the woman who is blighted by her criminal
passion was, among actresses of the past, Rachel. The
only actress now able to do justice to the character
is Bernhardt. In 1873, she played Aricie to the Ph&dre
of Mdlle. Rousseil, “ with a depth of feeling, a truth
and grace, that raised a character which might well
appear insipid into beauty.” Two years later, she
electrified the Parisians with her performance of Phedre,
even the staunch admirers of Rachel being compelled to
admit its value. As Phedre is Sarah Bernhardt’s
foremost performance among her impersonations in the
classic drama, and as, moreover, it is included in the list
of characters which she is to play in Australia, it may be
interesting to see how her interpretation differs from that
of Rachel. Por a picture of the latter, we must go to
George Henry Lewes, whose essays on the acting of
Edmund and Charles Kean, Rachel, Macready, Charles
Mathews, and other noted players, are indispensable to
the student of the stage. The distinguished author of
“The Life and Works of Goethe” saw Rachel in her
prime, before disease had attacked her and made her
efforts uncertain. Nothing he had ever witnessed sur-
passed the picture given by Rachel of “ a soul torn by
the conflicts of incestuous passion and struggling con-
science ; the unutterable mournfulness of her look and
tone as she recognised the guilt of her desires, yet felt
herself so possessed by them that escape was impossible,


are things never to be forgotten. What a picture she
was as she entered! Yon felt that she was wasting
away under the fire within, that she was standing on the
verge of the grave with pallid face, hot eyes, emaciated
frame —an awful, ghastly apparition. The slow, deep,
mournful toning of her apostrophe to the sun, especially
that close —
Soleil! je te viens voir pour la derniere fois—
produced a thrill which vibrates still in memory. The
whole of the opening scene, with one exception, was
inexpressibly affecting and intensely true. As an ideal
representation of real emotion, it belonged to the highest
art The remorseful lines —
Graces an del, mes mains ne sont point criminelles :
Pint aux dieux que mon coeur fut innocent comme elles—
were charged with pathos. And how finely expressed
was the hurrying horror with, as it were, a shiver
between each phrase, transient yet vividly indicated,
when she confessed her guilt;
Tu vas ouir le comble des horreurs
J’aime . ace nom fatal, je tremble, je frissonne . . .
(and her whole frame here quivered)
J’aime
CE"One — Qui %
Phedre —Tu connais ce fils de TAmazone,
Oe prince si longtemps par raoi-meme opprime
CEnone. FTippolyte! Grands dieux !
Phedre. — C’est toi qui Vas nomme !
In the second act, where Phedre declares her passion
to Hippolyte, Rachel was transcendant. She subtly con-
trived to indicate that her passion was a diseased passion,
fiery and irresistible, yet odious to her and to him. She
was marvellous in the abandonment to this onward-
sweeping madness; her manner was fierce and rapid, as
if the thoughts were crowding on her brain in tumult,
and she dared not pause to consider them ; and such was
the amazing variety and compass of her expression that
when she quitted the stage she left us quivering with an
excitement comparable only to that produced by Kean
in the third act of 4 Othello.’ In the fourth act came
the storm of rage, jealousy, and despair: it was lit up


by wonderful flashes. Like Kean, she had a power of
concentrating into a single phrase a world of intense
feeling; and even Kean himself could not have sur-
passed the terrific exclamation —
Miserable! et je vis!
Whoever saw Rachel play ‘PhMre,’ ” concludes Mr. Lewes,
“ may he pardoned if he doubt whether he will ever see
such acting again.” At the time, however, at which Mr.
Lewes was collecting his learned essays, and inditing his
“ Epistle to Anthony Trollope,” Sarah Bernhardt was
about to tempt comparisons between herself and Rachel
in the latter’s greatest character. How well she succeeded
was shown by the frequency with which “ Phedre ” was
subsequently acted at the Pranpais. When the company
played in London, in June and July, 1879, Racine’s
tragedy, with Bernhardt in the title role, was included in
the repertoire of the forty-one pieces then presented. With
each successive performance of “Phedre” the illustrious
actress, whose art never allows her to rest content with
the successful accomplishment of a first performance,
brought some new light, some fresh mark of intelligence
to bear on the character. But, even when she first pfayed
Phedre, her impersonation astonished these critics who
were experienced in the dramatic art of Prance. From the
moment when she came on the stage, drooping and trem-
bling as if scorched with the passion blazing within her,
to the conclusion of the tragedy, the spectators’ thoughts
were rivetted on the figure of the guilty woman. It was
difficult to give any heed to the other characters, well as
they were acted. Sarah Bernhardt’s Phedre reminded
Mr. Walter Herries Pollock, an astute critic, “of
Beckford’s terrible description in ‘ Yathek ’ of the dead
in the Hall of Eblis, each of whom carried within
him a flaming heart. But they walked in gloomy
silence, and her tortures drove her to uncontrollable
speech. She looked, walked, and spoke as if she were
consumed and yet sustained by her madness, as if she
drew her life from that which was destroying her. Her
passion was so intense that it seemed to wither whatever
came in its way; her grief was so desperate that horror
was lost in pity.” Mr. Pollock then singles out for


special praise the identical passage in the first act which is
cited by Mr. Lewes in his eulogy of Rachel. In thiis
scene, Rachel, “with one was inexpressiblly
affecting and intensely true.” The “one exception,,”
observed by Mr. Lewes, was her mode of renderimg
the poet’s meaning in the magnificent apostrophre,
taking from Euripides, “O’est toi qui has nomine..”
She uttered it in a tone of “ sorrowing reproach ”
which, as Mr. Lewes pointed out, “is psychologically
at variance with the character and the position. Eor
Phedre has kept her love a secret; it is a horrible
crime; she cannot utter the name of Hippolyte because
of her horror at the crime; and not in sadness but
in the sophistry of passion, she tries indignantly to throw
on (Enone the guilt of naming that which should be
unnameable.” In the intelligence of her rendering of
this scene at least Bernhardt outshone Rachel. The
effect of the line —“ C’est toi qui I’as nomme”—is the
more difficult on account of the gradual preparation for
a revelation which to the spectator is no news. “ With
each pause,” wrote Mr. Pollock, “ Mdlle. Bernhardt
conveyed a greater sense of horror, and yet, when the
final confession came, it struck and blasted the senses
like lightning. The actress delivered the last words
with a terrible mixture of triumph and self-loathing.
She spoke them with averted head and with a shrinking
of the whole body; and still there was a kind of fierce
joy in her self-condemnation, which one may compare
to the delight of a fanatic in his self-inflicted martyr-
doms.” The “fierce joy” of Bernhardt in this scene is
in keeping with the character and the situation, and,
to my mind, infinitely better than the “ sorrowing
reproach ”of Rachel. It displays, it seems to me, that
“high intellectual power,” so marked in Rachel, which
Mr. Arnold denied to Bernhardt, although he admitted
that she possessed “ temperament and quick intelli-
gence, passion, nervous mobility, grace, smile, voice,
charm, poetry.” In one case, at any rate, Bernhardt
certainly grasped what Rachel missed. The transcendant
genius of her Phedre made her position as the leading
actress of the Theatre unassailable.
Her next important parts were in “La Fille de




ELECTRIC PHOTO-ENG. CO. SYDNEY,
From a Photograph by Melandri, Paris
MADAME BERNHARDT IN HER STUDIO.


3LECTFUC PHOTO-ENG. CO. SYDNEY.
From a Photograph by Melandri, Paris.
MADAME BERNHARDT IN “ RU? BIAS.”




Roland ” and “Rome Ya incue,” dramas in which she again
distinguished herself. Her “ simple dignity and noble
fire ” were particularly praised in the former play, where,
with “ singular truth and pathos ” she expressed the
groivth of a maiden love. Following these pieces came
the production, on February 14,1876, of “L’Etrangere,”
a modern comedy in five acts, by Alexandre Dumas,
fils. This play, like the same author’s “Le Demi-
Monde ” and M. Feuillet’s “ Sphinx,” is a representative
play of modern Parisian life, called by Mr. Arnold the
drama of the “ homme sensuel moyen , the average
sensual man.” It is, perhaps, the poorest of its author’s
works, hut it was saved from failure by the excel-
lence of its interpretation. The dramatic power and
perfect elocution of the subject of this sketch, again
enabled her to give vitality to a rather tedious part. Her
acting as Mrs. Clarkson once more obtained for her the
unstinted praise of press and public. From this time,
until the visit of the Cornedie Fiancaise to London, she
played constantly at the Theatre Frangais, chiefly in “Le
Sphinx,” “L’Etrangere,” and “ Phedre.” As is the
•custom with the members of this company, she was
called upon in turn to fill minor parts. But her triumphs
in great characters were continued when she played
Monime in Racine’s tragedy of “ Mithridate,” and Dona
Sol in Victor Hugo’s “ Hernani.” Meanwhile, however,
Hie earned fresh laurels in the revival, in April, 1879, of
“ Ruy Bias.” Her later performance of the Queen was
admitted on all hands to he superior to that given seven
years before at the Odeon. Her acting of this character
•once more brought her into prominence, although
the cast of Hugo’s finest work was remarkable for
its general excellence and harmony. In the second act,
where the warm-hearted nature of the woman is exhibited
in contrast with the icy stiffness of Spanish etiquette,
und in the third, where her avowal of love for
Ruy Bias does not induce her to forget that she is
■queen, her performance was magnificent. Two months
before the revival of “ Ruy Bias,” she had appeared as
Monime, in a tragedy originally acted in 1673, and
the poorest specimen of Racine’s skill. The character
has been described by Clairon, a great actress of


the eighteenth century, in her “Memoirs, and Re-
flections on the Dramatic Art,” as one of the most
beautiful and touching, but, at the same time,
one of the most difficult, ever invented. The revival of
“ Mithridate ” was undertaken at the express wish of
Sarah Bernhardt who, in the smallness of her stature, and
her slender, graceful figure, as in her genius, resembles
Mdlle. Clairon. Though not so effectively dressed as-
usual, she soon captivated her audience, and conquered
the spectators by her mingled force and dignity. Then
came, last of her triumphs before leaving Baris for her
first visit to London, Doha Sol, in a revival of “ Hernani,”
Hugo’s romantic drama which, on Behruary 25, 1830,
overthrew the classicists and made way for a freer style
of play. So fine, so instinct with life and grace was this
impersonation that it aroused Matthew Arnold, an ardent
worshipper of the art of Rachel, to praise of Bernhardt.
In a comparison between Shakespeare, and Corneille and
Racine, he says : —“ Great artists like Talma and Rachel,
whose power, as actors, was far superior to the power, as
poets, of the dramatists whose work they were rendering
tilled out with their own life and warmth the parts int®
which they threw themselves, gave body to what was
meagre, fire to what was cold, and themselves supported
the poetry of the French classic drama rather than were
supported by it. It was easier to think the poetry of
Racine inimitable, when Talma or Rachel were seen pro-
ducing it with such inimitable effects. Indeed, French
acting is so good that there are few pieces, excepting
always those of Molisre, in the repertory of a company
such as that which we have just seen, where the actors
do not show themselves to be superior to the pieces they
render, and to be worthy of pieces which are better.
4 Phedre ’ is a work of much beauty, yet certainly one
felt this in seeing Rachel in the part of Phedre. lam not
sure that one feels it in seeing Mdlle. Sarah Bernhardt
as Phedre, but I am sure that one feels it in seeing her
as Dona Sol.” It should be considered that Mr. Arnold’s
earliest impressions of acting were received from
Bachel, and that Phedre was the character in which
she made her fame. “ I remember how in my youth,” he
has told us, “ after a first sight of the divine Rachel at


the Edinburgh Theatre, in the part of Hermione, I fol-
lowed her to Paris, and for two months never missed one
of her representations.” It is impossible to fix the date
when Mr. Arnold saw Rachel in Edinburgh - the his-
torian of the Edinburgh stage makes no mention of
Rachel’s appearance there —hut it is likely that he wit-
nessed her performance in 1841, the date of her first visit
to England, when he was nineteen years of age, Rachel
being one year older. Rachel did not play in Europe after
1855, and Mr. Arnold saw her successor at the Gaiety,
London, in 1879, nearly a quarter of a century later.
It is clear, however, that Rachel’s performance of Phedre
had made an indelible impression on the mind of the
great critic and essayist. Rachel was his ideal actress, and
although he would not admit that she was equalled by
her successor in Ph&dre, it is pleasant to find that he
readily admitted that Bernhardt, like Rachel, is so gifted
that her acting is, as a rule, far superior to the plays in which
she appears. It is also to be observed that Bernhardt’s
range is far more extensive than was that of Rachel The
latter excelled in the classic drama only. She “ could not
speak prose with even tolerable success” —I quote from
Mr. Lewes—and she could not play comedy. “ The subtle
influence of rhythm seemed to penetrate her, and gave a
movement and animation to her delivery which was alto-
gether wanting in her declamation of prose.” Eor these
reasons she failed in modern drama. On the other hand,
the marvellous versatility of Bernhardt enables her to he
overpoweringly grand in tragedy, gay, bright, and witty
in comedy, and thrilling as the heroines of latter-day
drama. She can speak verse and prose with equal beauty
and ease. In connection with her acting in “ Hernani”
and “ Ruy Bias,” the opinion of the great author of
these plays is valuable. This is what Victor Hugo said
two years before his death :—“ Sarah Bernhardt, who has
absolute genius, is Dona Sol. Nobody can rival her in
the last act, when even 1 feel proud of my lines —hearing
them spoken with so much taste and passion by this voice
of liquid gold. Sarah has the most wonderful voice I
have ever heard. Her passion, too, is so real, so touching,
that if she has not the tremendous concentrated power
of Rachel, she certainly equals her in many ways. She


is so poetical and graceful, and above all, so patrician in
appearance. In 4 Huy Bias ’ she lias but a few words
to say, but the moment she crosses the stage you feel her
presence, and become interested in watching her slightest
movement.”
The visit of the Oomedie Brancaise to London, in
June and July, 1879, was “the beginning of the end”
of Sarah Bernhardt’s severance with that company.
A member of a troupe of distinguished players, all of
wdiom were excellent, her genius raised her far beyond
the level of her companions. Meteor-like she flashed
forth, and was instantly hailed as the one actress of
supreme power in the company. The story of her treat-
ment at this period by her brother and sister artists, and
by the Parisian press is one of the most contemptible in
the annals of the stage. Before relating it, however, it
may be as well to glance at the parts played by her during
this momentous season in London. In the drama of Mr.
Matthew Arnold’s 44 average sensual man,” she acted
Mrs. Clarkson in “L’Etrangere” and Berthe de Savigny
in 44 Le Sphinx;” in the classic drama, she played
Phedre and Zaire; in the romantic drama, she played
Bona Sol in 44 Bernard” and the Queen in 44 Buy Bias.”
Also, in conformance with the rule of the Theatre
Brangais which compels its members to play a king one
night, a peasant the next, she appeared as Andromaque,
in Bacine’s tragedy of that name, a minor actress taking
the leading part of Hermione, Kachel’s second-best
character. The opening night of the Gaiety season was
June 2. M. Got, as doyen of the societaires of the
Theatre Brancais, spoke a prologue written for the
occasion by M, Jean Aicard. All the members of the
company were grouped around busts of Shakespeare and
Mode re. Interesting as was M. Got’s recital, 44 the
attention of the houseful of celebrities was centred upon
the fragile, graceful, and earnest woman who, in a
picturesque if somewhat affected attitude, fixed her
luminous saze upon the bust of Shakespeare,” This
was the actress whose performance of the second act
of 44 Phedre ” was afterwards to electrify an audience
already a little wearied by the ponderous satire of
Moliere’s 44 Le Misanthrope.” 44 Her fire, always femi-


nine,” it was subsequently said of her, “and her passion,
always womanly, at once secured for her that position
which is hers by the divine right of genius.” Her Phedre
was generally acknowledged as her most artistic, as it was
the most tragic, of her performances at this time. As Mrs.
Clarkson, she astonished the London critics by her skill
in displaying the complex motives which animate the
revengeful quadroon, while the delicacy and grace of her
acting as the injured wife in “ Le Sphinx ” were freely
praised. Her Doha Sol, as we have seen, her Zaire, and
her Queen in “ Buy Bias,” strengthened the good
opinion which she had created by her previous per-
formance. The effect of her popularity during this
season is shown by a reference to the receipts. The
forty-two representations realised the total sum of
£19,805 14s. 6d., the average being £472 a performance.
The largest house was £571, when Bernhardt played in
“Hernani,” while “ Le Sphinx” was acted no less than
three times to an average of £532 each representation.
The prestige of the Comedie Praucaise as a troupe
cVensemble secured the success of the season, but the
largest receipts were taken on the nights when the actress
who was only receiving eight pounds per week appeared.
Unfortunately for her own peace of mind and, as
events subsequently showed, for the Comedie
she did not rest content with the laurels which she gained
upon the stage. While enjoying her success in Paris,
she had found time to devote, amongst other things,
to sculpture and painting. Her best statue, an
admirable marble group, “ Apres la Tempete,” at-
tracted much attention in the Salon of 1876. She
even ascended a captive balloon a score of times and
wrote an amusing book, “ Dans les Nuages,” concerning
her aerial adventures.* When she arrived in London,
she was already a celebrity. Her genius was im-
* She commenced the study of sculpture and painting in 1869, the year in
which she first acted Zanetto in “Le Passant.” Her first work of sculpture was
a beautifully-modelled bust of a girl, exhibited in the Salon of 1873. Her most
noted painting is a fine picture in oil, “Medea Slaying her Children.” Her bust
of Emile de Giradin was exhibited in the Salon of 1878, and, with a reduction of
“ Aprbs la Tempete,” in the London exhibition of 1879- “ Aprbs la Tempete ”
represents an aged woman who, bereft of reason by the sudden blow which has
befallen her, gazes vacantly on the dead body of her only son. It is a powerful
work. Among the many celebrities who attended the private view of the


mediately recognised, and, as a consequence, the bitter-
ness of her rivals was increased. Nor was this feeling
lessened when the actress opened, in Piccadilly, an
exhibition of her paintings and sculpture. Her salon
became the resort of royalty, of art, of fashion. Her
“vogue,’' as an American writer puts it, was tremendous.
The jealousy of her associates was further fanned when
she undertook to give performances, on her own account,
in the drawing-rooms of her wealthy admirers. The latter
proceeding was not, perhaps, very dignified, but it is not
much to be wondered at when it is remembered that she
received an honorarium of one hundred guineas for each
private performance, whereas her income from the
Comedie Eranpaise did not exceed four times that sum
per annum. The hatred of her associates was bad
enough, but the actress incurred the displeasure of a
large section of the Paris press by undertaking to write
letters from London to the “Gaulois” and another
paper. The rival journals, led by the “ Eigaro,” abused
the actress in unmeasured terms. They vilified her most
shamefully, inventing disgraceful stories and misrepre-
senting her proceedings. M. Sarcey, the able critic of
the “ Temps,’ ’ was not ashamed to be numbered among
the vilifiers. While the actress was in London, this
cruel treatment did not matter much. Her success as an
artist was magnificent; personally, she was the rage of
the metropolis. When she returned to Paris, however,
the case was different. The press continued its cruel
attacks, her companions subjected her to every possible
humiliation. Nevertheless, she did not fail in her
duty to the public. Erom August, 1879, until March,
ISSO, she played more frequently than any societaire at
the Comedie Eranpaise —four times weekly—acting, as a
rule, such heavy parts as Dona Sol in “ Hernani,”
the Queen in “ Buy Bias,” and Mrs. Clarkson in
“ L’Etrangere.” In April, of the year last named,
exhibition in Piccadilly, were Mr. Gladstone, Madame Christine Nilsson, Sir
Frederick Leighton, Sir Theudore Martin, Sir Julius Benedict, and Sir John
E. Millais. 'J he exhibition excited such interest that Madame Bernhardt cleared
over £5OO by it. She executed some commissions, soon after her return to Paris,
for the Prince and Princess of Wales. The portrait of her in her studio, which
accompanies this sketch, represents her in a costume which she wears with grace.
The bust near which she stands is one of Mdlle. Louise Abbema, the painter.


Emile Augier’s comedy, “ L’Aventuriere,” originally
produced in 1848, was revived. The papers which,
a few months before, had lavished praises upon her,
attacked her vigorously. Goaded by bitter disap-
pointment, deeply mortified, assailed on all sides by
her enemies and deserted by her friends, Sarah
Bernhardt abandoned the Maison de Moliere once and
for all. It is questionable if this was the best possible step
to take in the interests of her art, hut it left the actress
free to choose her own ground It certainly was
detrimental to the Theatre Erancais, for the mantle
of Rachel is still worn by Sarah Bernhardt, whose place
in the first theatre of Paris has not yet been filled. As
a result of this breach of agreement Madame Bernhardt
was, on June 26, 1880, fined £6,000, and prohibited
from playing in Paris until the fine was paid. In
little more than two years afterwards, she was acting in
the Erench capital the first of the well-known characters
which Yictorien Sardou wrote expressly for her.
Released from bondage and undeterred by the per-
secution of the preceding months, Sarah Bernhardt re-
doubled her energies, and set to work to increase her
fame. Returning to the English capital, and sup-
ported none too well by a mixed Erench company,
she won the estimation of competent critics in another
character which is identified with Rachel. On Monday,
May 24, 1880, she played Adrienne Lecouvreur for the
first time, at the Gaiety Theatre, London. The beauty
and force of her impersonation of MM. Scribe and
Legouve’s heroine made an instantaneous success. Her
acting in this character was described at the time by
Air. Pal grave Simpson, whose article is so valuable that
I make no apology for reprinting it in the appendix to this
publication. Her triumph in “ Adrienne Lecouvreur ”
was followed, exactly a week later, by another imper-
sonation which added to her fame. “ Frou-Erou,” the
five-act drama by MM. Henri Meilhac and Ludovic
Halevy, was first produced in Paris, at the Gymnase
Theatre, on October 30, 1869. As “ Adrienne Le-
couvreur ” was written for Rachel, so “ Frou-Erou ”
was specially designed to display the peculiar ability of
a gifted actress of her day, Mdlle. Aimee Desclee. The


play has been so frequently performed in English, and
it has been so recently represented in Melbourne and
Sydney, that a detailed description of it is superfluous.
It is not given to every actress to play the frail heroine
even adequately. The character demands girlishness of
appearance and manner, light-hearted gaiety, and, in
contrast to its comedy, the capacity to touch the pathetic
and tragic stops. To my mind, Sarah Bernhardt is
supreme in the last three acts of the drama. She does
not attach too much importance to the comedy, which
she passes lightly by, reserving her strength for the later
acts, to which she imparts an air of tragedy which they
receive at the hands of no other actress. Her contrast
of Gilberte as she changes from frivolity to falseness,
from prettiness to passion, is terrible in its reality.
From the moment, in the third act, when Gilberte’s
jealousy of Louise is thoroughly aroused until the close
of the play, she carries everything with her by reason
of her passion and her pathos. The quarrel between the
two sisters is Sarah Bernhardt’s finest moment in this
play. The manner in which she lashes herself into a
fury of passion, and then gives full vent to her rage, is
terrible in its effect. The scene is closed by an exit
which is tremendous in its significance. Her sorrow in
the fourth act, when she discovers that men are going
to fight for her—for poor, frail Frou-Frou, whose
thoughts have never been educated up to anything but
gloves and laces —is infinitely pathetic, while the sim-
plicity and truth of her death are extremely beautiful.
During this short season she also acted in Casimir
Delavigne’s drama, “ Les Enfants d’Edouard.” Her
o ' '
artistic reputation was, as may be imagined, largely
increased by the successful verdict passed upon her in
London by the discriminating press and the play-going
public. Her engagement at the Gaiety Theatre was
followed by her first tour of the English provinces.
She reaped a golden harvest for her pains, and, like a
true artist, devoted herself to a study of another famous
character —Marguerite Gautier in “La Dame aux
Camelias.”
Sarah Bernhardt played this character, for the first
time in London, at the Gaiety Theatre, on June 11,


From a Photograph by W. and D. Downey, London.
ELECTRIC PHOTO-ENG CO. SYDNEY.
MADAME BERNHARDT IN “IE PASSANT.’




1881. As in “ Frou-Frou/’ she again reserved her
best efforts for the later acts. M. Dumas’ hectic
lieroine is too well known to require discussion here.
“La Dame aux Camelias ” is familiar to all English
and American playgoers either as “Camille,” or as
“ Heartsease ” —tlie title given to the version played by
the Polish actress, Helena Modjeska. When Bernhardt,
first acted it in London she made an instantaneous hit.
In the great scene of the third act, between the elder
Duval and Marguerite, when the father breaks in upon
the joy of an isolated and idyllic existence, the actress
won unstinted applause. This scene, in which the grey-
haired father comes to ask the dying woman to give up
the man of her choice and heart, was magnificently
acted, with all those waves and currents and changes of
conflicting emotion in which Sarah Bernhardt excels.
Her Marguerite, like that of her gifted predecessor,
Madame Doche, was a revelation. Her love was real
love, her tears came from the heart. Her parting with
Armand was full of anguish. Marguerite’s agony in
this scene was, perhaps, the finest point in this per-
formance. After the departure of old Duval, Marguerite,
it will be remembered, writes her farewell letter to her
lover. Of her acting in this scene on the memorable
first night at the Gaiety, the following description
appeared; —“The face and features seemed quite
swollen and distorted with emotion. Grief had changed
the look of the woman, and the conformation of her
countenance. She was to bear up against the blow
and be brave; she kept back her sobs, clutched at
her dress as though the thin fingers would pierce the
material; and, when nervous strength would bear up no
longer, there came a cry that rang through the house
and told its true tale. Then, again, one of those
wonderful and rapid changes set in with the entry of
Armand upon the scene, and the farewell was at once
so delicate and touching, such a mixture of forced gaiety
and profound despair, that it was spoiled in its con-
clusion by the applause that could not be restrained.
The actress was called again and again, and shouts of
‘ Seule ! ’ £ Seule ! ’ showed that the success was hers
and hers alone.” A second visit to the English pro-


yinces followed this London season, and then came a
tour of the continental cities, where the great actress
was received with unstinted favour. The characters in
which she chiefly played at this period of her career
were Adrienne Lecouvreur, Frou-Frou, and Marguerite,
all of which, be it noted, were written for and first
played hy other actresses.
The record of her subsequent career is one of
oft-repeated triumphs. She has played, during recent
years, with unvarying success throughout Europe. She
has made three tours of the United States of America,
one of South America. It is her custom to appear in
London in June of each year in the character which she
has first played in Paris. These characters are now
specially written for her. The names of the greatest
living French actress and the greatest living French
dramatist have thus become firmly connected. Yictorien
Sardou has written no less than four plays which have
helped the fame of other players as well as given
additional lustre to the actress for whom they were
specially prepared. On December 11, 1882, at the
Theatre du Vaudeville, came “ Fedora ” ; on December
26, 1884, at the Porte St. Martin, “ Theodora ” was
produced; on November 24, 1887, at the same theatre,
“La Tosca” was acted; and, on October 23, 1890, at
the Porte St. Martin, “ Cleopatre ” was presented.
“ Fedora” and “ La Tosca ” have been frequently seen
in English in Sydney and Melbourne. But “ Theodora ”
and “ Cleopatre ” will be new to this country. The
latter play is a gorgeous version, with occasional bor-
rowings from Shakespeare, of the story of the “ serpent
of old Nile” and her infatuated Antony. The former
piece is a showy, picturesque, vividly-coloured sketch of
the famous Byzantine Empress. It affords Sarah
Bernhardt the opportunity for a display of female
passion in which she is unequalled. She certainly
plays “ Fedora ” and “ Theodora ” in a manner in which
she is not approached by any other actress. She has
played in Paris and London, of late years, in addition
to the four Sardou dramas, in a French version of
“ Macbeth,” and in “Jeanne d’ Arc.” She first acted
Lady Macbeth, at the Porte St. Martin, on May 21,


1884. She subsequently played this character in
London and throughout a prolonged tour. The arduous
character so tried her physical strength that she was
compelled to give herself a brief rest towards the
close of the year. But her illness did not prevent
her from creating Sardou’s Theodora before the year
was out. While acting Eloria Tosca at the Porte St.
Martin, she wrote a one-act drama, “ L’Aveu,” which
was produced at the Odeon Theatre —the scene of her
early struggles and successes—on March 27. 1888. At
this time, she was also busy studying the title-role of
“ Erancjllon,” a three-act play by Alexandre Dumas
fils, originally acted, at the Theatre Erancais, on
January 17, 1887. Sarah Bernhardt played it, tor the
first time, at the Lyceum Theatre, London, on July 30,
1888. In less than a year afterwards, she had increased
her already extensive repertoire with the character of
Lena Despard in a dramatic version of Mr. E. C.
Phillips novel, “As in a Looking-Glass.” She first
appeared as the Maid of Orleans on January 3, 1890,
at the Porte St. Martin. “ Jeanne d’Arc,” written by
Jules Barbier, with music by Gounod, was originally
produced at the Gaite, Paris, on November 8, 1873.
Sarah Bernhardt played it in London, in pursuance
of her plan of acting there every twelve months, on
June 23, last year. Sardou’s Cleopatra has not yet been
given in London. The great actress commenced a
two years’ tour of the world, at the Garden Theatre,
New York, on Eebruary 5, 1891.
Although she has been before the public for
close upon thirty years, her energies do not seem to
be exhausted. Her vitality is something enormous.
She dominates a weak body by sheer strength of will.
Her artistic temperament allows her no rest. She is
for ever at work. And, despite an activity unparal-
leled in any other actress, she is seemingly as young
as ever to-day, and, most remarkable fact, the mar-
vellous purity and capacity of her voice remain
absolutely unimpaired. Her voice, when she last
played in London, was described as being as fresh
and musical as ever. I have seen the greatest actors
of my clay of the English, Erench, German, Italian,


and American theatres, but, in the matter of voice,
not one of them all can compare to Salvini, among
men, or Sarah Bernhardt, among women. The actress
is, naturally, heard to most advantage in verse.
“You cannot praise her for reciting poetry well,”
says Theodore de Banville, the learned and graceful
writer of “ Gringoire,” “she is the Muse of Poetry
itself. A secret instinct moves her. She recites verse
as the nightingale sings, as the wind sighs, as the
water mu r murs. ’ ’
82
Sarah Bernhardt.


APPENDIX.
RACHEL AND BERNHARDT: '1 wo Pictures.
BY ONE WHO HAS SEEN THEM,
[The following criticism on the impersonation of “Adrienne Lecouvreur” by the great actress,
Rachel Felix, and her gifted successor, Sarah Bernhardt, is from the pen of the late John Palgrave
Simpson, the dramatist. Mr. Simpson, who possessed an intimate knowledge of the French
stage, was present at the Theatre Framjais on the eventful evening of April 14, 1849, when
“Adrienne Lecouvreur” was first played. Sarah Bernhardt’s first rendering of the heroine of
F.ugene Scribe and Ernest Legouvd’s drama was given at the Gaiety Theatre, London, on Monday,
May 24, 1880. T hose who read may easily see which actress was preferred by Mr. Simpson—
no mean judge in a matter of this kind —in this famous character.]
Picture I.—lt is the evening of the 14th April, 1849. A
vast crowd is assembled in every part of the salle of the Theatre
Franqais— I beg pardon, 1 mean the Theatre de la Republique;
for in 1849 France is still governed by a Republic; and, as is
customary, the fantastic fancy oi the governing party has changed the
nomenclature of all streets, and squares, and public buildings, in obe-
dience to the spirit of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity. The occasion
may well account for the enormous throng : for a new play is to
be given for the first time by the deified dramatist of that day,
Eugene Scribe ; and the greatest actress of the period—some will
say of all time —Rachel, is about to appear in the principal part.
The play bears the title of “ Adrienne Lecouvreur.” It is not my
purpose to dilate upon the piece itself. The picture to be painted is
that of the actress alone. She enters at last in Act 11. Her reception
is stormily enthusiastic ; and she smiles a faint, almost melancholy,
smile, in return. She is studying the part which, as Adrienne Lecouv-
reur, she is about to play on the fancied stage beyond the stage.
Her diction is solemn and impressive, perhaps a little too heavy
for the occasion ; but this is Rachel’s fault in the lighter portions
of many plays —notably in the “Virginie.” Her bearing and manner
are imposing, and lay powerful seige to the feelings of her audience.
A caviller might say that they are too imposing for the situation.
Presently come the scenes where she meets her lover, Maurice de
Saxe (unknown to her except as a young officer of fortune), on
his return to Paris. Her love is displayed with wonderful impe-
tuosity and effect. It is excited and feverish. Her passion is
almost tigerish in its demonstration. It is powerful in the extreme,
but, surely, a little in excess of womanly tenderness. She recites
the fable of the “Two Pigeons” with admirable emphasis and true
artistic declamation ; but she is still passionate rather than tender.
On her return to the stage, after having received from her lover
the missive which tells her that he cannot meet her that night,
her feelings of mortification are expressed with less of violence,
however. She does not seem to think the scene worthy of
especial effort.
In Act 111. come the second interview with her lover and the dis-
covery that the supposed humble officer is in reality the celebrated


Comte de Saxe. In this scene there is a greater charm of womanly
tenderness in her natural surprise than in any of the preceding
scenes. In the interview which follows, when the lovers are alone,
impulsive passion again takes the place of tenderness. But her
power holds the audience enthralled. Is she not the divinity
of the time ? And can divinity err ? And yet it might be fancied,
by captious heretics, that her passion is strained to discordant
harshness. Presently comes the scene, the imbroglio of which is
so admirably conceived by the master of dramatic art in construc-
tion—the scene in which Adrienne discovers that she has a rival
—but a rival unknown to her, in the darkness. The incipient jea-
lousy of the woman, who thinks she is betrayed by her lover, is
powerful, without a doubt, but almost fiendish in its expression ; but
Rachel contrives to throw a marvellous dignity into the words
“ Et moi, je vous protege” in answer to the u Je vous perdrai” of the
vindictive Princess; and there is an accent of profound despair in
her words, as she sinks into a chair at the conclusion of the act
—“ Ah! Tout est fiiii” The curtain falls amidst a tumult of
applause. In Act IV. the scenes in which the devoted woman
sacrifices her fortune to save her lover from arrest, are played with
a feverish irritability which in some measure detracts from the
sympathy which the situation ought to create. But in the scene
where Adrienne discovers her rival, and considers the treachery of
Maurice complete, Rachel rises to her greatest height. The verses
from “ Phedre ” are declaimed in the face of the Princess, but with-
out moving from the spot where she stands, with so grand a scorn
that her whole audience is thrilled. Here it is that the actress,
without possibility of cavil, is perfect in her greatness.
The last Act comes, in which Adrienne is convinced in her
own mind of the infidelity of her lover. But her despair is alter-
nately lugubrious, rather than plaintive, tigerish and fiendish rather
than reproachful. The return of her supposed faithless lover is only
the prelude to the death scene by poison. That the death is most
powerful and effective none can deny. But it is repulsive in its
realism—a realism which may be said to be erroneous. The action
of the inhaled poison may be supposed to superinduce congestion
of the brain accompanied by delirium, but not bodily torture. The
agonised writhings of the dying woman, as depicted by Rachel,
would appear to be produced by intense pain, not by an affection of
the brain followed by total exhaustion. It was popularly reported in
Paris afterwards, that Rachel had studied the last moments of patients
dying from poison in the hospitals. Doubtless this is a fable, like so
many others of a similar description. But had it been true, she
must have copied the last throes of victims from a far different
poison than the subtle essence supposed to have penetrated the
brain of Adrienne Lecouvreur.
Picture ll.—The background is now the stage of the Gaiety
Theatre, London. A French actress, who in the previous year had
created a furore among certain admirers, and had awakened considerable
attention in all, is about to appear again before a British public.
By some she had been hailed in her previous performances as a


“genius;” by some —a minority, it must be said—she had been
dubbed an “ impostor.” The theatre is crowded; for Sarah Bern-
hardt is about to appear for the first time in this same play of
“Adrienne Lecouvreur,” and considerable curiosity as to the result is
excited. It may be said, that fair play is scarcely awarded her
among the old play-goers, who have already made up their minds,
and loudly proclaimed beforehand, that “it is utterly impossible she
can be a patch on Rachel.” Let us see ! From the very first,
Sarah Bernhardt shows that her conception of the part is entirely
different from that of her celebrated predecessor. How quickly and
simply she enters, studying her part! With what a pleasant smile
and ladylike grace does she respond to the importunities of the fops
around her ! With what seducive tones of grateful affection does she
address her devoted old friend, the prompter! Then comes her
meeting with her lover. The love scene here is replete with womanly
tenderness, springing from the heart. There is no violence of passion ;
and although the impulse of this loving woman is strong, it is kept
within delicate bounds. She is sweetly caressing, but not feverishly
fiery; and her fable of the “Two Pigeons” is recited in a strain
more touching, even to pathos, than strong. All is loving tender-
ness ; and not a spark of this conception of the character is lost,
Even, at the close of the act, the words, “ Ouil je nioccuperai encore
de lui—Vingrat ! ce sera Id rna vengeance /” are spoken with a sweet
tenderness, only faintly tinged with the colour of reproach.
The same conception, and the same execution of it, are continued
in Act 111., in the scenes where the great general is discovered in
the humble officer, and the lovers indulge in mutual protestations. And
yet there is not a trace of monotony. How varied is the tenderness
in tone and manner, in every varying phase of this love scene, as of
the previous one ! But this tenderness never warms into strong, exub-
erant passion. It touches the feelings strongly, but it never excites or
thrills by its vehemence. This womanly—not tigerish—Adrienne, as
represented by Sarah Bernhardt, is the simple, loving woman. The
stronger and darker traits of the feminine character are not yet
roused. The time, however, is shortly to come. The incipient jea-
lousy on the discovery of her yet unknown rival is admirably although
delicately portrayed, and gathers crescendo , like distance rolling thunder,
although the storm does not burst into an explosion. In the famous
phrase, “je vous protege /” alone, the actress is slightly disappointing,
and yet the tone in which it is uttered is consistent with her con-
ception of the part. It is with a quiet dignity that the words are
uttered, not with the thrilling force of Rachel. The audience is not
“struck o’ heaps.” But still it remains a question how far consis-
tency can be legitimately sacrificed to stage effect. The tout est
dni , however, thrills the audience. It is a real cri du cceur , although
subdued and choking. From this moment Sarah Bernhardt is
feverish, excited, restless, but without querulous irritability. The scene
in which she would sacrifice her fortune for the sake of the lover
she deems faithless, is feverish, it is true, but without going beyond
the bounds of tender devotion. In that which concludes the act,
when she discovers her rival and has no longer any doubt of her
lover’s treachery, Sarah Bernhardt is at once powerful with finesse


and passionate with subdued energy. The climax of the scene alone
may be considered at once a mistake and a failure. The manner
in which she advances across the stage towards her detested rival
and hurls the outrage, in the words of “ Phedre,” into her very face,
with outstreched finger almost touching her, is far too overstrained ;
and, in her situation, in the very drawing-room of the Princess, and
before distinguished company, the action becomes extravagant,
improbable, and far too strong, but without power. This may be
considered the one blot on the performance.
In the last acts ample amends are made for the one error.
Exquisite, without exaggeration, is her despair at the supposed deser-
tion of her lover, and equally beautiful her revulsion on his return
to her arms. The death scene follows —realistic it is true, but how
different from the realism of her great predecessor ! The fight for
life, the despairing cry, “ Non !je ne veux pas mourir /” are as real
as any death scene ever exhibited on 'the stage, but without repul-
siveness. The scene is harrowing but touching, energetic but with-
out excess. The death is obviously occasioned by the working of
the subtle poison on the brain , producing delirium. But there is no
physicial writhing of pain, and the last wail, “Adieu!” touches every
heart but those of the callous or the prejudiced.
THEODORA.
Gaiety Theatre, July ii, 1885.
Inscribed to Madame Sarah Bernhardt.
E' IMPRESS and Courtesan ! With every line
j Of sinuous limbs instinct with savage lust ;
O murderess who gave the deadly thrust
With golden bodkin : what a fate was thine.
Yet in thy splendid vice right leonine,
Cheering the craven with that voice which vowed
The palace walls would be thy fittest shroud,
When Atropos should give the fatal sign.
We see thee in thy splendour robed like those
Born in the porphyry chamber; and anon
Facing undaunted all the gathering foes ;
With Andre'as how fair to look upon.
Thou reignest in that strange Byzantine dream,
Augustua certes. In thine art supreme.
PI. SaVILE Cr.yRKE.


WRITE TO
min iiiinii i n.
Chemists,
490 § 504 WEET,
MELBOURNE,
for
LONGMORE’S
EYERTON COUGH REMEDY,
llie most Effective Cough Cure ever invented.
2s. 6d., post free.
LONGMORE’S
EYE LOTION
A O UARA JV TEED CURE for BLIGHT ,
Post free, 2s. 6d-
LONGMORE’S
purgative glood and giver gills,
Is. 3d., 2s. 6d , post free.


Works by the same A uthor:
Henry Irving.
A Biographical Sketch. Illustrated by Edwin Long, R.A.,
J. A. McNeil Whistler, J. Fulleylove, Mrs. Allingham,
Val Bromley, Alf. P. Tilt and Fred. Barnard.
Some Famous Hamlets.
A Record of all the Chief Actors of Hamlet from Burbage to Fechtef.
Dramatic Notes.
An Illustrated Critical Record of the I ondon Stage from 1880 to 1886.
Shakesperean Scenes and Characters.
Descriptive Notes on the Plays and on the Principal Shakes-
perean Players, from Betterton to Irving. Illustrated by Thirty
Steel Plates and Ten Wood Engravings, by Solomon Hart, R.A.,
Frank Dicksee, A.R.A., Fred. Barnard, C. Green, Val
Bromley, H. C. Selous, J. D. Watson, M. E. Edvyards, and
others.
“ Romeo and 1111161’’ on the Stage.
(1662 — 1890).
With Portraits of Mrs. Potter as Juliet, and Mr. Kyrle Bellew
as Romeo.


Sydney:
Marcus & Andrew, Printers and Publishers,
13 Bridge Street.


THE AUSTRALIAN
MERCANTILE LOAN &
GUARANTEE COMPANY
LIMITED.
INCORPORATED UNDER COMPANIES' ACT 1874.)
Melbourne Branch: 283 COLLINS STREET.
HEAD OFFICE:
Corner YORK & MARKET STS., SYDNEY
Chairman—J. P. HOWE, Esq., M.P.
BRANCHES :
London - - - 110 Cannon Street, E.C,
Melbourne - - 283 Collins Street East.
Brisbane - Edward & Elizabeth Sts.
Newcastle- - - 37 Hunter Street.
37 Hunter Street.
Agencies throughout the World.
LONDON BOARD OF ADVICE:
Hon. J. F. VESEY FITZGERALD,
LORD H. CLICK BROWNE.
JOHN HOWARD, Esq.
The Company is prepared to make ADVANCES upon all
classes of Mercantile or other approved securities, for a fixed term,
or repayable by instalments.
INTEREST ON DEPOSITS.
12 Months at - 8 per cent.
6 Months at - 7 per cent.
3 Months at - 6 per cent.
At Call - - 5 per cent.
J. B. READFORD,
Manager Melbourne Branch.


C.F. PICKLES & SONS
Carriage Builders.
§ir Special gpoiutnunt to |jis fedlencg t(jc (gobernor.
The Largest Manufacturers
— of —
CARRIAGES, PHAETOIS,
Pleasure and Business Waggons,
IN AUSTRALIA.
OVER TWO HUNDRED LEADING STYLES
TO SELECT FROM.
MANUFACTORY and REPOSITORY:
LATROBE STREET
(NEAR QUEEN STREET).
JOS. DONNELLY, Manager.


KRUSE’S
The Great Family Medicine.
' Recommended and Prescribed by the Medical Profession in cases of
INDIGESTION, DYSPEPSIA,
BILIOUSNESS, NERVOUS
HEADACHE, CONSTIPATION, &c.
AWARDED NUMEROUS GOLD MEDALS.
A Sure Preventive of Gout and Gravel.
An Invaluable Corrective after any
Irregularities of Eating and
Drinking.
FULL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ACCOMPANY EACH BOTTLE.
Of all Chemists, in Half-pint, Pint and Quart
Bottles, at Is 3d, Us (id, and 3s (id
respectively.
