

■ CSNlp
'•'4\ ' I
SB''- ■
jn* C 4-5 3 q-f
5 " '
J|ptorics
By Mrs. A. Field




SATISFYING
STORIES


V
V


atisfying
tories
Mrs. A. Field
True Tales from real life told
for “Children under ninety-
nine”
S.A. PRESS, 508 ALBERT STREET, EAST MELBOURNE, VIC




TO THE CHILDREN
OF THE
WONDERFUL AND SPACIOUS LAND
OF AUSTRALIA
WHOSE TRUE HOPE LIES
NOT IN NATURE'S RESOURCES, BUT
IN THE KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERIENCE
OF THE LIVING GOD.




FOREWORD
—oOo —
During fifteen years, with a faithfulness which is entirely
characteristic of her nature. Mrs. A. Field has been writing
for the blessing of her fellows, wisely choosing to cater for
the extremes of the human family, and thus ensuring the
whole community within the scope of her helpfulness.
In the pages of The War Cry her regular weekly feature
has contributed blessing and cheer to the aged, the infirm,
the afflicted —the shut-ins. as she tenderly terms them; and
in The Young Soldier the opposite to the shut-ins the
eager boys and girls have delighted themselves as they have
read her impressive little stories.
This book is made up of a selection of her writings in the
second category and they are here offered in the expectation
that, by means of this presentation, they may widen the
sphere of her realm of usefulness, and, at the same time,
take on a more permanent form.
Having been the happy recipient of the generosity of Mrs.
Field’s fluent pen. week by week, during nearly three years,
it is a great pleasure to me to reciprocate by assisting in launch-
ing this book, and commending it to every boy and girl who
may become as a " port ” to it. as it voyages on its adven-
turous way. May it bear to everyone treasures rare and
satisfying.
JAS. A. HAWKINS, Lieut.-Colonel
Editor-in-Chief of Salvation Army
publications in Australia.




CONTENTS
-—OOO-
GENERAL STORIES
Mimulus Tigrinus 13
The Boy who could not Sing 14
Little Mis’able Boy 18
A Good Samaritan 20
The Guardian Angel 23
The Echo 27
Prince’s Sacrifice 29
Willie’s Prayer 32
DARK TEXTS IN HEATHEN LANDS
The Shadow Seeker 3 7
Sunday Cricket 39
Lost in the Desert 40
Beating the Butler 42
Really Thirsty 44
Hunting the Hunter 46
Nets and Traps 48
Joseph’s Coat 50
Footmen and Forerunners 52
“You need it more than I” 54


THE GREAT DELIVERER
The Great Deliverer (poem) 59
The Lure of the Serpent 6 |
The Th ree Tall Trees 53
A Friend in Need (,g
Old Billy 73
Wally s Mother 80
A CHRISTMAS STORY
No room for Jesus 89
A POEM
Joy climbs the steps 94


PART I.
——oOo —
GENERAL STORIES
" jVo good thing will He withhold from them that
walk uprightly.’ —Psalm 84: 11.




MIMULUS TIGRINUS
MY NAME is “ Mimulus Tigrinus.” I am only a
small flower, not well known like the rose, or pansy,
or carnation, and this morning, as 1 opened my petals
and came into full bloom, my owner came and looked
long and earnestly at me. Her eyes were dim, and
she did not see me really, for her mind had gone back
to a sunny morning long ago.
The bell was ringing for school, and her father,
who was the teacher, was ready for the children to
come into school.
A little girl ran into the school-house verandah to
find her mother, and to kiss her before joining the
other children. She was watering a window boxful
of mimulus. There must have been a hundred or
more in that one box, and every flower was looking
in the direction of the sun.
“ Oh, Mother,’ exclaimed the child, “ how wonder-
ful those flowers look this morning! Why do they all
turn their faces the same way? What makes them so
beautiful? ”
The mother explained that they were looking to
the sun. The sun gave them life, health, and colour.
They were turning their faces towards the sun because
they wanted to be made beautiful, to grow and be
useful. The little girl kissed her mother and thought:


Oh, I wish I could write and tell others about the
lovely flowers that looked to the sun to make them
beautiful.”
So my mistress went away very quietly, and I knew
she was thinking of her own young days. A few hours
later she came back and looked at me again. There
were tears in her eyes, but they were happy tears, for
she looked glad in spite of her feelings. In her hand
were two letters, one from New Zealand, and one from
Queensland: beautiful loving letters, thanking her for
the words she had written in The Army papers.
She remembered how she had a longing to write in
those early days, when her mother and father taught
her to love God and to look to Him in the way flowers
looked to the sun. Her prayer had been answered,
and she was able to tell others some of the messages
that the flowers whispered to her, for as she held the
letters, and still looked at me, she said:
Thank God for a good father and mother. Thank
God 1 was taught to see His love in everything.
Thank God for the sunshine, and for the little plant
that brought these memories back to me.”
THE BOY WHO COULD NOT SING
—oOo—
THE SINGING CLASS was in full swing. Everyone
seemed to be enjoying the music and singing, but
there was one who, though intensely interested, did


not take part in the singing. The master put up his
hand for silence, and said:
“ John, why are you not singing?
The boy thus addressed coloured up in a moment,
and with downcast eyes, said:
Sir, I cannot sing.
“ Cannot sing? Oh, but lam sure you can,” said
he. “ I have been watching your face, and I know that
you are singing the words in your mind. Now, come,
sing along with the others.
So John joined in, but his voice was so deep and
so strong that everyone turned to look at him, with
the result that the singing ceased again.
John s eyes looked very bright as he said, There,
sir, 1 told you I could not sing. When I try to sing
at home it is the same. Even mother says, ‘ Oh, John,
stop that dreadful row.’
At this everyone laughed, and the master said,
" Sit down, and I will tell you a story instead of any
more singing to-day!”
Long ago, in England, a little boy named Caedmon,
who lived in a fishing village called Beacon Bay, often
in his play or work would look up to the top of the
cliffs where stood a double monastery. There seemed
to be a strange peace about the place, and he felt he
would like to be there. And it happened after a time
that he went to work in the monastery garden, and
once a year there was a feast when everyone about
the place had a share of the good things. As they all


sat around the fire, a harp was passed round, and each
one was expected to sing or play. Now, Caedmon
was full of poetry inside, but somehow he could never
express it in words. He used to sit drinking in the
songs of others, but when the harp came near to him
he would watch his opportunity to slip out, and thut
he never learned to sing. One night when Caedmon
was getting quite an old man, he fled, as he had done
so many times before, to hide his confusion.
He went out into the night, and after attending to
his work, lay down to rest on some hay in a shed.
He was soon asleep, and it seemed to him that an
angel came and said:
Caedmon, sing something for me.
Caedmon protested that he could not sing, and
that was why he had left the feast.
All the same, you have to sing for me.
What shall 1 sing?”
Sing of the beginning of things,” answered the
angel.
So Caedmon opened his mouth to sing, and found
that he was singing God’s praises with all the eloquence
he had always longed to possess. When he awoke,
he remembered clearly the words which he had sung
in his dream, and, more wonderful still, he found
that in his waking thoughts he could add more verses
to his song. So once again God had entrusted a
precious gift to one of the humblest of His children.
Caedmon d»a not hide his gift, but he was encouraged


and helped by those in the monastery, and became a
sweet singer and poet.
Salvationists will be interested to know that it was
in Caedmon s town that the Founder gave his first
address —Whitby. There, on the cliff commanding
the town, may be seen the ruins of the Abbey, built
on the site of the monastery where Caedmon breathed
his last, saying:
“ I am chanting, my children, with all the servants
of God.”
And there, too, stands a grey stone cross to his
memory, and carved upon it are the words: He
sang for the angel in his dream.
The boy who could not sing is the earliest English
poet of whom we know the name, and that part of
Yorkshire which was his home is called The cradle
of English poetry.’
When the master had finished, every child looked
interested, but John stood up and said:
Thank you, sir, but I will try to sing
" Yes,” said the master, “and 1 will help you. God
has put a song in your heart. 1 know it, and He wants
you to sing. You will soon learn. See if you cannot
take a lesson from Caedmon, the boy who could not
sing, and yet became a singer and a poet. Those
others who sang around the festive board are forgotten,
but Caedmon’s name still lives on.


LITTLE MIS’ABLE BOY
—OOO
JACK GRIFFITH was walking along the road when
he heard a child crying. He paused, and going over
to the little boy, asked him what was the matter.
“ Oh, lam so mis’able, so mis’able. Mummy has
gone away, and when I cried Daddy hit me, and I
won t go back any more if Mummy does not come
home.”
Oh, don’t cry,” said Jack, sitting down beside the
little fellow. “You are too big to cry like that. Come
along with me, and we will see if we can do anything
to help you.”
Wiping his eyes with a dirty hand, Harry looked
up into his new friend’s face. “ Now, come along and
see if we can count our blessings. That is a real good
thing to do when you are miserable.”
I ain’t got no blessings to count. I ain’t.
Jack smiled, and taking the little fellow on his knee
said, ” Ain’t got no blessings, eh? Well now, let
us see if we can find any. Can you see?” »
Course I can; you just ought to see me when I
am helping brother sell papers. A man cannot wink
without me seein’ him.”
Well, there s blessing No. 1. What would you feel
like if you were blind, and had to be led about, not
able to see the sky, or the flowers, or your own
mother’s face?”


“ Oh,” said the boy, “ I never thought of that. I
can hear, too, and speak, and I know one poor little
mate of mine who is deaf and dumb.
“ Well,” said Jack, “ that’s blessing No. 2. Many
boys and girls are deaf, dumb, and blind. Now, can
you run?”
“ Can I what?” answered the boy, “you just ought
to see me run.”
“ Yes, I am sure you can run, and you can use your
arms, too.” Here the boy put out his arm to show his
muscle. “That’s a good mus., isn’t it?”
“ Yes, it is a good, strong arm. Now don’t you
think that is a blessing? Just look on the verandah of
the hospital and you will see little boys who cannot
walk or run. Surely that is a blessing.
Harry now looked ashamed. “ I am so sorry I
said that. 1 will tell Mummy when she comes home.
She always says she ain’t got no blessings since Father
lost his job, and he says he’s got nothin’ to lose but
his chains. I don’t know what he means, but I do
wish you would come to see Daddy, cos he’s got a
lot of blessings, too, if he’d only try to count them;
and Mummy, too, if she comes back. I won’t say 1
ain’t got no blessings any more, ’cos she’s the greatest
blessing of all. I think I had better go home now,
’cos when she comes home she’ll be lookin’ for
me. Hooray, mister, 1 feel better now. I’m not
going to be mis’able any more.


A GOOD SAMARITAN
——oOo—
IT WAS a cold afternoon, and as Willie West and his
chum came out of the meeting they did not go for a
walk as usual, but ran straight away to Willie’s home.
Oh, Dad,” he said, as they rushed inside, “ I
think it must be going to snow.” They then sat by the
fire, and after a little while Willie said, ” My word.
Dad, that good Samaritan was a good chap, wasn’t
he? Fancy him putting the poor man on his donkey
and walking himself.”
His father smiled. Yes, he was a friend in need.
Would you like me to tell you what happened to me
one day? I know what it is to meet a good Samaritan
away on a lonely road.” Willie nudged his mate, and
they both were eager for the story.
Well,” he began, “ many years ago I sold a farm
on the Northern Line, and wishing to keep a light
draught mare and foal I had, 1 decided to ride the
mare and let the foal follow along behind. It was a
long journey to my home in the West, about 200 miles,
but the foal looked so well when galloping about the
paddock that 1 thought he would manage to do the
journey if we took it in easy stages.
All went well the first day or two, and then the
foal got so footsore that it could hardly walk. The
poor thing was knocked up, and we were right away
in the bush. There was not a house near, and it was


then ten miles to the nearest railway station. How
was Ito get there? I had hoped to reach the town in
the early afternoon, but here it was dinner-time, and
there was scarcely any food for myself or the mare.
“ We, however, rested a while and ate what we had,
and then resumed our journey; but that poor little
foal could not, or would not, go. 1 then got off the
horse and pushed it along for a time. For eight miles
I did this, pushing, pulling, and nearly carrying the
poor foal. There was yet two miles to go.
“ How could I manage it? I was faint with hunger
and fatigue, and there was no chance of buying food.
It was just getting dusk, when I heard the sound of
wheels, and a man’s cheery voice:
“ 4 Hello, mate; you seem to be in trouble. I don’t
know which looks the worse, you or the foal.
“ Boys, if ever I was glad of anything I was glad to
see that man. I told him I was trying to get it to the
station, but he assured me there was no hope. I could
never get the foal there, and even if I succeeded in
doing so I could not get it away without notice.
“ 4 But,’ he said, ‘ I live quite close here. You just
tie the mare on behind the sulky and jump in. lam
stronger and fresher than you are. I will bring the
foal along.’
44 And he would have it so, although he was com-
ing home from a week of hard work in the bush. I
sat in the sulky in his place, and watched him helping
the foal along, when his great kindness led me to think
of the beautiful words:


“ Then do your best for one another.
Making life a pleasant dream;
Help a worn and weary brother,
Pulling hard against the stream.”
“ At last we got to his house, and there he gave us
his very best. The horses were fed, then he took
some meat that he had purchased for his requirements
on Sunday and cooked it. I told him not to leave
himself short, but I was hungry, and he knew it, and
soon he had tea ready. Never will I forget that meal.
We laughed and chatted like old friends, and soon I
forgot my troubles in his cheerful company.
After tea I said, ‘ I will walk into town now and
order a horse-box, if you will let the mare and foal
stay here while Igo to Sydney.’ But, no, he would
drive me in; and when leaving him he would not take
any money. He looked at me and said: ‘ Would you
not help a poor chap in trouble if you could?’ I said,
Indeed, 1 would, gladly.’ ‘ Well,’ he said, say no
more about it.’
“ Now, don’t you think he had the spirit of the
good Samaritan?”
Yes, they answered, “he was a real good friend,
wasn’t he?”
And it makes me think of One always cares
for us. He comes to those who are in need, lifts their
burden, and tells us to cast all our cares upon Him.
And just as that man befriended me, and would take
no money, so the great things Jesus does are * without
money and without price.’ ”


THE GUARDIAN ANGEL
——oOo —
BABY PRICE was having his bath, and a jolly time
he was having, too, his four-year-old brother Eric en-
joying the fun just as much as he. But, oh, what a
splash he was making! Mother was laughing also, as
baby kept trying to put his toe into his mouth.
“ Oh, Mummy,” said Eric, “ isn’t he a funny little
fellow? I think he is the loveliest baby in the world,
don’t you, Mummy?”
“ I don’t know,” answered Mother, looking at the
wet floor; ” I think he is a naughty baby, don t you?
“No; don’t say he is naughty, Mummy; I’ll help
you wipe this up.
Baby kept watching Eric while he was being dressed,
Eric playing with him and making him laugh and
jump in mother’s arms.
When he was dressed, Mother said, “ Now, Eric,
be quiet, and let me put him to sleep.” So Eric tried
to be as quiet as he could, while Mother sang:
“ Hush, my babe, lie still and slumber,
Holy angels guard thy bed.”
“ Mummy,” asked Eric, “ does the angels mind me
when I go to sleep, too?
“Yes. dear.”
Quietness for a little while, and then the question:
Does they mind me when I walk about outside?


* Yes, pet,” answered Mother. “ God takes care of
us all the time, whether we wake or sleep.”
Just then baby opened his eyes, and began to laugh
and kick about. Oh, Eric,” said mother, “do run
outside. Look here, he will not go to sleep while you
talk to me; run out on the verandah and then you can
talk to Mummy afterwards.”
So Eric did as he was told, but baby was not
sleepy, and Mother took some time to get him to lie
down. When he was settled, she wondered what had
become of Eric—he was not on the verandah, nor
about the house. A cold shudder ran through her as
she called his name.
It was such a lonely place where they lived, and
all around were diggers’ holes. She had been afraid
of them when she came to live there, and asked her
husband to cover them over, but he said, “ Oh, they
have been there for years, and no one has ever fallen
in. Besides, these around here are not very deep.”
So she had to be content with that, and became
quite accustomed to seeing them. She always told
Eric never to go near them, and he never had done
so; but this morning she could not see him. She
called loudly, and listened for a reply. Yes, that was
his voice, but where? Then it came again: “ Mummy!
Mummy, quick!”
She knew only too well where to look, and, hastily
catching up a rope as she ran, tied it round her waist.
On looking down a hole not far from the house, she
saw her small son, crying loudly, but not much hurt.
Fortunately the hole was no more than about eight


feet deep, but there was water in it —just a little at
the bottom.
No one was in sight, and she did not expect her
husband home until evening. What could she do?
After crying, “ Help, Help! and lifting her heart in
prayer to God, she tied the other end of the rope
around a sapling, and let herself down the hole. Lift-
ing the little fellow in her arms, she cried, My darling
little boy, why did you come here?
“ I was chasing a butterfly. Mum, and I never saw
where I was running, until I fell down here.
“ But,” said she, “ it is a wonder you are not hurt.”
“ Oh,” he said, " I failed such a funny way. See
those sides sticking out a bit? I failed on one, and
then 1 slipped off and failed on the one on the other
side. 1 couldn’t stick on —it was too slippy, and then
I failed in the water.
Then you came, Mummy; but how can we get
out? Can you climb up?”
“ No, 1 am afraid I cannot, with you.’
“You won’t leave me here, will you, Mummy?”
"No, pet. Listen! Is that someone running?
Calling as loudly as ever she could, she waited, and
only a minute or two afterwards who should be there
but her own husband! Seeing the rope tied on to the
sapling, and hearing his wife s voice, he had run
quickly to the place. Very soon both Mother and
Eric were up in the sunlight again, and, oh, how glad
they were!
However did you happen to come home? asked
Mother—“ I did not expect you until evening.”


“ No.” replied Father; “ and I was greatly annoyed
because I found I had forgotten something I wanted
for my work. I tried to do without it, but I could
not get on, and so I came home to get it. As I was
coming I heard your voice.”
Eric was listening; and soon his sweet little voice
was heard: You said God lets His angels take care
of us all the time, didn’t you, Mum?”
‘Yes, indeed,” answered Mother.
” Mummy,” continued Eric, “ I thought you were
an angel when I saw you coming down to me. You is
the best angel I know, Mummy.”
And,” said Mother, while the tears stood in her
eyes, I thought Daddy was an angel when he came
and saved us both.”
‘ Well, my girl, I am not an angel, only a careless
husband, and I will take good care that those holes
are covered over very soon.” Then, taking his wife’s
hand in his, he continued, lam not a religious man,
but I feel I must thank God that I had to come home.”
“ I have been thanking Him all the time in my
heart,” she said, simply. “While I was in that hole,
holding my little, shivering boy in my arms, and think-
ing of our baby in the cradle, and you not coming
home until evening, I did pray to God, and no sooner
had I finished than I heard you coming. We have in-
deed much to be thankful for.”
And after Daddy had gone back to work, Eric won-
dered why Mother took him on her knee and sobbed
is she held him closely to her.


oOo ‘
THE ECHO
“ Don’t cry, Mummy,” he said, softly, ‘ God did
take care of me, didn t He?
And Mother kissed the dear little face, as she re-
plied: “Yes, He did! Thank God for His goodness.”
BOBBY AND BETTY GREY were only five and a
half years of age, and they were just starting to go
to school. These two small people were twins, and
always inseparable. They did not like going to school
because they did not like the idea of being separated.
As they walked along they agreed that they would
not have anyone else to play with, they would just
play together as they had always done. So they did.
They would not make friends with other children, but
kept together as far as they were allowed, and soon
the other children noticed it, and left them to them-
selves.
One day they came home with sorrowful faces, and
on their mother inquiring the cause of their trouble,
they said:
“ None of the other girls and boys play with us.
They are real nasty to us; they leave us out of their
games.
Then the mother said, “ Come here and I will tell
you a story.
” There was a little boy playing in the wood one


day, when suddenly he shouted, ‘Hello!’ A voice
answered, ‘Hello!’
Who are you?’ he asked.
Who are you?’ was the reply.
He fancied that some other boy was mocking him,
and became very angry.
Why don’t you come out?’ he cried.
Come out,’ answered the voice.
In a very angry way he shouted back, ‘ I’ll fight
And the voice replied, ‘ Fight you.’
Then the little fellow ran home and told his
mother that there was a boy in the wood who mocked
him, and wanted to fight him.
But his wise mother, who knew it was an echo,
said, Run out again and shout, ‘ 1 love you,’ and see
what the answer is.
So he ran out and did as his mother said, and
the answer came back in the same friendly tone, ‘ I
love you.’
“ Now you see what I mean.
You did not want to be friends with the other boys
and girls. Now they do not want you. It is cjuite
right for you two to stick to each other as much as
you can, but be friendly with the others, too, and they
will be friendly to you. The fault is yours.
It is only an echo of your own actions coming back
to you, and you do not like it. Now, try saying ‘ I
love you ’; don’t be selfish; try to be nice to the other
children, and see if the echo does not come back,
I will be nice to you!


So saying, the mother kissed the tears away, and
two happy children went off to play, not selfishly this
time, and soon they were happy with the other chil-
dren.
How the echo of our actions returns! One selfish,
bad-tempered person in a railway carriage can make
everyone miserable, while a happy, good-tempered
person has just the opposite influence. People will
push up and make room for that one, but keep away
from the bad-tempered boy as much as possible.
Boys and girls, let us remember the echo.
" Be you to others kind and true.
As you’d have others be to you.
And never do nor say to we whate’er
You could not take again.’'
PRINCE’S SACRIFICE
AND ITS DOUBLE RESULT
—oOo —
EXCITEMENT, WITH the accompaniment of plenty
of work, prevailed at the small country school-house.
Mr. Wilson, the school-master, had a removal, and
everything had to be packed very carefully, as it had
a long way to travel. Mrs. Wilson’s practised eye was
examining everything doubtful of sufficient value to
warrant taking away, when it happened to light on
Jim’s dog, Prince.
“ Jim,” she said casually, ” you had better give


Prince away—l am sure he is not worth taking so
far.”
Jim’s face fell, and, big boy though he was, tears
would come into his eyes.
“ Oh, Mum,” he replied wistfully, his lips trembling,
” 1 can’t part with Prince!”
At this moment it really seemed as if Prince himself
instinctively knew that he was being discussed, for,
standing on his hind legs and putting his paws on Jim’s
hands, he looked earnestly into one face and then the
other.
But Mrs. Wilson had many cares on her mind, and
felt that she should face matters reasonably, without
regard to sentiment.
“You know, Jim,” she said encouragingly, ‘‘he
isn’t much of a dog, and you can get another where
we are going.”
What was it that caused Prince immediately to go to
Mother and look up at her entreatingly?
This was just the help Jim needed.
“ Mother, look at him asking you. Oh, Mum, do
let him come. He’s such a dear old fellow, and you
don’t know how he takes care of me —he won’t let
anything touch me.”
“ Very well, Jim, you may keep him—he certainly
is fond of you.”
Jim’s eyes beamed as he thanked his Mother, and
Prince frisked and ran about. How happy they were
now.
At last everything was packed, and they were
away. On arriving at their destination, however, they


found that the school-house seemed to lie right in the
bush. Indeed, on one side the thick bush was almost
up to the house. Mother and Father agreed that a
clearing must be made on this side, so, as there were
still a few holidays, they all set to work with a will.
As Father and Jim cut the scrub down, Mother and
the little ones carried the branches to be burned.
Prince, of course, was busy, too, racing about—there
were so many new things to be seen.
What a happy time they were having, when sud-
denly a sharp cry was heard from Jim. On rushing
towards him they were horrified to see a large snake
rearing itself to spring. Then, before anyone could
do anything, Prince rushed in between, and the snake
bit the dog instead of the boy. Prince, however, seized
the reptile and shook it. Father and Jim soon finished
it off.
But what of Prince—poor old Prince? Oh, how
they tried to save his life. But it was of no use, the
venom had too surely done its deadly work. Tenderly
they buried him, and there were no dry eyes around
the grave.
Before bed-time that night Mr. Wilson took the Bible
and read: “ He was wounded for our transgressions.
He was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of
our peace was upon Him; and with His stripes we are
healed.” (Isaiah 53: 5.)
“ Children,” he said, ” you know how much we love
Prince for giving his life for Jim. But there is One
Who made a much greater sacrifice for you, Who
suffered death on the Cross for our sins, that we might


be saved. Oh, children, as you go through life take
that Friend with you always, and then when dangers
or temptations assail you, there is always Someone
with you to protect you. Let us love Him more and
more.”
The children’s softened hearts made good soil for
the precious seed of Truth, and, as they kept Prince’s
grave green in memory of his sacrifice, they remem-
bered, too, the Saviour of Whom Father had read and
spoken.
WILLIE’S PRAYER
——oOo—
MISS SHAW was feeling disturbed. She lived with
her sister, a widow, and surely there could not have
been a greater contrast in their dispositions. Mrs.
Wheeler was sweet-tempered and sunny-natured, and
although she never had children of her own, she loved
them, and they loved her, while her sister openly said
that she did not like children, and now, this morning,
there was a letter to say that their niece was coming
to stay with them for a week, bringing with her her
little boy four years old.
“ Four years of age,” grumbled Miss Shaw; “ just
the age for mischief. I’ll guarantee he’ll have every-
thing upside down in no time: his sticky fingers will
leave their marks everywhere. Well, Lou, you can
entertain Minnie and her child yourself, I shall keep
to my room.”


When the visitors arrived, however, Miss Shaw
changed her mind somewhat, for the little fellow had
the sweetest of smiles, and dark eyes brimming over
with fun. He was a favourite right from the begin-
ning with Auntie Lou.
That night, when Mrs. Wheeler was talking quietly
to her niece, and Willie was asleep, Minnie asked why
Aunt Betty was so different in her manner.
“ Your Auntie is kind and friendly also when she
likes,” said Mrs. Wheeler, “ but she is not really fond
of children.”
Next morning, little Willie tried to make friends with
Auntie Betty, but somehow did not succeed. She was
reading all the morning, and in the afternoon she took
her book to a garden-seat away in the shrubbery. Here
she fell asleep, until she was awakened by Willie tell-
ing her it was time for tea. The merry little fellow
called a smile to her face as he took her hand and
helped her up. He was chatting merrily to her as they
went indoors. But after tea Auntie wanted her book
again, and it was nowhere to be found. The house
was searched, and little Willie was secretly blamed
for losing it. Both Minnie and her little boy looked
for it, but without success.
” I is sure I did not touch it. Auntie Betty,” he said,
“ but I will find it if I can.”
When bedtime came, little Willie, in his prayers,
added, ” Please, God, I do want to find Auntie Betty’s
book. Please tell me where it is. Make me a good
boy. Amen!”
Then he was tucked into bed.


Presently he jumped up and startled them all by
running out, saying, “ I know where Auntie s book
is, I believe.” Not being quite dark, he ran straight
to the seat where she had fallen asleep, got up on it,
and found the book just behind the shrubbery.
“To think that I blamed you for losing it, said
Aunt Betty. “It must have fallen from my hand when
I was asleep. What made you think of it, then?”
“ Oh,” he said, looking up into her face, ” I asked
God to tell me where it was, and as I was going to
sleep I just thought it was there.”
Auntie Betty, a little later, said to Minnie, “ When
I heard you had three boys, I pitied you; I thought you
would be worried to death. But if the others are like
Willie 1 would like to come and stay with you for a
time, so that I might forget myself. I must say lam
quite pleased with little Willie.”


PART 11.
—OO0 —
DARK TEXTS IN HEATHEN
LANDS
" That was the true Light, which lighteth every man
that cometh into the world.” —John 1: 9.


w
►


DARK TEXTS
THE SHADOW SEEKER
——oOo —
“As a servant earnestly desireth the shadow ” —Job 7: 2.
TED SMITH and Ernie Jenkins were great mates.
They went to school together, and always managed
to keep in the same classes. They also studied their
Sunday-school lessons together. Sometimes they saw
a verse in the Bible that they could not understand
at all. One Sunday afternoon Ted said: “ I say,
Ernie, here is a queer verse: ‘ As a servant earnestly
desireth the shadow.’ Now, what on earth would a
servant want a shadow for?”
“ Oh, I don’t know, lam sure. I suppose he was
tired, and wanted to rest in the shade,” answered
Ernie; “ but I’ll tell you what we’ll do—after Sunday-
school we’ll go and ask Grandfather. He seems to
know everything, and he is always glad to help me
with my lessons. He told me that when I was puzzled
over a verse in the Bible, to ask him, and if he could,
he would explain it.”
“ Righto,” said Ted; “we ll go and see what he
says about it.”
So that afternoon they called on Grandfather, who
was pleased to see the boys and to know their errand.
“ Well, boys,” said he, “ you see, I have lived in
India part of my life, and the manners of the people
there closely resemble those of the Jews in our Lord’s


time. Now, tell me, do you boys ever look at the
clock when you are in school, and wish that the time
would go a bit quicker—that the hands would go round
faster?”
The two boys exchanged glances. “My word we
do—especially if it is a lesson we do not like, or if we
are very anxious to get out to play.”
Grandfather nodded. He knew all about it. “ Well,
that is exactly the reason why the servant earnestly
desireth the shadow. When I was in India I had a
mark for every hour of the day, made by locating the
place where the shadow fell, and as there is scarcely
any difference in the length of the days there, you can
tell the time almost to the minute by looking at your
shadow. Often you may see a servant running to look
at his shadow to know whether it is time to leave off
work.”
The boys thanked him as they rose to go. “ But,”
said he, “ the verse really implies eagerness. The
servant is eager to get away home; the hireling is
eager for his wages. Now, I am really glad to see
you boys eager to learn. Try to learn all you can
while you are young. Store your mind with good
things, and never be ashamed to ask if there is anything
you cannot understand in the Bible. Good-bye, boys;
be like the bees, ‘ Look for some sweet in all you meet,
and store up all you find.’ ”


SUNDAY CRICKET
—oOo
“ For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of
a fool.” —Ecc. 7: 6.
TED AND ERNIE came to see their grandfather as
usual on Sunday afternoon. As soon as they were
seated, the latter said:
1 can see you have something on your minds.
Tell me what it is.”
“ Well,” said Ernie. “ some of our mates have
joined in a cricket match to-day, and they wanted
us to go. We are fond of cricket, and we are very
much interested in this game, but, of course, we
could not go on Sunday. When we refused they
laughed at us, and called us fools.
Grandfather took their hands in his, and said:
“ Ah, I think it is the other way about. I have a
verse that will just fit you to-day. It is this: For
as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laugh-
ter of a fool.’
The boys were silent for a moment, and then said:
3Ve can see you have a story, let us hear it. So
grandfather proceeded.
“Our home, after we left the school at Bombay,
was on the borders of the great desert of India. I
often walked for about two miles in it from my home,
and the only vegetation to be seen were the thorny
bushes. The thorns were about two inches long,
and made excellent tooth-picks. These thorny bushes


were gathered by the natives, timber being very
scarce, and sold for firewood.
“ The servant would get the pot ready, and then
light these thorns underneath. They made a great
crackling sound as they were burning, but they did
not last long, for they soon burnt out. Now, can you
see what I mean? Your mates laughed at you to-
day; but do not take any notice. It will be like the
thorns crackling, making a lot of noise, but soon
burning out.
* Those thorns make you think of something else,
also. You remember ‘the Crown of thorns,’ worn
by our Lord, do you not? If we are His followers
we cannot escape some thorns, can we? So you will
just be brave, I know, and let your mates see that you
will be firm. They will see then that there is reality
in your religion, and perhaps you may be the means
of bringing them to love the Lord Jesus, even as you
do yourselves.”
LOST IN THE DESERT
——oOo—
The shadow of a great rock in a weary land.”— lsaiah 32; 2
“GRANDFATHER,” said Ernie, as the two boys
greeted their friend, "do you know anything about
A rock in a weary land ’?
Yes, my boys, 1 do,’ he answered. “My home
in Kotree, Scinde, was near the desert, not a mile
distant. My usual custom was to walk two or three


miles from home, with my brother, before breakfast.
But, one day, we lost our way, for there are no roads
in the desert.
“ We were afraid to go on, for fear we would get
farther into the desert. We stood still, and won-
dered what to do, when we spied in the distance a
rock— a rock in a weary land. We ran as fast as we
could, and climbed upon it, when we could easily
see the direction to take. 1 can tell you, we were glad,
and thankful the rock was there.
“The Lord Jesus is often likened to a rock. David
says, ‘ My strong rock for a house of defence ’ (Psalm
31 : 2), and in Psalm 94: 22, ‘ My God is the rock of
my refuge also Psalm 18: 2, ‘The Lord is my rock
and my fortress.’ You cannot understand these texts
nearly so well living in this country. You do not
know the great value of these rocks. Sometimes
storms sweep the desert, and the traveller looks anxi-
ously for a rock to shelter him from the storm; if he is
out in the midst of it, he would very likely be blown
off his feet and smothered in the sand.
“ David says again, ‘ Lead me to the rock that is
higher than I’ (Psalm 61: 2). And how those
travellers do pray anxiously to be led to the rock of
refuge! There they can hide in the crevices, and be
safe until the storm is passed.
“ And boys,” continued Grandfather, “ though we
have no desert here, we have storms. I mean, storms
come upon us suddenly, storms of doubt and unbe-
lief sometimes assail us and nearly blow us off our
feet, so to speak, but look for the Rock. The Great


Rock in a weary land. Jesus is a shelter in the time of
storm. He will shelter us and show us the way.
The Lord’s our rock, in Him tve hide,
A shelter in the time of storm.”
‘You will remember that rock, won’t you, boys?
And you will find that Jesus can be to you a refuge,
and a fortress. A rock in a weary land—a shelter
in the time of storm.’
When we lose our way, and do not know what
to do, or which way to take, remember the Rock,
and you will soon see the way that leads to safety.”
BEATING THE BUTLER!
—oOo—
“ And the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.”
—Genesis 40: 17.
“ GRANDFATHER!” said the boys as they greeted
their friend. “We have been studying the lesson of
the chief butler and baker, and we have come to ask
if you have seen anything like what it says in this
verse: And the birds did eat them out of the basket
upon my head.’
Grandfather laughed, and was evidently much
amused. Yes, I will tell you what I saw myself. One
day while we were at school our sister came to see
us. She said: ‘ Now I am married I want you to come
and see me at my home.’ So we gladly left and went
with her to Scinde.


“ When we got there we found a very comfortable
house, and our sister was so good to us that we were
very happy indeed. But we were surprised to find
such a lot of servants. The rule is one man, one
job.’ Men there do most of the housework in India,
washing, ironing, sewing, etc., while some of the
women do work outdoors.
“ The man who sweeps the house will not do any-
thing else. You have to employ so many because
they will only do one class of work. liked to talk
to these people, and we liked everyone but the butler.
“He was too proud for anything. He just went
about in quiet dignity, and we often thought we would
like to see his pride taken down. One day he was
bringing in the dinner, and, as usual, was carrying
it upon his head. The kitchen was a fair distance from
the house, and I happened to be watching.
“ I S aw the butler walking along in a stately fashion,
and then I saw what he did not see or hear. I saw
a vulture fly quickly towards him and take the joint
of meat from the basket on his head. Off the bird flew
with it; and you should have seen the look on that
man’s face.
“ You know, boys,” said Grandfather, ” I could
have warned him, but I just wanted to see how he
would look. We had to go without meat that day,
but 1 felt it was worth that to see his pride have a
fall. The Bible continually warns people about pride.
“ And boys, there is a verse that says, ‘ Let him
that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall. You
know, I think that butler, when he saw me watching,


just tried to impress me with his dignity. If he had
been careful he would have been on the watch, be-
cause he knew the birds would do that sort of thing.
But he just forgot to be careful, and so he had to en-
dure being laughed at, for we could not help being
amused.
So, boys, look out for the birds above, as well as
the pitfalls beneath.”
REALLY THIRSTY!
——oOo—
They have forsaken Me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed
them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water.”
—Jeremiah 2: 13.
OH, GRANDFATHER, I am thirsty,” said Ernie,
as the boys came in one hot afternoon. “ I feel as if
I could drink a well dry.” He went straight to the
tap and quenched his thirst, and Grandfather said,
You do not know what it is to be really thirsty.”
Don’t I!” answered the boy; “my throat was
parched.”
Their friend still looked serious as he said: “You
remind me of an event that happened when I was a
httle boy. Water was very scarce at the school, and
the well was enclosed in a room that was kept locked
day and night. How would you feel now, if instead of
having that tap to turn on, you found the water locked
up, and no chance of getting a drink for hours?
I remember, 1 used to clap my hands for joy


when Wednesday came, for on that day we got a
double supply of water. Every other day we got just
one pint to last us twenty-four hours. Many a time, in
those early days, I have been unable to sleep, being
so thirsty. I can tell you we used to hoard that water,
never wasting or spilling one drop.
“ Just fancy being in a hot climate with only two
cups of water for twenty-four hours! Well, one day
the man in charge happened to leave the door open,
and some of us boys found it out and went in. We
looked down the well. ‘ Oh, surely here was plenty of
water.’ About a foot down the well was a shelf, and
on the shelf jugs of water. One of the boys used the
same expression that you used just now: ‘ I could drink
the well dry.’
“ Then he leaned over, saying, ‘ I am going to get
a jug, anyway.’ While he was leaning over he over-
balanced and fell in. We ran at once and gave the
alarm, but when the men got him out he was quite
dead; poor boy! After that the water was guarded
more closely than ever.
“ Now, boys, this text says, ‘ They have forsaken
Me, the Fountain of living waters and hewed them out
cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.’ Fancy
forsaking a fountain for a broken cistern; a cooling
refreshing fountain, for a vessel with all the water
gone. What a foolish thing; and yet boys and girls
are doing it every day.
“ They leave off going to Christian meetings, for-
saking the One that said: ‘ He that is athirst let him
come unto Me and I will give unto him the water of


life freely.’ Not a pint a day, but freely. They for-
sake this and go out into the world. Then when they
thirst, they find that the cisterns they have hewn out
for themselves are broken cisterns that hold no water.
“ May you boys never do that, but always hunger
and thirst after righteousness, for Jesus has said,
‘ Blessed are they that do so, for they shall be filled.’
HUNTING THE HUNTER
——oOo—
“ Thou shall not he afraid for the arrow that flieth by day.”
—Psalm 91: 5.
“ NOW, BOYS,” said Grandfather, “ 1 have just been
reading that beautiful Psalm, 9 1 st, and a thought came
to me that I want to pass on to you. In some parts of
India and Malayan countries the bird of paradise is
found. It is a most beautiful bird, and the shikari-
walla or hunter, goes to a great deal of trouble try-
ing to snare and capture them for their beautiful
feathers.
“ Well, the natives cannot bear to have the birds
caught or killed. They do not like taking the life of
any creature, and particularly these birds. So, while
the man is stealthily pursuing them, a native is very
likely following him. He carries a tiny arrow case,
not like a bow and arrow, only a small affair, about
the size of your foot rule. The arrows are small and
sharp, and they are dipped in poison.


His eyes never leave the hunter, and when he
sees a favourable opportunity he lifts this small case
to his mouth and blows the arrow at the man. If
the arrow pieces the hunter s flesh, causing it to bleed,
it will mean death to him, but if he is prepared, know-
ing the danger, he will wear some protection.
“ Now, 1 think that St. Paul was thinking of the
same thing when he said, Above all, taking the shield
of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked.’—Ephesians 6: 16.
“You know, boys, we are being watched, and our
adversary, the Devil, is always ready to hurl a dart
if we are not protected by the ‘ whole armour.’ Don’t
be afraid of temptations. Being tempted is not sin,
but the yielding to sin is. In fact, temptation is a
healthy sign, for the devil never wastes ammunition on
dead men. Keep your armour bright, and you will be
safe.
“ The hunter has no idea that he is being followed
and watched. His whole thought is on capturing the
bird, and so he is not thinking of himself, and if un-
protected he falls a victim to his enemy. lam just
saying this to show how careful we must be—always
on the alert.
“ Read all about it in the 6th chapter of Ephesians.’’


NETS AND TRAPS
“ Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.”
—Proverbs 1; 17.
“ WELL, GRANDFATHER,” said the boys, as they
greeted their friend, “ we are so glad to come to see
you, and we want you to give us one of your talks
about when you were a boy.”
“ I wonder,” said Ernie, “ if you ever used to catch
birds or anything like that.”
Grandfather smiled. “Yes, I did, but I was never
cruel; I did it for fun; but I did not hurt the birds. •
” There is a verse in Proverbs which says: ‘ Surely
in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.’
Well, that is true, but in India 1 caught them in this
way: There is a plant called the pitcher plant. The
flowers are rather large, shaped like a pitcher, and
they hold water. Sometimes in the dry season, when
there was water in these flowers, the birds came to
drink from them.
“ Well, 1 used to make a trap out of string and
place it out of sight as much as possible. Then 1 would
sit very quietly and watch for the bird to come and
drink, and when its beak was dipping into the water
I pulled the thread, and the bird was caught.
” Does that remind you of anything, boys? The


nets are spread out in our towns, and men and boys
are caught in the snares, caught by their beaks, so
to speak, caught while drinking. They never think
they are going to be ensnared, but they are, and yet
they come again and again.
“Birds don’t do that! once they are caught and
let go, you don’t catch them again. But men are not
so careful. I saw in the street the other day, a young
man sorely under the influence of liquor. He had a
dear little girl with him, about two years of age. I
suppose the father had taken the little one for a walk,
and had gone to the hotel instead.
“ When I saw him, he was reeling about the street
with the child in his arms. A friend tried to take her
from her father, but, no, she loved her daddy, and
she clung round his neck. Every moment I thought
the man would fall with his precious darling clinging
to him.
“ As they passed out of sight, I noticed that his
friend still watched, ready to catch him if he fell. I
shuddered as I thought what might happen if he fell
with that sweet little child. Such a fall might easily
crush the life out of her, and yet the father loved her
dearly, and she loved him, loved him so much that
she would not go to anyone else.
“ Oh, boys, drink is the curse of our land. Fight
against it with all your might. Don’t go near those
nets that are spread openly, and which are catching
men, boys, and even women, every day.”


JOSEPH’S COAT
—oOo—
“ Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, and he made
him a coat of many colours.”—Genesis 37: 3.
“ COME, BOYS, and sit near me,” said Grandfather.
I am going to talk to you about a coat of many
colours. You have never seen one, I know, and you
would not wear one if you had it, but the people in
the East value such a coat very highly.
** is more like our waistcoat than a coat, and the
man makes it himself. The men do most beautiful
needlework, as well as the women. After the servant’s
work is done he goes to his own little home, which is
inside his master’s compound; and after he has had his
meal he takes out his ‘ housewife,’ which is really a
sort of pocket-book, in which are his needles, thread,
scissors, and pieces of coloured silk or wool. Then
he gets out his coat and goes on with the work, sew-
ing the small pieces of silk on very neatly with silk
thread.
Each piece is of a different colour, and he makes,
with the greatest care, something like our patchwork,
only perhaps neater, and more beautifully done. He
can only work at this for about two hours before he
retires to rest for the night, so that the coat will some-
times take about six months to finish. This coat he
will not sell, and he only wears it on important oc-
casions.
It is a great honour for a boy, if hi.s father makes


him one of these coats. So you see that is why
Joseph’s brothers were so angry when Jacob made the
coat of many colours for him. That proved to the
other sons that their father loved Joseph more than
all his children. Joseph evidently wore it about in
his work, for he had it on when he went to them at
Dothan, and this made his brothers more envious than
ever.
Joseph was very proud of it, of course, but I
think it would have shown a better spirit if he had
just kept it like the Indians do, for special occasions.
However, you know the story, how they stripped him
of his coat, dipped it into blood, and then took it
back to their father, saying, ‘ See if this be thy son’s
coat or no.’
“ How troubled Jacob was. He had deceived his
own father, and now his sons had deceived him. He
had only made one son his favourite, now he was suf-
fering the result.
“ What an awful thing envy is! All that trouble
came about through envy.
“ All through the Bible we can see what awful con-
sequences come about through envy. Some boys
say, ‘ Oh, Ido wish 1 was rich.’ Yes, that is a common
wish. We could all do with a little more money,
couldn’t we? But the rich boy may not be half as
happy as you.
“This verse in Ecc. 5: 12, seems to me to fit in
with our lesson: ‘ The sleep of a labouring man is
sweet, whether he eat little or much; but the abund-
ance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.’


“ Wouldn’t you rather have just enough for com-
fort, and feel free and healthy and happy, than be
like the rich man that cannot sleep?
“ So, boys, never let envy come into your heart.’
FOOTMEN AND FORERUNNERS
—oOo —
“If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee,
then how canst thou contend with horses?” —Jeremiah 12: 5.
“COME ALONG, BOYS,” said Grandfather, “ I am
going to tell you to-day just a little about the footmen
of India. It is a common thing to see a man running
in front of a carriage to clear the way, when there is
a person of importance travelling that way. He is
a forerunner, and if there is any impediment on the
road, he sees it and removes it, or else warns the
driver of the carriage.
“We read in Genesis 41: 43, that Pharaoh made
Joseph to ride in the second chariot, and they cried
before him, ‘ Bow the knee! ’
“ Fancy running before the chariot, making every-
one bow the knee in reverence to Joseph! Well, that
was the custom in those days, and in my young days I
have often seen the same thing. Now, a man who
can run like that must be strong, and able to endure;
it would be no use at all for him to get tired quickly,
so he has to be trained for the work, and he must
learn to run with footmen first before he can run be-
fore horses.


“ The text says, ‘ If thou hast run with the footmen,
and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou con-
tend with horses? He must learn to run and not be
weary before he can be a forerunner and run before
a carriage.
“ Now, boys, I fancy there is a lesson for us here.
1 have heard people say, Oh, if I only had a chance,
I am sure I could do great things!’ But why leave
the little things undone while we are waiting for the
great things; If we do not do the little everyday duties
faithfully, then what is the use of waiting for something
greater to do? I think the lesson for us is to —
Do the thing that’s nearest,
Tho’ it’s dull at whiles
Helping when you see them,
Lame dogs over stiles.’
Helping a lame dog over a stile would hardly
seem worth the bother, and yet it would be the proper
thing to do if we saw him in a difficulty; and if we
do these things as well as ever we can, God will open
the way for greater things.
“ We must not be weary doing the small things or
we shall never gain endurance enough to do the hard
things. Another thing I like to think of is, ‘ Jesus is
our forerunner.’ He endured unto the end; and as
we go on our way, we can say, ‘ Jesus knows all about
it. He has been along this way Himself.’
“ As we do the everyday work, we can think of
Jesus working in His workshop, just doing the every-
day common tasks that some of us find irksome, doing


them contentedly; and yet everything He did was
done to the honour and glory of God. I think that
is a great comfort to those who have to stay at home,
and be always doing the common tasks, to feel assured
that if they are cheerful, and do the very best they
can, that service is just as acceptable in God’s sight
as what appears to us to be much greater service.
“So let us do the little things as unto God,’ let
us learn to * run the race that is set before us, look-
ing unto Jesus,’ and Who has said: ‘ Lo, I am with
you alway, even unto the end.’ Each one of us can
do our best —no man can do more.’’
If We cannot sing like angels.
If we cannot preach like Paul,
We can tell the love of Jesus,
We can say He died for all.
" YOU NEED IT MORE THAN I ”
—oOo—
“ And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones
a cup of cold water . . . he shall in no wise lose his reward .”
—Matthew 10: 42.
“ NOW BOYS,” said Grandfather, “ I am going to
give you another (water) story. Perhaps you think
1 was a very thirsty boy; perhaps I was. At all events,
I was called by my mates ‘the cold water boy,’ be-
cause I would never touch intoxicating liquors, and
always preferred cold water. lam still of the same
opinion that water is the drink for me.


“ Well, now I am going to tell you of an experience
I had when I was leaving England by the Black Ball
line, in the sailing vessel ‘ Wanata, in the year 1862,
bound for Moreton Bay.
“ I had left India then, for some time, so that this
text is not really seen in an Eastern light after all;
neither is it a dark text, but you will not mind that,
will you? We had not a sufficient supply of water on
board, so they had to condense the salt-water from
the ocean, and make fresh from steam. Even with
this we had not nearly enough to supply the 600 men
we had as emigrants.
“ One night, I remember well, I was walking along
the deck wondering how 1 would be able to quench
my thirst, when I thought of going to the man who
had charge of the water. His name was John Brown,
and when I entered his cabin he was in the act of
drinking a tot of water.
“ I watched him for a moment, and seeing me, he
left off drinking, and handing the water to me, he
said, * Here, my boy, you need it more than I. Only
a cup of cold water, but I never forgot that man’s kind-
ness, and if there had been anything I could have done
for him, I would gladly have done it. Needless to
say, I drank the water and thanked him heartily.
“ Then I went to my bunk, and was able to sleep.
Only a cup of cold water, but just then 1 wanted it
more than anything else in the world.
1 heard of a man not long ago who died away in
a desert. In his hand he was grasping a bag of money;


the money was no use to him there, but if he had been
able to get a drink of water his life would have been
saved. What would that have been worth?
“ When I think of John Brown, I think he was a
friend in need, and I pray God to make me ever ready
to lend a helping hand to anyone in distress. Jesus
never despised the little things, but He did despise
those who made a great fuss over what they did. Let
us do what we can, and do it humbly, and then we
have His promise that we shall not lose our reward.
" If you cannot cross the ocean,
And the heathen lands explore,
You can find the heathen nearer.
You can help them at your door;
If you cannot give your thousands
You can give the widow’s mite.
And the least you give for Jesus,
Will be precious in His sight.”


PART 111.
——oOo—
THE GREAT DELIVERER
" The Lord is my Rock and my Deliverer.”
—Psalm 18: 2.




“THE GREAT DELIVERER”
—oOo—
Oh, hear my cry, be gracious now to me,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
My soul, bowed down, is longing now for Thee,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
I’ve wandered far away o’er mountains cold,
I’ve wandered far away from home,
Oh, take me now, and bring me to Thy fold;
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
I have no place, no shelter for the night,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
One look from Thee would give me life and light
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
My path is lone, and weary are my feet,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
Mine eyes look up, Thy loving smile to meet,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
Thou wilt not spurn contrition’s broken sigh,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
Regard my prayer, and hear my humble cry.
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
—F. J. Crosby.


X


THE LURE OF THE SERPENT
—oOo —
" Oh, hear my cry, be gracious now to me
Come, Great Deliverer, cornel”
JOHNNY WAS a good boy, and a great worker.
His delight was to go out in the early morning, with
an axe on his shoulder, to get wood for his Mother.
He always kept the shed well stocked, and delighted
in the neat piles of wood stored there ready for use.
While working he noticed many things, and the
birds interested him very much. He knew the habits
of the different birds, what kind of nests they made,
and never destroyed them, always regarding them as
his friends.
Sometimes he would notice one in a great state of
excitement; it would make such a plaintive cry, and
hop from one branch to another, coming down all
the time. Then he would stop his work and look for
a stick, for, surely enough, there would be a hungry
snake with its eyes on that poor little bird. Down
and down the bird would come, straight into the jaws
of that horrid reptile. But Johnny was watching, too,
and a good smart blow with a stick would give the
snake something else to think about, while the bird,
delivered from its cruel enemy, was free to go back
home to its nest. Strange that the poor little bird could
not get away, but had to come down, though its
piteous cry proved that it did not want to come. It


was lured by the serpent, but as soon as its eyes were
taken off the serpent it could go free.
Time went on, and Johnny had to leave home,
leave the country that he loved and go to town to be
apprenticed to a trade. His Father and Mother
warned him of the dangers, and he promised them
that he would not go into bad company. They were
anxious about him.
“ Don’t you worry about me,” he said, I will take
care of myself. I will not forget what you have taught
• •
me.
But it was lonely, he did miss home and the coun-
try. What was he to do in the evenings when his
work was done?
Another youth, about his own age, said to him,
“ Come out with me to-night, we ll have some fun.”
So Johnny went, and soon the two became mates.
After a little while they started to drink, though
Johnny knew it was wrong. But he thought, I will
just take a little, and that will not hurt me; I might
just as well enjoy myself as mope about.’
And so the tempter got his eyes on our poor Johnny,
and he started to come down. Poor lad! He tried
hard to keep away, but that old serpent had lured him.
He thought he would have a good time and see life,
little knowing that when he did want to give up the
drink he would find the habit too strong for him. Years
passed away; he became a good tradesman; he mar-
ried and had a family of his own; but still the drink
marred his life. He was a good husband and a good
father when not under drink’s influence, but it spoiled


his happiness and his life, bringing sorrow to his wife
and children, and also his Father and Mother. But
they did not stop praying for him all the time.
PART 11.
In one of the suburbs of Sydney there was a mother
dove with a nest of young ones. In her own language
this mother bird was warning them. “ Now, do re-
member,” she said, “ that just outside the gate there
is a tram line, and you must be careful, for if you
keep out late you may possibly get on the lines and
be killed.”
They all thought, ” What a silly thing to tell us,”
and one little fellow was quite offended.
He thought, ” Fancy telling a bird to keep off the
tram-line; I am very soon going to leave this nest, and
I will show Mother that I can look after myself.”
So he did not trouble to notice, and one day he got
out. He could not fly very well, and his Mother
called him back, but he did not heed her warning.
He would see the world. He would have a good time.
So he flew about, and after a while it began to grow
dark. He thought he would like to be at home after
all, but he did not know just exactly where he was.
When it became quite dark he was on the ground, and
did not know where to go.
Suddenly he heard a noise and thought, “ Oh,
surely I am not on the tram-line; surely I am not!”
But that was just where he was. He was trembling
and fluttering. Just then a man stooped and picked


him up. It was our old friend Johnny. He looked
at the poor little bird, and thoughts rushed into his
mind. He remembered his boyhood days, remem-
bered the birds who were his friends, also the poor
little bird he had saved when it was coming down into
the jaws of the serpent.
“That is like me,” he thought. “ I have wandered
away from God. I was taught to love Him, but I
have forgotten Him. The serpent has had his eyes
on me, and I have gone down, and now I cannot get
away, I cannot I give up the cursed drink.
Then a voice said to him, Yes, you can, look away
to Jesus, He will save you now.”
Then Johnny’s thoughts went to the early mornings
when he had been so glad to save the birds, and how
he had thought, “ Why cannot the poor bird look
away?”
“ I have a better chance than they had,” he thought.
“ I can look away. Yes, and I will look away to
Jesus.”
So taking the frightened little dove in his hand he
went home and prayed earnestly to God to come and
take away the power of sin, and deliver him from the
power of evil. May we all beware of the eyes of the
serpent, but also remember “THE GREAT
DELIVERER.”


THE THREE TALL TREES
" I've wandered far away o’er mountains cold,
I’ve wandered far away from home,
Oh, take me now, and bring me to Thy fold,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!”
“ MOTHER!” SAID MARJORY, as she came running
in from school, “ Oh, Mother, Mr. Smith is so ill.
Lena was telling me that he has to stay in bed now,
and they are so poor. Will you let me go and take
some nice things for him to eat?”
“ Oh, I don’t know,” said Mrs. .Grey. “ That is
a nasty road, and you might get lost. I don’t like you
going by yourself.”
Marjory’s cousin was standing near. She was about
thirteen years of age, and on a visit from Sydney.
Marjory was only seven, and lived with her parents
in a little country township.
“Auntie,” said Edith, “let me go with Marjory.
1 am sure I would know the way if you direct me,
and let us take some of these nice little cakes to Mr.
Smith.”
“ Very well,” said Mrs. Grey, “ only don’t go off
the track. There are some deep diggers’ holes on the
hills about there. As you go up this first hill you
will see three tall trees near the top. If you keep your
eye on them coming home, you will be quite safe.
Here you are; take this custard, and this plate of
goodies, and off you go.”


As the two girls trotted along, Edith was very curi-
ous to know all about the diggers’ holes.
What do they dig holes for, Marjory?”
Oh, they dig for gold,” said the little girl.
My, what a funny thing. And are they deep?”
Oh, yes, some of them are very deep. There is
one not far from here, and it is so deep that when you
throw a stone down you can hear it hit from side to
side, and it seems such a long time before you hear
the splash as it comes to the bottom.
“ Oh, I would like to see it,” said Edith. Do show
me as we come back.”
“ No, I must not; 1 promised Mother I would not
go off the track. We might get lost.”
Edith said no more until they were coming back.
Mr. Smith was so pleased with the good things they
had brought, and thanked them heartily, and they
were on their way home when Edith said:
“ Come and show me that deep hole—it won t take
long; I am going, anyway.”
So Marjory followed her and showed her. They
stayed a while looking down, then they ran to an-
other, and still another, forgetting their promise. They
were so interested that they did not notice it was get-
ting late.
Suddenly Marjory said, “Oh, we are lost; I do not
know the way home.”
“ Come this way,” said Edith.
“ No, not that way, I am sure,” Marjory cried.
Besides, I can’t see the three tall trees. Oh, Edith,
we should not have gone off the track.


They stood still, and both burst into tears.
At last Marjory said: “ I know what to do. Mother
and Father always say that Jesus can see us all the
time; let us say our prayers, and He will hear us and
show us the way.”
“ All right,” said Edith, “ and I will say my prayers,
because I know them off by heart, and when I have
done, you say Amen.”
“Yes, I will,” sobbed Marjory.
Edith began her prayers, and Marjory thought,
“ She will be able to say them nicely.” Presently,
however, Edith started —“ Now I lay me down to
sleep—”
This was more than Marjory could bear.
“ Don’t say that—we don’t want to sleep here in
the bush,” she said. “ I don’t believe Jesus will un-
derstand you, anyhow.”
“ Well then, say it yourself, if you are so clever.
You didn’t say Amen, or anything.”
“ No, I didn’t, because I don’t want to lie down to
sleep here.”
Then she closed her eyes and said: “ Oh, please.
Lord Jesus, we are lost. We are so sorry we went off
the track. Please show us the Three Tall Trees, and
let us get home before dark, Amen. Say Amen, Edith!”
“Amen!” said Edith, with tears.
Then they got up, quite hopefully, and looked
around.
“ Oh,” said Marjory, “ I didn’t notice that little
bush over there. That is the way; come on.”
Away they ran, watching all the time for the tops


of the three tall trees, and in a few minutes Edith cried,
“Here they are. See them over there!”
Oh, how glad they were. They were soon home.
Mother and Father were becoming anxious, and al-
though Mother was grieved they had disobeyed, she
was pleased when they told all the story.
“ Dear girlies,” she said, “as you go through life
there are Three Tall Trees that you would do well to
remember—Prayer, Faith, and Obedience. The track
is clear in God’s own Word, but if we are disobedient
and stray away, Jesus is ever near.
“ Pray always,” Mother continued, “ not vain re-
petitions, but from your heart, and then trust Jesus
to answer them. Now let us thank God for bringing
you safely home, and ask Him to guide you all through
your lives.” Then they sang the chorus—
" I’ve wandered far away o’er mountains cold.
I’ve wandered far away from home.
Oh, take me now, and bring me to Thy fold.
Come, Great Deliverer, comel”
A FRIEND IN NEED
Chapter I. “ Cadgers ” or “ Givers ”?
" I have no place, no shelter from the night,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
One look from Thee would give me life and light.
Come, Great Deliverer, cornel”


JIM JARVIS and Bert Blake were walking down the
street of the town in which they lived—a little country
town in New South Wales.
They felt pleased with everything in general, and
with themselves in particular. Both were well dressed,
and walked jauntily along, smoking cigarettes.
A little further down the street they could hear the
sound of music and singing, and coming up to The
Army ring, they stopped to listen. They did not,
however, take much notice of what was said, until
one of the lasses passed round the cap. Jim felt in
his pocket for a penny, while Bert put in sixpence.
Thanking them, the collector passed on, while Bert
and Jim continued their walk down the street.
“ My word, Bert,” said Jim, ” you’re pretty gener-
ous, aren’t you, giving sixpence in the collection?
Those folk are the greatest cadgers in the world.”
“Are they?” exclaimed his companion. “Well, I
think they are the greatest givers in the world."
” Why do you think that?” asked Jim.
“ Well,” went on the other, “ you know my brother
Joe went to the war, and he often wrote to Mother
and told her that things would often have been un-
bearable if it had not been for The Salvation Army.
Lots of times the boys felt done just as if they could
not go another step. Then some Salvationist chap
from goodness knows where would come with a cup
of steaming hot coffee. I’ll tell you another thing
they did, too. When Joe was wounded they watched
by him, and when he died they sent his last messages
home. I won't forget in a hurry what The Salvation


Army did out there, though I was only a youngster
at the time.”
Chapter 11. Out of Work.
A prolonged strike was on, and Jim and Bert, still
mates, were out of work, and there seemed no pros-
pect of their getting any in the little country town.
Finally the lure of the big city drew them—surely
work must be plentiful there? To think was to act,
and Bert and Jim were soon on their way to Sydney.
They walked about seeking work, yet finding none.
Day after day they walked the streets in hope of em-
ployment, only to find many others in the same plight
as themselves, and the prospects of work even poorer
than in their home town.
Finally they found themselves reduced to their last
few shillings, without even the fare to take them back
to the country. Only a day or two was required to
make their money, carefully hoarded, dwindle out,
and one bitter, cold night they found themselves seated
in the Domain, with no hope of either supper or bed.
The two lads were silent for a long while. Sud-
denly Jim broke the silence by saying: ” A penny for
your thoughts, Bert.”
“ Go on,” exclaimed the other, with some attempt
at wit, “you haven’t got a penny.”
“ Never mind, I’ll owe it to you, but let’s hear what
you were thinking.”
“ Fair exchange is no robbery. Will you tell me
your thoughts if I do?”
“ Yes, I will, go on.”
“Well, when I was a little youngster I was great at


learning things, and* I remember I once learned the
107 th Psalm. There is one verse in that Psalm that
has stuck to me, and it keeps going over and over in
my mind— ‘ Hungry and thirsty their soul fainted in
them ’! Doesn’t that fit us? But the next verse says,
‘ Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and
He delivered them out of their distresses. There—
that’s what I was thinking, though I didn t mean to
tell you,’’ concluded Bert apologetically.
“It’s a funny thing,” said Jim, slowly, “but my
thoughts were running in much the same direction.
There was a hymn we learned at Sunday-school, and
a verse of it went like this:
" I have no place, no shelter from the night,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
One look from Thee would give me life and light,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!”
A silence fell on them—each knew that the other
was silently praying to the Great Deliverer for help.
Suddenly, in the gloom, they heard a number of
men passing, and Bert distinguished the words, ‘ Free
feed,” as they went by.
I say, Jim, did you hear?” he said.
Yes,” replied Jim, 1 wonder where it is?
I wonder. I say, let’s follow the crowd.
‘ Right-o.”
Rising, they followed the men, and as they neared
the Domain Baths men seemed to converge into the
path from all directions.


Still following, they found themselves in a doorway,
and just within were men eating and drinking. A
fragrant smell of coffee was wafted to where they
stood.
On going inside, great was their surprise to see that
men and women in the uniform of The Salvation Army
were serving.
They were ravenous. Having had little food all the
day, they were glad to avail themselves of the plentiful
second helping which was offered.
Something about them apparently attracted the
notice of the Officers, and as soon as there was a lull
one of them came over to the two lads.
They were soon telling him their story, and the Cap-
tain listened sympathetically.
“ I think I can help you,” he said, when they had
finished. “ The strike is over. There should be plenty
of work at home now. Come here for your break-
fast in the morning about seven o’clock. I’ll let you
know then.”
With many thanks the boys rose and left the re-
freshment room in order to make room for a fresh
lot of men just coming in.
A big fire which had been kindled by some of the
earlier comers attracted them, a little distance away,
and, joining the group they proceeded to “ doss ” for
the night, not far from it. In their hearts was a song
of thankfulness to the ” Great Deliverer,” Who had
heard and answered their prayer.


oOo
OLD BILLY
—oOo—
" My path is lone, and weary are my feet,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
Mine eyes look up, Thy loving smile to meet,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!”
“ MUM, 1 SAY ; Mum, come out here a minute. Do,
Mum; come on!”
Little Harry Johnson came rushing to his Mother
just as she was preparing tea.
Why, Harry, what is the matter?’
“ Oh, Mum! do come out to the doorstep. Poor
old Billy is telling the loveliest story that ever you
heard, just like you tell us on Sundays, only better.”
Then apologetically, “ Well, not exactly better,
Mum; but you come and hear him yourself.”
“ All right, Harry,” said his mother, “ you run
along. I will be there in a minute.”
Harry ran back to join the group of children who
were listening eagerly to the story the poor old man
was telling. Such a poor old man he was, thin and
shrivelled and old. But when he spoke you could
tell at once that he had been educated. His beautiful
voice and the way he explained the stories of the Bible
held the children spell-bound. And Mrs. Johnson,
as she listened, wondered at the words she heard him
speak.
“ Better than my stories? I should think so,” she


thought. “I could never speak like that. I wonder
who he is, and where he came from?”
But no one seemed to know. All people knew about
him was that he sold fruit and lollies at one of the
street corners, and he lived in a very poor lodging.
Mrs. Johnson listened until he had finished, and then
went and spoke to him, and told him to wait and she
would bring him a cup of tea.
Poor Billy was very grateful, and after that would
often come in for a rest as he made his way to his
dingy lodging, and every time he would tell them a
Bible story that seemed so new, when told in his beau-
tiful way. One day he had been telling them about
the Prodigal Son, and how pleased the children were
when he told them the Father was waiting and watch-
ing for his son, and pictured the joy there was when
the son came back.
“Ah, my dears, he said, things do not always
turn out like that with earthly Fathers. Next time I
come 1 will tell you about another Prodigal Son I
know.”
So next time he came they reminded him of his
promises, and he began:
“ Well, there was once a lady and gentleman who
lived in a beautiful house. They had one son, and
they thought the best was not too good for him. They
wanted him to become a Minister. The boy himself
loved the Bible, and learning seemed no trouble to
him. Everything pointed to a brilliant career. Then
he became acquainted with another young man who


used to take a little wine—just a little, and our friend
thought he would take just a little, too. Surely one
small glass now and again was no harm, but soon the
desire grew, and all unknown to his parents and his
teachers, he was treading the downward path, while
learning in theory to lead people up to God,
“ Well, my dears, I won’t tell you all the details,
but when the Father came to hear of it, he turned
his son out of his house.
“ The poor Mother also was shocked and grieved,
and disappointed, and with tears, pleaded with her
son to stop drinking at once, and all would be well.
But the son resented the way his Father had spoken,
and left home. He went out into the world, and got
on fairly well at first, but the love of drink had a hold
on him, and dragged him down.
“ All the time he had no word from home. He trav-
elled to other countries, and at last thought he would
be like the Prodigal Son, and come back. He would
be good. How glad Father and Mother would be
to see him.
“ But when he got back, no one came to meet him;
and when he enquired for his Father and Mother he
found that both had died in his absence. This grieved
the son very much indeed, and in his grief he returned
to the Heavenly Father Who is always ready to receive
those who turn to Him. He gave up his wicked ways
and turned to his Bible, making up his mind to meet
his Father and Mother in heaven.


How he wished he could have his chance over
again, but it was too late. Sickness came over him,
and he felt his life was wasted.”
Here, the old man stopped, and the children said,
“ Oh. Billy, how did he get on?”
The last I heard of him was that he was very poor
and not at all strong. But he was happy, and trying
to make up for lost opportunities.”
Saying this, the old man took up his basket and
went away.
Chapter 11.
One bitterly cold night Mr. Johnson was rather late
coming in to tea, and explained, when he came in, that
he had been helping poor old Billy to his lodging.
” Poor old chap,” said he, “ I am afraid he won’t
stand much more of this weather.”
Oh, said Mrs. Johnson, ”I am sorry to hear you
say so. I will go down and see him after I get the
tea things away, and I will take him some fresh eggs.
They may do him good.”
She really intended to do it, too, but after tea a
friend came in, and she forgot all about poor Billy.
And he in his dingy, lonely lodging felt too weak and
too ill even to make up his fire. So he just crept off
to bed, and every now and then he would listen for a
footstep that never came.
At last he said to himself, ” I thought Mrs. Johnson
would come to see me when her husband told her I
was ill. Ido wish she would come. I would like a


cup of tea, but I feel too ill to get it myself. Well, I
will just fancy that I have had it, and after a good
night’s rest I will feel better. So he took his Bible and
read and prayed, then he thought of a verse he loved
to sing:
" My path is lone, and weary are my feet,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
Mine eyes look up. Thy loving smile to meet,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!”
Poor fellow. He knew that although he had been
too late for his parents’ forgiveness, God had forgiven
him freely. So he closed his eyes and slept, but in
the morning he felt no better, and could not get up.
One of the other lodgers missed him, and tapped at
his door.
“Come in,” said he, “I
go out to-day.”
am not well. I will not
“ Oh,” said the woman,
tea; I have not much to eat
thing.”
I will bring you a cup of
but I can give you some-
” Thank you, so much,” said Billy. “ 1 feel that I
am slipping away. lam not sorry to go, but Ido wish
I had made better use of my life.”
Then, as the neighbour rose to go, he said, “ God
bless you for all your kindness. If lam taken, you take
my Bible. You will find it marked all over, and every
mark is a precious promise. I hope it will be as great
a comfort to you as it has been to me.”


Meanwhile Mrs. Johnson was very busy about her
work. It was Friday, and such a lot of work had to
be done. Early on Saturday she thought again of poor
old Billy. “ I will go and see him at once,” she
thought.
So putting some fresh eggs and other things into
her basket, she went off to see him, but when she got
there she found that she was too late. Billy had
passed away. Oh, how sorry she felt. The poor old
man had passed away without knowing all the kind
things she had meant to do.
While she was standing there another woman said
to her, “ Why, were you his friend? I thought he had
no friend in the world.”
“Well,” said Mrs. Johnson, “1 meant to be his
friend; but I find I am too late.”
Then the neighbour told her how he had given her
his Bible and his blessing. Mrs. Johnson cried, and
said, “ I intended to come yesterday, but I was so
busy, I forgot.”
* Well,” said her neighbour, “if you have some
things in your basket that you meant for old Billy, 1
will show you some one who will be mightily thankful
for them. There are lots of poor folk lodging here.
Come, and 1 will show you such a poor, sick girl, and
she has no friends either.”
So together they went, and in answer to their tap
a voice said, “ Come in!”


Mrs. Johnson’s kindly heart went out at once to
the girl, who felt that here, at last, was someone who
could help her. Before long one of the eggs >vas
cooked, and the girl enjoyed it very much. All the
while Mrs. Johnson was tidying up the room and
making it look as bright as possible.
“ However did you hear of me?” asked the girl.
Then Mrs. Johnson told her all about poor old Billy.
“ Yes,” answered she, “ I heard he was dead, and
I heard them say that there is a poor girl that won’t
be long following if something is not done for her. I
knew they meant me, but 1 feel ever so much better
now. May I come to see you sometimes when I am bet-
ter? It would be different if I had a true friend.”
That began a real true friendship between the two.
They did not continue to live in that locality long, but
moved into a much better place, where Mrs. Johnson
was able to get a position for her little friend.
Mrs. Johnson has learnt a lesson from poor old
Billy, for, if ever she has a sudden thought to do a
kindness, she does it at once, for she says:
What is the use of doing a kindness if you do it
a day too late?”


WALLY’S MOTHER
——oOo—
Thou wilt not spurn contrition’s broken sigh,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
Regard my prayer, and hear my humble cry,
Come, Great Deliverer, cornel”
LITTLE WALLY HARGREAVES sat on his Mother’s
knee. It was morning. Father had gone to work,
and both Wally and his Mother looked very sad.
Tears were in their eyes.
“Wally, darling,” said his Mother, “ did I hurt you
last night? Tell me what I did, for Ido not remem-
ber.”
“Oh, Mummy, you did frighten me; you did beat
me. Was I naughty?”
“ No, my sweet little boy; no, my darling. It was
Mummy that was naughty. Kiss me, Wally, and love
me, and I won’t beat you like that again. It is the
drink that makes me do that, and 1 do not know what
I am doing. But 1 won’t do it any more. I won’t
go near the drink-shop again.”
“ Oh, Mummy, you are a dear, nice, good Mummy,
and I love you a big, big bit ” (this with his arms
tightly round his Mother’s neck).
Then his lips began to quiver—“ But I don’t love
you any bit when you put that old shawl on and go
away to get drink. I get so frightened, for when you


come home you do beat me, and you don’t look a bit
like my dear Mummy.”
Now, pet, I have told you that I won’t do it again,
so we will get our work done, and then I will take you
for a walk, and we will have a nice day in the park.”
Wally was overjoyed, and he helped Mother all
he could. It was not much, certainly, but he thought
he was doing nearly all the work. At last it was done,
and they were ready to go out. And what a lovely
day they had.
Then they came home and got Father’s tea ready,
and had a happy evening as well. Wally went to
bed feeling fine, and Mother kissed and tucked him
in. This kind of thing lasted about a week, and Wally
was looking well, and always telling his Mother how
much he loved her.
Then pay day came, and Mrs. Hargreaves remem-
bered that she owed a few shillings to the publican.
She knew if she went to pay it she would stay, and
all her good resolutions would be undone. But she
must go, and she would love just one drink.
So, telling Wally to run into the neighbour’s for a
few minutes, she went to pay, and tell them that was
the very last she would take. she got there,
alas, she had the one drink she was craving for, and
then another. All her mates seemed so glad to see her,
and she forgot the promise she had made to her little
son.
When at last she got home, she looked very miser-
able, and Wally began to cry.


“ Oh, Mummy,” he begged, ‘ don tgo back. Do
stay with me, and sing to me like you did last night.
1 love my dear, dear Mummy. Do stay home and tuck
me in.
But she shook him off, and told him not to bother
her; she would be home soon (this was before six-
o’clock closing). So both she and her husband went
out after tea, and poor little Wally went into the neigh-
bour’s place, and cried as if his heart would break.
When it was bed-time, the kind-hearted neighbour put
him to bed. She was roused up soon after by Mrs.
Hargreaves, demanding her boy.
“ Oh, but he is so comfortable now, let him stay
to-night.”
“I’ll do no such thing. Wally!” she cried, “come
here at once!”
Poor Wally knew that voice, and woke up. How
frightened he was! But it was no use crying; he had
to go, and very roughly was tumbled into his own bed.
Poor little Wally, and only the night before his Mother
had kissed him and had sung to him, and he had been
so happy.
Every night after, for some time, he was treated in
the same way. Sometimes the father would interfere
to protect the boy, but mostly he had so much himself
that he did not care. The best comfort Wally had
was in the neighbour, who did what she could, often
not allowing him to be moved after he was asleep.
Truly, he was a sad little boy.


One day a Salvation Army Soldier was passing the
door, when he saw a sight he will never forget. Mrs.
Hargreaves was sitting on the front door-step, the old
shawl on her head, holding the frying-pan in her hand.
There was meat in the pan, and she was surrounded
by a swarm of flies. The sun was shining, and it was
a very hot day.
The man stopped at the gate, and said: “ Whatever
are you doing there, Mrs. Hargreaves?” “ 1 can’t get
the meat to cook, anyhow,” she said.
He asked, “ But why don’t you put it on the stove?”
” The fire won’t burn, and I can’t stay inside. I feel
too sick. I will go in directly.”
He went on, and, oh, joy, whom should he meet but
The Army Captain’s wife.
Oh, lam so glad to see you,” he said. “ Take
this money and buy some meat, and go straight to Mrs.
Hargreaves. You will know what to do. You are
the best one to deal with a case like this.”
And give me those papers,” he continued. “ I will
ta ke them round, and call and tell Captain where you
are. God bless you!”
Mrs. Smith at once did as she was asked, and opened
the gate in time to see Mrs. Hargreaves trying to get
up, still holding the pan, and scattering the flies.
With a prayer for guidance, she went to the poor
woman.


“ Let me help you. Come and see if we can make
a fire. I am afraid the flies have spoiled this meat,
but 1 have some more here.”
“ And who are you to interfere with me? I don’t
like the Sallies, anyhow.”
“ I am going to try and help you, dear sister,” gently
replied the Officer.
So saying, she went through the house, and in a
few minutes had a fire burning. Then she washed the
pan, and put on some fresh meat, and by the time
Mr. Hargreaves came home, a nice tea was ready.
His wife had been given a strong cup of coffee, and
said she was feeling much better.
Mr. Hargreaves was sorely displeased with his wife,
but she was really and truly sorry for her sins.
“ I have tried my very best,” she said. “ I pro-
mised Wally I would not drink again. But I could
not help it.”
” Ah, my sister, you tried in your own strength.
Try in God’s strength. He can save you now. You
need no longer be fettered by a habit which has
brought you nothing but pain and shame when there
is One Who can deliver.”
Then she sang some of the gospel invitations
“ Thou wilt not spurn contrition’s broken sigh,
Come, Great Deliverer, come!
Regard my prayer, and hear my humble cry,
Come, Great Deliverer, comel”


and again:
" For the Lion of Judah shall break every chain
And give us the victory again and again.”
"Sing it, sister,” she said to Wally’s mother. “ And
while you sing and believe, the chains will break.”
“ Oh, I will try again.” And, kneeling down, she
prayed for strength to overcome. Mrs. Smith stayed;
and after tea Captain came, and they had quite a
meeting. They stayed until hotel closing-time had
passed, and early in the morning Mrs. Smith came
again and stayed all day, comforting, cheering, help-
ing. Oh, the strength it gave the poor woman.
When tea was over, Mrs. Smith said, “ Now, will
you come with me to the meeting, and come to the
penitent-form? ”
"Yes, I will do anything you think right,” answered
Mrs. Hargreaves, "as long as you stay near me and
help me.”
So both she and Wally went to the meeting, and
she was gloriously saved. Now her great desire was
to get her husband to do the same. Wally was de-
lighted, and especially enjoyed the singing. He went
home to tell Daddy how happy he was.
A fortnight has passed away, Mrs. Hargreaves and
Wally are as happy as can be this morning. They
are making everything clean and tidy, for Mrs. Cap-
tain is coming to dinner, and after dinner Mummy is


going with her selling “War Crys ” and “Young
Soldiers.”
What an experience it was!
When they went to the drink-shop Mrs. Hargreaves
prayed for strength, and strength was indeed given to
her.
Her old mate said to her: “ 1 am very glad to see
you have turned over a new leaf, and as long as you
keep like that, you can leave a ‘ War Cry ’ at my place
every week.”
She thought she would never have been able to go
round the town where she was so well known, but
with God’s help she did, and everyone helped and en-
couraged her.
When they arrived home, her husband saw her face
beaming, and he said, “ Well, if getting saved makes
such a difference as this in a person, I have a good
mind to try it myself.”
“ Oh, do,” cried his wife and little Wally, and Mrs.
Smith fervently murmured, “Praise God!”
So Daddy went to the meeting as well, and gave
his heart to God, and never was there a happier family
in the world. Good resolutions in one’s own strength
are vain, but in God’s strength we can do all things.


■ v $
0k* '
PART IV.
——oOo—
A CHRISTMAS STORY
For unto us a Child is bom, unto us a Son is given.
—lsaiah 9; 6.


\


NO ROOM FOR JESUS
IT WAS Christmas morning, and Nellie was awake
early. Strange, it is, but children are always awake
early on Christmas morning when they expect Santa
Claus. This morning Santa had left a whole lot of
things for Nellie, and she was so excited, looking at
one thing and then another, when Nancy, the girl that
looked after her, peeped in. “ Oh, Nancy, come and
see all the beautiful things I have got for Christmas!”
“Yes, I see, Santa has been good to you. Now
come and get dressed, and wish Daddy ‘ A Happy
Christmas ’ as soon as he gets up.”
Nancy and Nellie always had a nice little talk first
thing in the morning, for Nancy was a good soldier of
Jesus Christ, and longed to make Nellie one also. For
poor little Nellie, though she had everything else that
a little girl could wish for, had no mother, and her
father had told Nancy to do all she could to keep the
little girl from feeling lonely when he was away.
This morning Nancy was telling her of the dear
little Baby that had come into the world on Christmas
Day so long ago—the dear Lord Jesus —and how there
had been ” no room ” for Him.
“ Oh. Nancy, what a shame! And had He to sleep
in a manger?”
Yes, dear, but He wants to come and stay with


people now, just the same, only we cannot see Him,
and still people have ‘ no room ’ for Jesus.”
“ Oh, Nancy, I think they ought to give Him the
best room of all, don’t you?”
“ Yes, Nellie, I do, and I want you to let Him come
into your heart, and stay with you always. Kneel down
now, and say, ‘ Come in, my Lord, come in.’ We
won’t put Him in the manger, will we? We will put
Him in the best place of all—right in our very hearts.”
Yes, I will, Nancy. Now I can hear Daddy call-
” A happy Christmas, Daddy dear,” and little Nellie
gave him such a hug, and showed him all her presents.
After breakfast Daddy said: “ Come here, little girlie,”
so Nellie climbed on his knee to have a nice little talk.
“ Daddy, did you know it was the birthday of
Jesus to-day?”
Yes, darling, I know,” answered he.
Daddy, have you any room for Jesus?”
Don’t talk about it, pet—talk about something
“ No, Daddy, I just want to know which room you
put Him in. Nancy says He comes to every one of
us. Some won’t open the door at all; some put Him
in the manger, but Nancy and I have put Him right
into our hearts.”
“Have you?” said Daddy. “Well, then, don’t
bother about me.”


“Daddy, won’t you let Him in?’’
“ Not now, darling. You run and play now, and
to-night, after tea, I will tell you a story.’’
“ A story! Oh, Daddy, that will be lovely!’’
Nellie enjoyed her Christmas very much. Every-
thing was done to make her happy, but she could not
forget the sad face of her father, and wondered why
he would not make room for Jesus.
“ Now, Daddy,’ said Nellie, as she sat on his knee
and put her arms around his neck, “ tell me the story
you promised.”
“ Well,” said her father, “ there was once a young
man and a girl who loved each other very dearly.
They loved Jesus, too, and both worked for Him.
They waited until they had a nice house to go to, and
then they got married. After a while a sweet little
girlie came along, and they both felt their happiness
complete, but not long after—just about seven years
ago—the mother died, and the poor man was left
with a baby to look after.
“ Now she has grown into a dear little girlie, with
her mother’s eyes and her mother’s sweet way, and she
asked her father this morning why he had no room
for Jesus. Well, this is why: If God took your mother
from me just when we were both working for Him, I
wanted no more of Him, and I put Him right out of
my heart altogether.”


But, said Nellie, Mother loved Jesus, didn’t
she, Daddy?”
“ Yes, she did.”
Well, then, she must be in Heaven
Yes, I have no doubt about that,” said the father.
” Then, Daddy, I am sure she is looking out for
you. She’ll cry if you don’t come.”
No, darling, there is no crying in Heaven.”
Then, said the little girl, ” why don’t you try
to go there, because you are crying now, and I am cry-
ing, too. We both want Mother, but Daddy, if we
let Jesus come in, He will help us to be good and go
to mother by-and-by. Nancy told me so—she taught
me this verse to sing—”
And Nellie sang to her father:
" Christ is knocking at my sad heart —
Shall I let Him in?
Patiently knocking at my sad heart,
Oh, shall I let Him in?
Cold and proud is my heart with sin
Dark and cheerless is all within;
Christ is bidding me turn unto Him,
Oh, shall I let Him in?’
The little girl paused, and the father said: “Is that
all you know, my pet?”
” Yes, Daddy.”
Well, said Daddy, ” I will sing the last verse for
you, and he sang with quavering voice:


" Yes, I’ll open this proud heart’s door —
I will let Him in!
Gladly I’ll welcome Him evermore;
Oh. yes, I’ll let Him in.
Blessed Saviour, abide with me!
Cares and trials will lighter be;
I am safe if I’m only with Thee —
Come in, O Lord, come in.’
Nellie looked into her father’s face. “ That is lovely.
Daddy, and I do believe you mean it.”
” Yes, my darling, I do.”
"And you’ll give Him the best place, Daddy?
“ Yes, the very best place; my little girlie will help
me, so as to meet Mother in the skies.”
And the little maid that waited on Nellie felt (like
the little maid that waited on Naaman’s wife) that
through being faithful to God she had done a great
thing for her Master.


JOY CLIMBS THE STEPS
THE DAY was clear and bright and calm,
A merry party, we
Enjoy the view from Govett’s Leap,
When Fred called out to me:
“ Come, Mother, dear, and view the scene
From that look-out below;
We’ll leave wee Joy and Arthur here—
They came before, you know.”
“ No. no! me come, me climb the steps,”
Said little Joy, of three;
So down the steps from Govett’s heights
We all start off in glee.
With care we walk the slippery path.
As downward thus we go;
Then view with gladness and delight
The glorious scene below.
Arthur and Dulcie, in merry mood,
Are running here and there;
But wee Joy, with her shoulders squared,
Resolves to climb the stair.


She takes her hand from Daddy’s hold,
And starts to climb alone
Those steep, stone steps; her little feet
Are mounting one by one.
But Daddy walks just close behind,
And cheers the little maid;
She knows he’s watching every step,
So she is not afraid.
And so she climbs, but now and then
She falls on hands and knees;
And, almost in distress, she cries,
“Take dirt off. Daddy, please!’’
And then she rests, while Daddy wipes
And kisses little hands;
Then on she goes till, at the top,
She quite exultant stands.
“ Me did climb up the big stone steps.
Me climbed up every one.”
“ Yes, so you did, you brave, sweet pet,”
And we all say, “ Well done!”
Sweet little maid, as on you go,
The steps of life to tread;
May you as strong, as fearless be,
Blessings on you be shed!


The Father, watching from above,
Will each day’s journey know;
So, sure of His approving smile,
Still upward may you go.
And we of older growth may learn
Our troubles thus to face
With brave, strong hearts, and shoulders squared,
And trust for needed grace.
The Father, Who is near to help,
Whene’er we slip or fall,
He helpeth those who help themselves,
And listens to our call.
Oh, may we all, with brave, strong hearts
Climb up life’s steep stairway.
Trusting in God the Father’s love,
And then, “Well done!” He’ll say.
THE § END
y/f
A % cX £
f
A/ co/y




jf ijf*
*v• •'- ; . ■ , *>* ■/ ' ; -i- s -v ; -‘zr.-i-i ‘ J& "* y
