

; m : :0 If "■ V**
I #y I y i / I
K \i3 w I
Mf fllM w // \ wranvv
V v /1 a
jflr I # .. - ■ •■ I 4r / lift
| ft \
ft-— \
m
!l«
.1 mm
BT M B






'
.


Saturday’s Children


«


-
.


t jL
_. I if I ■
c78
“‘you must have it made quite simply,’ she said


Saturday’s Children
A Story of To-day
WINIFRED JAMES
Author of “Bachelor Betty’’
ILLUSTRATED BY FRANCES EWAN
BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED
LONDON GLASGOW DUBLIN BOMBAY
1910




Contents
I. Ways and Means - - 9
11. The Visitor *4
111. Sarah
IV. Mrs. Barrett Consoles 33
V. Terry’s Views on Acting 43
VI. Alicia goes to the Theatre - - - - 5 2
VII. The Major takes Possession - - - - 6 7
VIII. The Removal 77
IX. A Visit of Inspection 8 7
X. Alicia Begins Work 100
XI. Miss Fairy Barnes 10 4
XII. Terry Elaborates a Scheme - - - - 119
XIII. A Visit to the Major 128
XIV. Terry Entertains *4 X
XV. Terry Gets Her Chance 15 2
XVI. Terry Tells Alicia l( >s
XVII. The Career Begins 169
XVIII. A Tragedy i8 3
XIX. On an Ache and its Cure 194
XX. An Attack of Nerves 210
XXI. The Theatricals 218
XXII. Terry Philosophizes 2 4°
XXIII. The Family 2 55
6


Contents
XXIV. An Invitation from the Major - 266
XXV. Mr. Astley Sympathizes 273
XXVI. On the Delights of Poverty .... 285
XXVII. Mr. Isaac Rubinstein 296
XXVIII. Letters from Alicia 304
XXIX. An Event of Interest 316
XXX. The Angel Guest’s Resolve .... 327
XXXI. Buying the Trousseau 334
XXXII. The Wedding Day ------- 343
XXXIII. Back to the Tea-room 354
XXXIV. An Inspiration - 365
XXXV. On Several Joys 374
XXXVI. Just What One Expected 381
XXXVII. Which is the Beginning 386


Illustrations
“‘You MUST HAVE IT MADE QUITE SIMPLY,’ SHE SAID”
Frontispiece 294
‘“lt just wants that,’ she said” 56
Alicia and Fairy Barnes xi 6
“‘Are there any more?’ he asked of Sarah” - - 138
“Kanty was a magician” 219
“‘You know, Todger,’ whispered Mary” - - - 261
Sitting out on the Veranda 305
“‘Don’t move,’ he said quietly” 370


SIDNEY WILCOX


CHAPTER I
Ways and Means
“ Let’s do something,” said Terry.
“Yes, let’s.” Alicia looked hopefully at
Terry.
Terry looked down first at the rows of figures
before her and then out of the window, but she
said nothing. Alicia waited; it was unusual to
have to wait for a suggestion from Terry.
“ How much have we?” she asked at last.
Taking her eyes slowly from the survey of
Sarah stalking one of the few remaining fowls
in a depopulated fowl yard, Terry fixed them
on the figures again.
“Thirty pounds a year,” she said; “that is,
if we don’t take any more out of the capital;
less, of course, if we do.”
“ Each?” queried Alicia.
“ Between us.”
Alicia’s eyes opened wide. “ I say, that’s
rather a little, isn’t it?”


Terry stared at the figures while she played
a florid passage from “The Maiden’s Prayer’
with gusto upon the edge of the table, then,
with hands suspended in mid air upon the final
chord, she said impressively:
“About as much as it takes to keep the ex-
pensive nose of our next-of-kin tidy on the best
hand-embroidered lawn. Something must be
done. We’ve nearly eaten the chicken run,
and w'hen that is finished it means going into
the fruit garden and cropping the grass: that
leaves me cold. What suggestion can you
make?”
“ I don’t know, I’m sure,” said Alicia
vaguely; then, more as if she were marking
time than throwing light upon the subject, she
added:
“There’s Cousin Kate ”
Terry looked at her sister.
“ My poor misguided child,” she said, “ what
has come to you? The next-of-kin is about as
much use in a money crisis as a walking-stick
is in a hailstorm. We’ve got to look nearer
home than that for help. You and I, my dear,
are the ones we must rely on.”
Sarah came up from the yard with a fowl in
her hand, and put her head in at the window.


“The fowls are getting low,” she said.
“We know,” said Terry; “it is that that’s
driving us to look for a profession. How many
are there left?”
“ Five and the rooster,” said Sarah.
“Three people into five fowls and a rooster
go, with care and plenty of vegetables, twelve
times and the bones over for soup,” said Terry
calculating rapidly. “ Don’t kill the rooster
till last, Sarah; he’s a great pleasure to the
eye.”
“ More to the eye than he’ll be to the tooth,
I’m thinking,” said Sarah with a shrug. “If
you’re counting on ’im for a dainty dish you’ll
get took in badly.”
“A few hours’ steaming ought to carry him
back to the days of his juiciness,” said Terry
optimistically; “and even if he won’t behave
prettily it can’t be helped; the only thing we
can do is to hope for the best and prepare for
the worst. If he refuses to come to heel as a
joint we can always crush his proud spirit in a
mince. There’s no use looking on the dark
side of what has inevitably to be your dinner
some day. It’s what comes—or doesn’t come
—after that worries.”
Sarah gave another shrug and went off to


the kitchen to tie the leg's of her quarry to-
gether, till the baker should come. She and
the baker’s wife were cronies, and the baker per-
formed such small offices as wringing fowls’
necks, out of pure friendship. The girls went
on with their discussion.
“ I could teach, I suppose,” said Alicia.
Terry gazed out of the window, down the
walk to the street, and pondered.
“Teaching nowadays means having degrees
and things,” she said. “You’ve got to know
so much to be able to do anything at all, and
we weren’t much good at school,” she added
frankly.
Looking back upon her record, Alicia grew
silent.
“There are always babies waiting to learn,”
she said at last, with the hope that springs
eternal lighting her eye. “ I could teach in a
kindergarten.”
“Yes, but you’ve got to learn it first,” said
Terry, “ and it costs money. It would be
nice though, wouldn’t it, to get a lot of young
things together, and make clay pies and plait
coloured paper, and sing “Oh, ’tis so so that
the farmer” with them! Who’s that outside
the gate?”


As she spoke a man lifted the hasp of the
gate, stepped inside, hesitated, and then walked
slowly up the path. He carried himself like a
soldier, Terry thought.
“He’s coming in.” The girls drew back
from the window and watched from the recess
of the room as the stranger, stopping every few
steps to look around him, made his way up the
walk and through the garden gate to the house.
“He’s sniffing the roses as he goes,” said
Terry interestedly. “ I think he looks rather a
dear. There’s the bell; who’s going?”
“ Let Sarah,” said Alicia, temporizing.
Sarah opened the kitchen door and put her
head out.
“There’s someone at the front door,” she
said, then she went back to her work.
“You go,” said Alicia.
Terry went slowly.


CHAPTER II
The Visitor
The door which led directly out of the sitting-
room on to the veranda was open. The man
stood with his back turned gazing down the
garden. He seemed so absorbed that he did
not at first hear Terry approach, then suddenly
he turned and saw her.
“I am afraid,” he said with a bow, “that I
have no excuse to offer for my intrusion but the
beauty of your garden, and the remembrances
it brings back to me.”
“You are English,” said Terry straightly.
He laughed a little amused laugh. Terry
took your breath away sometimes.
“Yes,” he said. “Why?”
“Because you couldn’t pass the garden; it
seems as if no English people can.”
“ It is wonderful, wonderful!” he said as if to
himself; “the house, the garden, everything!
One might be a boy again; and twelve thousand
u


miles from home. It is twenty years now—
twenty years!”
Terry watched him as he talked. He was
older than she had at first thought him to be.
The grey hair, the almost white moustache, and
the worn, lined face told more years than the
spare, soldierly figure admitted. And near by
there was a suggestion of frailness. Something,
she did not know what, drew her to him in a
quick, silent sympathy. Perhaps it was the
look that came into his eyes as they rested upon
the green garden, and the longing sound of his
voice: “One might be a boy again ... it is
twenty years now, twenty years!”
“My grandfather was an Englishman,” said
Terry, “and he built this house, and planted
the garden, fifty years ago. When he died he
left it to our mother. She died when Alicia
and I were little, and we have lived here ever
since.”
They stood for a while without speaking.
This cottage, in its tangled garden, was a plea-
sant place. It is true that it was on the verge
of falling to pieces for lack of repairs, but, after
all, the rain had to be fairly heavy before it came
through the roof, and, as it always came through
in the same place, you knew exactly—by the


spot on the ceiling —where to place the basin
in readiness to catch it; and it was rather fun
watching the basin fill up. Time and tempest
and want of paint at proper intervals had caused
one of the window sashes in the sitting-room to
let in more air than was comfortable on cold
days, but at the same time they had allowed
a pushing little creeper to steal through and
cling with tiny green fingers to the woodwork
inside the sitting-room. If the sash had fitted,
nothing so delightful as that could have hap-
pened. And if you felt the draught too much
you could always pull the curtains close and
poke up the fire.
And a garden such as this did not belong
to everyone. All the flowers that could speak
of home to those sturdy pioneers in a voluntary
exile had been planted there—planted, tended,
and left at last to grow in their own sweet way.
On this hot morning the sun had kissed the
dew-bathed roses and wallflower and migno-
nette to fragrance, and the little breeze was
carrying that fragrance to the two who stood
upon the veranda drinking in the freshness of
the moment.
The man turned to Terry, his eyes lingering
upon the garden. He spoke musingly.
(C 78)


“ Once when I was a boy,” he said, “ I lived
in such a garden as this. As a youngster one
accepts all bounties carelessly, enjoying without
knowing that one enjoys. But the beauties of
childhood are never lost to you. I have only
seen that garden once since I left it forty years
ago, but the memory of it has grown stronger
with each departing year, and the love of it has
fertilized many a desert place for me.” He
smiled down at Terry. “You will know in
after years, if it has not come to you yet, what
a gracious beginning you have had, little
lady.”
Terry listened. She had always loved the
garden, but perhaps, as she had never been
without it, she had never realized how much.
The fine courtesy of this quiet gentleman, the
simplicity with which he spoke of simple things,
and the sadness that lay behind the smiling eyes
he bent upon her stirred in Terry something
that made her heart go out to him in a sudden
sense of kinship, a feeling of understanding.
She was only a young thing, and could have
none of the experiences that would give fellow-
ship with a man of his years and knowledge)
but it was the unclouded instinct of youth that
rushed out freely to meet the youth that had
(C7S) ' 2


remained untouched in the heart of the old man,
and the tenderness in her felt a sorrow she
could not know and made her want to recom-
pense in some way. Such a sympathy is not
given without making itself felt. No word of
it was spoken between them, yet the tired man,
with a life behind him, and the untried girl,
eager and unafraid for the life before her, were
friends instinctively, and each felt the better for
the moments they had spent looking out upon
a garden together.
The man broke the silence.
“I suppose,” he said, “you couldn’t find
just such another spot as this where a stiff
and gouty old man might end his days in
peace?”
Terry considered. “No, I’m afraid not,”
she said. “I don’t believe there’s a cottage
quite like this anywhere.” Then she looked
him up and down. “ But you are not stiff
and gouty; you’re straight up and down like a
boy. You do bend over a little,” she added,
“but that is nice; I like it.”
“Do you; why?” The man bit the amuse-
ment off his lip, although he could not keep
it out of his eyes.
“I don’t know quite,” she said thought-


fully; “I think it’s because it makes you seem
interested —as if you were listening and being
attentive.”
“Well, I am interested,” he laughed out-
right. “ But not as often as I stoop,” he
added slyly.
Terry smiled. “Do you really want a
house?” she asked.
“I do,” he answered, “if I can get one
like this.”
She thought for a while. “There’s one in
the Avenue,” she said at last, “but I don’t
think you’d care very much for it; it isn’t a
nice shape like this,” she looked affection-
ately along the low, flagged veranda and in
at the casement windows that were opened to
the morning air, “and it has only quite an
ordinary garden.”
All at once an idea struck her. If he wanted
a house, and liked this one, why should he not
have it? Alicia and she could not afford to
keep it much longer, and to let it to one who
appreciated it as obviously as this man did
would not be like handing it over to strangers.
Perhaps, sometimes, he would let them come
and see it. But there was Sarah—would he
take Sarah? And if he would, would Sarah


be willing to stay? The thoughts chased one
another through her brain and made her speech
a little incoherent.
“Would you like this?” she asked breath-
lessly. “Alicia and I can’t stay much longer.
The roof in the dining-room leaks sometimes,
and the doors want painting, but it is really
quite comfortable, and if you kept Sarah —that
is, if she would stay —she would look after you
and see that everything was all right.” She
stopped. Perhaps, after all, he had only been
jesting, and she had taken him in earnest!
The thought made the colour rush to her
cheeks. But the man looked at her atten-
tively.
“ Do you think seriously of letting it?” he
asked with interest.
“Well,” said Terry, “I didn’t think of it
till a minute ago, because it didn’t occur to
me that anyone would ever want to take it —
at least, not unless a good deal was done to
it—but it is true that we cannot afford to
live in it as things are, and to let it would
be the best possible way out of our difficul-
ties. I would have to talk to Alicia and
Sarah first. And you haven’t seen it yet,”
she added.


“ If it is as delightful inside as it is out,”
he said sincerely, “it will be all that I could
wish, and more than I could hope for.”
Terry turned and led the way into the house.
She felt very humble as she stood looking
round the sitting-room with its faded furniture
and darned curtains. Her eye flew from the
hole in the carpet, imperfectly hidden under a
fine old rosewood table, to the shabby chintz-
covered sofa and the mended curtains. It was
not that she was in the least ashamed of their
poverty, but it was one thing to have shabbi-
ness for your own use and another to offer it
as a marketable quantity. You could learn to
dodge the broken springs in a sofa that had
been part of your life from childhood, but you
could scarcely expect the person who was
paying money for the use of it to do the same
unmurmuringly.
While Terry was making a reluctant inven-
tory of all its imperfections, the man was
resting his eyes upon a low-ceilinged, sunshiny
room that carried him back to his boyhood
just as the garden had done.
Under one window stood a little walnut
work-table. It was octagonal in shape, with
a deep well that ran into a clumsy pedestal


and base, but it was just such another as it
had been his childish joy to ransack, and as
he looked he saw a silken-clad figure sitting
in a low chair beside it. The ringleted head
was bent over an elaborate piece of embroi-
dery, and a soft voice arrested the marauding
hand:
“ Is that naughty William tangling Mamma’s
silks again?”
To the girls of a later period it was an
eyesore that only justified its existence by
supporting sturdily and securely a bowl of
lilies or roses; to the man it was a key that
opened the golden gate into the garden of
sweet memories, and set the fountains of love
and youth playing again. For a moment his
eyes looked mistily with something like bless-
ing upon the despised little table, then he
turned to Terry.
“If you really find that you must leave
your cottage for a while,” he said, “ I hope
you will give me the first offer of it. And
if”—he smiled—“you can prevail upon your
Sarah to stay and look after me, I shall be
more than grateful.” He took out his card-
case. “This address will find me, if you will
be good enough to write when you have made


up your mind. And let me thank you for
your kindness to a stranger. I am afraid I
have taken up a great deal of your time, but
it was such a pleasure to talk with you that
I forgot how long I was staying.” He held
out his hand.
“ I have liked it too,” said Terry with sin-
cerity; then suddenly she remembered. “ But
you don’t even know my name.”
“ I don’t think I do, yet.” He laughed.
“ That’s just like me,” she said. “ I always
forget those things. I am Terry Grant, and
I live here with Alicia.” She knitted her
brows, then she looked up suddenly. “That’s
really all there is to tell, I think.”
“ I am sure it is enough,” he said whimsi-
cally. “To be Terry Grant, and to live in
this garden with Alicia, sounds so delightful,
that to add anything more would be wrong.”
He bent over her hand. “Goodbye, and
thank you again very heartily, my dear little
lady!”
There was no freedom, only a protective,
gallant tenderness in the words and the tone
with which he addressed her, and Terry felt
the protection and the comradeship of it, and
was glad. She stood for a while letting the


pleasure of it sink in, and turning the card
slowly in her hand as she read it:
Major William Trevor,
Melbourne Club.
Then she went to find Alicia.


CHAPTER 111
Sarah
“Alicia!”
Alicia turned from the window and looked at
her sister with interest.
“ Who is he, Terry? What did he want?
Let me see!” She stretched out her hand for
the card.
Terry held it high above her head. “He is
a British War Lord looking for peace, and he’s
taken a fancy to our idea of it, so I’ve offered
him the house and grounds for a consideration,
and he has gone away to think it over.” She
waved her arm magnificently.
“ Don’t talk nonsense,” said Alicia impa-
tiently, “ and give me the card.” Terry
handed it to her. She looked at it slowly.
“ I’ve never heard of him,” she said medita-
tively; “ have you?”
“No,” said Terry; “but then I go out so
very little.”


“What did he want?” said Alicia again,
refusing to be drawn.
“What I tell you,” said Terry. “He
wants this house.”
“But no one in his senses ” began
Alicia.
“ Perhaps he isn’t,” said Terry rapidly,
“but he wants it all the same. I’ve been quite
honourable,” she went on, dropping into the
banter that was always her refuge in moments
of unusual excitement. “ I took him into the
sitting-room, and stood him right opposite
the hole in the carpet, and I pointed out
the watermark on the ceiling in the dining-
room. It wasn’t till I invited him to sit on
the bad end of the sofa that he wavered, and
even then he was very nice about it. He
just said: ‘You haven’t any pietheth of old
joolry or faded flarths you could throw in to
make it up, have you?’ And when I said:
‘There’s Sarah and Alicia, if they’re any use,’
he said: ‘That’ll do nithely.’ He seems quite
ready to put up with anything,” she added
innocently.
Terry’s voice was such an exact imitation
of the old-clothes woman with whom they on
occasions spent half-hours of barter, that Alicia


laughed in spite of herself. Then she stamped
her foot.
“I wish you would talk sense,” she said
in exasperation. “There’s no getting at
the truth of anything when you are like
this.”
Drawing a chair up to the table, Terry sat
down before the figures she had been adding
up when the interruption came. The excite-
ment caused by the unexpected interview, and
the sudden possible solution of at least part
of their difficulties, had been vented in this
outburst of absurdity, and she was ready to
go through the proposition soberly and thor-
oughly. Sitting there, making unconscious
patterns on the blotting paper with her pen,
she told all that had happened to Alicia, who
listened with rapt attention. The untried was
always so full of possibility.
“ Do you think Sarah will consent to stay?”
said Alicia at last, when every contingency but
this had been considered.
“ I suppose she will object at first,” said
Terry thoughtfully, “but I don’t think she
would leave us altogether; she has got too
used to having her own way. Shall we have
her in?”


Alicia nodded. Terry went to the door and
called:
“ Sarah, come here; we want you.”
“I can’t; I’m busy,” said Sarah.
“Never mind that; we want to tell you
something very important.”
“I can’t come with the scones upon me
’ands,” said Sarah exasperatedly; “you’ve got
no sense.”
Terry went back to her chair, and through
the open door poured a gentle fire of chaff
into the ears of the distinctly short-tempered
Sarah.
“If Miss Sarah ” she began; “are you
married or single, Sarah? I never can re-
member.”
“Single,” snapped Sarah, “and you know
it quite well.”
“How stupid I’m getting!” said Terry
apologetically. “Well, if Miss Sarah Benson,
when she finds herself at leisure from her many
tasks, will call upon the Misses Grant at their
office next the kitchen she will learn something
to her advantage.”
An extra hard thump upon the paste board
was the only reply to Terry’s piece of in-
formation, and the girls went on talking


together till they heard the oven door
bang.
“The scones are in now,” said Alicia;
“make her come, Terry, I’m tired of wait-
ing.”
Terry called again; Sarah appeared at the
door.
“What is it?” she said crossly; “you never
give one a minute’s peace.”
Getting up from her seat, Terry crossed to
where Sarah stood, and, taking her by the
hand, led her with grave formality to a chair.
Then, making some mysterious passes before
her with her hands, she said: “Now sit quite
still and don’t move while I tell you. We’ve
let you.”
“Ye’re mad,” said Sarah, almost patiently.
“Not sold you right out,” continued Terry,
“but let you for a period to an old gentleman
who caught sight of you as he came up the
walk, and was so moved by the sight that he
offered to take the cottage rather than lose
you.”
Alicia looked at Terry with admiration. Of
course she was making Sarah cross, but it
didn t much matter, because Sarah got cross
anyway.


And she did. “If that’s all ye wanted to
tell me,” she said, red with indignation, “ye’d
better have kept it to yourself, and saved your
breath and my time. I’ve no patience with
yer blatherin’!”
Terry stood before her and pressed her back
into the chair.
“Wait a minute, Sarah, I’m going to be
good.” She shook herself and planted her
feet firmly together. “ Now,” she said soberly,
“this is what has happened,” and quietly and
clearly she put the plan to Sarah.
“Ye mean to say,” said Sarah at last, after
listening in a despairing state of stupefaction,
“that ye’re going to leave the place ye’ve
lived in nearly all your life?”
“It’s better to let it than to sell it,” said
Terry; “and according to that,” as she
pointed to the solicitor’s letter that lay open
upon the table, “we shall have to do either
one or the other very soon.”
“But ye’ll have to pay rent wherever you
go; and two young things can’t go off by
themselves; it’s not proper.”
“Now that everything is settled,” said Terry
slowdy, “Alicia and I have about thirty pounds
a year between us, and the house of course.


If we let the house at thirty shillings a week,
including rates and taxes —it’s not worth more
—we shall be able to get rooms somewhere
and save a little out of it. Beside that we
must both do something. If you stay on it
won’t seem quite so bad as if we all went;
and perhaps some day we may be able to
come back to it—if it hasn’t fallen down in
the meantime,” she added with a sigh and a
twinkle.
“But it’s not proper,” began Sarah again.
“My good Sarah,” said Terry impatiently,
“neither is it proper to starve or to get into
debt, and we’ll do both if we live as we have
been living.” She got up decisively and
gathered together the papers that lay upon
the table. “ It’s no use saying any more yet
till we know for certain that we can let; but
if we can we must. Alicia, I think I’ll go
and see Mrs. Barrett.”
“All right!” said Alicia; “I’ve got to go
to lunch with Cousin Kate.”
“What does she want?” asked Terry.
“I don’t know yet,” said Alicia with a
grimace; “it’s supposed to be a purely dis-
interested indulgence of cousinly affection.”
“It always is when there is anything to do,”


said Terry. “ I can see you writing jam labels
till the light fades. Don’t tell her anything
till we make up our minds.”
Alicia nodded, and the girls went off.


CHAPTER IV
Mrs. Barrett Consoles
The Barretts lived in a rambling red-brick
bungalow, round three sides of which ran a
wide veranda screened with ivy and Virginia
creeper. The hall door was open, and as
Terry went up the steps a maid crossed the
hall; she came forward.
Miss Ella is in the morning-room, Miss,”
she said.
“And Mrs. Barrett?”
“The mistress is in the greenhouse.”
“Thank you!” said Terry. “I w iH g Q
to her; don’t tell the others I’m here
Fanny.” ’
“Very well, Miss.”
Terry turned and went down -the veranda
and round the corner; the greenhouse was on
the left wing, and opened into the drawing-
lt was on the other side from the
mo^^ (c 1 and there was no fear of her
33 3


being caught if she entered it from the out-
side. She wanted her talk with Mrs. Barrett
alone first.
Terry opened the door and went in. Mrs.
Barrett was moving about among the flowers,
snipping off the dead leaves and loosening
the earth in the pots, with the youngest
Barrett, a tow-headed urchin of four, in a
linen smock, following at her heels. She
looked up and smiled as Terry entered.
“ I want to talk to you alone for a little
while,” said Terry, after she had made her
greeting to the Barrett baby, and been intro-
duced to the worm he had captured from
under a pot, and was now holding covetously
in the palms of his hands. Mrs. Barrett put
down the scissors, and, pulling off her gloves,
led the way into the drawing-room.
“ Come in here,” she said ; “it is cooler.”
Seated in a deep armchair in this shaded
room Terry unfolded her plans. To Mrs.
Barrett, married at seventeen to a man who,
although he had not given her riches, had
given her care and protection and comfort,
there was something tragic in the thought
of these two girls having to face life with
nothing but a tiny pittance between them


and starvation. Their youth and their inex-
perience was their strength, but her heart
swelled with tenderness when she compared
their lot with the lot of her own daughter.
It was not work that aged, but fear and re-
sponsibility. She thought of the rich woman
whom the girls irreverently called the next-
of-kin, and a sudden flush of indignation came
over her.
“But, Terry, there is Miss Bastable; surely
she will make you an allowance? She has
no one to spend her money on but herself,
and she can well afford it.”
Terry laughed cheerfully. The suggestion
sounded like a rather far-fetched joke.
“ I feel as if you were doing Cousin Kate
an injustice to imagine her capable of such
conduct,” she said. “Poverty is a sin in her
eyes, and she certainly isn’t going to reward
the sinner for his wickedness.” Her eyes
twinkled, and she went on demurely: “But
I think if we behave ourselves we may still
enjoy the charity she has always bestowed
upon us.”
“What is that?” asked Mrs. Barrett.
“A periodical parcel of clothes she hasn’t
the courage to offer to her maid,” said Terry.


“Skirts and bodices that don’t match, and
hats whose glory has departed.”
“It’s disgraceful!” said Mrs. Barrett indig-
nantly.
“Well,” said Terry, “after all, she might
sell them herself; she’s quite rich enough to.
As it is we look through carefully and take
out anything that’s of use, and send a card
to Mrs. Jaggs to call and assess the rest.
She gives quite good prices, and the last
transaction bought Alicia a linen dress she
wanted, and me a white petticoat and three
pairs of stockings.”
Mrs. Barrett laughed in spite of her indig-
nation.
“It’s well for you that you are able to look
at her in the light you do,” she said. “And
what will she say to that which you have
just told me?”
“She will probably raise every objection
there is to be raised; but as we aren’t in-
debted to her for anything it won’t matter
much,” Terry sighed. “Of course it’s nicer
to have people with you rather than against
you, but if it can’t be it can’t be, and there’s
an end to it. We’ve got to find a way some-
how.”


There was a pause, during which Mrs.
Barrett watched Terry, who was looking
thoughtfully and unseeingly into the conser-
vatory beyond. Here were two young things
setting out along a difficult road with no staff
but the staff of their own courage, no bread
but the bread they would earn of their own
labour. Their need was the result of that
terrible frenzy called the Land Boom, when
men for the time lost their reason in sight of
the golden promises dangled before them, and
invested their all in securities that were not
worth the parchment on which they were
written; when whole communities woke one
morning to find themselves irretrievably beg-
gared, their assets a bundle of waste paper in
an iron safe, and their ready money the pence
they carried in their pockets. Even those who
had only looked on were swallowed up in the
whirlpool; for the banks, when they closed,
closed for the just and the unjust, the cautious
and the reckless alike; and the nest egg of
the little dressmaker had to go with the pluto-
crat’s thousands.
Then came the terrible aftermath of disgrace
and imprisonment and suicide and death. But
out of it grew for the while a spirit of com-


munism. It was a common ill, a universal
disaster, and it bred a common sympathy. It
stripped people of their masks and pretences,
and showed them as they were. When your
houses are burning, or your children dying,
you do not wait to be introduced before you
either offer help or ask for it; and so, by
reason of a worldly cataclysm, people got to
know each other as nature, and not the world,
had made them.
While the shock of a loss never to be re-
trieved caused or hastened the death of the
old, it brought out the grit and the pluck of
the young. Those who had ridden their short
life’s journey in cushioned carriages found
themselves suddenly tossed out into the road
with nothing but their heads and their hands
to help them. And there was no whining - or
grizzling. After the first surprise of the fall
was over they picked themselves up, set their
hats straight, brushed away the dust, and
started off to w r alk with the rest. It was
naturally a feminine development. All boys
were trained as a matter of course for some
profession or calling, and while some had to
abandon a course of study and take to office
work, yet it was not such an upheaval as it


was for a girl who had never looked forward
to a task more arduous than the arranging of
flowers in a drawing-room, or the entertaining
of her mother’s guests, to find herself travelling
into the city every morning, with a satchel full
of shorthand books, and the delirious prospect
of one day possessing a typewriter of her own.
There were some, and Miss Bastable and
Dr. Barrett were of the lucky number, who
had not been touched, except by the inevitable
depression that followed on the heels of the
disaster. Gratitude for her own security had
not made Miss Bastable unloose her purse
strings to her nieces in their necessity, and
her attitude towards them had only strength-
ened their independence. As Terry argued
reasonably, if they knew that they would
always be able to fall back upon someone
else’s cheque-book in their extremity, they
might be inclined to do it, and then grumble
if their freedom were imperilled. As things
were they had a perfect right to make any
mistake they liked, because they would always
have to pay for it themselves. And, after all,
said Terry again, she was their father’s aunt,
and might quite well feel that it was not in-
cumbent upon her to go on being responsible


aunt to all the ages. Terry was always un-
consciously looking for a philosophy that would
make life as sweet as possible, and sometimes
she found it.
There was a crash of an empty pot upon
the conservatory floor, and Terry and Mrs.
Barrett woke from their thoughts.
U Snowy, what are you doing?” said his
mother anxiously.
Oh, my worm!” said Snowy sorrowfully.
Ive lotht my worm.” He was down on his
knees grubbing among the broken pieces.
“Never mind,” said Terry; “I’ll help you
find another ”
“But I did like thith one,” said Snowy.
Then suddenly he burst into an exclamation:
“It ith here, and thomething’th felled on it,
and now it ith two wormth.” He picked up
the halves and carried them to his mother.
She put up her hands. “Take it away,
you little heathen,” she said with a horrified
laugh, and, as Snowy went obediently back
to the conservatory, she turned to Terry.
Terry, child,” she said warmly, “what-
ever you find it best to do I will help you
with. Martin shall find out about Major
Trevor, if he doesn’t already know him, and


if you let the cottage we will do what we can
to fix you up in your rooms. When you and
Alicia make up your minds what work you
are going to undertake, tell me, and perhaps
1 may have some influence that will open the
way more easily for you both. You are dear,
plucky things, and you ought to be helped.”
She kissed Terry impulsively.
Terry laughed rather shyly. “ I don’t know
that it’s plucky to try to save yourself from
drowning,” she said.” “It seems the only
thing to do —for your own sake.”
The door opened and Ella Barrett came in.
“Hullo, Terry!” she said; “just the very
person I wanted to see. Mother, Cook wants
some more jam out for the tart, and she says,
which shall she use—strawberry or raspberry?”
“Raspberry, I think; the strawberry is get-
ting low,” said her mother.
“Oh, Mother, and I said strawberry!”
Mrs. Barrett laughed. “Well, what did you
come and ask me for?”
“ I thought perhaps you’d say strawberry
too, and take the responsibility off" me. Terry,
which would you rather have?”
“Am I going to stay to lunch?” asked
Terry?”


“Of course you are,” said Mrs. Barrett.”
Terry looked at her quizzically. “I’m sorry,
when you are such a dear to me, to have to
go against you, but I should be untrue to
every part of me if I said raspberry.”
“As you please,” said Mrs. Barrett with
another laugh; “only, remember, when the
strawberry is finished, you don’t get any more
till the raspberry is eaten.”
Ella kissed her mother. “I love to hear
you say that; you do it every time so much
as if you meant it that it almost frightens me.
Come along, Terry, while we tell you what’s
in store for you.” She took Terry by the
hand, and led her away to the morning-room.


CHAPTER V
Terry’s Views on Acting
“ Here’s Terry,” said Ella, opening the door
and leading her in.
There was a burst of applause; the Barrett
twins advanced towards Terry respectfully,
with heads bent and hand on heart. They
were seventeen years old, exactly alike, and
inseparable.
Harry, the elder by ten minutes or so,
having expressed the wish to be an electrical
engineeer, Charles —more often called the Wag
—followed suit. “United we stand, divided
we fall,” he said. “Henry can tarry in the
shop while I go out to mend the bells, and
we will divide the profits.” So they studied
together.
“We are willing,” said Charles to Terry,
“to meet any of the demands you choose to
make —within reason —so long as you will ac-


cede to our request.” He turned to his
brother. “Am I right, Henry?” Henry
bowed automatically.
“Quite right, Charles.’
“Even to printing your name in the same-
sized type as that of the leading lady. How’s
that, Ella?”
“Quite true,” said Ella.
Terry looked from one to the other.
“I’m ready to believe that you’re all being
very funny,” she said, “but I could laugh
better if I knew what the joke was about.
Will someone tell me!”
“Its this,” said Ella, sitting down before
Terry and speaking rather breathlessly ;
“Father’s let us have the old stable for a
theatre, and the boys have made a stage, and
as soon as we can we are going to do a play
called “The Pink Cushion”. It’s to be in
aid of Father’s creche in Escott Street, and
we’re going to charge admission, and I’m
going to do the haughty mother in it, and
there’s a girl called Petty that you could take
just beautifully if you would, and we’re going
to ask Netherby Lennox to play the man.”
Ella stopped from sheer inability to go on,
and eyed Terry anxiously.


“You want me to act?” asked Terry scep-
tically.
Ella nodded.
“But I’ve never done such a thing in my
life; I couldn’t.’’
“Yes, you could, Terry. Why not?’
“Get up and say things before people that
I’d had to learn off by heart first?”
“Yes; it’s easy enough.”
Terry shook her head. “No; I wish I
could. I’d love to; but I’d either die of fright
going on, or else I’d forget my lines and die
of shame coming off. It would be a horrible
end either way.”
“Charles!” Ella looked at her brother ap-
pealingly.
“ It’s as easy as falling off a log, Terry,”
said the Wag helpfully. “I’ll just do a bit
now to show you.”
He stretched himself out gracefully among
the cushions on the lounge, and in a quaver-
ing falsetto lifted his voice and his arms to
heaven. Then, slowly and faintly, after a
pathetic five minutes, he dropped both and
lay still with closed eyes. Terry watched him
with interest.
“What’s that?” she asked.


Charles swung round and planted his feet
upon the floor.
“That’s little Eva’s death scene, out of
Uncle Toms Cabin” he said. “What do
you think of it?”
“I think you’re very brave and sensible not
to mind what you look like,” she said; “but
it decides me. I won’t do it if you don’t
mind.”
Harry came to the rescue.
“You won’t have to make a fool of your-
self like Charles,” he said. “This piece is
different.”
“Yes,” said Ella, “you’ve only got to wear
an evening frock ”
“And let a man make love to you,” inter-
posed Charles. “ It’s very simple.”
Terry looked unhappy. “Get someone else,
Ella; it gives me doll’s knees simply to think
of it.”
“But you are just the one for it,” pleaded
Ella. “Why should you mind? You aren’t
shy, Terry.”
“ I know I’m not, in an ordinary way, but
this is different. I’ve often envied girls who
could do it; but the one time I was forced
into saying ‘a piece’ at school I had scarcely


enough strength left to crawl off the platform
after it!” She shuddered. “I can’t see my-
self going through the same misery twice.”
Ella sighed. “Then I suppose I shall have
to ask Maxy Barton,” she said. “She’ll do
it like a shot, but she giggles so.”
“She does,” said Terry penitently. “I’m
so sorry, Ella dear, but I’m afraid it wouldn’t
be any use promising. Let me see the theatre,
will you?”
Ella led the way down an asphalt footpath
across the yard to the stable, Terry and the
boys following.
“We haven’t got it straight yet,” she said;
“but we’ve only been working at it a week.”
Harry held the door open, and they all went
in. The place was a disused stable and barn
knocked into one. At one end of it a stage
was being erected; on either side of the stage
was a space big enough for a dressing-room.
“ Father got old Sparrow in to whitewash it,
and Harry and the Wag are doing the carpen-
tering. It will seat seventy people comfort-
ably, and we are going to charge half a crown
for the tickets. These places at the side are
the wings and the dressing-rooms combined,
and there’s a passage round the back of the


stage to get from one to the other. The
groom is making the footlights in his spare
moments out of kerosene tins, and Mother’s
going to paint the drop scene for us; isn’t
it jolly!” Ella looked round with pride; it
is a great thing to have a theatre of your
own for the first time.
“I think it’s splendid,” said Terry enthusi-
astically, “just splendid! I wish I weren’t
such an idiot.” She gazed at the stage and
the unfinished wings with regret. To think
that nothing but a craven self-consciousness
stood between her and glory.
Ella saw the weakening in Terry’s eye, and
played upon it warily.
“It’s all in the thought of it,” she said
easily; “I know people who’ve felt just as
you do before, and directly they get on, it
goes right away.”
Terry looked doubting, yet longing to be-
lieve, and Ella continued:
“ Nobody’s any good if she doesn’t feel a
little bit shaky, because it means she can’t feel
anything. That’s where it is that Maxy will
be able to do it all right, but not well. She
won’t forget her part, but she thinks such a
powerful lot of herself that whatever she does


will be all right in her eyes —no matter how
wrong it is—because she has done it.”
“I sometimes think that is the way to be,”
said Terry thoughtfully; “people seem to think
of you as you think of yourself. Take Maxy;
she thinks she can do everything. She can’t,
but the belief in herself makes her that she does
something, and she does it so surely that people
think her clever.”
“She isn’t half as clever as you are,” inter-
rupted Ella vigorously.
“She’s a conceited little ass, and I’m
jolly glad you aren’t like her, Terry,” said
Charles.
“I’d like to be a bit like her, though, if it
would make me able to do things I want to,”
said Terry slowly, and with a sort of lingering
envy.
“ You could do it if you made up your mind
not to mind,” urged Ella; “it’s like the bath
on a cold morning; it’s only the first plunge
that matters.”
“I know,” said Terry; “but you can soap
the end of the bath, and you’re in before you
know. There’s no soap but the soap of conceit
or unconsciousness for this bath, and I haven’t
got either.”
(078) 4


The Barrett family stared at Terry with honest
admiration.
“My goodness, Teresa, you needn’t envy
Maxy Barton when you can make a speech
like that,” said the Wag; “she couldn’t put it
that way to save herself from jail.”
“What’s the use of putting it that way if
it doesn’t help me to do the things I want,
said Terry with a little mournful shake of her
head; then she laughed and stamped her foot
exasperatedly. “I’d rather be Maxy any
day.”
“ And be laughed at by all the decent people
because of your footling airs and graces?” asked
the Wag, toe-dancing towards the stage, and
blowing a kiss off the tips of his fingers to an
imaginary gallery; “I don’t think.”
Terry sighed. “Perhaps not,” she said,
“but I think I’d rather be an actress than
anything. Life’s very hard.”
The lunch gong sounded.
“Not so hard as it might be if that blessed
tocsin didn’t sound three times a day reg’lar,”
said the Wag devoutly. “A happetite and a
cut off the joint is a combination that keeps
a man thanking Providence he is a man.
Give over railing at fate, and come and


drown your sorrows in a roast, my girl; there
are still some pleasures left to you.”
Ella looked at her brother calmly and im-
partially. “You are nothing but a vulgar
glutton, Charles,” she said.
“ I am a man who has learnt early the way
to take pleasure in the simple things of life,”
replied Charles without heat. “ After you with
the asphalt path.” He stood aside to let the
girls pass, and they went towards the house.


CHAPTER VI
Alicia goes to the Theatre
It was close upon dinner-time when Terry got
home from the Barretts’. Alicia was kneeling
beside the kitchen table, her head bent, and
two screwy plaits laid out on the ironing blan-
ket. Sarah, with a flatiron, was pressing gently
and cautiously.
“I’m going to the theatre,” said Alicia,
speaking of necessity to the floor.
“Who with?” asked Terry interestedly. It
was evidently a dress occasion for Alicia to
be having her plaits ironed. Such things did
not come their way often, and were distinct
events when they did arrive.
“Cousin Kate,” replied Alicia. “She has
a party to-night, and at the last minute some-
one dropped out. I was there when the tele-
gram came, so she asked me. Keep off my
ears with that iron, Sarah; you'll burn me.”


“ Keep them out of the road then,” said
Sarah.
“All right! wait a minute.” She put up her
hands, and bent them down. “That’s better;
now go on. Have you got anything you can
lend me, Terry?”
“What are you going to wear—your white
dress or your black?” asked Terry.
“The white, I think; don’t you? The
“That’ll do,” said Sarah, standing off with
the iron in her hand, and looking critically at
her work. Alicia got up.
“Yes, I think the white,” said Terry medi-
tatively. “The black is getting rather tender
lately; it has never been really well since the
time I put my foot through it at the Barretts’.
Come into the bedroom and we’ll see.”
Alicia’s frock lay spread out upon the bed.
It was a simple thing, made of cream delaine,
with a frill at the foot, and a “baby” bodice,
and it had been in the tub many times since its
creation, but with Sarah’s careful washing and
ironing it came out each time looking as well
as it did when it went in. Upon such a non-
committal foundation it was possible to work
a good many changes. Terry knitted her
brows and thought. Alicia went to the


mirror, and began to undo her plaits. She
must be dressed and fed and away in half
an hour.
“I used the tucker in the black frock last
time,” said Alicia, shaking out her hair and
brushing quickly, “and I don’t think it will
be fresh enough to put back. What shall I
do?”
“I will lend you my collar,” said Terry;
“I washed it and did it up with tea only
yesterday, and it looks grand.” She opened
the drawer, and took out the collar with de-
liberation.
It was a piece of what Terry called brain-
work, evolved from a lot of lace taken off
an old dress of Miss Bastable’s. The lace
was heavy and rich, and Terry, with the prac-
tised eye of a child of necessity, seeing possi-
bilities in the disconnected pieces, had carefully
unpicked them and patterned them together on
net until they grew to a perfect whole. Then,
as parts of it had looked soiled, she had left it
to soak a night in soapsuds, dipped it in tea,
and finally ironed it upon many thicknesses of
blanket till the pattern stood out almost like
a carving.
“ It’s wonderful what old-ivory tints you can


get with tea,” said Terry, turning it over and
examining it with admiration. “ I wouldn’t
be surprised at Kate wanting this back, if she
has the wits to know it again.”
Alicia gave a last sidelong look in the glass
at the little puffs and rolls into which she had
twisted her crisp, curly hair; pulled a piece out
here and tucked a bit in there; then she turned
to look at the collar.
“Oh, Terry, how nice!” She pulled the
frock over her head, and took the lace in
her hands, while Terry fastened the hooks.
“You are an artist!” She threw it over
her shoulders. “Where does it do up?”
“At the side,” said Terry, “in a line with
the point, so.” She gave it a little pat as she
fastened it.
“There’s a hook and eye on it,” said Alicia
with some astonishment.
“I know r ,” said Terry complacently; “I’ve
done myself very well this time —spared no time
or trouble over it. Hooks and eyes, if you don’t
make a habit of them, give one the same grip
on the universe as a silk lining does.
“‘My pride is as the pride of ten
Because my garb’s secure.’”
Alicia laughed.


“What a shame, Terry! I always liked that
so.”
“I’m sorry,” said Terry apologetically, “but
it simply asked for it. Would you like my sash
too?”
Alicia’s eyes sparkled.
“ Rather!”
Terry took out the sash and tied it round
Alicia’s waist; then she stood off and looked
her up and down with satisfaction. The washed
frock was fresh and dainty, the heavy creamy
lace covered it almost to the waist, and the long
folds of the satin sash—a birthday gift from
Mrs. Barrett to Terry—fell straight to the hem.
She wore no gloves, it being decided that the
only pairs they possessed were not good enough
for the occasion, but her arms were soft, and
young, and round, and her hands well kept.
The excitement of an unexpected pleasure and
the hurry of dressing had painted two pink spots
on her cheeks and made her eyes bright, and
Terry felt a sense of comfortable pride in her
sister’s appearance. She took a deep crimson
rose out of a glass, and held it against her
dress while she studied the effect.
“ It just wants that,” she said with her head
on one side critically. “That red on the ivory


i **itar j
mH^
*w ■,- | '"” ‘
MVtBk'
c?8 ’ ’ ——— *“*
“‘IT JUST WANTS THAT,’ SHE SAID’


.


makes my heart beat, and you can wear flowers
without killing them.” She pinned it into the
lace securely. “ Don’t crush it.”
“ No, I won’t,” said Alicia tenderly. “ Could
I ” She hesitated. “ Might I wear your
bangle, as I haven’t any gloves, Terry?”
“Yes.” Terry went to the drawer, and,
taking out a little leather case, opened it
and clasped the bangle upon Alicia’s arm.
Once Terry had been a bridesmaid, and for
that office had received the fine token of a
jewel that was treated with reverence and re-
spect by herself, Alicia, and even Sarah. It
was a large square topaz, set round with small
but very brilliant diamonds, and it was screwed
into a slender gold wire that circled the wrist
closely. With that on her arm Terry felt she
could bear with greater equanimity the con-
descensions of Kate. It wasn’t snobbishness,
she told herself when searching with knitted
brows for the reason why it gave her comfort;
it was more the feeling that there was some-
thing nice near her, and the bangle, with its
clean yellow and white flashings, was very nice.
“Thank you, Terry!” said Alicia gratefully.
“Do you think I look all right?” She turned
round slowly.


“Yes, quite,’’said Terry, looking her up and
down searchingly.
Sarah put her head in at the door.
“The dinner’s getting cold,” she said.
“We’re ready.” Alicia slung her coat over
her arm, and turned out the gas. “ I wish you
were coming,” she said regretfully.
“So do I,” said Terry with sincerity, “but
perhaps it’s just as well I’m not; there’s not
enough of beauty in the wardrobe to send us
out together with honour.”
W hen Alicia had gone, Terry finished her
dinner slowly, and went out into the garden.
Her mind was full of the events of the day and
the possibilities those events opened up before
her. The spirit of adventure which had stirred
in the man of an earlier generation, and driven
him out to do battle with the unknown, stirred
now in the child of his child, and made her that
she looked forward eagerly and without fear.
On this side of the high paling fence was
poverty and a sweet-smelling garden; on the
other side—Oh, what? Terry’s heart beat fast,
and her pace unconsciously quickened as she
flew on the wings of her thoughts over an
untrodden world. How easy everything was
"hen one felt so! How could one ever feel


afraid! Unknown to herself she laughed a
little soft, breathless laugh—what things she
was going to do! The remembrance of Ella
and the theatre came to her, and she won-
dered now how she could have minded. Of
course she would play the part; in the morn-
ing she would go round and tell Ella so before
she had a chance of offering it to Maxy. And
that night—the night of the performance—she
would discover it was the stage she was fitted
for, and nothing else. Applause thundered in
her ears, and she saw herself bowing repeatedly
over the footlights. How wonderful life was!
Alicia and she would never be poor again,
because she would make more than enough
to keep them both
“The coals will only last another couple of
days,” said Sarah, appearing, it seemed to
Terry, from nowhere. “I meant to tell you
yesterday.”
“What?” said Terry bewilderedly. Here
was someone speaking a foreign tongue, and
it meant using another part of one s brain to
understand. She put the whole of her energies
to it, and a glimmer came to her. “Oh, the
coals!”
“ \ es, said Sarah patiently, “the coals.”


“I haven’t got any money,” said Terry
slowly, “except the half-crown I was keeping
to pay for my shoes being mended. Do you
think Alicia has any?”
“No,” said Sarah; “she borrowed a shilling
of me yesterday, and said she couldn’t pay
me back till next week.”
Terry’s brows met together, and the lines
gathered on her forehead.
“We paid for the last,” said Sarah. “Stet-
son would let you put ’em down, I’m sure. It
isn’t as if we’d ever owed him long for any-
thing.”
“I know,” said Terry reluctantly; “but I
hate beginning to ask for credit when I can’t
see my w r ay out.”
“There’s nothing to cook with if we don’t
have them,” said Sarah.
Terry sighed, and a fear gripped at her
heart. Perhaps, on thinking it over, Major
Trevor might find he did not want the house;
then what should they do?
“Very well,” she said; “I suppose it can’t
be helped.”
“We shan’t need as many as if it w r as
winter,” said Sarah.
“ That s true,” said Terry, with a return of


her optimism. “ I suppose thing's could always
be worse than they are: I dare say something
will happen to see us through.” She turned
and walked slowly towards the house and
went indoors to think things out —this time
practically.
“Terry, are you awake? Where are the
matches?”
Terry sat up alertly; when she woke up she
woke altogether, as a puppy does.
“They’re on the corner of the chest of
drawers. I forgot to put them back in the
candlestick. What was it like?”
Alicia lighted the candle, and sat down on
the edge of the bed with her back to Terry.
“Undo me, will you? It was lovely! Is
there anything to eat?”
“I put a jug of water and some stodge on
a tray on the dining-room table,” said Terry,
as she unfastened the frock; “get it and
bring it in here; I feel as if I would like some
too.”
Alicia slipped out of the frock, hung it over
a chair, and went for the tray. Stodge was
a standing dish peculiar to the household, and
the discovery of it was the result of an acci-


dent. Someone had once given Sarah some
cake to eat, and the recipe of it to carry in
her head. Sarah came home and made it; it
was very good, but, although it rose once, it
sat down again for ever.
“I must have forgotten something,” said
Sarah. “Next time I go to see her I’ll
ask.” In the meantime they ate it as it was.
When the correct formula was used, taste for
the thing as they knew it had become a
habit, and both Terry and Alicia resented
the change. “There’s no body in the new
kind,” said Terry; “it’s gone before you
know you’ve had it.” So back they went
to the old allegiance, with a name that once
and for all separated it from the hundreds of
inferior batters that were tossed out of an
oven to masquerade in the world as cakes.
“It was lovely,” said Alicia, sitting cross-
legged on the end of the bed, with a great
piece of stodge in one hand and a glass of
water in the other. “I sat between a nice
squatter person and his son, and between the
acts they didn’t change places, so we were
able to go on talking in a sort of to-be-con-
tinued-in-our-next way all the time.”
“What did you talk about?” asked Terry.


“Oh, us mostly, I think,” said Alicia. “He
—the father —kept asking me questions, and
every now and then he and his son laughed,
and when Cousin Kate leaned over once and
said: ‘I hope my little cousin isn't boring
you, Mr. Astley?’ he said something so nice
that I felt I wanted to thank him. And the son
looked nearly cross with Kate.” She laughed
at the remembrance of it.
“That woman does see to it thoroughly
that no false radiance shall cling round us,”
said Terry without anger. “How did you
feel?”
“Well,” said Alicia thoughtfully, “just for
a moment I felt as if I had been smacked
suddenly; but they didn’t give me a chance to
feel it long; they—at least it was the father
mostly—began to talk rather quickly, as if
they wanted to cover it up. Some people are
dears, aren’t they, Terry?”
“They are,” said Terry whole-heartedly.
“After the theatre was over,” continued
Alicia, “ I was going to hop on to a tram
and go off alone, but as we came out Mr.
Astley insisted upon taking all of us to
supper ”
“Where?” asked Terry.


“At the Didon,” said Alicia. “We had
oysters and funny little birds and ”
Terry gave a groan; Alicia looked at her.
“What is it Terry?”
“ I can’t finish my stodge if you go on
talking like that; and to me, who’d rather
have oysters than new hats.”
“Never mind,” said Alicia sympathetically;
“ I got a bad one at the end.”
“What’s that to me?” said Terry dolefully.
“I’ve had three bad ones in the middle, and
gone on to the end without wincing. You
don’t know what it is to care as I care. You
can’t, or else you’d never come straight away
and dim the memory of them with stodge:
they’re wasted on you—that’s what hurts.”
Alicia looked guiltily at the rapidly diminish-
ing wedge in her hand. “Perhaps they are,”
she said; “but whatever I’d had to eat out-
side, I’d always want something when I came
home; it’s a habit, I suppose.”
“What were they? Stewart Islands or
Sydney Rocks?” asked Terry, harking
back.
“Sydney Rocks,” said Alicia humbly.
“ Big or little?”
“ Big,” said Alicia, as if it were being forced


from her. “Why do you torture yourself so,
Terry?”
Terry covered her face with her hands and
rocked silently.
“11l be better soon,” she said almost in-
audibly; then, taking her hands away: “Did
you come home in a tram?”
“No,” said Alicia. “Mr. Astley’s little
boy”—she laughed— “ brought me home in
the biggest, newest, softest, rubber-tyredest
hansom as ever was. I’ve been a princess
to-night.” She stretched her arms luxuriously.
“What did Kate say?” asked Terry with
interest.
“It was because of what Kate said that it
happened, I think,” said Alicia. “As we
were leaving she said: ‘How shall we manage
about you, Alicia?’ as if it were a little bit
of a bother; and it seemed as if the others
must have heard it, for when I said quickly:
‘lt’s all right, Cousin Kate, I can get my
tram quite easily’, Mr. Astley’s little boy said
something to him in an undertone, and Mr.
Astley turned to Kate and said: ‘lf you will
allow it, my son will drive Miss Grant home’.”
|| And Kate said ” began Terry.
‘Kate said: ‘Oh, thank you, Mr. Astley,
5


there is no need for that! If he would be
good enough to put her into the tram she will
manage quite well; there will be no need to
bother him further, I assure you!’”
“I am afraid our next-of-kin is an outsider
sometimes,” said Terry regretfully. “And
then ?”
“And then,” said Alicia, jumping off the
bed and prancing up and down the room,
“then Mr. Astley’s little boy he up and says,
with a glint in his eye: ‘lndeed, and it would
be a pleasure;’ and Kate answers back and
says: ‘You're too kind’; and he says, more
glintful than ever: ‘To myself it must be then;’
and I stands by feeling like the corpse they’re
wrangling over, and wishing the best man to
win, which he did, for I came home in a cab.”
She pulled up breathless opposite the glass
and began to take down her hair.
“ Hooray!” said Terry, flourishing an empty
glass. “Here’s to Mr. Astley’s little boy!
How big is he?” she asked suddenly.
“I don’t know about thirty,” answered
Alicia absent-mindedly.


CHAPTER VII
The Major takes Possession
Terry stood in the middle of her little dis-
mantled bedroom looking round at the empty-
walls. Everything was settled; the house was
let, Sarah was to stay, and Major Trevor was
to take possession that afternoon. There had
been a long stormy scene with Miss Bastable,
in which she prophesied disaster, and ended
by washing her hands of the whole affair, and
Terry had flung off in a white rage to find
comfort from Mrs. Barrett.
“ She began by saying she had heard we had
let the cottage, said Terry, excitedly drumming
on the window pane, and staring out into the
garden; “but of course she had said it was
a mistake. She was right in saying so, she
supposed?” Terry stopped.
Yes? said Mrs. Barrett, quietly stitching
at a garment of Snowy’s. She felt that Terry
must get rid of it in her own way.
“ I said no, that she was wrong, we were
67


thinking - of letting it. I tried to be as civil as
I could, I wanted to put it to her quietly and
reasonably, and to have her with us rather than
against us; but I knew by the very tone of her
voice that she was out for trouble, and my heart
sank into my boots and my back went up both
at the same time. I know that gentle waiting
sound in her voice.
“ After that she asked who we were going to
stay with, and I said we weren’t going to stay
with anyone, we were going to take rooms; and
she said very sweetly: ‘ But won’t you find that
more expensive than living at home?’ I said:
‘ No, not where we mean to go;’ and when she
said: ‘ Where is that?’ I said: ‘To a building in
town that they can’t let as offices, and are turn-
ing into living-rooms.’ She said: ‘But surely
Sarah won’t like that!’ and I felt then it was no
use walking round one another as we were doing,
and that it was better to have it over at once.
I said Sarah wasn’t coming, and that we were
only going to have two rooms and do all our
own work, and try as well to earn some money.
She sat quite still, watching me, as I talked —
and that didn’t make me feel any pleasanter
either —and then she said, with eyes like knitting
needles: “ Do I understand that you two young


girls are giving up your home and going to
live a hand-to-mouth existence in the city
without any protection whatever?”
I said: “If you choose to put it that way,
J9
yes.
“And is there no one among your own
friends being a relative I do not expect to
count —is there no one among your own per-
sonal frends to advise you against this piece
of folly?”
“Yes?” said Mrs. Barrett once more, for
Terry had stopped again.
Wheeling round suddenly, Terry stood with
clasped hands before Mrs. Barrett.
“Then, oh then,” she said, her eyes flashing,
“ I made a mistake, I appealed to her. I asked
her to see things as they were, I said she must
know that it cost more to live in a house than
in rooms; there were rates to pay, Sarah’s
wages, repairs, and a hundred-and-one things
that kept cropping up for which money had to
be found. To live so meant getting into debt,
and debt made me afraid.” Her voice choked.
“If only she would have been nice then!”
“What did she say?” asked Mrs. Barrett
\ery gently; but without looking up from her
work.


Terry recovered herself.
“She stopped tapping her foot on the floor,
and said in a voice like a —like a razor blade
with a smile on the edge of it: “I fail to see
that you are less likely to get into debt in town,
where you have to pay for everything, than you
are here with a roof over your head; and also, it
seems to me, no more creditable to run up bills
in the city than in the suburbs. But you have
evidently made up your mind, so it is waste of
time discussing it. I suppose you have made
Alicia fall in with your plans?”
“Alicia thinks as I do,” I said.
She got up. “You understand that I
thoroughly disapprove of the whole thing.
Therefore it will be useless for you to come to
me when you are in difficulties, for I should on
no account help you; remember that!” Then
she went.
“As if I should ever have thought of going
to her for help!” exclaimed Terry, white and
trembling with the indignation and hurt pride
which filled her.
Mrs. Barrett put her work down in her lap.
“ You had to tell her,” she said, “ but you could
never expect to make her see your point of
view, so you must try not to think about it or


let it worry you. I don’t want to talk as if she
were wrong,” she went on quietly; “she is not
able to see it any other way than she does,
and you must allow her that, and put it out of
your mind. And I don’t want to preach either,
dear; but so long as you are doing what you
believe to be the right thing, from a sincere
motive, you must be content to get your strength
from that, and not from anyone’s opinion of
you. It’s nicer to have everyone with you, I
know, but you must be ‘with yourself’ first or
it won’t be any real use. You’ve got to make
your own way, and you are doing now what
you believe to be the wisest all round. Let
that uphold you; it is your affair, and you have
the right of your choice. I believe you are
doing the best thing, but even if it should turn
out not to be, it is not irrevocable.”
Terry listened, and as she listened her heart
grew softer and less strained. The injustice of
Miss Bastable’s attitude towards herself seemed,
as Mrs. Barrett talked, to recede into the dis-
tance, and at last to fade away into something
quite impersonal. It was the point of view of one
absolutely ignorant of the conditions that had to
be met, and as such was merely a blindness to
those conditions, not a personal attack. Just as


there is no universal speech, so there is no
universal understanding, although there are
gropings towards both, and Terry felt uncon-
sciously nearer the one as the bitterness in her
heart died down. She put her hand on Mrs.
Barrett’s shoulder for a moment.
“ You’re a dear,” she said rather unsteadily.
Mrs. Barrett smiled up at her. “And you’re
a sentimental tornado,” she said very tenderly.
“ Ring the bell for tea.”
Are they really going? Not for very many
more nights would Terry sleep again in the
little room that she had slept in ever since she
was thought big enough to have a room to
herself. It looked odd now, she had never
seen it without furniture before, and it seemed
like another room; even the window didn’t
seem in the same place. Sometimes she had
amused herself by going round the house from
room to room, imagining that she had enough
money to put it into proper repair.
Things which would have seemed bare neces-
sities to a person with a little money were sheer
luxuries to Terry, who had none; and the
thought of being able one day to give all the
woodwork a good coat of paint was a possi-


bility that only existed in her most extravagant
imaginings. If she had money, what dainty
papers she would put upon the w r alls, what
delicious covers to the furniture! It was the
beginning of the revival of all the oldfashioned
rose-patterned chintzes, and in Terry’s dreams
the rep sofa and the horse-hair armchair dis-
appeared for ever under loose covers made by
herself and Alicia. Her understanding stopped
short of their being made professionally, but she
longed for them so heartily that, even if she
had never held a needle in her life, she felt she
would have found a way to put them together
somehow. Oh, how was it possible for people
who could go to shops, and buy whatever
they wanted, to be unhappy! To be able to
say whether you’d have a pink bedroom or a
blue bedroom, and to have it. Not to have
starched Nottingham lace curtains, pleated on
to a piece of tape, but creamy muslin that
fell in long soft folds from a brass rod, and
pulled backwards and forwards as you pleased;
not to have to put up with a shiny walnut
chiffonier with a marble top and squiggly
corkscrews running down beside the glass
fronts, by way of ornament, when you wanted
a reserved and dignified sideboard; not to put


brown and red together in the same room,
because once there had not been enough red,
and the brown had been picked up a bargain
and could easily be made to “do” —that hideous
word—oh, what wonderful, untouched joys the
world was filled with!
The door opened and Sarah came in.
“There’s a cab just driven up. I suppose it’s
the Major with his things.” She spoke gruffly,
and there was an inflection in her voice when
she said “the Major”, that was a mixture of
resentment and contempt. It was what the
girls called her “ I-don’t-hold-with ” voice, and
proclaimed her attitude more eloquently than
words. Hating changes, she looked upon
this move as a personal affront, and all who
took part in it —even to the cabman who drove
the Major—were in conspiracy against her.
“I will go and meet him,” said Terry quickly.
As she went out on to the veranda Major
Trevor came in through the garden gate from
the walk. Terry went towards him with her
hand outstretched.
“You have got someone to bring in your
luggage?” she asked.
“ Yes, thank you, the cabman has found
a friend.” He followed her into the house.


“How cool and sweet it is inside!” he said,
looking round him contentedly.
“We always keep the dark blinds drawn
through the hottest part of the day,” said Terry;
“it makes a wonderful difference.”
The cab discharged and the trunks disposed
of, Terry went away and returned in a few
minutes with a tea-tray.
“ I don’t know if you want it,” she said,
as she poured, “but I do, very badly. Do
you take sugar?”
“ Please, two lumps,” he laughed. “ Yes, I
think I do too, very badly.”
“At four o’clock,” said Terry, handing him
his cup, “ I begin to get restless, and by half-
past I’m just rampageous.”
“ And at five?” he queried gravely.
“Oh, at five, if I haven’t had it, I’m about
what Sarah calls ‘ past it ’. I can barely sit up
to drink.”
He looked at the clock.
“ I’m so sorry,” he said; “ it’s just ten minutes
past.”
“Oh!” said Terry again, stopping short
with the second piece of bread-and-butter
halfway up to her mouth. They looked at one
another for a moment, then they both laughed.


“They’re such little bits,” she said apologeti-
cally.
“I’m sure they are,” said he leniently.
“And I’ve been so busy, I forgot the time,”
she went on.
“ Indeed, you must have been,” said he,
still more indulgently; then they both laughed
again.
“ If you are rested,” said Terry, when they
had finished their tea, “ I will take you through
the house and explain things before I go.”
The long, warm day was drawing to a close
as Terry shut the big gate behind her and went
off to begin her home with Alicia among the
housetops of the city.
She had made a tour of the cottage with
Major Trevor, introduced him to Sarah, who
received him quite graciously, much to Terry’s
relief, and finally delivered up the keys with
the earnest injunction that he was to tell
Sarah at once if anything should by chance
be forgotten. And now she was on her way
to Alicia and the packing cases, and—and?
Terry gave up wondering—it was no use—
and turned her thoughts to supper-buying;
Alicia would be wanting hers.


CHAPTER VIII
The Removal
“You look in a pretty pickle,” said Terry,
putting her parcels down upon a box and
gazing round the room.
Alicia was sitting perched on a high pack-
ing case, her legs dangling, her hands lying
palms upwards in her lap. In the half-dark,
with the room littered and bare, she looked
a very forlorn person.
“ I know,” she said disconsolately. “ I
wasn’t able to put the matting down, because
I had forgotten whether you wanted it across-
ways or downways.”
“ Downways,” said Terry; “it fits better.”
“Well, I couldn’t remember. And I’ve
smashed the handle of the hammer, and the
caretaker’s not in his room, and I’ve only got
one of the cases a bit open.” There was a
suspicion of tears in her voice.
“Is it the one with the cups in it?” asked


Terry, her heart sinking as the problem of
supper suddenly presented itself.
“ Yes,” said Alicia.
“ Perhaps we can dig for them in the hole
you’ve made,” said Terry hopefully. “What
is the other room like?” She went through
the doorway. Alicia’s voice followed her.
“I’ve made the beds, and hung up a looking-
glass, and found the brushes and combs and
a towel and a piece of soap; we shall be able
to go to bed properly, anyhow.”
“That’s something to be thankful for,” said
Terry, returning. “It must have been beastly
here all day by yourself. Did you have any
tea?”
“ No,” said Alicia brokenly
“ Why not?”
“ I was too tired to make it.”
“ Never mind, we’ll have supper right away.
Is there any milk?”
“There’s what I got for tea and didn’t
use,” said Alicia, pointing to a jug in a
corner.
Terry picked it up and looked into it. “That
will be plenty, ” she said. “Where shall we
have it?”
Alicia slid off the packing case. “ This is


as good a place as any,” she said; “the
little table’s too small, and there’s nothing
else as high as this.”
Picking up a big sheet of brown paper,
Terry smoothed it out carefully and spread it
over the box; then she undid her packages
and laid them out. “There’s sardines,” she
said, “ that nice little kind without any bones
or scales, that you can eat right down to their
tails, and a big box —I spared no expense;
and butter, and rolls, and melon jam with
ginger.” She peered round. “ Where are the
candles, I can’t see to open the sardines?”
“ There’s one on the table.”
“ Only one?” asked Terry.
“There’s a packet on the floor, but there’s
only one candlestick,” said Alicia.
“That doesn’t matter,” said Terry, “we’ll
make them stay up somehow.” She lighted
the one in the candlestick and placed it in
the middle of the feast, then, pulling out the
others from their wrapper, she put a strip of
wood that had been torn from the partly
opened packing case upon a shelf on the wall,
and, dripping the wax on to it, stuck six
candles in a row, then she lighted them.
Alicia watched her with amazement.


“Why are you doing- that?” she asked in
an awestruck voice.
“We must have lig-ht, ” said Terry, stand-
ing- entranced before her work; “it’ll make
us better. I can’t be dark and uncomfort-
able both tog-ether, and it wasn’t meant that
we should be either. I feel better now.”
“ But it’s wicked to lig-ht seven candles at
once,” said Alicia puritanically, yet at the
same time thrilled by Terry’s recklessness.
I know, said Terry, still g-azing* fasci-
natedly at the row of candles; “ it’s threepence
or fourpence g-one at one fell swoop, and I’m
not even sorry, and, by the feel of the inside
of me, never shall be. I wonder if everybody
likes doing wrong as much as I do. It’s a
beautiful feeling.” She clasped her hands and
looked at Alicia in silence; it seemed as if
there ought to be some thunder to follow.
They waited.
But the candles went on burning gaily, and
a breath of the evening air came in through
the opened windows. The girls looked at one
another for a moment longer, and then Alicia
broke the silence with a soft little lauo-h
b *
“ It’s almost like saying, ‘I don’t care’, when
one was little, isn’t it, Terry? You feel as if


something must happen;” she laughed again.
“Something always did, in those days.”
“Yes, said Terry dreamily. It was odd
how every now and then one said a careless
thing that started other thoughts which were
not careless ones. It was like lifting the cor-
ner of a curtain. Why—why was everything?
She dropped the curtain, and gave a sigh,
half-perplexity, half-content. It was a com-
fort to have the candles, and Alicia, and even
the sardines and an appetite.
In a very short time the water in the little
kettle was bubbling, and while Alicia watched
it, and made the tea, Terry dived her hand
into the opening in the packing case, and
fished for cups. Out came everything else
that was not wanted, but at last Terry was
rewarded.
“Hooray, a bite!” she ejaculated trium-
phantly producing a round hump of paper.
“I wouldn’t mind betting it’s a basin,” said
Alicia.
“Whatever it is you’ll drink out of it, as
long as it has a bottom to it,” said Terry,
unwrapping.
A cup! She handed it to Alicia. “Long
may it comfort you and keep thirst from the
(C7B)


door —the trap-door,” she added significantly:
the size of Alicia’s mouth was a cause of great
sorrow to her.
But this time she refused to be drawn.
“You can’t make me suffer that way to-
night,” she said placidly. “I feel so grateful
for having a mouth, that I wouldn’t mind if it
went twice round my head and back again.”
She gave a little shiver. “ Think of the horror
of wanting food as badly as I do, and having
no way of getting at it. I feel as I would
never worry about the size of it again.”
They sat down together at the packing case,
and Terry divided the sardines and put the tin
away.
“There’s an extra lot for you,” she said.
“You haven’t had anything but sandwiches
all day, and I had a good tea at home.”
Then they began, and there was no more
speech for some time.
“It’s funny,” said Alicia at last, stretching
7 &
herself luxuriously and looking at the denuded
plates, “what a difference food makes. When
those sardines were where they aren’t now, all
I wanted to do was to turn my face to the
wall, and get away from a world that seemed
unfit for human beings to live in. Now I


could do some more work with the greatest
ease.”
“Well,” said Terry, “we will.’
“ No, we won’t,” said Alicia quickly. “That
was only a figure of speech. I’m going to
bed.”
“And I’m going to lay the matting,” said
Terry with decision.
Alicia looked at her incredulously.
“ But it’s so late
“I don’t care,” said Terry. “I feel if I
were to wake up to-morrow morning to bare
boards it would warp the whole of the future;
and as I haven’t done anything much to-day
but talk, it will do me good.”
“You’ll have to muffle the hammer,” said
Alicia, “or else there will be complaints. I’ll
go down to the caretaker and find out about
the baker and the milkman.”
She opened the door and disappeared down
the passage; presently she came back.
“You put out a plate and a jug, with a
piece of paper on each saying how much you
want,” she explained delightedly, “and when
you open the door in the morning the jug has
milk in it and the plate bread. It’s like a
zoo, isn’t it?”


“No,” said Terry; “the animals don’t put
out plates and jugs and find bread and milk,
and they don’t open the door in the morning.”
“Perhaps it isn’t,” said Alicia reflectively;
“but it seems to be like something. I know;
it’s a prison! Put your head out and see.”
Terry went to the door and looked out.
“It is rather,” she said, gazing down the
long, narrow, dimly-lighted corridor. “The
doors are cells, and the caretaker is the
warder. I wonder what the others are in
for?”
“What are we in for?” asked Alicia in-
terestedly.
“Having no money,” replied Terry; then
she looked at Alicia comically. “ I think we’ll
be what you call ‘ Lifers ’, Alicia.”
“Never mind, ‘stone walls’ ” began
Alicia, but Terry stopped her.
“Not allowed,” she said; “it’s been done
too often. Will you please to go and ask the
warder to lend you a hammer till to-morrow?
I want to begin before the others are in bed.”
Very cautiously and carefully Terry began
her tappings. It was only half-past nine, but
one did not know the habits of the other
prisoners, and she did not wish at the outset


to come up against their prejudices. For half
an hour she might legitimately permit herself
to drive with a certain boldness, but anything
after that must be few in tacks and pianissimo
in treatment. She would then be a tresspasser,
and must tread delicately.
So she set to work cutting the matting into
strips, laying the edges together, and tacking
it down at intervals with double-headed tacks.
Of course that wasn’t quite the best way of
doing it; she had gone into that when she
was making her calculations. The right w r ay
was to have it sewn and bound before it was
put down; but that way would make it cost
six-and-threepence more, and they had found
it very difficult to get together the fifteen-and-
sevenpence-halfpenny necessary for the pur-
chase of the bare material, let alone anything
extra for fashioning it.
Terry laid two strips, and drew away from
it to get a better view. It was a great bar-
gain—sevenpence-halfpenny a yard, and made
of cool green-and-white straw —one of those
lucky chances that comes just at the right
moment, and makes you very pleased with
yourself for no reason at all, because really
you have had nothing to do with it except sit


still and be the recipient of the bounty of Pro-
vidence. But it is a very nice feeling all the
same, and Terry glowed with it as she looked
at her work; then she fell to with renewed
ardour.
At twelve o’clock, tired but triumphant,
Terry dropped into bed to dream of unending
pilgrimages made across rocky continents on
bare knees. One does not crawl over twenty-
five yards of straw matting to some purpose
and forget it directly afterwards. There is a
period of self-consciousness in between.


CHAPTER IX
A Visit of Inspection
“Do you think it looks quite nice, Alicia?”
Terry asked it anxiously, as she moved about
giving touches here and there to things already
straight and in perfect order.
“Quite,” said Alicia appreciatively. “I’m
sure they’ll like it.”
“There is plenty of milk?”
“Yes, plenty,” said Alicia again.
“Do you think we’ve buttered enough
scones?”
“Yes, I think so, and if we haven’t I can
easily go into the kitchen ” —she smiled—“and
do some more.”
There was a knock upon the door. Terry
opened it. Mrs. Barrett and Ella were stand-
ing outside.
“This is the right door then? I was afraid
I might have made a mistake.” Mrs. Barrett
kissed the girls, and turned round to look about
87


her. “My dear children, how sweet you’ve
made it!”
“You think it is nice?” said Terry quickly.
She always spoke rather breathlessly when she
was shy, and somehow she felt shy to-day.
She had often done the honours at home, but
this was different. The other was a home
made for them; to show the one you had made
yourself was like telling- your thoughts; that
must be the reason why she felt shy.
“I think it is charming.”
The girls waited in a delighted silence. Mrs.
Barrett knew how things should be, and she
was speaking approval not only with her lips
but her eyes.
It wasn’t easy, with a few packing cases and
half as many pounds, to bring fifteen by fifteen
feet of space into line as a living-room, but at
least they could not err on the side of over-
crowding, and they had the instinct not to
make attempts at decorating that could only
be poor and tawdry imitations at best.
The walls were distempered a pale green,
and green-and-white matting covered the floor.
In one corner stood a little tea table—one of the
few things brought from home—and another
corner was cut off by a Japanese paper screen.


“We wanted a cloth one, but couldn’t afford
it,” said Terry. Everything- had its purpose,
and the purpose of the screen was a deep one.
Over the windows hung short white-muslin cur-
tains—butter muslin, —explained Terry again
with pride, because it was only twopence-
halfpenny a yard and very wide, and hung
softly, into the bargain; that to Terry, with
her hatred of starch, being the chief thing in
its favour.
There were two chairs, a divan which at
night was Terry’s bed, but which by day made
the most important piece of furniture in the
room, a hanging shelf with some books on it,
and two or three pictures, personal property,
and in no wise filched from the lawful and
present owner of the cottage. They had, by
Major Trevor’s wish, closed up their own two
rooms, so were free to take from them what
they needed, but they had conscientiously re-
frained from abstracting anything else than the
barest necessities; and a few knives and forks,
and some odd crockery, made up the total of
their possessions.
“Show me everything,” said Mrs. Barrett;
and Terry, losing her shyness in the joy of the
housewife, began.


“This is the spring mattress off my bed at
home,” she said, going over to the divan. “ I
put it on two orange cases, which made it
just the right height from the ground, and we
bought enough stuff to make a cover for five
shillings, and did it ourselves. The pillow is
inside the cushion case.”
“ It’s a very pretty pattern,” said Mrs.
Barrett, critically lifting up a corner of the
cretonne, “and a very good quality. You got
a bargain.”
“I’m glad you say so,” said Terry; “I
thought it was, but I couldn’t be quite sure
when it was so cheap.”
“It must have been very much reduced,”
said Mrs. Barrett; and Terry felt within her the
thrill of the collector who has won his maiden
spurs. She moved on to the next exhibit.
“This is a chair we found in the attic. Its
back was broken, but Stetson made it right for
a shilling, and I bought a pot of enamel and
painted it black. There was enough cretonne
left over to do the seat. It’s rather a good
shape, isn’t it?” She looked down upon it
almost in a motherly way. The chair was cer-
tainly a dutiful child, and had paid for the care
and paint which had been spent upon it.


“And this”—she walked towards the screen
and drew it aside —“this is the kitchen.”
Mrs. Barrett stood looking - around her with
admiration. Here, in a space not more than a
yard long and less than that wide, was packed
all that was necessary for the “up-keep” of two
rooms and as many maidens. A zinc-lined
packing case covered with white American cloth
was the table and cupboard combined. On one
end of it, on a tin tray, stood a gas-ring upon
which a kettle was boiling, on the other a
divided box for the knives and silver and a
bread tin. At the back, upon the wall, a wide
strip of the same American cloth had been
tacked up, and from a row of nails hung a tin-
opener, an iron spoon and fork, a small sauce-
pan, an equally small frying-pan, a mop stick,
a toaster, and a soap-saver. In the lower part
of the “cupboard” lived the washing-up tin,
a large saucepan, a dustpan, a broom, and a
box with dusters in it; on the shelf which
made the upper part were kept the china and
the “stores”, which stores consisted of half
a pound of tea, a tin of cocoa, some jam, salt,
pepper, and sugar in small quantities, and two
tins of sardines. The milk and the butter had
to stand on the space between the g'as-ring and


the bread tin by day, and were put on a table
by an open window in one of the recesses at
night. A long-handled broom stood in the
angle of the walls, and at the end of the box-
table-cupboard was a kerosene tin, with a
handle and a lid, which served as a boiler and
copper for the home wash. Then you pulled
the screen round the whole affair, and you were
in the drawing-room again.
“It is quite wonderful,” said Mrs. Barrett.
“ I would like Cook to see this when she is
grumbling about the size of her kitchen. But
how do you manage about dinner?” She
looked round for the oven.
“We cook it on this,” said Alicia, who
was standing by the gas-ring making the
tea.
“ But you can only fry and boil with that.
What do you do when you want a joint?”
Terry and Alicia looked at each other,
“ I think we go on w r anting, as a rule,” said
Terry.
Mrs. Barrett looked distressed.
“ But, my children, you can’t live on sau-
sages and sardines all your life. You must be
properly fed, or else you will get ill.”
“It isn’t quite as bad as that,” said Terry.


“We’ve worked it out, and we think we shall
be able to have one good dinner a week cer-
tain ”
“We’ve had one already this week,” inter-
rupted Alicia in a voice of lingering retrospec-
tion.
“And how did you cook it?” asked Mrs.
Barrett.
“ It’s quite easy if you manage,” said Terry.
“We couldn’t roast, so we put it—it was a
piece of rolled mutton ”
“Stuffed,” said Alicia pensively.
“Yes, stuffed —into a flat wide saucepan,
half-full of dripping. It boiled in that, and it
tasted just the same as if it were roast. Then,
when it was nearly done, w r e took it off and put
it aside ”
“With the lid on tight,” explained Alicia.
Yes, of course, with the lid on—to keep
the taste in. We put it aside while w r e boiled
the beans and the potatoes together.”
Together! said Mrs. Barrett w r onderingly.
“Together,” said Terry; “the beans in the
saucepan part and the potatoes up above in the
steamer. I think a steamer is a w r onderful in-
vention,” she went on reflectively. “There’s
a lot in chance, isn’t there?”


“How do you mean?” asked Mrs. Barrett,
taking a seat by the tea table.
“Well,” said Terry, “I’m sure if ever the
King- or the Prime Minister had had to cook
their own dinners on a gas-ring without one,
when the man came along who invented it
they would simply have hung knighthoods
round him, like a necklace, out of sheer grati-
tude. I wish I’d been a person in power then;
I would never have let him die unsung.”
“The worst of Terry is, when she begins to
talk like that, she always forgets to pour out,”
said Alicia, picking up the teapot. “She’s
funny sometimes, but she’s bad for the diges-
tion when she happens at meal times.”
“ I didn’t mean to be funny then,” began
Terry rather indignantly; “ I ”
“It’s all right,” said Alicia soothingly;
“you weren’t. I only said sometimes; but
the tea gets cold just the same, whichever
way it is. Get some more hot water, will
n y y
your
Terry took the jug that Alicia held out to
her. Mrs. Barrett laughed.
“Never mind, Terry, one’s own family is
always merciless. Tell me”—as Terry came
back with the hot water —“what you have


made up your minds to do, because I have
a proposal to make for one of you.”
“ I haven’t been able to think of anything
yet,” said Terry slowly, her brows drawing
together unconsciously; “but Alicia is going
to Miss Pinkley’s to learn kindergarten. She
is to go for six months without either paying
anything or getting anything, and then, if she
is any good at it, she may go on at a salary.”
“When do you begin?” asked Mrs. Barrett
of Alicia.
“ Next week,” said Alicia.
“And are you to be there all day?”
“Yes,” said Alicia.
Ella looked at her mother. “It is just near
us, Mother.”
“Yes; I was thinking, Alicia dear, you will
come in and lunch with us every day!”
“Oh!” said Alicia, reddening with pleasure,
it wouldn tbe fair, every day. I will come
sometimes, if I may.”
“Are you to lunch with Miss Pinkley?”
asked Mrs. Barrett.
no, said Alicia hesitatingly.
“Then you are to come to us. I will take
no refusal.” Mrs. Barrett spoke decisively.
“Indeed you are good,” said Alicia in a


grateful voice. “I wasn’t liking the thought
of my paper lunches in an empty schoolroom.”
“ I should think not,” said Mrs. Barrett sym-
pathetically.” Then she turned to Terry.
“ How would you like to go into a tea-room,
Terry dear?” she asked.
“I don’t know,” said Terry. “I’ve never
thought of it.”
“We have just heard of one that is to be
opened by Colonel Hotham’s widow. Her
sister is one of Dr. Barrett’s patients, and she
was telling him about it the last time he saw
her. If you like I will get him to speak for
you. What do you think?”
Terry looked from one to another.
“What do you think?” she said at last,
addressing no one in particular, but turning
with final appeal to Mrs. Barrett.
“It seems to me rather a good idea,” said
Mrs. Barrett, “unless, of course, you have
any strong feeling against it.”
“I haven’t at all,” said Terry; “the only
two things I feel strongly against are teaching
and companioning. I wouldn’t like to do
either of those —for long.”
“There isn’t very much left,” said Mrs.
Barrett thoughtfully, “unless you have capital


at your back. There are the Charring-ton girls
with their hat shop and the Maxwells with their
library, but they all had someone to finance
them.”
In the pause which followed, everyone thought
of Miss Bastable, and Mrs. Barrett’s indigna-
tion stirred again. What better use could she
put her superfluous money to than the setting
a young thing, eager to work, upon her way?
Even if she never saw that money again, she
would have given something its chance, and
the loss would not be more to her than the
dropping of a halfpenny out of the pocket
of a poorer person.
Terry was off on the horse of her desires
again.
I d love to keep a shop,” she said dreamily.
1 always wanted to when I was little, and I'd
hke it just as much now; a fancy shop with toys
m it, hke Miss Catt’s ’’
“With a bell that rang when the door
opened,” said Ella.
“ Yes, and expensive things inside the cases
and medium things outside; and the toys and
childrens books on a counter by themselves.
en you went m with sixpence or a shilling
° y ° U ° nly looked in th « window or on


the counter, but if you’d saved up a lot you
made her let down the glass flap and take out
the lovely little smelly leather purses and card
cases and everything you weren’t able to see
at any other time, and you felt somebody when
you’d paid your money over, regardless. I’d
like to be on the other side of the counter now,
and see what it felt like to sell to the funny little
capitalists.”
“And the people who turned the shop inside
out without buying, ” said Alicia.
“You’d get that whatever you did,” said
Terry; then she came back to earth with a
little laugh.
“What about the tea-room?” she said to
Mrs. Barrett.
“I don’t know very much yet,” answered
Mrs. Barrett. “ I only know that a good
deal of money has been put into it, and they
are relying on Mrs. Hotham’s name and fol-
lowing for its success, but if you think you
would like it, I will get Martin to speak at
once to Mrs. Chesney —or I will write myself,
that perhaps would be quicker.”
“Thank you!” said Terry slowly. “ I think
I had better try, don’t you?”
“I think so.” She got up. “I will write


to-night, and let you know directly I hear.
And goodbye, you dear, dear children! I
wish I could do more for you.” She kissed
them warmly, and a mist came before her eyes.
She thought of her own child being left to fend
for herself, and her tenderness to these two
seemed like a prayer, a votive offering.
“Indeed,” said Terry and Alicia together,
“you are always doing something for us.”
“ It’s odd, isn’t it, Terry, how differently
different people make you feel?” said Alicia
after Mrs. Barrett and Ella had gone, and
they were sitting alone together.
“How?” said Terry absently. She was
looking out, between a gap in the house
tops, to the masts of the shipping in the bay,
four miles off, and her thoughts were farther
away still.”
“I feel all in a lovely warm glow after I’ve
been with Mrs. Barrett,” said Alicia.
“I know,” said Terry, coming out of her
dreams, and speaking tenderly; “she’s so good
that she makes you feel good yourself and
wonder what you can do to be gooder. She
isn’t only a person, she’s a h’influence.”


CHAPTER X
Alicia begins Work
It was half-past eight on Monday morning.
To-day Alicia began work at Miss Pinkley’s.
She was feeling rather nervous at the prospect,
and the excitement of it had made everything
difficult to button as she dressed, and was now
turning the bloater-pasted toast into something
that was uncommonly like chaff or paper shav-
ings in its lack of flavour. Tea and toast was
about all the exchequer could provide in the
way of breakfast; but they had found that
bloater paste, not too thickly spread, helped
one to be interested in a dish that, without
variation, was apt to pall; and, used in small
quantities, it did not add very much to the
expenses, except that of course it made you
eat more toast, which increased the bread-and-
butter bill a little. Still, one had to eat some-
thing. This morning the paste seemed to have
lost its power; for there was no appreciable
difference in Alicia’s side of the dish, and the


Alicia begins Work
broken pieces on her plate told a tale of failure.
Terry, on the other hand, razed her little pile
with the same celerity as usual, and the un-
littered condition of her plate spoke the thor-
oughness of her methods eloquently.
“You’re not eating anything,” she said,
stopping with the last slice in her hand to look
at Alicia’s neglected heap; for they cut the
toast straight down the middle, and kept to
their own sides.
“I'm not hungry,” said Alicia, getting up
from the table; “nothing seems to taste this
morning.”
“Don’t you really want it?” asked Terry
unbelievingly.
“No.”
“Then I’ll eat it—and glad to,” she added
rather gloomily. It was hard lines when you
got a letter saying there was nothing for you
to do that you should develop an appetite
which seemed to need a whole sheep to
satisfy it. In Terry’s pocket, stuffed there
quickly to be out of sight, was a communi-
cation from Mrs. Hotham to the effect that,
much as she would like to have Miss Terry
Grant upon her staff, the vacancies were all
blled. She would, however, keep her in re-


membrance, and if at any time one should
occur she would give her the preference.
And the first month’s rent of the cottage
had gone in moving expenses, and shoes
and gloves for Alicia, and still there was her
ticket to buy, sixpence a day, or eight shillings
a month, if only one could afford to lay out as
much; which for a month at least was out of
the question. All this going out and six clear
months before she—Alicia —could earn any-
thing, and Terry herself doing nothing. She
found the toast suddenly sticking in her throat.
“Goodbye!” said Alicia, coming in from the
bedroom ready to start. “ I suppose I shall be
home about five.”
“All right!” said Terry, going to the lift to
see her off. “ I will wait tea for you. Good-
bye!” She smiled, but as the lift disappeared
she went back to the rooms forlornly. There
were things to be done, but the day looked
long with no one to speak to, and no garden to
go out into. She could go out and look at the
shops, and prowl about generally; but walking
made you hungry, and with things as they were
it was better to let sleeping dogs lie. She
pulled herself together resolutely. When the
housework was done she would mend all the


stockings, and buy virtue that way. If she
could feel pleased with herself she could with-
stand most things, and there was nothing that
gave her such self-satisfaction as a basket
empty of stockings and a drawer full of them.
Alicia’s too; she would stop at nothing. Already
the outlook was different.


CHAPTER XI
Miss Fairy Barnes
Miss Pinkley received Alicia in her own pri-
vate room, and explained her duties to her.
She was a large, dignified-looking woman, who
seemed to have stepped out of some illustrated
book that belonged to Alicia’s childhood. One
of those people who have never been any
younger than they are now, and who never
will be any older. Dressed in black cloth in
the winter and black silk in the summer, she
wore year in and year out fine white linen
cuffs and collar, a large cairngorm brooch, a
thin gold chain, and a signet ring. Upon her
smooth black hair, that was parted in the mid-
dle, she wore a lace cap, neither small nor
large, and like all great bodies she moved
slowly, having the appearance of wheeling
rather than of walking. Her sudden entrance
would bring a look of self-consciousness into
the faces of the governesses, and of guilt into


the eyes of the pupils. Those who had done
wrong felt she knew it by instinct, those who
hadn’t, felt she was waiting for them to do it.
Everyone felt honoured by her approval, and
everyone breathed a sigh of relief when she
had gone by. To have thought of her as
regulated by the same human feelings as one-
self seemed improper, and to expect her to
enjoy what the ordinary commonplace person
might in his vulgarity think amusing, was very
nearly profanity. She was not a person, she
was an institution.
When she had explained things sufficiently to
Alicia, Miss Pinkley led the way to the school-
house, which was some little distance from the
house proper.
“This,” she said, turning to an entrance on
the left, is the part of the building reserved
for the kindergarten; we keep the two schools
apart. She said “we in a voice that made
Alicia think of royal proclamations.
With her hand upon the door knob, Miss
Pinkley paused and her face hardened.
There is one child who is likely to give you
a great deal of trouble,” she said sternly;
there seems to be no restraint placed upon
her at home, and her mother, who is a poor,


useless kind of person, apparently leaves her
entirely in the charge of constantly changed
servants. I would never have taken her if I
had known what she was like at first, and I cer-
tainly shall not be able to keep her unless she
alters very considerably in her behaviour.”
“What is her name?” asked Alicia, feeling
an illegal interest in anything that could cram
so much wickedness into so short a life.
“Fairy Barnes,” said Miss Pinkley, as if the
name hurt her; then she turned the handle.
“We will go in.” She opened the door and
swept through, Alicia followed.
The room was a small one, furnished only
with some cupboards, a blackboard, over which
hung a lettered scroll, a long table with forms
down either side, a desk and a chair, and
another form on which eight small children sat
chattering together.
When the children saw Miss Pinkley, seven
of them stiffened into Dutch dolls; the eighth,
who by her attitude Alicia judged to be Fairy,
lolled at ease on the end of the form. “ Stand,”
trumpeted the voice of Miss Pinkley, and seven
fear-stricken little objects slid on to their feet to
wait for the worst.
But not Fairy; she the order with a


disregard so sublime that Alicia was able to
trace Miss Pinkley’s antagonism at once to its
source. It was only when the form, released at
one end and weighted at the other, shot from
under her that she realized how much more
comfortable it might have been to have gone
with the majority.
Picking herself up ruefully she turned slowly
towards the principal, with one cheek so dis-
tended that her eye was nearly closed, and her
mouth appeared to be set almost parallel with
her nose.
“Fairy Barnes,” said Miss Pinkley with
thunder upon her face, “what have you in
your mouth?”
“Its toofache,” replied Fairy, mournfully
wagging her head, and disclosing, as she spoke,
the black and white streakings of a bulky bull’s-
eye.
“How dare you tell me such an untruth?
Open your mouth at once!” Miss Pinkley was
finding a difficulty in controlling herself.
Recognizing philosophically that the game
was up, Fairy held her head well over and began
to unload. Three of the offending sweets rattled
out into the palms of her hands.
“That’s all I 've got —true,” she said honestly.


“Go and throw them away instantly,” ex-
claimed Miss Pinkley tremblingly.
Fairy went, and in her own good time re-
turned.
“I gave them to the fowls,” she said cheer-
fully, “and the big rooster’s got one stuck in
he’s froat;” then she put her finger into her
mouth and stroked round the lining of her
cheek.
“It’s such a funny crinkly place where they’ve
been,” she said thoughtfully; “feel,” and with
a fine courtesy she offered her discovery to the
community.
Miss Pinkley retired. Her dignity demanded
that, as she was making no headway, she should
leave before the enemy gained any more ground.
It was not retreat; it was manoeuvres.
At last the class was settled; each child with
his task before him. The desk on which they
usually wrote was away being repaired, and the
children had to balance their slates upon their
knees, no easy thing for the mites, whose feet
were not within inches of the floor. But they
worked on, unmindful of disadvantages, lolling
out their tongues as they wrote, and breathing
as if in the throes of a mighty asthma.
Alicia tried to steal surreptitious glances at


Fairy, but as Fairy seemed to be as interested
in Alicia as Alicia was in Fairy, she had to give
it up, and content herself with an impression,
taken in snatches, of a small, wizened imp, with
straw-coloured hair and a body arrayed in a
wonderful mixture of shepherd’s plaid, magenta
plush, and imitation torchon lace, whose legs,
encased in fawn and white zebra-striped stock-
ings, terminated in a pair of leather boots
resplendent with copper fittings.
Presently she slid down and went towards
Alicia with her slate.
“I ve fin shed,” she said, fixing bright,
ferrety eyes upon her new mistress, and steal-
ing a small hand into hers.
It was such a funny, rough little paw that
Alicia took it up to examine it more closely.
It was about the texture of a piece of Bombay
Duck, and the skin seemed to be drying off
it in patches.
“Fairy,’ she said in astonishment, “why is
your hand like this?”
Fairy looked down curiously, as if she were
about to make a wonderful discovery.
Like what? ’ she gasped excitedly.
“ All dry and withered and strange.”
“Oh, that!” she said, lapsing into indiffer-


ence, “that’s nuffin. Me servant washed me
in monkey soap till me muvver found out and
sent her away. But me body’s like that too.
I’ll show you.” She prepared to disrobe.
For the sake of discipline Alicia had to
refuse the offer; but she felt sorry, when she
saw the cheated faces of the children along
the form, to think that she had deprived them
of what would have been a pleasant break in
a long, toilsome day.
At half-past twelve the school broke up for
lunch, and reassembled again at two o’clock.
Alicia was invited by Miss Pinkley to lunch,
and, when lunch was over, tried to gather in-
formation upon the subject of Fairy—not from
Miss Pinkley, she had too much tact to remind
a conqueror of his failures. For there was no
doubt about it, Fairy Barnes was a distinct
blow to the principal’s omnipotence. From
what Alicia could learn, Fairy’s best time was
the afternoon. She girded on her armour and
wished for Terry. Terry would have enjoyed
Fairy so very much.
In the schoolroom were waiting the seven
faithful ones, but no Fairy. Half an hour after
she rushed in, quivering with excitement.
“ You are late,” said Alicia obviously.


Fairy nodded.
“Yes,” she replied, “an’ d’yer know w’y?
Cos me baby bruvver were nearly deaded, an’
I stayed ter watch him.”
The seven dropped their slates as one man,
and she continued rapidly;
“He were, and it were my fault. I put him
in the clo’es barstick an’ gave him free bull’s-
eyes, ’pressly sayin’ he were not to eat them,
and w’en I looked at him again he were black
in the face and his eyes were beginning to
come out.”
She paused for breath and looked triumph-
antly about her. In that moment Alicia, who
had been completely carried away by the
recital, pulled herself together and remembered
her authority.
“Go on with your work,” she said sternly.
“You are wasting time, and if your lessons
are not done before the bell rings you will all
have to stay in and finish them.”
There was a sudden squeaking of pencils,
and for a time no other sound was to be heard.
Then Fairy raised her head.
“ Me farver’s had he’s shoes mended,” she
said affably.
Alicia refused to be entangled, and Fairy


retired behind her slate again, squinting every
now and then over the top of it, ready for the
first sign of weakness; but Alicia was on guard
and gave no chances.
It was the custom, so Miss Pinkley had ex-
plained earlier in the day, for the children to
be put on their honour not to speak, if at any
time they had to be left by themselves. Alicia
wanted to go into the next room.
“Children,” she said, “I am going away
for a moment; you will remember not to talk.”
Closing their mouths with an ostentatious
snap, they placed a sealing forefinger upon
their lips and looked at each other impres-
sively.
Always excepting Fairy: she merely skreeked
her pencil madly down the slate and back
again, glanced contemptuously at the row of
solemn faces, and gave vent to a sound of such
unmistakable derision that Alicia fled before
the whip of it.
Returning, she was greeted with a tumult.
Fairy had spoken, and the righteous sought
judgment upon her. With a few well-chosen
words upon the subject of tale-bearing, Alicia
addressed them, then she turned to the offender.
She sat beating a sort of devil’s tattoo upon


the leg of the form. Her arms were swing-
ing madly, keeping time with the hammer of
her feet, and her eyes shone with a wicked
light.
Next to her was George, a calf-like boy with
wide-open blue eyes and a fair skin. Just
now his eyes were watery, and his usually pale
nose reminiscent of the dawn.
“She hit me on the nose,” he said piteously.
Fairy avowed it triumphantly.
“ I did,” she said. “ I did, because he were
so stupid. I asked him if he didn’t think that
funny feel that comes in yer nose on a very
cold morning were like taking too much mus-
tard, and he said he didn’t know, so I hit him
on the nose to show him, ’cos it’s the same as
mustard an’ a very cold morning bofe together,
if you only hit hard enough.”
In such a mood it was impossible to give her
lessons with the other children; so, putting her
on a chair beside her own, Alicia gave her a
duster to hem and prayed for a respite.
For a while she sewed in ominous calm, then
she lifted up her voice.
“I m all bluggy,” she announced. “ I’ve
dugged the neagle into me finger and it’s made
a hole. Look!”
(C 7B ) g


With a sinking heart Alicia took away the
duster, and, sending for a slate, gave her a
“copy” to do.
Hardly two minutes after she had settled
herself in the chair she was up again, present-
ing a slateful of hieroglyphics that was no more
like the copy than a bath bun is like the
Eiffel Tower.
Alicia took a sponge and, carefully wiping
out what appeared to be the temperature chart
of a hopeless fever patient, returned the slate.
“ I am afraid you are giving yourself a lot of
trouble,” she said.
Fairy took it without a word, and the battle
proceeded. Backwards and forwards she went,
arriving with a full slate and returning with an
empty one; but still there was no change in the
writing.
Presently the defiant head drooped, and one
of the rough little paws was passed furtively
across her eyes.
Alicia began to feel remorseful. After all,
she was only a scrap of a thing with an un-
usual nature and no one to guide her. It was
the idiotic parents who should be doing copies
on the chair of repentance.
“Fairy,” she said softly; but Fairy took no


notice beyond dropping- her slate and cover-
ing her face with her hands. “ Come to me,
I want to talk to you.”
She slipped off the chair and came slowly,
her face still hidden, her small shoulders heav-
ing. Alicia drew her close.
“Tell me you are sorry,” she said softly,
“and we will get the copy done and forget
all about it.”
For a moment Fairy stood silently, her head
bowed, then with a sudden jerk she sprang
away and dropped her hands, her eyes spark-
ling, her face working with unholy joy at her
success.
“Ho! ’ she said exultantly, spinning- round
on her toes and clasping her hands in an
ecstasy; “you thought I were crying and all
the time I were laughing. An’ you never
knowed, ’cos I covered my eyes and wag-gled
my soljers. Ho! ho! ho!”
From that moment the fountain of Alicia’s
lovingkindness was a sealed thing. All the
sympathy she had was for herself and those
who shared the burden with her. For all
their sakes, and the sacred cause of freedom,
the spirit of the tyrant must be broken.
The time for dismissal arrived. The children


rose, said “Good afternoon”, like the little
ladies and gentlemen they were, and prepared
to file out, Fairy with the rest.
“Where are you going, Fairy?” asked
Alicia pleasantly, though she could feel her
teeth grinding one upon the other.
“ Home,” said Fairy, deceived by the silki-
ness of the tone into dancing out on a cheaply
won victory.
“Then you have done your copy!” said
Alicia with evident pleasure. “Bring it to
me, and let me see it before you go.”
Fairy looked out of the tail of her eye, warily.
“ I haven’t done it,” she said slowly.
“That is a pity,” said Alicia; “you will not
be able to go.”
“I can’t stay by myself,” she argued hope-
fully.
“ I will stay with you.”
She looked depressed, then her eyes
brightened. “Me muvver told me ’spressly I
were to hurry home, ’cos she were going out,
and she always likes to kiss me first.”
“ I am sorry, but she will be disappointed.”
Alicia’s voice grew more and more silky; there
was something hypnotic about it.
“She will be waiting for me.”


— - - .. _ r
jbL L i\\ ’ '"'X Jr * v \_ -
dn I
Hk * ,’:i^ : - ■ .<
j 1 I
<»■»
r < /• . "
c78
ALICIA AND FAIRY BARNES




“Then you must make your excuses when
you return, I dare say she will understand.”
For the first time Fairy seemed to be at sea;
her wits deserted her, and she fell back upon
defiance.
So for the long afternoon they sat in the
silence of the empty schoolroom. Alicia, as if
there were not a human being near, wrapt in
the entrancing tale of A?m Wood ’, whose kind
aunt gave her a piece of print to make her doll
a shift; Fairy defiant, curious, gloomy, and
hilarious by turns, bringing up occasional slates-
ful of markings that make Alicia’s fingers itch
with unsatisfied longings.
But as the sun dropped lower and lower
there were signs of tiring. The marks in some
instances were beginning faintly to resemble
letters; only faintly, but they held out promise
of better things if the day would but last long
enough.
At last, when the final streak of sunlight had
disappeared behind the schoolhouse for the day,
Fairy held before Alicia’s weary eyes seven
lines of “A Cat and a Bat”, each one of which
was more beautiful than the other; while on
the reverse side the inscription, “Miss Fairy
Barnes”, in finest copperplate, rose up as a


stately monument to mark the struggles of two
powerful opponents, and the ultimate victory of
one.
They parted at the gate, Fairy the vanquished
hopping and skipping on her way. Alicia the
victorious walking with slow and sober foot-
steps.
Terry fell upon her as she came in at the
door.
“Oh!” she cried with a little cry of relief,
“ I never knew I loved you so much till I had
to spend the whole of this blessed day alone.
Where have you been? Why are you so late?
I feel like a cat that’s been shut up in a cup-
board.”
Alicia dropped into a chair by the tea table.
“I met someone who kept me,” she said
solemnly; “I couldn’t get away.”
“Who was it?” asked Terry with interest.
“ Miss Fairy Barnes,” said Alicia.
Terry knitted her brows.
“ I’ve never heard of her,’’ she said thought-
fully.
“No,” said Alicia, “but you’re going to as
soon as I’ve had some tea.”


CHAPTER XII
Terry Elaborates a Scheme
It was the fourth Sunday of their life in the
rooms. Alicia was busy in the kitchen stuffing
a rabbit for dinner, Terry was in the bedroom
mending her shoes with number-ten cotton —
there was no thread in the basket. Soon she
would have to find the money for them to be
mended professionally; in the meantime she
wanted to go out, and one must manage some-
how. She sighed, and a line furrowed itself
across her forehead. She had answered so
many advertisements and received so few replies.
One that looked so desirable on paper—even
though it was teaching—Terry had tramped
out to answer in person. She found a delight-
ful villa, a dressed-up child, and a mother who
offered sixteen pound a year salary, then, as if
repenting her generosity, she explained that she
did not pay for holidays. Terry thanked her
and walked the two miles back to the station


pondering - on life in general. Even a billet like
that would be taken up by somebody. And
still she was waiting, and while she w T aited her
shoes wore out terribly quickly. She sighed
again.
“ Bother!” said Alicia in the other room.
“What’s the matter?” called Terry.
“I’ve forgotten the big needle and cotton
for sewing the stuffing into the rabbit.”
“You can’t have it for a minute,” said Terry.
“ I’m using it to mend my shoes with. I’ll
bring it when I’ve finished.”
“Well, hurry up! I can’t do anything else
till the rabbit’s in.”
Terry finished off the cotton carefully, cut it
close down to the shoe, and, threading the
needle again with white cotton, she carried it
to Alicia.
“You have put a lot of stuffing in; that’s
right,” she said; “it makes it go so much
further. It’s a good thing we like rabbits, isn’t
it?” she went on thoughtfully.
“A very good thing,” answered Alicia;
“it’s as nice as chicken any day, I think.”
“ And fancy buying a chicken with two legs,
two wfings, and a body that cuts into four large
pieces, for fivepence.” She put her head on


one side and looked at the rabbit critically.
“ I think you ought to have turned in the selv-
edges, Alicia; he’d look much smarter on the
dish.”
Alicia went on with her w r ork, ignoring Terry’s
chaff, and Terry continued more seriously:
“ It’s odd what a difference a point of view
makes. When we were rich enough to call
three good meals a day a necessity, and not a
luxury, it would have seemed indecent to have
thought about what we were going to eat.
Now” she lowered her voice, and spoke
slowly and emphatically—“now, I just live for
Sunday.”
“ It’s true,” she nodded, talking more to
herself than to Alicia. “ Half the week I’m
looking back upon the last dinner, and the
other half I’m looking forward to the next. Six
days out of the seven the prospect of it helps
the bloater paste down, and the seventh is a
morning of quivering anticipation, separated
from an afternoon of happy retrospect by one
hour of perfect enjoyment, and ended by a sleep
in which as often as not I fight my battles over
again. Oh, it is exquisite to be greedy!” She
stopped, intoxicated by the imagery of her
speech.


“Go on,” urged Alicia. Terry in this vein
always got her loyal admiration.
“If you are really greedy,” she said, “you
can get pleasure out of merely talking about
food. And it is so wonderful how life, by
denying you your expression in one direction,
forces you to develop yourself in another. For
instance, people who are blind have a more
sensitive ear and touch than people who can
see.”
“What’s that got to do with it?” asked
Alicia.
“This: life, fortune, chance, anything you
like to call it, has denied me expression through
the ordinary medium of a banking account.”
“That’s quite true,” said Alicia.
“ But by a beautiful law, the law of compen-
sation, it has made it up to me in other ways.”
“ How?” asked Alicia.
“ It has sharpened my intelligence to such a
fine point ”
“ I haven’t noticed,” said Alicia softly.
“That’s because your own wants rubbing
up, ’ replied Terry. “It has sharpened my
intelligence to such a fine point that my brain
is able to procure for me what my money can’t.”
“Inasmuch as ?” asked Alicia, turning


the rabbit very carefully in the saucepan and
closing down the lid again.
“By the application of that intelligence to
small everyday practicalities I have been able to
work out a scheme by which I can live like a
fighting cock for next to nothing a day.”
Terry waited long enough to give Alicia time
for a courteous enquiry, but as none was forth-
coming she went on without it.
“The beauty of it is, that while it will cost
me little or nothing for my keep, the burden
will fall just as lightly upon everyone else in-
cluded in the scheme.” She stopped. “You
might ask me what it is, Alicia.”
“I’ve been waiting impatiently for you to
come to the point,” said Alicia, “and wonder-
ing how much longer you were going to skirt
round it. Get on.”
“I didn’t think you seemed interested,” said
Terry reproachfully.
“Of course I’m interested,” said Alicia,
“horribly interested!”
“Thank you!” exclaimed Terry. “Well,
the plan is this: Breakfast, which is an inex-
pensive meal, I provide myself.”
“There’s nothing- new in that,” interrupted
Alicia,


“Perhaps not; but I’m not going to bother
altering a thing that won’t pay for altering.”
“ Sorry!” said Alicia. “Goon.”
“The idea for lunch came to me through
an illustrated paper and my own observation.
Once when I cooked a dinner I wondered how
it was that I couldn’t eat it afterwards. There’s
a chance for a poor joke there,” she said, as
Alicia, with a snigger, opened her mouth to
speak; “but I’m glad to see you aren’t taking
it.” Alicia closed her mouth again hypnoti-
cally, and Terry continued: “I supposed it
was because I had taken in the fumes of it
through my skin and up my nose. Then
after that I saw a picture in a paper of a man
standing outside a cookshop; he was saying;
‘My goodness, I wish I ’ad a bit of bread
to eat along with that smell!’ and it made me
think I had been right, but it didn’t occur to
me that I’d have an opportunity of putting
it to a practical use so soon.”
“ But how are you going to manage?” asked
Alicia; “you can’t go out into the street and
do it.”
“The little balcony under the bathroom
window is just over the kitchen of the people
underneath. They evidently dine in the middle


of the day, and from the incense which rises
I should say they do themselves pretty well.
I shall simply take my bread out on to the
balcony at the first whiff, and I won’t leave
till the oven plays ‘ God Save the King You
can think of me doing it when you are at the
Barretts’ passing your plate up for the second
helping.”
“Poor Terry,” said Alicia; “I wish we
could take it turn about. It doesn’t seem
fair.”
“It’s quite fair,” said Terry valiantly. “You’re
a worker and I’m only an idler.”
“That isn’t your fault ” began Alicia.
“ No; but it’s true all the same. Now listen
to my idea for tea; I think it is a pretty good
one.”
“Yes?” questioned Alicia.
“I would borrow —I know it doesn’t sound
new, but it all depends upon the way it is
done. I would borrow, but in such small
quantities that the lender could not allow
herself to be paid back without feeling she
had forfeited her self-respect. I would always
offer, but I would do it shyly, as if I were
afraid she might be insulted; and if she didn’t
begin by feeling insulted, something would


make her feel she ought to be, and me and
the pinch of tea would go back home together
laughing, because we’d know that all the time
we had never intended to be separated.”
Alicia stopped in the middle of her work
and watched Terry with eyes overflowing with
admiration.
“And dinner ?”
“By that time,” said Terry magnificently,
“I should feel I could afford to throw the
money about a bit. I should wash my face
and hands and go off to dine with all my
friends who didn’t live more than sixpence
away from town. I’d take them in turn, and
alphabetically, so that, if they were to compare
notes afterwards, not one would be able to say
she had been neglected for another. You’ve
got to be tremendously consistent and careful
of detail when you embark on a system,” she
said. “One false step, and the whole thing
is in ruins about your ears. People are so
sensitive when it comes to be a matter of
precedence.”
“You can lay the table now,” said Alicia,
peering into the saucepan. “I think the
rabbit is done.”
Ten minutes later they seated themselves at


a table on which reposed the rabbit roasted
a golden brown, and surrounded by slices of
lemon and little rolls of bacon. A tureen
divided in the middle gave shelter to four
white potatoes and a liberal allowance of
green mint-scented peas, and bread sauce
lurked near by in a dish of smaller propor-
tions. Terry gave a glance round the table
and breathed a sigh of satisfaction.
“My scheme is a good one,” she said, “but
it comes out all the fresher for having a holiday
on Sunday; and I’m inclined to think I do
too,” she added, looking affectionately at the
rabbit.


CHAPTER XIII
A Visit to the Major
“ Let’s go and see Sarah and the Major on
our way,” said Terry, as they jumped on to
the dummy of the tram. They were going
to the Barretts’ for supper, and had a standing
invitation, which amounted to an entreaty, from
Major Trevor to come to the cottage whenever
they were able. He had grown to look for
their visits, and to be disappointed if the time
went over without one or the other putting in
an appearance. Terry’s visits were of neces-
sity few and far between; there was nothing
but her own desire to take her, and one
couldn’t spend sixpences unlimitedly in the
pursuit of pleasures when sixpences stood for
what they did. But Alicia, on her way from
school, sometimes stopped and had tea with
him. And sometimes, on the rare occasions
when he went to town he would call in upon


Terry and take her off to lunch, insisting* that
she saved his life by going with him.
If I eat alone, he said, “ I bolt my food
so quickly that every meal I take is a day off
my life; and I am not in such a hurry to go,
now I’ve got that garden,” he added with a
smile; “it is putting fresh strength into my
old tentacles, and growing new ones for me
as well.”
“But you can always talk to people if you
lunch at your club,” expostulated Terry, who
had the feeling that he was perhaps thinking
more of her than he was of himself.
A lot of fogies as old as myself, who growl
if you interrupt them in their soup,” he said
shamelessly. “I wi H g0 to my dub if yQu
don’t want to come with me, but it isn’t good
for me.” And Terry would laugh, and they
would go off together to some place where
they could sit quietly and watch the spectacle
of life moving round about them.
It was absorbing to Terry. To sit in the
great cool dining-room with the punkahs
waving rhythmically overhead, to hear the
hum of voices, and to watch the people com-
mg and going, meeting and greeting; and then
t0 g ?o7 a B f enVards t0 the P alm -shaded lounge, to


play with coffee while one watched the people
again as they loitered and gossiped in groups;
pretty girls in shady flowered hats and muslin
frocks; brown young men who looked as if
they spent most of their life in the saddle;
older men, less brown, but keener-faced, who
moved quietly, but with an eye to time, having
hung up their gowns and wigs in the Law
Courts close by, and come across to spend
a comfortable hour. There were prosperous
fathers and mothers who had brought their
muslin-frocked girls down from the station for
a month in town; men from the Exchange
entertaining visitors from a neighbouring state,
and forgetting finance for the moment as some-
one of interest rose from the chairs and passed
out. To Terry, emerging for the occasion from
her quiet little corner among the housetops, it
was like a pageant, and it thrilled and stimu-
lated her without making her envious. Some-
times, it is true, when she saw a girl of her
own age looking particularly fresh and dainty,
she would watch her rather wistfully, wonder-
ing what it would feel like to have such things
as a matter of course; but they were so far
beyond her that she would shake off her
longings and turn her thoughts quickly to


something else. Yet it had its effect, and in
the rig-ht way. It made her more exact about
the putting on of her own washed cottons, and
more careful about the dressing of her hair.
It did not rest with her to be beautiful or
sumptuous in her frocking, but it was her
own fault if she were not trim. Desire for
the lovely things she saw made her feel she
must at any rate be as “right” as she could,
and the effort strengthened her, beside making
her better to look upon.
To-day the Major was sitting out upon the
veranda, enjoying a pipe and a magazine.
Every now and then he would lift his eyes
from his paper and look out dreamily over
the garden; it was good to rest one’s rather
tired old bones in such a quiet haven, and
the heart, which on occasions behaved so
strangely that it was a surprise to the Major
when he found himself through the attack
and going about as usual, seemed as if it
had almost forgotten its evil tricks. It was
a beneficent Providence which had directed
his steps along that side street three months
or was it three years?—ago. Time went so
slowly and so quickly, without events to mark
it, and life was so pleasantly uneventful in


this little corner. His thoughts turned to
Terry and Alicia. “Those dear children,”
he said to himself very tenderly; “and I
turned them out!” They had fine courageous
hearts, and bore themselves gallantly. He
had tried, in quiet, unobtrusive ways, to help
them in their march. Sometimes it was a
night at the theatre, finishing up with a
supper of Terry’s beloved oysters afterwards,
sometimes a book, or a box of flowers from
their joint garden. One day arrived a chicken,
roasted by Sarah, to which was tied a card
inscribed: “With Major Trevor’s compliments
to his respected landladies, and may he share
a dish with them this evening? And at six
o’clock there stood the Major on the door
mat, a parcel of salads under one arm and
a cake under the other. No one could dress
the salad but himself, he said gravely, and
he made the girls stand by and watch him
closely while he did it. There were many
joys in life if one kept one’s heart fresh, and
made up one’s mind to allow no corroding
bitternesses to take hold. To live as simply
as one could, and to refrain from judging;
to remember that we pass this way but once,
and owe it to each other to be as courteous


and as kind as possible; to be grateful for
the joys that have been ours, and not to
whine if they are taken away; that is how
one could help to make a world fragrant.
But it was not always easy. The Major
shaded his eyes with his hand, and sat very
still, as a memory came to him. There were
two graves, one of a woman in an English
church) ard, and another of a boy in a far-off
Indian cemetery. His wife had died when
the boy was born, and the baby had been
left with her people to be brought up. All
the early years of his life the father had denied
himself the joy of his child’s companionship
that he might grow strong and sturdy in
his own native element; two years after he
joined him in India the boy died of fever. In
spite of his attitude towards life the Major felt
at times as if he himself were dead, or at best
only moving in a dream. Pain taught one to
understand the suffering of others, but at the
same time the overwhelming burden of it
numbed almost to insensibility.
And now had happened something that
seemed as if it were setting all the dry bones
moving. Through the merest chance there
had come across his path two young vital


things, who in the stress of their living called
to him to live again. It was the old familiar
battle-cry ringing out across the ages, and the
soldier in him rose out of his sleep to answer.
When one was young one said: “Because of
everything it is good to be alive ”; when one
was old one said: “In spite of everything
it is good to be alive ”. After all, courage
was a great possession; the youngsters should
not outdo him; he took his hand away from
his eyes, and there was a fire in the tired face
and a whimsical lift in the corners of his mouth.
Someone was moving in the room inside. He
called:
“Is that you Sarah?”
“Yes, sir, I’m bringing your tea out here.”
She put a little table beside him, and spread
it with a cloth. Whatever objections Sarah
may have originally had to the Major’s ad-
vent, they seemed to have gone like morning
dew in a hot sun. Her master might have
been her child, she guarded him so watchfully,
and even tenderly. There was something about
the Major that moved one to service; perhaps
it was his ready courtesy to others that bred
it.
He looked rather longingly towards the gate.


“ Isn't it a little early yet?” he asked.
“No,” said Sarah promptly, “it’s past the
time.”
“I thought perhaps if we waited a little,”
began the Major.
“Yes, I know,” said Sarah; “ye’re wanting
to wait for Miss Terry and Miss Alicia. It’s
as likely as not they aren’t coming, and there
ye are going past yer tea-time for nothing.”
“They very often do come on Sundays,”
pleaded the Major again.
“Well then, they know what time tea is, and
they should get here for it; they’re not babies.”
Major Trevor watched her as she talked, and
a smile came over his face.
“I believe sometimes you think that I am
one,” he said.
“ All men are, more or less,” answered Sarah,
smoothing the cloth, and setting down the
cups and saucers with decision. “My mother
always said so, and she ought to know, for she
’ad two ’usbands and seven sons.”
“ That is a pretty fair apprenticeship to philo-
sophy,” said the Major with amusement; “her
advice ought to have been worth having. What
else did she tell you?”
“Never let a man wait beyond time for ’is


meals,” said Sarah, quoting - ; “they weren’t
born to stand it, and it’s bringing trouble on
yourself to think you can make ’em. If they’re
well, and ye do it, it makes ’em too ’igh-spirited,
which is another word for breakin’ the crockery.
If they’re poorly, an’ you do it, then they get
low-spirited, and the ’ouse isn’t fit to live in till
they’ve got rid of their grievance, which you
may reckon won’t be any sooner than they
can ’elp. She used to say: ‘lt’s safer to get
between a snake and its hole than a man and
his dinner’, and from what I’ve seen I think
she was about right.” Sarah pulled out the
fringe of a d’oyley, and put the plate close
to the Major’s elbow; there were some cakes
on it that he liked.
“But you have never noticed anything like
that in me, Sarah?” He asked it gravely,
although his eyes w r ere twinkling.
“ I’ve never kept you waiting,” answ r ered
Sarah without a smile, and the Major laughed
outright.
“I’m going in to make the tea now,” said
Sarah, and she went back to the house.
The gate into the road banged, and the
Major craned his head forward. Terry and
Alicia came up the walk and through the


wicket into the garden. The Major went to
meet them.
“Here you are!” he said triumphantly.
“I’ve just been having an argument with
Sarah as to whether you were coming or not,
and she has at the same time been giving
me some of her mother’s home-truths about
men.”
\\ hat department did she discourse upon
to you?” asked Terry.
“The commissariat,” said the Major.
“That’s a very useful one,” said Alicia.
“We know it off by heart. Terry and I
always say that if we were to marry after all
that Sarah has told us about her mother and
the two husbands and seven sons, we wouldn’t
be brave, we’d be foolhardy.”
Sarah came out bearing the tea, and her
welcome was tempered by her dislike of being
proved a false prophet. Also she looked at
the special cakes with a jealous eye. They
had been made for the Major, not for a pair
of hungry children, and he must eat them all.
Terry and Alicia w'ere children in her eyes long
before they guests, and, having taken ab-
solute possession of the Major, her natural
instinct was ready to be outraged at the first


sign of any infringement upon the rights of
her adopted child.
The Major, unconscious of this, and feeling
he could honour Sarah no more than by press-
ing her masterpieces upon his visitors, was
urging them to keener effort.
“These are delicious,” he said; and the
girls, knowing them of old, agreed with him.
“Are there any more?” he asked of Sarah,
who, giving a reluctant assent, departed in
disgust to find the balance.
“This is lovely,” cried Terry delightedly.
“When we were little we were never allowed
to have more than two of these at a time, and
only then as a very great treat. It will be sheer
pain to Sarah to have to stand by and watch
them melt before her eyes.”
“It depends on w r ho melts them,” remarked
Alicia with discernment. “You’ll have to eat
two right off,” she said to the Major, “and
keep her standing there while you do it, or
else she will never forgive us. And you must
say ‘No” when you’re asked to have another,
Terry.”
“Why should I?” said Terry wickedly. “I
haven’t had half enough yet.”
“You’ve had more than you’ve ever had


- L " k, -jfe 4..JL JIL « v|| * .*
- I * £«SL
V *V j I Ji 4
| *41 |i| if |l EyAf^b^^SyT
»-. -J
ARE THERE ANY MORE? 1 HE ASKED OF SARAH v




before,” said Alicia; and the Major sat back
and enjoyed himself. Youth was very invigor-
ating-.
Sarah came back slowly.
“These are all I can find,” she said grudg-
ingly.
“Are you sure you looked in the tin in
the left-hand corner of the right-hand dresser
drawer?” asked Terry innocently.
Sarah refused to reply, and Alicia took the
plate from her.
“Have one,” she said, offering it to the
Major.
“Thank you!” said the Major, attacking it
with evident enjoyment.
“Terry? She held the plate towards her
sister.
“Thank you!” said Terry, putting her hand
out.
Involuntarily Alicia withdrew the plate—it
wasn t fair of Terry—but at the same moment
Terry seemed to have changed her mind, for
she let her hand fall into her lap.
No, I don t think I will,” she said lan-
guidly. “They make me feel rather ill.”
That was Sarah’s moment.
“No wonder,” she said feelingly; “any-


thing makes you ill when you eat too much
of it.” With that she retired to the kitchen.
They looked at each other; then they all
laughed.
“That’s one to Sarah,” said Terry, “and
a cake for me, to mend my wounded feelings.”
She helped herself. “ It’s a jolly world,” she
went on contentedly, forgetting in the plea-
sure of the moment that to-morrow was Mon-
day, and as yet she had found nothing to do.
“ It’s a very jolly world,” echoed the Major,
looking into the young faces before him and
then away to the garden. The sunshine seemed
to be everywhere.


CHAPTER XIV
Terry Entertains
Alicia was late. Terry put it down to Miss
Fairy Barnes again, and began her tea alone.
There was a knock upon the door; she opened
it. A young man stood in the passage hold-
ing a broken-nosed teapot.
“I’m sorry to bother,” he said, “but my
kettle has suddenly begun to leak, and I can’t
make tea. I would be very grateful to you if
you would give me a little hot water.”
In the calm glance that Terry gave him she
made a rapid survey, and the flag of her ap-
proval went up. One sometimes was mistaken
in one’s likes and dislikes, but never, if instinct
were strong, in one’s trusts; and Terry had
that primitive instinct—so strong in young
things for their protection—which leapt on
guard unconsciously at the first need of de-
fence. Why she knew, she didn’t know; but
that she knew, she knew.


Here was no feeling of defence; one did not
lock up one’s treasures against fellow creatures,
only against marauders—one did not think of
one’s treasures. But the fact that you didn’t
think, didn’t mean that your judgment was
lacking, only that you judged unconsciously.
Terry had no consciousness of judgment as
her eye travelled over the young man. Some-
thing she saw without seeing, and knew with-
out knowing, made simple speech a matter of
course. What struck her most forcibly was
that it was absurd to make tea in such a pot.
“You can’t make it in that,” she said, look-
ing at it pityingly. “ Come inside.”
“Yes, I can. I always do,” said the young
man.
It was a relief to find the attention switched
off himself to the teapot so quickly. He had
not been at all sure of what he would find the
other side of the door. When it turned out
to be something he had watched and wondered
about—knowing its habitation without know-
ing the exact number of its habitation —the
discovery was confusing. It was odd that he
should have picked upon the very door by
chance. Asking a complete stranger to make
your tea for you was one thing; finding that


stranger to be the lady of your thoughts was
another.
Terry’s interest in the teapot gave him time
to recover.
“ But it’s got no spout,” she said.
“It’s got a little,” he said, holding it up
and turning it round. “ It’s all right if you
know how to manage it.”
“I’m sorry’,” said Terry, “but I’ve just used
all the boiling water. You must wait a little
while; it won’t be long.” She turned to go
over to the kitchen, and an idea struck her.
“If you haven’t anyone waiting for you,”
she said, “ I can give you some tea here now.
Mine is already made.”
“Thank you!” he said hesitatingly. “You
are very good but ” He looked at the tea-
tray set for three.
“ It’s only my sister,” said Terry interpreting
his glance, “and I am afraid she will not come
now. You shall have hers, and if she comes
in we can easily make some more.”
“And the third cup?” he asked, seating
himself beside the table.
Terry laughed. “That is for the Angel
Guest,” she said. “I always lay one too
many, in case someone should come in. I say


it is a beautiful thought, but Alicia says it is
a form of laziness. She says I’m afraid of
having to get up to fetch another.”
He watched her talking and pouring out the
tea. She was just as nice as she looked, he
thought. He didn’t believe one could ever be
mistaken in faces, when they were such faces.
“ Have you lived here long?” asked Terry.
“I don’t remember seeing you before.”
“About a year,” he answered; “but I’m
in all day and out most evenings.”
“Oh!” said Terry, longing to ask why; they
were not most men’s hours.
“ I draw for the papers,” he explained.
“Oh!” said Terry again, tremendously in-
terested; “are you a black-and-white artist?”
“Yes.” The absorbed, searching gaze of
Terry’s eye was embarrassing. He bore it for
a while; then he laughed. “Shall I do?” he
asked rather diffidently.
Terry came to herself with a blush.
“I’m so sorry!” she said apologetically; “I
didn’t know I was doing it. But you don’t
look like an artist.”
“Perhaps I’m not,” he said, the smile still
in his eyes. “There are a good many who
make the same mistake about themselves.”


Terry Entertains
“ Wel , said Ten T in a relieved voice,
VV' ~t h6y d ° n ta " Wear lon §' hair and
V-necked blouses.”
He laughed again. “ But they don’t all,” he
' ** l know a ,ot of chaps who are rattling
good artists, and they look just like human
bemgs They wear linen collars, and they cut
heir hair, and they don’t make their clothes
themselves, or look as if they did. It’s gener-
ally the little ones, who are trying to get
noticed at any cost, ivho do those things.”
Terry listened, he had a nice voice, and
he sound of it gave her pleasure. It had
the same effect upon her as had certain com-
b. nations of notes on the piano. What odd,
interesting- things there were in life!
", h ’ S lUCk ? be a man > if one has to earn
ones living,” she sighed.
“Have you to do that?” he asked quickly.
t mTu m ' ght HaVe ex P ected 't, but it
roubled him. Working for a living often
meant clinging on to existence with your
nger nails, and there ivas that in him made
im ate to feel that any woman should have
to suffer the anxiety of that.
Terry nodded.
don’t think women ought to have to do


it,” he said, getting up from his seat and
moving about the room.
“I don’t mind the work,” said Terry rue-
fully. “It’s not being able to get any to do
that is the bother.”
“I know,” he said quickly. “I’ve done
some pretty long waits, and they aren’t easy.
One’s boots wear out so quickly while you’re
doing nothing, and, although you can make a
good many things, you can’t make your own
boots. And the trouble is that you must have
them, whoever pays.”
“Oh,” said Terry, clasping her hands across
her breast, “you’ve suffered from that too!
It makes me feel I’ve known you all my life.
“I should think I had,” he said; “often.”
“ Have you ever mended yours?” she asked
breathlessly.
“I was the only person who ever did for a
a long time,” he answered. “I made some
pretty good jobs of them too,” he went on.
“ I did mine the other day,” confided Terry.
“I did them with number ten cotton; but
they broke out again directly, even though I
stepped like a cat on a hot shovel to try and
save them.” The memory of herself gingerly
picking out the smooth places in the road,


and stepping off the tramcars like an old
gentleman with gout, came upon her, and she
laughed softly. The young man watched her;
she had spirit, this jester girl.
“Cottons no good,” he said gravely; “you
want thread and cobblers’ wax. Next time
they want doing tell me, and I will put them
right if its to be done; I’ve got everything for
the purpose in my rooms.”
Thank you! said 1 erry, just as gravely.
“I will remember.”
After he had gone she sat looking out over
the housetops to the bay. The sun had set,
leaving a sky of violet and rose, and the masts
of the ships that lay at anchor were shrouded
in the soft haze that comes at the end of a
Jong, hot day. Lights began to twinkle in the
windows of the big hotel—it was the hotel
where Terry and the Major lunched together
and suddenly, as it does in that part of the
world, the darkness came down and covered
the city. Terry looked out upon the velvety
night and felt the throb of the world in her
own heartbeats. Oh, it was wonderful to be
alive!
There was the click of a key in the latch
and the door opened.


ii Hullo, where’s Terry? Why is it all in
darkness?” Alicia came in peeringly, followed
by Ella and Charles Barrett.
“I am here,” said Terry’s voice from the
window. She found the matches, and, lighting
the gas, stood blinking at them. “Its very
nice to see you,” she said delightedly. “What
made you think of coming?”
Ella put her parcels down upon the table;
Charles looked at Terry.
“ That’s our supper,” he said. “We bought
it on the way —sliced beef and ham and toma-
toes, and you’ve got to act.”
Terry looked from one to the other, Alicia
went off to the kitchen to prepare the meal,
and Charles, having delivered himself, followed
inquisitively. “What does he mean?” she
asked of Ella.
“Oh, Terry,” said Ella beseechingly,
“Maxy’s gone and got measles, and there’s
no one but you to play Letty! You will do it,
won’t you?” She picked up a little roll from
the table. “This is the part; it isn’t a bit
long. You’ll be able to learn it in a night,
and Charles and I will go through it with you
after supper.”
“ But ” said Terry feebly.


“ That s all right,” said Ella joyfully.
“Charles,” she called in exultant tones, “she
will do it; it’s all right.”
“ But ” said Terry again in a dazed way.
Charles came from behind the screen.
“That’s my brave little Terry,” he said
kindly. “Come and sit beside me while I
learn you your piece.”
Terry sat down helplessly.
“Terry,” said Alicia as they were going to
bed, “whom did you have with you for tea?”
Terry gave a start; she was wrapped in the
contemplation of her part.
“An artist,” she said; “an artist who lives
in the other corridor, and whose kettle had
gone holey. Instead of giving boiling water,
I offered your tea, which was already made.”
“What was she like?” asked Alicia with
interest.
“It wasn’t a she, it was a he,” replied Terry,
dividing her hair in half, and plaiting one half
slowly and carefully.
“Well, what was he like?” asked Alicia
again.
“He had a linen collar and short hair, and
a teapot with a broken spout,” said Terry


dreamily, “and he mends his boots with waxed
linen thread.”
“ That sounds thrilling - ,” said Alicia. “What
is his name?”
Terry felt as if she had suddenly been
smacked.
“I don’t know,” she said.
“Then I don’t think it’s proper,’’said Alicia
stoutly.
“ I forg-ot,” called Terry, when the light was
out; “ I do know his name,” she paused.
“Well, what is it?” asked Alicia.
“Guest,” said Terry.
“ Guest?” repeated Alicia. “ I wonder if he
is one of the Henry Guests of Brig'hton?
“No,” said Terry suavely, “he isn’t; he’s
one of the Angel Guests that the extra cup and
saucer belongs to. You’ve heard me speak of
them?”
There was a sound which might have been a
word and it mightn’t. Terry did not press the
point, and the silence was not broken again,
except by a chuckle, which certainly did not
come from Alicia.
At a late hour a young man rose from his
easel and stretched his arms above his head.


Looking- round for some matches to light his
pipe with, his eye caught a little tin kettle
perched on the edge of the stove. He picked
it up, and was about to put it in the waste-
paper basket, when suddenly he stopped and
looked at it rather tenderly.
“You’re a jolly bad bargain as a kettle,” he
said softly, “but you’ve done me a good turn
to-day.” Then he put it carefully away on a
top shelf, and went to bed.


CHAPTER XV
Terry Gets Her Chance
A week later Terry sat with her chin resting
on her hands and her elbows on the table; she
was studying her part, and was not anxious
to be interrupted. Because of that everything
seemed to be happening this morning—at least
everything that meant breaking off in one’s
work to answer a door. The next person
should knock and go away unsatisfied.
She went on reading; the part was an amus-
ing one, and not long. As she read she visual-
ized, and in her imagination she tried the
situations half a dozen different ways, to get
what she felt would be the right interpretation
of each. To act, and to act seriously, must be
enthralling; she would make this part the first
stepping-stone to a career. It seemed ridicu-
lous to call amusing oneself in this fashion
work. And to be paid heavily for it! She
felt almost apologetic for taking the salary that


the manager of her dreams was pressing upon
her.
There was a knock upon the door. She rose
in her chair, then, remembering - her resolve, sat
down again. The knock was repeated. Terry
felt impelled towards the door, and kept her
seat with difficulty. It was partly curiosity,
and partly a fear that she might be turning
away a chance of work, that urged her. The
next knock got her; she opened the door.
“ Does Miss Watson live here?”
“No,” said Terry as politely as she could;
“she lives at No. 27.” Then she shut the door
and began again.
At the next knock Terry bounded from her
chair in exasperation, and was at the door
almost before the man had taken his hand
away.
“To take the meter, please,” he said, rather
astonishedly.
The bill was heavier than usual—it generally
was—and Terry went back to her study carry-
ing a fainter heart within her than she had
begun the morning with. To owe was so
nerve-destroying!
When a heavy footstep stopped at her door
the next time she sat quite tig'ht. It sounded


like the caretaker. She was not interested in
him; he never came unless it was to bring a
bill for services, and she did not want any of
those just at this moment.
There was the sound of a letter being pushed
under the door, and the footsteps died away
down the corridor. Terry looked; it was a
stamped letter. She went and picked it up,
turning the envelope over in her hands and
examining the writing. She didn’t know it,
yet she seemed to have seen it before. She
opened it.
After she had read it she stood quite still for
a moment, then she gave a little cry of delight
and danced about the room. It was from
Mrs. Hotham; one of her girls had left her.
Would Terry call that afternoon about five
o’clock?
Would Terry call? Would a bee sip honey!
There was no more thought of a career with
fame in the offing; here was work now, and it
meant shoes that could be paid for with ready
money. She looked at the gas bill which had
so suddenly lost its power to terrify, and she
felt as if a load had been lifted from her head,
a band loosened from her heart. Ten shillings
a week —that was what Mrs. Hotham offered


—made all the difference between poverty and
affluence. It would pay the gas bills, buy her
clothes, and leave something over for Alicia.
Ihe very kettle sang for joy with her as she
prepared her lunch. Oh, if there only some-
one to whom she could tell her good luck!
And Providence, which seemed to have sud-
denly taken a fancy to Terry, sent someone ;
for the next person to whom she opened the
door was the artist. He stood on the mat
looking very solemn, and a kettle was in his
hand.
“I know it seems like a made-up thing,”
he said in an awed voice, “but the new kettle’s
gone the same way as the last. There’s some-
thing sinister about it.” He came into the
room, and they stood together examining it
intently.
“It’s very odd,” said Terry. “Is it a new
one?”
“It was sold to me for that,” he said per-
plexedly. “ I can’t make it out. I’ve given it
all the care and attention possible, yet the last
one only lived a month, and this has gone in a
week. It’s as if an evil spirit were hanging
round to blast them all in their infancy. I’ll
have to boil my tea in a paper bag if this goes


on; I can’t afford it.” He looked at Terry with
knitted brows, as if she could perhaps solve the
mystery.
“What do you mean by every care and
attention?” she asked, a light dawning upon
her.
“Well, I empty it every night, I never let
water stand in it when it isn’t being used ”
“That’s what has killed it,” she said tri-
umphantly, putting her finger on the canker.
“I once lost a dear little kettle the same
way,” she continued, “and it taught me. If
you are prepared to wipe the inside of it dry
every time, you can afford to take liberties
like that, but unless you are you must always
leave it full, or else it will rust into pinholes in
a night.”
He looked relieved.
“I’m glad there’s nothing occult about it,”
he said; “ I was beginning to wonder if I were
a bad influence. You’re sure that’s it?”
“ Sure,” said Terry with conviction; then she
remembered her news. “ I think I’ve got
something to do,” she said; “isn’t it splen-
did!”
“Splendid!” he echoed, looking down at her
happy face, and deep in his heart wishing- it


were not true. He would like this jester girl
not to have to work.
“I’ve got to go down and see about it this
afternoon at five o’clock,” she said. Then
suddenly a fear overtook her. “Suppose I
should not get it!” she said with a catch of
her breath and a queer little contraction of her
heart.
“Of course you’ll get it!” he said, with
such intense belief that Terry felt as if he were
giving it to her there and then.
“And if I get it shall I just put my head
in and tell you on my way?” asked Terry. It
wasn t quite on her way, but turning into
another corridor for a moment was as good
as on one s way when one wanted it to be.
“Oh, would you!” His face glowed, and
his voice was a little unsteady with the pleasure
that came with her words. He was being
included, treated as a comrade; and but a few
days before he had gone to his work content
because he had crossed her on the stairs—the
world of his thoughts grew suddenly ablaze
with coloured lights. “I would like it very
much,” he added quietly.
“Very well, I will,” said Terry. “It’ll be
between half-past five and six, I suppose.”


“I am not going out,” he said, which was
quite true —now.
Terry did a little bit of everything till half-
past four; then she got ready. It was no use
trying to settle to anything with such a prospect
dazzling your eyes and distracting your brain,
you could only make the moments dribble away
till the great moment of all. Looking at the
clock was very little use —it never seemed to
move; and deliberately keeping your eyes off it
was only an excuse for taking a glance at it
again to see what had happened in the meantime.
There is nothing in all the world so contrary as
a clock when you are consulting it on matters
of vital importance. If one is late, the hands
race round like a paper windmill in a tornado.
If you are early—hours early—for every minute
they crawl forward they seem to slip ten back.
If you want happiness or comfort at such times
you certainly won’t go to a clock face for it.
Terry watched it till she wanted to whip it.
At last it was time to start. She give a final
glance at herself in the mirror—turning round
slowly to see that she was perfectly trim and
tidy—and buttoning on her gloves she went
along the corridor and down the staircase into
the street.


Her heart was thumping hard as she came
within sight of the tea-room, and twenty yards
away from it she walked very slowly, gathering
herself together with an effort as she entered
the door.
She stood for a moment looking about her
bewilderedly. The room was crowded, and
everybody seemed to be talking at once. It
was the busiest hour of the afternoon, and she
felt lost in the whirl of it. A girl with a tray
caught sight of her standing alone, and came
to the rescue. She was a pretty girl in a green
cotton frock, and dainty white cuffs and collar,
but she looked rather tired, and she seemed to
be in a tremendous hurry. She looked at Terry
questioningdy.
“I have come to see Mrs. Hotham,” said
Terry shyly.
“Oh yes! she’s expecting you. Come with
me.” The girl led her through what seemed
to be miles of tables, to an office at the end of
the room. In answer to the knock a voice
called “Come in!” and she found herself alone
with Mrs. Hotham. After a minute’s conver-
sation Terry’s nervousness vanished. Her shy-
ness was never more than momentary, and it
was due more to imaginativeness than natural


timidity. When she came face to face with
the thing her mind had been magnifying and
embellishing, and probably distorting as well,
she regained her balance; to meet it was like
finding the person behind the voice that had
been agitating only because of its formless-
ness.
Mrs. Hotham, who was an alert businesslike
woman of about fifty, dressed plainly in black,
put Terry through her facings in a way that
showed there was no time to be lost. Indeed
the venture had grown every day since its be-
ginning, and a less capable woman might have
lost her head. It had become “the thing”
to foregather at Mrs. Hotham’s Tea House,
and, although the room was a very large one, it
was necessary to book your tables beforehand
if you did not want to run the risk of being
turned away. A good deal of money had been
sunk in it, and, while its prosperity was assured
under the present conditions, Mrs. Hotham
knew that the continuation of that prosperity
depended very much on the standard of excel-
lence being maintained, and the keeping up
of that, coupled with the responsibility of the
business side of the work, was making the lines
in her face deeper, and the set of her rather thin


mouth sterner. It was no pretty game to be
played by amateurs.
“You are not afraid of hard work?” she said
to Terry with a smile; “there is a good deal of
it here.”
“No,” said Terry simply. Was anyone ever
afraid of anything that went along with his
desire?
“ 1 want someone who is not going into it
for amusement,” continued Mrs. Hotham “ I
Have taken only those girls who work because
t ey have to, not because they are bored at
home; and I don’t think that any girl, unless
she is strong-, should attempt it.”
“I have never had anything the matter
with me in my life except measles and whoop.
■ng cough,” said Terry. “I am quite, quite
strong. n
. “ You look ver y strong,” she said approv-
ingly- Terry’s face pleased her, and her
manner was good. “ How soon can you come
Do you think you could manage to
i ” ,ta '» °»
“I could try,’’said Terry. “ This is Wednes-
day; perhaps 1 could get one done.” And after
discussion it was decided Terry was to begin


work on Monday. She went home treading
on air.
Taking another turning when she got to the
top floor, she stopped at a door on which a
card was pinned. The card bore the name
“Richard Curtis”. The man who lived within
was The Angel Guest.
“ I’ve just come to tell you,” said Terry,
with a radiant face, “that I’ve got it, and
I’m going to begin on Monday. Isn t it
lovely?” f
“ Splendid! I knew you would. But won t
you come in?” He held the door open, look-
ing at her eagerly.
“ Just for a moment, then,” said Terry. “ 1
must get back to tell Alicia.” She walked
into the room. “How nice this is! I’ve never
been in a studio before. Did you do all those
things?” she asked, looking with wondering
admiration at the walls, which were covered
with sketches of all sorts and sizes, charcoal
heads, studies of hands and feet, little glimpses
of the town done in pen-and-ink, figure studies
in chalk. There were canvases with their
faces turned to the wall, and portfolios full of
drawings. Terry, who had reached her zenith
at school with a painstaking but fairly unfaith-


ful copying of “ Dignity and Impudence ” and
a study from life of an apple, two bananas,
and a bunch of grapes, grouped on three
books, beside which stood a wineglass and a
fruit knife, felt dumbfounded; to her it looked
like the work of several lifetimes, yet he
couldn’t be more than twenty-seven, and he
looked truthful.
He laughed. “ Yes, and some more besides.
W ill you come and look at them properly some
day?”
“ I would like to very much, but it would
have to be soon. I begin work on Monday,
remember.”
“As soon as ever you can come. Would
to-morrow do?”
“ \ es, I think so,” said Terry, considering;
“that is, if Alicia isn’t doing anything. I may
bring Alicia?”
Of course, I meant to ask her if she cared
to come,” he said.
“ I know she’d love it,” said Terry.
W ell, then, you will come to tea with me
to-morrow; that is settled.” He held the door
open.
es, said Terry again. “Thank you
very much!”


After she had gone he closed the door and
stood for a while in the middle of the room,
then he went back to his work.
The Angel Guest was in that state of mind
which made tea-time to-morrow seem quite
one hundred years ahead.


CHAPTER XVI
Terry Tells Alicia
Terry found the door open; she swept into
the room like a whirlwind. Alicia was sitting
onthe floor trimming a hat. She looked up.
Pig. she said, going back to her work
again. Terry had promised to have tea ready
by the time she got home, so that they could
have it and go out together directly. When
Alicia arrived, rather late, at five o’clock she
found the tray but no Terry. That was cause
enough for a grievance. She had wanted
Terry to help her choose her hat.
Terry swirled about the room for a while,
and at last dropped on to the divan.
“Oh,” she said, pressing the palms of her
hands together and chanting her words in a
kind of soft sing-song, “this has been such
a day for me, such a day, such a day, such a
day!” 7
Alicia sniffed. She wasn’t going to be
166


danced out of her rights like that, and she
had a right to her grievance. Terry came
out of her ecstasy to make her apologies,
which she did in her own way.
“Stop looking like that at once,” she said
energetically, “and try to have a face like a
Christian. I want to tell you something.”
“Well?” said Alicia aloofly.
“ I’ve got a job at last,” she said, “a job,
a job, a job! On Monday I put on a clean
pinny and carry pies for money to the people
in Mrs. Hotham’s tea-room.”
Alicia put the hat down on the floor; there
was no pretence of indifference now.
“When did you hear about it?” she asked.
“You didn’t know anything this morning.”
“No,” said Terry; “a letter came about
twelve o’clock, asking me to go down to be
interviewed at five —that was why I couldn’t
wait for you; and I didn’t leave a message,
because 1 didn’t want to say anything till I
really knew. I went, I was seen, I con-
quered.” She swayed magnificently backwards
and forwards, like a mandarin, for a while in
silence, then sat up straight. “ Isn’t it a
good thing?”
“ I should think so,” said Alicia, looking


at Terry with interest. She would get Ella
Barrett to go in with her one day, and they
would make Terry wait on them. It would
be worth paying sixpence to order her about.
In her mind’s eye she saw Terry obediently
carrying back tea to be made stronger and
toast to be re-buttered, not daring to refuse.
She chuckled.
“ What are you laughing at?” asked Terry.
“I’m thinking of how I will go in some day
with Ella to have my tea,” said Alicia.
“ Don’t come till I’ve learnt my way about
a little,” pleaded Terry, suddenly grown shy.
“ Promise, Alicia!”
But Alicia only looked wdse and refused to
answer, which left poor Terry unsettled, and
with nothing but her luck to trust in. She
dreaded her friends more than any other part
of the business.
“And,” said Terry, remembering the other
event of the afternoon, “the Angel Guest has
invited you and me to tea with him in his
studio to-morrow afternoon.”
“That’s jolly,” said Alicia. “I will get
my hat done; perhaps, if I look nice, he will
want me to sit for him. I think I would
make rather a nice picture.” She picked up


her hat and held the roses to it, putting her
head on one side to see the effect.
This time it was Terry who sniffed. Really,
Alicia wanted a better sense of values.
“I’m afraid your opinion of yourself is too
good to be true,” she said caustically.
But Alicia only smiled a seraphic smile and
twiddled the hat about.
“These roses were very cheap,” she said
sweetly.
Terry went and looked out of the window.
It she’d been a baby she’d have put her thumb
in her mouth. The window was the equiva-
lent.


CHAPTER XVII
The Career Begins
It was Monday morning-, Terry had packed
her basket and was ready to start. In the
basket she had put —besides the new green
cotton frock and its attendant white muslin
“pinny” and cuffs and collar—a blue print
overall and a pair of dainty shoes. There
were duties to be performed behind the scenes,
and the overall would help to keep her spot-
less; the shoes were that she should save her
street ones, move more fleetly, and look
nicer. She arrived, and was taken to the
dressing-room.
“ I would advise you not to change into
your room dress till you leave the kitchen,”
said the girl who was looking after her; “you
are bound to get it soiled round the hem, and
it is so light it shows every mark. So Terry
took off her hat, put on her jumper, and went
down to her work. Her place was beside a
pale girl with rippling red hair, who was


vigorously cutting loaves into slices and
stacking the bread in a cupboard above the
bench. Terry’s business was to fill the cruets
and the milk jugs and to roll the butter. She
was handed over to the red-haired girl, who
proceeded to show her how to do it.
“Here are the things;” she took the salt
and mustard and pepper off a shelf overhead
and put them on Terry’s part of the bench;
“and these are the butter plates. There are
seven dozen. You must put four small balls
on each plate and a sprig of parsley on top,
and carry the plates up on trays to the ice-
chest. And you must do a big dish of balls
as well, so that the plates can be refilled
when they get empty. The milk jugs and
the can are on the shelf under the bench.”
She went back to her bread-cutting.
Terry looked at the seven-pound block of
butter, and felt it would be a good thing to
have the ground clear before she began on
it, so she filled her cruets and her milk jugs
first, and then set to reducing her mountain
to seven dozen little molehills. Halfway
through, Mrs. Hotham put her head in at
the door.
“ Let Miss Grant go into the room and


take the early ordeis;” she turned to Terry.
“It will help you to get used to the work
before the rush comes,” she said kindly; then
she was gone.
“You had better go and change,” said the
red-haired girl; “I am to- get your orders
ready for you.”
Terry went into the dressing-room and put
on her new frock. When she had got it half
on, a bell rang. One of the girls called to her:
“It’s all right, I will take the orders till
you are dressed;” and in a moment or two
the same voice spoke again:
“Three teas, one coffee, buttered toast for
one, and cakes for three.”
Terry listened intently; she must notice how
it was done.
The tray was ready when she came down
all spruce and fresh in her green dress and
white apron. She had tied her white collar
with a black ribbon, and as she carried her
tray into the room, Mrs. Hotham, who was
sitting having a morning cup of tea with one
of her own particular friends, looked her up
and down with satisfaction. She put her
things on well and she moved deftly.
“That is a nice-looking- girl,” said the friend.


“Yes,” said Mrs. Hotham; “this is her first
day. I am wondering how she is going to
turn out. She seems to shape very well.’
Then they went on with their conversation
but Mrs. Hotham watched her till she left
the room and when she came into it again.
Poor Terry! Calm as she appeared to be
outwardly, her hands trembled as she put the
cups and saucers down on the table, and she
felt as if everyone must know how her heart
was quaking. It would have been much easier
if Mrs. Hotham had not been in the room
w r atching her; as it was, her fingers seemed
to be all thumbs, and the table rose up to
meet the things she was putting on it.
Still, she managed to get everything trans-
ferred from the tray to the table without a
breakage, and she did not forget to count
the cakes. Then she retired behind a curtain
to wait for the next call, looking round the
corner every now and then to see that no
one came in unawares, and in the meantime
studying the menu. In a little while a bell
rang; it was Mrs. Hotham’s.
“A little more hot water and a small jug
of cream,” said Mrs. Hotham with an en-
couraging smile.


Terry got it, and while she was putting it
on the table three girls with golf clubs came
in at the door and sat down at one of the
large tables. They took no notice of her as
she stood waiting for their order, but went
on talking as if no one were there.
“Who are you going with on Saturday?”
asked one, picking up the menu and fanning
herself with it.
“ Reggie and his wife as usual,” said the
girl who was addressed. “We always go
early and try to get the same places in the
stand.” She put out her hand for the menu.
“What are we going to have?” she asked
carelessly.
The other threw the card down upon the
table.
“Tea and a muffin for me,” she said, staring
out of the window. “ I always have the same;
it’s easier.”
“I’ll have—what’ll I have?” said the girl
who had picked the card up, drumming with
her hand upon the table. “Cakes, crumpets,
toasted scones, m-m-m-m. I’ll have toasted
scone; no I won’t, I’ll have oatcake and
butter.”
“What a heathenish joint!” said the one


who had not spoken. “I’m going to have
walnut cake. Have you any walnut cake?”
she turned to Terry.
“Yes, I think so,” said Terry in her most
exquisitely polite tones. It was a delicious
satisfaction to play the queenly beggar when
others were playing the beggarly queen. She
had no resentment against those who made
such an attitude necessary; they paid their
debt with the opportunity they offered.
“All right!” and they went on talking
again.
“And tea for three?” asked Terry quietly.
“What?” They looked annoyed at being in-
terrupted. “Yes —no, I’ll have coffee.”
“Two teas and one coffee?” asked Terry,
with steady persistence.
“Yes —no, I think after all I’ll have tea.”
Terry waited a moment, and as no other
alteration was made she went away. When
she was halfway up the room the bell rang;
she went back.
“ Have you got China tea?”
“Yes,” said Terry.
“Well, I’ll have China tea, and lemon in-
stead of milk.”
“You’ve got three nice ones to begin on,”


said the girl who had the next table to Terry’s.
She had been watching.
“Who are they?” asked Terry.
“I don’t know, but I’m always thankful
when I don’t get them. They come in very
often. They haven’t got the manners of a
pig,” she added rather bitterly. She was one
of those sensitive people who took lack of
breeding in others to be insult directed against
themselves personally, and she was often un-
happy without cause.
“I think they have,” said Terry, going into
the kitchen with her order.
The room was filling rapidly as she got up
from what was called the early lunch and went
back to her tables. Several different lots of
people came in at once and wanted to be
waited upon in a hurry, and she found it
difficult to remember who wanted brown bread
and who wanted white. The girl who got her
orders ready did not always remember what
she was told, and it meant a double journey
down the long room. She kept her head fairly
well while the people came in slowly, but at
last came an awful moment when she went
back into the room to find all her tables filled
suddenly. She stood for a moment looking


at the sea of people and her brain reeled; then
she walked down the room, desperately trying
to gather up the orders.
Oh, the terror and confusion of the hour
which followed! Terry felt herself like some
puny little atom trying to hold back a world
that was falling upon her, or a person sinking
beneath the waves for the last time. It would
have been a simple enough matter to have
stemmed the flood if everything had gone
smoothly in the kitchen; but when she went
back with a head crammed full of the requests
that had poured in upon her, she found the
red-haired girl first in a state of panic and
then in a condition of collapse. If Terry
had known her business better she would not
have been so bewildered; but it was the first
day, and an extra busy one at that; and, beside
having to remember what people wanted, she
had to remember what things there were on
the list and how much they cost.
In her panic the red-haired girl sent out
some of the trays inadequately furnished.
“There was no butter on that last tray,” said
Terry, as she came in with a fresh lot of orders.
“I can’t help it; I couldn’t get a butter
plate; they aren’t washing up quickly enough.”


“Well I’ll take this,” said Terry, lifting
one off a tray that was being prepared.
“ Listen! Two curried chickens, one ”
“It’s no use giving me any more,” said the
red-haired girl passionately. “I’ve got ever so
many more than I can remember already.”
Terry nursed the orders, and fled out with
the butter; on the way she met Mrs. Hotham,
who worked as hard as anyone during the lun-
cheon hour.
“The bells are ringing on your side of the
room, Miss Grant,” she said sternly. “You
must try not to keep anyone waiting.”
“Yes,” said Terry with a sinking heart;
interruptions like that frightened her, and
made her forget what she was trying so hard
to remember. She put the butter down on
the table, and was speeding away again, when
a voice recalled her.
“Is that toasted bun of mine ready? I shall
not be able to wait any longer.” It was a cross-
looking man with a black beard who spoke.
“ I will see,” said Terry, going off.
“ Remember it is to be dry toasted.”
“Yes,” said she over her shoulder. Dart-
ing into the kitchen she picked up another
tray.
(0 78) j2


“There’s no bread on this,” she said scan-
ning it closely.
“I forgot.” The red-haired girl put some
on a plate.
“And is that toasted bun ready?”
“Yes, here it is.” She put it on top of a
teacup. Terry went away with it.
“I said dry toasted,” said the man in a
voice of thunder and ice, and Terry looked at
it aghast; the butter seemed to be running
out of it in torrents.
“I am very sorry,” she said tremblingly;
“they have made a mistake in the kitchen;
I ordered it dry.”
He scowled and said no more, and Terry
escaped. It was her fate to carry many more
buns to the same man; but later on she ceased
to be afraid of him, and was able to tell her first
terrors to him quite frankly. He smiled, and
seemed rather proud of having been able to
frighten her, and when she commented se-
verely upon it he smiled the more. But that
was not yet.
In the kitchen the battle raged furiously.
To an onlooker it would have seemed deli-
ciously funny to see two full - grown young
women fighting over a cup and saucer or a


fork; but if you were the person who wanted
that fork the situation was too grim and
tremendous to contain any humour. When
a hungry man, with half an hour for lunch,
had been kept waiting twenty minutes, with
a prospect of another twenty minutes added
to that unless you snatched, you snatched,
and whoever snatched the quickest got it.
It was through no lack of management that
things were as they were, but the kitchens
were small, and there was no prospect of
enlarging them as the need for more room
grew. They would only hold a certain amount
of stock and accommodate a certain number
of people, and when the business was started
the stock was ample, and the staff quite nu-
merous enough. Now there were days when
Mrs. Hotham felt she must shut the door of
the tea-room till those who were seated should
be ready to move away and make room for
others; yet it was driving away custom. Every-
one did not come in at once and go at once,
really—although in that hour between one and
two it seemed like it—and if people chose to
come in and wait till a place should be vacated,
she felt they must be allowed to do it.
And then, too, it was so impossible to gauge


the public appetite. Because people wanted
nothing but one thing to-day, it did not fol-
low they would look at it to-morrow.
“Three teas, three pies ” began Terry.
“There are no more pies left,” came a shrill
voice from the stove, and Terry darted back
into the room to the defrauded customers.
One had to learn how to travel furiously with
an air of calm. Terry brought up at the table
gently.
“I’m sorry, but there are no more pies
left,” she said. “What would you like in-
stead? There are sausage rolls.”
“Yes, we’ll have sausage rolls.”
She sped back.
“ I’ll have sausage rolls instead of the pies.”
“I’m just taking out the last sausage roll,”
said a girl next to her, and Terry went back
more slowly; it was difficult to ring the changes
on the same sentence.
The people looked cross, and decided upon
something they didn’t want. Mrs. Hotham
met Terry going out with a tray.
“What is the order for that top table of
yours? They seem to be grumbling.”
“They wanted pies, and there weren’t any;
and then they asked for sausage rolls, and they


were off,” said Terry breathlessly. “Now they
are having ham sandwiches.”
Mrs. Hotham passed on without saying any-
thing more; such a happening was no one’s
fault; a sort of common instinct seemed to
drive everyone to want the same food on the
same day. But it was unfortunate—she sighed
—and exasperating—she set her teeth. It was
anxious work.
Someone whom she had kept waiting a long
time smiled at Terry, and all at once she felt
her fears lift. She smiled back gratefully, it
was wonderful of a stranger to be so kind; she
would remember her if she ever came in again,
and see that she got her lunch at once, if it were
possible.
More suddenly than the room had filled it
emptied, and with the sudden stop came a
slackness among the girls.
“Get the tables cleared as quickly as pos-
sible,” said Mrs. Hotham authoritatively. The
washing up must be got through first, and it
was not fair to the kitchen maids to make
them late with their work.
In a little while the place was reduced to
order again. The tables were cleared and
dusted, the room swept, and the flower vases


put straight in their places. The sight of the
quiet, almost empty room was like Paradise to
Terry, whose mind was dazed with the tumult
and the bewilderment of the last hour. It was
port after storm; she breathed a deep, deep
sigh, and dropped into a chair. What a
luxury it was to sit down!


CHAPTER XVIII
A Tragedy
After lunch, and before the busy part of the
afternoon came, Terry had time to look round
her. Mrs. Hotham, who, now that the strain
was over, relaxed and became less official, sat
down for a moment beside her.
“You have had your baptism of fire this
morning-,” she said. “How do you feel you
got on?”
“I don’t know,” said Terry; “it was all
so quick and so furious there wasn’t time to
think. I found it rather hard to remember
everything.”
“Of course you would at first; but you
will get used to that in time, and it was a
harder day than usual. I ordered extra things,
and everything has been eaten. Did you get
anything for your lunch?”
“ I didn’t want much,” said Terry; the sight
of so much food had sickened her. She had


been demonstrating her theory of living on
nothing a year, and eating by absorption. It
seemed as if she had been taking in food
through the pores of her skin.
“One always feels so at the beginning,”
said Mrs. Hotham, smiling at her. She looked
nice, Terry thought, when she smiled. “You
will get your appetite back in time.” She
got up and went down to the cash desk to
relieve the girl there. She wasted no time;
indeed there was no time to waste, and, above
all, there was an example to be set.
Things went quietly till four o’clock. Men
came in in twos and threes from The Lane—a
narrow street where most of the wholesale
houses were situated —to discuss business.
They sat for ten minutes or so over the tea,
which was merely an excuse for a talk in a
quiet corner, and went out again. A lady
brought in two children, and Terry, when
she had given them their tea and milk and
cakes, went away to watch them from a dis-
tance. The mother was a pretty, dark woman,
who seemed to be completely at the mercy of
her babies, which same babies did not know
what mercy meant.
“Tell that woman to put sugar in my milk,”


said the bigger one of the two, looking with
round, fearless eyes first at Terry then at her
mother.
The mother blushed.
“Hush, Nettie, you’re not to speak so!”
She turned apologetically to Terry, and was
relieved to see that she smiled. “It is very
rude.”
“Is it rude to want sugar in my milk?”
queried Nettie in a surprised voice.
“ No,” said her mother helplessly.
“It’s all right,” said Terry, laughing, but
wondering inwardly what sort of a life the
nurse led.
“ I want that,” shouted the baby, a black-
haired, black-eyed tartar with scarlet cheeks;
she pointed to a cream cake, her eyes nearly
darting out of her head.
“Well, wait a moment,” said her mother,
holding her down in the chair while she
manoeuvred the cake on to her plate.
The baby wriggled herself free, and fell
upon her prize. Attacking it with a large
spoon she laboriously tried to push great
pieces into her mouth sideways. When the
mother tried to feed her she screamed fiercely.
Terry retired to watch from a distance. She


was a greedy little beggar, thought Terry
with a laugh, but she was very funny as she
sat wrestling with the cream cake. On the
end of an absurd nose was a dab of cream,
left there by the part of the spoon that would
not go into her mouth, and already her spark-
ling eyes were raking the dish and watching
with furious eagerness that no one should take
the cake she had set her gluttonous little heart
upon next. There seemed to be force enough
in her atom of a mind and body to vitalize a
whole community, and she made one wonder
what she would do with it when she grew up.
She was only being furiously greedy because
she would be furiously anything. Whatever
her hand found to do, she did it with her
might, and just now it was shovelling in
cakes with a mighty spoon.
Having swept the board bare, they were
led out, satisfied for the time, and there was
a lull.
Then suddenly, as if without any warning,
the room filled again, and the bewilderment
of the luncheon hour was upon Terry once
more. Mrs. Hotham’s voice came at intervals
through the kitchen door, sharp and rallying:
“You are sure you are not letting the muf-


fins and crumpets run out?” or “There are
plenty of cakes? Do not forget to send George
out in time if anything is getting low.” Then
she would disappear, and come back with an
order, and disappear again.
Terry managed fairly well for a while, but
every now and then a blankness would come
over her, and her mind seemed as if it were
swept clean of everything. Then she would
go out into the room, and look anguishedly
at the sea of faces, hoping thereby to recall
her wandering wits. A searching glance at
a young man and maiden would bring two
teas, a muffin, and a toasted scone back from
the shadows of her understanding, and she
would fly in to the red-haired girl to enquire if
they were ready. Or else a single face would
detach itself from the crowed as one who had
been waiting quietly since ever the world began,
a silent, eloquent monument to her stupidity
and blindness, and she would seize a tray,
prepare it with a supernatural haste, and skim
down the room to lay it with humble self-
abasement at the metaphorical feet of the sur-
prised man, who, abandoning all hope, was in
the act of reaching for his hat.
Then, in the height of the battle, something


terrible happened. If a man in a motor race
were to find he had suddenly run out of petrol,
or a beleaguered garrison that its last round
of shot had been fired, the effect could not
have been more stunning, more awful.
The kettles had gone off the boil!
On one side of the door was a room full of
impatient people, some only out for pleasure,
but many with urgent appointments to keep
and businesses to go back to; on the other, a
kitchen full of desperate girls who-must meet
the displeasure of the people, and one stony-
faced kitchen maid' who was responsible for
the tragedy. And Mrs. Hotham over all.
“Why aren’t my teas ready?” An anxious
girl burst in from the room and stood looking
at her trays set ready with everything but the
teapots.
“You will have to wait; there is no hot
water,” said the girl who superintended the
stoves, in the mechanical voice of a hypno-
tized person. She was responsible as well as
the kitchen maid.
“No hot water?” repeated the room girl in
a dazed way. “What do you mean?”
“No hot water,” said the other patiently;
“the kettles have gone off the boil.”


A silence as sudden as the stopping of a
clock fell upon the kitchen. The girls looked
at each other dumbly. They had seen Mrs.
Hotham angry once, and it was over a smaller
thing than this; they were not anxious to see
it again.
Presently she came in jubilant. A party
from Government House had just arrived, and,
while she was not a snob, she knew the cachet
that such custom would give to her rooms.
She spoke to the girl whom she considered
the quickest and most capable.
“I want you to attend to this order,” she
said. “Tea, with buttered toast and cakes,
for five.” Then she went away.
The toast gave a respite; it would take
some little time to make, and perhaps by
that time the kettles would be boiling. In
the meantime there was nothing to do but
pour small quantities of the hot water into
a very small kettle and boil it, practically in
cupfuls.
She came in again with a shadow on her
face. “There seem to be a lot of people
waiting and no trays going out,” she said
rather irritably.
“Some of the orders are for hot things,”


said someone, hoping to stem the torrent with
a straw.
“I know,” she said, “but they can’t all be
hot things. Is my order nearly ready?”
“Nearly,” said the stove superintendant
faintly, and no one looked at anyone.
At last the moment came. Mrs. Hotham
appeared again, her face was full of suppressed
passion, and she looked round at the waiting
trays.
“ I insist upon knowing what this all means,”
she said intensely.
No one spoke.
“Why are these trays not going out?”
Her face was white and her eyes blazed.
Still the same palsied silence.
“If ” began the girl at the stove, but
Mrs. Hotham broke in upon her.
“There is no boiling water, I suppose?”
“I am very sorry, I thought it was all
right,” said the girl miserably.
“You thought it was! I don’t pay you to
think,” began Mrs. Hotham, her voice shak-
ing; then her anger overwhelmed her, and the
storm burst.
There was no doubt about it, the stove girl
was to blame. She knew the importance of her


post, and should not have relaxed her attention
for a moment. It was a question of method
and vigilance, and if she had been careful the
thing would not have happened. But she
trusted to the kitchen maid, and the kitchen
maid trusted to her, and so it came to pass. It
might seem a small thing, but it was enough to
disorganize a whole afternoon, and to endanger
the success of the tea-room; and when that
meant Mrs. Hotham’s livelihood and her
friends’ money it was a fairly far-reaching
thing. There were plenty of people whose
chief pleasure it w r as to pick holes and to find
fault, and a few like that, coming in on a day
when such a catastrophe was stirring, would
go away and talk as if it were the rule, and
not the exception. If you have half a dozen
people to tea, and a tragedy happens, you can
explain it away easily enough, but you cannot
conduct a place on purely business lines and
confide your domestic troubles to every stranger
who pays his money over the table.
So the blame was all to the girl who muddled
her department; but no mistake on the part of
one person could give another the right to
say some of the things which fell from Mrs.
Hotham’s lips that afternoon.


Terry had crept out into the room so that she
should not hear; her cheeks were crimson, her
ears tingling with what she had been forced to
listen to. How could anyone say words like
that to a fellow creature before fellow creatures!
If she had to talk so, why could she not do it in
the privacy of her office? It was not right; it
was not right! She felt shy when she had to
go back to the kitchen; and she passed Mrs.
Hotham, sweeping into the office, tremblingly;
it was all so humiliating. Mrs. Hotham was a
gentlewoman by birth, yet the gentlewomen
that Terry knew showed their anger without
deliberately insulting as she had! Surely if
you owed nothing to anyone else you owed
something to yourself, and if you felt that, it
would keep you from giving yourself away so
badly in your passions!
The kettles were boiling again and work was
going on much as if nothing had happened, but
the gaiety had gone out of things. The girls
did their work as if they were under a spell,
and they did not speak to each other except
when an order made it necessary.
But they were unconsciously tender to the
stove girl, and did not ask her for anything they
could get themselves. They did not want her to


know that they knew she was weeping - . And
she was grateful and kept her face turned away
as much as possible; but every now and then
the girl who stood beside her would hear a little
sob, and the tears would drop from her brim-
ming eyes, and fall with a sizzle upon the hot
iron. It did not help one in a situation like that
to know that one was altogether to blame.
That night Terry, lying flat on the divan to
rest her aching back, gave a detailed account of
the day’s doings to Alicia, and the interest of
the story put even Fairy Barnes into shadow.
To-morrow morning it would begin all over
again. Terry wondered what the next day
would bring forth, and, putting out the light,
tried to go to sleep to gather strength to meet
it. But her brain was too active, and her body
too stiff, to make unconsciousness easy; and
the town clock struck three before she slipped
into a dreamful slumber.
(0 78)


CHAPTER XIX
On an Ache and its Cure
The next morning- Mrs. Hotham came into the
room quite cheerfully and as. if nothing- had
happened the day before, and the tension was
removed. Yesterday had gone out with such
gloom that each girl returned to her work in
trepidation, and the relief of finding the day
beginning comfortably made them all more than
usually cheerful. The red-haired girl discussed
her prospects with Terry over the bread-cutting
and the butter-balling, and Terry, who had no
prospects of her own more delicious than the
keeping of her head in the tea-room, was tre-
mendously interested and asked her all the
questions necessary for the stimulating of the
recital.
“Of course I shan’t stay long here,” said
the red-haired girl cutting deftly through the
pile of slices, and taking- another loaf by the
hair of its head. She looked like an innocuous
executioner who merely cut off heads for a


living, but whose real interests in life were quite
apart from her profession. Still, that did not
prevent her doing her work well and thoroughly;
she owed it to herself to give g'ood value for
money received.
“Won’t you?” said Terry. “What are you
going to do instead?”
“Well, I began to train as a singer,” she
said, “but the delicacy of my throat made it
that I could never depend upon that for a
living.”
“What a pity!” said Terry sympathetically;
“it would be a lovely way of making money.”
In her imagination she saw the red-haired girl,
supported by a full orchestra, bowing to an
enthusiastic audience, and she felt bread-cutting
in a tea-room must be a very poor alternative.
“ I sing a good deal,” continued the red-
haired girl, “but only privately. What lam
really thinking of taking to, when I can work
my way in, is literature.
“You mean story-writing?” asked Terry.
“Yes, stories and articles and essays,” said
the other loftily; and Terry looked at her
respectfully. It seemed very grand to talk like
that, and to do it with confidence. She seemed
to have no fear, this girl.


“ Have you ever done anything- at it —had
anything printed?” asked Terry deferentially.
“I’ve written a good deal,” said the red-
haired girl, “but so far I haven’t had anything
printed except one thing I sent into a competi-
tion.
“ What was that?” asked Terry again.
“It was a verse on Morse’s Marvellous
Migraine Mixture. They were offering a prize
of fifty pounds for the best verse— —”
“And did you get it?” interrupted Terry
breathlessly. The thought of getting fifty
pounds for five or six lines on a patent medi-
cine made her dizzy. What she could buy
with fifty pounds—and still have money left
to. put in the bank!
“No,” said the girl truthfully, “but I got
half a crown and a mention. You ought to
try; it’s still open.”
“I’m afraid I wouldn’t be any good at it,”
said Terry; then a bell rang in the room, and
she went to answer it.
There was a man sitting at one of the tables.
He was dressed in corduroy trousers, strapped
at the knee, and wore a flannel shirt under his
coat. He was spotlessly clean, and looked as
if he might be a prosperous stone-breaker. It


was rather extraordinary the people who
dropped in here; people who, one would
think, would go, as a matter of course, to a
place of their own kind. There were plenty
of them, little cake shops with a back room
set with small tables, leading out of the
shop.
He was smelling the flowers as Terry ap-
proached, and he looked up with a smile.
“Those are good,” he said heartily, but in
no way familiarly. “What have you got for
me to eat, Missy?”
“What would you like?” asked Terry, smil-
ing back.
Aw, some tea an a bit of ” —he pondered
over the card for a while—“ oatcake,” he read
out. “ Have ye got oatcake?”
“Yes,” answered Terry.
“ That 11 do me fine. Ah like oatcake.” He
looked at Terry with interest; she was a bit like
his lassie at home.
Terry brought the tray and set it out before
him, and he stared about him as if the room
pleased him.
“Ye’ve got a fine place here,” he said ad-
miringly. He was like a big child, and as
unconscious as a baby.


“ It is nice, isn’t it?” said Terry.
He nodded. “What d’ye call them flouncy
things overhead?” he asked; they had been
puzzling him ever since he had come in.
“They are punkahs,” said Terry.
“ Punkahs?” he repeated.
“Things to make the air cool,” she ex-
plained. “A boy sits up at the end of the
room and pulls a cord, and they all wave
backwards and forwards together.”
He looked at them curiously; he would like
to see them work, but had not the courage to
ask.
“I’ll pull them as I go by to show you,”
said Terry obligingly, and he thanked her
courteously. She had the same ready way with
her as his own lass, and he wished her well.
Mrs. Hotham passed by as Terry was un-
tying the cords.
“What are you doing?” she asked.
“There is a man in the room who is inter-
ested in the punkahs,” said Terry, “and I
offered to show him how they worked.”
Mrs. Hotham smiled and went into the
room. The stone-breaker was sitting with his
cup motionless in his hand, holding the spoon
back with his thumb, and gazing raptly over-


head. The punkahs stopped, and he went on
drinking - . Terry gave him time to finish, and
went down again to take his money.
He stood up and took a little leather purse
out of his pocket.
“Thank ye for showin’ me!” he said; “it
makes a gran’ draught. How much do I owe
ye?”
Terry told him, and he took some coins out
of the purse.
“There it is,” he put the money in her
palm, “and there is something for ye’self;
an’ if ye’ll buy ye’self some gloves with it, I’ll
be proud.” He laid a bright shilling along-
side of the money for his lunch.
For one moment Terry’s impulse was to
refuse excitedly, then her common sense came
to the rescue. That the offer came genuinely
from the man’s heart was obvious. She had
struck a chord somewhere, and he was answer-
ing in the only way he knew. His lass loved
a bit of finery; all gels were alike in that.
Here was one, a plucky one, working for her
living, and she’d found time to give him a
smile and a word with the doing of her duty.
No airs and graces, no nonsense, and with
eyes like the bairn who’d brought him his


slippers ever since she was big enough to
carry them.
Slipping the official sixpence into the other
hand, Terry held out the shilling.
“It’s very kind of you,” she said, “but you
must take it back.”
“No, no; I’d like ye to have it.” He
pushed it away from him.
“I couldn’t take it,” she said; “nobody
here ever takes money, and it wouldn’t do for
me to break the rule.” She smiled. “Why,
they would turn me out, and then where would
I be?”
He put the money unwillingly into his purse
again. Of course, if that was the case, it
couldn’t be helped, but it was a pity; he would
have liked her to have had it. It wasn’t quite
fair on young things to make a rule like that.
Terry went back to the kitchen, and con-
fided her experience to the red-haired girl,
who laughed.
“ I wonder how many pairs he expected you
to get for a shilling?” she said. “Men are
funny things,” she added with an air of worldly
wisdom. She was bound to study them quite
impartially for the sake of her work; no one
ought to write who was not a judge of human


nature. “I’ll use that, if you don’t mind; it
might work into a sketch for the New
Journal .”
“Indeed, you’re not to use it,” said Terry.
“Think if he were ever to see it!” She felt
like a betrayer.
“All right!” said the red-haired girl sooth-
ingly* “I won’t, if you would rather not; but
I can’t see that it matters.”
“ I can,” said Terry. Some things mightn’t
matter, but this certainly did.
Lunch-time came again with its fears and its
furious rushes. It was something like going
over the falls of Niagara and finding one had
come out at the other end alive. But the result
was exhausting, and it didn’t leave one much
time for anything but sleep. The room was
supposed to close at six o’clock for the day,
but people very often came in at five minutes
to, and wanted something hot, and by the time
they had finished, and the flowers had been
taken off the tables, and the pot plants watered,
and the sugar basins emptied, it was half-past
before one could g*o and change. Terry, who
had never known what it was to be able to
sleep unless in bed with the light out, found
herself doing it as she sat in her chair waiting


for supper; and one evening, going home after
a particularly hard day, she cried from sheer
tiredness as she walked along the street. She
had chosen a quiet way, so that she should not
risk meeting anyone she knew; for she was too
tired to have to talk. The day had been a long
one and fiercely hot. People had come in
early in the morning, and had kept on coming
in till the door closed; there had been no com-
plete cessation between lunch and tea, and the
anxiety of one was upon them before they were
rid of the other. It was no worse for Terry
than it was for the other girls, but the fact
that a dozen others were limping home in dif-
ferent directions did not make you yourself any
less footsore, no matter what the philosophers
have said to the contrary. And to be so tired
that you did not care whether your hat was on
straight or not meant that you were losing in-
terest, to a certain extent, in personal things.
Terry took her basket in her hand and went
wearily up the narrow street; there were sar-
dine sandwiches in the basket for Alicia.
Alicia loved sardine sandwiches, and so did
Terry —once; now she hated the sight of them.
She hated the sig-ht of all the foods she saw
about her every day, and her exhausted body


craved for a food it had not absorbed from
morning to night for so many weeks. To be
back again in the cottage, with Sarah to cook
your dinner for you, and to be able, when you
had eaten, to walk out of the house into the
garden and breathe air that had filtered through
wallflowers and roses before it reached your
lungs! A sob escaped her, and the tears
trickled down her cheeks. There was a blister
on her heel where the shoe rubbed it, and
every step hurt; also, there was cold sausage
for supper, and Alicia would be out. She went
on crying softly; there was no one in the
street, and it was a relief.
As she turned the corner into the main
thoroughfare she wiped her eyes hastily. It
was idiotic for a girl with her hair up to go
whimpering along like a child; she must pull
herself together.
When she was nearly home she heard a
voice beside her. It was the Angel Guest.
He had seen her in the distance and had
hurried on till he caught her up. He put
out his hand to take the basket.
“ Please give it to me.” He looked at her
and looked away again quickly; the jester girl
had been crying.


“Oh,” said Terry, “I didn’t think I’d see
anyone!” She gave up the basket. “I’m
going home,” she said, because she didn’t
know what else to say; then she laughed.
“ That’s rather stupid of me, isn’t it?” Already
she was beginning to be normal again, and
wishing- she didn’t get a red nose when she
cried. What a fool she was, and how quickly
shadows lifted! Terry didn’t know why they
had lifted, but things seemed very different
from what they had been as she cried quietly
along the side street.
He didn’t answer. He was thinking about
her tears, and wondering passionately what
he could do to make things right. Someone
had been harsh to her—she was tired. How
he hated her having to work!
“You are tired,” he said gently, and the
care in his voice was like a cool hand on
Terry’s head.
At the door of her rooms he yielded up the
basket. Terry thought of her cold and lonely
sausage, and wondered if she might ask him
to share it with her. As she wanted to very
much, she allowed her wishes to decide for
her.
“ Alicia is out,” she said, rather hesitatingly,


“and I do hate to eat my supper alone, will
you have yours with me? There is only cold
sausage and bread and jam.”
He looked at her joyfully. “ I love cold
sausage and bread and jam,” he said; and
they both laughed.
All at once an idea came to him, “ No,
I don’t,” he said quickly. “ I hate cold
sausage and bread and jam to-night, and so
do you—to-night. You will be good and
come out to supper with me, and I will take
you to a little place I often go to alone, and
we will have oysters and cold teal and a
salad together, and burn brandy-and-sugar in
the saucers of our coffee-cups afterwards. You
would like that?” He waited impatiently.
“ But ’’said Terry. It sounded as if it
cost a lot of money.
“ There is no ‘ but ’. I have had a piece of
good luck to-day, and I want someone to share
it with me. Say ‘yes’.”
“Yes,” said Terry; and they separated to
wash their faces and brush their hair, like
tidy children going to a party.
Ten minutes later two happy things made
their way to a quiet little shop kept by a
Greek with an unpronounceable name, in a


gay part of the town. In the windows were
rocky beds of oysters on which fine crayfish
sported redly between cool, green lettuces.
There were dishes of pink prawns, and roast
teal, all brown and crisp, garnished with
tomatoes and lemons and parsley. On the
oyster bar inside the door stood plates of
brown bread-and-butter, and high pepper and
Chili vinegar bottles, and you walked down a
narrow passage between little cubby holes to
a quiet room at the end of the shop.
And when they had finished their oysters
and teal and salad and bread-and-butter, and
everything that constituted the meal, the coffee
was brought, and with it came tiny glasses of
liqueur brandy. Terry didn’t like brandy as
brandy, but she couldn’t resist making a
sugar bonfire ; so the cups were carefully
lifted out of the saucers and the lumps of
sugar carefully put in, and then the brandy
was tipped over the sugar, and the matches
were lighted and the whole thing set ablaze.
“What do you do now?” asked Terry when
the last little flicker of flame had gone out.
“ Now you mix the melted sugar with the
brandy and pour it into the coffee. Shall I
do yours for you?”


“ No,” said Terry, watching him as he let
the last drop of syrup drip into his cup, “ I
want to do my own.”
He laughed and watched her in turn, as
with monkey-like gravity she imitated what he
had done. They drank it in silence.
“ Isn t that nice?” he said, looking affec-
tionately at his cup.
“Lovely,” said Terry, but it was the nice,
messy game with the brandy and the sugar
and the matches she was thinking of. From
an epicurean point of view the brandy itself
was a sheer waste of money. Still, it wouldn’t
be gracious to let him know that.
They loitered till nearly nine o’clock and p-ot
up reluctantly.
“It is too early to go home now,” he en-
treated.
“Yes, I think it is,” said Terry, and they
looked at each other.
Let us see if we can get a dummy seat
on a St. Kilda tram,” he suggested.
They walked to the Town Hall corner and
waited. Tram after tram went by with the
dummies all crowded; the people were coming
down from the suburbs on the far side of the
town, after the closing of their shops, to get


a whiff of cool air and to listen to the band
that played on the esplanade over the St. Kilda
beach.
At last, when they had almost given up
hope, two people got off the front seats and
they jumped on.
Oh, it was delicious to go speeding along
like that through the summer darkness, the
rush of the air in your face, the blackness of
the night overhead! There are no cars in
the world like those little cable cars in Mel-
bourne, with their open dummies and their
easy motion; they are so deft, so trim, and
so light that they seem almost like swallows
skimming the ground. Nearly everyone on
the tram was bound for the same place, so
there were few stoppages, and soon the lights
of the parade grew nearer and nearer.
“We won’t get off,” said Terry dreamily;
“we shall lose our seat;” and he agreed.
It was the first word they had spoken since
they started; but talking was superfluous, the
night was enough. Down at a little hotel
called the Village Bell the tram stopped, and
they sat waiting till the other cars which were
before them should get away. It was all ab-
sorbing, the long pier dark with people, the


little boats touting for passengers for a “ shil-
ling sail ”, the roundabouts on the beach, and
the still, quiet bay, with the twinkling lights
of Williamstown away on the opposite shore.
One did not want to speak.
It was a very happy Terry who put out the
candle that night. The night air and the sea
had blown all the cobwebs out of her mind
and made her deliciously drowsy. And~and
—the world was a very good place, she
thought, as she fell asleep.
(078)


CHAPTER XX
An Attack of Nerves
It was Saturday afternoon, the day of the per-
formance of “The Pink Cushion,” and a week
after Terry had joined the tea-room.
Alicia was at the table sewing furiously,
Terry sat crumpled up on the bed, the picture
of misery.
“Why did I ever say I’d do it, idiot that I
am!” she wailed. “I know I’ll forget every-
thing right in the middle, and they’ll have to
stop the piece. Serve them right for making
me do it against my judgment,” she said,
growing suddenly fierce, and sitting up very
straight. “It’ll be their own fault—their own
fault entirely,” she crumpled up again; “but
that won’t help. What shall I do-what shall
I do!” She buried her face in her hands, and
rocked backwards and forwards.
Alicia went on with the sewing; even if Terry
did go to pieces she must get that done; it was
the black dress which was being rejuvenated


w.th bits from the glory box, and she was to
wear it that night to play the slow music in.
As she sewed she tried to stiffen Terry into a
semblance of courage.
Don t be silly,” she said cheerfully, “you’ll
get through all right. Nobody’ll take much
notice of you; you’ve only got a small part.
And after all to-morrow’s got to come, and it
will all be over by then.”
Terry listened, then she sat up and took her
hands away from her face. She had told her-
self the first two things over and over again
without getting more than just the most fleeting-
comfort by it, but the other idea fascinated
her. Whatever happened at the performance,
to-morrow would most surely come. Nothing
could really lengthen out to-day by even the
smallest fraction of a minute, and she looked
at the clock and counted—by four o’clock to-
morrow afternoon, in twenty-four hours, every-
thing would be well over, and almost forgotten.
She tried to narrow it down; by four o’clock
to-morrow morning, in twelve hours, everything
would be over, and most people would be un-
conscious Only twelve small paltry hours,
seven hundred and twenty unconsidered min-
utes, between her and a blissful never-ending


peace. What was a minute? A thing that
slipped by unheeded; she counted sixty seconds
and tried to multlpy the pause by seven-hun-
dred and twenty; she had got herself almost
jubilant, when suddenly the panic came flooding
over her again. Only twelve hours; but what
did those hours not hold! She couldn’t do it;
she wouldn’t do it!
Yet there it was before her, inexorable; she
must do it somehow. She rose up from the
bed, and picked up the part which in one of
her several paroxysms she had thrown to the
other side of the room. The performance had
been put off another month, partly to give her
more time in which to learn her words; now
that she was in the tea-room she had only the
evenings free, and a great many rehearsals
had been needed to get not only the play but
the working of the theatre perfect. Now every-
thing was ready, and in five hours the curtain
would be going up.
“They’ve done everything to make you
happy,” went on Alicia encouragingly.
“ How?” asked Terry, in her curiosity for-
getting her troubles.
“Well,” said Alicia, “you’ve got a new
dress.”


Terry nodded despondently. “ I know,”
she said. In any other circumstances such a
dainty frock as Mrs. Barrett had insisted upon
bestowing upon her would have carried her
to the seventh heaven and left her there. As
it was, fear seemed to have taken the taste out
of everything.
“And they’ve given you Netherby Lennox
to make love to; that’s generally regarded as
a luxury.” Alicia put her head on one side
critically to get the proper effect of a velvet
rosette near the left shoulder, thereby avoiding
Terry’s eye with unconscious ease.
“ I don’t make love to him,” said Terry
disgustedly. “ You’ve a very crude way of
putting things sometimes, I must say, Alicia.”
“Well, he to you, then; it’s all the same,”
said Alicia, deciding for the rosette. “You’re
too high and mighty. I know one or two who
wouldn’t turn up their noses at the chance.”
She closed one eye and looked at Terry
solemnly out of the other.
Terry stared at her in amazement, and Alicia
continued her dressmaking well content. In
her disgust Terry seemed to be forgetting her
woes, which was what Alicia was aiming at.
It was rather wearing to be shut up in two


rooms with a person who had been dithering
with fright for nearly two hours, and who
apparently would be a good deal worse before
she was better.
“ Make the tea,” said Alicia in the voice of
a general delivering orders, and Terry went
and lighted the gas under the kettle; then
she came over to the table and picked up the
dress.
“ That’s a good idea,” she said; “ where did
you get the rosette?”
“Off a hat of Kate’s,” said Alicia. “It’s
rather well made, isn’t it?”
“ It’s beautifully made,” said Terry critically.
“ I’ve often wondered how they do those thing's,
to get them so flat and so regular.”
“When it’s dead,” said Alicia, “we’ll pull
it to pieces and see. I brought in some Swiss
roll for tea.”
Terry smiled; it was a wan kind of smile, but
still it was a smile.
“ You buy Swiss roll as Mary Fenwick buys
cushion covers and chocolates for her husband’s
birthday.”
“ Well, you like it too, ” said Alicia, defending
herself.
“ I know,” said Terry, “ and I am always so


grateful that it isn’t used in the tea-room. I’ve
had every other love but that torn from me
since I went there—Swiss roll and oysters,”
she added.
“Terry,” said Alicia, stirring her tea dreamily
and looking out of the window at nothing,
“wouldn’t it be awful, and awful, and awful —
said slowly three times like that—if one were
doomed to eat nothing else but those two
things together for all your life?”
“You make me feel ill,” said Terry; “stop
it.”
“ For ever, and ever, and ever; first an
oyster, then a bite of Swiss roll to wash it
down.”
“You’ve got a morbid mind,” said Terry,
withdrawing her hand from the third slice and
taking bread-and-butter instead.
“Three times a day, three hundred and
sixty-five days a year, for perhaps sixty more
years, if you lived an otherwise temperate
life.”
“ I notice it does not make much difference
to your taste for it at this moment,” said
Terry, as Alicia absently transferred the piece
which Terry had discarded to her plate.
“ It’s too big,” began Alicia.


“ Cut it in half, then,” said Terry.
“ I mean the idea. I can’t grasp it; that’s
why it doesn’t affect me. Besides, I made it
myself—the idea—and you never can get the
full force of a thing when you are viewing it
from the inside. You’ve noticed that, per-
haps.” She paused to look at the cake affec-
tionately before she dispatched it.
“ I don’t know that I have,” said Terry
slowly, eyeing her sister wrth a close scrutiny
that had the dawn of a new understanding in
it; “but there is something else I seem to
have discovered.”
“ What is that?” asked Alicia politely.
“That you know how to keep the big half
of a Swiss roll to yourself, without actually
snatching it with your bare hands. You’re
a very intelligent young woman. ‘ Swiss roll
and oysters for ever, and ever, and ever.’ I
shall remember that.”
“I’m afraid you’ve got a very low mind,”
said Alicia; “an imputatious mind, if I might
make a word.”
“And I thought you had a morbid one,”
said Terry; “but I apologize. I didn’t know
then what your method was. It looks hopeful
for the future.”


“ Inasmuch as ?” asked Alicia.
“Well, with your ability and my charm
we ought between us to find a way of getting
rich more quickly than we are now.” She
looked at Alicia with an undisguised admira-
tion. “It was pretty clever of you.”
Alicia waved the compliment aside depre-
catingly.
“It’s quite a simple thing, really,” she said
modestly; “you’ve only got to put your heart
into it and it does itself.”
“Thank you!’ said Terry; “I’ll know better
next time.”


CHAPTER XXI
The Theatricals
It was half-past seven, and everyone was in a
state of bustle and excitement, everyone except
Mrs. Barrett, who, with the burden of every-
thing upon her shoulders, was calm and serene.
She went round the house from room to room,
the faithful Snowy, who on other occasions
would have been in bed and asleep, trotting at
her heels; and her capable, resourceful mind
allowed nothing to be forgotten or overlooked.
“Run and tell Charlie to light the lanterns
on the veranda, darling,” she said, and Snowy,
very important in a clean white smock, wagged
his little head and went off to find Charles.
He met him hurrying through one of the
passages.
“ Kanty, Mum theth you mutht light the
lanternths on the verwanda.”
Charles stopped and looked down at the
small thing* blocking his way.


T I
■o yiji j j>
duH i r <j jy /s Ji ill i
• ■, ■ 1 ■• 4
'K
| f -:. ( I ■& -a-".-. ;C*V < ,,;^v^# ? -, * t>
WWimm "I '.I #lr
I
... ' \ ; *■< jt V _^^R|
ivl it JT
I 1
- 4 ~ i 8 H /aSj^^K. sfegjj|
* ‘ *V M |w\ll| jg
%4MhI v^
KANTY WAS A MAGICIAN *




“Which ones, nipper?” he asked teasingly.
Snowy’s speech was slow and laborious.
“The Chinethe wonthe; may I come too?”
This to him was the moment of the day,
when a flame should be set inside those beau-
tiful paper balls, and turn their pinks and reds
and greens into glowing wonders.
Charles swung him up on to his shoulders
and carried him out; then he put him down
while he took a chair from one to the other
and lighted the candles, or rather the night
lights which, on account of their staying
powers, had superseded the candles. Snowy
stood below, watching entranced as the dim
globes changed miraculously from paper bags
to living jewels—rubies, and emeralds, and
topazes —carved with wonderful figures of men
and women, with trees and bridges and gar-
dens, with birds and fishes, such as never
were on land or sea. Kanty was a magician.
Snowy backed slowly to get a finer view of
these marvels, and, taking a step too many,
went over the edge into the flower-bed under-
neath.
It was only a little fall, and the ground was
quite soft, but it was a long drop from fairy-
land, and Charles, hearing a startled cry, looked


up as Snowy disappeared. He jumped off the
chair and stooped over the veranda edge, hold-
ing out a hand.
“Here, catch hold; now jump up. You
aren’t hurt, old man; that's all right.”
But though Snowy manfully kept back the
tears, and Charles vigorously brushed him
down, it wasn’t all right. Dr. Barrett, who
would no more allow an evening to go by
without watering his beloved flowers than his
wife w r ould let a day pass without feeding her
family, had given that particular bed a par-
ticular soaking, and the damp earth had ruined
poor Snowy’s spotless smock —Snowy, who
had been got up regardless, to hand pro-
grammes to a fastidious and expensive audi-
ence !
They stared for a moment at the havoc that
had been wrought, and then at last, in spite
of all effort, Snowy’s feelings got the better
of him. His lips quivered, and the tears rolled
down his cheeks.
“An’ I were dwethed all clean to give the
paperth!” he said with a sob.
Charles, on his knees, tried to comfort him.
“Never mind, Snowkins; it was Kanty’s
fault, and he’ll tell Mum how it happened.


Come along now and we’ll find her; she won’t
be cross when she knows.”
Mrs. Barrett stopped aghast in what she was
doing, as Charles, holding Snowy by the hand,
appeared before her.
“Oh, Charlie!” she said despairingly, and
at the note in her voice the waves of Snowy’s
grief broke over him afresh.
“ It couldn’t be helped, Mum darling,” said
Charles breathlessly. “ I was on a chair, light-
ing the lanterns, and Snowy was watching me,
and he had his back turned to the garden, and
he went over, and the ground was wet. We’re
so sorry; aren’t we, nipper?”
“Yeth,” gulped Snowy.
“Tell me where his clean things are kept, and
I’ll change his jumper in a jiffy,” coaxed Charles.
Mrs. Barrett looked at him and smiled; then
she looked at Snowy, poor, downcast, quiver-
ing Snowy. She stooped and gathered him
in her arms.
“Never mind, sweetheart,” she said softly;
“Mummy’ll find another smock, and make
you clean again in a moment.”
And Snowy’s tears, which could not be
stopped all at once, changed from devastating
rains to refreshing showers, as his mother,


standing him on the table in her bedroom,
slipped off his earth - ridden garment, and
wrapped him once more in unspeckled white.
He put his two soft little arms round her neck,
and pressed his cheek against hers.
“Mummy,” he whispered, tightening his
clasp unconsciously.
“ Little Snowy,” she whispered back.
She lifted him off the table, and he ran out
before her joyfully; the world held no cares
for either of them then.
“ Mother, is that you?” called Ella, as Mrs.
Barrett went by the door. “Just do this up
for me.”
“Mother, where’s Mother?” shouted Harry’s
voice along the passage. “ I can’t find the
waistcoat thing you bought yesterday.”
“Nelly, are you there?” said Dr. Barrett.
“Mrs. Ellison is here with Ruby and Jack.”
Mrs. Barrett “did up” Ella, gave Harry the
clue to his waistcoat, and went out to greet
Mrs. Ellison. Ruby and Jack, two unconquer-
able sparks aged five and six, were to open
the entertainment with a cakewalk, and were
about to be taken away to a bedroom to
be “unpacked” when Mrs. Barrett appeared.
Snowy was standing watching them with awe


and wonder; he had never seen anything
dressed like that before—certainly not any-
thing of his own age.
The house was looking very gay when Alicia
and Terry arrived —late; for Alicia had been
sewing at her frock up to the very last minute.
The coloured lanterns shone out through the
gaps left by the creeper on the veranda, and
the hall door—wide open—threw a stream of
light on to the gravel drive. People were
passing through, talking and laughing, and
cabs and carriages were driving up. The girls
went swiftly up the steps into the hall.
Mrs. Barrett saw them and came forward
with a welcome. “Will you go straight to
Ella’s room and leave your things? You will
find her in the theatre; you know the short
cut, do you? That’s right; ask Fanny for
anything you want.” She turned away to
greet someone else.
The girls knocked at the door on which was
written: “Ladies’ dressing-room”, and a voice
called: “Come in.”
They opened the door and went in. The
room seemed to be full of people, all talking
at once. Ella, who was sitting at one of the
dressing-tables, jumped up.


224
Saturday’s Children
“Oh!” she said in a relieved tone; “I was
afraid you were never coming.”
“We’re both quite ready, except for Terry’s
doing-up,” said Alicia. “How splendid you
look, Ella!”
“Do you think so?” said Ella, regarding
herself critically in the mirror. “ Harry and
Mother arranged it all. Do you think I look
old-young enough?”
“Yes,” said Terry, “quite; your hair is
so right.”
“ I had it done at the barber’s, and powdered
it, just a little, after I got home. We told
him exactly what we wanted it for.
In spite of her youth, Ella really looked the
ultra-smart widow of forty who is—almost—
successfully trying to seem thirty. Her dark
hair had been most elaborately curled and
dressed, and there was just a suspicion of
greyness on the temples. Her figure, which
was too girlish and slender for the part, had
been improved upon sufficiently to meet the
requirements of the beautiful black gown lent
by a friend of her mother, and the close-fitting
toque of roses with its rather matronly plume
helped to keep up the illusion. Terry, in her
collarless embroidered muslin frock and shady


garden hat, with her hair parted at the side,
and dressed low upon her neck, looked quite
young enough to be her daughter.
Ella got up from the dressing-table to make
wa y for Terry. At another table a girl dressed
as a parlour maid was arranging the tails of her
cap and patting the bib of her apron.
“Do you think the bow at the back is flat
enough, Ella?” she called out, standing with
her back to the mirror, and twisting her head
over her shoulder.
Yes, I think so, said Ella, going over
and giving it an extra pat to make sure.
“Have you got your music, Alicia?”
“ No,” said Alicia, “ I shan’t need it.”
“ But suppose you forget ” began Ella
anxiously.
I never forget, said Alicia so assuredly
that Ella was calmed. “ I never can play
decently with the paper stuck up before me.
You needn’t be afraid.”
“Where’s the paint for my lips?” called the
parlour maid again. “I’ve forgotten to put it
on.”
‘‘Here,” answered Terry from her table.
“I’m using it, I won’t be a moment.”
She stretched across to hand it to the o-irl
( C 78 ) of
IS


and as she did so Alicia slipped in between
her and the glass.
“Just a minute,” she said rapidly; “I want
to pull my hair out a bit.”
There was a knock at the door, and Harry
put his head in.
“ It’s five minutes past eight,” he said, “and
the room seems to be full; where are those
kids?”
“They haven’t come here yet; you’d better
go and get them,” said Ella. He disappeared.
“Is my sash straight?” asked Terry; “one
loop seems to be too long.”
“It is, rather.” Alicia pulled the loop into
order. “That’s right. Can Ido anything
more for anybody? Then I’m going to the
front to look on; there’s not too much room
here.”
As she left the room Mrs. Ellison came in
with Ruby, who was to enter the stage from
that dressing-room while Jack went in from the
other. Harry, who played rather brilliantly,
went to the piano, and struck up a cake-
walk.
There was a sudden lull as the first notes of
the music sounded, and a shout of laughter
as the two babies, dressed as dandy coons,


stepped solemnly out from the wings and met
in the middle of the stage —Jack in skin-tight
trousers, tail coat, and wonderful waistcoat
with a huge pointed collar, a tie as big as
his head, and a long cane and curly-brimmed
“topper”; Ruby, in a Parisian gown with a
sweeping train, her curly hair scraped up
from her fat little neck and done into a bob
no bigger than a reel of cotton, and a great
hat covered with feathers. It was a mirth-
making sight.
They took their applause gravely, in no way
allowing it to interfere with their professional
duties, and when the dance was over stood
hand in hand bowing to the people. They
were strictly professional to-night, working
for the high wage of a whole box of crackers
between them and a lolly cake each; but the
far-seeing mother, having in her memory certain
performances when the wheels did not run so
easily, had made it understood that full pay-
ment only depended on perfect compliance with
all the rules of the business.
The clapping was still furious as they turned
to go off the stage; this time they were both to
go together, for their mother was waiting in the
dressing-room to meet them. As they passed


the piano, Harry spoke across the footlights in
a stage whisper.
“Got enough wind to do an encore, young-
ster?” he asked of Jack.
Jack stopped and looked severely at him.
“What is win-to-do-an-ongkor?” he asked
audibly.
For answer Harry plunged into the cakewalk
with renewed fervour, and Jack resumed his
journey. Once off the stage they fell through
the door.
“Wer’s our crackers?” they cried in one
breath, swarming to their mother like bees to
a hive.
“The man at the piano said ‘win-to-do-an-
ongkor,” said Jack in sudden remembrance.
“What is that?”
The mother looked mystified; the last word
was the only one that threw any light upon the
subject.
“They want you to do it again, my dar-
lings,” she said coaxingly.
“We will not do it again,” said Ruby slowly
and sweetly, fingering her mother’s brooch as
she bent over them. “Wer’s our crackers?”
The music stopped, but the applause went
on. Harry came to the door.


“Would it be too much for them to do it
again?” he asked.
“I am vewy tired,” said Ruby, drooping her
head wearily. Mrs. Ellison looked at Harry
significantly.
“ I am afraid it would be too much for
them, she said. “I will just get Nurse to
put on their things and take them quietly home
to bed ”
With a bound they were at the door, and
through on to the stage. Harry bolted back
to the piano in time to find Ruby blowing
ecstatic and sounding kisses off the palm of her
hand to a delighted audience, and Jack caper-
ing round the boards to a tune of his own. At
the first note of music again they fell solemnly
into step, prancing and anticking through to
the final chord with a verve and abandon that
fairly brought down the house. Then they fell
upon their mother again:
“ Wer’ s our crackers?”
“Here, ’ said the mother, breathing a deep
sigh of relief, and drawing them out of the
dressing-room with a box held well out of their
reach. She was proud of her cherubs, but it
was always a matter of intense satisfaction to
her when their performances were over; she


never quite knew how they were going to turn
out.
To give time for the stage to be set, there
was a short programme, which turned out to be
not long enough. Alicia had been accompany-
ing the singers to allow Henry to help behind.
As the wait grew longer she went round to see
what was happening.
“We’re nearly ready now,” said Harry in
answer to her question.
“It seems very long from the front, I’m
afraid,” said Alicia. “Could I do anything
to help?”
“ No, I don’t think so,” said Harry.
“Well, let Charles sing ‘The Hard-boiled
Egg and the Wasp’,” she suggested.
“That’s rather a good idea. Charles,”
he called. Charles appeared from the dress-
ing-room. “You’ve got to go and mark
time with ‘The Hard-boiled Egg’.”
Charles looked flattered; it was the only
song he knew, and the family seemed to spend
their lives in keeping him from singing it.
Alicia went back to the piano, and Charles
made his way to the front of the curtain to
enjoy himself.
It certainly was a success, unwilling as his


family were to own it; and neither the dainty
little French song by the pretty girl in blue,
nor his father’s quite fine rendering of “To
Anthea”, evoked anything like the apprecia-
tion which was given to “The Hard-boiled
Egg”. From the non-committal beginning:
“A hard-boiled egg on a table lay,
As hard-boiled eggs often do, do, do”,
to the despairing cry at the end of each verse:
“ For you can’t get any sense out of a hard-
boiled egg,”
the house was his to do as he liked with.
Having sung the last two verses twice over,
in response to terrific encores, and bowed his
acknowledgments to four or five recalls, he
sauntered into the male greenroom, as it was
called by Harry to distinguish it from the
female one, and looked jubilantly round him.
“ Do you hear that?” he asked tenderly.
“ Perhaps I’ll be allowed to do it oftener
now. I always knew I’d come to my own if
I only got the chance.”
No one took a scrap of notice. Now that
the curtain was on the point of going up, it
was each man for himself; and for a past


success to expect you, who were trembling
on the edge of your own, to stop and listen
to his opinions upon himself was as incon-
siderate as it would be, if a man, w - ho had
just won his mile walking, were to bail you
up between your hurdles to ask you the time
of day. Charles had to satisfy himself with
the applause which came from over the foot-
lights, or else call another day if he wanted
it from those behind.
The play was a one-act piece, and Terry
did not come on till it was well advanced.
After a telling scene between Letty’s mother
and Algernon Borthwick they both leave the
stage, and Letty comes in from the garden
with a book in her hand. She replaces the
book, chooses another, and while her back is
turned Borthwick enters the room again so
quietly that Letty, who is absorbed in the
choice of the book, does not hear him. He
comes up behind her and speaks suddenly;
she drops the book in her fright, recovers
herself, and then occurs a pretty little fencing
match in which all Letty’s remarks are simply
pegs for Borthwick to hang his answers on.
He is in love with Letty, and thinks she
regards him as too old. She is in love with


him, and thinks, beside being in love with
her mother, he looks upon her as a child.
He tries to discover what her feelings towards
him are, and she, thinking he is delicately
offering himself as a prospective stepfather,
hides them deep and acts up to him bravely.
Then comes something about a pink cushion
which she found under her head one after-
noon when she had fallen asleep in a veranda
chair. Someone had put it there, but she
does not know who till Borthwick says some-
thing which gives her the key to the whole
situation, and allows the curtain to fall upon a
tender little love scene.
Up to the very last moment Terry kept
hoping that something might happen to pre-
vent her going on. It was a wild hope bred
of despair, and nothing did happen. So with
carmine on her cheeks, powder on her nose,
and an icy fear gripping at her heart she
staggered through the door and took up her
place at the bookcase with her back to the
audience. That, at least, was a help—that she
might stand with her back to the audience.
Clutching the book tightly with frenzied
hands, she waited for Borthwick to enter and
speak to her, and as she waited the words of


her part seemed slowly and steadily to fade
out of her memory. She had stood with that
book in her hand for years; would she go on
standing like that till she died? Something
made her turn her head, and as she turned
she came face to face with Borthwick. With
a cry of real unacted fear she dropped the book
and sprang to the other side of the room.
“Oh, how you frightened me!” Her voice
was made up of a scream and a sob.
The audience rustled simultaneously in sur-
prise, as a window rattles with a peal of
thunder; Borthwick jumped —so it seemed to
Terry’s distorted vision—three feet in the air,
and then all was dark.
She could hear a man speaking something
in strong, clear tones, and then saying some-
thing else in a hurried undertone, which she
repeated mechanically after him. She felt
herself to be moving about, but where or how
she did not know, till at last, after some cen-
turies, she found herself sitting on the arm of
a big chair. Slowly her sight returned, and
she saw standing before her a man with a
kind face who was saying nice things to her,
and looking rather anxiously into her eyes.
She would watch him, and if he tried to


leave her she would not let him go. Where-
ever he went she would follow.
“ Do you care for me enough to bury your-
self in such an outlandish hole for my sake?”
asked The Voice before her.
Did she care enough! Why, all the time it
was she who was afraid it was he who was
going to leave her!
“ I would go with you to the end of the
world,” she said. Often at rehearsals she had
said those same words, but never from the
bottom of her heart, as she said them now.
“Kiss me, Letty,” ordered The Voice; and
in a passion of gratitude for such kindness she
flung her arms round Its neck.
On such fervent interpretation the curtain
descended, and as it slowly shut the people
and the lights out of her sight, Terry came
back to realities. It was over! For ever
and ever it was over. Never again would
she allow herself to be tempted to stand up
before any audience, small or great, to make
a double-distilled, superfine idiot of herself.
Not for the sweet sake of charity, though
millions of crecheless babies should hammer
eternally upon the gates of her lovingkindness;
not for fame, though offers should fall thick


as the leaves in Vallombrosa and managers
weep for ever upon her doorstep. It was
over, over, over, and she was a free woman.
At twelve o’clock a small group sat tucked
up on chairs in the schoolroom, which now went
by the name of the study. Harry came in bear-
ing a dish stacked with whatever he had been
able to gather from an already denuded supper-
table. He put up his arm to ward off the rush.
“One at a time, please, there’s plenty of time;
those nearest the barrier go in first, the rest
follow in order.” To illustrate his words he
chose the cake of his fancy, which happened
by an odd chance to be the largest and hand-
somest on the dish, and then courteously handed
the others round.
“The Ellison kids were in pretty good fettle
to-night,” said Charles.
“They were lovely,” answered Alicia with a
little reminiscent laugh as the picture of the
two little strutting imps rose before her.
“ And Father wasn’t bad,” continued Charles.
Ella put up her hand.
“ Don’t help him,” she said warningly, “he’s
going through the lot till he comes to ‘ The
Hard-boiled Egg’.”
“You’re just like a woman,” said Charles,


casting a withering glance at her; “you let
your prejudices get the better of your critical
faculties always. Indeed you haven’t got any
critical faculty; you’re just a seething mass of
prejudices.”
“ Poor old Charles,” exclaimed Terry sym-
pathetically, “ I think it’s a lovely song, and
I wished I hadn’t been so frightened at what
I had to do, so that I might have enjoyed it
better. I’m sure it sounded splendid from the
front.”
Charles looked gratified; Terry wasn’t a bad
sort.
“I thought you were frightened a bit at
first, said Alicia; “but it wore off very soon.”
“ Wore off!” said Terry. “ When?”
“Well, I never knew anyone make more of
her opportunities than you did when you got
to the armchair. Shiela Morris was sitting
behind me, and I heard her say that there was
more than the desire to be an actress at the
back of that piece of work. I think she rather
grudged you the wind-up.”
Terry looked round her defensively, and
began a hot explanation, but stopped suddenly,
feeling that greater dignity lay in silence.
Harry and the Wag stared solemnly at each


other for a while; then Harry rose, and, going
over to the Wag, flung his arms round him
and buried his face on his shoulder.
The Wag bent over him.
“Kiss me, Letty,” he whispered in a voice
of hoarse entreaty.
There was a sound of an unending saluta-
tion, then a long-drawn sigh, and Harry,
slowly unwinding himself, went back to the
table to finish the sandwiches that he had
concealed between two doilies at the bottom
of the dish.
“Your humour is rather coarse,’’ said Terry
disdainfully, looking from one to the other.
“ I am sorry to have to say it,” said Charles,
going back to his old subject, “but we look at
things from different standpoints. We, being
men, are children of nature, and see things
naturally. You, being a woman, are an arti-
ficial product, and can have no point of view
worth mentioning. I wouldn’t speak of this
in an ordinary way, because it is not kind to
remind people of their unalterable imperfec-
tions, but on this occasion it is my duty.”
“To whom?” asked Ella.
“To man as a whole; which whole I repre-
sent here to-night.”


“What about Harry?” asked Alicia.
Charles looked at his brother kindly.
“ Harry is all right as a man,” he said, “but
not as a defender of man; he is sound, but not
articulate.”
Terry’s disdain merged into admiration.
Charles’s verbal impertinences were always a
pleasure to her.
“My dear children, go to bed, all of you;
it’s nearly one o’clock,” said Mrs. Barrett,
coming in quickly. “Charles, you turn off
the gas.”
“It’s about time he did,” said Ella, quite
as simply and naturally as any child of nature
could hope to. There wasn’t really much to
choose between the sexes when it came to a
backhander.


CHAPTER XXII
Terry Philosophizes
“Who do you think came into the tea-room
to-day?” asked Terry as she and Alicia were
sitting over their supper one evening. She
had been burning to tell her news ever since
she came home, but felt she must wait for a
fitting moment.
“I don’t know,” said Alicia rather uninter-
estedly; “Cousin Kate?”
“No,” said Terry; “someone just as un-
likely for me to meet though. I’ll give you
ten guesses and you won’t do it —twenty
guesses,” she went on lavishly. She pressed
her hands against the edge of the table, and,
tilting her chair, swayed slowly backwards and
forwards, watching Alicia s face.
“The Major!” said Alicia again.
“No, stupid; there’s nothing wonderful
about his coming in.
“Was it a man or a woman?” asked Alicia.


“Men,” said Terry.
Men! repeated Alicia; “what men?”
“Oh, do try and guess!” exclaimed Terry
impatiently.
“ Two rich relations from England,” hazarded
Alicia wildly.
“We haven’t got any that I know of.”
“Two poor ones.”
“No!”
“Well, I’m not going to try any more; I’ll
give it up.”
“Mr. Astley and his little boy,” said Terry
slowly, watching the effect of her words.
Alicia turned red.
“How do you know?” she said, more to
cover her confusion than because she doubted.
She felt angry with herself for changing colour,
but in secret she had often wondered why it
was that she had never heard anything more
about them after the evening at the theatre,
and it had hurt her a little —perhaps even
quite a lot. Anyhow it had mattered enough
to make it that she would never say anything
about it, or talk it over with Terry. The
evening had been such a delicious one, and
the new friends had been so interesting, and so
interested, that it was like an unexpected vista
16


opening up before Alicia’s delighted eyes. This
was how one found one’s friends. You sat
with people you had never even heard of be-
fore, and suddenly you found that you were
very glad and very happy and very contented,
and took it as a matter of course that you would
see them again, because they seemed just as
glad as you were. You went to sleep smiling
that night because the world was such a good
place to be in, and you woke wondering when
and where it would be that you would meet
again. But the days went by, till at last that
wonderful evening was more like a dream than
a reality, and at last you came face to face
with the fact that what had seemed to you
only the beginning of a delightful friendship
was to the others nothing but one of many
episodes in a social whirl. Yet these two had
seemed different from that. Alicia had won-
dered many times how she had been so mis-
taken.
Perhaps if she had been a richer girl, with a
lot of interests in her life, she would have for-
gotten quickly. As it was it had counted a
good deal; pleasures did not lose their indi-
viduality through coming too thickly, one upon
the other, to Terry and Alicia Grant; they


stood like the milestones in a road, not like
the flowers that grew beside it.
“I know because they told me,” said Terry
emphatically, avoiding her sister’s eye till she
should recover herself. The flush was a sur-
prise to Terry.
“Do you know, Alicia,” she went on, “I
believe that Cousin Kate has been the cause
of you not seeing anything more of them.”
How? asked Alicia intently. It would
be very nice to feel that, after all, they were
not people who said real things without mean-
ing them, just because it was the pretty thing
to do.
Well, 111 tell you. About half-past five
this afternoon I was sitting down for a few
minutes. I’d had a wearing afternoon, all
muffins and toasts, and babies that wanted
things not on the list, and I was feeling that
the next person or persons who came in and
gave any bother should have his, her, or their
ears boxed with celerity and dispatch, and I’d
send in my papers, counting it cheap at the
price, when in walked two men and sat down
at the top table. And what do you think they
wanted?”
“ Muffins and crumpets?” said Alicia.


“Tea and toast,” said Terry; “dry toast,
which meant remembering.”
“Did you box their ears?” asked Alicia
relentlessly.
“No,” said Terry without any shame. “I
was just on my way back to do it when Mrs.
Hotham went towards them and they got up,
shook hands, and sat down again to talk.
They’re evidently old friends of hers.”
“ I got their teas and their toasts ready and
took them out. I noticed the young one looked
at me a good deal, but I didn’t think anything
of that; it’s been done so often before. Still,
he seemed so very interested that when I left
the table I went straight up to the dressing-
room to see if I had a smut on nose. In-
stead, I found I was looking unusually hand-
some for me, so I put it down to that and
stopped thinking about it any more. Then
the bell rang, and when Mrs. Hotham said
very sweetly i i Some hot water, please, Miss
Grant,’ he started as if something had stung
him.
“I got the hot water and went back with
it, and when I went away I knew they were
talking about me. After a while they got up,
and Mrs. Hotham rang the bell again. They


were all standing- together, and Mrs. Hotham
said, when I went up: ‘Mr. Astley has been
telling me that he knows your sister.’ Then
she introduced us and went away.
“ He —it was the father who did most of the
talking—began at once to ask about you. He
said they had met you that night at the theatre
and were always hoping to see you again at
Miss Bastable’s, but they were never fortunate
enough to call on the days when you were
there. They had asked for your address, but
Cousin Kate had said we were just in the
middle of a move, and so they had not liked
to bother. Then we went on talking about
other things, and it seems they know both
Dr. and Mrs. Barrett and Major Trevor well.
They were to have been at the party the other
night, but they were away at one of the stations
and couldn’t get back to town in time. When
he said they were staying at Menzies, and
would be going away again in a week, I said:
“Why, you are only a stone’s throw from
Alicia and me;” and then they asked if they
might call ” She stopped
“What did you say?” asked Alicia, for a
curiously hard look had crept into Terry’s
rather boyish face.


“Oh,” she said, “sometimes I feel as if I
were such a miserable snob, but I can’t help
it! I know that the real me is the same
whether it is carrying a tray or a sceptre, but
I can’t help feeling the difference and letting
it alter things. Somehow it seems to take
away your courage. It isn’t that one minds
work in the very least, or that one is ashamed
of poverty, but it makes you remember all sorts
of things that shouldn’t get into the picture at
all. Once or twice some girls I met at dif-
ferent places have come into the room, and
have turned the other way and talked very
quickly when I was putting the things down
on the table; and although one’s own real
friends don’t do that, and a great many others
don’t either, it makes you that you stop to
wonder who is going to and who isn’t, and
you either take no chances, and cut the whole
lot, or else you risk smiling at the ones who
don’t want to smile at you. It’s the uncer-
tainty of it that is so bewildering. I don’t mind
the people I don’t know coming in and be-
having badly; that always makes me such a
‘P u ffick lady' by contrast”—she smiled a little
twistedly at her remembrances—“that I’m al-
most grateful to them for giving me the oppor-


tunity of showing what I can do when I’m put
to it; but it’s the ones I know a little, and yet
don’t know, who worry. I cut someone the
other day who was looking uncomfortable and
as if she ought to bow and didn’t want to,
and then I heard after that she was very, very
nice, but awfully shy and sensitive, and never
spoke to anyone unless she were spoken to
first.”
Alicia listened without saying anything.
Terry was getting right away from her subject,
but she felt that what she was saying now had
to do with it indirectly, and in her own time
she w r ould work back to it.
“ It doesn’t give you a chance to be your-
self,” she went on fiercely. “It’s like sitting
on a chair and knowing that the legs might
come off at any minute. Even though it’s not
your chair, and you are not responsible for the
disturbance if it comes, yet you’re conscious of
the possibility all the time, and you can’t give
your proper attention to what you may happen
to be saying or doing. And if it does come, it
may be someone else’s fault; but it’s you who
fall. I dare say, if I were stronger-minded, I’d
be able to snap my fingers at such things, and
by that turn them into the trifles they ought to


be, but I can’t. You need a firm floor to stand
on first; either your own thickskinnedness, or
your own vanity, or a family to back you. I’m
not a bit thickskinned, and the conceit I’ve got
is only a pretence that anyone can break down
with a feather if they like. And the only family
we’ve got turns its back on us as if we’d
done something wrong.”
“Yes, but our own friends know ” began
Alicia.
“That’s true enough,” said Terry, “and it
would be all right if one only had to deal with
one’s own friends. With you it is different;
you see a certain number of people, but you
don’t come up against it. But it was only yes-
terday that some women were in here talking
about cousin Kate and us.”
“To you?” exclaimed Alicia.
“No, to each other; but one of the girls
heard it, and told me as if it were a great
joke.”
“What was it?” asked Alicia rather faintly.
She wanted to hear, but it gave her a sick
little feeling at her heart; it would be very
much nicer if everyone would go his own way
quietly and not bother about anyone else.
“Nothing very much,” said Terry, “but it


showed which way the wind blew. One said:
‘ There’s a niece of Kate Bastable’s in here,
I believe’, and when the other said ‘Oh!’ in
a surprised sort of way, the first one said:
‘Yes, I imagine she is rather a trial to her,
from what Miss Bastable let fall. Not that
she said anything against her, but she turned
the subject rather quickly when the girls’ names
were mentioned. She is rather conservative in
her ideas about women, and hates the idea of
them coming out of their lavender-and-lace
atmosphere.’ ”
Alicia’s face was red with indignation. “ Oh,
Terry!” she burst out inarticulately.
“Then, when the other said: ‘But perhaps
they have to work; lots of girls have to work ’,
the first one said: ‘I don’t think so. I heard
something about a cottage and a little money
of their own.’ That was all,” said Terry, “and
it’s got so much truth in it that it might very
well pass for quite true.”
“ It’s odd how untrue some true things are,”
said Alicia perplexedly. “ People say ‘There’s
no smoke without fire’, and think they’ve nailed
the whole thing down with that. Yet with us
there’s the fire and there’s the smoke, and the
one comes out of the other, but neither has


anything - to do with the real thing - , and the
whole effect is as untrue as if it were a deli-
berate lie. It’s time someone with a little
intelligence took those pernicious old adages
and wrung their misleading little necks for
them,” she said in a sudden burst of elo-
quence, “they’re only a lot of scorpions for
smug, lazy people to thrash others with.”
Terry’s ill humour evaporated in the fire of
this outburst of Alicia’s. It was so unexpected.
Alicia generally sat in the stalls and applauded
when any indignation meeting was called; this
time she was taking the stag'e and wielding the
flail herself.
“You’re quite right,” said Terry admiringly.
“ It’s often worried me how those sayings
looked like pennies, and weren’t when you
came to spend them. Some day we’ll get
famous and flatten them all out, and then we’ll
have our photographs taken as the two female
St. Georges who slew the lying dragons of
platitude, and freed the world of one of its
chief sources of misery. Hooray, hooray,
hooray!”
“What did you say to Mr. Astley when he
asked if he might call?” asked Alicia, gently
leading her back to her beginnings.


“ I was a snob,” said Terry frankly and with-
out any bitterness—speech was a fine safety
valve, and in the privacy of one’s own chamber
of no harm to anyone. “ I thought of the tea
trays and the bloater paste, and doing one’s
own washing, and living in poky attics ”
“They’re a good size,” interjected Alicia,
looking round the room.
“Attics in a poky passage then; and I
thought how we had nothing to give and every-
thing to receive, and I got rather cold and stiff
—haughty, I think it’s called, when you’ve got
anything to do it on—and I said we would like
it very much, but that I was out all day, and
you did not get home till five o’clock; and I
think he saw I was making excuses, and he
did not say any more, but just went on talking
about other things, and at last they said good-
bye and went away.” She looked at Alicia’s
disappointed face. “I’m sorry, Leeshi,” she
said, going back to the name she had given
her sister as a baby, “I’m sorry if I was a
captious pig and spoilt your pleasure, but all
the time I was thinking of Kate as well, and
feeling they were her friends, and must have
heard her side of the story. I felt I couldn’t
lift a finger to anyone like that, and I dare say


I went too far the other way and was cold and
inhospitable. That’s what comes of being made
self-conscious,” she said with another burst of
indignation. “Unless you are a very level-
headed person, which I suppose I am not, you
lose your sense of balance altogether. It’s
hateful!”
“It can’t be helped,” said Alicia, turning
away so that Terry should not see how much
she was minding; but Terry had caught the
look in her face and felt unhappy.
She knew that Alicia would agree with her
about leaving it to others to make the over-
tures, but when they did make them, was it
not right to accept those overtures in the spirit
in which they were made —simply, courteously?
She felt she would give a good deal to have
the situation over again that she might act
differently. After all, they would not have
asked to come if they had not wanted to come,
and she in her sensitiveness had done a dis-
courteous thing; she had refused hospitality,
and at the same time she had cheated Alicia
out of what she knew would have been a very 7
great pleasure.
Poor Terry, she went to bed that night
rather at loggerheads with herself. It seemed


so difficult to do just the right thing no matter
how hard one tried.
Two hundred yards away, in the big hotel
whose windows twinkled across the darkness at
Terry when she sat looking out at her own,
two men sat in the lounge smoking and watch-
ing the people as they came and went.
“It’s my opinion,” said the younger of the
two, “that Miss Bastable is ashamed of her
relatives earning their own living, and has
dropped them out of her parties because of
it.”
Mr. Astley leaned forward and knocked the
ash off his cigar very deliberately before he
spoke:
“My dear boy,” he said, “I’ve known Kate
Bastable since she was five years old, and she
was a snob even then. We don’t lose our
characteristics as we get older unless we make
up our minds to, and I don’t think she ever
saw any good reason why she shouldn’t be
what it was perfectly natural to her to be.
Knowing what I do of her, the little lady’s
attitude to-day told the state of things pretty
eloquently.” He laughed jovially. “We
must try and see if we cannot break down
her resistance,” he said; “I should like to see


more of them.” It was always a matter
of sorrow to Mr. Astley that he had no
daughters.
Jim Astley nodded. He certainly was agreed
with his father about that.


CHAPTER XXIII
The Family
It was Saturday morning a week later. Terry
was busy attending to the wants of The Family,
as they were very tenderly called by the girls in
the tea-room. Every other Saturday morning,
at eleven, a gentle, sad-faced woman came into
the room with four little children. They always
went to the quietest table they could find, and
as soon as it became known that they might
always be expected at that time, and on those
days, the table was rigidly set aside for them,
and no one else allowed to go near it till they
had been and gone. When they were all
seated, each one was allowed to choose ex-
actly wdiat he wanted, and to eat as much as
he wanted, without let or hindrance. It was
the children’s gala, and there must be no rules
but the ones they chose to make for them-
selves.
“ Have you got everything you want, sweet-


hearts?” the mother would ask, carefully scan-
ning the table. “Well then, I’ll begin to read;
shall I?” and taking out a little pocket Bible
she would await her orders.
“It’s my turn to-day,” one would say, and
then he would choose his particular story.
George, the eldest, generally asked for Samson-
and-the-Philistines-be-upon-thee, although at
times he rejected it in favour of Joshua com-
manding the sun to stand still. Bob, the
second one, who was evidently a sentimentalist,
was always faithful to the story of Ruth, and
Mary rarely ever left her beloved Esther.
To-day it was Todger’s—the baby’s— turn,
and as usual his request was for little Samuel.
The mother read softly, in a low tone, and
the children ate their cakes and drank their
lemonade in an interested silence. Sometimes
Todger, when there came a part in the story
which gave him particular pleasure, would stop
with a cake halfway up to his mouth, and sit
motionless with his little fat body pressed up
against the edge of the table, and his eyes
staring out in front of him; and it was only
when George, getting tired of being looked
through, poked out his tongue, that he would
come back to realities, and with a deep indrawn


sigh of contentment go on with the business of
the morning.
After the reading was over they would talk
about it in a practical kind of way. The
people they read about were always living, vital
personalities, and each child unconsciously
placed the name part. Then they would tell
their mother all that happened since they had
seen her last. At first the girls were very
puzzled as to the reason of these odd little
gatherings, but in time more got to be known
of The Family, and Terry’s heart used to ache
badly as she watched the happy little party,
knowing what lay behind the happiness.
Two years before, when Todger was a baby
of two and a half, the father had gone away
and left them, and the mother had had sud-
denly to find a way to feed four hungry young
mouths. She had taken a position as governess,
and placed her babies in the care of a woman
who had once been her nurse. For the last
year she had been housekeeper to some rich
people about twenty miles from town, and one
day in every fortnight was allowed her, that
she might be able to have her little family to
herself.
On those days she would rise early, and go
17


about her work swiftly, getting everything
arranged before she left, so that nothing should
come between her and her desire. And as the
train slid into the Prince’s Bridge Station, she
would see Emma standing with her four pre-
cious charges, all with their hands tightly
linked, and their intent little faces scanning the
windows for the first sight of her.
She was a simple, gentle thing, not very
learned or clever, and wise only in the wisdom
that love gives, but she had the right know-
ledge for the care and keeping of her babies,
and they gave her back all the love she gave to
them.
And that the day should in every way be a
good one, the girls in the tea-room did their
part. The Family must have its own table, the
children their own special cakes. Todger’s
fancy was a settled one for cream puffs, and if
there were no cream puffs in by eleven o’clock
the page boy was sent at once to get them.
There was always a girl hovering about with
an eye watchful for their comfort, and the least
sentimental one of the lot would feel a softness
in her heart as she helped the mother tend her
eager little brood: they were so very good, so
very joyous, you couldn’t help wanting to do


something for them. And it was such fun to
listen to them talking; they said such odd,
quaint things.
To-day Mary was simply stiff with secrets.
She had two, while George and Bob had only
one between them.
“Now,” said George, gathering up the eyes
of the other children; he was always the leader
of the orchestra.
They all looked with restrained intensity at
their mother.
“Now, Mother,” said George again, “guess
what secrets we’ve got for you.” Terry lin-
gered about within earshot, she was as keen as
they were.
I can t think, said the mother, after a
string of suggestions, all so wide of the mark
that the youngsters were wriggling on their
chairs with joy at the thought of their success.
“Well, the rabbit’s got another family.”
George and Bob eyed their mother in a breath-
less silence. That would do for her if anything
could.
There was something so appalling in the
regularity with which this information was im-
parted that it took all the power of dissimula-
tion the mother could muster to act up to the


part assigned her; but she managed it some-
how, and the boys had to give a long and
intimate account of the appearance, manners,
and individual characteristics of each member
of the new batch before she could be satisfied.
At last they turned to Mary; it was her innings
now.
Impressively drawing her hand from under
the table, where she had been tightly holding
a parcel hidden in her lap, she passed the
parcel to her mother, who again showed no
signs of the needed intelligence. At last the
paper was removed.
“It’s a button-hole!” said Mary proudly.
“Emma showed me how to do it.
The mother looked from the piece of material
in which a gaping wound seemed to have been
drawn together with much pain and tribulation,
and very little cotton, to the face of her little
child; and as she thought of the love that
had animated the stumbling, halting piece of
work her heart yearned, and a prayer went
up from her: “Oh, God, look after them for
me!” The days were so few when she could
be with them, the weeks so many when she
was away.
“You are a good little daughter,” she said


' I
M , j J
ft JVSHk W |||gS
mm il I
m&
C 7» -«■
“‘YOU KNOW, TODGER,’ WHISPERED MARY”




softly. “Some day you shall help me to
make your frocks—and mine too; won’t that
be grand!”
“When?” said Mary in an ecstasy.
“Some day when w T e have a cottage and
can all live together.”
“All live together!” repeated Todger won-
deringly. There must be some joy afoot that
he did not understand, by the light in the
faces round the table.
“And Todger’s learnt a new piece of poetry,”
said Mary. That was the other secret, and
also the result of her own individual labour.
“Say it now, Todger.”
Todger sat up and looked at Mary.
“ Look at Mother, Todger,” said Bob.
“He can’t,” said Mary; “he’s always said
it looking at me, and he’ll forget unless he
does.”
And Todger, with his eyes grappling on
to Mary’s, gathered himself together for the
effort.
But nothing came.
“Give him a start off,” suggested George.
“You know, Todger,” whispered Mary
coaxingly, ‘The Lamb’.”


“THE LAMB”
began Todger, and stopped again.
“I’ll tell him the first line,” said Mary to
her mother; “he doesn’t know it very well
yet.”
“ Little lamb, who made thee?”
“ Little lamb, who made thee?”
repeated Todger, his face clearing,
“ Dost thou know who made thee?
Gave thee life and bade thee feed
the stweam and o’er the
“mead”, prompted Mary in an undertone;
“ mead.
Gave thee clothing- of delight,
Softest clothing, woolly bwight;
Gave thee such a tender voice,
Making all the vales ”
“rejoice”, said Mary again;
“ wejoice.
Little lamb, who made thee?
Little lamb, who made thee?”
“Oh, Todger, what a lovely piece!” ex-
claimed his mother. Were there ever such
children as hers?
“There’s another verse,” said Mary. “Do
you think you can say that too?”


“Yes,” said Todger, switching his eyes on
to Mary’s again. This time he started off
alone.
“ Little lamb, I ’ll tell thee;
Little lamb, I ’ll tell thee.
He is call-ed by thy nam,
For he calls himself a lamb.
He is meek —he is meek
the eyes gripped and searched;
“ He is meek and he is mild,
He became a little child.
I a child and thou a lamb,
We are call-ed by his nam.
Little lamb, God bless thee;
Little lamb, God bless thee.”
Todger was beginning to breathe rather
heavily towards the finish, but as the last
word was said he gave a great sigh and
turned to his mother in triumph. Mary looked
at her pupil with satisfaction.
“ Emma chose the piece because it had
so few ‘r’s ’ in it,” she explained. “Todger
isn’t good at ‘r’s’. And I had to let him
say ‘ nam ’ to rhyme with ‘ lamb ’, because the
right way put him out so.”
At the time when Terry was wanted to give
The Family its bill she was nowhere to be
found, and another girl did it for her. There


was something in the face of the mother,
watching her baby toiling through his love
task, that sent her off to hide in a remote
corner of the building till her throat should
be open again.
“Oh,” she said in a whisper, “let them
be together soon, let them be together soon!”
Then, blowing her nose very hard and pulling
herself up, she sniffed a few uncontrollable
sniffs and went back to her work.
And the man who didn’t like his bun buttered
for him, and had many prejudices beside, was
rather overcome by Terry’s solicitude for him
that morning. Things had gone wrong in the
office, and he had left with the unadmitted
determination to take it out of someone.
Therefore, when Terry brought the bun toasted
dry and crisp, with the butter in little golden
pats upon a parsley-decked plate, he glared
at her and said: “I’ll have it buttered this
morning. And when she took it away cheer-
fully, and he called her back, saying, in a
voice heavy with injury; “It doesn’t matter,
I 11 take it as it is, now you’ve brought it,”
she perplexed him still more.
“It isn’t a bit of trouble to take it back
if you d rather,” she said sincerely.


He smiled an odd, twisty little smile. “No,
thank you!” he said, thinking what a nice
voice she had. And she smiled back, think-
ing how beautiful Todger had looked as he
struggled through his piece. There were such
lovely, tender things in the world; they made
you ashamed of your own roughness.


CHAPTER XXIV
An Invitation from the Major
“This note came from the Major after you
left this morning,” said Alicia as Terry came
in, hot and tired, from the tea-room. “He
says he has got a party this afternoon, and
he doesn’t know how to pour out. Look,”
she handed her the letter.
“He seems to want us rather specially,”
said Terry thoughtfully. If she had had her
own way that afternoon she would have lain
down and gone to sleep.
Saturday was only half a day, but there
was the whole week at the back of it, and
the summer had been a long, hot one, and
the trays were very heavy to carry. Still,
when she had had a bath and changed she
would feel all right; and if the Major was
needing them they must go.
“I wonder who it is,” she went on; “he
doesn’t often have parties.” She laughed as


she finished the letter and laid it down. He
had written a postscript to say that, to make
perfectly sure of their coming - , he had ordered
Sarah to make a special baking of stodge. If
he couldn’t get them any other way he would
buy them.
It was half-past four as the girls went through
the big gate from the street and walked slowly
up to the cottage. The garden was looking
so lovely, and, after the chimney-pots of the
town, it seemed a Paradise. Brier-rose, and
periwinkle, and ivy covered the hedge on
either side of the path, and white and yellow
roses canopied the porch over the garden
gate.
There were voices on the veranda.
“I wonder who they are,” said Terry to
herself. She wished it might only have been
themselves and the Major. Strangers meant
that you had to sit up nicely and think of
things to say, and there were some days when
that seemed a task.
The Major heard the click of the garden
gate, and came forward to meet them.
“This is very good of you,” he said, as he
greeted them. “I was rather afraid my note
might come too late.” He looked at Terry


closely; the dear child looked tired and paler
than she should, he thought: he wished with
all his heart that she should not have to work
so hard.
“ I got it just after Terry left,” said Alicia.
“ I wanted you to meet some old friends of
mine,” he said, leading the way on to the
veranda, where the tea table was set behind the
shade of the honeysuckle. “ I believe you have
met before.”
Two figures rose out of the basket chairs.
“Oh!” very nearly said Terry; it was Mr.
Astley and his son.
Somehow all the little discomfortablenesses
that had ever been seemed to be swept away
in that pleasant afternoon. Kate Bastable and
her lack of understanding, the tea-room with its
wearinesses, its petty hurts and annoyances, the
longing for things one couldn’t have, the fear
of not being able to pay for the things one had
to have, the stress of living was all lost in the
joy of it. All congestion of evil or troublous
thought was dissipated by the power of under-
standing and good friendship that drew them
together. The Major, with tender fatherly
interest in the doings of the two girls into
whose lives he had come so suddenly and


unexpectedly, and who seemed by their cour-
age and their gaiety to add such a zest to
his own; the girls themselves, happy and for-
getful of their cares in the pleasure of the
moment; Mr. Astley, whose only experience
was of women who were tended and cared for
and sheltered from all troubles that came from
the world outside their own homes, curious and
absorbed in the study of this new genus that
asked nothing but the right to do for itself,
and did so unwhimperingly; and Jim Astley,
not thinking anything except that Alicia’s face
was the sweetest he’d ever seen, and fearing
lest, having found her again so suddenly, he
should lose sight of her just as quickly.
When tea was over, Terry and Alicia went
off to the kitchen to find Sarah, and to tell
her the latest about Fairy Barnes and the
people who came to be fed by Terry. Sarah
never took quite kindly to the tea-room. The
kindergarten was all right, that was a young
lady’s work, but the tea-room was a shop, and
had no place in the picture. A friend of hers
had married a baker once; they had started a
refreshment room at the back of the shop; it
didn’t seem the thing that Terry should be
doing the same.


Terry always tried to explain, but it wasn’t
much use.
“We haven’t things in the windows, and
I don’t have to do up parcels,” she said.
“Come in and have tea some day, and you’ll
see what it’s like.”
“We’re frightfully grand really,” she went
on, as Sarah pursed up her mouth. “A
marquis’s second cousin has the tables next
to mine, and the general’s step-aunt makes
the cakes. I’m only the daughter of a sugar
planter; remember that.”
“And you’ve got to carry cakes to a cobbler
if he comes in?” said Sarah.
“Yes,” said Terry, “if we think he’s got
enough money to pay for them.”
“Then I don’t hold with it,” said Sarah em-
phatically. Everything was all topsy-turvy in
her mind. She was a servant, and was brought
up to wait upon Terry and the likes of her.
Terry was a lady, and had to run about after
any butcher or baker or candlestick-maker who
liked to sit down and ring the bell. She gave
it up.
“Never mind, Sarah,” said Terry com-
fortingly, “it’s good honest labour, and them
as ’asn’t any brains must work with their ’ands.


Some day perhaps they’ll give me the money
to look after, and then I’ll save enough out of
it to have a nice little place of my own. You
wouldn’t mind it so much if the place were my
own, would you?”
Sarah “ gruffed ”, which was the name given
by Alicia to the inarticulate sound that always
resulted from Terry’s banter, and the subject
was dropped till the next time.
When they returned to the veranda, Mr.
Astley and his son were standing ready to go.
“Goodbye!” said Mr. Astley, taking Terry’s
hand. “We are off to the country again to-
night, but perhaps when we come back you
will allow us to call?” He said it as if he
were making the suggestion for the first time.
Terry remembered her foolish pride when he
had asked" her the same question a week ago,
and smiled.
“ Indeed that would be very nice,” she said.
“ But you must come on a Saturday or a Sun-
day, or else I shall not be able to see you.”
“Goodbye!” said Jim Astley to Alicia, and
as that was all he could think of that wouldn’t
be too much, he said it twice to make up.
Some day, when I’ve finished telling you about
Terry and Alicia and all the palpitating little


nothings that went to make up their history,
I mean to write a book upon the things that
were never said and the letters that were never
written.
It will be a very big book, and everyone in
the world who is worth his salt will have helped
to do a bit of it.


CHAPTER XXV
Mr. Astley Sympathizes
Christmas had come and gone in a blaze of
heat. Alicia, who had seven weeks’ holiday
spent two of them with the Barretts, who had
a house at Portsea for the season, but Terry
was only able to go for a few days at Christmas
and New Year.
Christmas Day fell on a Friday, and as there
was no evening boat service she had to spend
half the day getting there. The Major, who
had been invited both to the Astleys’ and the
Barretts, chose the latter, and would not go
‘ Chnstmas Day, SO that Terry might not
have to travel down alone. An acquaintance
between Dr. Barrett and himself had, through
Terry and Alicia, extended to a warm friend-
ship with the whole Barrett family, and things
had developed so quickly, yet so quietly and
eadil_\, that the four months which had passed
morning when the Major stopped to
273 1 8


look through the gate seemed almost like four
years, by the amount that had been got into
them. It was odd how one went on living
the same life year after year, till one grew to
feel that there never could be anything dif-
ferent. Then all at once everything changed
as quickly as the slides in a magic lantern,
and that which had seemed eternal became
only a memory.
Life was going very gaily for Alicia, and
while Terry was glad with all her heart that
it was so, yet it made things very much more
lonely for her.
When the Astleys came back to town they
brought Mrs. Maxwell, Mr. Astley’s widowed
sister, with them, and the result was that the
girls’ carefully guarded “party” frocks were
beginning to show the strain of a fortnight’s
hard wear. Then came an invitation for them
to go back to the station for a visit. Terry,
for whom it was impossible, spent days and
nights longing for it, and for the rest concen-
trated her energies on the extension of Alicia s
wardrobe, which had to be effected in various
ways, as there were certainly no means. Alicia,
who still had three weeks of her holiday to
run, was able to go, for the difficulty of


the travelling expenses had, at the time of
the invitation, been settled at once by Mrs.
Maxwell.
11 Understand,” she said with decision, “that
as you go up with me you go as my guests all
the way;” and when the girls had looked dis-
senting, she added: “It is a rule John makes
with regard to all the girls who come to stay.
He says, as he hasn’t been allowed to have
a daughter, at least he’ll know what it would
feel like to have one.” She laughed. “Jim
always swears that his father would dress him
up in petticoats if he were given his own way;
he says his worst nightmare is that he finds
himself with long curls and a blue sash.”
Terry and Alicia laughed, and for some
absurd reason Alicia felt shy. She always
seemed to feel shy now when Jim’s name was
mentioned, and changed the subject as hastily
as she could. Then, when she was alone, she
lashed herself for her stupidity and self-con-
sciousness. Next time she would see to it
that she felt like a sensible human being and
not a gawky idiot. But next time brought no
change, and in her confusion she avoided him.
She felt as we all do when we have something
we want to keep to ourselves; it seemed as if


her mind was glass-fronted, and her thoughts,
printed in very black ink on very white paper,
were hanging in the window for all eyes to
read.
Jim Astley, knowing nothing of this, and
having no desire that one person should do
anything hut read what was going on inside
his mind, was bewildered and chilled by the
sudden reserve in Alicia’s manner. He read
it as indifference, and it developed in him the
consciousness of a glass front and an accom-
panying need to put up the shutters. One
might care very much, but one couldn tgo on
showing it w T hen it was distasteful to the person
for whom one cared. So, for the sake of his
pride, he pretended to be indifferent, and Alicia,
who had at first been only shy, grew proud too,
and she pretended, and they were both as
miserable as they pretty well could be.
“ You don’t think that the little girl is giving
him the cold shoulder for the fun of playing
with him, do you?’’ asked Mr. Astley of his
sister one night after an unsuccessful dinner
party, during which Alicia had hardly spoken
a word, and Jim had devoted himself assidu-
ously to Terry. “I would be sorry to think
of her as a stupid little coquette.” In spite of


his longing for a daughter, his son was his son
and the apple of his eye. And when the apple
moped the father was unhappy.
Mrs. Maxwell smiled. “I don’t think she
is a bit of a coquette!” she said. “ I think it
is that they are both young and are discovering
themselves for the first time. Jim cares, and
I think she cares, but things have happened
very quickly, and she is bewildered. Jim
doesn’t know that, and is hurt. Such things
must take their own time.”
Mr. Astley looked relieved, but still an abso-
lutely “let be” policy seemed dangerous.
“I dare say you are right,” he said, “but
what do you think about asking them up to
stay for a while. They’d like it, eh?”
“ I’m sure they’d like it if they could afford
it,” said Mrs. Maxwell far-seeingly.
“Afford, afford!” said Mr. Astley impetu-
ously; “it’s not got to cost them anything.
I wouldn’t allow that.”
Mrs. Maxwell looked at her brother. James
was a dear, but he was terribly unworldly.
“ Perhaps you wouldn’t,” she said, “but that
is more easily said than done. They are not
your daughters—yet,” she added with a smile.
“But it’s absurd—absurd!” he said. “I


wouldn’t let you ask any girl all that way to
pay for herself, unless she’d got a father, or
a husband, or —or something, to do it for her.
Bless me, Laura, what are you a woman for
if you can’t arrange a little thing like that?”
She laughed outright. “ I’ll do it,” she said,
“ if it is to be done, but it isn’t the simple thing
you think. You’ve always had money, and you
don’t understand what small things might stand
between a penniless girl and her pleasures.
You can give them their journey, but you can’t
give them money for their pockets, and if they
have to earn most of what they spend, it isn’t
very likely they’ll have much left over. Boots
and shoes cost something, and the cleverest
girl, although she may be able to make a very
passable frock out of a length of threepenny
muslin, can’t make those herself.”
He stared, trying to focus his mind on the
pin-points his sister was presenting to him. He
knew what it was to be in a tight corner after
a drought, and sometimes found it difficult to
lay his hand for the moment on the necessary
thousands he was needing, but boots! —they
were like air and water and —and bread; you
had to have them, so you never counted them
in your expenses. Something of it dawned


upon him as his sister talked. He had always
understood the very poor, but it was not un-
usual for them to go without boots if they found
a difficulty in providing them. But the poverty
of those who sat at table with you, that was
difficult to comprehend, when they talked as
you did, lived as you did, and, if you were not
too critical in your observings, wore apparently
the same clothes as you did. You knew, al
the back of your mind, perhaps, that they were
often in need of money, but that, to your under-
standing, meant that they were unable, through
lack of capital, to take up schemes that would
benefit them, or that they found the educat-
ing of their families an almost unbearable
strain.
But that the girl in the pretty white frock
who sat beside you at the theatre, whose face
was animate with very joy of living, and whose
laugh was pure gaiety, should have to stay
away from your garden party to-morrow be-
cause she had no shoes fit to wear, and could
not even afford to get the ones she had, mended
—it was incredible! How did she get to the
theatre? Ah! One could wear one’s only pair
of bronze slippers—chosen years ago, before
one had learnt the wisdom of always buying


black if one could not indulge in collections —
to the theatre, but not to a garden party.
Mr. Astley’s sympathy with Terry and Alicia
had been the sympathy a generous large-hearted
man would feel for any young, vital creatures
who were forced through circumstance to go
without the pleasures that belonged to their
age. It was hard upon them that, instead of
being able to live healthy, out-of-door lives,
they should be cooped up in a building all day
and every day; he understood that, because
once he had broken his leg, and while it was
mending he had counted every hour of every
day till he should be allowed out again.
His heart had been sore when his old friend
Charley Forrester had been forced to give up
his yacht, and content himself with a few days’
sailing every now and then in a hired boat.
Yet here were two girls whose wildest dreams
would not let them hope for one day’s sailing in
a lifetime, unless it came by chance, and whose
ordinary allowance of absolutely fresh air was
cut down to almost nothing. He took a deep
breath and filled his lungs; the very idea of it
was stifling. He had lived most of his life in
the saddle, and he was glad when each morning
came and he could be off again. His thoughts


went back to the girls; they were the only two
he knew who had to fight so hard, yet there
must be many more, all working ceaselessly
and more or less uncomplainingly for their little
foothold, and doing it without hope of any
glorious future or fear of any hopeless one.
His heart grew big. It was such courage as
that which kept the world sweet and young
and alive; if his boy could get a wife like that,
he would be lucky. He turned to his sister;
his eyes were shining.
“ I wish—l wish I could fill their pockets for
them,” he said impulsively; “they deserve it,
and more.”
Mrs. Maxwell had been watching his face
during the silence which followed her speech.
She got up to go to bed, and stood for a
moment, her hand resting on his arm. There
was a whimsical light in her eyes.
“You’re nothing but the schoolboy who
used to buy sugar sticks for the village
babies and sit down to watch them eat.
Jimmy, you haven’t grown up at all,” she
said gently.
“A very grey-headed schoolboy,” he said
ruefully, glancing at himself in a mirror.
“Good night, Laura! he stooped down and


kissed her. “Perhaps one of them, at any
rate, will get her sugar stick. What do you
think?”
“I told you what I thought,” she answered;
“things will come all right if you’ll let them
be, I’m sure.” She kissed him and went to
bed.
He sat on in the empty lounge till the
people began to come in from the theatres,
then he got up to go to his room. In the
hall he met his son.
“Hallo, Jim! Did you see them home
quite safely?” It took two minutes each way,
and Jim had been away three-quarters of an
hour.
“Yes,” said Jim, “and I’ve been for a
walk. Don’t you think it would be rather a
good idea to get back as soon as we can,
Pater? There’s no air in town.” He passed
his hand rather wearily over his head. It was
a confounded nuisance; one never felt like
this at Harpenden!
“Just what I’ve been thinking,” said his
father. “Your aunt and I have been talk-
ing it over, and we thought it would be
another good idea to take the two little
ladies back with us for a spell. That’s if


they can come. Do ’em good, don’t you
think?”
“Yes, I should think so,” said Jim, search-
ing in every pocket but the right one for his
cigarettes.
“She’s going to ask them to-morrow,” said
Mr. Astley, who seemed to be in the same
trouble over his matches. “Good night! I
think I’ll turn in now.”
“Good night!” said Jim. “I’ve got some
letters to write first.” He walked into the
writing-room, and, sitting down at one of the
tables, took up a pen. For ten minutes he
divided his time between biting the end of it
and tearing up the sheets of paper he had
spoilt; then he got up. He would write to
Marshall to-morrow.
He walked down the passage and through
the portico, standing on the pavement bare-
headed.
“A hot night, sir,” said the porter, touching
his cap.
“ It’s very hot indoors,” said Jim. Somehow
he wasn’t tired, although he had thought so,
and it was too early to go to bed yet. He
would go for another walk. He turned and
went down the street instead of up it. That


way he passed by the buildings where Terry
and Alicia lived. He looked up; there were
two lighted windows in the fourth row of the
west wall, and he wondered whose they were.
What a jolly night it was!


CHAPTER XXVI
On the Delights of Poverty
“ I don’t like to go when I think that you
can’t come too,” said Alicia.
“That’s nonsense,” said Terry. “I can’t
get a holiday till I have been in the room a
year, so there would be no chance of it, even if
there were enough money and enough clothes
to send us both. The question to be con-
sidered is: How are you going to get
enough?”
They looked at each other without deriving
much inspiration from it.
“ I shan’t want a great deal, shall I?” asked
Alicia vaguely.
“ No,” said Terry; “but you’ll want a great
deal more than you’ve got. You ought to
have some gloves, and another pair of shoes
at least, and two evening dresses, besides a
new dressing-gown and another cotton morn-


ing dress.” She looked at Alicia gravely. “ It’s
a pity we are angry with Kate; we might
have had another consignment of cast-offs by
this time if she had only known how to be-
have prettily; but really one must draw the
line somewhere.” She sat down cross-legged
on the floor, and, flattening a piece of paper
over her knee, held a pencil in the air. “ Let s
make a list.”
Alicia laughed. “I think it was Kate who
drew the line,” she said.
“ Sh!” said Terry; “that’s weak and wanting
in self-respect. One pair of ladies’ Oxford
glaces, one pair tan dittoes,” she went on,
writing to her own dictation.
“I’m afraid it’s rather hopeless,” said Alicia
forlornly; “where’s the money coming from to
pay for them?”
“Nothing’s hopeless if you want it badly
enough,” said Terry with an uplifting cheer-
fulness. “You may not get the tan dittoes,
but something’s got to produce the Oxford
glaces for the honour of the family sugar
cane that was, and the confusion of the Bas-
table who is.” She flourished her pencil
magnificently. “Full stop after tan dittoes.”
‘You might put it before, and have done


with it,” said Alicia; but Terry refused to
be depressed.
“There’s no harm in writing them, even
if you can’t wear them,” she said sensibly.
“A dressing-gown —we can make that our-
selves out of half a dozen yards of muslin, as
it’s summertime —two evening dresses ”
“The black would do for dinner,” said Alicia
more hopefully. Here, at last, was something
tangible.
“And I will lend you the white muslin Mrs.
Barrett gave me for ‘The Pink Cushion ’,” said
Terry; “that will do if there are any afternoon
‘ functions ’.”
“Oh, Terry, you are a dear!” Alicia looked
at her sister gratefully.
“It’s only for a fortnight,” said Terry.
“Then you want a garden hat and a show-
off hat; they’re easy enough when once you’ve
bought them ”
“You are like Mrs. Dailey, who always
says if only she had some money she could
pay her debts,” said Alicia, smiling in spite
of her troubles. “Terry,” she said, jumping
up suddenly, “what a difference three little
pounds would make, wouldn’t they? We could
do it all on that, don’t you think?”


“Yes,” said Terry, “easily.” Three pounds,
as matters stood, seemed untold riches. “I
tell you what, Leeshi,” she went on; “you
shall have the housekeeping money. I’ve
got just three pounds in the box, and the
rent can stand over for a month. Something
will happen to make it all right some-
how.”
“ Could I really, do you think?” said
Alicia longingly; it meant so very much to
her.
“Yes,” said Terry resolutely; “there won’t
be you to keep for a fortnight, and you had
no railway ticket last month, and we’ve been
out to dinner so often lately that we’ve saved
on that,” she went on, sweeping in all the
infinitesimal economies that could be gathered
together to square the three pounds, until she
almost convinced herself that it would be
an economy to spend it. Alicia was growing
more radiant with every word.
“ It’s my early night to-morrow,” said Terry.
“Call at the room for me at five o’clock and
we’ll go out and buy the things.” She herself
was overjoyed at the prospect.
Next day Mrs. Barrett and Ella came into
the tea-room for a cup of morning tea. They


were out for a day’s shopping-. Terry told
them the news about the visit.
“Poor old Terry,” said Ella; “I wish you
could g-o too! Harpenden is such a lovely
place; you would enjoy it.”
For the moment Terry felt very sorry for
herself. She had been trying valiantly to bury
her disappointment deep, but Ella’s sympathy
brought it very near the surface again.
It is a pity, said Mrs. Barrett quickly,
noting the shadow in her face; “but you are
sure to have the chance again, Terry. Per-
haps you will go the next time you get vour
holidavs.”
J
\ es, said Terry, feeling it would not be
very much fun going without Alicia.
“ How is Alicia - managing about her
clothes?' 1 asked Mrs. Barrett? “Has she
enough?”
“ Not quite,” said Terry. “ I’ m lending her
the dress you gave me, and she is taking the
black one for dinner; but she ought to have
some other sort of evening dress; and she’s
got to get some shoes and gloves and a few
things besides. We are going out shopping
to-night after five.”
Mn>. Barrett looked thoughtful. “Do you
(c/S) 19


think she will be in about lunch-time? she
asked. “I would run up for a moment if I
thought I should see her.”
“She’s bound to be in at lunch,” said Terry;
“she never goes out for that;” and Mrs. Bar-
rett said no more.
That afternoon, at the appointed hour,
Alicia was waiting for Terry with a beaming
face.
“What do you think!” she said joyfully,
“Mrs. Barrett brought me up the most beauti-
ful piece of silk for a frock you ever, ever saw.
It’s white, with little blurred bunches of roses
on it tied up with blue ribbons, and she says
I am to take it out there to-morrow and Miss
Meeson will help me to make it. Isn t she
good and sweet, and altogether lovely?” Alicia,
in the clouds with her happiness, narrowly
escaped being run into by a goods van, and in
saving herself bumped against an irascible old
gentleman, to whom she apologized radiantly.
Everything was a pleasure to-day.
“She is,” said Terry, with her heart warm
and glowing. If it was courage that kept the
world alive, it was thoughtfulness like that
which made it fragrant.
“I’ve had my nose glued to the shop win-


dows all this morning- trying to find the best
places to get the things,” continued Alicia,
“and there’s a grass lawn embroidered in little
white rings at Raynham’s that will make just
a darling frock for either morning or afternoon,
and it’s reduced from two and elevenpence a
yard to one shilling.”
They went to Raynham’s and looked at the
lawn; it was rather wide, so they got eleven
yards instead of twelve; the shilling saved
would buy the buttons, and tapes, and cottons
for it. From there they went on to a well-
known shoe shop, and gloated over the window
for a few minutes before they went in. Alicia
had a small foot, and was able to wear sample
shoes, so she got a very smart pair for a good
deal less than she would have had to pay in
an ordinary way. When the man had fitted
her he went to one of the cases and took out a
pair of white satin slippers.
“I don’t know if you want anything of this
kind,” he said, “but if you do these are a
wonderful bargain.
“No, thank you!” said Alicia; then she
stopped.
They were so lovely, they took your breath
away, if you were accustomed only to look


at footgear from a utilitarian point of view.
Terry and Alicia bought, with much careful
and anxious choosing, the pair of shoes that
would look the prettiest, wear the longest, and
cost the least. Every purchase had to be
viewed from these standpoints, and if a possible
choice fell short in any one count it had to be
discarded, and a new one made. Therefore
anything satin or anything coloured could no
more enter into their calculations than could
diamond necklaces or sable coats.
“They are a sample pair,” said the man, tak-
ing advantage of the pause; “the usual price
of them is a guinea, and the sample price
twelve-and-six, but there is a slight flaw in the
satin on the inside of the left heel,” he turned
the shoe over, and showed a dull white patch;
“it will wear all right, but we cannot sell them
as perfect, so the price has been reduced again
to seven - and - eleven.” He waited, holding
them out enticingly.
Alicia looked from the man to the shoes,
from the shoes to Terry, and from Terry
back to the shoes again. Those lovely rosetted
things with her silk frock with the roses —it
was out of the question—but, oh ! she drew
a long breath.


“Yes,” said Terry’s voice, coming to her
unbelieving ears like beautiful music, “if they
fit you, Leeshi, take them; they would be just
the thing with your white frock.”
She sat down in a maze. If they had been
made for her they could not have fitted more
exactly. But the wicked, awful, delicious ex-
travagance of it! It seemed as if the earth
must stop spinning to gasp.
“Where shall I send them?” The man bent
over the desk with his pencil poised.
“I I will take them, thank you!” said
Alicia hastily. Wait a whole night and part of
a day before she saw them indeed! She was
only human, and that was asking a little too
much.
“ We’ve spent one pound eleven,” said Terry,
calculating as they went along the street; “ that
leaves twenty-nine shillings for the rest, and
you must have a pair of stockings to go with
the shoes.”
They bought a shady burnt-straw hat, and a
blue satin ribbon to tie round it, for the garden;
and then Alicia found a white chip with a
double brim of pale blue for the best one, and
they got a big bunch of field daisies and a
black velvet ribbon to trim it with. As the girl


handed them the parcel Terry looked at the
clock; it was half-past six.
“We must leave the other things till to-
morrow,” she said; “it’s too late to do any-
thing more now.”
They got home, tired, but happy and ab-
sorbed. Before they could think of supper the
silk had to be shown to Terry, who stood rapt
before its dainty beauty.
“You must have it made quite simply,” she
said, “with a very full plain skirt, and a folded
belt, and rucked elbow sleeves. It ought to be
a picture dress, and you shouldn’t have any-
thing but very fine muslin ruffles in the sleeves,
and a little flat tucker to hold it up round the
shoulders. Those shoes will look lovely with
it, and you must dress your hair high, and
wear one red rose. Oh!” Terry was in an
ecstasy as she painted the picture. She wished
she could see Alicia dressed in it for the first
time.
After supper they trimmed the hats. In three
days Alicia was to start, and there was a great
deal to be done before she went: buttons to
be sewn on, and things to be overhauled, besides
two frocks and a dressing-gown to be made.
Still, it could be done, as Mrs. Barrett was


lending Miss Meeson. They would be very
simple frocks, and Terry and Alicia could make
the muslin dressing-gown together in two even-
ings. It w T as rather nice to be in a bustle over
pretty things.


CHAPTER XXVII
Mr. Isaac Rubinstein
It was Saturday afternoon. On Monday
morning- Alicia was to go, and so far there
was no pocket-money for her. Terry knew
that she could have had it in a moment from
either Mrs. Barrett or the Major if she had
asked, but she couldn’t do it. Mrs. Barrett
had been so good already; the Major—no,
not even the Major if there were any other
way of getting it: and Terry had ideas.
A little before tea-time she went along the
corridor to the studio of Mr. Richard Curtis,
and tapped gently upon the door. There was
no answer. She knocked again.
“Come in!” cried Dick, not too graciously.
He had made up his mind not to answer at first,
for he was very busy.
Terry entered.
“Oh!” he said, feeling as if he had been
spared by some merciful providence from inflict-


mg - an irretrievable injury upon himself. “ I
didn’t know who it was.” Suppose she had
thought he was out when he did not answer,
and had gone away!
“Am I interrupting you?” she asked, hesi-
tating in the doorway.
“No! Please come in!” he pulled a chair
forward hastily. Terry sat down.
“I came to ask you if you would have tea
with me, or if I might have tea with you,” she
said. “Alicia won’t be home till late, and I
hate having mine alone.”
“Stay and have yours here,” he said eagerly.
It was nice to see her in her own place, but
he thought it was even nicer to have her in
his.
“I’ll stay if you’ll go on with your work, and
let me get the tea, then,” she said; and he went
back to his easel to watch her while he pre-
tended to work.
“You’re very tidy for an artist,” she re-
marked, going to the shelf where the tea things
were kept. “ I’ve been into several studios
since I met you, and all the others look awfully
higgledy-piggledy compared with yours. What
have you got two kettles for?” She pulled one
out from the back of the shelf and peered into


it. “This is one of the holey ones,” she said;
“you ought to throw it away.”
He looked up.
“No, leave it there,” he replied quietly; “I
use it for something else.”
“What on earth could you use a kettle with
a hole in it for?” asked Terry wonderingly, as
she returned it to its place.
“It makes a very good model,” he said
unblushingly.
Terry stared, then she laughed; the idea was
irresistible.
“ I’d like to come in some day and find
a kettle sitting for you,” she said; “it would
be very interesting.”
“They are very nice to paint,” he said
gravely, “they keep so still;” and Terry
laughed again. She wondered how it was
there were so few men as good-looking and
as clever as The Angel Guest. It may have
been a coincidence, but the same thought had
occurred to Alicia with regard to someone else.
“We’ve got one,” she resumed; “but it’s
been trained as a singer. When its voice
breaks we’ll hire it out to you if you like.”
“That’s a good idea,” he said. “ I’ll make
a study of it, and call it “A Queen of Yester-


day”. It ought to fetch a lot of money for a
guessing competition. Any paper would buy
it, because no one would guess it, and the
prize money could stay where it was. I’ll
give you half if it comes off,” he added
generously.
Terry made the tea and poured it out.
“Artists can make
they?” she enquired.
a lot of money, can’t
He laughed softly,
done,” he said, “but
who did it.”
“ I’ve heard of it being
I’ve never met anyone
“Won’t you make
a lot some day?” she
asked, looking at him earnestly. She was
sure he would succeed, he had it in the set
of his head, the shape of his mouth.
“Yes,” he said, looking back at her reso-
lutely. He’d never wanted money very much
till he met her; now—he would have it.
“Some day I shall make heaps and heaps,”
he said again, almost as if it were an incan-
tation. Then he smiled. “And in the mean-
time there is always my watch.”
“How do you mean your watch?” asked
Terry innocently, but with deep purpose in
her question.
“Well, sometimes I don’t wear it," he said.


“Why not?”
“Because a very good friend of mine who
has a shop in Bourke Street pays for the right
to lock it up in his safe,” said the Angel Guest,
“and in exchange I take care of a little of his
money for him. That sees me over the time
till someone shall buy my pictures again, and
when that happens I take him his money and
a little over, and he gives me back my watch.”
“What is his name?” asked Terry.
“Mr. Isaac Rubinstein,” said Dick gravely,
“and he’s the very best one in town; I have
tried them all.”
“It must be a comfort, if you have to part
with your watch, to leave it with a gentleman
you can trust,” said Terry sympathetically;
then they both laughed, and Terry began to
tell him about Alicia’s visit.
An hour later, Terry, with a little case in
her hand, was walking swiftly along one of
the small streets that led to Bourke Street.
When she turned into Bourke Street she
walked more slowly, looking about her as
she went. There it was, 107 a, on the other
side. She crossed the road and went in. An
old man in spectacles stood behind the counter
talking to someone across it. Terry’s heart


beat rather fast, and she walked to the far
end of the counter. It sounded quite easy
as The Angel Guest described it, but it seemed
a more difficult thing when one came to do
it. She didn’t quite like it.
The old man in spectacles left his customer
and came down to where Terry was standing.
“I want to borrow something on this,” she
said rather faintly, pushing the case across
the counter.
He opened it, and, taking out the bangle,
looked at it carefully.
“ How much do you want on it?” he asked,
looking over his spectacles at her.
“A pound, if you please,” said Terry.
He gave it immediately—he would have
given more if she had asked it, —and, the trans-
action completed, Terry sped back home. It
was a great relief at a crisis to know of such
things.
That night, as they were packing the trunk,
she took the pound out of her purse and handed
it to Alicia.
“You are a wonder, Terry; how did you get
it?” asked Alicia.
“I’m not quite sure that I’ll tell you,” said
Terry mysteriously.


“ I feel rather a beast over this holiday,” said
Alicia, stopping suddenly in the middle of the
room with some clothes hanging over her arm.
“ I’m not earning anything, and yet I m taking
all the money.”
“Don’t you worry,” said Terry; “ I’ll get it
all out of you some day,”
Alicia went back to the drawer, and poked
about for a while as if she could not find what
she was looking for.
“What do you want?” asked Terry.
“The bangle,” said Alicia. “You’ll let me
have that, Terry; I’ll be very careful with it.”
“You’ll have to be,” said Terry with a grin;
“it’s got to last a whole fortnight.”
Alicia stared. “How do you mean?” she
asked. It seemed as if Terry could not have
heard her aright.
“ I mean you’ve got it in your purse, . said
Terry.
For a while Alicia continued to look be-
wildered, then a horrified light broke over her.
“You don’t mean to say you’ve sold it!” she
gasped.
“No,” said Terry, “I’ve lent it to a kind
gentleman for a pound.”
“ Paw —!” began Alicia.


“Yes,” interrupted Terry, “I went and had
tea with The Angel Guest on purpose to find
how it was done.”
“Did you ask him?” queried Alicia with
shocked interest.
“Of course I didn’t. I just led up to it
very gently, and then dropped away when I
had found out what I wanted. And he no
more knew that he was giving me anything
but an intimate piece of news about himself
than I know what the next-of-kin is doing
at this very present moment.” A smile of in-
tense satisfaction at her own subtlety over-
spread Terry’s face, and she leaned back in
her chair contentedly.
Alicia looked at her admiringly. Terry
always could “find a way”.


CHAPTER XXVIII
Letters from Alicia
Harpenden, January 22nd.
Dear Terry,
I don’t know where to begin, every-
thing is so lovely and everybody’s so good.
Mr. Astley travelled with us, and Mr. Jim,
who had gone home two days before, came
to the train to meet us. There was a long
drive up to the house, which is perched right
on the top of a mountain, and we got there
just in time to have a bath and change for
dinner.
We went and sat out on the veranda after
dinner, and Mrs. Maxwell suggested that as
I had had a long day we should go to bed
early.
It was very nice of her, but I was far too
interested and excited to be able to be tired;
so when I went to my room I undressed and
then I blew out the candles and sat down by


HT
r ' i >\ '■ - jKyfSw |
HL. Bto^aHE™
" wS -'* jjL TfrjRfepPv -^m
Sl—
|- i JHL
■B
tm& *Jjk*
w v *■»
p f’lw
k/lm
%
A. ;x
nHr u>
Jl ~»v- Mr 1IH
, r
ij|i
ft 4S 0m %*3
SITTING OUT ON THE VERANDA




the open window and thought about everything
and nothing, and why I should be up here like
a princess in a palace and you down there
working like a whatever-it-is-that-works-as-
hard-as-you’ve-got-to.
It seems so odd the way things happen. If
you’d told me six weeks ago, when I was
setting copies and making clay pies with all
the little Georges and Fairy Barneses, that in
a month and a half’s time I should be luxuri-
ating in a beautiful house hundreds of miles
away, with more new clothes in my box than
I could ever remember having in my life
before, I wouldn’t have been even interested,
because I wouldn’t have believed it. Yet here
I am, and when I pinch myself I don’t wake
up.
All to-day till five o’clock we just stayed
quietly in the house. Mr. Astley and Mr. Jim
went out after breakfast and didn’t come in till
lunch, and they disappeared again till tea-time.
Then after that we went for a lovely long
drive, behind a pair of spanking horses, till
dinner-time, and after dinner we went out on
to the veranda again and talked and gossiped
till it was time to go to bed.
To-morrow some people are coming over
(° 7B ) 20


from one of the stations, and the next day we
are going to drive to The Old House, which
is the first place Mr. Astley had, and fifteen
miles from here among the mountains. My
bedroom is such a lovely big one; it has a
French window opening on to the veranda at
one side, and a casement one looking out over
a valley and across more hills on the other.
Last night there was a bush fire miles away
on another mountain, and we sat on the ver-
anda watching it blazing in the darkness. It
looked very weird and splendid, but it made
me shudder a bit when I thought that the
forests round us might quite easily do the
same thing. A wide ring is cleared round
the houses in case anything should happen.
I wear the grass-lawn dress in the afternoons,
and it looks very nice; Mrs. Maxwell remarked
about it yesterday. I like people to notice
your things; don’t you? That is if they do
it the right way, and she does. Goodbye for
this time, Terry dear! The postbag’s being*
kept open for me while I finish this, so I must
hurry; but I’ll write again soon.
Your affectionate
Alicia.


P.S. —I haven’t touched the pound yet; they
haven’t given me a chance. A.
Harpenden, January 26 th.
Dear Terry,
Things are happening so quickly that
the days are melting away like minutes. Six
days have I been here, and it seems almost like
a flash.
Yet in another way it seems years and years.
I can’t believe that I’ve only really known the
people I’m staying with a week; it feels as if
I must have known them all my life. Yet,
after all, I suppose a week being together all
the time would be as good as three months in
an ordinary way, don’t you think? If you had
twenty-four meals, and spent six mornings and
six afternoons and six evenings with the same
people in three months, you’d feel pretty inti-
mate; and you get all that in six days if you
are all shut up in a house together. Perhaps
in town it wouldn’t be so, because everyone
might be doing different things and you might
only meet for some part of the day; but here
it’s morning, noon, and night, and you never


seem to get tired or to want it to be any differ-
ent, and when I think it will all be over in
eight, or at the most ten, more little days, I
can t believe it. Still, I’m not going to think
about it; if I think about anything it will have
to be how jolly lucky I am to have had this
beautiful, delicious holiday at all.
The people I told you about came to
lunch and invited us to a dance they are
giving next week (I shall wear my rose-
bud dress and my satin shoes for the first
time), and next day we drove to The Old
House.
We started quite early, directly after break-
fast. It was a hot morning, and there were
some pretty stiff hills, but it was a good road
most of the way. Oh, Terry, the lovely smell
of it all ! The road wound the whole way
through eucalyptus forests. Sometimes we
were on the top looking dow r n over them,
sometimes right in the heart of them, with the
great white-trunked trees shutting us in close
on either side; then we would come to an open
bit of road, and see the hills and the valleys
stretching away and away as far as the eye
could reach, and in the valley there was that
lovely smell of damp earth and hot ferns —you


remember it, don’t you, when we used to go
out to that little creek at Glen Iris and hunt
for maidenhair? It all gave me a tight, little,
squeezing pain deep down inside my heart.
I was glad there were no strange people with
us, so that we needn’t talk. Once Mr. Astley,
who was driving, looked down at me and
smiled, but he didn’t say anything. That’s
so nice, when you can think without having to
say anything.
We got to the house in time for lunch. The
manager came out to meet us, and his house-
keeper took us to our rooms. After lunch
Mrs. Maxwell showed me over the house. It’s
such a funny, little, old place, with long, low
rooms and thick walls, and it reminded me
very much of the cottage at home. There is
a wide wooden balcony-veranda place round
three sides, and you go up four or five steps
to it. All the rooms open on to the veranda
with French windows, and there are funny,
little, unexpected places cropping up all over
the house that make you feel as if you are
very young and playing a game of make-be-
lieve. You would have loved it. I said to Mrs.
Maxwell: “If Terry saw this she would want
to furnish it right away;” and she laughed and


said: “It wants it badly. The next time It
is done, we’ll send for her.” Wouldn’t you
like it if she did?
We had tea and left about five o’clock. It
was even better driving back, because it was
cooler and not so uphill. Mr. Jim drove home,
and I kept the same seat. The sunset was
beautiful and the stillness and the bigness of
it all was so wonderful. Do you remember
how awfully worried and tied up \ve used to
get at school about the Twelve Tribes? Part
of one verse came back to me as we drove
along. It was: “Unto the utmost bound of
the everlasting hills”, and it kept ringing in
my ears all the way home. I remember what
a nuisance it always seemed to be to have to
learn verses; but I used to think of it as a
lesson, and anything that was a lesson seemed
a bother. Suddenly thinking of it like that
made it seem quite different, and I wondered
how I ever could have minded.
We were all rather tired when we got home,
and nobody seemed to want to talk much.
I think the mountains must have got into our
bones. Somehow or other I feel as if the
people who live always with wonderful big
things like that about them must be more real


than the ones who don’t. Cousin Kate looks
such a speck from here.
Your affectionate
Alicia.
Harpenden, January 29th.
Dear Terry,
I haven’t time for more than a
word, because to-night is the night of the
dance, and I’ve got to get ready in a few
minutes. We are going to drive over to
dinner.
Like a dear, find out for me if the school
opens on the 7th or the Bth. If it is the Bth
Mr. Astley will bring me back himself on the
7th. It’s cutting it rather fine, I know, but
it makes all the difference having someone
to travel with, and I feel I want to stay till
the very last minute. It will be a very long
time before I can have such a beautiful,
happy, delicious holiday again. If it’s on the
7th, I shall have to come down on the 6th
alone, as he says he will not be able to get
away before the 7th. I think he is really
making it as early as that so that I shall not
have to come home alone. It’s very nice to


have people thinking for you so, and it makes
you want to do it for others. I know, after
saying a thing like that, I shall go straight
away and be selfish, but it does all the same.
I didn t tell you before, in case I wouldn’t
be able to do it, and should have to give it
up, but I’m learning to ride. At first I was
awfully frightened, but they started me with
a very gentle pony called Catkin, and next
week I am to be allowed to try Bluebow, Mrs.
Maxwell’s hack, and a perfect beauty. Of
course I hadn t a habit, but Mrs. Maxwell
lent me a linen one of hers, and, as it has a
loose coat thing with a belt, it looks quite all
right when I pull the belt in tight. Mr. Jim
takes me out for a little while every morning.
I didn’t go this morning because of the dance
to-night. Isn’t it grand to think of having
three or four more days than I was asked for!
I’ve been learning how to make bread.
Your affectionate
Alicia.
■P'S. On second thoughts I will keep this
letter over till to-morrow and tell you about
the dance when I get back.—A.


January joth.
Oh, Terry! you’ll just have to go to a party
in that dress when I bring it home; it’s the
sweetest thing you ever saw! There were ever
so many pretty ones in the room that I’m sure
must have cost pounds and pounds more than
mine, but all the people—at least Mr. Astley,
and Mr. Jim, and Mrs. Maxwell—said they
none of them were a patch on mine. It made
me very glad, because Mrs. Barrett had given
it to me and you had said how it was to
be made; and I felt they were saying nice
things about you both all the time they were
talking.
We took our dresses with us and changed
there. At breakfast Mr. Astley said to me:
“You must tell Cresset what flowers you want,
and he will cut them for you at once; they
ought to be gathered before the sun gets too
strong.”
I remembered what you’d told me, so I
said:
“ I only want one red rose, thank you.
Terry said I mustn’t wear anything else with
my dress.” And when I went into Mrs.
Maxwell’s room on my way down to dinner


she looked at me and said: “ Do you know,
that Terry of yours is an artist, Alicia; no-
thing- else would have been right with that
frock. Then she asked who designed it,
and when I said “Terry”, she said: “Well,
she’s wasting- her time in the tea-room,” and
she looked thoughtful, as if she were wonder-
ing- what you might do instead. Wouldn’t it
be lovely if you could make a lot of money
at dress-designing-? I danced all the dances,
and never felt tired at all. Everyone I danced
with danced well, and that makes such a differ-
ence, whether you are tired or not, doesn’t
it?”
To-morrow there is a garden party at the
Merrits’, five miles away, and the night after
there is to be a dance here. There is a lovely
balhoom. Dear old Terry, I wish you were
having some of it.
Your affectionate,
Alicia.
—I feel I have so much to tell you, but
it must wait till I get home. It’s so hard to
put things in letters.—A.


Harpenden, February 6th.
Coming back to-morrow as ever is. Oh,
how glad I shall be to see you again! Expect
me about a quarter past seven.
Yours,
Alicia.


CHAPTER XXIX
An Event of Interest
Terry stood by the supper table, looking* over
it carefully to make sure that nothing* was
forgotten. Alicia would be tired when she got
in, and although she would not want a great
deal, what she had must be very nice. After
to-night they could go back to their old regime
of rigid economy, but to-night—well, teal were
plentiful this week, and Terry had bought a
beauty, all roast and stuffed, for one-and-
threepence, and with that and two crisp rolls,
and a tomato salad, she was going to cele-
brate the return of the wanderer. She looked
at the clock; the train was due at Spencer
Street at seven o’clock, and it was now half-
past. Allowing for luggage and delay, Alicia
should have been home ten minutes ago; the
train must be overdue. Terry left the door
ajar so that she might hear her coming up
the passage.


A quarter of an hour later there was the
sound of a light footfall and a heavy tramp,
and Alicia came in, followed by the porter
carrying her boxes.
“Just put them inside the door, please.
Thank you, that will do!” She closed the door
and went up to Terry, putting her arms round
her.
“ It’s very nice to see you again,” she said
shyly; and Terry, sensitive always to impres-
sions, was immediately conscious of a difference
in her sister.
“ If it’s nice for you,” said Terry, “ you may
imagine what it is for me. I got so mopey last
week that I shut up the rooms and went to the
Barretts’ till yesterday.”
“ Poor old Terry!” said Alicia, then she
looked at the feast.
“ What a grand spread!” she exclaimed.
“Yes,” said Terry, “that’s what you call
buttering the cat’s feet.” Under cover of her
jesting she watched Alicia. It was so odd
for her not to look you straight in the face.
To-night she seemed to shrink from meeting
Terry’s eye; indeed, she refused to.
“Mr. Astley wanted us both to dine with
him at Menzies’,” said Alicia, turning her back,


ostensibly to put her hat down on the divan,
but keeping - it turned while, with great pre-
cision and neatness, she folded up her veil,
and did various things that were altogether
superfluous and unnecessary; “but I thought
it would be better for us to have supper alone
quietly. She turned and looked at her sister
for the first time. “ Don’t you think so?”
she asked rather wistfully.
“Yes,” said Terry, “very much nicer.”
Alicia had something on her mind; Terry
wanted to help her, and didn’t quite know
how. She looked her straight in the eyes for
a moment.
“ \\ hat is it, Leeshi?” she asked simply, and
with no urge in her question.
For answer Alicia turned rather white, then
she pulled off her gloves and held out her left
hand; on the third finger a diamond was blaz-
ing.
Terry caught her breath.
“Alicia, she said in a half-whisper, “it’s
Mr. Astley’s little boy!”
Alicia nodded, and the blood surged into her
face again. It was over at last! “ I couldn’t
write it, she said, “ although it happened four
days ago; and 1 felt, when I saw you, as if I


couldn’t even say it. Oh, I am so glad you
know!” She gave a little cry of relief that was
something between a sob and a laugh.
There was nothing mercenary in the sudden
rush of thankfulness that flooded Terry’s heart.
She knew that Alicia would not have taken
Jim Astley unless she had cared; therefore,
with her gladness for her sister’s happiness
came a sense of blessed relief. Here, at
least, was one from whom the burden would
be lifted; for without any special training to
fit one for the struggle it was a burden,
although one might shoulder it as gaily as
needs be.
“I am very, very glad,” she said; then for a
moment she turned away. She could not trust
herself to say more, and she did not want
Alicia to see the tears that stood in her eyes.
And Alicia, who was wanting a moment or
two in which to recover herself, picked up
her things and carried them into the next
room, while Terry stood blinking over the
stove.
“The tea’s made,” called Terry a minute
later.
“All right! I’m just getting into my old
dressing-gown; I won’t be a second.”


“ I don t know why,” said Terry, as they
both sat down at the table—“ I don’t know
why people should say exactly what they
don’t mean when they aren’t going to do
it.”
Alicia looked bewildered, and Terry con-
tinued :
“You said just now, ‘ I won’t be a second ’,
which meant you would, and a good many more.
People in shops say: ‘ I won’t keep you waiting
a minute , and that means that they are going
away indefinitely. Other people say: ‘ I’ll come
directly’, ‘directly’ meaning now, this minute,
while they intend you to understand you will
have to wait till they are ready. I’m always
meaning to make a collection of words that
haven’t anything to do with the work they
were born to. That’s a darling ring, Leeshi.”
“Is that one of them?” asked Alicia,
and they both laughed and began their
supper.
“It was his mother’s,” explained Alicia,
going back to the ring. “Oh, Terry, they
have been so sweet to me about it!”
“ Tell me,” said Terry.
“ I think I cared very much from the be-
ginning,” said Alicia, twisting the ring round


on her finger and watching it break into a
hundred different lights as she talked, “but
I pretended to myself that I didn’t when I
did not see him any more after Kate’s party.
Then, when we met again, I felt stupid and
shy, because I knew that I cared, and I didn’t
want anyone to see it. So the more I cared
the stiffer and the stupider I got, and some-
times, when I w r as just longing for him to
come and talk simply and nicely with me as
he did with you, he would come, and then I
would get just as bad as ever, and say some-
thing that I knew was going to drive him
away; yet I couldn’t stop, no matter how hard
I tried.
“Then came the invitation, and away up
there at Harpenden everything seemed to be
different. We drove and rode and danced
together, and all the silly artificial things
seemed to slip away, and w r e w r ere just our
own real selves. She smiled reminiscently,
and a little flush rose to her face. “He asked
me to marry him three days ago, when he
was driving me over to The Old House to
lunch, and then, when we pulled up at the
steps he said: ‘This is to be yours, Alicia,
when you are ready.’
(0 78 ) 21


“ When we got back he went straight to
find his father, and I went to my room.
While I was dressing, Mrs. Maxwell came to
see me. She just put her hand on my shoulder
and bent down and kissed me, and she said:
‘Jim has told me, Alicia dear; I am so glad.’
And when I said something about it being
very sweet of her, she smiled and said: ‘ I
think Jim is one of the dearest boys I know,
and I think you are quite good enough for
him; now, what more can I say?’ Then we
both laughed, and she sat on the bed and
talked while I went on dressing.
“ I felt terribly shy when I went down to
the drawing-room and found Mr. Astley there
alone; but he didn’t let me feel it more than
a moment. He came forward with his hand
out, and he took mine and held it tight in
both his own and said, in his dear hearty way:
‘ And so you have promised to try and make
my boy miserable, have you?’ And when I
plucked up courage to look at him, and said
I would do my best, he threw back his head
and laughed over and over again, saying, ‘ I’m
sure you will, I’m sure you will.’”
Terry listened; it all sounded like a fairy
tale, and such a happy fairy tale! One knew


such things happened, but they generally hap-
pened to other people. It seemed too good
to be true that Alicia could be going to be
so happy so easily.
“Jim is coming down the day after to-
morrow,” continued Alicia shyly; it was an
effort as yet to say his name comfortably,
“and he and Mr. Astley are going to call
upon Cousin Kate; but Mr. Astley is coming
to see you to-morrow.”
She got up suddenly and went into the other
room, coming back with her purse open in her
hand.
“There,” she said, holding up a sovereign
between her thumb and finger, “there is the
bangle, unbroken.”
“ Do you mean to say you never used it?”
asked Terry.
“ I didn’t get a chance,” replied Alicia.
“ They took me from my door to theirs, and
from theirs back to mine, and there wasn’t a
shop within fifty miles.”
“ But the servants?” said Terry.
“ Mrs. Maxwell told me it was one of the
rules of the house that nothing should be
given by the visitors. She says Mr. Astley
arranges all that when he engages the ser-


vants, and pays them their salaries accord
ingly.”
“ How very nice!” said Terry. “ I shall
go and see Mr. Rubinstein to-morrow.”
They sat up till the small hours of the morn-
ing talking matters over. There were so many
things to be thought. Jim Astley wanted the
marriage to take place immediately, but Alicia
had still two months more of her time at the
school to run, and then there was the trousseau
to be found.
“There won’t be much for you, unless
Cousin Kate steps down, which, as you are
marrying a rich man and one of her own
friends, she may think it incumbent upon her
to do,” said Terry’ sagaciously.
“ I don’t want it from her,” began Alicia
impetuously; “she said she would never help
us, and I would rather she kept to her word.”
Terry looked at her sister with a comical
twinkle in her eye.
“You haven’t got it quite right,” she said.
“ Kate only said she would not help us if we
were in difficulties. She would scarcely call
this difficulties, I think.”
As the girls were undressing for bed, Alicia
said:


“Terry, you’ll have to give me that white
dress.”
“ Indeed I won’t,” said Terry. “ I’m much
more likely to charge you rent now for the
weeks that you wore it. Why do you want
it?”
“Well,” said Alicia slowly, and bending
her head so that her hair should fall over her
face, “ I wore it the day I drove to The Old
House.”
“ The day?” asked Terry.
“Yes,” said Alicia, brushing vigorously at
her hair.
“Then I certainly shall charge you rent
“And he said,” continued Alicia, still more
slowly, “that I was always to wear that dress
when I went out with him.”
“And you,” enquired Terry, “what did you
O > *
say r
Alicia parted her hair and held it back on
either side, looking through the curtain she
had made. Her eyes danced mischievously.
“I said: ‘lndeed, I wish I could; but I’ll
have to give it back when I get home; it
belongs to Terry.’”
“And ?” said Terry.
“ He said: ‘ Let’s buy her another then.’


“All right!” said Terry. “I’ll change you
for the rosebud one.”
“Hm !” said Alicia; the rosebud one
seemed to have associations too, now she
came to think of it.


CHAPTER XXX
The Angel Guest’s Resolve
It was Easter Monday, a fine warm day, and
the last of a good Eastertide. Terry and
Major Trevor were walking slowly round the
warden of the cottage, stopping every now
and then to look at some bush or flower which
the Major’s careful tending had brought to
finer growth. They were talking about Alicia.
“ She has finished at the school," said Terry,
“and the next two months are to be given up
to trousseau-getting."
“And how are you managing?" asked the
Major. It must be very hard to find a trous-
seau when even bread and butter was a diffi-
culty. He was a comparatively poor man,
but still there was a balance at the bank. He
turned and faced Terry.
“You think well enough of me, child, to
let me help you if you need help; is it not
so?” His eyes were bent upon her tenderly.
527


Terry laid her hand impetuously upon his
coat sleeve, and the tears sprang to her
eyes.
“Thank you, thank you!” she said with a
little catch in her voice. “I ask you
indeed if it were necessary, but Cousin Kate
has stepped in,” she smiled. “She has for-
given us publicly for earning our own living,
and we have forgiven her privately for forgiv-
ing us. At first Alicia and I felt w r e would
like to snap our fingers and tell her we could
manage quite well without her; but on think-
ing it over made up our minds to swallow
our pride. Alicia is so happy, she can’t find
enough decent anger in her heart to kill a
mosquito; and I ” she shrugged her shoul-
ders, “I don’t know whether it is because I
am happy too, or growing more wordly-
minded, or only lazy. Everyone is so nice
about it that I feel like a cat in the sunshine,
and it seems sheer ingratitude to keep alive a
discomfortableness in the face of such gracious-
ness.” She stretched her arms up over her
head with a gesture of relief. “And I hate
a quarrel so, it is such an effort after the first
heat of it’s over. If one could have it out and
have done with it, it might be a good healthy


exercise; but when you’ve got to keep it by
you, it goes flat and sour.”
“You’re quite right,” said the Major
heartily. “Anger is like champagne; when
once it’s uncorked you must finish the bottle
at a sitting. What’s left over is no use to
anyone.
“ I don’t think for a moment,” went on
Terry, “that her feeling to me is changed.
I shall always be the one who incited Alicia
to wrongdoing, and it is only because I can t
v£ry well be left out that I am included. I
don’t see Cousin Kate doing the same for me
when my time comes,” she laughed without
any bitterness. “Her time” was so remote
she could afford to jest about it.
The Major looked gravely down into the
upturned face beside him. Terry made him
think of a gay little schooner in a stormy
sea; she breasted the waves so gallantly, she
rode her troubles so superbly, yet she was
so unconscious with it all. It was youth, but
the very flower of youth, the throbbing beat-
ing pulse of a world that could never grow
old so long as such sap rose in it. His boy
would have been just such another as Terry
if he had lived. His boy and Terry! He


sighed, and then he smiled, for Terry’s eyes
were searching him through and through.
Sometimes the Major had a look in his face
that gave one a longing to “make things
up ”to him. Terry was haunted with it now.
He saw T the anxiety in her face, and so he
smiled.
“When your time comes,” he said, “ I shall
reserve the whole right to do everything, even
though I have to fight twenty Cousin Kates
to get my way. Remember that, Miss
Terry.”
“All right!” said Terry, smiling back; “but
it will be a horrible humiliation for me to see
the years go by, and to feel I can't give you
anything to do. I never think of myself with
a ‘time’.”
“Never mind,” said the Major consolingly;
“you shall have a parrot and a monkey in-
stead. They’ll be almost as much trouble as
a husband, with the difference that you’ll be
able to get rid of them the moment you want
to. I’ll see that you’re not left alone.”
Twenty miles away The Angel Guest sat
upon a hilltop, painting furiously. He had
packed his knapsack on Thursday afternoon,
and gone away to lose himself in these blue


ranges that gave him back all the belief in
himself that he needed. Black-and-white work
bought him bread and cheese and kept his
name before the editors, but here was colour
and air and hope and life. This was the road
to fame—and the jester girl. He would tear
the secret of the mountains from the very heart
of them and give it to the world; and the
world should give him money, and money
would give him —the jester girl.
Over that plain lay the city, and in the city
she worked, carrying food and drink to a pam-
pered, gluttonous public. She, for whom no
throne was high enough and no homage great
enough; and she lived in a garret and mended
her own shoes with waxed thread and a laugh!
He would make the world give him money so
that he might give it to her. If he loved
enough he could do anything. Quentin Matsys
was an ironworker and loved a painter’s
daughter. The painter said: “My daughter
shall never marry anyone but a painter.”
Quentin Matsys said: “Well, I will be a
painter;” and now he had been an old master
for hundreds of years. He would be a young
master while he lived, and an old one after;
but he would be a master.


And some day, some day, he would carry the
jester girl off with him to those very hills, and
together they would learn the secrets of them
and the secret of life, which was love. He
looked from his picture across the plain to the
horizon, where a thin line of smoke was rising.
There were the chimneys of the city, the city
that held his Dream and his Business 5 for he
was no dreamer only, who besieged heaven
with a full heart and idle hands. He believed
that heaven helped those who helped them-
selves, and he made up his mind that heaven
should help him.
So he painted with his heart ablaze, and as
he painted, the love that was in him mixed
his colours and guided his brush. He would
be great for the jester girl, and, later on, with
the jester girl. The world was going to be
his, his, his!
In case you might think that what I said
about the friend who stood at his elbow mixing
his colours and holding his brush was only a
figure of speech used by me for decorative
purposes I would like to tell you it’s just as
real as the hair upon your head or the nose
upon your face. And if anyone says it isn’t,
don’t believe him any more than you’d be-


The Angel Guest’s Resolve 333
lieve the person who said there was no such
place as Rome, simply because he hadn’t been
there.
I’ve been to Rome.
And I know.


CHAPTER XXXI
Buying the Trousseau
There was no doubt about it, the buying - and
choosing of Alicia’s trousseau was a breathless,
entrancing task. Terry, who had to go off
to her w r ork at nine in the morning, and did
not get home till close upon seven at night,
could not be present at the actual purchasing
of the things; but Alicia would not buy a
single frock of any sort without first showing
her the patterns and consulting her as to the
design. In this she had some battles with
Cousin Rate, but she stood her ground firmly
and sweetly. Life was giving her everything
Just at present and Terry nothing, except the
pleasure she got out of her—Alicia’s—happi-
ness. As much as it was possible for her to
have of that she should have.
Cousin Kate, ’ she said coaxingly, “it is
very good of you to give me all these things,
but }ou mustn t mind if I show them first to


Terry and let her have a say in the choosing
of them. It’s all she’s got, you see, and while
she wouldn’t want a bit to be interferey, yet
I know she feels it very much that she can t
g-o about with us and see everything. We’ll
c>
choose the stuffs and then I 11 just take them
home and let Terry see before we decide.
That would do, wouldn’t it?”
Miss Bastable, who had been an autocrat
all her life, objected strenuously on several
occasions, but in the end Alicia got her way;
for Alicia was no longer an obscure child, but
the prospective daughter-in-law of an influen-
tial person, and as such had a right to a way
of her own.
There were two weeks during which Terry
got off at five o’clock, and one Saturday morn-
ing that was her rightful holiday. Those hours
were blissfully spent in a turmoil of buying and
fitting, and Terry wished humbly that her role
in life were to clothe the outsides of people
rather than the insides; it was such delightful
work matching silks and satins and draping
chiffons and laces indeed it was a pleasure
even to touch the beautiful things.
It was arranged that she should have a
week’s holiday at the time of the wedding.


She would have to pay someone to take her
place, but it was a kindness on Mrs. Hotham’s
part to allow her to do it; a temporary worker
always meant more or less trouble. Even if
she were experienced, she would not be ex-
perienced in the particular working of that
particular room, for every place had its dif-
ferent methods. Terry was very grateful, and
looked forward to her week as a child looks
forward to its first party.
Alicia stayed with Miss Bastable off and
on during the two busy months before her
wedding, but she would never go for more
than a night or two at a time. In a little
while she would be leaving Terry altogether,
and till then she wanted to be with her as
much as possible. Terry working all day
long in the tea-room and coming back at
night to an empty home was not to be thought
of. And it was so much nicer, too, to be able
to talk things over in the privacy of their very
own home.
There was a great deal to be done, and as
the time narrowed down it became a breath-
less whirl of excitement. Mr. Astley and Mrs.
Maxwell were in town giving dinner parties
for Alicia, and Jim, who was trying vainly


to be in both places at once, was going - back-
wards and forwards from Harpenden to town
and town to Harpenden, alternately superin-
tending the painting and alterations at The
Old House and arranging his affairs in town.
The furnishing was to be done when they
came back from the honeymoon; but all the
decorating was to be executed while they were
away, so that the house should be in readi-
ness for the things as they were sent up. Terry
and Alicia spent an ecstatic morning choosing
papers for a green-and-white drawing-room,
a red dining-room, and a pink bedroom, not
to mention a cream-and-blue spare-room and
a little buff morning-room. Oh, what a house
it was going to be!
Then there were the bridesmaids’ dresses to
be thought of. It would be a winter wedding,
and, after much lying awake at night, it was
decided that the three bridesmaids—Terry, Ella
Barrett, and Marjory Maitland, a cousin of
Jim s should wear cream cloth gowns, with
large plumed Cavalier hats of golden-brown
velvet, and carry posies of golden - brown
chrysanthemums.
It was Terry’s idea again, and as Mrs.
Maxwell heard it, and saw the dainty frocks
(° 7B > 22


that had been designed by her for Alicia’s
trousseau, she more than ever felt she was
wasting her time in the tea-room.
“There must be an opening for anyone with
her eye for form and colour, said Mrs. Max-
well to Mrs. Barrett one day, after they had
been looking at a particularly pretty frock
which Alicia had proudly ascribed wholly to
Terry’s inventiveness. “It is absurd to think
of a girl with that instinct leaving it unde-
veloped.”
“It is,” said Mrs. Barrett. “Ever since
I first remember Terry she has had the knack
of getting more out of a scrap of ribbon and
a flower than most other girls would get with
a whole shop to choose from.”
“Perhaps after Alicia is married something
might be arranged,” went on Mrs. Maxwell
thoughtfully. Terry would need another in-
terest to keep her from fretting when Alicia
went. The matter must be considered.
The first day of her week’s freedom was a
gorgeous one to Terry. She awoke with the
luxurious feeling of being absolutely her own
mistress. There was no watching the clock
to see that the minutes should not fly past
unobserved, no seven-pound block of butter to


roll, with the salt water trickling down your
arm, and no terrible fear gripping at your
heart, as one o’clock approached, lest your
people should all come in at once, and the
red-haired girl forget what was told her. She
sat idly sipping her tea and chipping her toast,
while Alicia opened the pile of letters that came
as a matter of course now by every post, and
read out the little bits she thought would
interest.
“ Raynham’s can’t match the mauve glac£,
so I shall have to have satin. I think I’d
rather have it after all. What do you think,
Terry?”
“I’d like the satin if you can get a soft
enough one,” said Terry.
Alicia put down her letter and looked at her
sister thoughtfully.
“ Isn’t it wonderful to think it is barely five
months since the day we bought the grass lawn,
and took so long to decide whether we’d have
eleven or twelve yards?”
“Yes,” said Terry with a laugh, thinking
how there were still plenty of such momen-
tous questions left in life for her to decide,
even though Alicia’s small economies might
be over. When first Alicia was engaged she


had impetuously insisted that Terry should
give up her work and go to live with her;
but Terry, although she was glad Alicia should
want her, felt it would never do. She herself
had grown to need her independence, and
the shabby attics, with their freedom and
their privacy, satisfied a want that another
person’s home, however luxurious, could never
supply. She had chosen a road, and once
on the way she could not go back. But
there w r ould always be the joy of Alicia’s
home to go to and Alicia’s interests to absorb
her.
“Jim wants me to meet him for an hour at
three o’clock,” Alicia went on. “Have you
got anything you can do then?”
“Yes,” said Terry; “I will go to Pauline’s
about the hats.”
“Well, meet us at Muller’s at four and
we’ll go somewhere to tea.”
They met at four o’clock and went to a
quiet place for tea, where they could talk
things over undisturbedly. When they were
seated, Alicia handed Terry a little packet.
“That’s for you,” she said.
Terry looked at it.
“ For me?” she asked.


“Yes, for you,” said Alicia. “Open it and
say if you like it.”
Terry undid the parcel. Inside the paper
was a leather case; inside the leather case was
a little, flat, gold watch on a dainty fob-chain.
“Oh!” said Terry delightedly; “is this for
my bridesmaid’s present?”
“No,” said Alicia with a quick embarrassed
little laugh; “its just for nothing. We got it
for you to-day.”
“Oh!” said Terry again, and she looked
at Alicia understandingly. Long ago, when
they were little, it had been her great desire
to have a watch with a little “ball” chain.
The nearest she had ever got to it was once
when she had saved up her pennies and bought
a gilded one for sixpence. She remembered
how proudly she had hooked it into her pina-
fore, and insisted upon Alicia asking her the
time whenever she saw anyone coming, so
that she might have the opportunity of pulling
it out and dangling it before the longing eyes
of the passer-by. Alicia had remembered the
fob.
“You can have it on a safety-pin instead
if you like,” she said; “but I thought you’d
be able to stick that into your belt easily.”


“I wouldn’t have anything but the fob,”
she said happily; “not if you offered me a
chain of diamonds for it.” She tucked it into
her belt and looked at it tenderly, then she
glanced quickly back at Alicia.
“Ask me the time, Leeshi,” she said plead-
ingly.


CHAPTER XXXII
The Wedding Day
It was the day of the wedding; a stream of
carriages was passing slowly through the
church gates and out again, and a crowd of
people lined the way to the portico. Inside
the church the pews were rapidly filling. Mrs.
Barrett, in a front pew, was trying to keep
Snowy quiet and answer his questions at the
same time. Snowy, hugging a horseshoe of
little roses that he was to step out and give
to Alicia on her way back from the altar, was
doing his best to conform with the instructions
given him when he was being dressed; but
still a man of five was a human being after
all, no matter how hard he might strive to
be something more, and it was a little too
much to expect of any human being that he
should remain quite speechless in the midst
of such new and strange surroundings. He
had been to church once or twice before, but


it had been nothing like this. Why did they
have bunches of flowers and bows of ribbons
on the pews? Why didn’t they sing hymns?
Where was the man in the nightgown? Snowy,
as long as he promised to keep quiet, was
allowed to stand up on the seat beside his
mother, so that he might be able to see. He
craned his neck forward. Hullo! There was
a face he knew—up there behind the flowers.
He waved; it was the bridegroom.
“ I did thee Jim Athtley jutht then,” he
whispered to his mother. “ Werth Farv?”
“ Fat her’s going to bring Alicia into church,”
she whispered.
“ An’ Ella too?’
“\es, and Ella too. Listen to the music,
darling.” Snowy listened obediently for a
while, but his eyes were giving him more en-
joyment than his ears just now.
Suddenly, behind the screen of flowers, the
boys in their nightgowns began to sing.
They re coming now,” whispered Mrs.
Barrett, and she stood Snowy in the corner
of the pew, by the aisle.
Snowy leaned over and looked down the
long, narrow way to the door at the end of it.
Far down were some people moving slowly;


they were coming towards him. There was a
man and something all white beside him.
When they got nearer, the white thing turned
out to be a girl covered up with the same
stuff as he had on his cot to keep the mos-
quitoes away. He couldn’t see her face, but
she had flowers all over the top of her head.
The man was quite easy to guess.
“Farv!” He said it unconsciously in his
excitement. Mrs. Barrett tightened her clasp
upon him.
“ Hush, Snowy!” she said imperatively.
The procession passed; Snowy turned to his
mother.
“ He thaw me, and he thmiled at me,” he
whispered triumphantly.
At the altar Alicia stood, her curly head,
with its chaplet of orange blossom, bowed
low, her voice trembling as she repeated her
vows. And beside her was Jim, tall, lithe,
and all the browner for her whiteness, his
heart thumping like a steam engine, his mind
awed by the solemnity of the words he was
saying.
“Let us pray,” said the clergyman, and
they knelt down.
“O Eternal God, Creator and Preserver ot


34 6 Saturday’s Children
4
all mankind, Giver of all spiritual grace, the
Author of everlasting - life, send Thy blessing
upon these Thy servants, this man and this
woman, whom we bless in Thy Name; that, as
Isaac and Rebecca lived faithfully together, so
these persons may surely perform and keep the
vow and covenant betwixt them made (whereof
this Ring given and received is a token and
pledge), and may ever remain in perfect love
and peace together and live according to thy
laws; through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.”
“I will try always to do right; indeed I
will!” said the heart of Alicia.
“ Please God, she shall be happy if I can
make her,” said Jim voicelessly.
“Now,” said Mrs. Barrett, as the strains
of the wedding march burst out joyously,
“Alicia will soon be here.” She lifted Snowy
down and stood him at the entrance of the
pew. Snowy looked at his mother and followed
her eyes to the vestry door. He stood motion-
less, watching. At last, after wdiat seemed to
him an eternity, the door opened. Alicia, with
her veil thrown back, was coming towards him,
this time with Jim Astley beside her. He
stepped out into the aisle.
“Thith—thith—oh, thith ith for you!” In


his excitement he could not get the words out
quickly enough.
Alicia and Jim stopped. Before them stood
a white-haired, breathless urchin, with flushed
cheeks and earnest eyes. His little legs were
planted squarely, and he held the horseshoe
out with both hands.
Alicia stooped down and took it from him.
“Oh, Snowy, how lovely!” she said, kissing
him.
Snowy looked pleased with himself.
“It ith for you and for him.” He nodded
at Jim; then looking round he saw Ella, and,
squeezing himself in between her and the
groomsman, he took her hand.
“Come along, Mum,” he called; “here ith
Ellie.” Then he trotted off contentedly in the
middle of the procession.
Mrs. Barrett caught him up at the church
door, where he was continuing to make
diversion.
“ It’s all right, Mother,” said Ella, as Dr.
and Mrs. Barrett were trying to persuade him
to go with them; “let him come in our car-
riage; there’s plenty of room.” And Snowy,
waving a short farewell to his father and
mother, was carried off in state on the knees


of two flower-laden bridesmaids and two fault-
less groomsmen. He was really having a
very interesting day.
At the door of the first drawing-room Miss
Bastable, very splendidly gowned, was re-
ceiving the guests, and at the entrance of an
inner room Alicia stood with Jim beside her,
and her bridesmaids hovering near.
She looked very pretty and sweet in her
trailing gown of creamy satin, with its heavy,
simple folds, her brown hair crowned with
blossom, and her fresh young face framed in
the softness of her filmy veil. It was happi-
ness that helped to make one pretty, and
Alicia could not complain of any lack in that
respect. There were little moments when she
caught her breath for fear; it all seemed so
wonderful.
All her own friends were there, smiling and
congratulating her. Dr. and Mrs. Barrett;
Henry and Charles, who had not been able
to go to the church; Sarah, resplendent in a
new brown cashmere dress with silk facings
—a present from Alicia out of one of her
presents; the Major, who, after having paid
his respects to the bride and bridegroom, was
courteously piloting Sarah round the tables


where the wedding presents were being shown;
her old school friends, crowding round her full
of good wishes; Mr. Astley; Mrs. Maxwell.
Once or twice, when there was a lull be-
tween the handshakings, she turned to Jim
and looked at him silently, and he smiled
down at her. Everyone was so very good;
she seemed to be getting so much more than
her share, and it made her feel very humble.
When she went away to dress for the journey
Terry and Sarah followed her up to her room.
They had dressed her for her wedding, and
she wanted no one else with her now. But
every now and then would come an impatient
knocking at the door, and a fresh voice would
cry: “Let me come in, please, let me come
in; I won’t stay more than a moment;” and
at last she found herself hopelessly surrounded
while she scrambled into her travelling dress
and tried to answer half a dozen people at
once. Sarah, by the bed, was carefully fold-
ing up the discarded gown and veil. At least
it would be a comfort to get those out of the
way with so many people filling up the room.
Terry was looking through the dressing-case
for the last time, to see that nothing had been
left out, and Alicia, in the chair before the


glass, was vainly trying to tie a veil over her
travelling hat.
There was a knock at the door and Mrs.
Barrett’s voice spoke warningly.
“Are you nearly ready, Alicia dear? You
must leave in ten minutes, and you have to
say goodbye yet.”
“Come in,” called Terry; “she’s just
ready.”
Mrs. Barrett looked in at the door and
laughed. There was no room for another
person; she would say her goodbyes down-
stairs.
Alicia came out to the door where the car-
riage was waiting, followed by Terry and
Sarah with the dressing-case. Jim took the
case from Sarah, and Alicia went up and
kissed her.
“Goodbye, Sarah!” she said affectionately;
“I’ll come and see you directly I get back.
Goodbye, Mrs. Barrett! Where’s Snowy?” She
lifted him up, while he put his two little arms
round her neck and hugged her. “See, I’ve
got one of your roses in my dress, Snowy.
Goodbye again, Cousin Kate! I will write
at once from Sydney and go to that shop for
you. Goodbye, goodbye, everybody!” She


ran laughing and breathless down the steps
to the carriage, her head bent against the
storm of rose petals that descended upon her
from all sides. “Where is Terry?” she paused
with her foot upon the step. “Oh, there
you are! Jump in, Terry! Goodbye, good-
bye ! ’ ’
The door banged, and they were off. The
guests stood watching the carriage until it
turned out of the drive into the road, and
then they went back into the house to look
at the wedding presents again and to talk it
all over.
In the carriage Jim and Alicia and Terry
were busy picking the rose leaves off one
another, and crumpling them into little balls
and throwing them out of the window. It
would be necessary to look unconcerned on
arrival at the railway station, and that would
not be possible if you unexpectedly carpeted
the platform with what was known to be only
a humane substitute for rice. Rice never
jumped out of the folds of the most ordinary
traveller’s garments without causing some
speculation among those who saw it, and,
as everybody always seemed to see it, the re-
sult was embarrassing to the ordinary tourist.


Therefore these three worked very hard at
eliminating the rose-leaf element.
Mr. Astley and Mrs. Maxwell had left the
house earlier and had driven to the station
to see them off. They were waiting outside
the reserved carriage when the three came
along the platform.
“Here you are, Jim,” said his father, and
the guard unlocked the carriage, while the
porter put the cases up in the racks and the
rugs and cushions on the seats. It was a
cold evening, and the carriages were not
heated. Alicia w’ould be glad of the great
possum-lined rug that Jim had included among
his many gifts to her.
Sitting there in her furs, her face rather
pale from the excitement she had been through,
and her eyes shining, Alicia seemed a new
and yet an older Alicia. Terry felt her heart
contract. Would it be that marriage would
gradually draw her sister from her? A jealous
wave swept over her, and she turned away
from the group who were laughing and talk-
ing together. They all seemed as if they
belonged to each other already. She felt very
lonely.
Alicia caught the look on Terry’s face as


she turned away, and she leaned out of the
window.
“ I say, Terry,” she spoke in the old, abrupt,
comradey way, and it warmed Terry’s heart
to hear it; “I wish, if you’ve got time, you’d
hunt round after chintzes while I’m away, and
have them ready when we get back. You
know exactly the sort of thing I like, and
I’m always surer of your taste than I am of
my own.”
“All right!” said Terry, beaming.
“And don’t be a little cat and forget to
write every day. Even if it’s only a postcard,
I’d like it, although you know how I hate
postcards. If you don’t write, I won’t.”
“All right!” said Terry again. There was
nothing the matter with the world really. It
was we ourselves who made it stupid.
(C 78)


CHAPTER XXXIII
Back to the Tea-room
Terry went to stay with the Barretts for the
week end, and on the following Monday took
up her work at the tea-room again.
She shrank from going back to the empty
rooms. No Alicia, and dust over everything.
That was the worst of a holiday; it made one
collar-proud. Instead of being grateful for the
break, and going back to work like a giant
refreshed, one grumbled and groused that it
did not last for ever. She took a pull at
herself as she went in at the tea-room door.
This would never do. She saw Providence
standing like a chiding nurse shaking its finger
at her. “Very well, Miss Terry, if you can’t
behave nicely after a party, you shall not go
to another.” She smiled, and re-adjusted her
outlook. That had got to be done; for she
liked parties. She flung all her energy into
her work; her hand found the butters to do,


and she did them with her might. It was
really easier to work if one worked so.
The red-haired girl gave her a sincere though
temperate welcome.
“I’m glad you’re back,” she said in her
monotonous sing-song voice. “I got used
to having you beside me, and I hate changes.
Did you have a nice week?”
“Yes, a lovely one,” said Terry.
“ It makes it rather hard to come back to
butter-rolling,” said the red-haired girl under-
She had heard a good deal about
the wedding from outside. “I’ve written a
thing on vegetarianism. I’d like you to read
it, and tell me what you think of it.”
“ Could I read it at lunch?” asked Terry.
“Yes, easily; it’s only about five or six
pages of writing.”
“But you aren’t a vegetarian,” said Terry,
remembering certain occasions on which she
and the red - haired girl had matched their
fleetness in a race to the oven for the last
plate of curry.
The red-haired girl laughed softly.
“ No, I’m not,” she drawled; “and the paper
isn’t a vegetarian one either. It is simply an
idea, suggested by the principles of vegetarian-


ism, to rid the world of all the people who
bore you.”
“Get rid of them?” asked Terry. “ How?”
“ Dispatch them, conduct them off this plane
on to another.”
“You mean kill them?” said Terry, aghast.
“That was the old name for it,” said the
red-haired girl placidly; “but ‘to kill’ suggests
wrongdoing, and, according to the vegetarian
idea, there is no harm in doing it under cer-
tain conditions.” She looked at Terry’s puzzled
face and laughed again. “The other night,”
she said, cutting deftly at her loaf, “someone
came to see my mother. She was a vegetarian
because she believed it was a sin to take life.
She stayed to supper, and had two helpings
of fish. I watched her eat the first lot with-
out saying anything, but when she went up
again I couldn’t keep quiet any longer. I
asked her if in her religion they counted a fish
a vegetable. She said: ‘No; but a fish had
no brains, so there was no sin in destroying
• > n
It .
“ H asn’t a fish brains?” asked Terry in-
terestedly.
“ I don’t know,” said the red-haired girl.
“She says not, and she seemed to speak as


one having authority. My contention is, if
it is not wrong to kill a fish because it has
no brains, it is not wrong to kill anything
that suffers in the same way. It’s time some-
thing was done,” she went on; “we are
growing far too particular about the preserva-
tion of life at all costs. In a little while we
won’t be able even to eat vegetables without
having a nasty uncomfortable fear that we are
hurting their feelings. I can see the news-
papers of a few generations ahead: ‘Horrible
Murder in a Lonely Field, Cauliflower found
with its Stalk Cut!’ ‘ Night Shelters for Frost-
bitten Potatoes: Bringing in the Victims!’
Mark my words, our unbalanced and unlicensed
humanitarianism will be our ruin. The giants
of the world are so busy sick-nursing that they
haven’t any time to do great things. Fancy
a big scientist denying himself the qualities
contained in a lettuce or a cabbage, because
he was afraid it would break their hearts to
cut them. More than ever I say it’s time
something was done.” She carved away mag
nificently at the bread, her voice contrasting
curiously with the vigour of her speech.
“ But if you’re going to do away with people
who haven’t any brains, what will you do with


idiots? Their trouble is that they’ve got too
many,” said Terry.
“ I don’t say that all the problems of the
universe are going to be settled by my one
little idea,” she replied rationally; “but if I
keep my small corner of the world bright and
tidy there is that much more of it bright and
tidy than there was before; don’t you see
that?”
“ I don’t want to be a bit personal,” went on
Terry, “but, if you let that idea get abroad,
how are you going to protect yourself against
the people who haven’t the intelligence to see
your exceptional intellect?”
“They, being people with no brains, would
be dead,” said the red-haired girl modestly.
“That’s true,” said Terry, “if you happened
to get your little hatchet out first. And if you
don’t preach your doctrine before you practise
it, what is going to prevent you being judged
Old Style and suffering the penalty? You
might have a little difficulty in prejudicing a
jury who knew that every moment longer you
remained alive was one chance the less for
them dying comfortably in their beds.”
“ I admit there would be personal risks,”
said the red-haired girl, “but the pioneers of


any movement know they have to take their
lives in their hands. The chief thing that
matters at present is whether the editor is
willing to pay me so much for my literary
treatment of the subject. For the rest
she waved the bread knife with a fine philo-
sophic gesture, “ I can wait for the fulfilment
of a scheme that may be a little in advance of
its period.”
“ Two ham sandwiches and two cups of
coffee,” announced the girl who took the early
orders, standing in the doorway and looking
in the direction of the red-haired girl: she was
responsible for the sandwiches.
With a splendid detachment the red-haired
girl arranged two sets of four triangular sand-
wiches in squares upon two plates, and, decorat-
ing each plate with parsley, she slipped them
on to the tray. The greatest idealist was all the
greater for being practical, and the red-haired
girl was not only an idealist.
The Toasted-Bun-with-the- Butter-Separate
greeted Terry w r ith something like enthusiasm
—at least for him it was enthusiasm.
“ I thought you were never coming back,’
he said shortly.
Terry felt flattered. So far he had brought


her up to believe that he resented her presence;
it was a distinct advance that he should resent
her absence.
“I hope you got your buns as you liked
them,” she said, smiling.
“Oh yes, thank you!” he said indifferently;
“ but I hate changes.”
“I’ve just had one,” said Terry, “and I
thought it was rather nice.”
He smiled in a tortured kind of way. Smiles
did not come easily to him; still, this girl, with
her unruffled cheerfulness, deserved an effort.
There was a woeful lack of unruffled cheer-
fulness about Terry as she stood that evening
in the middle of her sitting-room floor and
gazed round the deserted room. For all that
she needed her independence it seemed a
dearly-bought thing at this moment. Every-
thing looked poor, meagre, and unbrushed.
The curtains hung limply, and whatever she
touched was gritty with dust. On a table
under the window stood a plant—dead. It
had been forgotten in the hurry of packing
and going away, and had died for lack of
water. Terry had brought home some sand-
wiches from the room for her supper, and now
she remembered there was no milk for the


tea. She stood cold and disconsolate, looking
about her, then her face brightened. There
was just a chance that The Angel Guest might
not have gone out; she would borrow some
milk from him.
She went quickly down the passage to his
door and knocked. There was no answer; she
knocked again and again. Then she went to
the caretaker’s rooms. As the door opened
she caught sight of a bright fire blazing in
the range, and there was a pleasant smell of
something roasting. To Terry, cold, discon-
solate, and with no home but a dishevelled
one, the little sitting-room looked like a para-
dise. She longed unspeakably to be the care-
taker’s wife for that evening.
“ I can let you ’ave some milk if you like,
Miss,” said that lady; “ but Mr. Curtis, ’e went
orf about two days ago, and said he didn’t
know w’en he’d be back.”
“ Thank you! ” said Terry slowly. “ I think,
after all, I will go out for my supper. Will
you please tell the baker and the milkman to
call again as usual.” She turned and went
back to her room. The absence of The Angel
Guest was the last straw.
Opening her basket she took out the ham


sandwiches; they had been cut early in the
afternoon and were beginning - to curl up at
the edges. She gathered them up carefully
and went to the window.
“There!” she said, pitching them out into
the lane below; “if there’s anybody hungry
underneath, so much the better; if there isn’t,
I don’t care, so long as I never see you again.”
She came back, and, picking up her purse and
her gloves, went out of the room and closed
the door with a bang behind her. She would
find her way to the Greek oyster shop, and,
if they were what she wanted, she would
choose the most expensive oysters she could
find, also anything else that took her jaded
fancy. She seemed to have thrown away her
frugality with the sandwiches.
There was nothing very expensive to lure
her, and what she had seemed to give her
very little satisfaction. She paid her bill list-
lessly, bought a bottle of rolled anchovies for
breakfast, and went home heartsick. She
would not do anything when she got in ex-
cept go to sleep in the dust; and in the
morning she would get up in the dust. And
so it would go on.
She unpinned her hat and put it away with


her gloves in a drawer; there was plenty of
room for her clothes now that Alicia had gone.
Then she began to undress.
All at once she stopped and looked round
the room, first at one object and then at an-
other. She couldn’t bear it. Hastily slipping
on an old wrapper, she seized the biggest
kettle there was and ran along to the bath-
room to fill it. When she came back she put
it on the little stove and lighted the gas. Then
she tied a towel round her head, and, piling
the furniture on the divan, she took a broom
and swept as she had never swept before.
When she had swept one room she went to
the other and did that; then she came back
and dusted the first.
At two o’clock, grimy, tired, but no longer
cold or miserable, she stood triumphantly look-
ing at her handiwork. The floors had been
swept and the curtains shaken; everything that
could be washed had been washed, and not a
single corner or crevice in which dust might
lurk had been passed over or neglected.
Everything—except Terry—was as clean and
shining as a new pin.
“Better now!” said Terry contentedly, as
she surveyed her surroundings. It was what


used to be said to her when she was a little
thing and brought her scarred knees to be
kissed after a tumble. Then she had a lovely,
hot, soapy bath, and crept into bed. It would
be nice to wake to-morrow morning to a spot-
less house. Things weren’t so bad after all.


CHAPTER XXXIV
An Inspiration
Dick Curtis came back to town a week after
Terry returned to the rooms, and Terry wel-
comed him joyfully. There was something so
friendly and so comradey about her greeting
that he was chilled by it. It seemed as if
she showed him all she felt, and that all was
not enough. Yet he could do nothing to help
himself. What right had he to ask anyone to
wait for him, when so far there seemed no
earthly prospect of anything to wait for?
Some day he would make money and a
name, but that day was not yet. And in the
meantime he saw Terry being taken from him
twenty times a day. In his love and his long-
ing and his helplessness every man she spoke
to was his rival, and his powerful rival. He
hated the Barrett boys without ever having
seen them; poor innocent Harry and Charles,
who were two years younger than Terry, and


who were about as much in love with her as
she was with Snowy. In the distance, and
through the medium of Terry’s frank affec-
tion, which allowed her to chatter freely and
unconsciously of their merits to The Angel
Guest, they assumed an importance that was
overwhelming. Poor Dick lost his sense of
proportion in the maze of his longing. The
fact that she was so openly glad to see him
impressed him with the hopelessness of his
case; the fact that she talked so freely of
others a sure sign that they filled a very
significant place in her thoughts. He would
not tell her he cared, or try to make her care,
till he had at least one plank to stand on. But
if he did not tell her, how was she to know?
And if she didn’t know, she wouldn’t think of
him in that light. And in the meantime some-
one else w r ould come who wanted her and could
afford to tell her, and she wrould forget all about
him, and he would lose her for ever and ever.
He would speak at once, and then go away;
anything was better than suspense.
Then he thought of what that would mean.
No, he couldn’t do it. He set his teeth. She
didn’t avowedly belong to anyone else yet —
although in his heart he felt she never sent


away less than one suitor a day—and he would
work ceaselessly till he had bought even the
slenderest right to ask her to wait. And
while he was working—oh! there was always
the hope that he would see her every day for
a minute —or an hour —or whatever time Pro-
vidence and his own machinations managed
to procure for him. Bless her, she brought
him some wonderful leberwurst for his supper
last night —just a scrap of a piece, she said,
to see if he liked it. She had found a tidy
little German who made it himself, and it was
only tenpence a pound, and gave just as lovely
a feeling in your mouth as pate de fote gras if
you could forget the truffles. He would like
to have made a hole through the leberwurst
and hung it on his chain to keep it always
in remembrance of her sweet thoughtfulness,
but leberwurst didn’t lend itself to such ex-
pressions of tenderness. And also there were
times when he was not wearing his chain.
All this time Terry was going about her work
impatient in his absence, glad as a child when
he returned. She didn’t ask herself any ques-
tions as to her feeling for The Angel Guest.
He had become a necessity to her, and she
felt more than aggrieved when she came back


and found his studio door locked and himself
away. When she saw him standing in the
doorway of her own room she nearly fell upon
him.
“Oh, I am glad you’re back!” she said with
her face radiant. “Where have you been?”
“To Bendigo, doing some mining sketches
for The Weekly Echo," he said, feasting his
eyes upon her face, yet absurdly chilled by
the gladness of her greeting. It was almost
boyish.
“Stay and have your supper with me,” she
said; “I haven’t seen you since the wedding,
and I feel as if I had such a heap to tell you.”
He stayed, and the more Terry talked about
the wedding the farther away he seemed to get.
He was furiously jealous, jealous of Jim Astley
giving to Alicia so easily all that he longed to
give to Terry and couldn’t. Everything was
wrong.
After he had gone Terry sat wondering per-
plexedly. The Angel Guest had come in like
June and gone out like December. Why did
he change so? Why did he seem so glad when
he arrived, and so quiet and difficult of speech
when he went away? Was it anything she had
said? Yet it couldn’t be. She had only told


him about Alicia and Jim and all the things
that had been happening. Perhaps she had
talked too much, and he had got tired of
listening. He was a busy person, and must
have a lot on his mind. She hoped she
hadn’t bored him, and she felt she would
have to leave it to him to suggest coming
again.
But next evening, when she found the leher-
wurst, she could not resist running into the
studio for a moment with a little piece of it
for him to taste. She would not stay long,
only just long enough to see if he liked it.
She was sure it would be good for him, be-
cause it made one want to eat, and that did
not always happen with everything that lay
within reach of one’s purse.
She found she had stayed much longer than
she meant to. He had a fireplace in his studio,
and she had nothing but a paltry little gas fire
as big as your hand, that she never lighted
unless the cold was very bitter, or unless
someone was coming to see her. It was
cheaper to go to bed with a hot-water bottle.
But The Angel Guest had a real fireplace
with real coals in it, and when Terry came in
“just for a minute” he piled them on extrava-
(C 78) 24


gantly, and made her sit in the rickety old
armchair with her feet upon the fender, doing
everything he could to make her so comfortable
that she might forget to go “ home ”.
For a long time they sat so, Terry fascinated
before the fire, he at his easel working. Once
he looked away from the drawing before him to
Terry, and stopped suddenly—it was a pen-and-
ink thing he was doing on chance of it being
taken. Carefully, so as not to disturb her, he
unpinned it and laid it on the table beside the
easel; then, taking a fresh sheet of paper, he
set it up on the board before him. If she
would only stay long enough like that!
Once she stirred ever so little, as if the
thought that she ought to be going were
suggesting itself to her. “ Don’t move,” he
said quietly, “ I am just making a sketch.”
He did not want her to know it, lest she
should become self-conscious and alter her
pose. But Terry, tired from her long day’s
work, and hypnotized by the warmth and
light of the fire, had no wish to move if there
were any reason worth calling a reason to
keep her as she was, and she dropped lazily
back into the chair, glad to do as she was told.
Dick worked rapidly. Here was a picture!


/I mSP i r
B *■ N >jj
i I' .'•;;■•■ sj^*
n« i I f |
V
'.'• j'jv'.N 1 ?W^ v ? ) / Vr',.'--,:? i ; 1 -v : ;'
T; f j
»?dl%lF ; ,-i !i5- 4 W ■ * ibr'
“ ‘ don’t move,’ he said quietly




No black-and-white caricatures, no studies
of poppet heads and stampers and mullock
heaps for a prosperous mining journal that
wanted to get everything for nothing, but a
flesh-and-blood picture born out of his heart
and his brain and his understanding. As he
worked, the sketch grew amazingly. It was
an idea that had seized him, and not he who
had seized the idea, and it drove him before it.
The coals fell together with a crash. Terry
looked up at the clock on the mantelpiece,
and stretched her arms out.
“It’s ten o’clock,” she said in surprise.
“You’ve been two hours drawing!”
He looked at the sketch before him, and his
heart exulted. It was all there, that which he
had gone for; the tired droop of the shoulders
and the listless arms stretched out along the
chair: the spirit of weariness in the body
and the unbeaten courage in the whimsical,
laughter-loving face. He had made scores of
surreptitious sketches of Terry’s face at differ-
ent times, and the difficulty had been to catch
the smile that belonged to a mouth which
really drooped at the corners. To-night he
had got it, and got it irradiated by the
blaze of the fire. The face emerged from the


shadow like some gay spirit that was gay, not
because it knew no sorrow, but in spite of
the sorrow that it knew. To Dick, in the
exaltation of his work, it was like a call, a
call to live as gallantly as one could, not be-
cause of any reward at the finish, but simply
because it was the finest thing to do. Dear,
human, laughter-making, pleasure-loving Terry
had given him the message, and he was to crys-
tallize it for the whole world.
“Let me see it,” said Terry, getting up out
of her chair, and coming towards the easel.
She stopped before it in surprise.
“My goodness!” she said; “did I look as
tired as that?”
“Do you think it looks tired?” said Dick
with concealed delight.
“Yes,” said Terry, “I should think it did.
And that’s rather a darling look in the face.
Have I got that?” She went over to the glass
and studied her face as if it were something she
was seeing for the first time. “I don’t quite
see it,” she said truthfully.
“You may not have it this very minute,”
said Dick, “but you had it. You very often
have it,” he added.
Terry looked mightily pleased.


“I think you are very clever,” she said with
honest admiration. “I’m sure you’re going*
to be somebody.” And quite humbly and
sincerely, yet with no false humility or con-
ceit, Dick felt that everything she said was
true. He would, indeed he would!
Terry went to bed and dreamt of a golden
future for The Angel Guest, in which she,
without any hesitation or self-consciousness,
played an equally tremendous part. As to
what her part would be she did not bother
to speculate. Simply it would be there for
her.


CHAPTER XXXV
On Several Joys
Alicia came back from her honeymoon, and
spent three weeks in town before she went
up to Harpenden.
She was overjoyed at seeing - Terry again,
and brought her a lovely Japanese kimono
from Sydney, made of pale-blue silk, with a
soft padded hem and embroidered with trails
of mauve wisteria.
“Oh!” said Terry in a perfect shock of
delight. “I always seem to be saying ‘Oh!’
now.” She stood with clasped hands gazing
at it. The colours gave you a pain, they
were so lovely. “I’ll keep it and wear it
when I come to you in the summer; indeed
I’ll wear nothing else.”
Later on she slung it over her arm and went
off to show it to The Angel Guest.
“ You must let me paint you in that,” he said.
“ Blue belongs to you.” It was quite true,


but he was fast getting into that state of mind
when he felt everything belonged to her—or
ought to.
Terry, who could never be with Alicia till
seven, generally dined at the hotel w r ith her.
Sometimes there was a dinner party, some-
times only Jim; and sometimes, when Jim
had to entertain his bachelor friends, just
their two selves. Much as Alicia loved Jim,
and honestly as Terry admired him, they were
able to see him go off on those occasions with-
out feeling very heavy-hearted. Dinner parties
and gaieties were very nice and interesting, and
all that sort of thing; but it was rather jolly
to be able to have a quiet, uninterrupted talk
once in a way. Jim felt that Terry would be
wanting to see as much as she could of Alicia,
and he went away on his own affairs as often
as was necessary, and the girls, guessing what
lay at the root of his disappearances, respected
him for it. Sometimes an official party would
be formed in honour, perhaps, of Miss Bastable,
and they would dine in state and go to the
theatre after; but those evenings weren’t quite
as interesting as the ones on which Alicia and
Terry, at a small table in the hotel, w 7 ould
go through their dinner slowly and com-


fortably, and depart with the coffee to Alicia’s
room, where they could talk about the house
that was being so wonderfully decorated and
furnished, the house that was going to be just
a little more perfect than any house had ever
been before, or ever could hope to be after,
except (and it was such a far-away dream that
it could scarcely be said to consciously exist
in the mind of the dreamer) the Cottage, that
some day was going to be painted all over,
inside and out, and dressed according to its
merits and its chatelaine’s desires.
For the present, and with no limitations or
restrictions, there was Alicia’s new home to
occupy the whole of one’s thought and atten-
tion. Should they decide upon the muslin
with the hailstone spot, or the one with the
Empire wreath for the casement windows up-
stairs? Certainly there must be brass dogs
for the newly made open fireplaces, and
nothing but an Aubusson carpet would do
for Alicia s bedroom. After all, tussore cur-
tains, encrusted with heavy lace, would be
better in the green-and-white drawing-room.
The light through them would be softer, and
the biscuit colour would go so beautifully with
the over-curtains of apple-green satin apple


green just a little bit faded; one would be
able to get it at the Kalizoic. Oh, it was
all enchanting! How could a dinner party
in honour of Cousin Kate and a few more of
Jim’s Cousin Kates compare with conferences
like these, when one sat with a sample length
of satin or brocade in one’s hand, and thought,
and thought, and thought!
And after those shopping expeditions, from
which Terry, by reason of her calling, was
unhappily excluded, things would sometimes
find themselves at the caretaker’s rooms await-
ing Terry’s arrival. Once it was a screen of
dull terra-cotta cloth framed in narrow Japanese
carving, to replace the paper one that was
growing very much the worse for its everyday
wear and tear.
“ Only twenty-five shillings! Wasn’t it won-
derful?” said Alicia, in answer to Terry’s “You
are too good, Leeshi.”
Another time a rug to throw down in the
middle of the floor, that you might forget how
cold a combination of straw matting and no
fire could be on a winter evening.
And finally, oh, rapture! came a thing that
Terry had never allowed herself to think of as
possessing—in this world at any rate —a soft,


comfortable, capacious, hair-stuffed, cushion-
backed, linen-covered chesterfield, with ad-
justable ends and an ample storing place
under the seat for clothes. Alicia and she
had often talked over the delight of such a
possession, but it had been considered even a
luxury to think about it, and had only been
indulged in in moments of unusual visionary
excess. Alicia, in the fullness of her happi-
ness, had thought of this, and, feeling that
she could not honestly buy it out of the
money that was being given her to furnish,
had told Jim about it, asking that she might
give it to Terry instead of having it for her
own room.
“I meant to have one,” she said, “but I
don’t really need it if I could give it to her;
I’ve got so many comfortable things, and she
hasn t anything.” She looked at him like a
child pleading for a penny to spend, and he
looked down into her face and smiled.
“You dear little thing,” he said tenderly;
“of course she shall have one, and you shall
have one too. You don’t think one piece of
furniture the more is going to break up the
firm, do you?” and Alicia thanked him grate-
fully, and thought what nonsense it was for


people to talk of money not making people
any happier! Still, it was quite true that every-
one was not so generous with it as Jim.
When Terry opened the envelope that was
pinned on to the back of the chesterfield, she
sat down and wept a little. On the card en-
closed were written the words: “To our dear
sister Terry, from Alicia and Jim . The hand-
writing was Jim’s.
“The blessed, blessed things!” she said, as
she gazed at the card in her hands. Then
she put it away in a little box with some
letters. A long time after, when Terry was a
very great-aunt she came across that card in
an old desk. Sitting with it in her hand she
looked at it long and tenderly. The years
had brought much knowledge; there had
been much to sadden, much to disillusionize,
but there had also been much in the sadness
to uplift and to strengthen, and there had
been great joys to inspire. Across the years
came the remembrance of the girl Terry,
reading the little card for the first time, and
to the woman, grey-haired but still gay and
indomitable, it was like the breath of a clean
salt breeze. If at the end of life one had a
little garden of such thought-flowers to dream


among, one was very, very rich. And to have
planted a few of those flowers in the gardens
of others—well, it would help one to sleep
peacefully.


CHAPTER XXXVI
Just What One Expected
At the end of her year in the tea-room Terry
left. The idea of putting her talents to better
uses had been discussed exhaustively, and it
was decided at last that she should go into
some big establishment for six months to get
the necessary practical experience, and if at
the end of that time she cared to take it up,
money was to be found for her to begin.
Mrs. Maxwell and Mr. Astley were her
godparents in this. When Terry had been
approached upon the subject she had heartily
expressed her wish to do it, but she did not
think of it seriously, as she saw no prospect
of getting the capital. Her small income was
invested in such a way as to make any other
speculation impossible. It would not take a
great deal of money to start her, for her real
capital was her own cleverness. Still, she must
have rooms, however unpretentious; and also
she would want good workwomen to carry out


her designs. The amount necessary seemed
in Terry’s eyes to be enormous, but when Mrs.
Maxwell, who had been making a business-like
investigation into matters, told Mr. Astley as
nearly as possible what was wanted, he smiled.
“That’s very simple,” he said. “ I leave it
to you to do whatever you like, Laura; only
make the child understand that I am not
having seriously to curtail my expenses to help
her.” He laughed. “If it seems such an un-
procurable sum in her eyes, you may have some
difficulty in getting her to take it.”
At first Terry refused. She felt it was too
much to risk. Better to stay on in the tea-
room than chance losing money which was
not her own. If it had been her own it would
have been a different matter.
“You won’t lose it,” said Mrs. Maxwell
confidently, and Terry suddenly felt braced.
“ And if you did, James wouldn’t be sold up
over you. He’s got a few pennies in the bank
beside.”
Terry smiled. It was nice that they should
all believe in her so, it made her very much
inclined to believe in herself.
So it was arranged. At the end of Sep-
tember she was to leave the tea-room, and as


soon as she could get ready she was to go
up to stay with Alicia till after the New Year.
Then she was to enter upon her technical
training, and after that ! Terry's brain
grew dazed through wondering.
At the first knowledge of her good fortune
she went to tell The Angel Guest.
Poor Angel Guest! he was at that particular
time in a particular crisis of his affairs. The
watch and the chain were both away, and he
had just lost a post for which he had been
trying hard, and apparently had almost got.
Terry was going farther and farther away
from him. He looked into her glad, animated
face and spoke bravely. She deserved all the
good luck she had—and more.
“I am very glad,” he said, from the bottom
of his heart, and he held out his hand.
Terry looked up at him; he was smiling, but
there was pain in his eyes. She had loved
him so unconsciously and so long that she
felt it at once. Her dear Angel Guest, who
was always so plucky and so helpful and so
good, was being hurt; she couldn’t bear it.
“Oh!” she said, holding out both her
hands to him. In her longing to heal she
must touch.


Still he stood there, looking - down at her.
The smile in his eyes seemed to bless, but
once his mouth quivered a little. He was
wishing she would not look at him so; it took
his strength away. It made him that he for-
got he was a penniless painter with nothing
but his own courage to help him—it made him
forget everything but that he loved the jester
girl, must have her at all costs. And that
would be bad for the jester girl.
Terry, overwrought with the excitement of
the last week, burst into a storm of tears. In
a moment Dick had her in his arms. Nothing
mattered now but that she should not weep; he
scarcely knew that he held her.
“Terry, darling, tell me what it is! Don’t
cry so, dear, dear Terry! He held her tenderly
and stroked her hair, kissing the salt tears and
soothing her as one might sooth a terrified,
sobbing baby.
Terry cried on till the passion of her tears
was spent, then she lifted her face and looked
at him again.
“Why—why did you look like that?” she
asked, the sobs still catching her breath.
“ Oh, he said breathlessly, and instinctively
holding her closer, “I thought I was going to


lose you, and I love you so. I’ve got no money,
and nothing seems to be going right; but it
will now. I know it will so long as you love
me. You do love me, Terry?”
Terry did not answer. For a while they
clung to one another like two children; it was
almost as if they were defying anything to
separate them. Then Terry looked up and
smiled.
“Dear, dear jester girl,” said Dick in a
whisper.
She put up her hand and touched his face;
he was such a beautiful Angel Guest.
(C 78)


CHAPTER XXXVII
Which is the Beginning
Terry sat quite still, steeping herself in the
restfulness of the fresh summer morning.
From the low balcony she looked out over
hills and valleys scattered with little home-
steads snuggling down in the shade of the
tall eucalyptus trees.
Here and there were paddocks of yellow
wheat, looking like squares of buff-coloured
velvet, pinned out over the hillside. Near the
house some cows were browsing, placidly
cropping the long grass, and down in the
hollow a man was ploughing with an old grey
horse, the deep brown of the upturned soil
making a vivid contrast to the emerald green
of the turnip patch beside it.
The clearness of the atmosphere made the
slightest sound distinct. A dray, driven tan-
dem, came slowly along the winding, white
road, the hoofs of the horses ringing sharply
as they struck the flints. From distant tree-


tops came the cackling of a colony of laughing
jacks, and in the pines close by the little wattle
bird piped a song of joy.
A deep violet haze on the far hills and the
sizzling sound of insects heralded a hot after-
noon, but so far the sun had had his guns
spiked by an absurd little breeze that was
playing a game all to itself among the leaves
in the orchard below. Later on the sun was
going to slay the little breeze, or at least put
an end to its nonsense till he should have had
his way with the world, but just now the breeze
was really getting the best of it.
Terry stretched out her arms and clasped
them behind her head; she was so happy
that every breath she took seemed to give
her pleasure. How good life was to her!
Her year in the tea-room had been a hard
one, but it was an interesting one, because
it had taught her to know people better, and
through knowing them to understand life
better. One was not so cocksure about every-
thing when one lived with one’s eyes wide
open for a little while. And if you were not
sure, you hesitated about judging, and so
long as you could keep on hesitating there
was always the chance of your not doing it


at all, which probably caused you to make
one mistake the less, besides lightening the
burden of the misunderstood.
And then had come her knowledge of Dick’s
love for her and of her love for Dick. Caring
like that made her fc. 1 that she loved the whole
world, and wanted to help it. One couldn’t
help it by giving money to all the poor ones,
and health to all the sick ones, and Dicks to
all the unloved ones; so there was nothing to
do but keep one’s heart as kind as possible
and hope for the best. That was the little
bunch of flowers you laid upon the altar of
your gladness, and it made the air sweeter.
This morning Terry was waiting for Dick.
She had written and told Alicia when it had
happened, and Alicia had written back warmly
and comfortingly. She knew Dick had noth-
ing but his brains and his paintbox, but it
seemed that there were a few people already
who had got to hear of both; for when Alicia
had spoken to Jim about him he had said;
“Is that that clever chap who draws for The
Magnet? I’ve heard Sellars speak of him.
He thinks him no end of a swell at painting,
and he says he’s a good sport too. Let’s ask
him up for Christmas.”


Alicia wrote this appreciation to Terry, who
was in the seventh heaven. Terry had told
her secret to her sister rather tremblingly.
Dick hadn’t a penny after his own bare bread
and cheese was paid for, and she was afraid
lest that would be counted against him. She
wasn’t in the least afraid of Alicia being a
snob about it, but she was just a little bit
anxious lest close communion with the flesh-
pots should have made her worldly wise. If
Dick were a shirker, or only a dreamer, there
mieht be reason for anxiety, but he was not.
He was fine and eager and full of the will to
do, and more than that, he had the power.
“And he shall have the glory too,” said Terry
devotedly, to herself.
When Alicia’s letter came she felt as if her
cup was running over, for Jim and Alicia had
put their heads together, and the result was
a commission to do a picture of The Old
House “for the pater’s birthday”. That
would make the visit possible if Dick hap-
pened to be in a tight place.
Dick got the invitation and the commission
together. He had written to Alicia and was
waiting for her letter in a condition of mind
which was an intensification of Terry’s own.


If there were any objections raised it would
be because of him; and on the appearance of
things it would not be unreasonable. But
they didn’t know, and he would have to prove
himself before they could know, what he meant
to do.
When the letter came he sat looking at it,
reading the address over and over again. At
last, very deliberately, he tore the envelope
open and began to read. His face was pale
when he began, and his lips were pressed
rather tightly together; as he read on, the
blood rushed back into his face, singing in his
ears and burning in his eyes. When he had
finished he sat quite still, holding the letter
motionless before him. Then he stood up and
took a deep breath, filling his lungs as if he
needed air.
“A h—h! ’he said. He wanted to go
out, to walk. r
It was night. He took a cap off the peg
and went down into the street. Till the re-
lief came he did not know how great the
anxiety had been. Now all the world was
free to him! His eyes were shining. How
splendid life was!
This morning Terry waiting for him


Jim had driven the ponies to the station and
ought to be back soon. She took the watch
out of her waist belt and looked at it; her
heart began to beat furiously. She got up
and went quickly across the long paddock to
the one where the Nun lived. The Nun was
a blackened tree stump that from a distance
curiously resembled a woman in a white coif
and black veil stooping down as if to pluck
something. From it there was a path down
to the bend in the road, which was used as
a short cut to the house. Terry leaned
against the Nun and listened.
Far away she could hear the faint quick
tap of the trotting ponies. The sound came
nearer and nearer; suddenly they swung round
the bend. Jim caught sight of Terry, and
she saw him speak to Dick and point with
the handle of his whip towards her. Then
he pulled up and Dick got down.
“ Hi! ” shouted Jim, and Terry waved. The
ponies started off again. Dick jumped the
railings of the road fence and came quickly
across the paddock by the little track. Terry
and the Nun stood there motionless, but the
Nun’s heart was not beating as Terry’s was,
because she wasn’t waiting for Dick.


“Dick!” said Terry tremulously as he took
her hands and looked into her eyes.
“Terry,” said Dick, “oh, Terry!”
That’s enough now, but if you’d like to hear
any more about Terry and Dick later on I’ll
tell you.
Only, let me know.
&?3 -.2
0 2? at
"V copy)




%


0




