

SCHEME FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT
CO-OPERATIVE
COMMUNES.
Adopted at Fourth Annual Session of the General
Council, A.L.F., 20th February, 1894.
Information supplied on application to the
Geneeal Secretary, A.L.P.,
Trades Hall, Brisbane.
CO-OPERATIVE PRINTING COMPANY LIMITED, EDWARD STREET.




SCHEME FOE THE ESTABLISHMENT
CO-OPERATIVE
COMMUNES.
Adopted at Fourth Annual Session of the General
Council, A.L.F., 20th February, 1894.
Information supplied on application to the
General Secretary, A.L.F.,
Trades Hall, Brisbane.
CO-OPERATIVE PRINTING COMPANY LIMITED, EDWARD STREET.




INTRODUCTION.
F E LLOW W OKKEiiS,
The complete emancipation of Labour
can only be attained by union, blew Unionism
alone can reasonably hope to accomplish this Her-
culean task, because it is based upon the three great
fundamental principles : the federation of all Labour,
a federation embracing peoples and continents; a
legislature solicitous of the rights of Humanity ; and
co-operative production.
Since it is to New Unionism that Labour must
look for its emancipation, it is our duty to submit
for your consideration the policy which appears best
calculated to achieve the desired end. Hence it is
we now unfold a policy of constructive socialism
which we firmly believe will be a step in the direc-
tion of our emancipation.
Before discussing the details of our proposals
it is well to pass in review the salient features of the
■existing system of capitalistic production in order
that all may understand that its inevitable trend is
towards wage-slavery, and that only by a radically
new departure can we hope to emancipate ourselves.
Man can create nothing, but by the expenditure of
his labour he can transform the raw products of
nature into useful things. Labour alone can produce


wealth. The produce of Labour under existing con-
ditions is divided into wages, about one-fourth of the
whole, divided among the labourers ; rent, interest,
and profits, about one-half of the total produce,
distributed among the privileged few ; and taxes,
absorbed by the Government, which constitute the
remaining fourth. .Rent, interest, and profits, which
together form surplus value, can only be increased
by decreasing wages. Surplus value is therefore
withheld wages , the sum which private possession of
productive capital enables the employing class to
filch from the employed. It is the constant accumu-
lation of this fund which enables the capitalist class
to acquire an ever wider grip of all productive capital
—land, machinery, and all the instruments that create
wealth. Hence the interest of the capitalist is to
despoil his labourers and have them completely at his
mercy. Save so far as the unions can check his all-
devouring greed, he is more or less successful in
reducing wages to the minimum. His position is
almost impregnable, as will be seen from the enume-
ration of the following causes : The employing class
owns all productive capital; Labour is absolutely
dependent upon Capital for employment; the march
of invention, all the . profit of which accrues to
Capital, enables machinery, run by women and chil-
dren, to displace men in ever-increasing numbers in
every branch of industry, wdiile immensely increas-
ing the output; only about half the labourers seeking
employment can obtain it, and much of it when
obtained is of a very casual nature; the market is


swamped with unemployed, wages are continually
reduced through the fierce competition for work,
hence the purchasing power of the great mass of the
population is lessened, and a “glut,” or a “crisis,”
results, the brunt of the loss being borne by the
working classes. .Further, Labour receiving but a
bare sustenance can never save; the capitalist, after
gratifying every whim, can re-invest in productive
industry, or loan out at interest, the balance of the
withheld wages which he has appropriated, in either
case obtaining a further lien upon the produce of
Labour. The cost of the competition between
capitalists, the loss arising from their speculations, is
principally defrayed by the workers. Wages, being
fixed by “ freedom of contract ” at the minimum
the wage-earners will accept to support life, and not
being a definite share of the wealth produced, in-
creased productivity on the part of the workers
benefits only the capitalist by increasing surplus
value. Nor must it be forgotten that Capita] to-day,
as it has done for ages past, uses the legislature as'a
burglar uses his tools, corrupts the Press with adver-
tisements, seduces the magistracy with promises of
promotion, and controls even the judiciary. In the
toils of a ,system like this Labour can never be more
than a human chattel.
Fellow Workers ! our resolution to emancipate
ourselves from the octopus-like grip of this odious
system of capitalistic production is as deep-rooted
and unchangeable as the everlasting rocks. The
most practicable way appears to us to be the for-


mation o£ a network of co-operative settlements, or
communes, united indissolubly to the unions by the
all-enduring tie, “ Self Help by Mutual Help.”
There Labour will own all productive capital, pay
toll to no exploiting employer, acknowledge no
capitalist as feudal lord.
The time has come for the unions to aspire to
higher ideals. A large proportion of our members
must seek to become their own .employers. With
permanent work, a settled, comfortable home for wife
and child, with the full produce of your toil assured
to you, supported in sickness by your fellow members,
your widow and children befriended in the event of
your death, you can live a human life and have no
fear for the morrow. With short hours of toil and
access to a good library you can read and think. The
steady and permanent withdrawal of workmen from
the labour market cannot fail to benefit the remainder
and absorb many of the unemployed.
On behalf of General Executive Australian
Labour Federation.
David Bow max, President.
Albert Hinchcrippe, General Secretary.
Trades Hall, Brisbane, 14th March, 1894.


COMMUNAL SETTLEMENT
SCHEME.
Amended and adopted at the Fourth Annua! Session
of the General Council A.L.F. held at Charters
Towers, February, 1894.
1. It is proposed to found a Labour Bank, the
head office of which will be wherever deemed most
convenient. Every member of the unions will be
asked to take at least one share each year of the
value of £l. The payments will be ss. upon
allotment, and ss. on the first day of each of the
ensuing three months, or such longer intervals as
may be found necessary. The subscription to be
perfectly voluntary and quite independent of the
ordinary union subscriptions. The funds of the bank
will be quite distinct from the ordinary funds of the
unions, and will be preserved inviolable for promot-
ing the formation of co-operative communes.
2. As soon as sufficient funds are available, the
formation of a self-supporting co-operative commune
will at once be proceeded with. Membership


of the A.W.U. being open to ail no one but a
unionist, who is also the holder of a share in the
Labour Bank, will be eligible for membership. The
selection of members for the communes will be
confined to the shareholders of the Labour Bank,
and wherever practicable will be by ballot, provided
that while the system is on its trial special pre-
ference shall be given to men of known skill and
experience in agricultural, pastoral, mining or other
pursuits ; also that no member who has paid more
than one annual subscription shall be omitted, other
things being equal, while another who has paid only
one annual subscription is selected, unless it be for
the latter’s especial skill, experience, or administra-
tive abilities. Selection will thus be primarily
governed by seniority of enrolment on the share
register and the punctual payment of the annual
subscriptions, a ballot only being resorted to when
more members are equally eligible than can be ac-
cepted at the time.
8. A site for the commune will then be selected
by experts engaged for the purpose by the bank
authorities. The bank will make all necessary ad-
vances to acquire the land, purchase the necessary
live stock, tools, seed, agricultural, and other imple-
ments. A co-operative store will be at once opened
on the estate and stocked from time to time by the
bank with the necessary rations, clothing, etc., likely
to be required until such time as the commune may
reasonably be expected to be self-supporting.
4. After the first unavoidable outlay, advances


will only be made as value in permanent, irremovable
improvements is created, and only to tbe extent of
three-fifths of the estimated value. To provide an
absolute check against waste, negligence, or incom-
petence, the management of the bank shall be
empowered to inspect the settlement before further
advances are made. If the capital is being wasted
it shall thereupon report the same to the executive,
who shall verify the statements by personal inspec-
tion. If the charge is sustained the executive shall
be empowered to foreclose upon the property, to
expel the old and introduce new members, who shall
take over the assets and liabilities of the commune at
a fair valuation.
5. The advances made by the bank shall be
secured by the joint and several unlimited liability
bond of all the members so far as their interest in
the communal property is concerned. No interest
will be charged by the bank upon advances to the
communes, but each commune, while in debt to the
bank, will be debited with a fair proportion of the
cost of management, such charge, however, not to
exceed four per cent, on the total indebtedness. No
repayment will be demanded during the first two
years, but the total advance must be repaid there-
after in such progressive annual instalments as the
increasing area under tillage and the increase in the
stock will enable the commune to pay.
6. These communes shall be co-operative and
not communistic societies, except as hereinafter
provided. The land and all productive capital will


be held conjointly by the bank and the commune from
generation to generation, and will be indivisible. The
land, with all improvements, the dwelling houses,
live stock, agricultural implements, mills, shops, and
factories, will be the property of the bank and the
commune. No member will be allowed to ply
privately any trade or business. The land will be
tilled co-operatively and never subdivided or tilled
in sections by individuals. A sinking fund will be
established to acquire the share of any member
passing by bequest to heirs who do not wish to
become members, or held by any female who desires
to marry out of the commune, or that of any member
who is expelled from, or desires to leave the
commune; but it must be distinctly understood that
no member has any legal claim upon the property of
the commune for any money or shares, the majority
of the members always deciding the amount to be
refunded to the member expelled or who may have-
left the commune. In the Tillage E-eserve a cottage,
with suitable area of ground attached, will be leased
at a peppercorn rental on an indeterminable lease
to the head of every household and his heirs, which
plot he will be expected to make as ornamental and
attractive as possible. The number of live stock
privately owned which may be depastured on com-
munal land will be limited.
7. The management will be vested in a guild of
five members elected annually. Questions of grave
moment will be referred to the general council of all
members, and decided by a majority vote. Each com-


mune shall fix its own uniform rate of wages, such,
wages to be credited to the account of each member.
Until such time as the commune has a reserve fund
and is out of debt the weekly wages will be paid
in labour-note money, exchangeable at the store for
all necessary articles at their full face value. A
small proportion of these labour notes may be
exchanged for gold should any member desire tem-
porarily to go outside the bounds of the commune, or
for any other legitimate purpose approved by the
guild. The weekly payments shall not exceed one-
half the total wages, the balance being credited to
the worker’s account. The guild may allow 75 per
cent, in special cases. Each worker’s share of the
withheld wages and the profits will be credited
annually to his account, and a final settlement shall
take place as soon as the commune has sufficient
funds at its disposal. All labo ir-note money must
be redeemed and payment thereafter made in
ordinary legal-tender money as soon as circumstances
permit.
8. An insurance fund for the support through life
of the widows and, until attaining adult age, of the
children of deceased members, for providing for the
medical attendance and support of the sick, and the
burial of the dead, will be instituted from the com-
mencement, to which it will be compulsory for all to
subscribe. A widow leaving the commune will
forfeit all claim upon the insurance fund. Provision
will also be made for the education of the children in
technical studies as well as in the ordinary school


routine. No child under sixteen will be allowed to
leave the school.
9. A certain number of single women will be
admitted as full members as vacancies occur in the
dairy, or other departments. Every inducement will
be held out to single men to marry and found for
themselves happy and comfortable homes.
10. When a commune is about to be stai'ted,
before entering on the land, any twenty members
may demand a ballot as to whether its constitution
shall be communistic, or co-operative. A three-fourths
majority deciding for a communistic constitution
shall prevail, the remaining fourth having the option
of acquiescing, or waiving their membership in favour
■of others holding communistic principles. Members
so waiving their claim shall have the prior claim,
without further election, to membership in the
next communistic or co-operative commune started.
It must be distinctly understood that the executive
does not recommend a communistic constitution as
a practicable form of social ethics. In any case
elaborate care will be exercised to preserve intact
and inviolable the sacredness of the family life, it
being indispensable that the children should be
brought up in the homes and under the immediate
personal supervision and control of their own
parents.
11. The Directors of the Labour Bank shall
have the right to nominate without election three
members to each commune, subject to its approval.
One shall be given to a certificated school teacher,


one to a skilled accountant, it suitable men are not
found in the commune. Every member on entering
the commune shall sign a pledge of total abstinence
for two years. No fermented or spirituous liquors
shall at any time be sold upon the estate. A member
convicted of immorality, intemperance, or insubordi-
nation, or who for any other reason is ineligible as a
member, may be expelled by a two-thirds majority
vote.
12. The A.L.E. shall be recouped by the Labour
Bank for all expenses incurred in connection with
the promotion of this scheme. In order to indis-
solubly bind the two movements together, the
manager of the bank shall be ex officio a member
of the board of the A.L.E. He shall give a sub-
stantial fidelity bond to the executive of the bank
authorities and receive such salary as may be
stipulated by the directors.
13. Eurther, the communes will be bound under
a penalty to continue their banking accounts with the
Labour Bank. To promote the cause of unionism,
each member of a commune must annually renew
his union ticket, and this he shall empower the
commune to pay annually on his behalf before
entering into membership.
14. The Labour Bank will receive deposits, and
it is hoped all unionists will make it their savings
bank. It will avail itself of all privileges under the
existing law to issue notes in order to increase its
available capital. It will neither pay nor receive
interest. Any unclaimed deposits will be trans-


ferrecl to the reserve fund. Its strength will lie in a
fresh acquisition of capital every year through the
annual subscription of new shares. The shares will
be transferable.
15. Any member who pays to the manager of
the bank, or to the union official deputed for the
time being to discharge his duties, the sum of £5O
shall be entitled to have his name enrolled in a sepa-
rate register, and when thirty such names have been
registered they shall be at once organised into a
commune, the Labour Bank providing any reason-
able additional assistance that may be required.
16. A Bushman’s Home may be erected in
each commune as circumstances permit, where bush-
men, travelling, or temporarily out of work, who can
show a union ticket, shall receive comfortable enter-
tainment, as long as it is convenient for them to
stay, at a moderate weekly charge payable in
advance.
17. The co-operative stores on the communal
estates will forward packets of goods at cost price,
plus carriage, to any unionist, on receipt of cash
remittance in advance, and to any union official
acting on behalf of a union, union camp, or shed, one
month’s credit may be given. As it is hoped that
communes, each with a well-stocked co-operative
store on the estate, will be ultimately established in
each of the principal western districts, and also in
the proximity of the large gold-mining centres, the
need for a network of bush co-operative stores, so
long felt by the bush unionists, will be met in the


best possible maimer. Nearly all tlie articles ordi-
narily required by bush workers can be produced in
the communes and re-sold at first cost, without the
intervention of any middlemen’s profits, while the
patronage of their brother unionists will largely assist
in finding a market for the produce raised in the
communes. Co-operative distributive stores will be
established in the large centres of population to
dispose of the surplus produce of the communes on
commission. Where no such stores exist union officials
will act as agents for the purchase, or sale, of goods
on behalf of the communes, receiving a commission
for their services.
18. It will be sought to establish branch banks
in the large centres of population to assist share-
holders in every branch of co-operative industry.
19. Each member of a commune shall purchase
at least one share annually.
20. Pending the establishment of the Labour
Bank, all moneys received by the A.L.F. for the
purposes of this scheme shall be lodged in the name
of the two trustees of the General Council in the
Government Savings Bank.
Brisbane Co-operative Printing Co. Ltd., Edward Street.


