

.. THE ..
ADMINISTRATION, CONVERSION,
AND EXTINCTION
of THE
WAR DEBTS
OF THE
BRITISH EMPIRE
Proposals submitted for the consideration of the Governments of the British Empire,
by the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia.
C.6051
Jgp glutfjoritp:
ALBERT J. MULLETT. GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.




SCHEME
FOR
THE ADMINISTRATION, CONVERSION,
AND EXTINCTION
OF THE
WAR DEBTS
OF THE
BRITISH EMPIRE
Prepared by the Honorable W. A. WATT ,
Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia,
ON BEHALF OF THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT.
Melbourne, sth May, 1919.




1. The Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia, with
the approval of the Government, has the honour to submit
for the consideration of the Governments of the United Kingdom
and of the various British Dominions a scheme for the adminis-
tration of the war debts of the Empire, their conversion from
time to time, and their ultimate extinction.
Debts to be dealt with.
2. It has been estimated that the present war debts of
the Empire are as follow:
United Kingdom ... £6,500,000,000 or about £l4l per head
of population.
Canada ... ... 300,000,000 or about £37 per head.
Australia 300,000,000 or about £6O per head.
New Zealand ... 70,000,000 or about £6O per head.
South Africa ... 30,000,000
India and other
Dominions 150,000,000
Empire Total ... £7,350,000,000
SCHEME FOR THE ADMINISTRATION, CONVERSION,
AND EXTINCTION OF THE WAR DEBTS
OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE.


A Burden.
3. Even after allowing for any moneys which may be
paid by the enemy, these debts represent a great burden.
Their liquidation will tax the resources of the nation during one
or two generations, and to devise the best means to clear off the
debts deserves the most earnest attention of all British statesmen
and financiers.
Mutual Help.
4. Though the loans were raised for a common purpose,
each Government made itself separately liable for a definite
share corresponding to the expenditure incurred with respect
to its own fighting forces. Reasons might be found for altering
this arrangement and for making a redistribution of the
obligations according to the respective numbers of the peoples,
or their wealth or some other factor, but the difficulty of
arriving at a fair basis of allocation seems insurmountable.
That does not mean, however, that each Government must be left
to contend as best it may with its own financial troubles. On the
contrary, mutual help is possible, and certainly would be highly
advantageous to all.
Development from the War.
5. A scheme for joint management and liquidation of the
debts is a natural development from the war. During the
struggle all members of the British family pooled their
strength, and their future resources were necessarily pledged.
This combination, which brought the nation safe through
the world-war, should be maintained, as far as possible, until


the debts have been paid. To meet the financial difficulties,
and to continue the practical relationships of the war, a great
association of the British peoples is suggested.
An Expert Commission.
6. It is the opinion of the Government of the Commonwealth
of Australia that the debts should be vested in, managed, and
ultimately discharged by a continuous expert Commission
representative of the interests of the whole Empire and of
each of the Dominions.
Conversion into Common Stock.
7. The debts as they mature would be converted by the
Commission into a War Loan Stock of the British Empire,
but the Commission would have discretion to establish more
than one common stock, and, with the consent of bond-holders,
to convert loans before maturity. The Commission would be
given absolute power to determine, in relation to every conversion,
the place, the time, the rate of interest, and all other conditions.
Payments to Commission.
8. Each Government would pay to the Commission a fixed
annuity equal to the yearly amount payable by that Government
at 31st December, 1919, for—
(a) interest on war debts ;
(b) expenses of paying that interest; and
(c) sinking fund or contributions towards redemption of
war debt.


The Commission would thus be provided with funds to pay
interest to bonddiolders and to meet general expenses, and
would be able to accumulate moneys for the ultimate discharge
of the bonds. The Commission would have the right, on finding
the fixed annuity at any time insufficient to maintain a sinking
fund at the rate of at least one-quarter of one per cent, per annum
in respect of the debts of any Government, to call upon the
Government concerned to make good the deficiency by a payment
to the Commission in addition to the annuity.
Each Government liable only for
Amount of its own Debts.
9. While the debts remain subject to the existing periods
of currency, the liability of each Government will be plainly
discernible, but 011 conversion into one or more common stocks
the debts would lose their identity, and the Commission would
therefore have to determine the amount of the common stocks
for which each Government would be responsible. This allotment
to the several Governments, while chiefly an arithmetical
matter, would sometimes involve the exercise of discretion,
but the Commission might safely be trusted to make an
equitable distribution in all circumstances. A similar
adjustment would be necessary in relation to redemptions of debt
and other transactions. In that way, all the debts administered
by the Commission would be duly apportioned amongst the
several Governments, each of which would be required to
continue payment of its annuity until its portion of the debts had
been paid. Each Government would be liable only for the
discharge of its own debts as handed over to the Commission.


One Government's share of the debt might be liquidated, and its
annuity might therefore cease long before another Government
could discontinue its payments to the Commission. That Govern-
ment which contributed the largest sinking fund would be the
first to earn its freedom from war debt.
Debt may be paid in Fifty Years or less.
io. The time at which any Government might expect to have
liquidated its debt cannot be indicated with anything like
precision. If, after payment of interest and expenses out of
the moneys contributed by the Government to the Commission,
there remained a sum sufficient for a sinking fund of only
one-quarter of one per cent, per annum, the Government's whole
debt would be paid off in about seventy-two years. The scheme
for a Commission is put forward, however, on the assumption
that, after conversion of the debts into common stock, interest
rates would be lower than they are now, and that the money
saved would be paid into a sinking fund. These savings might
be so large as to result in the complete discharge of the debt of
every Government in fifty years, or even less.
Commission to raise Conversion Loans anywhere.
ii. An important feature of the scheme is that the Commis-
sion would have discretion to raise conversion loans in foreign
countries as well as in Great Britain and the Dominions. In
this way the field for borrowing would be enlarged and money
would be obtained in the cheapest market.


Effect on Location of Loans.
12. There is apparently no need to fear that the operations of
the Commission would result in locating an unduly large portion
of the loans in London, and that the Dominions would con-
sequently find themselves in the position of paying additional
interest to external creditors, instead of to their own residents
as at present. It is true there would be some possibility of
disturbing the present location of debts, but there seems to be
as much chance of location being transferred from London to the
Dominions as of transfers in the reverse direction. In any case,
the Commission would be an expert body charged with the duty
of making the best arrangements in respect of the public debts,
and that duty could not be performed properly without regard
to the general financial welfare of every country concerned. It is
inconceivable that one of the peoples could be treated unfairly
or injuriously. A transfer of location of debt from a Dominion
would occur only when interest rates were relatively high there
and bank exchange was adverse to the Dominion. These
unfavorable conditions would indicate that a transfer of location
of debt away from the Dominion would be generally beneficial.
Compulsory Loans not suggested.
13. In one Dominion at least, subscription to war loans was
made compulsory by law. No doubt that action was advisable
in the circumstances, and may still be necessary for raising
the further loans required, but compulsion under an Empire
scheme could not be arranged and is not suggested in relation to
the debts which may be taken over or which may be raised by
the Commission.


Income Tax only in Country of Domicile.
14. Considerable portions of the war loans were issued on the
condition that the interest should not be subject to income tax.
Freedom from the tax would not cause any difficulty to the
Governments or to the Commission as long as the debts continue
in their present form, but it would be necessary that the interest
on conversion loans be made subject to tax. This will probably
not be regarded as a hindrance to the acceptance of the scheme,
because tax-free loans are objectionable on many grounds, and
some at least of the Governments would be glad to abandon the
system at the earliest opportunity. The proposal is made that
the holder of securities issued by the Commission should pay
income tax to the country in which he is domiciled, and to
that country only. Under such a condition, it would not matter
that the rates of income tax be not the same in all countries.
Representation on Commission.
15. The question of apportioning each country's representation
on the Commission is important, but it is not intended at this
stage to submit a definite proposal. The proper place for that is
at the conference of representatives of Great Britain and the
Dominions, which it is suggested should be called to discuss the
project, if its main features commend themselves to those
interested.
Scheme could be Extended.
16. Although the consolidation of war debts is the immediate
object in view, it may be possible, if the scheme proves acceptable


to the responsible authorities of the Empire, to extend its scope
to embrace some, if not all, of the pre-war debts.
No Limitations on Future Finance.
17. It is not proposed that any limitations shall be imposed
on the future finance of any Government, apart from loans which
have been or which may be necessary for the conduct of the
Great War, their conversion and their extinction.
Parliaments not Fettered.
18. The creation of an independent Commission to discharge
the duties indicated would not deprive any of the Parliaments
of a discretion which they habitually and legitimately exercise.
Unfettered action as to taxation would remain with the Parliaments,
each of which would be free, as at present, to distribute amongst
the people under its jurisdiction the burden of the war debt in
the proportions which it regards as equitable.
Autonomous Rights not affected;
Harmful Competition eliminated.
19. Autonomous rights would not in any way be affected,
except the right of each to compete against the others, and no
argument is needed to sustain the proposition that competition in the
loan markets for conversion of war debts in itself would prejudice
the interests of all. Competition between Governments in
operations 011 the stupendous scale of the war loans must, by the
consequent increase of interest and of the expenses of the
operations, result in the long run to the disadvantage of all the
parties. The creation of an independent Commission would


eliminate competition, would guarantee continuity of management
by experts, would establish a stock attractive to investors in all
parts of the world, and would relieve successive Governments of
responsibilities which must otherwise fall upon them and which
are greater than any yet experienced in the history of Govern-
ments in any time or in any part of the world. The war, in
other ways, will weight statesmanship throughout the Empire
with duties more varied, more complex, and more onerous than
anything which Governments have yet had to perform. Any
proposal which, while preserving the essentials of self-government,
has for its object the transference of this immense responsibility
to a capable and representative body, demands therefore the
earnest consideration of public men and of the people generally.
Advantages to be derived from the Scheme.
20. The chief advantage which may be derived from the
appointment of a Commission is the immense saving which can
be secured by expert management operating in the cheapest
markets. A well-informed body with a wide outlook and with
the power necessarily attaching to a great financial organization
might be trusted to obtain loans for conversion purposes at the
lowest possible rates of interest. Underwriting charges, brokerage,
and other expenses could also be reduced to a minimum. These
benefits are in addition to those resulting from the elimination of
competition. Not only has the scheme all these attractions, but
it is probable the combined resources of Great Britain and the
Dominions would be regarded by investors as a better security
•\
than that which can be offered by any one Government. In that
case, the common stocks issued by the Commission would take a


leading place in the markets of the world, and a corresponding
reduction in interest rates naturally might be anticipated.
Great Britain and the Dominions to benefit.
21. It might be said that the scheme aims at securing for
the Dominions a share in the borrowing power of Great Britain.
That is not so. The proposals are made in the firm belief that
both Great Britain and the Dominions would benefit. The
securities of Great Britain are regarded in every quarter of the
globe with confidence. This is the result of her great power and
her long-continued and honest finance. But the fact that great
Dominions have now grown around the Mother Country must not
be overlooked. The Dominions can bring strength and support
of a financial nature, just as they supplied men to fight side by
side with soldiers from the Old Land. To the honorable name,
the wide experience, the might and the resources of the Mother
Country, may be added the present financial strength of rich
Dominions and the great future wealth to which they will attain.
Population in new countries increases in greater ratio than in
old, and it appears to be certain that, as years go on, the
riches of the Dominions will show a greater proportional increase
than those of Great Britain. Thus the hoped-for advantages
would be reciprocal.
Details of Scheme.
22. The full details of the scheme are :
(i) That there be created an Empire War Debt Commis-
sion representative of the Governments of Britain
and her Dominions, on a basis to be arranged:


(2) The Commission to take over the war debts at 31st
December, 1919, of the United Kingdom, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, India, and
other Dominions or Colonies participating:
(3) All war loan sinking funds and redemption funds
existing on Ist January, 1920, to be vested in
the Commission; and an annuity, calculated in
the manner hereinafter described, to become
payable by each Government to the Commission
as from that date :
(4) Interest and principal moneys falling due after the
date named to be paid by the Commission:
(5) The debts as they mature to be converted into a
War Loan Stock of the British Empire, the
Commission to have discretion to establish
more than one common stock, and, with the
consent of the stock-holders, to convert loans
before maturity:
(6) All the terms and conditions of issues of the
common stock or stocks to be determined by
the Commission :
(7) Additional loans necessary in consequence of the
war to be raised by the Commission:
(8) The Commission to have discretion to raise
redemption loans in foreign countries as well
as in Great Britain and the Dominions:
(9) War debts due by the Dominions to the British
Government, including the cost of maintenance
of Dominion soldiers at the front, to be
included in the scheme as part of the debts
of the several Dominions:


(10) Each Government to pay to the Commission a
fixed annuity equal to the yearly amount
payable by the Government at 31st December
1919, in respect of —
{a) Interest on war debts;
(6) Expenses of paying that interest;
(c) Sinking fund or contributions towards
redemption of debt;
the annuity to be paid in such instalments as
may be desired by the Commission and to run
until the debts handed over by the particular
Government, including debts converted into
common stock, have been discharged by repay-
ment to the bond-holders :
(11) If at any time the annuity payable by a
Government is not sufficient to pay—
(a) Interest then actually payable 011 the
debt taken over by the Commission
from the Government, including debt
converted into common stock;
(b) Interest 011 any additional loans raised for
the Government by the Commission;
(c) The Government's proportion of the
Commission's general expenses; and
(d) Sinking fund or redemption contribution
of five shillings on every £100;
the Government concerned to make good the
deficiency by a payment to the Commission in
addition to the annuity:
(12) The amount of payments by a Government to
the Commission in excess of—
(a) The interest paid by the Commission
on debts taken over from the


Government, including debts con-
verted into common stock;
(b) Interest on any additional loans raised for
tlie Government by the Commission;
and
(c) The Government's proportion of the
Commission's general expenses ;
to be treated as payments towards the
redemption of the principal of the debt of
that particular Government:
(13) The Commission to keep an account of the
obligations of each Government, charging and
discharging it with principal and interest; for
this purpose the Commission to have power to
decide how much of the common stocks is
chargeable to each Government, and how much
of the earnings of general investments is to be
credited to each:
(14) The general expenses of the Commission to be
charged to each Government on such basis as
the Commission may direct:
(15) Costs of conversion, including cost of acceptance
of subscriptions below par, not to be included
in the general expenses of the Commission, but
to be provided for out of capital:
(16) Continuing appropriations of revenues to be made
by the several Legislatures for the annuities and
additional moneys (if any) payable by the
Governments to the Commission.
Empire Co-operation.
23. These proposals are submitted by the Australian Govern-
ment as the best business method of dealing with the subject. It


is believed that they have merits which will appeal strongly to
that spirit of Empire co-operation made manifest during the
Great War. Co-operation for the achievement of an end of
transcendent importance was found even in the great stress of war
to be not incompatible with the independent existence of, and the
independent power exercised by, the pre-existing Governments.
The more intimate relationships between the United Kingdom
and the Dominions, and between Dominion and Dominion, which
have been one of the most conspicuous developments of the war,
should not be allowed to weaken. These newly created interests
in the family of nations composing the British Empire would be
preserved and strengthened by the establishment of a closer
governmental alliance for this common purpose. Such a financial
partnership would not impair the freedom of each in its own
proper sphere, and the combination formed would be powerful
beyond anything known hitherto.
Conclusion.
24. In the confident belief that this scheme offers a practical
solution of a great problem, the Commonwealth Government
submits its proposals to the Governments and to the peoples of
the various parts of the Empire.




