

SCHOOL HYGIENE.
SCHOOL COMMITTEES’ ASSOCIATION, BRISBANE.
A LECTURE DELIVERED TO THE ABOVE ASSOCIATION
BY
J. S. C. ELKINGTON, M.D., D.P.H.,
Commissioner of Public Health, Queensland.


SCHOOL HYGIENE.
J. S. C. Elkington, M.D., D.P.H., Commissioner of Public Health, Queensland.
(Lecture delivered to School Committees’ Association, Biisbane,
21st November, 1910).
In the course of a single lecture it is impossible to do more than outline
the main principles of a subject of such wide scope and application as modern
School Hygiene. During the past few years a large variety of books and other
publications have been issued, and at least two technical School Hygiene
Journals are published in England alone. It is by no means a new subject,
although the organisation within late years of systems of School Medical
Inspection in certain Australian States, and, more recently, throughout
England, has drawn public attention to it In Europe its beginnings date back
for over 100 years. In India the Emperor Akbar took an active interest in
the subject some 300 years ago, and there is reason to believe that the priest-
scientists of ancient Egypt knew a good deal about its practical features some
4,000 years before the Christian era. Even such a relatively modern develop-
ment as School Medical Inspection appears to have been practised in ancient
Rome, and in modern Europe it has been operated in Sweden since 1863.
Practically every civilised country in the world has adopted it since that date.
Like most other subjects which have for their basis the improved well-
being of the race, School Hygiene has had to survive the test of unthinking
enthusiasm and of consequent anti-fad reaction. Like Opie’s colours, it
requires to be mixed “ with brains.” At the present day the educationist
recognises that he has nothing to fear from the hygienist, but a great deal to
gain in the way of practical educational progress. School Hygiene does not
involve the invasion of quiet classrooms by determined doctors bent on
measuring and weighing and stethoscoping scared children to the verge of
exhaustion, it does not necessitate the simultaneous rebuilding of all defectively
constructed schools, and it does not require teachers to convert themselves
into half-fledged doctors. It does not hamper school work or interfere with
administrative method. It does not rouse the ire of parents or fierce denuncia-
tion in the Press. On the other hand, it simplifies the teacher’s work, increases
school efficiency and school comfort, and enables difficulties to be overcome
which would otherwise be unsurmountable.
School Hygiene is not School Medical Inspection alone. The school doctor
is an important factor in the work but by no means the only—or even the most
important —one. In its wide sense it covers, not medical inspection alone, or


buildings, or school furniture, or outbreaks of infectious disease, or the healthy
management of schools, but all of these, and everything else which has to do
with the physical side of child life at school ages.
The aim of education clearly is to fit the children of the nation as
u yas possible for the work of life. During the process these children are
no mere y citizens-to-be, but they actually are citizens. The after life for
w nch they are being trained grows more and more artificial every year, and
he standard for even moderate success rises ever higher as man’s busy brain
overcomes the impossible of to-day and fits it into to-morrow’s daily round.
C nldien must be taught to live as well as to work, for that very civilisation
w uc i , eniands so high a standard of fitness ruthlessly treads down the unfit.
The need for a sound well-cared-for body is even greater than it was in the
w en our senn-savag© ancestors wrested a hard-won living from a
Nature which was no less uncompromising then than now. Electric lights
po icemen, and universal suffrage will not make the philosopher endure his
toothache with any more equanimity than he did in the days of old. ‘
True education, therefore, includes, of necessity, the physical as well as
he mental organisation. At the very least it must include deliberate provi-
sion for reducing to the lowest practicable minimum the risks arising from
its processes for securing mental training. That such risks exist will be
evident to all who will take the trouble to compare the work required to be
done at school ages with the arrangements made by Nature in the bodies of
the children. It must be acknowledged by any trained observer who
faithfully makes such a comparison that most modern methods of mental
training are fundamentally unnatural. The results of actual observation
prove the correctness of this conclusion beyond all doubt. Nevertheless, the
work must be done; or the resulting ignorance and neglect will do more harm
in the long run, both to the individual and to the people of which he is a part
than will the risks incidental (but not essential) to the training process.
The human body is a highly complicated and beautiful mechanism, upon
whose healthy working depends the harmonious and proper development and
action of the cerebrating centres to whose training and development the
educational effort of the past has been almost wholly directed. Body and
brain are parts of one organisation, and neither can be considered or cultivated
by itself. This may appear the most superficial of truisms to those who can
recall some occasion on which they have tried to do their best work under
stress of some integrally slight but relatively disturbing bodily ailment.
Nevertheless, its non-recognition has been and still is a real and great
factor in hampering educational progress. Every educational process, mental
°i physical, pioduces physical changes in the child or person educated. Child
knowledge, based on physiological knowledge of a somewhat special kind,
is the] efoie necessary to all teachers. Similarly, teachers require to know
and recognise those conditions of school environment which conduce to healthv
or unhealthy development respectively of mind or body. In these two require-
ments there is nothing of deliberate humanitarianism, nothing of deliberate
effort towards hygienic improvement. They are purely educational require-
ments based on the unalterable laws of Nature as expressed in the construction
and working of the child body.


These laws cannot be evaded; they cannot be argued or explained away.
They enclose within immutable boundaries every system of educationa e or
that has ever been devised. Froebel recognised this when he pointed out tha
it was not a child who was playing, but primitive man who was busy educating
himself. For hundreds of thousands of years mankind.has been slowly creeping
ever higher and higher in respect of mental development, but the laws o
Nature have not varied. They are written in our bodies, and the body is
the elder brother of the brain. Man is still the sum of his movements, and
the physical environment governs the mental output.
Hygiene, therefore, is the inseparable coadjutor of successful education.
By its aid alone can the teacher obtain effective results from the human
material under his charge. To neglect it is to court professional failure, and
the transgression of Nature’s laws is punished without warning. As 1 mfessor
Huxley pointed out long ago, it is not a word and a blow, but the blow first
without the word. Here the blow falls most often on the innocent, although
the transgression is effected for them.
The object of School Hygiene in all its branches is to increase true educa-
tional efficiency, and hence to raise continually the mental and physical
standard of the race. In naming it the School portion is put first; and this
prevails also in the practice of every wisely administered scheme of School
Hygiene. In it there is no question of ramming medical dogma down the
throats of teachers, irrespective of their professional beliefs or of the adminis-
trative conditions under which they must work. Similarly, there is no
question of urging the rebuilding or alteration of all defectively constructed
schools, or upsetting existing methods or principles. The work is done
primarily in the interests of education, and has for its object the detection,
mitigation, and removal of conditions which the teacher or school manager
is powerless to deal with, but which hamper educational progress as nothing
else can. To that end it requires to be carefully subordinated to the needs
and conditions of real education. The school doctor is above all things a
teacher, and a colleague and helper of teachers. The cause of the child is
admittedly cosmopolitan, but that cause will not be effectively served by
either the teacher or the school doctor alone. The work of both depends upon
their true and faithful service to that cause for which both have been called
into official existence. Mutual faith and goodwill are essential, and the
importance of the doctor’s assistance to the teacher in securing effective
educational result is only equalled by the vital necessity to the doctor’s work
of the teacher’s active support and sympathy. Lord Nelson was accustomed
to tell his captains that “ it is easier for an officer to keep men healthy than
for a physician to cure them”; and the same thing holds with teaoheis and
school children. It is essential, however, to know how' to carry this wise advice
into practice, and herein lies one chief function of the school doctor.
How then can this assistance be given to teachers without interfering
seriously with their professional work or overburdening them with new and
unfamiliar duties? It is best done through the school doctor, although it
can be done in other ways. This coadjutor of the teacher can accurately
detect defective children whether on entry or later in their school career, can
indicate measures for mitigation of such defects so far as school stress is


concerned, can arrange for them to be brought under the notice of parents,
can show how and how far hygienic defects of buildings or apparatus are
capable of remedy by the teacher, and can bring under the attention of the
proper authorities, those defects or difficulties which are too extensive or too
technical for the teacher to deal with. The school doctor again can relieve
the teacher of much responsibility and difficulty in connection with school
outbreaks of Infectious Disease, by laying down direct and simple rules for
dealing with cases, contacts, and carriers encountered in the school. When
necessary, the resources of the skilled epidemiologist can be brought to the
teacher’s aid for the purpose of stopping extensive or persistent outbreaks.
The school doctor, moreover, can undertake the training of students at a
Training College, and can introduce them to that wonderful new world of
educational thought and practice by acquaintance with which alone the
teacher can obtain the best educational results from the human material which
comes under his hands.
With your permission, I will now proceed to outline a few of the
principal objectives of applied School Hygiene, and to indicate some of the
ways in which difficulties can be met.
THE SPECIAL SENSEE.
The two great portals to the child soul are the senses of vision and
hearing. Ordinary educational method works almost wholly through these
two senses, and depends for its result on the clearness and detail of the
resultant brain-impressions. If the eye, for example, can only convey blurred
or imperfect pictures to the retina for transmission to the visual-memory
centres in the brain, the resulting visual-memory pictures stored up for after
use will be correspondingly blurred and imperfect. It is obviously uneconomic
to attempt to teach children by means of pictures which they cannot see
clearly.
School life is admitted to impair in greater or less degree the eyesight of
the larger proportion of those who undergo it. The impairment is not always
permanent, but this does not affect its immediate influence on the child’s
education. Moreover, an originally temporary sighf; defect may readily be
converted into a permanent one, with the result that the child is crippled for
life in the most immediately useful of all its senses. The greater risk is run
by the earnest sensitive child possessing a slight and unrecognised defect of
vision. Those who care to try the experiment for themselves can readily enter
into the feelings of such a child by putting on a pair of spectacles which do
not quite suit the sight, and carefully copying with the left hand a few chalk-
written sentences from a blackboard placed 20 feet away in a dim light. To
those who still doubt, a subsequent half-hour spent in reading, through the
glasses, some solid text-book requiring actual mental effort for its mastery, will
bring complete conviction and understanding, with or without headache. ’
Temporary sight defect is very common amongst school children. It
usually depends on irritability of the apparatus for accommodation, which,
having keen strained for long into working at near distances, automatically
resumes its position for near vision when distant objects are looked at This
is known as “habit spasm.” It is clear evidence of great and unnecessary
eye-strain. J


The production of permanent sight defect is all too easy. The eyes of
children up to about twelve years of age differ from those of adults, in that the
eyeball is relatively somewhat shorter from point to back. The child is,
therefore, normally somewhat long-sighted, and has to strain its accommoda-
tion much more than an adult to see any near object distinctly. The eyeball,
also, is not so well supported and packed in its socket.
Children in working attentively with small objects always tend to biing
them close to the eye in order to get a magnified image, even though clearness
is lost. The strong muscles on which rotate the eyeball pull on it as the eyes
converge, and if the strain is frequently repeated the ill-supported back of
the eyeball may be made to bulge a little at the rear. Directly this occurs
the eye has been made longer than it should be, images from the lens cannot
be focussed accurately on the sensitive spot in the retina, but fall short, and
the condition called myopia or short sight is produced. A difference in length
of the eyeball equivalent to the thickness of a sheet of thin paper is sufficient
to cause permanent short sight. It is also probable that the eye defect
known as Astigmatism, caused by irregularities in the shape of the eyeball,
which cause the image to fall slantingly on the sensitive part of the retina,
is not infrequently produced in the same manner.
Those acute and crippling forms of severe eye disease, which prevail in
parts of Queensland as in many other warm countries, constitute a problem
of special importance. A considerable sum of money has for some time past
been expended for their limitation and suppression, and they and their effects
must of necessity form an important feature in any system of School Hygiene
which may be organised in this State.
The remedy for school eye-strain does not consist in putting all visually
defective children into glasses, or in reconstructing all defectively lit schools.
Children with “ habit spasm ” are not infrequently “ fitted ” with glasses (at
the nearest general store, perhaps) with ruinous results. They do not need
glasses. The enforcement of proper working attitude, wherein the eyes are
never allowed to be used within 12 inches of the work, is the first and most
important measure of school-applicability. In this the teacher of infant
classes is particularly concerned, for she controls the school period wherein is
formed ingrained habit, as well as that wherein the foundations of eye-defects
are most often laid. Another measure of prevention lies in attention to the
proper management of school lighting, and the avoidance of unnecessary eye-
strain in bad light.
A third is found in the systematic testing of the vision of at least those
children who appear to suffer from eye-strain, or who appear to have difficulty
in receiving visual-memory impressions correctly. The process is simple, and
can be made to yield very useful results if the information so obtained is
acted upon. By using the ingenious optotype of Drs. Halley and Hogg, infants
can be tested as readily as other children, the test being turned into a school
game. Amount of light can be sufficiently well tested, for practical purposes,
by attempting to read a line of small type (diamond) at 15 inches distance.
School lighting certainly exercises a great effect for good or evil upon the
sight of school children. From actual observations made by myself some four
years ago on 471 children in three large schools, it was possible to trace


a s eady and marked deterioration of eyesight from the Preparatory to the
► ecom asses, which tallied closely in its relative extent with the degree of
• g 1 °\ the l° omS ' The most in i urious of all conditions of school lighting
is' produced by light from the front, and I have found, time after time the
of widespread injury, amounting at times to 50 per cent, or more of
e ective vision capable of interfering actively with educational progress
amongst children subjected to this form of strain. The resourceful teacher will
meet this by altering the desk line to secure left lighting where possible, or,
f thlS 1S not feasible > W heavily blinding the front light with a couple of
layers of green holland or paper, and improving light from other directions—
tor example, by removing frosting.
Defective hearing is another frequent cause of educational inefficiency.
Its effect may be judged by attempting to listen carefully to a speech, with a
plug of cotton wool in one ear or both. The most frequent cause of deafness
amongst children is contributed by adenoid growths in the cavity behind the
nose— post-nasal growths,’’ as they are commonly termed. The condition is
a serious one if it is allowed to advance, and has elsewhere been found to be
widely spread amongst children. The resulting deafness is intermittent at
first, but may become constant. The condition, when advanced, produces
marked changes in the facial expression, and appears to dull mental activity
to a pronounced extent in addition to causing physical defects. The typical
school dunce depicted in old pictures is very often an excellent but unintended
portrait of the typical victim of advanced post-nasal growths. It is readily
remediable by surgical operation at skilled hands, and the resulting improve-
ment is often little short of miraculous.
Other causes of deafness are wax in the external ear passage, and disease
of the deeper parts of the ear. The latter is very dangerous, and often follows
scarlet fever or measles.
Hearing can readily be tested by whispering numbers from a distance of
18 feet to the child, who has his back turned to the observer. Each ear can
be tested in turn by pressing a pad against the other. The numbers are
repeated as heard. If they cannot be heard at 18 feet (as a clear whisper
should), the observer approaches nearer till they are heard and repeated.
TEETH.
Th© soundness or otherwise of children’s teeth plays a large part in their
educational progress, and the teeth of Australian children have been found to
be at least equally unhealthy with those of children in other places, wherever
examination has been carried out on a large scale. Apart from the active—
aifd, in the aggregate, serious—interference with school work caused by tooth-
ache, the presence of decayed and often painless stumps in the mouth is the
cause of much ill-health in the shape of anaemia, indigestion, neuralgia, head-
aches, rheumatic pains, sore throats, and other conditions arising from irrita-
tion and septic absorption. Severe and even fatal illness arises not unfre-
quently from decayed teeth, and a strong influence in intensifying th© effects
of infectious disease is apparent from the same cause.


In Tasmania 1,119 out of 1,207 children specially examined (92 per cent.)
had decayed teeth. Oyer 30 per cent, of these children had dangerously foul
and septic mouths. In Victoria last year a, preliminary examination showed
some 98 per cent, of children with bad teeth. In America some 93 per cent.,
in Italy 92 per cent., and in Switzerland 90 to 100 per cent, of children
examined have been found to have defective teeth. There is no reason to
believe that Queensland children are any better off in this respect, but, on the
contrary, I am informed by members of the dental profession who have paid
special ’ attention to the subject that the conditions here are, if anything,
rather worse.
A great many of these decayed teeth are first-set teeth, and an extra-
ordinary popular delusion exists that first teeth may be neglected with
impunity. This is not so. Not only do first teeth injure health and general
development if they are allowed to decay widely, but they infect the second
set as these come through the gum. The first molar of the second set is cut
at the age of six years, and in a very high percentage of cases where the first
teeth are carious it is found to be rapidly attacked. Decay is a continuous
and extending process if allowed to persist, and, by neglect of the first set of
teeth, the second set, designed to last a lifetime, is often ruined before the
child reaches adolescence. The continual mouthing of rotten bones is a grue-
some concept, but thousands of young people are doing it to-day. As Dr.
Whitehead puts it in speaking of this condition; “To drain, trap, and venti-
late a house for such a man is waste of money, for he pollutes the purest air
as he breathes it, and contaminates the most wholesome food as he eats it.
He, in effect, lives in a sewer, and his mouth, to use a quotation, is ‘ like unto
a cage of unclean birds.’”
In Strasburg (Germany) and in a few places elsewhere, dental clinics have
been organised to meet the serious condition of affairs. At Strasburg, at the
dental clinic of Professor Dr. Jesson, to whose self-sacrificing work is due the
organisation of the first undertaking of the kind, many thousands of children
are treated annually at a cost per head of about Is. per child in attendance
at the schools served. The object of the treatment is to save teeth wherever
possible. In Brisbane a great deal of highly useful work is done for children
at the Brisbane Dental Hospital, where a number of busy dental practitioners
devote gratuitously much valuable time and material to the remedy of dental
defects.
The teacher can do much to prevent the worst results from this condition,
by occasional or regular lessons on the care of the teeth. I have known of
more than one instance where “ clean teeth leagues ” have been organised,
the active interest of parents aroused, and much benefit to the health of the
children secured by timely dental treatment.
The proper use of a proper toothbrush is a small thing in itself for a child
to learn or for a teacher to impart, but it may readily be productive of real
and lasting benefit. The school dentist is an essential feature in all modem
systems of School Hygiene, both as an educative and a remedial agent. Not
the least of his good influences is the promulgation of the fact that the modern
dental chair is no longer a place of pain and torture, or the modem dentist an
odontological Torquemada.


INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
Outbreaks of Infectious Disease cause loss of time and upset school
rou me un ess they can be systematically handled. A little known or
frequently forgotten rule in these matters is that infection is spread by human
beings and by their body refuse rather than by infected articles. Diphtheria
infection in schools is probably wholly a question of “ carriers "—that is,
ot children (or, in rare cases, teachers) who are either suffering from a mild
unrecognised attack or who are carrying virulent diphtheria organisms in
eir throats or mouths without being themselves apparently affected.
Ihe requisite measures lie in the direction of promptly excluding all
known cases, and all children from infected houses (contacts), and keeping a
sharp lookout for sore throats. This, with attention to hygienic management,
including careful watch on slates, pencils, drinking cups, and other imme-
diately exchangeable articles, will usually suffice. If spread persists and the
school doctor comes on the scene, swabs are taken from the throats of the
infected classes and examined in the laboratory; the undetected carriers are
thereby identified, and promptly excluded, and the outbreak stops of necessity.
Drains probably have no connection whatever with diphtheria.
Scarlet fever is similarly dealt with by exclusion of cases and contacts,
and by careful watch for children showing symptoms of a commencing or
recent attack.
Measles usually assumes epidemic proportions rapidly, and brings the
attendance down with a run, especially amongst the younger children. The
only way to keep the school open is to continue excluding cases and contacts
(unless these are protected by a previous attack) until the attendance is down
to 50 per cent, or less. When this happens, the uninfected and unprotected
children from healthy households are excluded and the contacts and protected
children recalled.
The official Rules of the Department cover most ordinary matters of
infectious disease procedure.
Most teachers of any experience are good judges of the facial expression
of children for purposes of school discipline. It is no more difficult to detect
the signs of acute disease, and, with a little technical knowledge, such as may
be gleaned from easily available sources, to form a shrewd idea of their
actual cause, than it is to pick out the hero who sticks wads of chewed paper
on the ceiling while the teacher’s back is turned. A short lesson on simple
realities of disease and of its prevention is not difficult to prepare, and may
prove of great and lasting benefit to those who receive it.
THE SCHOOL MOTHER.
It has been suggested that parental care and home education should
provide sufficiently for the physical side of the child. In theory this should
be the case, but in practice it is otherwise. In all educational work it is of
great importance that, as school constitutes only a small part of the child’s
environment, instruction should keep touch with the child’s “ out of school ”


life at as many points as possible. School life thus assumes a cl-er rdat on
to the persona! hygiene and body care of the children becausin the
may in not a few cases have to be carried out more or dirwtiy in t h e
school, owing to lack of knowledge, or more rarely to prejudice, on the part
of the parent.
One of the most useful features of the skilful school doctor's work is the
education of parents, and particularly of mothers, but it is work wh
test every fibre of professional knowledge and human experience m that
officer's mental equipment. It is not work for a mere mar. to attempt with
any likelihood ot real or permanent success. Successfully do y
informal “talks” to parents after school hours, it y.eMs most valuable
results, and rapidly gains wide popular support for the work.
Another method, much used in Germany, Austria, “ d P^ 8 ® f
is the issue ot simple and clear Notes for Parents on he healthy■ Me
ot school children. Under Australian conditions, at least, t ‘
employed as an adjunct to actual meetings between the school doctor a
parents.
The best place for educating the school mother, however is m the
school and long before she is a mother; but in the meantime no.effort can be
spared in any well-organised system of School Hygiene to re p
and enlist their sympathy and support.
HYGIENIC SCHOOL MANAGEMENT.
Methods ot school management form a prominent feature in , c
Hygiene. The ideal can be gathered from any text-book on the subject
to approximate the reality to it is often a matter ot some ingenuity. Ther
is, however, no need to despair in any ordinary case, more especially a.
there is a particularly sympathetic Department behind it all.
Deficient light can often be improved by judicious removal of frosting or
other obstruction, excess of light (a rare defect) 01 g are can e one
bv a temporary screen of holland or brown paper, wrongly directed light
may be got over by altering desk lines or blinding out front light as already
described Defects of seating and decking may be met by securing propel
relative positions of seat and desk, and by sorting the children as tar
possible to fit the furniture.
Overcrowding suggests the use of verandas or basements, with due care
for direction of light and selection of work.
Ventilation is seldom a difficult question in our splendidly equable
climate, but occasionally, when the westerlies blow, the need for keeping e
air sewage below a brain-dulling limit must not be forgotten. In this case
it is best to let the used air be blown out every now and then by opening doors
and windows in recess times, taking care to see that any ventilators provided
are clear and able to do their work.


overhauled Z Z™ 0 / gUtterß Whi ° h them can usually be
Z t ? W 1 1 th 6 ° f th 6 W*. a«d fouling of the water
f a . gainS A COU P Ie of teaspoonfuls of kerosene regularly applied
to the tank will often prevent a plagne of mosquitoes. A plague of P flies
, h 11 n ° ' 111 rec l ue ntly be traced to an adjoining stable, where they breed in
, 6 ma . nUrej and ’ even if tllis cannot be dealt with by securing 'its regular
emoya e ' ol > week, a couple of teaspoonfuls of formalin, or some bichromate
o po ash and sugar, m each of a few saucers of water will soon poison enough
o ©m to reduce the infestation materially. A little kerosene used in the
closet pans will also produce a good effect in this direction.
The maintenance of proper cleansing of schoolrooms is not infrequently
a burden to the conscientious teacher. It is hardly necessary to explain
that for this purpose the so-called “ dry cleaning ” is useless and only serves to
stii up the dust instead of removing it. A bucket of damp sawdust, a broom,
and a damp duster moistened with some kerosene and water, if nothing better
is available, will do more, when‘properly applied, than a year of dry sweeping
and dry dusting. I have known teachers to organise cleaning squads, each in
c arge of a sanitary officer, and, by the simple expedient of deputing a
ittle authority to this functionary and making the blue or red arm badges
impress themselves as symbols of trust and responsibility, to keep their school
buildings in a spotless condition of cleanliness. The lesson learnt was valu-
able, and no trouble arose with parents.
Clean school buildings are essential from every standpoint to true
education.
Just here let me sound a note of warning against the growing popular
idea that well-advertised disinfectants can replace cleanliness. They cannot,
and they never will. The value of any disinfectant, used in the only ways
in which it is practicable to use it in ordinary school cleaning, is very pro-
blematical ; and no blaring of the advertising trumpet should ever be allowed
to mask the fact that the scrubbing-brush, the broom, and the damp duster
are as necessary to-day as they ever were.
For a schoolroom is a place which, above all other places, except perhaps
a hospital ward, requires to be kept clean. To it there come the children
from many houses for several hours daily, and each contributes to or shares
whatever of infectious material is brought on clothes or in bodies. School-
room dust contains a large proportion of organic matter derived from the
clothing and bodies of the inmates, and it is safer to remove it than to treat
it in situ.
Trials have been made with various heavy oils applied to floors to
prevent dust from rising, but the difficulties arising from stained dresses and
clothing, and the dark unpleasant appearance given to the floors, have
restricted their use. An important factor in school management is the avoid-
ance of stamping movements by classes at attendance or dismissal. These
serve no useful purpose, and only raise dust to the breathing level.


SPECIAL PROBLEMS AND HYGIENIC TEACHING.
Our geographical and climatic conditions involve the consideration of
certain special aspects of School Hygiene.
Ankylostomiasis, for example, is said to be prevalent amongst school
children in certain Northern coastal districts, and it is very desirable, m the
interests of the welfare of the State, that its extent and effects should be
accurately ascertained in the near future. In other countries this disease
has exercised a disastrous effect upon the physique and mental activity of
large sections of the population, and in the Southern United States (where
it is popularly known as “ hookworm disease ”) it has received much attention
of late from the United States Government on this account.
Malaria is also a factor to be reckoned with in parts of Queensland, and
school children are capable of being made useful allies against this disabling
and dangerous disease. When that distinguished man of science, our present
Governor, Sir William MacGregor, ivas Governor of Lagos, on the West Coast
of Africa, he instituted a system of highly valuable nature study in
schools which had for their basis the life history of the malarial mosquito.
Each child had a properly covered bottle in which the progress of the insect
from the egg to the fully developed mosquito was observed from day to day,
and by means of which the effect of various methods of stopping its develop-
ment could be noted. The practical knowledge of mosquito destruction so
acquired was thus distributed to hundreds of households, and had a potent
effect in assisting that remarkable conversion of Lagos from a malaria-ridden
town to a coastal sanatorium, which has since become so well known a
feature of Sir William MacGregor’s period of rule.
Another matter requiring precise inquiry is that much-debated question
of the relative physical and mental development and well-being of the white
race in tropical Australia. This can only be finally settled by precise obser-
vations extending over a series of years and embracing, particularly, the
school ages. In the course of such an inquiry much useful information would
incidentally be gained concerning the necessity or otherwise of modifications
of school hours or school methods, and of any special or local conditions
of child-life which may affect or influence educational progress.
Again, it is always likely that epidemic disease from Asia may strike the
North in terrifying guise, and when that day comes it will be well for our
country if it is possible to turn to the schools and their teachers for
enlightened support and assistance.
The time has come when instruction in the Art of Healthy Life must take
its proper place in the mental training of every citizen. Elementary health-
teaching fits itself admirably to the educational ritual of habit, mind-pictures,
attention, and reasoning. With it can readily be interwoven other useful
knowledge of the daily-wear kind—domestic economy and elementary civics,
for example. Prevention is proverbially better than cure, but for all that a
vast amount of cure is still necessary for lack of a little prevention. It is
not beyond hope, however, that some of us may live to see the day when the


serious acceptance of a doctrine of national physical morality will cause pre-
ventable disease to be regarded as somebody’s crime, and when the preserva-
tion and protection of health will occupy a place in the daily round of unques-
tioned duty to the State and to one’s neighbour. This development of the
national common sense must be effected in the schools, if it is to ever come
about.
Although in the time at my disposal it has been possible to traverse only
a small part of the field, the position of School Hygiene as an ordinary
common-sense adjunct of education will, I trust, have been made sufficiently
apparent. Like public health work generally, its purposes and necessities
are so clear and evident that they evoke no discussion, and hence gain few
enthusiastic advocates. It is apt to become a matter of popular acceptance
that somebody must be doing all that is necessary. But this attitude is not
the one which is needed. The educational efficiency of the children of the
Nation is more than a mere question for polite superficial discussion.
It is not the child in the next street or the child in the next city who is
concerned, but the individual child of the household and the school, who will
in a few years be taking up the work when we—immortal, unaging we, as
we in our hearts are apt to consider ourselves —are forced by Father to
uiy it down. And it is for us all to take good care that, in obeying the laws
which require the children of the nation to sit in the school benches for the
seven most impressionable anci plastic years of their lives, they suffer from
file process no harm which can be prevented by reasonable care and precaution.
1 or now, more than ever, a good human being requires for success in life
to be also “ a good animal.”
By Authority: Anthony James Gumming, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane.




