

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY.




SCIENCE AND THEOLU
A PAPER READ BEFORE
THE ADELAIDE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY.
RICHARD DAVIES HANSON, Esq.,
pr&PiB „
CniEF-Jcstice op South Australia.
REPRINTED FOR CIRCULATION
ON BKHALP OP THE CAUSE OP
FREE INQUIRY AND FREE EXPRESSION,- *
LONDON;
PRINTED BY CHARLES W. REYNELt,
LITTLE PULTENET STREET, XTATMARKET.




SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY.
r Proceed on the present occasion to attempt to
redeem my promise to read a Paper on the Rela-
tions between Science and Theology. But I confess
that I have entered upon the task with much re-
luctance. The subject is one of great intrinsic
difficulty, and it is not easy so to speak as to avoid
misconstruction ; nor do I feel that I am competent
adequately to deal with it. Still, the topic is not
merely interesting, especially at the present moment,
but it possesses a close practical relation to the
great majority of the subjects, which from time to
time occupy our attention as members of this Society.
Every scientific investigation, whether physical,
physiological, or historical, runs up into regions
which have been at one time or another monopolized
by Theology ; and it is consequently almost a matter
of necessity that the respective claims of the two
should be adjusted. Whether this can be satisfactorily
accomplished, may be doubted; or rather, it is quite
certain that no present adjustment is practicable,


which shall secure freedom to the enquiries of Science,
and at the same time preserve the peace of the
theologian. It may be permitted, however, to inves-
tigate the nature of their relations, and the points in
which' they apparently conflict, in the hope that
something towards the solution of the question may
be accomplished in this case, as in so many others,
by an attempt to exhibit in calm and unexaggerated
language what the question really is.
It can, I imagine, scarcely bo doubted at the
present time, that in many particulars the conclu-
sions of Modern Science conflict with the dogmas
of Theology; and, even if it were possible to dis-
semble the fact of this contradiction, either by
denying the conclusions of Science, or by modifying
the theological dogma, so as to bring the two into
apparent juxtaposition, yet there would still remain
an absolute difference between the theological and
the scientific basis and method, as they are at present
understood. Theology rests upon authority: Science
upon investigation. Theology is always based upon
a revelation, either universal or special: Science upon
reason. Theology presupposes the absolute insuffi-
ciency of the human faculties : Science their relative
sufficiency. Theology proceeds from certain facts or
principles, which are held to be above all need of
proof, and to be exempt from investigation: while
Science assumes nothing excepting by way of hypo-
thesis and conditionally, accepts nothing as true
excepting upon the appropriate evidence, and regards
no assertion as raised above investigation. Even,


therefore, when the conclusions of the theologian and
of the philosopher coincide, they rest upon different
foundations, and have been attained by a different
process.
And yet it would appear, a priori, that there need
not be any such conflict. For the appropriate domain
of Theology lies altogether beyond, or at any rate
apart from, that of Science; and those ultimate
Truths, upon which Theology pronounces so abso-
lutely, are Truths which Science confesses itself
without instruments either to prove or to confute.
What is the origin, and what the essence of mind or
of matter —what the cause and principle of the forces
which pervade nature—what the essential being and
attributes of God—what the ulterior destiny of man—
these are questions which Science, properly under-
stood, can scarcely propound to itself, and which,
when proposed, are by their terms beyond the reach
of a scientific solution. Some of them, no doubt, are
not bej'ond the reach of analogical conjecture; but,
as these conjectures have no basis of certainty, and
are beyond the possibility of verification, they cannot
pass into the domain of Science. They may raise a
faint presumption in favour of one set of views or
against another; but that is all. And thus there
cannot be properly, and there is not, I imagine, in
fact, any opposition between Science and Theology
upon these essentially theological subjects.
It may even be said that Science, by the very limi-
tations which it confesses, and the contradictions in
which it is involved, when it attempts to pass these


limits, and to speculate upon subjects which transcend
its sphere, bears unconscious testimony to the central
Truths of Theology—viz., that there exists a Great
First Cause, from which proceeds every thing that we
see and all that we are, and that this Cause is
unsearchable and past finding out. No doubt this
testimony is, under most of its aspects, rather nega-
tive than positive, and under every aspect imperfect.
But it is not therefore the less valid, so far as it
extends. In every direction, in which our enquiries
are prosecuted, we find ourselves encountered by
insoluble mysteries. We are absolutely unable to
conceive the possibility either of the origination of
matter or of its eternal existence, and yet are of
necessity compelled to conclude that one or the other
of these must have been the case ; and similar diffi-
culties surround the question of the cause and origin
of spirit. We cannot conceive of force as an essen-
tial attribute of matter, and yet cannot conceive of
matter otherwise than as possessing force ; for matter
is inconceivable without resistance, and resistance is
a manifestation of force. And these are only samples
of the contradictions, in which we are involved, when
we attempt to form any conception of “ things in
themselves.” But, then, the very impossibility of
any solution derived from our own faculties appears
to involve the idea of something, or rather of some
Being, the cause and the reason of all existence, in
whom all these seeming contradictions are harmo-
nized, but whose nature and essence are on that very
account inscrutable to our imperfect conceptions*


And, when we see how a few elementary substances,
manifesting or acted upon by various forms of force,
result in all the variety and order and beauty of
organic and inorganic nature —how every part is
dependent upon and adjusted to the whole, as the
whole is adjusted to the various parts—how all crea-
tures, from the lowest to the highest, are adapted to
their circumstances, and all apparently exhibit a
marked preponderance of enjoyment —we cannot, as
it appears to me, do otherwise than regard all these
phenomena as so many manifestations, relative to
our faculties, of the wisdom and goodness of the
Being to whom they are owing, though we still
confess our inability to conceive of Him as he is.
And further, although, as I have attempted to
show in my previous papers, everything around us,
everything that Science discloses of the past or can
conjecture of the future, displays the same obedience
to Law —although nothing in nature warrants the
assumption that there have been emergencies, which
Infinite Wisdom had failed to foresee in the adjust-
ment of these laws, or against which Infinite Power
had been unable to provide, and in which, therefore,
some suspension or violation of Law was needed in
order to prevent or to remedy disorder —yet there is
nothing in this conception, which contradicts the
theological idea of a personal God, or excludes the
notion that He works in all things according to His
Will. Impossible as it is for us to think of absolute
being as personal, or to predicate of it such an attribute
as that of will, yet these difficulties are metaphysical.


not scientific. So far as Science is concerned, there
is nothing in the conception of causation, which
necessarily contradicts personality —nothing in the
universality of law which excludes will. On the con-
trary, knowing that with men, the higher their moral
and intellectual faculties, the more nearly do they
approach to consistency, and the more rarely do they
manifest anomalies aud imperfections, we are natu-
rally, if not necessarily, led to regard this connection
as essential, and to suppose that in proportion to the
wisdom, goodness, and power, which any being pos-
sesses, will be the uniformity of the procedure in
which his will is manifested. And hence, assuming
the absolute Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God,
we should deduce from that assumption an absolute
uniformity in the processes of Nature and the deal-
ings of Providence, supposing that these are the
results of His Will. Ho doubt, to those who place
God outside of Nature, and conceive of Him as in
some respect antagonistic to it, this view of the
universality of Law is repugnant, because it appears
to exclude God from the universe. So far from this
being the case, however, it negatives the idea of the
occasional intervention of the Deity, only because it
regards Him as always and everywhere present and
active.
It is not, therefore, upon any of these great Truths,
which underlie all Theology, that the oppositions to
which I have referred arise. The questions, which
are now at issue between men of Science and theo-
logians, stand upon another and a lower ground.


They are, for the most part, reducible to one, or,
rather, they are different aspects of the same funda-
mental question: viz. what, in matters of Science,
(meaning by this everything which the human intel-
lect is competent to investigate,) is the authority
of the Hebrew and Christian Scriptures ? Either
directly, or incidentally, these writings contain
notices, or descriptions, or narratives, which refer
to matters susceptible of investigation, and which
are more or less at variance with the results of
scientific enquiry. And, as the first consequence of
the perception of these variances was the denial of
the conclusions at which men of Science had arrived,
and a condemnation of the method of enquiry which
had led to these obnoxious conclusions, it followed
necessarily that those, who had proved the sound-
ness of their method of investigation in a hundred
fields of research, and who could not, without re-
nouncing the exercise of their reason, doubt the
truth of the conclusions at which they had arrived,
were drawn to examine their position in reference to
the Bible. This examination took at first the form—
Is the teaching of Science in these matters, espe-
cially in Geology, at variance with the teaching of
the Bible ? In this enquiry many persons, among
whom I may name Granville Penn, Chalmers, Buck-
land, Pye Smith, Hugh Miller, proposed various
methods of reconciling the apparent discrepancy—
some by moulding the facts of Science so as to make
them harmonize with the language of the Bible, and
some by moulding the language of the Bible so as to


make it harmonize with the facts of Science. But as
all of these, however decided and however sincere
their professions of belief in the inspiration and
infallibility of the Bible, virtually conceded by the
very attempt at reconciliation that, in matters of
Science, Science was the ultimate authority, a further
question necessarily was raised: Is the Bible to be
regarded as infallible in matters of Science ? And
this latter question became connected with others,
which resulted from contemporaneous investigations
into the origin of the Bible itself, and which con-
cerned the date, authorship, authenticity, and genuine-
ness, of the various Books of which it is composed.
And all these questions have gradually been investi-
gated with more boldness and earnestness, as their
importance to the interests both of Science and of
Religion has been more appreciated, and as the
materials for forming a conclusion have become more
abundant and accessible.
The question, therefore, between Science and Theo-
logy has a twofold aspect. It regards, on the one
hand, the facts narrated in the Bible—its Cosmogony,
Chronology, Ethnology, and History, and examines
into their accordance with the Laws of Nature, and
with the inferences derived from a complete induction
of known facts. And, on the other hand, it regards
the origin of the Bible itself —at what time, by what
authors, under what circumstances, were its various
Books written. And under each of these aspects
Science comes into collision with Theology. Theolo-
gians assume that these Books are the direct utter-


ance of the Supreme Being, and that whatever is
therein narrated must not only be received as lite-
rally true, but must —if needs be in order to its
reception—be considered as withdrawn from the
operation of the ordinary Laws of Nature, and as
being in the strictest sense miraculous; and this, if
admitted, would be fatal to the pretensions of Science.
It is true that, in deference to the opinions of the day,
from the influence of which no man can wholly
escape, there has been on the part of many theolo-
gians a recession from these extreme pretensions.
But this is at variance with the theological spirit;
and those, who have made such concessions, are
often regarded as only a shade less dangerous than
those, who frankly adopt the scientific method
throughout. This, then, is the theatre of conflict;
and the question is whether Science in its enquiries
upon these subjects has invaded the domain of
Theology, or Theology, in attempting to exclude
them from investigation, has intruded into that of
Science.
It cannot, of course, be pretended that the great
majority of these subjects, relating, as they do, to
results of physical agencies, and to human conduct,
are not in themselves properly the subject of scien-
tific investigation. Whether, for instance, at any
time within the last 4,000 or 5,000 years the whole
of the earth has been covered with water to the depth
of some miles, and for a period of many months, is a
question of the effect of physical agents, and pro-
perly to be investigated by the methods of physical


enquiry. Whether a book, such, for instance, as
Genesis, appears to be the production of one indivi-
dual, or of more than one —whether it exhibits a
unity of conception and of execution —whether the
language is all of one age, or in parts of different
ages, and to what age or ages the language is to be
referred —and whether the date of the composition,
in whole or in part, can be approximately fixed by a
consideration of the peculiarities of the language, or
of other internal evidence —are questions of Criti-
cism, and are jprimd facie to be decided by the same
canons, as are applicable to other ancient writings.
Whether a particular people belonged to one branch
of the human family or to another, is a question of
Ethnology, and to be decided by considerations of
their language, institutions, and history. Whether
events are probable or the reverse, and whether the
evidence of their having actually occurred is of such
a nature as to overbear any antecedent presumption
against them on the ground of their improbability, is
a question of evidence, and to be decided by the same
principles, as would guide us in investigating any
contemporary narrative. At least, this must be the
case, unless some reason can be shown for applying
different methods and tests, to the investigation of
the Books of the Bible and the events therein nar-
rated, from those which would be applied to other
books and events.
There is, however, a widely-spread feeling that the
Bible, and everything that it contains, ought to be
exempted from enquiry. Apart from those, —and


they are man}’, —who think that the teachings of the
Bible are to be taken as conclusive upon all subjects,
and that it is impious to enquire, when, as they con-
ceive, God has spoken, because enquiry implies a
doubt either of His knowledge or of His truth, there
are many who would willingly ignore all these topics.
They admit the right and the competence of the
human intellect to prosecute such enquiries ; but they
fear, possibly, that the results may tend to weaken
their own faith, or, at any rate, to weaken the faith
of the multitude. Both of these classes are entitled
to much consideration; but neither of them has a
place within the walls of this room. The very object
of this Society is to investigate the Laws of Hature,
in their practical and in their speculative aspects;
and this implies, necessarily, the absence of all bias
and of all limit. In other societies, philosophical or
scientific investigations may be followed only to a
certain distance, and always with a tacit regard to
consequences. Here we have no object but truth,
and no limit but that which results from the neces-
sarily progressive character of all knowledge. In
fact, it is obvious that any such limits, as Theology
would impose, are inconsistent with all enquiry. In
Geology we should have to stop with the last divi-
sion of the recent period, (because that may possibly,
with a little management, be brought within, or
nearly within, the received chronology,) and must
exclude from our investigations everything beyond.
In Ethnology, we should have to limit our enquiries
to the mere classification of the existing varieties of


the human family, without venturing to speculate
upon their origin and affinities ; because these specu-
lations must, or, at any rate, may, result either in
attributing an antiquity to the human race far beyond
that warranted by Genesis, or in assuming an original
diversity of races. In the Science of Language we
should have to shut our eyes to the evidences lying
before us of the existence, so to speak, of one stratum
of language underlying another; because, tracing
these downwards, we may, in the dim distance of an
unknown antiquity, far beyond the records of history
or the dawn of tradition, faintly surmise some original
language spoken by our primeval fathers, from which
all existing languages have been derived by natural
processes. In History, we should have to leave out
of our investigations the oi’igin, course, and results of
the two most pregnant facts in the development of
our race —the Jewish and Christian Religions. I
might extend the list of these limitations indefinitely.
But these arc enough to show how narrow would be
the range, or, rather, how impossible would be the
prosecution, of philosophical investigation, if we
should really determine to avoid all those points,
in which the Bible and Science may come into
collision.
It may however be said, “ Granting all this, the
investigations of Science should be conducted apart.
Philosophers may pursue their speculations and form
their conclusions; but they have no right to bring
these conclusions into comparison with the dogmas
of Theology. This is the task and the function of


theologians only ; and therefore all such enquiries as
the present are beyond the legitimate objects of a
philosophical society.” There might be some fair-
ness in such a suggestion, if men of Science were
left to pursue their enquiries, without encountering
opposition or obloquy from the men of Theology ; but
even then it would be alike unwise and impracticable.
For, in the first place, why should Science be con-
demned to be irreligious ? There can surely be no
reason why the man, who before all others is familiar
with proofs of the marvellous adaptations of Nature
—who sees above, around, and within him evidences
of Wisdom and Benevolence, which increase with
every increase of his knowledge—should be compelled
to exclude from his consideration all the lessons which
he may thence derive. It has been too often, though
unjustly, the complaint against Science that it is
irreligious ; but this would be to compel it to remain
so, in the supposed interests of Religion itself. And,
in the second place, it must be remembered that after
all, members of philosophical societies are men, and,
as such, are as much interested in Theology as any
one can be. It is for ns, individually, as important
to know whether there is or is not any conflict
between Science and Theology, as it is for the man
who repudiates all Science as profane. We do not
drop our personality when we enter this room ; nor
are we able to draw a sharp line of demarcation
between our scientific and theological belief, —much
less to assume the same thing to be a theological
truth and a scientific error. Whatever may be our


creed, it is the same person who believes and who
investigates ; and it is therefore our right, as
enquirers, if it is not also our duty, to attempt to
ascertain the relations between our Faith and our
Science.
That there is such a duty, whether it devolves
upon us or not, must be taken to be admitted, for
otherwise it would be impossible to account for the
large and increasing number of works, professedly
devoted to this subject. It must, however, be con-
fessed that there appears something of inconsistency
in the manner, in which these questions are treated
by different persons, who have discussed them from
the theological point of view, and even by the same
person at different times. Sometimes what, for the
sake of distinctness, I may call the orthodox view, is
supported by ai*guments appropriate to the subjects
of enquiry, regarded under their scientific aspect;
while sometimes the application of similar arguments
to the determination of the same questions is de-
nounced as irreverent, if not impious. It would
really seem that the true solution of these apparent
inconsistencies is to be found in the assumption, that
the scientific method is permissible in reference to
questions of Theology, only when it is employed to
establish the truth of the received opinions, and in
no wise when it is employed simply to investigate
whether they are true or not. Ido not suppose that
in fact the majority of orthodox writers have con-
sciously represented their own principles to them-
selves under this definite formula. But it is difficult


not to imagine that some such feeling is more or less
unconsciously underlying all their conceptions on
the subject; and there are some who undisguisedly
avow their adhesion to this rule.
It is, however, obvious that all arguments, addressed
to the reason, presuppose that reason is the ultimate
■’’udge of the truth of the conclusions, to which these
arguments are designed to lead. And it would seem
equally obvious that any claim to authority, which
shall exclude the employment of the reason in refe-
rence to any particular subject, must, in the first
instance, vindicate itself by arguments addressed to
the reason. However much we may be disposed to
concede to authority, when its claims are established,
it would seem to be unquestionable that the esta-
blishment of these claims is a necessary preliminary
to our submission, and that this must, or rather
should be, —(for often it is not,) —the result of argu-
ments addressed to the reason. Whatever form',
therefore, the argument may assume, whether the
truth and divine authorship of the Bible are attempted
to be proved inductively, from an examination of its
contents, and from the characters of the persons by
whom it was written, and the miracles by which it is
alleged to have been authenticated, or whether the
truth of everything it contains is established deduc-
tively upon the basis of its divine authorship, the
appeal is ultimately made to the human reason, —in
the one case as to the validity of the induction, and
in the other as to the truth of the assumed basis.
And, if the reason of each man is to be for himself


the ultimate judge of the conclusions he shall adopt,
then those conclusions must be tested by the same
methods, and the evidence adduced in their support
must be subjected to the same processes of examina-
tion, as are applicable to all other questions.
There is probably nothing in this, which would
not receive the formal assent of all Protestant theo-
logians ; since the very right to protest against the
doctrines and the practices of the older Church must
be founded upon, or, at any rate, can only be justified
by, the right of private judgment —that is, the ulti-
mate supremacy of the human reason —with regard
both to the grounds and the objects of belief. It too
often happens, however, that the supremacy, thus
conceded in theory, is denied in practice; and men
are permitted to enquire and examine, only upon the
tacit condition that they shall arrive at certain
predetermined results. But this is an inconsistency,
which by no means derogates from the soundness or
value of the admitted principle.
Taking it, then, to be admitted, at least in this
room, that there is a right of enquiry into the grounds
of theological belief, both as regards the authority of
the Bible, and the conclusions to be drawn from its
teaching, and knowing that there are many persons
who have, as the result of such enquiry, arrived at
the conclusion, that the Bible is not only inspired, but
also absolutely authoritative upon all subjects, it is not,
perhaps, irrelevant to remark that any inferences, to
be deduced from this conclusion, must partake of the
uncertainty of the conclusion itself, as well as of the


added uncertainty of the reasoning by which the
inference is reached. It would often appear as if, by
a natural confusion of ideas, men upon this subject
transfer the attribute of infallibility, which, as the
result of their investigation, or sometimes prior to
all investigation, they attribute to the Bible, to the
process or act by which the conclusion has been
reached, and thus not merely conclude that the Bible
is infallible, but that they are infallible in making that
conclusion. In fact, however, it is only necessary to
state the proposition in order to secure its reception,
viz., that whether, in point of fact, the Bible be or
be not infallible, our conclusion that it is so, being
simply the result of our own mental processes, has
no greater certainty than belongs to other conclusions
arrived at by similar processes. The stream cannot
rise above its fount. There can be no infallible con-
clusions of fallible reason; and therefore the asser-
tion of the infallibility of the Bible, being only a
deduction of reason, cannot logically be used to bar
any course of enquiry or to prove, a priori, the
unsoundness of any conclusions to which that en-
quiry may lead.
And, as has been well shown by Archbishop
Whately, in reference to another subject, it is impos-
sible to escape this dilemma: whether a man sur-
renders his reason to the Bible, or to the Church,
or to a Priest, or to the witness of the Spirit within,
and however complete the surrender or abnegation
of reason may be, there is one exercise of reason
which he cannot escape; —he must decide what shall


be the authority, to which his reason shall be subser-
vient, and that choice must be determined explicitly
or implicitly by his reason. As a late writer has said,
to attempt to avoid being ultimately decided by
reason in choosing a faith, is like a man attempting
to jump off his own shadow. And thus the uncer-
tainty, which attaches to all processes of argument,
necessarily attaches to the decision in favour of this
or that authority. Any conclusion, consequently,
formed upon the basis of any authority, has neces-
sarily no greater validity than the act of reason, by
which that authority was recognized.
I have said this, because it appears to me that
many persons conceive, either that there is something
in the fact, that Theology has claimed any subjects as
being within its domain, which renders the human
reason incapable of forming a judgment upon them,
or that there is a peculiar certainty in the conclu-
sions, which may be formed or accepted by the
human reason in relation to them. And, singular as
it may appear, it often happens that these two some-
what contradictory conceptions are held by the same
person, who thus both denies the competency of his
reason to form an opinion, and asserts the absolute
truth of the opinions, which (as he alleges) in the
absence of his reason he has adopted. And I have
therefore attempted to show that, on the contrary,
the points, upon which scientific investigation is now
exercised, are matters especially within the domain of
science, and that every opinion which may be formed
on the subject is an opinion, which, in the nature of


things, must rest upon individual reason, and conse-
quently can at any rate have no greater certainty
than belongs to conclusions of reason in general.
I might, if it were necessary, go even further, and
say that, from the nature of the subject, there is
necessarily a smaller amount of certainty attaching to
theological conclusions than to conclusions upon any
other subject; because, in addition to the difficulties
which are common to those subjects and to Theology,
there are added difficulties, arising from the very
nature of the objects of theological investigation.
And, in support of this view, I might quote largely
from Mr Mansel, whose new defence of the faith
excited so much attention a short time since, and,
having answered its end of puzzling some and amus-
ing others, is gradually sinking out of notice. But
I refrain from dwelling upon this view of the subject,
which is besides immaterial under that aspect of the
question which I am considering, and content myself
with remarking that these admitted difficulties may
at least serve to inspire theologians with reserve and
diffidence in stating their conclusions, and with some
consideration for those who, upon matters so import-
ant and so difficult, may have arrived at views diffe-
rent from their own, even though this should appear
to admit the possibility, that their own views were
not absolutely complete and accurate.
But if, in fact, it is competent to any one to investi-
gate the age, authorship, and authenticity of the
various Books of which the Bible is composed, to
examine upon independent grounds the historical


truth of the narratives which it contains, and to
pursue the study of sciences, though their conclusions
may conflict with the plain language of the Bible —
then it would seem that no theological considera-
tions ought to be allowed to influence the course
of enquiry, or to affect its result. A scientific inves-
tigation is utterly worthless, unless it is absolutely
unbiassed. And, if so, it would appear further
that no real theological principle can be involved in
the enquiry. For instance, the uniform course of
opinion during the last half century among all com-
petent enquirers has been in a direction adverse to
the historical character, at least of the early part, of
the Book of Genesis. Geology has, I believe I may
say, utterly exploded the notion of Creation in six
days as given in the first chapter, as well as the idea
of a universal Deluge; and it is gradually throwing
back the date of the first appearance of man upon the
globe to an antiquity, which, according to present
appearances, will ultimately be measured by hundreds
of thousands of years. The Science of Language and
Ethnology both tend to show that the separation of
the human family, if, as is probable, it was one family
originally, must be thrown back for tens of thousands
of years, and that the people of Canaan, whom the
Israelites drove out, belonged, no less than the
Israelites themselves, to the Semitic race, instead of
being Hamites, while the Persians belonged to the
Indo-European family, instead of being, as the author
of the tenth chapter of Genesis makes them, Semitic.
And, at the same time, critical investigations, as to


the age and authorship of the Book, are leading un-
mistakeably to the belief, that, whoever its compiler
might be, and whatever ancient documents might be
embodied in it, there were,, at any rate, more than
two persons concerned in its authorship, the earliest
of whom could not have lived much before, and
probably did not live after, the time of David. Ido
not now put forward these conclusions as true, though
personally I consider the evidence such as to warrant
our belief of their truth ; but I mention them as those
conclusions, to which the current of opinion is now
leading, and which the majority of independent
thinkers, who devote themselves to these enquiries,
will be likely to adopt. In fact, but for the theo-
logical interests supposed to be at stake, and the
theological passions therefore aroused, I believe that
there would at this time be no more doubt, as to the
general truth of the conclusions which Bishop Colenso
is enouncing, with regard to the uncertainty of the
early history of the world and of the Jews, than there
is with regard to those put forth by Niebuhr, as to the
uncertainty of the early history of the Romans. But,
however this may be, it cannot be denied that among
independent thinkers, who have directed their en-
quiries to this subject, the tendency is towards the
conclusions which I have indicated, in spite of strong
early prepossessions, and of no slight present induce-
ments to maintain the contrary views. Now, is it to be
supposed —will any one venture to assert—that these
views, if adopted, can affect the relation of man to
God, or the purposes of God to man F —that the induce-


merits to virtue or piety ■will be diminished, or that
virtue and piety will be less acceptable to God ? —or
even that these opinions, if honestly formed and
manfully proclaimed, will be less pleasing in the eyes
of the God of Truth, than the contrary opinions, taken
at second hand without enquiry, or obtained as the
result of an enquiry whose conclusion was foredeter-
mined ? No doubt it is true that many opinions,
which we have been accustomed to hold, —rather,
though, upon the authority of the school-men and of
Milton than of the Bible, —will fall if these views ulti-
mately prevail; and those, who insist upon having
their Theology in a systematic form, may have to
remodel their systems. But these are the necessary
consequences, in every branch of enquiry, of the
discovery of new truths, whenever systems have been
prematurely formed. Still whatever may be their
results, unless we are prepared to prohibit all scientific
investigation, —and though outside these walls there
may be many who would do so, yet the very character
of this Society is a proof that all here would repudiate
such a proposal, —these enquiries are demanded by
the very importance and sacredness of the subject;
and, if instituted, they must be carried on with no
other purpose than that of following Truth, whither-
soever it may lead us.
But there is another aspect of Science, of which
the previous Papers that I have read have been partial
illustrations, —that is, that all things are conducted
according to invariable rules, and, to use the common
phraseology, through the instrumentality of second


causes, —which even more conflicts with the theologi-
cal spirit. But, apart from the question of miracles,
with which I do not here intermeddle, only remarking
that the evidence to prove a miracle must he strong
in proportion to the exceptional character of the fact
to ~be proved, I imagine there is no well-informed
person —(I beg pardon, I must except modern spirit-
ualists, but excepting them) —who does not admit
that the course of Nature is now uninterrupted, and
that all results are brought about by the silent oper-
ation of natural forces, working in definite and
prearranged directions, and producing, no doubt,
their appointed results. The Hebrew poets regarded
thunder as the voice of Jehovah, and lightning as the
breath of His nostrils ; hail and snow were laid up in
His Storehouses, to be poured forth at His Will, and,
in fact, every occurrence, whether helpful or hurtful,
was referred to His direct agency. We, however,
see in thunder, and lightning, and hail, the effect of
electrical agencies. Even the courses of the winds
and the fall of rain are found to be regulated by
laws, as definite as those which cause the succession
of day and night; and in all surrounding circum-
stances we are able, altogether or proximately, to
refer them to their causes, and to show the manner
in which those causes operate. But we do not, on
that account, deny the being of God, or conceive of
Nature as existing independently of Him. We are
unable, doubtless, to represent to ourselves the mode
of His existence, or the character of His relation to
the phenomena by which we are surrounded, and the


sum of which we call “ Nature.” But we look upon
all manifestations of power or beauty as tokens of
His Presence ; and we regard the laws, which we are
able to trace, not as hiding Him from us, but as revela-
tions of His method of government, and as enabling
us, however imperfectly, to conceive of some of His
attributes. And, if we are to believe what reason,
no less than revelation, would seem to teach, that He
is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, then this
may be presumed to have been the method of His
government from the beginning. And yet, whenever
attempts are made to suggest the manner, in which
the existing order of things may have been deve-
loped, by the operation of laws which still subsist,
there is always more or less of suspicion attaching to
the attempt, as if it were derogatory to God to show
that he was not like man, and that his operations
have none of those marks of weakness and imperfec-
tion, which characterize our own.
It is probable, however, that one great source of
the objection felt to these views is the fact, that they
conflict more emphatically, than even the views as to
the antiquity of the human race, or as to the non-
occurrence of the Flood, with the Book of Genesis,
and with theological deductions from it, especially as
to the Fall. For if the world has existed under the
same laws from the first moment of its formation —
if all things have been slowly shaping themselves into
fitness for the existence of higher and higher classes
of being, organic and inorganic nature gradually
assuming improved forms, —and if, as the culmina-


tion of the long progress, Man appeared, at first in a
low animal form, but gradually elevated to higher
and higher types,—then the whole doctrine of the
Fall, as represented in our systems of Theology, and
of the present degradation of our race as compared
with its early elevation, and of the deterioration of
external nature as a consequence, is obviously erro-
neous.
I may, however, venture to observe upon this point
that, although this view is inconsistent with the his-
torical truth of the narrative in Genesis, yet the idea
of the Fall answers to facts lying deep in the human
consciousness, and to which the experience of every
man will testify. The contrast between faith and
practice —between resolve and performance—between
the excellence which we are able to conceive and that
which we can embody in action —is a real and per-
manent fact in the nature of man, whatever be the
language in which it is expressed, or the cause to
which it is to be referred. Whether we say, with St
Paul, “ To will is present with me, but how to per-
form that which is good I know not,” or with the
heathen poet, “ I see, and I approve the things which
are better: I follow the things which are worse ”
whether, with Augustine and his modern followers,
we regard it as a predestined result of the sin of
Adam, which was itself predestined, or with some
recent thinkers, as a proof of the growing supremacy
of the human reason and conscience, an increasing
knowledge of good and evil, which brings with it an
admiration [of the former, accompanied by a con-


sciousness of subjection to the latter, —or in whatever
other forms it may be represented or embodied, —it
remains as a fact. And, consequently, no theological
doctrines, chwhi are based upon its existence, would
seem to be affected by the result of any scientific
investigation; though dogmas, which rest entirely
upon the form of the narrative, must fall if the nar-
rative itself is shown to be at variance with fact.
There is, then, even at the present time, an opposi-
tion upon these various grounds between Science and
Theology. And, while Theology has been stationary,
at any rate since the Reformation, —for the same
questions are agitating theologians now as were then
raised, and are apparently as far from settlement as
ever, —Science has continued to advance ; and, re-
garding the signs of the times, it would seem destined
to continue its progress, unless stopped by some
catastrophe, such as that which overwhelmed the
civilizations of Greece and Rome. For, however
much it may be distrusted or denounced, the obvious
practical benefits which it confers upon Society, and
the political, intellectual, and material superiority of
those countries, in which its unfettered cultivation is
permitted, as compared with those, where the theo-
logical spirit is in the ascendant, are too plain and
palpable to allow of any doubt of its utility and
value. The nations, for "whom Science has done and
is doing so much, will never willingly consent to dry
up the sources of their progress, by throwing im-
pediments in the way of its further development.
Whatever, consequently, may be its effects, they are


inevitable, and must be accepted as necessary ele-
ments in any scheme for the future. If Science
stood in need of State patronage or of artificial fos-
tering of any kind, there might be some uncertainty
as to its permanence and progress. It needs,
however, no other encouragement than to be let
alone; and then its inherent attractions will secure
for it a crowd of willing votaries by whose efforts it is
advanced in every direction. And, whenever any
object requires for its accomplishment more than
isolated individuals can perform, the results to be
attained are such as to ensure the ready union of
private persons, or to command the support of the
public. And, as-a result of this progress, we may
expect to see every occurrence in nature and every
historical record explained and accounted for, by
being referred either certainly or probably to natural
circumstances, acting in obedience with or in analogy
to known laws. Ho doubt, the time of the complete
fulfilment of this anticipation is far distant; but
every year will see some progress made towards it,
and every step in the progress is an earnest and a
prophecy of its ultimate realization.
But, in this case, what is to be the attitude, and
what the function, of Theology ? For the last four
centuries theologians have been fighting a losing
battle in every country in which free thought has
been permitted. They have been compelled to
concede one point after another, always after having
continued the defence, when impartial bye-standers
could clearly discern that the point was already lost.


And they hare at last retired unwillingly and under
protest, not seldom anathematizing those, by whose
labours they have been compelled to recede. And in
countries in which thought has been fettered, and
enquiry forbidden, or its results stifled, Theology has
been able to hold its ground only on the condition of
arresting the mental progress of the nation. So that
a very few years since (as late as 1857) a Spanish
Archbishop could denounce the whole circle of
Modern Science, including the discoveries which
have immortalized the names of Newton, Laplace,
and others, as only a renewal and reproduction of
errors, which had been a thousand times refuted and
denounced by the Church!* Might we not fancy
this to be an echo of recent orthodox denunciations in
England P t Are theologians prepared to continue a
* I subjoin a translation of the passage so far as material. It
occurs in a note in “ Buckle’s History of Civilization in England,”
vol. ii., p. 147. “ Firstly, that the schools of Holland, Germany,
England, and France, hostile to Catholicism, have commenced and
prosecuted with the utmost zeal certain philosophical discussions,
presenting them as a triumph of reason over religion, of philosophy
over theology, and of materialism over spiritualism. Secondl}',
that these maxims are, for the most part, nothing more than the
reproduction or further development of errors a thousand times
refuted and condemned by a holy philosophy and by the Church ,
so that, instead of having to congratulate themselves upon their
progress, they should far rather blush for their retrogression.”
f See Charge of Bishop Wilbbrfobce, of Oxford, on the subject
of Bishop Colenso, of Natal’s, writings—“ In all essential points
they are but the repetition of old and often answered cavils against
the Word of God; ” —See also the Charges of Archbishop Lonolet,
of Canterbury, Bishop Hampden, of Hereford, Bishop Bicker-
stetb, of Ripon, and others on the same subject.


conflict in which defeat is assured, if the terms
of the combat are equal, or in which victory, or
rather escape, is only possible on the terms of
prohibiting all enquiiy into the subject P Or will
they not rather recognise the fact that "Nature
is as truly a revelation of God as any Book can be, —
that the reason of man is a God-implanted faculty, and
its free exercise a sacred duty, —and that, in the
exercise of his reason for the purpose of discovering
the laws or elucidating the phenomena of Nature,
man is only bringing into broader light the proofs of
the Wisdom and Goodness of God ? This alternative
is open to them; and in spite of the clamour, which
a few have raised, and which the many have echoed,
I think there are some symptoms that no inconsider-
able portion of the theologians of the present day will
adopt the latter course.
In this case the task of the theologian is marked
out before him. He has two objects to keep in view.
The first is to show that the essential doctrines of
Theology are and will remain unaffected by any
scientific conclusions, to separate them from all
extraneous or adventitious elements with which they
may have become mingled, and to present them in
their purity and simplicity; and the second is to
consecrate, so to speak, the conclusions of Science,
by showing their harmony with these essential truths,
and by bringing out their religious significance. The
attitude, which Theology in Protestant countries has
long since assumed with regard to Astronomy, may
be taken as an illustration of the spirit, in which this


twofold task should be performed. There can he no
doubt that in the first instance the system of
Copernicus was regarded as eminently anti-theolo-
gical and atheistical. It was at vai'iancc with the
letter of the Bible, with the teaching of the Church,
and with the doctrines of the Fathers; and, by
destroying the localities, in which mediaeval theology
had placed its heaven and its hell, it seemed to
annihilate the belief in those future rewards and
punishments, of which they were to be the theatre.
But now-a-days no one, in England at least, ever
dreams of their being any such contradiction, and
the discoveries of Astronomy are referred to as a sort
of common place, for illustrations of the Infinity,
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the Creator. It is
true that more is involved, or rather, perhaps, more
seems to us to be involved, in admitting the antiquity
of man —the origin of all species, including man, by
development out of lower organisms—the late date
and uncertain authorship of the Pentateuch —to take
only a few of the matters, which are still the battle-
field of Science and Theology. Nor do I assert
or assume that these are now proved, or that ever
they will be proved, at any rate, with the same
absoluteness of demonstration, as belongs to the
discoveries of Astronomy. But, if not proved, these
opinions are held by men eminent for ability,
learning, patient investigation, and a reverent spirit;
and they are winning their way into an ever-widening
circle of disciples. They demand recognition, then,
as plausible, and even probable, hypotheses, —not


proved, but coming, year by year, nearer to proof;
and, as such, a theologian might deal with them.
And surely there are aspects, under which all of these
might be made to subserve the purposes of Theology,
I am no professional theologian, but I might, perhaps,
suggest as appropriate, and as sanctioned by prece-
dent, such as these. The enlarged view which they
present of the period, during which the Divine energy
and superintendence has been manifested on our
globe—the confirmation which they give to the
Divine wisdom and immutability, in showing that
one system of laws has prevailed from the very
commencement of organization, and that system so
arranged, as gradually to evolve all that we now
see —the manner in which instrumentalities of the
most varied and seemingly unlikely kind have been
employed, for the education of the world, and in
preparing it for higher and purer teaching —these
are some of the lessons which might be deduced, and
which, whether or not the most appropriate or
edifying that might be drawn, may at least suffice to
show that Theology need not lose anything essential,
or any instrument for elevating or purifying the
intellect or the character, even were these conclusions
adopted.
To me the opposition between Science and Theology
has always appeared most unfortunate. The implied
stigma cast upon Science, by denouncing its enquiries
as presumptuous and unwarranted, and its conclusions
as irreligious and atheistical, is injurious to the
mental tone, of those to whom it is addressed; and


the consequent injury to Theology, when it is per-
ceived, as in many cases it is, that what has been so
denounced is nevertheless demonstrably true, has
been at least equal. If I could believe that the
opposition was necessarily inherent in the nature of
the two conceptions, I should have no prospect before
me but, on the one hand, the destruction of Theology,
or, on the other, the enslavement of the human
intellect, —either of which I should regard as a mis-
fortune of almost equal magnitude; though un-
doubtedly the former would be the more tolerable
and the more hopeful condition: for man, by his very
constitution, if left free, would frame a Theology for
himself, not, we may believe, without the guiding
Spirit of God; while the enslaved intellect might
struggle for ages without ever raising itself to a
worthy conception of its Author, its nature, or its
destinies. But Ido not think that there is any such
essential incompatibility between the tAvo; and it
appears to me, therefore, that their present conflict
arises from mistaken views on one side or the other,
which a calm and dispassionate investigation may
help to remove.
W. BKTNKLL, LITTLE PULTEH KT STEKKT, HATMABKKT.
