

--So2jt ~"fr. /5 3%%
nth: A- fad"
SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY,
ESSAY,
With a dedication bt
H 0 K 0 E,
TO THB
~ y $>
EEY. A. M. HENDERSON,
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY R. BELL, 97 LITTLE COLLINS STREET EAST.
1 8 7 0.
I •*'
L ■




K. vo
lo .-V-W
DEDICATION.
It seems to be tacitly agreed that nothing less than the relations
between Science and Theology should form the staple of most of
the Lectures given on behalf ef the Early Closing Association ,
which, unfortunately, however, are deprived of most of their point,
for want of the simultaneous presentation of the v.ews with which
they are in antagonism. It, therefore, seems desirable to rescue
them from the imminent charge of fighting against shadows. This
is a defect which is doubtless inseparable from the one-sided dis-
cussion which is characteristic of the ordinary lecture hall and the
pulpit, where the views contested are stated, if at all, solely by an
opponent. Human nature seems scarcely competent to do this with
impartiality and perfect fairness ; refutation being the object, the
easiest way to accomplish it is naturally and unconsciously adopted .
As Dr. Boyd says—“ you have merely to state your opponent’s
“ views so as to make them rank nonsense, and then it is compara-
“ tively easy to show that they are rank nonsense.” But truth
thus suffers from want of salience in the error with which it should
contrast.
I find also some rather puzzling passages in the address of the
talented lecturer on “ Historyseveral apparent defects indeed,
some elucidation of which is probably desired by others as well as
myself. For these reasons I venture to offer to the consideration
of the Rev. A. M. Henderson and of the Early Closing Association,
a revised reprint of a colonial production on the subject of “ Science
and Theology,” the reasoning in which I have never been able
satisfactorily to refute, and which does not appear to me to have
been met by Mr. Henderson ; and I take advantage of the oppor -
tunity thus afforded of indicating points in Mr. Henderson’s address
of which explanation seems most required.
Though I desire to confine these remarks mainly to that part of
the lecture in which an attack is made upon those views of the
Philosophy of History, which are becoming so prevalent among the
most distinguished disciples of modern Science, and which are
notoriously spreading elsewhere in due proportion to the more
general application of scientific method in the investigation of
nature ; still I do not feel justified in passing over his ninth page
in which ho scouts the idea that the supernatural is impossible. He


flays (page 9, line 20.2)-^* 44 It is on all hands admitted that the
41 sscred Scriptures assume the existence of the supernatural ;
“ nay, even base all their claims to acceptance upon it.” If this
be really true, it seems to follow clearty, that there can no longer
remain a shred of rational basis for belief either in the sacred Scrip-
tures or in the Supernatural! Yet those are Mr. Henderson’s
words ! According- to them the sole basis for belief in the Scrip-
tures or in the Supernatural (which may be regarded as his
whole stock-in-trade), is nothing but a mere assumption! One
which itself implies the absence of corroborative evidence, and which
is directly opposed by the testimony of modern science ! Mr. H.
himself says —line 41-2 — 44 No believer in the supernatural has ever
44 said it was to be seen in the natural 1” But the rationalistic
opinion is based upon evidence to be seen everywhere in nature, and
is applied to nothing beyond. It simply asserts the unreasonable-
ness of gratuitously assuming the existence of a supernatural in the
natural, where it is confessedly 44 not to be seen;” the charges
therefore of absurdity and impudence are surely inapplicable.
Those who simply ask for reasonable evidence in favour of a bare
assumption which they are required to adopt, seem scarcely ' /
serving of such bard terms ; while those who use them can harder \
be justified in doing so, while compelled to admit that they have
no proofs whatever to offer ; whether they recognise^the force of
that producible on the other side, or not.
Mr. Henderson next ridicules his old skipper for saying that he
had not seen certain phenomena in places where it was asserted
that they had sometimes been seen by others; and for therefore in
some instances disbelieving their existence; and Mr. Henderson re-
gards that statement as equivalent to an assertion by the skipper
that the phenomena could not have been, because he (the skipper)
had not seen them, though Mr. Henderson does not say that the
old skipper actually said so. Is Mr. Henderson really incapable of
recognising the important distinction between the two statements ?
From his own account of the.matter his cautious old skipper seems
to have understood what he was saying far better than Mr.
Henderson, who might have learned from him a useful lesson in
logic. In the following reprint Mr. Henderson may find argu-
ments against a belief in the supernatural, which, though they
might be far better stated, are I think not easily refuted.
At page 21 Mr Henderson generously comes to the rescue of the
doctrine of free will,
, 4 versal conviction of man.” If this conviction of man be, as Mr,


11. states, universal, is any rescue required ? And does Mr. H.
speak truth in calling this conviction of man universal , if he knows
that Luther, Hobbes, Edwards, Locke, Collins, Hartley, Pnestlev,
Buckle, Mill, Spencer, Bain, Ac., express the opposite? Iwesfln
fact that Mr. H. comes to the rescue prove that he feels that tne
conviction is universal ? Or was this merely a rhetorical flourish
In any case I decline to borrow the termsabsurdity an t
“ impudence,” to characterise the passage.
In the next paragraph Mr. Henderson quotes from Mr. Hansel a
singularly weak passage, in which it is attempted to be shown that
statistical averages are not results of natural laws. Mr. Mansel
says, “ A natural law is valid for a class of objects, only because
“ and in so far as it is valid for each individual of that class ; the
<< Jaw of gravitation, for instance, is exhibited in a single apple as
“ much as in an orchard; and is concluded in the latter from being
«■ observed in the former. But the uniformity represented by
“ statistical averages is one which is observed in masses only, and
“ not in individuals.” I will adopt Mr. Hansel’s illustration, and
see if the law is less applicable to men than to apples. I a accordance
with the law of gravitation a single apple falls to the ground if suffi-
ciently unattached to the tree and nothing intervene; and so
under the same conditions will all the apples in the orchard,
law of averages expresses under conditions how many apples will fall
with a wind of given Strength in a given time. In accordance with
the law of human action, a man will.commit suicide if he be sufficiently
unattached to life and if opportunity serve. The law of averages
expresses eertaia-conditfons how many men will commit suicide under
misfortunes of' given severity in a given time, and we can foretell
the number of suicides as accurately as that of fallen apples. Is it
not clear that the laws of motion and of average aro equally applica-
ble to both ? Mr. Mansel and Mr. Henderson both overlook the
fact that, in defiance of statistics, they determine the application of
the laws of motion and of average by their own foregone conclusion
that they are inoperative on man, instead of simply considering
whether the logic of facts is not equally applicable to both men and
apples. It was never asserted that of a certain number of men
under the same conditions , a few will commit suicide while the
others will not; —any more than that of an orchard full of apples,
equally firmly attached to the trees, a few will fall and the others
continue fast. It was never asserted that a few happy fortunate
men out of ten thousand must commit suicide; but that in large
masses of men of all conditions, a few are sometimes so miserable and


dissatisfied, that tie ordinary attachments of life are weakened so
much, that a small additional temptation will suffice to make them
leave it. the law of averages merely expresses this proportion, and
a !i the V l e Wlth the weakes t attachment to the tree must
tail with a sufficiently strong wind—so the man most friendless,
moneyless, and hopeless, inevitably changes the fate most conso-
nant with his circumstances and;frame of mind.* Mr. Mansel
con mues an hence the law, if law it be, which such averages
indicate, is one which offers no bar to the exercise of individual
reedom exercised, as all human power must be, within certain
hmits ! Within certain limits 1! ! Yes! within certain limits !
Why in these three words lie all the pith and marrow of the argu-
ment. A stone is free “ within certain limits,” and so is a steam
engine or a watch. But the movements of the watch and steam
engine are as evidently determined by the motive power of each,
limited by the texture, form, and disposition of their parts, as is the
repose of the stone itself. So are those of a bull-dog—a far more
comp ex eing than either; a being too that, Mr H. can scarcely
deny, exhibits more will and determination than the average of
men though he does not attribute to it moral responsibility, of
which again he makes will and determination the basis.
„ But turning to page 22, where Mr. Henderson says that “ Mr.
„ Uc e , was evi dently blind to the fact that, as consciousness,
« P ro P erl y understood, is that knowledge which the mind has of
„ ltse| f~as thinking, feeling, or willing-he was destroying the
possibility of all knowledge by denying the validity of its testi-
-1 challenge the statement that Mr. Buckle ever
denied the validity of all knowledge, or the possible validity of much,
of its testimony But he showed most incontrovertibly that man’s
nowledge and the testimony of his consciousness cannot possess
abso ute certainty and infallibility ; and that the greatest certainty
which he can attain must be achieved by careful comparison of
adooHn ; rm n ? m f times and P laces ’ and the cautious
adoption of that which, on the whole, seems most consistent with
itself and past experience. Though the Pope may not lie infalli-
ble it does not, therefore follow, that he may not think accurately
on a few points on which he may agree with Mr. Henderson. This
illustration may avail further, and suggest that as the (Ecumenical
Council, to give authority to its dictum, has yet to prove its own
a** r Uiv


infallibility ; so Mr. Henderson, even if he be infallible, would find
some difficulty in demonstrating the fact upon his own authority.
His Lecture on “ History” has certainly not tended to prove it.
Mr. penderson says (page 22) that on the subject of volition, the
deliverance of his consciousness is diametrically opposed to that of
the late Mr. Buckle. Evidently, therefore, one of them must be
or have been, in Mr. H’s. words, “the dupe of his own deceptive
consciousness-” Of course, that of Mr. Henderson may be as-
sumed to be genuine. But then, if that of Mr. Buckle—a man
at least worthy to be selected as the most eminent victim of his
scathing criticism—if Mr. Buckle’s consciousness was so radically
fallacious, what guarantee or hope can any ordinary man have of
the certainty or accuracy of his own ? By admitting the possible
duplicity of Mr. Buckle’s consciousness, has not Mr. Hender-
son utterly annihilated his own argument for the infallibility of
human consciousness generally ? If my consciousness should un.
fortunately err with Mr. Buckle’s, what am Ito think ? If Mr.
Henderson’s consciousness be infallible, I should rejoice to follow
it. But if Mr. Henderson’s consciousness asserts mine to be in-
fallible, am I not bound to follow my own ? I pause for a reply.
Mr. Henderson says in his next paragraph, with happy innocence
of definition, that his volitions are his own, with power to choose
the alternative. Might it not be replied, that if that were the case
—if the act of volition has no antecedent determining cause—
there can be no reason to expect that the future will be like the
past—causation must be altogether a myth—science and know-
ledge impossible—and experience inapplicable and worthless ? But
the unsophisticated consciousness of all men (including Mr. Hen-
derson), rejects such a fatal theory ; which, however, it may be
nominally held, is practically denied by all men in their every act.
Their instinctive faith or rather certainty in inviolable causation is
too strong, and is so rapidly expanding into a recognised principle,
that the theoretical objections of those whose conduct invariably
contradicts their assertions must eventually pass into desuetude
and contempt. The simple fact that those who advance them en-
deavor to influence others, proves that they instinctively recognise
that the volitions of men are liable to be caused by the physical
acts of writing and speaking. In fact, education, business, and
social life, consist mainly of endeavors to supply to others, motives
which we feel will induce them to act as we desreU Allowing,
for the sake of argument, that there could be any sense or mena-
ing in the statement that “ all volition is conditioned on motive


‘‘ though not determined by it (though to my poor conscious-
ness this seems too like an attempt to gain shelter in sophistical
obscurity) it should, at least, be susceptible of clearer explanation,
jf Mr. Henderson allege a relation between motive and volition as
cause and effect, he yields the point taken by Mr. Buckle. If not
he has failed to show any cause for an act of volition; which,
therefore, being so far as'shown, an uncaused phenomenon, neces-
sarily comes into the category of chance, which Mr. Henderson
elsewhere repudiates. When Jdr. Henderson says that volition is
not apart from motive, bpt is conditioned on it —if he means that
they are concomitant or concurrent causes, he gains noting ; for
it is then plainly incumbent upon him, if he would consistently re-
pudiate a doctrine of chance, to indicate the causes of the motive
as well as of the volition. If he assert the efficient causation of
volition without equally efficient antecedent causation, whether in
motive or otherwise, he not only by implication contradicts him-
self when he repudiates a doctrine of chance, but he also explicitly
contradicts the scientific experience of those who have ascertained
and proved that for every act there is an equivalent molecular
change, corresponding ty) the expenditure of efferent nervous force,
for which there is invariably an adequate measurable cause in
afferent stimulation. To put this more .concisely—Every event
must have cause. If the cause of volition be not in motive, it must
be elsewhere, and should be shown before -the causation of motives
is denied. But to imagine that the exigencies of the argument are
met by saying that volition is conditioned on motive-though not de-
termined by it, or that that is equivalent to the indication of the
link of causation which universal experience and consciousness de-
mand, is merely se 'payer des mots.
Once-more, —as tp the power to choose between alternatives*
To suppose any fact, whether of choice or otherwise, to have oc’
curred differently, clearly involyes (to my consciousness) that its
causes must have been different also:—their causes also again—
and so on throughout the preceding eternity. From this it follows,
that nothing could ever have happened, or can happen, otherwise
than as it did, or does. Either this is infallibly true, or else expe-
rience can furnish no certainty or even a balance of probabilities
as to the consequences of events, and must, therefore, be as worth-
less as knowledge is impossible. Every intelligent act, however, is
based upon the invincible conviction of the uniformity and in-
violability of causation, and experience consistently justifies this
confidence.


It also appears (to my consciousness) that any consistent con-
ception of freedom or liberty necessarily involves absence of re-
straint—of obligation ; and that obligation —rather than its
antithesis freedom —is an essential constituent in moral responsi-
bility, with which freedom and liberty are, tnerefore, essentially
incompatible. Let us formulate this however.
Liberty and Freedom are incompatible with restraint and obligation.
Restraint and obligation are essential to moral responsibility.
~ * - ' • • •' Therefore
Liberty and Freedom are incompatible with moral responsibility.
It may profit those to whom the collocation of terms is
novel, to ponder the foregoing syllogism, and observe that its
integrity demands solely that the word obligation be denuded of
no other meaning than is absolutely surreptitious, and antagonistic
to its strictest etymological signification. I think the term should
be rescued from the equivocal misapplication to which it has
been subjected. On this important point the deliverance of Mr.
Henderson is not as direct and explicit as might be wished.
The cases selected by Mr. Henderson as those to which the words
“ ought” and “ ought not” are inapplicable are those of a tree and
& stone. But a bull dog evinces fully as much “ will” and “ deter-
mination” as any man ; and, in fact, typifies anyone who exhibits
both in an eminent degree. Would Mr. Henderson apply “ ought
and “ought not” equally to dogs as to men in so far as they
exhibit such qualities ? And why not, if will and determination are
with .fiiipjthe. bases of moral responsibility ?
lam conscious of entirely sympathising with the most eloquent
indignation against impersonal bigotry and intolerance. At the
same time I consciously excuse and pity those who exhibit them. I
repudiate even the supposititious right claimed by Mr. Henderson to
blame them. But self-interest and altruism (not comtism) concur
in forbidding that we the self-cancelled claims of any
individual thief, murderer, or intolerant to weigh with
us against the peace and security of their Qt&erwise probable vic-
tims in the future, or of the victims of those who might be en-
couraged by their immupity to follow their example. Am I wrong
in asking the learned lecturer whether, if lawyers were to demand
the release of prisoners on the grounds given by him (at the top of
page 28 in his lecture), the <c certain condition of society” provided
for in the premisses (in page 22), would not be thereby materially
altered and changed ? So much so that, to my consciousness, it
seems that it would have been more accurate if Mr. Henderson had


said next— 11 1 cannot,” instead of 11 I need not say that such are
11 the legitimate conclusions of the doctrines taught by this much
“ lauded writer.”
In the next paragraph the lecturer is scarcely sufficiently explicit
for my consciousness. He does not show horn the theory of free will
—of a cause acting without any anterior cause or mover—differs
from a doctrine of chance, susceptible of accurate description in
nearly identical terms. This fallacy, however, has already been
sufficiently pointed out.
Mr Henderson says (p. 26, line 12) that he takes “ the liberty
“ of converting Mr. Mill's admissions into an argument for that
11 which he rejects. All sound philosophers” (!) he proceeds,
11 have regarded the action of the human will as a true instance of
“ an efficient cause —indeed the only instance directly known to
41 us ; and they have regarded it as the analogue of a higher will
11 conceived as the cause of the universe itself. The argument is
41 very plain. We see changes produced in our own system by our
41 own volitions ; and seeing analogous changes occurring around
44 us, we naturally trace them to an analogous cause.” Really Mr.
Henderson seems to haVe been so intent upon picking a hole in Mr.
Mill’s argument, that he quite overlooked that he was rending his
own into shreds and tatters. What can this mean, but that we
should infer a cause—analogous to that which Mr. H. discerns
within ourselves —volition—in every object in which we observe
analogous changes ! nay, in the universe! (line 41). Thus either
every change in surrounding objects is caused by an intrinsic will
or volition in—and identified with each object;—or else, —if these
analogous changes are to be referred —not a local volition analogous
to our own, residing or arising in every such object, but —to a
higher will conceived as the cause of the universe itself; —what
possible reason can we have, if there is any analogy at all in the
matter, for refusing to refer the changes occurring in ourselves to
the same cause as that which produces the changes around us ?
Mr. Henderson here places himself in the dilemma exposed by the
author of the following essay. He either commits himself to the
Pantheistic doctrine by which the volitions of men are—as ex-
clusively as any movement in the universe—the action of Deity ;
(thus annihilating free will as completely as Mr. Buckle could
desire, and transferring at the same time all responsibility for
every action to God alone) —or else he ignores Deity completely—
makes everything happen by intrinsic volition in each moving
object —denies causation —and has nothing to substitute for it but


blind chance \ And all this comes by complete misconception of
the point of Mr, Mill’s argument. Mr. Mill speaks of volition as
an efficient cause, not as a premiss of his own, but as a supposititious
one granted solely for the sake of argument (vol. 1, p. 898, 1.
18-22), and he shows conclusively that even if volition mere an
efficient cause, we should have even thbn no right whatever to
attribute analogous efficient causation to every movement around
us (as Mr. Henderson would assume when rising to “ the assertion
“ of will as a universal efficient cause ”), but should restrict it to
those movements which are strictly analogous. Mr. Mill points
out how unwarrantable —even from their own premisses—is the demand
made upon him by such as Mr. Henderson, “to infer that volition
<•' causes everything, for no reason except that it causes one particu-
“ lar thing ; although that one phenomenon, far from being a type
“ of all natural phenomena, is eminently peculiar ; its laws bearing
“ scarcely any resemblance to those of any other phenomenon,
“ whether of inorganic or organic nature.” (Vol. 1, p. 399.) And
Mr. Henderson admits that this is so (page 26, line 13-4), when he
says “ that the action of the human will as a true instance of an
“ "efficient cause —” is “ indeed the only instance directly known
“to us.” Clearly, then, Mr. Mill’s position is impregnable,
although he reasons only from an illegitimate assumption of his
opponents to show them that their logic is as defective as their
premisses.
But after quoting from Mr. Mill’s second volume to the effect
that induction by simple enumeration is a valid process in arriving
at the generalisation of universal causation from the uncontradicted
and best known facts of experience—but not from assumed and
disputed assumptions of efficient causation in what is confessed to
be “ the only instance directly known to us Mr. Henderson pro-
ceeds thus —“ Now this is precisely the thing we do in arguing
“ upward to a First cause. We notice a fact, that certain changes
a take place in our own frame from the exercise of our own will, and
« Mr. Mills admits that this is so” !11 Where does Mr. Mill
admit this ? Let the quotation be given, which it is not by Mr.
Henderson ; though the page he quotes (898, vol. 1.) contains an
exactly contrary conclusion. The only concession I can find is
distinctly made (page 398, lines 18-22) merely for the sake of
argument to give added force to the refutation, but which Mr.
Henderson appears to have misconstrued into an unconditional
admission. But Mr. Mill does not admit anything of the kind ; and
it should be sufficiently obvious from what I have said, that Mr.


Henderson's process of arguing upwards to a First Cause is directly
opposed to that by which we arrive at the generalisation of the
universality of causation ; and that it inevitably conducts into sole-
cisms which should be as abhorrent to piety r , as they are repugnant
to reason. So much for Mr. Mill’s supposed admission, and Mr.
Henderson's argument, by which he was 'to have convicted Mr.
Mill of the inconsistency in which he has plunged himself.
Mr. Henderson seems to be as unfortunate in dealing with Spencer,
Taine, &c., as with Buckle and Mill. On the fundamental point at
issue he expressly yields the argument to them (lines 24 5, page
25), by saying, “ and we agree with them that when they do know
“ all, they can predict;” a statement identical in effect with that
©fr which (at Mr. Henderson’s page 20, lines 88-5), Buckle’s 18th
page is the object of derisive censure ; and at page 27,1 find a para-
graph devoted to assertions that the wills of Abraham, Cyrus, 1 aul,
and Cromwell were influenced and moulded, determined and caused
by God to suit his purposes. Their wills evidently could not have
been free when so influenced ; nor, if they were free, could God
have foreseen the alternatives that they would choose. The theories
of freedom and foreknowledge are absolutely incompatible. (See
Jonathan Edwards's demonstration to that effect.)
I have now only to express my admiration of the method by
which close and terse argument is rendered en'irely superfluous by
the simple asseveration that t( the creed of thoughtful men’ finds
its expression, not in the writings of Hobbes, Locke, Collins, Ed-
wards, Voltaire, Priestly, Buckle, Mill, Spencer, Bain, &c., so
much as in the mouth of a Melbourne preacher, of whom the trait
freshest in my recollection, is that the Early Closing Association
has found the wav to convert him. At his lecture, no doubt, not
only his great dead and absent living antagonists were mute, but
his present dissentient auditors were likewise silent from conven-
tional courtesy, even when the round assertion was made that il all
“ sound philosophers” have held the lecturer’s opinions. It is of
trifling importance how many or how great men may have held
the opposite —because, of course, they must have been “ unsound
philosophers.’’ —Q.E.D. .
Before concluding my remarks I wish distinctly to disclaim any
intention whatever of blaming Mr. Henderson for misrepresenting
the views of Buckle and others. He had, doubtless, no more in-
tention of doing so than of stultifying himself, as I have shown
he has done. One cause of his mistakes I have already indicated
in the vicious system of one-sided discussion incidental to his un-


fortunate vocation, and probably I have sufficiently explained that
whatever he has spoken or written, has been evoked—not by any
undetermined volition arising without cause in Anketell Matthew
Henderson at a Great First Cause thereof (Good God, what a
theory !) but has been simply the necessary result of a concatena-
tion of circumstances, of which he has been privileged to be un-
consciously the instrument. This is, doubtless, humbling-—par-
ticularly to one who has been misled into believing himself the
voluble exponent of the ideas of Deity, or rather (I beg pardon),
of his own volition! I now merely wish to point out (he superior
charity of those necessitarian principles w’hich admit of the benig-
nant exposure, and even sometimes of the merciless punishment,
of grave error, without imputing wilful turpitude to its perpetra-
and to contrast them with those by which a mistake cannot
be discovered without attributing voluntary perversity and sin to
a poor organism, in which the effects-of particular circumstances
upon its individual constitution could not otherwise be converted
into expression. The one syfetem producing only sanctified con-
ceit, intolerance, hatred, and all uncharitableness; the other, true
humility, brotherly kindness, and aspirations after all possible
knowledge and good of humanity.
Finally—as it is a common device to refuse to reply to unan-
swerable arguments, on the ground that anonymity is used merely
to screen the writer from the consequences of making personal
attacks, I have to point out that such reasons do not apply in this
case. I attack opinions, not men, and have expressly exempted
Mr. Henderson from all blame. It, therefore, concerns the inte-
rests neither of ‘Mr. Henderson nor of anyone else to notice me
personally. Let ray opinions be refuted and I shall be delighted
to change them, and recant them as publicly as I express them.
It seems to me also that those who set themselves to defend the
authenticity of writings so peculiarly anonymous as the Bible,
should be the very last to depreciate and contemn anonymous
writings as such.
Trusting that the following essay may prove the means of pro-
longing attention to this sublime theme,” and of promoting a
correct consciousness with respect to it, I commend it to the
attention of the Bev. A. M. Henderson and of the Early Closing
Association.
HOKOR.


and Slwologjj.
Exile 1. We are to admit no more causes of natural things than such
as are both true and sufficient to explain their appearances.
Eule 2. Therefore to the same natural effects we must, as far as possible,
as?igu the same causes.
Eule 3. The qualities of bodies which admit neither of intention nor of
remission of degrees, and which are found to belong to all bodies within
the reach of our experience, are to be esteemed the universal qualities of all
bodies whatsoever.
Eule 4. In experimental philosophy we are to look upon proposition*
collected by general induction from phenomena as accurately or very nearly
true, notwithstanding any contrary hypothesis that may be imagined, till
such time as other phenomena occur, by which they may either bemademore
accurate, or liable to exceptions.— lsaac Newton s Pbinciples op Natubal
Philosophy. Book 3.
An interesting discussion took place some time
ago in the columns of the Melbourne papers, on
“ Science and Sermons but it soon lost all the
point and vigour with which it commenced ; which
was attributable to the fact, that the real points of
radical opposition were not stated with sufficient
sharpness, and the question narrowed to some
specific issue. If we can succeed in exposing the
true basis of antagonism, surely we may more
reasonably hope for a practical useful result, from
what can scarcely have tended then but to create
mistrust, if not alarm.
In tbe first place, the relegation of the argument
to times so ancient and conditions so exceptional as
to be entirely removed from observation and
verification, renders the disproof of bold assertion


and of plausible theory alike impossible, and
deprives the question also of more than a very
superficial interest. A few words, however, upon
that view of the subject may serve as a useful
introduction to something more relevant.
What can it matter to us now how many
thousands or millions of years have elapsed since
man first walked or talked ? Whether it was six
thousand or six thousand millions of years, it is in
either case the facts of to-day that are superlatively
important to us now. Being indisputably in
possession now of our present organisms, powers,
privileges, and responsibilities, what is it to us
whether the Yalley of the Dead Sea thousands of
years ago was covered with twenty-five thousand
feet of water or none at all ? However that might
be, the present facts remain the same. Whatever
affects our present conduct and prospects is alone
of actual pressing iuterest to us. How futile also
to devote our time to the investigation of the
primeval origin of matter —which, for all we know,
never had a beginning—when we certainly have it
substantially before us now, and can try every
available means to analyse it, and test its
destruotibility and creatability at our leisure.
Grant that all possible tests cannot produce a
demonstration, we can have no stronger evidence or
test than those which actual experience supplies,
and which constitute amply sufficient reasons for
not only our opinions, but even our actions. Upon
facts all our knowledge is based.
To talk of reasonableness or probability with
respect to events said to have occurred in an age
when it is assumed that miracles were current,


seems to us to bo equivalent to a surrender of the
whole argument. When the geologist points
to a gigantic stratum, consisting, apparently, of
incalculable multitudes of cretaceous fossils, which
he reckons took thousands of centuries to accumulate ;
how, without impugning the theory of miraculous
power, can his inferences from natural experience
be received as of any weight compared with the
statements of a record which authoritatively affirms
that all strata were supematurally produced ? Was
it not quite as practicable for Omnipotence to create
the rock at once by fiat, with * the appearance
of having been slowly deposited in conjunction with
fossiliferous remains through countless ages, as to
create the inorganic constituents of the rock and
the cretacea, etc., separately, to be afterwards
deposited together ? Was it not fully as competent
to the Almighty to cause supernatural rain from
heaven during forty days and forty nights to cover
the whole earth with water above the tops of the
highest mountains, as the Scriptures simply tell us
was the case, as to anthropomorphically manage it
by a sudden subsidence of the east coast of' the
Mediterranean Sea, as has been repeatedly suggested?
Whoever thus substitutes natural causes for the
supernatural action of the Creator, yields entirely
the broadest distinction made by any one between
the two theories of causation, and does evident
violence to the sacred text ; the essential character
of which is professedly miraculous. The man of
science who accepts such a compromise is as
inconsistent as he who offers it. Each, out of
deference to the other, yields, not a portion, but'
the whole of his own principle. Compromise is


suicidal. For, in acknowledging any efficacy in
liis antagonist’s principle of causation, he admits
that so far his own has none. And if so far, why
not altogether ? For if one principle he at all
adequate to the production of the effect, to suppose
the second must be superfluous and unphilosophical.
It is clear that the supernatural cause must be
amply adequate to every effect if valid at all; but
the supposition of natural causes in lieu, or in
addition, at once implies its inadequacy in the
instance in which they are supposed ; and the n>an
of science may well retort that the admission of the
intrinsic efficacy of natural causes to any exten
should be held to render their adequacy to the
production of every phenomenon more t han piobablc ,
because their efficacy should not have been admitted,
if that of the supernatural cause could have been
maintained as indisputable or reasonable.
We are fully aware that this argument suffers
much in it& application to such events as the creation
and the deluge. The lapse of ages introduces
many elements of* uncertainty, such as the
imperfection and paucity of the evidence, the
changes in the signification of words, and the
elasticity of the processes of interpretation adopted
with regard to the Scriptures. We, therefore, desire
to lay no stress upon this application of our
principle, and have only dwelt upon it so far that
we might not appear to neglect what has been
already said on the subject; to point out the
hopelessness of any practical result from investigations
into the events of such distant times; and also to pre-
pare the way for the following adaptation ot the same
principle to facts within our personal observation.


The question as to the nature or philosophy of
causation, can, fortunately, be applied to current
practical phenomena with immeasurably greater
advantage and force. One of the most direct and
obtrusive points of antagonism is that raised by
Professor Tyndall in his article “ On the Constitution
of the Universe,” in No. XIY. of the Fortnightly
Review * He there showed that to pray for, and
praying for, to expect or suppose possible, any
objective results different from those which would
otherwise have occurred, is essentially unscientific,
and puts the “ intellect to shame that prayer, to
be efficacious, can be so only by a miracle, though
it is conceded that the age for miracles is past; in
fact, the dispute is substantially the same as that
respecting creation.
But a little careful attention and reasoning show
that theories of nalural and of supernatural causation
mutually and essentially exclude each other. For
the supposition of intrinsic efficacy in either, makes
the introduction of the other unnecessary, and,
therefore, unphilosophical. To suppose both is,
therefore, inadmissible. In fact, the admission of
the second amounts to a declaration of the inadequacy
* “A miracle is strictly defined as an invasion of the law of the
conservation of energy. To create or annihilate matter would be deemed
on all hands a miracle ; the creation or annihilation of energy would be
equally a miracle to those who understand the principle of conservation.
Hence arises the scepticism of scientific men when called upon to join in
national prayer for changes in the economy of nature, hose who devise
such prayers admit that the age of miracles is past, and in the same breath
they petition for the performance of miracles. They ask for fair weather
and for rain, but they do not ask that water may flow uphill 5 while the
man of science clearly sees that the granting of the one petition would be
just as much an infringement of the law of conservation as the granting
of .the other. Holding th s law to be permanent, he prays for neither. — l
Fortnightly Review„ No.’XlV., p. 144.


of the first to observed results. ‘Nay, to any results.
For whichever is held equal to the greater or more
difficult results, must obviously be held equal to
the lesser and more simple, and should, therefore,
be preferred for both. Compromise is here aga/n
only self-destructive. For to suppose natural causes
as dependent upon, or acting only by virtue of a
supernatural cause operating through, or behind
them, is obviously to suppose really nothing but the
action of the supernatural cause itself. And to
suppose their independence or intrinsic efficacy to
any extent, is to admit and establish the radical
distinction and antagonism between natural and
supernatural force, and, as shown above, to declare
the latter superfluous and inadmissible. Truth must
be on one side or the other ; not on both, or neither.
Again, natural causes are clearly perfectly
adequate to the production of all natural effects ; and
the supposition of a supernatural cause should be,
therefore, wholly superfluous for any other than
supernatural effects. I3ut while the law of
conservation involves the eternity and constant total
quantity of both matter and force, on the other side
it is conceded that the age of overt miracles is past;
and natural and supernatural causation cannot be
supposed to co-operate in any proportions in the
production of the same effects, for natural forces are
accurately measurable in some instances, and are
then found exactly commensurate with the observed
effects; thus, of course, excluding the supposition
of any additional force, supernatural or otherwise.
If it be said that we only call the supernatural force
by the name of natural force, because of the natural
forms in which, and by means of which, it is


manifested, what is this but the. identification of one
with the other ? The supernatural force, if any,
must be the only really operative one ; any of the
natural objects which it moves being no more
than as a tool in. the hand of a man , and
the supernaturalist is clearly bound, in logical
consistency, to maintain his theory of supernatural
causation intact, if at all. The supernatural cause
must be universally, particularly, and solely active,
to the exclusion of all efficacy in any natural cause
whatsoever; any admission of operative natural
causation being entirely fatal to the supernatural
theory. We shall soon see the logical consequences
involved in this established position.
Though thus the argument appears to be
concentrated on the single point of the nature of
causation, it may be readily apprehended how much
more is involved in it. For upon the decision hangs
not only the efficacy of prayer, but also the whole
theory of a special, or of any Providence. All is
involved in the question of the nature of causation.
All possible theories of causation may be
exhaustively classified as follows :
Ist. God, as Force operating solely, continually
and universally, in eternal necessarily existent
matter (Pantheism).
2nd. God, as creator of matter, and as Providence
or Force, operat ng therein solely, continually, andj
universally (Pantheistic).
3d. God, as creator of matter, and of Force
active therein, but not interfering with the operation
of that Force after its creation (Creatorial).
4th. God, as creator of matter, and of force active
therein, and continually governing and guiding that


force after its creation(Creatorial and Providential.)
sth. God, as Providence guiding Force, that Force
consisting of necessary intrinsic properties of eternal
uncreated matter (Anthropomorphic).
6th. Eternal Matter: and Force, or the intrinsic
activepropertiesofmatter(ScientificandCausational).
In the first class, the Deity being supposed the
only operator, man, like everything else, must act,
perhaps blindly, biit in any case compulsorily. In
God all action, and therefore all responsibility
are at once centered. Beligion is impossible, for
prayer and adoration are thus the action of their
object; man, like anything else, being merely used
as a tool or instrument, conscious by sensation of
his acts, but utterly unconscious of their true cause.
The second is essentially the same as the first,
the single new feature of the creation of matter
directly involving, of course, more entire responsibility
for all its intractability. But the first supposition
involves that matter had originally no intrinsic
properties whatever,.-; and, consequently, no in-
tractability. If, however, to lessen the responsibility
for evil, the intractability of matter be still imagined,
omnipotence is at once sacrificed, and the theory is
so far anthropomorphic. But to suppose matter as
existent without properties is clearly not only
eminently unscientific, but absurd.
The third is merely a nominal concession to the
undeniability of the intrinsically sequential character
of the operation of natural forces. If God created
matter and force, and left them to themselves, the
result must be to us the same in effect as if they
were uncreated, and acted by intrinsic necessity.
For past and present cosmioal, facts are, and are


supposed, the same. Only in the one case an
origin by fiat is imagined j in the other, evolution
from all eternity. But although a continuous
guiding Providence is thus abandoned, still,
entire responsibility in the Creator is maintained,
whether the creation be supposed to have been
accomplished in ignorance, or with knowledge, of
all possible consequences.
The fourth is like the third, but it involves a
virtual denial that miracles are less common now
than ever before ; all action being supernatural and
none natural, all is miraculous ; or more accurately
speaking, no action was ever more miraculous at any
one period than at any other. The responsibility for
all action whatever, cosmical or human, is, if
anything, even more directly fixed upon the creator
in this than in the preceding theory. Yet this is
unquestionably the most popular hypothesis.
The fifth is a further concession to the inchoate
idea of the eternity of matter, and the intrinsic
nature of its properties and laws. It reduces the
Deity to much the same position as a magnified
man. Matter and Force are to him at best only
partially tractable, and it is impossible to say how
much or how little. Science, or the knowledge of
nature, is constantly taking from the exceptional
and arbitrary, to add to the uniform and necessary,
and the application of this process is extending
so rapidly as to threaten to become speedily
universal.
The sixth is simply Nature as expounded by
Science. In this theory, Deity has simply hitherto
held, but with questionable utility, the place of #,
the sign representative of the unknown quantity in


an algebraic equation, pending the solution of the
great°problem by Science. When this is known the
sign may be discarded. IVlattor is judged, upon
the evidence of all experience, to be and
constant in quantity; uncreatable and indestructible.
Force is the activity of the intrinsic properties of
matter itself, being like matter constant in total
quantity, though infinitely variable in its forms of
manifestation; so that, when expended in one, it is
always to be traced in another, into which it is
converted in the process.
Though we have enumerated six theories of
causation, it is clear that the first and sixth are
really the antithetic alternatives, of which the others
are but nominal, untenable compromises, logically
inconsistent and impossible; and a theory of
causation can scarcely be proposed which may not
legitimately be classed under one of these six heads,
and therefore resolved, by consistent analysis and
reasoning, into the first or last.
So far this statement of the case appears
impregnable, together with that of the inevitable
and startling consequence; not only that all causation
mast be due to one of two sources, either natural or
supernatural, but that either alternative is
irreconcileable with and excludes the other. There
remains absolutely no logical alternative between
on the one hand a Pantheism which, by identifying
Deity with the intrinsic properties of matter, makes
it, as the sole mover, exclusively responsible for
every accident, offence, and crime perpetrated in
our world —a conclusion at which consistent piety
must stand aghast —and on the other an inviolable
universal causation ; which, utterly blind to and


forces. But no such anomaly has yet appeared;
and until such an instance occurs, the man *of
science feels not only justified in rejecting such an
unphilosophical supposition, hut compelled to rejectit.
Above all, is this argument applicable to the solar
system, the optic organ, the apiarian cell, &c., &c.,
the commonly cited examples of supernatural
action. In each of these it is found that the
phenomena conform strictly to mathematical laws,
by which we learn to comprehend them ; if we are
not rather conducted to those laws hy tfiem. And
it would be strange indeed if the substantial
manifestations of those mathematical principles
were to be less certain and inevitable in fulfilment,
than the abstract processes themselves ; which are
but the signs of the material things, and of their
actual relations. Is is possible that any even
supernatural power should be competent to change
the course of the phenomena, without producing a
corresponding aberration of the mathematical laws
which merely express them ; hy which we ascertain
and understand them ; and which may be called
simply the description of them as physical facts ?
Applied to the phenomena of organic continuity ;
the wonder should not be that hens breed chickens,
dogs puppies, sheep lambs, and men children ;or
that the same food eaten by sheep should form
mutton, by pigs pork, and by oxen beef ; but the
wonder would be if the results were different.
Thus, a cow has never been known to produce a
cat, nor a hen a monkey ; nor does, nor can , the
grass eaten and digested by a horse, produce the
same results as if eaten by a sheep or a kangaroo.
Yet there is scarcely less evident continuity or


regardless of particular consequences, makes every
isolated circumstance the necessary and absolute
product of the condilions under which it may he
evolved. To what docs this commit the man of
science ? To our theory of causation expressed in
the law of the conservation and persistence of
Force, so lucidly propounded by Professor T yndall
in the paper before mentioned. That law, it
appears, cannot be held consistently with a belief
in the efficacy of prayer, or even in a special
Providence. It involves the necessity of all causation,
and that every event is the inevitable result of its
concatenated antecedents * It involves that the
nature of the causation of human actions
essentially identical in kind with that by which two
and two make four, which Omnipotence* cannot be
supposed competent to alter. Still, man’s actions
are his own ; and their consequences prove to him
every hour his responsibility .
The man of science finds that the operation of
natural causes is strictly in conformity with
mathematical and physical laws, and, therefore, may
philosophically be deemed as undeviating and non-
contingent as mathematical and physical processes.
Obedience to such laws is simply “ movement in the
direction of least resistance.” Were a single case to
occur in which the observed movement was not in the
direction of least resistance, or not in accordance
with, but in opposition to, mathematical or physical
necessity, there would then be ground for inferring
the operation of a supernatural cause, and
relinquishing all idea of any efficacy in natural
• Sec articles by Professor Tyndall in the Fortnightly Review for Ist of
December, 1805, and Ist of June, 1867, in which this is amply proved.


persistence of force in those instances than in the
necessary persistent identity of any physical object.
We are not surprised that what was a stone yesterday
should continue to be a stone to-day and to-morrow,
instead of becomig a tree, or a living organismn,
&c., from hour to hour ; and, as experience
convinces us that the identity of any substance
or object must persist or endure in time and space
until adequate physical causes produce the
dissolution of the arrangement of its parts ; and
as, in accordance with the first Newtonian law of
motion, a body impelled in any direction in space,
must continue its course in that direction until
some external force deflect, retard, or accelerate its
motion; so it seems that any kind of motion,
including assimilation and reproduction, must, in
like manner, persist or continue in time, until
adequate causes compel its cessation, or conversion
into some other form of force. The pabulum
appropriated by organisms, thus undergoes changes
determined by the special media of assimilation.
By the tremendous solvent powers of the digestive
apparatus, it is perfectly disintegrated and
chemically decomposed, until it loses all the special
characteristics by which it was before distinguished.
Thus prepared to receive those which alone it is
in a position to acquire, nothing whatever appears
to be necessary to identify it with the substance
of the organism itself into which it may have been
introduced, but rapid and constant circulation
through every part and corner of the structure,
whence it is subsequectly expelled when effete
by peripheral excretion. But such a stringent pro-
cess appears to be indispensable to effect any rapid


change in the outward constitution of substance,
the actual chemical bases of which remain
constant in quantity throughout. Different
results from those which we observe are simply
impossible, and would be motion in the direction of
greater resistance. We cannot really believe that
even supernatural power could effect different
results ; and we necessarily and instinctively
attribute absolute efficacy and continuity to natural
causes, which we are convinced and feel, produce
the effects we observe. And our confidence is
never deceived.
What, however, is the position of the
supernaturalist ? When once it is recognised and
understood that he cannot consistently admit the
efficacy of any natural causes but must regard
them, if he recognise them at all, as mere
supposititious puppets in the hand of an over-ruling
Providence ; then nature and man must be supposed
alike irresistibly subjected to a power of which
they form but passive instruments—irresponsible
machines. And if man’s natural organic functions,
such as digestion, and his involuntary animal
action, such as sensation, require the intervention
of a supernatural force, surely it cannot be
reasonably contended that his intellectual operations,
thought, speech, and reason, require a less super-
natural or potent cause.
Is not man thus, by the supernatural theory,
deprived of action ? and all his movements made
simply the involuntary expression or effect
of incomprehensible, untraceable, supernatural
energy ? Can anything be more demoralising than
such blind, helpless, fatalistic Pantheism ? The


scientific theory admits of tire action of rational-
man as a natural force ; but by the
supernatural theory his acts are not his own, but
those of an arbitrary, irresistible, supernatural
power, softening or hardening whom lie will. And
if it be alleged that the age of miracles is past, as
as is conceded to experience; if the former
supernatural is now merged in natural causation ;
if a Providence is really as obsolete as miracles
by the reduction ofHts action to what cannot be
distinguished fromaindeviating, inexorable, physical
necessity ; what then remains of Deity to venerate
or adore ? Are all our hallowed traditions' —-all
our religious proclivities to be subjugated and
annihilated by a blind, inevitable causation ? On
the other hand are not all knowledge, all
experience, and all science, absolutely based not
only upon the uniformity, but also upon the
necessity of causationf ? For that uniformity there
must surely be a reason, a cause ; and a single
departure from the absolute uniformity of the
results of given conditions, would, if we could
believe it, falsify the knowledge and destroy the
experience until then accumulated. Were it
possible, or could we suspect, that, as regards the
uniformity of causation, the future will not, nay
must not be as the past, both experience and
knowledge must inevitably be worthless—in short,
i n possible.
To the scientitic man do these considerations make
* Wbat a striking and suggestive analogy there is in the meaning of Iha
words responsible and rejlex !
f See Fortnightly Review already quoted.


lifijlesg sweet, heal ill less delightful, love less pure,
the world less beautiful, knowledge less invaluable,
morality less indispensable, or tyuth less (rue?
Can they alter reality in the world or in himself?
And if not, it is nothing to find his reasoning at last
consistent with facts and with itself? Has the
theologian this consolation in abiding by his
traditional faith P May he also love this beautiful
world which smiles so benignantly upon him ? Can
he touch what he regards as pitch and not be defiled ?
Can he reap the benefit of thq achievements of
science in chemistry, mechanics/physics, and in all
the wealth of worldly comfort and civilisation,
remembering at the same time that he “ cannot
serve God and mammon ?’’ Can he live in ease by
forbidden usury, travel by steam on land or water,
enjoy the worldly pleasure and worldly advantage
resulting from the cultivation of scientific knowledge
and literature; can he attain to worldly wealth,
social honour, and domestic felicity, and lay the
flattering unction to his soul, that he shall never
hear, “ Woe to you ! for you have received your
consolation ?” w '
For him, is consistency possible ?
Should he not feel absolute despair rather than hope
of that ultimate bliss, for which, according to his own
principles, he must repudiate and despise the worldly
blessings so exuberantly evolved around him ? To
secure it he knows that his principles require him to
be more meritorious than all or nearly all his
neighbours —for many are called but few chosen—
yet those same principles bind him to repudiate
all merit! Humility being an indispensable
qualification, he should know that any confidence


which bo may ft el in his salvation, must itself be
enliiely fatal to his pretensions. Tl us should he be
indeed of all men most miserable'! In Christian
theology it is asserted that the salvation of the
vicious is achieved solely and righteously by
the suoerings of the virtuous and innocent ! Is
not this to proclaim immuni y to vice, and punishment
to virtue ? An inversion of the plainest moral
principles ! a theory of immorality ! To hold the
doctrine of the forgiveness of sin, and yet that a just
and benevolent deity rather than forego or abate one
jot of the penalty exacts it, rather than from none
from the wrong and an innocent person, instead of
from the guilty one, is obviously not only contradic-
tory but impious. Yet it is not lound to be absurd.
But even this contradiction is not more glaring
and suicidal than another which has more direct
relevance to our argument, and lies besides at the
basis of all theology ; namely, the assertion that
because every event must have a cause, therefore
there must have been a beginning and a first cause
of all. For on the self-same principle the asserted
beginning must have had a cause, that cause a prior
one, and that again a prior, ad infinitum. To suppose
a first cause, without an antecedent eternal precession
of causes , is evidently to violate the principle and
destroy the basis of the supposition itself.
We have stated this double dilemma as accurately
as we can, doubtless with a strong and irresistible
leaning in the same direction to which believers in
science notoriously tend. The lovers, however
distantly, of knowledge, must perforce follow where
the leading pioneers have cleared the way We have
endeavoured to confine our statement to one


principle, cerla : nly a comprehensive one; the
nature of causation. Patient analysis and strict
logic form ample means for dissipating all the
mystery in which traditional authority and sophistical
equivocation have enveloped the subject. The
essential difference between metaphysical mental
gymnastics and consistent reasoning is maximised in
the results.
We believe that we have herein—imperfectly,
perhaps, but truly-/frepresented the real positions of
the contending parlies, and the alternatives their
system oflVr, with reasons
That; perhaps another,
Sailing o’er life’s solemn main,
A forlorn, [bewildered] brother,
Seeing may take heart again.
Let such a one remember that the absoluteness
of causation is the essence of experience, which is
itself the basis of knowledge ; while consistency is
the best available test of human reasoning. That
tl art is long and time is fleeting;” and, lastly, this *
“ Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy
might 5 for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou
goest.” Ecclesiastes ix-, 10.
R. Bell, Printer, 97 Little Collins Street East, Melbourne.


M Cop Cf ~)
3 1508 01963269 9
