

pern
SCIENCE and RELIGION
KBUAIOJS PAM a
OR Bo< If
THE RELATIONS OF MODERN SCIENCE
WITH THE CHRISTIAN CHURCHES
A LECTURE
GEORGE HI GIN BOTHAM
JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
Delivered in the Scots Church , Melbourne
Under the auspices of the Scots Church Literary Association
August Ist, ISS'i
IJlclbourne
SAMUEL MULLEN, COLLINS STREET EAST
1883
Price Sixpence




fr\o' 4
SCIENCE and RELIGION
THE RELATIONS OF MODERN SCIENCE
WITH THE CHRISTIAN CHURCHES
A LECTUBE
GEORGE HIGINBOTHAM
JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
Delivered in the Scots Church, Melbourne
Under the auspices of the Scots Church Literary Association
August Ist, 1883
IgdJjounw
SAMUEL MULLEN, COLLINS STREET EAST


♦
..
. I


SCIENCE AND RELIGION.*
Lecture by Mr. Justice Higinbotham.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies, and Gentlemen, —
I am to address you this evening on a subject which I may not so
much as attempt to make entertaining. What I shall say will, I
fear, be in part unwelcome and probably displeasing to some of you.
I should deeply regret if I were supposed by you to be capable of
seizing the opportunity to respond rudely and ungraciously to the
honour which has been conferred upon me in being invited to
deliver a lecture in this place. I desire, therefore at once to inform
you that I am not responsible for the subject of this lecture, nor,
indeed, for the manner in which I shall treat that subject.
When the invitation was given to me to lecture before the Scots
Church Literary Association, the Rev. Charles Strong requested me
to select a particular subject, and he assigned a reason for his
request. The position of the Christian churches in the world at the
present day; their relations to mankind and to one another • the
relations of the clergy and the laity to each other in the several
churches; the effects of existing disunion between the churches;
and the prospect and the means, if any exist, of a return to unity ;
all these aspects of one most difficult and thorny subject are, we
know, often present, and suggest disquieting and desponding thoughts
to a large and increasing number of educated minds, both lay and
clerical, in this day. But such thoughts rarely find adequate and
complete expression; they never form the subject of friendly
discussion or of deliberation with a view to active effort of any
kind. “ The disease requireth rest rather than any other cure ” was
the judgment of Bacon in reference to the internal causes of dispute
about matters “ not of the highest nature ” in one of the churches.
The indolence or hopelessness of educated men has led them tacitly
to extend this judgment to “the high mysteries of faith,” and “the
great parts of the worship of God,” to which its author intimates
that he did not intend to apply it.
Most thinking men would agree that controversy, unfruitful at all
times, could not be productive of any but mischievous consequences
upon these the highest subjects. But may there not be free and also
peaceful discussion without controversy? You may be of opinion,
perhaps, that a young poet has spoken the word of practical wisdom
upon this matter. “ Men,” said Keats, “ ought not to debate or
dispute about truth; but they ought to whisper results to one
* This Lecture, delivered before the Scots Church Literary Association in
Melbourne, has been reprinted from I 1 he Argus at the request of several gentle-
men, and with Mr. Justice Higinbotham’s kind consent.


another.” The Rev, Charles Strong thinks, as I understood him r
that laymen should now whisper their thoughts to one another about
the present state of the Christian churches ; he is of opinion that the
time has come when the laymen should confer together with freedom
upon questions which affect the very existence for any useful purpose
of one and all of the churches. Now, I am one of not a few
laymen who believe that the Rev, Charles Strong has placed all
laymen in this community under obligations to him, that his
manifest sympathy with our difficulties as laymen commands our
gratitude, and that his powerful, and, at the same time, highly
courageous advocacy of the layman’s right of free thought within the
limits of the law binding on us all, entitles him to the united
support of every one of us. And so when Mr. Strong expressed
a desire that I should tell you, the lay members of this Society,
my thoughts, as a layman, upon some one or another portion of
this large subject, I felt it to be a duty to comply with his request,
without considering my own inclinations. I need not tell you that
Mr. Strong, although he has brought me here, is not responsible for a
word that I shall utter. Neither, indeed, do I hold myself respon-
sible, for having accepted this task I have conceived it to be my sole
duty to endeavour to place before you in plain speech my real
thoughts, whether they be deemed by you to be right or wrong, and
whether they be welcome or displeasing to you, without intentional
reserve br suppression of my personal opinions and convictions. And
if I succeed in doing this I know that I shall give voice and
expression to the silent reflections of other laymen also. There
is a certain kind of freemasonry between laymen upon these
burning questions of religious thought. I believe that we all, or the
majority of us, think and feel very much alike about them, and we
dimly know it ; but we shrink from outward acknowledgment of the
fact. My belief is that I have no thoughts to submit to you to-night
but such as have in one form or another passed through the minds of
scores of the educated laymen whom I address, and are now seething
and breeding anxiety, and even despair, in the minds of thousands of
thinkers amongst both the clergy and the laity in the old land,
to which we still find ourselves ever turning for intellectual com-
panionship, and whence, too, we would fain draw light and leading,
but they do not come to us.
decline of the influence op the pulpit with educated
LAYMEN.
I heard a sermon preached in a church in Victoria some time ago,
which seemed to me to touch the heart of the particular question—
namely, the growing division between the minds of the clergy and
of the educated thinking laity in the Christian churches, its origin,
and the means of restoring union, to which I desire to invite your
attention this evening. The preacher was addressing himself to
the different sections of a mixed congregation, and when he came
to the adult males he spoke to this effect, “ Which of you, I ask,


has received our report 1 I fear if the truth were told that the
answer must be very few of you. The adult laymen of Christian
congregations appear to me to think that the teaching of Christ’s
ministers is something that may possibly be of use to women and
children, but that it has nothing whatever to do with them. They
scarcely pay to it the respect of formal and decorous attention.”
These I'emarkable words, addressed to a strange congregation, were
uttered with emotion, as though the preacher keenly felt the slight
to his order of which he was complaining as an affront offered to
himself. At the time I heard them they appeared to me to convey
bitter reproach, and also to express with exact truth a momentous
fact. There are, of course, many exceptions in every church, and
in every congregation of every church ; but I take it to be certainly
true that the intellects of the great majority of educated and
thinking laymen at this day lie wholly outside the influence of the
intellectual teaching of the Christian clergy.
The observation is true, we have good reason to believe, of all
the Christian churches and in all countries of Christendom. It is
true of the Greek Church in Russia: we are told by the author
of a remarkable book lately published —Underground Russia —that
the whole of the educated classes in Russia are materialists. It
is true of the Roman Catholic Church in Italy and the other
countries of Europe where that church prevails. It is true, though
the fact may be less obvious and there may be a larger number of
exceptions, of one and all of the Protestant churches of Germany,
Great Britain, America, and these Australian communities. In
all countries professedly Christian the laity evince by their conduct
in reference to great public questions such as education and the
relations of the State to the churches a growing and profound
distrust of all church systems of religious and moral belief. In all
the churches the clergy display more and more unwillingness even
to allude in their addresses to the laity to the intellectual bases
of religious truth and of moral obligation. In all the churches in all
Christian countries the adult male laity, by whom the affairs of the
world are managed, on whose judgment and mind and character the
highest interests of mankind in the present and in future generations
mainly depend, remain intellectually untaught by those whose mission,
if they have any mission, it is to teach. And to teach adult thinking
laymen, I will add, rather than women and children. For is it not a
keen and yet a most just reproach to all -adult laymen that we have
abandoned to other and strange hands the duty of teaching wives and
children, which plainly devolves by natural obligation on ourselves ?
We have an excuse indeed 3 I do not mean to say that it is a justifica-
tion. We ourselves are untaught, and we are consequently incapable of
performing a duty which demands a knowledge of the most difficult
of the sciences and the most delicate of arts, I mean the science and
the art of educating and training the undeveloped mind of the child
nnd the receptive and dependent mind of the woman. But where
shall the responsibility be laid for the uneducated and untrained
condition of the layman’s mind with respect to the highest truths ?


PRESENT STATE OF RELIGIOUS ORGANISATIONS.
The late Rev. Professor Dinan, in an able article on “ Religion in
America,” written in 1876, describes the most recent phase of
American religions culture as “ the aesthetic phase,” in contradistinc-
tion to the ethical and the theological phases which preceded it. He
observes that the present tendency of American Christianity is to
assign to “ sentiment ” a more prominent function in religion; that
a wide-spread re-action has set in, not so much against any particular
tenet of the old theology as against the whole dogmatic apprehension
of Christianity, while at the same time, owing the quickening of
ecclesiastical activity and the impulse to ecclesiastical development
there exists a strong conservative preference for stable ecclesiastical
order and a decided tendency to aggregation in a few great
denominational types.
This description may be extended to Great Britain and to these
colonies of Australia, and it will represent with tolerable accuracy,
I think, the present state of religious ox’ganisations in the mother
country and amongst ourselves. Everywhere, in all Protestant
churches, dogmatic truth is either not presented at all to the
intellects of educated laymen, or it is presented in such a manner as>
that the large majority cannot understand it, and will not accept it.
The reasoning intellect of man demands ideas as its needful and
and sole proper aliment. It is only through ideas that the human
intellect can be enabled to render that service which the religion
professed by all the Christian churches claims from the intellect as
well as from the affections of our human nature.
SENTIMENT AND ART IN RELIGION.
But the clergy of the Christian churches, abandoning the attempt
to educate the layman’s intellect, appeal to human sentiment, and
employ art in various forms to evoke sentiment and to attract and
influence the feelings by pleasing the senses. Let me not be supposed
even to think disparagingly of any human sentiment that is true, or
of art that is genuine ; but I venture to affirm that neither the best
and the noblest sentiment nor art when it is most pure and refined
can be a substitute for the verities of religion—if religion have any
verities. What is sentiment at its best 1 “ How beautiful is noble
sentiment,” exclaimed Carlyle, without any touch of scorn, I think,
but taking a just measure of its slight and fleeting value in the
serious concerns of politics and religion. “ How beautiful is noble
sentiment! Like gossamer gauze, beautiful and cheap, which will
not stand any tear or wear ! Beautiful and cheap gossamer gauze,,
thou film shadow of the raw matexfial of virtue, which art not woven,
nor likely to be, ixxto duty ; thou art better than nothing and also
worse.”
And of ax-t, when it is employed in a church as a sxxbstitxxte for
intelligent religious thought, liear the opinion of the gx’eatest living
master of art, Mr. Ruskin, whose supremacy, I think, is most clearly


proved by his constant reference of even true art to a second place
only in human esteem. He ranks music, the purest of all the fine arts,
and unquestionably the most rational as well as the most attractive
art element in our church services, on the same level with tangible
idols or images, and other sources of influences which address
themselves to the commonest instincts of the human mind ; and of all
of them, as used for ecclesiastical purposes to an unexampled degree
in the Church of St. Mark’s, Venice, he observes that they are “ The
stage properties of superstition, employed to produce a false emotion
in minds incapable of apprehending the true nature of the Deity.”
Must not the same observation be applied to every Protestant church
in the Christian world in which art is present and is used for the sake
of its attractive influence, and from which religious and moral
teaching, which the intellects of rational plain men can understand
and accept, is continuously absent 1
WANING INFLUENCE OF THE CHURCHES AS A TEACHING POWER,
Now what is the cause of this waning influence as a teaching
power of all the Christian churches ? What is it that has created the
wide and ever-deepening chasm between the intellect and the
intellectual judgments of the educated Christian clergy, in their
capacity as teachers, and the intellect and the intellectual judgments
of the educated laymen? This inquiry is one of the very highest
interest, and it has not received, I think, its due share of considera-
tion either from clergymen or laymen. Ido not think that we should
be justified in tracing this fact to any deterioration in the general body
of the clergy. So far as the Protestant churches are concerned—and
it is with respect to them only that we have information on which an
opinion could be founded—it may be affirmed, I think, that at no time
previous to the present has more care been bestowed by all the
churches upon the preparation and training of candidates for the
duties of their office. And it may be affirmed with even more
confidence, that at no period since the Reformation have the clergy of
all the churches alike displayed so much zeal and devotion in the
discharge of their allotted duties, or earned so generally and with so
few exceptions a title to the personal influence which naturally and
most justly belongs to consistent conduct and a blameless life.
Neither should we be at liberty to conclude, I think, that the clergy
do not and cannot teach the laity, because laymen generally are at
this day indifferent to religious truth, and refuse to be taught. The
growing interest which the general body of educated laymen take in
the highest and largest questions of religion and morals is certainly
one of the most marked features of the present intellectual life of the
world. At no time during the last 200 years have so many persons
been engaged, fitfully and unmethodically it must be admitted, yet
anxiously and eagerly, in the search for truth. Ideas, “ the natural
home and resting-place of the human mind,” as they are fitly termed
by Coleridge, are sought for with more or less earnestness by the
great majority of educated thinking laymen in the present day.


If we look to the history of this city of Melbourne alone, we shall
find that at any time during the last ten years any one who has
professed to be able to communicate anything to his fellow men on
the subjects of religion and philosophy has been able to secure a
numerous, earnest, and attentive audience of thoughtful men,
provided only that his hearers were not invited to assemble within
the walls of a Christian church, and that the preacher has not
founded his teaching upon the lines of any of the Christian creeds.
What, then, is the cause ?
INFLUENCE OP MODERN SCIENCE.
I believe that the best answer to this question will be found in the
additions that have been made by modern science to human knowledge,
and in the change or rather the revolution which those additions
have made in the mind and its judgments with reference to subjects
of religious speculative thought. I do not allude to the numerous
great practical discoveries of recent science. Of the two classes into
which the sciences may be divided, founded upon what Bacon calls
“ the last or farthest twofold end of knowledge,” namely, those
sciences which tend “ to the glory of the Creator,” and those which
tend “ to the relief of man’s estate,” the latter class appear to leave
no special enduring mark upon the minds of successive generations
of students.
On the other hand, the two great sciences of astronomy and
geology, which have gradually raised and expanded the human
intelligence more than all other influences put together, have done
very little to help man in his contest with material nature. A learned
and very practical thinker, Sir George Cornewall Lewis, startled the
scientific world half a century ago by the proposition that the dis-
covery of Copernicus had been of little or no benefit to man for any
practical purpose, but he proved his proposition as he stated it by
showing that almost all the requirements of navigation, the art which
more than any other derives assistance from astronomy, might have
been supplied by the Ptolemaic system of astronomy if that system
had not been supplanted. The science of geology, in like manner,
during its briefer history has done comparatively little towards giving
effectual practical aid to man in his search for mineral wealth. But
astronomy and geology, each exerting a wide and indirect influence,
have enormously extended man’s conceptions of space and of time in
the minds even of persons who know little or nothing of either
science, and in doing this they have changed the whole character of
human thought upon the highest subjects of speculative inquiry.
The extent of this change may perhaps be best understood by
comparing, or rather contrasting, the state of two minds, before
and since the time of Copernicus. Let us take the case of a
European, an educated and learned man, at any period between
the second and the sixteenth centuries. What were his thoughts
about Nature and God? He could see, as we now do, that man
was at the head of the animal world. But he believed, in


accordance with ancient tradition, that all animal and plant life
had been called into existence about the same time as man, and
that they had been created for the use and benefit of man. He
looked np from the earth, whose shape he did not know, and saw
that the heavenly bodies appeared to revolve round it at uncertain
but small distances, and he naturally concluded that they, too,
like everything else on the surface of this planet, existed for man
and to supply his needs, that the sun ruled by day and the moon
and the stars governed by night in subservience to man’s con-
venience and wants. He would necessarily infer that man was
the centre of the universe, and that all things existed for him.
The Creator of the Universe could not, in the estimate of such a
mind, be other than a magnified man, not free from the prejudices
and caprices, and even the passions, of men of smaller growth.
How profoundly erroneous do all such conceptions now appear
to us 1
SCIENTIFIC REVELATIONS.
Let me ask you to make the effort that is necessary in order to
form an idea, inadequate though it must be, of the universe as it
presents itself to the student of science in the last quarter of the
nineteenth century. Astronomical’ spaces and geological times
are so vast that without some artificial aids the mind fails to
apprehend them. The phrase “a million of miles” or “a million
of years ” conveys no definite conception of distance or of time to
a mind of ordinary capacity, and yet it is in such conceptions that
the chief value of both sciences consists. I will use, with your
permission, a measure of space which most of us can grasp, and
I will invite yon by its aid to try to get a distinct idea of
interplanetary and interstellar spaces.
Those of us who have come to Australia from Great Britain have
a tolerably definite idqa of half the compass of the globe we inhabit,
and thereby of its whole circumference. Now, think of this fact—
a ray of light will travel a distance of nearly eight times round the
earth in a second of time; it will take more than eight minutes, or
four hundred and eighty seconds, to pass from the sun to the earth ;
that is to say the distance of the earth from the sun is something
more than three thousand eight hundred times the length of a girdle
round the earth. If we pause to reflect on this we shall get some
idea of the enormous distance of our planet from the sun. Now,
let ns take in this further fact, that the planet Neptune, the
most distant from the sun of all the planets, is more than thirty times
further from the sun than is the earth. It taxes severely our powers
of thought to stretch the mind so as to bo able to conceive this idea
of the magnitude of the space occupied by the sun and its attendant
planets, and yet this idea, when it has been reached by a great effort,
is only preparatory to the apprehension of the infinitely vaster
spaces beyond the limits of the solar system.
To get a notion of these spaces I must ask you to make another
effort of thought. One of the two stars called the Pointers, the


farthest from the Southern Cross, is the nearest to our sun of all the
fixed stars. Now let us reflect on this fact which comparatively
recent science tells us. The light which enters our eyes as we look
at this star on any night, although it has travelled during every second
of time at the rate of nearly eight times the earth’s circumference,
has taken three and a-half years to come to us from this star. Here
is another and perhaps a better mode of getting a conception
of the distances of the fixed stars. It consists in reducing in imagin-
ation the vast size of our solar system to some very small space with
which we are quite familiar. Let us, for example, assume in imagin-
tion that the 5,700,000,000 miles, which is nearly the length of the
greater axis of the orbit of the planet Neptune, is compressed into
that small part of Collins-street that lies between Swanston-street and
Elizabeth-street, or say about five hundred and twenty feet, and then
let us consider what lies outside our solar system so reduced. The
nearest of all the fixed stars, the Pointer a Centauri, will then be
seen at a distance of nearly three hundred and fifty miles from our
sun ; another of the few fixed stars whose distance can be measured,
Sirius, will be seen at a distance of about fourteen hundred miles ;
while extending beyond and beyond, upon all sides, and, so far as we
can judge, at corresponding vast distances from each other, three
hundred and twenty-four thousand fixed stars have had their places
mapped out in the heavens by the astronomer, and, as Mr. Proctor
told us when he visited Melbourne some years ago, not less than one
hundred millions of such suns or solar systems have been revealed to
our eyes by Lord Ross’s telescope.
These stupendous discoveries of modern science, in regard to space,
have been accompanied during the last century by discoveries equally
stupendous, though not by any means so certain or precise in regard
to time. The evidence yielded by the earth’s strata points with
reasonable certainty to the conclusion that man has existed on the
earth during a period anterio) to history of about two hundred
thousand years, and that the age of the earth itself must be measured,
not by thousands of years, but by scores, and even by hundreds of
millions of years.
Both astronomy and geoiogy have surely revealed to us clear
proofs of ascertained and unchangeable law, of design and increasing
purpose, of slow and steady progress, and also, I think, in animated
nature, of benevolent if stern discipline. The earth and all the other
planets revolve, and have revolved for millions of years, round the
sun in the same direction, in similar elliptic orbits, at rates of progress
that vary in accordance with unvarying laws, and in periods related
to each other by a fixed proportion of times and distances. Kepler’s
great discoveries are know to us by long verified experience, and are
held by us with a minutely accurate certainty, far transcending the
certainty we can feel with regard to anything under the immediate
cognisance of our senses; and hence wo necessarily feel an undoubt-
ing confidence in scientific predictions of events still in the future,
and in scientific generalisations which may be as yet only highly
probable.


In illustration of this, consider the instance of a verified and of an
unverified scientific prophecy that occurred quite recently. It was
announced many years ago that the planet Venus would begin to
pass between the earth and the sun on the Bth day of December,
1874, at 14 h. 45 m. 57 s. Greenwich mean time, and preparations
were made, as you will remember, by the Governments ot several
European countries, in reliance on this exact prediction, to ta ce
observations in different places, with the view of ascertaining more
accurately the earth’s distance from the sun. On the day and at the
hour and the minute and the second foretold the transit commenced.
Again, the same event was predicted to occur on the 6th day of
last December, and again the prediction was exactly fulfilled. And
now, when we are told by astronomers that another, and the next,
transit of Venus will take place 121 years hence, in the year 2,004,
on the 7th day of June, beginning at 17 h. 3 m. and 43 s. Greenwich
meantime, can we have any doubt that, supposing no catastiophe
occurs in the meantime to either planet, our children in the fourth oi
fifth generation will see the same phenomenon that we have seen, on
the day and at the minute and the second of time foretold 1
The same order, the same unvarying action, the like steadfast
purpose and constant exercise of developing power are observable in
the history of plant and animal life upon this planet, as revealed by
geology; formless matter changing into crystallised inorganic mattei,
inorganic matter developing into organic matter instinct with life,
plants, and animals of various degress of complex structure with
corresponding degrees of internal life, following one another in
ascending scale, until now, in these latest days, man, God s last, and
undoubtedly His greatest work on this earth, has been reached—
“ One first matter all,
Endued with various forms, various degrees
Of substance, and in things that live, of life:
But more refined, more spirituous, and pure,
As nearer to Him placed, or nearer tending,
Each in their several active spheres assigned,
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds
Proportioned to each kind.”
The student who at present contemplates these vast results of
modern science is another and a totally different man from the
mediaeval student. It is not so much a change as a revolution that
his mind and its concepts have undergone. To him man no longer
appears to be the centre of all things, but one of the smallest of the
works of God, although also the most wonderful and the grandest of
those that are known to us, as is shown by the marvellous capacity
displayed by him in the act of discovering his littleness. To the
same student God also is presented in an entirely new and
inexpressibly grander form of conception ; anthropomorphism, oi the
representation of God in the likeness of man, is no longer possible in
any shape; arbitrary dealing, capricious favour, vengeful punishment,
sudden passionate change, are attributes that are wholly unthinkable
in regard to the Creator by an educated layman in the present day,


who sees with open eyes and ponders upon the vastness and the
duration of the works of God, and the majestic simplicity of His
unvarying action.
SCIENCE NOT OPPOSED TO RELIGION.
There is, of course, no opposition or conflict between modern
science, with its great results and the enlarged conceptions which it
has evolved in the human mind, and religion, using this last word in
the sense that points to the existence of the supreme mind and the
relations existing between that mind and the derived mind oi man.
So much was recently demonstrated with rare eloquence, and also
with the utmost ease, by one to whom also, as a clergyman, we
laymen of all denominations are deeply indebted for the sympathetic
and helpful interest he has shown in some of our lay difficulties, and
for the broader and more tolerant tone that has been communicated
by him to the discussion of many public questions —I mean the
Bishop of Melbourne.
At present no more can be said than this, that there exists no
opposition between religion and modern science. Considerable
advances have been made by science in our own day in the direction
of the probable unity of the elements of matter and the probable
unity of the originating causes of matter and motion. But science
retains an attitude of reserve, and still refuses to speculate. This
attitude, however, cannot in all probability, long be maintained.
It is not merely the right, it is a necessity for science to speculate
upon, to inquire into all phenomena, mental as well as material.
But science, affrighted by ecclesiasticism and its not yet exhausted
terrors, has for a long time almost wholly abandoned the field of
highest speculation to the Christian churches, and they in turn do
not care to occupy it. “Non Jingo hypotheses, I do not frame
hypotheses/’ exclaimed, in the early days of modern science, the
illustrious but timid English philosopher, Sir Isaac Newton, alarmed
at the consequences that were to follow from his formula of universal
gravitation —the grandest generalisation in physical science ever
propounded by the human intellect. He wished, if it were possible,
to confine his formula to the bare statement of the terms of a
mathematical proposition. But Euler, not less distinguished
as a mathematician than Newton, declared that gravity must
be caused either by a spirit in the particles of matter, like “the
directing angel,” supposed by Kepler to reside in and to regulate
the movements of the planets, or by some subtle material
medium. Euler accepted the latter hypothesis, and this is
still adoj>ted and applied by science in the present day to explain the
operation of particular modes of motion, light and heat, as well
as of gravity; although its sufficiency, even for this purpose, is
undemonstrated, while its insufficiency to account for other modes of
motion, as well as for any vital or mental phenomena, is admitted.
But a great and a most happy change has begun, and has made
rapid progress within our own time. Ecclesiasticism has become far


less aggressive and violent than it was even a quarter ot a century
ago, while science, on the other hand, has gained confidence and
courage in a proportional degree. We can measure the extent of
this change by a comparison of two events, both of them within
the recollection of some whom I now address. In the year 1859
Mr. Darwin’s book On the Origin of Species hy Means of Natural
Selection made its appearance, and instantly there rose from scores
of English pulpits, and through a hundred channels in the English
press, cries of indignation and scorn, and also, it must be said,
of fierce personal vituperation, directed against the blameless authoi
of that book. In the early part of last year (1882), when Mi.
Darwin died, the English press was unanimous in its eulogies of his
life and labours, and sermons were actually preached in Westminster
Abbey and in St. Paul’s Cathedral, by two most distinguished
clergyman, in which not only did the simple character of the
illustrious student receive due commendation, but his great speculations
and their results upon the thought of the age were referred to in
terms of respect.
THE FUTURE PROBLEM OP SCIENCE.
As soon as science shall be completely set free from its lingering
fears it must return, we may expect, as an inquirer and a learner,
to the field of deductive speculation and hypothesis. Even now
the old and inevitable questions “Whence” and “Why, the
questions which every human intellect that really lives at some
time puts to itself, and must either find some answer to them
or perish in the attempt, again begin to be heard. Whence comes
matter 1 And whence comes motion, or rather the force or forces
which first originated, or which is, or which are, ever originating
motion? And seeing that, as Sir John Herschel has observed,
mere force may produce chaos, but never a cosmos, whence comes
the ordered, regulated, directed force, which, never changing,
never failing, has produced and still sustains the motions of the
planets and all the complex phenomena of life upon this planet ?
Such is the form which this Sphinx’s riddle has now assumed,
and science cannot rationally refuse either to accept the only
hypothesis that has ever been proposed which pretends to explain
all phenomena, or to suggest another equally comprehensive and
equally consistent with ascertained facts. I mean the hypothesis
which supposes that matter was originally created, and that eveiy
movement of every particle of matter has been in all time and
now is impelled and directed by a supreme mind or will, ever
and in every part of every natural phenomenon exerting a force
analogous to that by which the derived mind in animals and
o *■ , ,
man creates and directs motion in matter.
According to this ancient hypothesis, as applied to the facts
of modern science, the world is but “manifested deity, or, as
Agassiz has expressed it, “ the whole creation is the expression
of a thought, and not the product of physical agents;” every
so-called “ law of nature ” is merely the continuous action of the


Supreme Mind; every movement of matter is the act either of
Deity or of some one of the infinite number of derived minds
which have been invested with a delegated and like power; and
evolution, of which progressive improvement is the unvarying
mark and ideal perfection the ultimate end, is the visible operation
of the Supreme invisible mind.
Nowhere has this hypothesis been more accurately or better
stated than by our English poet, Pope :
“ All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
Whose body nature is, and God the soul;
That, changed through all, and yet in all the same,
Great in the earth as in the ethereal frame,
Glows in the stars, refreshes in the breeze,
Warms in the sun, and blossoms in the trees,
Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
Spreads undivided, operates unspent;
To Him no high, no low, no great, no small;
He fills, He bounds, connects, and equals all.”
This hypothesis has been declared by one acute thinker of the
present day to be “ unthinkable,” and it cannot, of course, be enter-
tained by those who so regard it. To my mind it appears to be as
thinkable —not more so, and not less—as the fact, of which I am
conscious, that my mind possesses the power of moving a finger or a
limb. Each of us is conscious of this power, and he cannot rationally
refuse to believe in the fact of its existence merely because he knows
nothing either of the essential nature of the mind in which the power
is lodged, or of the relations between the mind and the body on which
the power is exerted.
To those minds that can apprehend it, this hypothesis yields the
only satisfactory explanation of the innumerable and complex facts
that go to make up “the burden and the mystery of all this” (other-
wise) “ unintelligible world.” It is the only hypothesis which even
pretends to account for all phenomena, mental as well as physical.
J f it should ever become a theory or even a “ working hypothesis ” of
science, in the same way that the purely hypothetical existence of
ether is now necessarily assumed for the purpose of explaining gravity
and light, and the nomenclature of science be varied and adjusted to
the theory, it can hardly be doubted that the separation (not
opposition) that now exists between religion and science will
disappear, and that science and religion combined will exercise a
most powerful and enduring, as well as beneficial, influence over all
educated minds, and through them will transform the world.
SCIENCE NOT OPPOSED TO CHRIST’S SYSTEM OF RELIGION.
My mind has been led to a further conclusion. I believe —and I
conceive that in the circumstances under which I am addressing you,
I am called on to state to you my belief—that not only is there no
opposition between modern science and religion, or natural religion,
as it is sometimes vaguely and inaccurately called, but that there is
no opposition between modern science and that system of religion
which was communicated to the world by the founder of Christianity.


What was that system? What was the truth which He, whom
we heedlessly call the Great Teacher, diligently sought lor and
discovered for himself, and which He desired to communicate as the
most precious gift that mind can give to mind to every member of
the human race 1 Is it presumption in a laymen to ask this question 1
I fear that many who aspire to control the mind of the laymen, while
they are unable to teach or persuade it, really think that it is.
Now, I am very sensible that with regard to questions of this
nature, I, and you also, my brother laymen, are unlearned and
ignorant men, and extremely liable in consequence of our ignoiance
to fall into grave error. But why are we ignorant 1 I say that it is
because the chaos of creeds and the babel of striving tongues in the
Christian churches leave us ignorant and untaught, and compel eveiy
thinking layman to set out alone and unaided on the perilous path of
inquiry.
And what shall a rational man who is constrained to seek truth for
himself upon this subject do other than this, to close his eais
resolutely against all others sounds and voices, and try to catch the
sound of that one voice which alone above the din of nineteen
centuries still makes itself heard as the voice of one that has authority ?
That it is more profitable to seek the fountain-heads than to follow
the course of the rivulets is a canon of critical research peculiarly
applicable to this inquiry. The precise words employed by a teacher
are almost invariably the best exponent of his meaning; they acquire
a supreme and exclusive value when differences arise as to what
the scope and the effect of his teaching were, and when those who
had the privilege of hearing him, and who might be expected therefore
to be competent and concordant interpreters, have admittedly failed
to comprehend his meaning and his mission, and do not agree with
one another as to several particulars as well as to the general spirit of
his doctrine.
The words of the Great Teacher of which the gospels are not the
exclusive depositories have come down to us by tradition only. No
contemporary record of them exists, or has ever existed. Isot moie
than two of His immediate followers committed to writing His
remembered words, and the Gospel of St. John assuming as I do
that it is genuine—was not written until more than thirty years, or,
according to another authority, more than fifty years after his
M aster’s* last words had been spoken. The general accuracy of
His reported utterances, spoken in one language and recorded in
another and a very different language, depends largely in respect
to both form and substance on what has been called the
uncertain testimony of slippery memory.” But an answer con-
veyed almost wholly in a quotation from an old and still existing
book has a very special claim to be regarded as an authentic
and probably accurate report of His actual words, huch an answer
we find in a passage that occurs in all the three synoptic gospels, with
some unimportant differences in each. The full meaning and force of
this passage —the most weighty and significant, I think, that is to be
found in all Jewish and Christian literature—will be apparent if we


remember the main tendency of Jewish philosophy during all periods
of the history of that people.
The highest philosophy amongst the Jews appears to have consisted
in the search for a comprehensive rule of life and conduct, founded
upon and capable of being traced to a principle or a fact accepted by
the understanding. That this thought pervaded Jewish literature
and is a key to its historical meaning is shown by a curious and
instructive passage quoted from the Talmud by Emile Deutsch, which
with your permission I will read to you :
Six hundred and thirteen injunctions was Moses instructed to give to the
people. David reduced them to 11 in the 15th psalm. The prophet Isaiah
reduced them to six (c. 33, v. 15); the prophet Micah reduced them to three (c. 6,
v. 8); Isaiah once more reduced them to two (c. SG, v. 1); Amos reduced them
to one (c. 5, v. 4) ; hut lest it might be supposed that God could be found in the
fulfilment of His holy law, Habbakuk said (c. 2, v. 4), “ The just shall live by
his faith.”
“ What is your doctrine ? What is the truth sufficient, according to
your teaching, for the guidance of the life of man V’ This was in
effect the question put by the jurist or scribe to Him who as a boy
appears to have proposed questions of a like nature to the learned
doctors of the Jewish law. You know the answer that was promptly
given to the question. It was quoted from the early records of
Jewish history, where it had lain neglected for fourteen centuries,
buried under heaps of ecclesiastical traditions and forms. It states
the central principle or dogma of the existence of one God and His
relationship to man, together with the primary and secondary rules
of human conduct founded on and springing out of that relationship.
And on these rules, the answer proceeds to state, “ hang all the law
and the prophets;” they contain the whole practice and theory of
the universal religion which the Teacher had himself sought for and
had found; none more comprehensive than these exist.
With the exception of a few, a very few, discordant notes, which a
just and fearless criticism may and must either moderate or reject, all
His other utterances are in complete harmony with and merely elucidate
this one. I believe that no student who reads with an unpreoccupied
mind the records of the sayings of Christ can doubt that it was this
simple and sublime idea, realised in his life as an idea never before or
since has been realised, that possessed, controlled, and animated it all ;
that it was this that gave great and enduring authority to His words,
and has gained for Ids person the tender reverence of millions of men
who have never accepted only because they have never been enabled
to understand His doctrine ; that this was the good news which he
wished to extend from the Semitic to the other races of mankind ;
and that the transmission and the teaching of this truth, and the
application of it to all the varying circumstances of civilisation in the
course of its development was the wise purpose of the commission
which He gave to His church.
If my inquiries upon this subject have led me to conclusions not
wholly erroneous, it will be evident that there is no opposition or
conflict between the religion of Christ and modern science. The


resulting conception of both is the same. “ God is a Spirit” is the
single central dogma of the first; it is the highest generalisation
towards which the latest and grandest discovei’ies of the second seem
to be conducting the human mind.
“ When we have really penetrated,” a recent writer, Mr. Greg,
observes, “to the actual teaching of Christ, and fairly disinterred
that religion of Jesus which preceded all creeds and schemes and
formulas, and which we trust will survive them all, we shall find
that so far from this, the true essence of Christianity, being renounced
or outgrown by the progressive intelligence of the age, its rescue,
re-discovery, purification, and re-inthronement as a guide of life, a
fountain of truth, an object of faith, a law written on the heart, will
be recognised as the grandest and most beneficial achievement of that
intelligence.”
THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION NOT THE RELIGION OF CHRIST.
“ The Christian religion has existed for more than eighteen hundred
years. The religion of Christ has yet to be tried. The contest lies
between the Christian religion and the religion of Jesus Christ; the
religion of which Jesus is the object, or that of which Christ is the
subject.” The contrast which these words of Lessing vividly express
brings us into the presence of the most portentous fact, as it appears
to me, of this age of the world —a fact so fraught with pain and
perplexity that I should be glad if I were able to pass it by. But I
cannot do so, for it contains in itself the answer to the question
which I have undertaken the attempt to solve.
I assume that the founder of Christianity intended to establish a
church, an organisation which should propagate and should for ever
maintain His doctrine throughout the world. The positive evidence
of such intention is slight; the antecedent probability in favour of it
is strong. The best and the most fruitful thoughts are usually the
most evanescent, and when they are lost it is difficult to regain them.
The saying of Wordsworth,
“ ’Tis hard to keep
Heights which the soul is competent to gain,”
is proved by the history of systems of religious thought to be equally
true as applied to communities and to individuals. And the higher
the ideal, the more difficult it is to propagate ; the broader and more
comprehensive the principle, the harder it is to apply it to the minute
and ever-varying circumstances of practical life. It is unquestionably
true that the religion taught by the founder of Christianity avowedly
claims a right to hold absolute and exclusive control over all the
faculties of the human mind, and to employ them continually in their
fullest energy. To communicate a religion of so exalted and exacting
a character to nations who were ignorant of it, and afterwards to keep
its claims constantly before the minds of those who should adopt it,
as well as to supply the means of applying its principles to the new
and more complex events and circumstances of advancing civilisation,
might well be supposed to require a permanent teaching organisation
of some kind.


Of the intended form of the church, whether it was to be an
independent and separate body, or whether it was to be identical
with the State, the civil head of the community presumed to be
united by the bond of a common faith, we have no knowledge-
Certainly no system of government was fixed by the founder of the
church, no ritual was prescribed, no form of common prayer was
directed, but only a closet prayer, constructed, according to Wetstein,
almost verbatim out of the Talmud. Everything except the central
dogma and the rules of life dependent on it was left at large, and free
to adjust itself to the different characters and habits and the varying
conditions of each nationality and age. How instructive is this
majestic silence in the Founder of a religion that was to affect so
largely the destinies of mankind 1 How deep the debt of gratitude
due from all who acknowledge His authority for the liberty with
which He intended to make and to keep them free !
CHURCH ORGANISATIONS,
Christianity is, and always has been, represented in the world
by the Christian churches. The churches are organisations,
distinguished by different forms of government, by different
rituals and forms of worship, and chiefly by different and
conflicting systems of religious belief, contained in hostile
creeds, articles, confessions, and standards of faith. This last
fact is that which appeal’s to me to carry with it the final
condemnation of all Christian churches alike as they exist down to
the present day. All other differences may be necessary, or if not
necessary, may be expedient, and therefore lawful. But unity in the
object of worship and in the fundamental principles of belief and
practice must be the essential and distinguishing mark of the one
Church founded by Him who restored and announced to the whole
world the obscured faith in one living and true God.
I assume, of course, that not one of the Christian churches can
successfully set up so much as a shadow of a rational claim to regard
itself, or to be regarded by others, as being itself the sole Church of
Christ.
CREEDS OF THE CHURCHES.
A protestant, and addressing the members of a protestant church,.
I will now further assume that no man and no council or church has
had authority given to it to alter or to add to, in anything great or
small, by way of development or otherwise, the doctrine of the
Founder of Christianity, or to impose the profession of belief in any
added doctrine or practice upon the human mind and conscience as a
condition of membership of the Church of Christ. But the great
bulk of the propositions of fact and of belief in even the earliest
creeds and in all the later articles, confessions, and standards of faith,
are undoubtedly additions to the primitive doctrine. If we except
the first article in the earliest and the least exacting creed, the
Apostles’ Creed, which is a superfluous repetition, we shall find
scarcely anything in any of the creeds and standards, increasing as


they multiply in the number and oppressiveness of their arbitrary
dogmas, that is not an unauthorised addition to the primitive simple
doctrines.
Again, some of those dogmas which the churches have superadded
to the doctrine of Christ without His authority, and which they
endeavour pertinaciously to force upon the clergy and the laity, are
dogmas which, as some of you, I doubt now, know from bitter
personal experience, are revolting and odious to the natural conscience
and to the understanding of man. lam well aware that at this point
I stand on the borders of the deepest mysteries of being- and of
Providence. Such mysteries, painful and full of perplexity as are
many that the course of nature and the constitution of the human
mind present to us, must be endured. Faith reposes in the assurance
that they all admit of, and that they will yet receive, explanation —
We trust that somehow good
Will be the final goal of ill. ”
But while the human understanding bows before the mysteries of
God, and awaits His solution of them, may we not, ought we not,
to resent the attempts made by men like ourselves, only far more
ignorant—to represent the hideous dreams that our interpretation, no
doubt faulty, of those mysteries sometimes suggests, as articles of
Christian faith, and the acceptance of such articles as a condition of
salvation ?
I observe, lastly, that some of the articles, and not the least
opposed to reason and conscience, of these unauthorised creeds, have
been undermined by recent science. The ancient tradition that man
was created perfect, that the first man so created fell by his own act,
and thereby introduced death for the first time into the world, and
entailed hereditary guilt and moral ruin upon all his posterity,
appears to have taken some hold upon the Jewish mind. The alleged
historical fact, and the dogma of hereditary guilt founded upon it,
are not so much as mentioned once by the Founder of Christianity ;
possibly they were included by Him amongst the traditions which
had been the means, He said, of making the commandment of God of
none effect. But both have found their way into the majority of the
Christian churches, and have lent a distinct colour to most of the
Christian creeds.
How, if there be any general conclusions to which recent geological
science has forcibly drawn the human mind, and to which, although
they may not be established by inductive proof, laymen cannot, if
they would, refuse to accord belief, they are these—That man at the
first did not fall from a higher state of existence, but that he rose
from a lower j and that what we call death, or the change and disso-
lution of the organic form in which life temporarily resides, existed
on this planet from the time that life first appeared upon it, and
millions of years before the comparatively recent date when man first
came into being. There is here irreconcilable variance between
modern science and the doctrine of the Christian churches.


And now we are brought to the point at which we find the answer
to the question—What is the cause of the failing influence as a
teaching power of the clergy of all the Christian churches over the
minds of educated, thinking laymen 1 Science in its modern, enlarged,
and generalising spirit, and also in some of its recent conclusions, is
opposed, not indeed to religion, but to the creeds of the churches, all
of which urge an unfounded claim to infallible authority. The laity
are habitually and of necessity influenced, though they do not always
know it, by the broad conceptions of nature and of God which science
imperceptibly but irresistibly conveys to their minds. Thinking
laymen cannot reconcile these conceptions with the doctrines of the
creeds ; they have ceased even to make an effort to reconcile them.
They yield an indolent assent, indeed, to the creeds, as they do to
every part of the particular church system with which they are con-
nected by birth, but in fact and actual practice they totally disregard
them.
The clergy of all the churches, on the other hand, occupy a very
different position. The clergyman is selected for his office while he
is very young, and long before he has had time or has acquired suffi-
cient intellectual expansion to be able to comprehend the nature and
scope of the great subject to which his life is to be devoted. His
mind is carefully trained to believe the tenets of a particular church,
to defend and to teach them and them alone, and to carry on cease-
less war against the opposing tenets of other churches ; and the fulfil-
ment of these narrow functions during the whole of his professional
life is attempted to be enforced by sanctions highly penal in their
personal, social, and professional consequences. How can a mind so
trained, and harshly compelled to submit to such discipline, exercise
the commanding power of a real teacher over the intellect, differently
constituted, ever otherwise occupied, and constantly subject to
influences so wholly diverse, of the educated, thinking layman at this
day 1 The thoughts of the two men are not in unison ; there is no
intellectual sympathy, no common intellectual interest between them
in regard to a large number of the topics and arguments which the
clergyman is constrained to select for his pulpit utterances.
I must use all brevity in stating to you, the lay members of this
Society, the practical conclusions upon this subject at which I, a
layman born into another church, have arrived.
PRACTICAL CONCLUSIONS.
They follow from the belief I hold, that the creeds of the Christian
churches, while they have been by far the most potent engine of
ecclesiastical power, have also been the most dangerous and insidious
enemies of the religion of Christ—that so far as they have expressed
his doctrine, they are merely an unauthoritative and superfluous
repetition of that doctrine ; while so far as they have pretended to
add to it, they have either obscured or falsified it, and in either case
have imposed a burden on the intellect and the conscience of the
Christian world which is now becoming wholly intolerable. If this


belief be not quite erroneous, it must be clear that the Christian
churches, above all other human institutions at this day, need “ the
blessed amending hand ” of radical Reform.
The laity are the only instrument by which reform can be effected..
They are not free from a share of responsibility for the evils that
exist. In Protestant churches they undoubtedly possess the power to
remove them. The aid of the clergy cannot be expected ;it ought
not in fairness to be asked; the opposition of the clergy must be
overcome.
The means of reform apparently available are suggested by the
proposals that were made at the time of the Reformation to abolish
the creeds. These proposals were not accepted. The conduct of the
Reformation, which in the earlier days of Wyclif and Huss was in
the hands of the laity, and aimed at a lay reform of ecclesiastical
abuses, passed at a later period into the hands of the clergy and of
politicians, and it is to them rather than to the general body of the
laity that the Church of England owes the added burden of her
Articles of Religion, and the Church of Scotland that of the
Westminster Confession of Faith.
If the compulsory subscription by the clergy of all creeds, articles, ;
and standards were abolished through the united action of the laity
in only one of the older Protestant churches, consequences most
momentous and beneficial might be expected, I think, to follow. The
example would be catching, and would probably extend quickly to all
the Protestant churches. The intellectual division between the clergy
and the laity would soon be removed, for both would rejoice speedily
to forget the systems of dogma that now, like a nightmare, oppresss
them both. Alterations in ritual necessary for the purpose of
consigning those systems to complete oblivion would then be readily
made. Science and the churches would be no longer alienated, and the
unworthy jealousy and emulation between the various churches, of
which their rival creeds are the constant and by far the most effective
cause, would cease, A real union, founded upon an enlarged basis of
belief, would gradually be established, and formal union would not
long loiter behind the removal of every cause of disunion. And when
the Protestant Christian world is united, and all its churches combined
in one, the open abandonment by the educated laity of the Catholic
and the Greek churches, and the final absorption or total decay of
both of those churches, would only be questions of time and
education. Do not suppose that lam speaking of results which I
believe to be at present possible or near. That abolition of
subscription by the clergy in any one or more of the churches would
be immediately productive of great results, and would probably lead
ultimately to the further results I have indicated, I do believe.
But before the initial step of practical church reform can be taken,
it is necessary that a spirit which shall point to and demand reform
shall first be created in the minds of the laity, and I am bound to
admit that I do not perceive at present any indication whatever of
such a spirit in any one of the chui’ches.


I am aware that I have already exceeded the limit of time which
a lecturer is entitled to ask from the most liberal and indulgent
audience ; and yet I will crave your permission to add another
word. I would ask you, my brother laymen, are you entirely
satisfied and contented with the state of things now existing in
your own and in the other Christian churches ?
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LAITY.
Do you think that we, the laity generally, can view our own
conduct and position in respect to the churches with unmixed gratifi-
cation ? We criticise the clergy with unbounded freedom—usually,
as it appears to me, with cruel injustice, and often in profound for-
getfulness that our criticism reacts upon ourselves—for their alleged
illiberal and narrow views, and for irrational, unpractical, and
ineffectual teaching. But may we not be reminded that the views
and the teaching of the clergy are the direct and the necessary result
of the church systems which we, the laity, have helped to form, and
which we continue to support, and to guard jealously against all change,
even after we have ceased to entirely believe in them ?
We imagine that we ourselves are free ; and in a certain sense we
are. We are not bound by subscription to any church; each of us
is free to leave the church in which he was born, and to go anywhere
or nowhere. But should we not greatly err if we imagine that we are
free from the influence of creeds to which we pay the observance of
outward adhesion, but which do not govern our thoughts and convic-
tions 1 There is not one of us who does not yield apparent assent to
much that he does not and cannot really believe. Is it possible that
assent without belief shall continue for an indefinite time without
affecting the natural vigour of a man’s intellect, and even the
integrity and straightforwardness of a manly character ?
Every day these burning questions of religious thought in
connection with their general tendencies, and also with the
personal applications they suggest, are brought nearer and nearer
to us, and they naturally inspire an increasing number of us with
uneasiness, and even with vague and terrible apprehensions.
The state of the woi’ld as it now presents itself to our obser-
vation cannot, we may be sure, long tolerate the continued
treatment by the laity of these questions with careless levity, or with
self-isolating reserve, or with the boastful incapacity of honest
agnosticism.
PERPLEXITY OF MODERN THOUGHT.
Is it not an astounding fact—l take it to be an indisputable fact—
that at the end of the nineteenth century of the so-called Christian
dispensation a very large number of the most cultivated, the most
thoughtful, the most sober-minded, and the most upright men in
all the civilised and Christian countries of the world, are really unable
to determine whether good and sufficient reasons can be found for
belief in the existence of God, and whether there is any basis for
morality other than supposed pez-sonal interest or utility ? We cannot


wonder, though we may well be appalled to observe, that this mental
paralysis of a large number of the leaders of men in every country is
•extending rapidly to all classes, and is plainly disturbing the
springs of action in almost every department of human activity,
and in every region of human thought. In religion, in politics,
in literature, in art, in the social relations, in scientific
research itself, the human mind at this day is divided, weak,
irresolute, perplexed, unregulated by a single ascertained and
unquestioned law. And this, too, at a time when civilisation is
threatened in some countries by new and hitherto unknown perils.
Never before in the history of the world have the elements of evil
and of danger to human society confederated on a scale so vast, and
with purposes so deadly, as at present. Never befoi’e have the
elements of good appeared to be so incapable of combining against the
enemies of all. It seems as if the world were hurrying towards the
realisation of that picture of universal intellectual and moral anarchy
in which the human mind is seen to perish, while the animal life of
man, and even the material civilisation of the race, survive—one of
the most terrible pictures ever painted by a poet’s imagination, and
which we are told the painter himself could not to the end of his life
ever look at without being moved to tears.
“ She comes ! she comes! the sable throne behold
Of night primeval and of Chaos old!
Before her, Fancy’s gilded clouds decay,
And all its varying rainbows die away.
Wit shoots in vain its momentary fires,
The meteor drops, and in a flash expires.
As one by one, at dread Medea’s strain,
The sick’ning stars fade off th’ ethereal plain ;
As Argus’ eyes by Hermes’ wand opprest,
Closed one by one to everlasting rest;
Thus at her felt approach and secret might
Art after Art goes out, and all is night.
See skulking Truth to her old cavern fled,
Mountains of casuistry heaped o’er her head
Philosophy, that leaned on Heaven before,
Shrinks to her second cause, and is no more.
Keligion blushing veils her sacred fires,
And, unawares, Morality expires.
Nor public flame, nor private dares to shine,
Nor human spark is left, nor glimpse divine.
Lo ! thy dread empire, Chaos, is restored,
Light dies before thy uncreating word.
Thy hand, great Anarch, lets the curtain fall,
And universal darkness buries all.”
We do not, of course, believe that this catastrophe imagined by
Pope will finally overtake and overwhelm the human mind, though
as yet the way of escape may not be apparent. Science itself seems
to forbid that thought of utter despair. It is a wholly incredible
supposition that the light which has guided humanity so far in its
painful but inevitable struggle upwards on the eternal hills to the
point that it has already reached will be suddenly and finally
withdrawn. The power which has been man’s help in the ages that
are past is, and must be, a rational ground of his hope in years to


come. But let us not forget that dangers that have been created by human
ignorance and causeless dissensions will certainly be averted only by
the instrumentality of wise and united human efforts. The salvation
of the mind of Christendom at present appears to depend, so far as
we can venture to hazard an opinion, upon union amongst laymen of
all churches, who still retain an intelligent hold upon the ultimate
object of faith, and who will combine to cast out from their own
minds and from the Christian churches the spectres of old and
now discredited fallacies.
For my part, I believe—and this, my deep conviction, is the
last result of my reflections, which I shall “whisper” to you,
my brother laymen, to-night—that it were the part of highest
wisdom for you and for me, and for all thinkers everywhere,
in this day of rising floods and beating wind, to withdraw resolutely
and with all speed from all the lower standpoints of thought that
are now no longer tenable, and to meet on the high central platform of
thought—the rock of all ages, whereon every human mind may,
if it will, build for itself a secure and indestructible abode—God,
“ the living Will that shall endure when all that seems shall
suffer shock ” —God, revealed to the intellect in every minute
movement of matter, and in all the phenomena of this vast universe
—God, revealed anew to the intellect, and also to the responsive
human heart, as the Father, the Friend, the Guide, and the Support
of our race, and of every member of it, in the simple but profound
philosophy, and also in the sublimest life, of Jesus of Nazareth,,
the Light of the World,
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS MELBOURNE




