





SCIENCE V. SPIRITISM,
WITH SPECIAL-REFERENCE TO THE EXTRAORDINARY
PRETENSIONS OF THE TRANCE LECTURER,
MR. THOMAS WALKER,
FROM LANCASHIRE. AND MRS.,
EMM A HARDINGE-BRITTEN,
THE CELEBRATED INSPIRATIONAL LECFURESS.
BY
A. S. HAMILTON,
PROFESSOR OF PHRENOLOGY.
19 HUNTER STREET
The Subject is treated purely upon Physiological,. Phrenological,
and Psychological principles.
CONTENTS:
Indispensable qualifications of an Author who driticises Splitism. —Great and peculiar gifts
of Lecupers like Mrs. Hardinge-Britten. —Special gifts of [?] memory and language,
which distinguishes Mrs Britten, and in lesser degree, the Trance [?] Walker,
Capacity of actor or act less essential to a [?] like Mrs. Britten [?]
Walker. —Wooderful Energy. Conrage, and [?] of the [?] The [?]
language of reality has its distinctive characteristies as oppsed [?] ass[?]ption or
imitation. Sinking manifestation of self-conscious acting on the part of Mrs Brittenlin her
So-called Inspirational Orations. — Herb Seeming Earnestness, its causes and results Circam-
stances which tend to develop self-delusion. —Trick of Spiritists in their knowledge of how
to act upon the weak side of human nature. The inVocation or religious trick its effe[?]
upon an audience. Challenge to Spiritists to discults the subject publicly. —The [?]
imposture of Walker and the more polished [?]ions of Mrs. Britten. —T[?]ue Spirltualism
Its fruits, trail trusted with the ghostly shams of Spiritism, as far as they have been indiented
in Sydney by Trance Mediums Trance Lectures and Inspirational Oraters Fallary, ab-
surdity, incongruity, folly, and evils of Spiritism as manifested in Sensptional Performances
of Sydney Demonstrators. Disease, delusion, and madness of Spirit Its [?] for those
not too far gone. The Authors hope and good intentions on behalf of its Vi[?] and his
efforts to prevent Spirit-Rapping and Mater dized Ghosts from [?]ming the form of a
Foundation of Religion for the Inhabitants of the Cology.
SYDNEY:
S. GLASSOP, WEST CITY GENERAL MACHINE PRINTING OFFICE
92 CLARENCE STREET.
1878.
F B H[?]




HENEY SIMGOE
(FROM JAMES McCABE, CORNHILL,)
EOH O U 1
(Uatdi ani OUodi iJJahcr,
liWILLlij ITC
70 MARKET STREET,
FOUR DOORS WEST OF PITT STREET,
SYDNEY.




SCIENCE V. SPIRITISM,
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE EXTRAORDINARY
PRETENSIONS OF THE TRANCE LECTURER,
' 1 V
MR. THOMAS WALKER,
FROM LANCASHIRE, AND MRS.
EMMA HARDINGE-BRITTEN,
THE CELEBRATED INSPIRATIONAL LECTURESS.'
BY
A. S. HAMILTON,
PROFESSOR OF PHRENOLOGY,
The Subject is treated purely upon Physiological, Phrenological,
and Psychological principles.
Sydney:
S. GLASSOP, West City General Machine Printing Office,
gz Clarence Street.
1878.




Science versus Spiritism.
MR. CHAIRMAN, Ladies and Gentlemen, —T come before
you as a bold and impartial observer of the phenomena
of human life and character. My avocation as a phrenologist
for nearly forty years has brought me directly into
contact with all types of men, —from the savage to the
man of highest culture, from the great statesman to the petty
alderman, from the genius to the fool, from the Chief Justice to
the criminal upon whom he passes sentence, from the earnest
truth-seeker to the juggler, trickster, and mountebank. It is
well known to the people of Sydney that I endeavoured, about a
year ago, to stir their minds to a discussion, upon scientific
grounds of the merits of this question of Spiritism. By public
lectures and otherwise I endeavoured to prove that Spiritism
was a fallacy, especially with reference to the performances
of Mr. Thomas Walker, from Lancashire. The people
were indifferent or credulous, and neither inquiring nor
critical, therefore, after the expenditure of much time
and money, I left the deluded victims of Spiritism as well
as the general public, to take their own course. But now
the aspect of Spiritualistic affairs is changed, as we have
amongst us a lady who is gifted largely beyond the
generality of her sex, and who now leads this ghostly move-
ment, as a pretender of a higher order than the man
Walker, whose imposture I successfully exposed. The gifted
lecturess no.w with us is possessed of talents of the
highest character, if measured by the natural standard;
therefore, I challenge her claims to inspiration, and proceed to
prove that she is either labouring under a delusion, or
fraudulently practising upon ignorant credulity. From the
uncouth appearance and peculiar form of the head of Walker,
he was by some believed to be deficient in intelligence, there-
fore his pretension of being controlled by the Spirits was more
likely to be taken as true than thehigher pretensions and grander
talents of the lady are likely to be acknowledged as gifts of
supernatural agency. The man Walker was but a shadow com-
pared with the great intellectual substance of the woman Britten.
Her talents are greater than those of many of the most highly
educated men; hence it is that many respectable and intelligent
persons of both sexes support her in her claims to inspiration.
Her gifts are so grand in regard to language and eloquence,
and so complete in manner and action, that those who


are ignorant of the laws which govern the functions of the
organs of the brain cannot account for her capacity, except
upon the principle of supernatural assistance. This wonderful
lady now leads the forlorn hope of Spiritism in this hemisphere,
and the disciples are jubilant, because they believe that they
have an empress of intellect as their commanding angel. I
fear that the joy of the Spiritists will soon be turned into
mourning, and the present bright day of Spiritism into night,
unless it shows something more practically demonstrative of
its truth than anything yet done or- attempted in Sydney.
The Spiritists having deserted their dear old mother, Nature,
will soon return penitent, after they get rid of the pretenders
or delusionists; and it is some satisfaction to learn day by day
that pretenders to the supernatural gifts of Spiritism are being
brought before the bar of public justice, and condemned for
their impostures. I greatly grieve to find good credulous
people turning away their physical and moral eyes from the
beautiful scenes and sweet enjoyments, the manifold blessings
and practical duties of this life, to follow the delusions of their
troubled spirits. Though Ido grieve, I still th’’nk it my duty
to call upon the leaders of this movement to afford the public
a test of their willingness to try to produce some of the
Spiritual phenomena, of which they loudly prate, as a
partial compensation for the heavy debt they owe the
people for so long keeping them in ignorance and suspense.
Have those who have for years amused themselves by
tidily-winking with the spirits in the dark no sympathy
with the sensible multitudes who seek to test the reality
by passing a few of their ghostships through the searching
ordeal of light ? After I have given you my scientific
opinion of this mystery of mysteries, by revealing the physical,
moral, intellectual, and psychological characteristics of the
two Spiritualistic performers—Mr. Walker and Mrs. Britten
—I believe you will agree with me that these supernaturally
inspired mediums would be more usefully and honestly
employed were they to direct their talents in accordance with
their natural functions. The question whicli every sane
person wall put to himself upon this matter is,—Would not
Airs. Britten, and all others similarly employed, honour God
and. their own nature more by striving to acquire scientific
knowledge, by which they could practically benefit this world,
rather than abuse their faculties by making tools of themselves,
under the influence of fanciful goblins conjured up by their
morbid imaginations ? I hope to be able to prove that the
system I condemn is simply the result of the estrangement of
the intellectual faculties from their legitimate objects, this
estrangement producing perversion of function, and all its


attendant evil consequences. The following sketch of character
was written from my first impressions of Mrs. Britten, after
having heard her in the Temperance Hall. T was closely near
her while she spoke, and had a complete view of her head,
and physique in general, while she lingered for a few minutes
on the floor of the hall after the lecture, and can
therefore guarantee the correctness of my diagnosis up to
the measure of my capacity. lam guided in my deductions
solely from physiological, phrenological, and psychological
evidences in my portraiture of her character. Sly sketch is
based upon the principles of the science of cerebral
physiology, which explains and describes the normal and
abnormal manifestations of the functions of the organs of the
brain. Mrs. Britten’s physique is transcendent in balance of
vital organism, and in rare excellence of temperament. I seldom
find such grandeur of physical power, combined with elements
so rich in mental life, elastic in action, enduring in quality,
electrical in effects, and so wonderfully potent in the execution
of intellectual work. I can call up the names of very
few who have impressed me so "forcibly with the power
,of their magnetism, or who have charmed me so much by the
variety and excellence of their intellectual gifts. The force by
which I was charged while under the influence of Mrs.
Britten’s orations was entrancing, overwhelming. Mrs. Biddons,
Madame Ristori, Madame Grisi, and Jenny Lind have each, in
their separate walks, charmed millions by the fire of their
genius. They have left impressions upon the minds of
recipients of this fire—impressions which have taken root in
their souls, and fructified, like evergreens, dividing life, as it
were, into two distinct periods, —the life before and the life
after having come into contact with the electrifying power of
genius. No mind elevated one step above the vulgar can ever
forget the impressions made by the great orator, actor, or
songstress ; no one, on the same principle, who heard Mrs,
Britten on her first Sunday evening lecture in Sydney, can
ever forget the rapture of pure intellectual admiration which
they experienced while sitting under the spell of her eloquence
and power. I say, without the least taint of exaggeration, that
not one of the great names mentioned ever sustained
a greater effort than that sustained by Mrs. Britten in henfest
grand lecture in the Victoria Theatre. In, tragedy, PkT in
grand opera, the leading actors are occasionally relieved
during the' performance of great parts, which demand the
exercise of sublime force of passion and sentiment, and which
tax, to a painful extent, the great capacity of their minds; but
Mrs. Britten had no relief, no pause, even for a second, during
the delivery of one of the grandest discourses ever spoken
5


from stage, pulpit, or platform. She held, for an hour and
forty minutes, her vast audience in breathless suspense, in
perfect subjection to her magnetism, and never stumbled, nor
tripped, nor wavered, nor lessened in the least degree her most
emphatic, eloquent, thrilling, unbroken, and harmonious
utterance. She is gifted with the highest genius for tragedy,
which would have made her fortune in a short time, had it
been early and entirely directed to the interpretation of the
tragic Muse. Her action is magnificent, her delivery almost
perfect. In clearness, correctness, - emphasis, and force of
expression, she is superior to any lecturer that ever traversed
this side of the world. I have no* remembrance of having
listened to her superior in the old world, though for twenty
years I had advantages (of which I availed myself) Of hearing
the grandest oratorical talent of the times—Gladstone, Bright,
J. W. Fox (the great anti-corn-law agitator), Gough (the great
temperance lecturer), Gavazzi (the eloquent convert from the
Catholic to the Protestant faith); —all these celebrities, and
hundreds more, have passed under my review. Each has some
point superior to Mrs. Britten, and some greatly her superiors
in general mental gifts, yet none of them equal her in
completeness of long-sustained and perfectly unbroken utter-
ance. I care not whether, she speaks from memory or
from inspiration; as it regards my argument concerning
intellectual gifts as instruments of her power, and as
regards her delivery, and the force of its effects in her best
utterances, she stands unrivalled. There are some defects
which I may refer to, which, to the true reader of the natural
language of the passions and sentiments of the mind,
are in a measure disagreeable. There is some vehemence
and destructive sound in her voice at times which ill accords
with her profession of angelic love. There is too strong an
evidence of proud self-conscious power, which cannot be reconciled
with her assumption of divine inspiration, for that would impart
a prevailing manifestation of a consciousness in the creature of the
infinite distance between her and her Creator. There is also at
times expressed a scorn of weaknesses and failings which she
must know are the common lot of mankind, and should be
dealt with gently by one who claims the' voices of good spirits to
interpret her meaning, by the intonation of the truth of divine
instigation. You lose sight 6f these defects, in a great measure,
by the continual flow of her utterance, and the fertility of her
clever powers of illustration. While speaking, her fine eye and
eloquent hand seem charged with spiritual power and intelli-
gence to enforce and interpret a diviner meaning than language
can convey. The natural language of the fire and power of
genius is everywhere expressed in her manner, attitude, and


enunciation. These qualities of oratory are seen in full force
when she seems to think it necessary to defend her favourite
doctrine of Spiritism from the attacks of those who revile it,
while they (as she says) fatten upon the proceeds of evangelical
gymnastics, which they cunningly perform for the enslave-
ment of the minds of the ignorant. Her satire is
withering when she denounces the conduct of open
enemies to Spiritualism. It is a grand intellectual, and,
even in some measure, a moral treat, to listen to her, were it
not for the conviction that she is either acting a part, or that,
as regards Spiritism, she is labouring under a delusion. There
is a grandeur, almost rising to the sublime, in the expression
of her wonderful and triumphant self-esteem. It is soul-
exalting to witness the completeness of her self-assurance
her marvellously self-sustaining self-possession, which never
shows the least diminution, but is triumphantly self-asserting,
even in answering questions put by her auditors,
which puzzle the philosopher, and cause the truly
pious and sincerely religious to veil their faces in
confusion, and cover themselves with self-abasement.
Combativeness, self-esteem, and the fiery and revolu-
tionary power of destructiveness, wielded—as they are—
by intellect, form pictures of psychological phenomena as rare
as they are interesting to the student of human nature, and
which are wonderful in their results upon the minds of a mixed
auditory. These gifts of self-sustaining energy impart amazing
vigour to her delivery, and call up in the minds of some of her
audience sentiments of faith, reverence, and admiration. The
most surprising feature of her character, in a psychological
point of view, is that onegrand burst of eloquence, doselyfollowed
by others equally spirit-stirring, does not in the least disturb
the grand balance of her powers, or the complete harmony of
her utterance. No pitch of excitement, however high in
emotional extacy or mental fervency, can disturb, in the
smallest degree, the even balance of her faculties. She
can, notwithstanding all her fervour, enter most minutely
into all the descriptive accuracy essential for the detail of
scientific technicalities, and though her premises may be wrong,
she has wonderful fertility of illustration to prove they are right,
even when there is not a shade of truth in her reasoning. She is
so seemingly filled with earnestness that the multitude look
amazed and confounded, while her intellectual auditors
are as much astonished at her almost miracle of memory
as they are bewildered by her successful acting in the
part she has resolved to play. Her brain is consider-
ably above the average in size, and especially deep,
broad, and rounded at the region of the perceptive and constructive
7


powers. From th« opening of her ear to the centre of the lower
portion of her forehead she is remarkably deep, like unto her
little predecessor—Walker, and very like the Rev. Charles
Clarke, whose head I hare manipulated, and which measures in
the region referred to half-an-inch deeper than the average of
heads of highly intellectual men. This depth and fulness,
roundness and breadth, is the index of perceptive observation
and memory, and when I add the extraordinary development of
Mrs. Britten’s language to the faculties of marvellous perceptive
power, I at once perceive the secret of her success as a lecturer,
and can account for all the phenomena which she displays in
connection with her power and versatility of intellect. Being a
mistress of language, her word-paintings are astonishing to the
uncultured, and pleasing to those of high culture, and as long as
they cannot, or think they cannot, prove her pretentions a deception,
they look on with admiration, and attend, night after night, for
pleasure, just as they would a play, the plot of which they know
to be fabulous. Great individuality, imitation, language,
comparison, and self-reliance enable her to throw her whole soul
and energy into the character she is describing, or the scene
she is pourtraying; hence her capacity to carry her audience
with her, especially as there is never a break in her discourse
which can be used, as a period for .criticism or reflection. She
is mistress of every shade of the meaning of words, and has such
a vast vocabulary at her command, that she bewilders as much
by her powers of amplification as she pleases by the accuracy of
her expression. She perfectly understands the pathos of natural
language, which is a special gift of all great actors,
hence her power to give the fullest effect to all the
colours, tints, and shades of words. Breadth, clearness, quickness,
correctness, and strength of perception enable her to acquire
and impart general knowledge. Of course the organ of
language plays the leading part in expression and fluency, and
when I have summed up the group of her special gifts, I see no
difficulty in arriving at correct notions of her exceedingly
intellectual character, nor of perceiving that she requires
nO aid from spirits to display her world-famed talents.
In her specialities she is superior to all the women I
have ever heard; her faculties take a wide and versa-
tile range, yet she is not by nature gifted with talent for
profound research, in consequence of having only a very moderate
development of the organ of causality. She is what I said she
was, after having heard her first lecture, viz.,—A. lady who could,
by virtue of extraordinary memory, energy, dignity, and language,
deliver a lecture upon any subject to which she gave her
undivided attention for a short period. On first glancing at her
intellectual development I told two members of Parliament and
8


others that such was my conviction, and though they smiled
infcredulously, I observed enough in ' their expression of counten-
ance to convince me that they were Of my opinion, As I have read
two; ahd heard nine of Mrs. Britteh’s discourses, and have ever
felt the admiration due to her splendid talents, I confess to the
experience Of great moral disappointment at her persistency in
still claiming inspiration from the angels, against all the rules of
evidence to the contrary which are witnessed by those who are
critical upon'her manner and utterances. We now briefly call
upon psychology to account, in some measure, for her belief in
spiritualism ahd in the reality of her inspiration. According
t» her own confession, she has for twenty years been in the
habit Of invoking the aid of the spirits in her public addresses.
Large numbers of the' people havihg believed in her, and
bestowed upon her* assurances of their faith and approval;
she, , as the recipient of this homage, though ‘ doubting
at' ’first, may ‘ have, after , some years of even
persuaded herself to confide in her own power of inspiration—in
her capacity to become filled with the Divine afflatus, - Habit, as
it were, superinduces a kind of second nature, and we all know
how prone men and women are, who become objects of public
admiration, to look upon themselves as superior beings, with
whom God and the angels hold sweet communion. Gratified
vanity and selfesteem, —and even veneration, when perverted-
combine to superinduce a feiud of self-worship ; and this is all the
more marked when multitudes sound the praises of pretenders
lo Divine inspiration. When we witness the infatuation of those
believers in Spiritualism who sit spell-bound tinder an influence)
which proceeds from her marvellous powers of memory, peroeption,
and expression, we need not wonder if she is confirmed jjjf iheM ex-
presSitmshffSiiwiiri her power,.that she Really iaj ih her morbid fancy,
tinder the delusion that God knd the angels directly
her mltflstrstSdns in the manner in which She tlmy 'Tl%e
enljStfpgnf ’thei sympathy of the religious sentiments of mankind
ih by invoking the Divine blessings tends .to forward
tfie business of the evening, and renders' the minds
of her’auditors passive, peaceful, subjective, and sympathetic.
The these influences affords her opportunity lor perfectly
concentrated thought upon her subject. This religious miwC at
fhe bf proceedings, 'ls a grand stroke of J p6lidy,‘an,il
thduglf it speaks little for the consciences of the and
therrassistatitS, it evidences a knowledge of the weak side of
h'umaU' ilhturel which they skilfully turn to thnif advantage, ‘ and
Wittipiijb' which' the whole scheme would fall to the ground. It is
this religious element in the masses which is played upon, almost
at wifi; by the cunning Of the priest as well as by the art of’the
inspirational medium. It requires but slight acquaintance with
9


the science of physiognomy to read in the faces of the votaries
of Spiritism the symbols of mental dulness or superstitious
credulity.,
one thing more remarkable .than another in these falsely-named
addresses ijt is this, viz.,—that there never was actor
or actress, lecturer or preacher, more consciously, eagerly, and
hpnt hpqn success iq their efforts than was Mrs- Britten
lipbh every 'occasion on have witnessed her performances.
JJf wasa fine ' j>sycltologicai study, and as amusing as it was
instructive, to witness the conscious efforts she
made.to read and to utter correctly, the characters which were
written on the leaves of her brain. This was specially
true aq<l painfully evident, on the occasion of her two hours’
unbroken discourse upon Joan of Arc. During the simple
delivery of the narrative there was an unusual monotony in her
tones, under which ‘ I nearly fell fast asleep, but during the last
half-hour of her discourse,, while she recounted the various
evidence of Spiritual gifts bestowed-upon her heroine, she was
literally, grand in manner and; in matter, and so evidently
conscious'that she was elev^tiqg.Spiritualism while exalting the
heroine qf her.’ story, that Iwr whole frame, from eye to foot,
testified tp the in ward consciousness of satisfaction arising from
the knowledge that the acting of her very extraordinary part was
as pleasihg to herself in its perfect accomplishment, as it was
astonishing to her listeners. It is because I see, feel, and know
these palpable truths, that I regret Mrs. Britten’s efforts have
not the sanction of my moral-sentiments. I cannot commend as
truth that which I know to be false, and when I see the Bev.
Charles Clarke stand the test of public approval, and reeeive,
support, almost equal to that accorded to Mrs. Britten, without
pretension to spiritual inspiration, I would counsel Mrs. Britten
to throw off the mask', and appear in her .true character, as one
of the most gifted of her sex in memory, language, and eloquence
tbftt.thils, or any other age, has ever witnessed. Mrs. Britten fs,
In sense, as a speaker and orator, the superior of the highly
gifted gentleman to whom I have referred,'and! holdit to be a
slander and libel upon the dignit\, self-respect, and intellectual
ol her own nature, to ascribe to Spirits from without, or
from beyond herself, that which inwardly belongs to her by virtue,
of tie ten talents bestowed upon her by the Creator* whose
blessing shaeloquently invokes. It will, no doubt, bq a hard
teak-to renounce ,her claims .to Spiritual inspiration, hut she is
oapable of noble efforts in. a right as .well as powerful influence
ill cause.; tiereiqre she may, if shej desires, hopefully rely
newresolvestqplaoehonestsimple trust
m exeroise of her intellectual functions. Exactly


one year ago I tendered similar advice to the so-called trance-
lecturer Walker, when I told him to endeavour to lecture
■without closing his eyes, and ‘ without affectation of being
contro.led by Spirits. He expressed Ms hope that he might soon
be able to follow my advice, and added that it was very-
unpleasant to know that three-fourths of. his audience branded
him as an impostor. It is easy to' learn bad habits, but not so
easy to overcome them. In Mrs. Britten's case, however, the
task would be comparatively easy, because of her strength of
courage, volition, and self-esteem, and also because of the aid to
to improved action afforded by a clearly perceptive and readily
imitative intelligence. My mother having been a public leoturess
for forty years, I can lovingly and respectfully refer to lady
lecturers, and with much pride I claim to have heard her speak
for three hours before nearly a thousand people, and during the
entire delivery of her oration, without note, she held her
audience in rapt attention, broken only by bursts of general
approval. When I tell you that her. subject was “ Civil and
religions liberty, and the removal of the bishops' 'febjm rtbft -Hooso
of Lords,’’ you can form some, notion of the boldness of her
mind and the character of her intellect. I further tell you that
seven years ago, when she was seventy-three years of age, she
lectured to .five hundred people, and that, too, only a few days
before her death. You may gather from these circumstances, and
from the fact that I have for nearly forty years been daily
engaged in psychological studies, that my strictures upon Mrs.
Britten, and upon Spiritualism, have not been uttered without
deliberation and perfect moral evidence of their truth. Mrs,
Hamilton was poetical, rhapsodical, and impassioned, but neither so
talented in memory, nor so cultivated in speech, as Mrs, Britten.
Mrs. Hamilton did appear inspired, because she was so carried away
by her subject as to almost lose her individuality, and sometimes
she Was scarcely conscious of the presence of objects, around Tier,;
but Mrs. Britten, on the contrary, is never without a directing
intelligence in all she does, even to the adjustment of her skirt,
which she manages with elegance and adroitness, at the same
time with a cunning manipulation, so as to prevent her audience
from perceiving the act. Even in the highest flights of fancy,in
the strongest excitement of impassioned and vehement orutpry,
she moves with perfect balance and unruffled V,|?he
is as skilfully -conscious of how to suit the action tp sie
addresses ah she is grandly self-assured and triumphantly rpady iu
her answers to ijuestioris put by her audience. I woul4 nct,!hbweyeri
lower ' the lowest of her Sydney auditors, ejcpnt confjlrmed
Spiritists, so very low as to say that they believe jm her
inspiration. Even the Spiritualists themselves, when questioned
upon the subject, will give evasive answers, excepting the few


who may be supposed to have suffered from cerebral derangement.
Some of the leading men among them openly confess jthat they do pot
e in her inspifatibn. They say they give her, support upon the
tWo-fold ground that her sentiments are. liberal and in accord
with their own, and that her denunciations of the old fabric of
o’flhodbxy are calculated to do much good to society. Her
, antagonism.to the old faith, splendidly expressed, never fails to
carry her audience vtfith her. This is the grand secret of her
success ; without this her other gifts would ' fail to secure a
continuance of support. In declamation and in irony she is
withering, destructive, and triumphant Ido not see njy, way
clear, with all .the courtesy I can command, to make an exception
in Mts. Brittehls favour ; therefore, I boldly assert that luck
of healthy reasoning power, or weakness of conscience—either the
former or the latter—is all I can offer in explanation of the
inspirational lecturer’s conduct in her claim to inspirational
_ assistance. I exposed Walker completely, though the public took
"little iiiteiest m the matter; and T now challenge all the
Spiritualists in Sydfaey to discuss the subject fairly and openly,
and as a start in the right direction, to prove my courage and
ahhWjcf any questions put by Spiritualists or
ptpefs, ' they afford ■ me, latitude similar to that
which was afforded to' Mrs. ‘Britten, t have a'few warm
sbcjalltietids aniong ' Spiritists,—eager seekers after truth; men
religious arid good in .character, but,' dissatisfied with orthodox
teachings of eternal torments ; they therefore fly to Spiritualism
as a system more generous and less though they are
as much Opposed to the claims of Spiritism as a source of
religiori as all Sensible men are. Mysterious tappings and'dancing
tables .were just the kind of phenomena likely to set Mrs.
Britten’s faculties in motion, and being Unable to account for
these effects, she naturally concluded that they were effected by
supernatural power. Had her brain been more highly gifted
with |the power of causality, she would have perceived the incon-
ascribing to angelic power the ludicrousness of the
phenomena Connected with ."the early history of Spiritism. Had
her organs of faith been larger, they would have imparled that
happy evidence of things unseen that would have left her intellect
free tb take' higher and nobler flights than those connected with
the usual phenomena Of, Spiritism.. Physical and moral science,
Haturaf philosophy, and natural theology, would have afforded
for the happy exercise op her intellectual faculties.
ItilTtbtfi'e jtoikbsilbp pf gifts'for these higher studies,'and to
great pipWer Of narrative and delivery that she is interesting in
her discourses upon Spiritualism,! Of course, she 'mfist find great
pleasure in the exCrcihedf her talents, just as we fipdeiajoy
ment in their manifestation. Her gratified love ‘of approba


tion and self-esteem afford her great delight under the perfect
confidence that ghe can always command the attention and
admiration of multitudes of people. The evidence of this power
has of course great influence upon her audience, and enhances
the delight experienced by those who fully appreciate her ex-
traordinary intellectual capacity as manifested in her discourse.
Permit me most respectfully to ask you and Spiritists, if there
, are any present, the following grave and important question
Axe ail ,the spirit offerings of love, charity, meekness, magnan-
imity, and martyrdom, which' have blessed and enriched
humanity through human instrumentality to be ascribed to the
influence and powers of unseen disembodied spirits T This is
the .leading, doctrine of Spiritism, -therefore, I say, perish the
doctrine so utterly debasing to roan, who is universally acknow-
ledged to be the glory of creation. You, whose affec-
tions are not perverted by the delusions of Spiritism
. know too much of the sweet realities of your spiritual
nature to debase them by embracing a doctrine so contrary to
fact, so monstrously outrageous to the dignity of man. With
affection pure, and the oil of'benevolence burning brightly,
you feel it unnecessary to consult disembodied spirits regard-
ing your duty to man. With enlightened faith and hope, our
spirits mount heavenward withbut the aid of angel-wings of
Spiritists’ fancy to sustain you in your flight. You
men who revere the name and virtue of true woman,
and gratefully acknowledge the Creator’s goodness ip giving
you so sweet a sVeetener of life’s felicities, are in no.unseeming
haste to part with her in exchange for a vague faheiful some-
thing or nothing called an angel. The man who has
ever ' fully realized the purity and rapture of true
love for woman cannot conceive of anything holier or
more divine, because it is the acme of human joy, it is the
holy of holies to the spirit, it is a foretaste of heaven upon
garth. You may, perhaps, agree with me in this, that it is
fin evidence of an unhealthy state of the feelings and of
perverted imagination, when men become over anxious
in their desires to realize a material intercourse with
materialized spirits in another world. I firmly believe that if
the organs of the conjugal and domestic affections
of unhappy Spiritists were sufficiently examined, there would
bo found strong evidence that all was not right, just as it may,
with strong, colour of truth, be sa’d tiiat those- of orthodox
belief, whose trust in God is .weak, have either .been blighted
in affection or blasted in hope, or hereditarily cursed with an
unhappy constitution of body and mind. TJntil we discover
constitutional and circumstantial causes for aberrations so
and painful as .are .witnessed in decided cases of


Spiritualistic delusion, we need not expect to have much real
light thrown upon the subject. This argnmont applies only
directly to those whose manner, appearance, practices, and
extraordinary visions attest that they have resigned their
volition and rensoh into the control of the delusion- tfte
purity, depth, ancl spirituality of maternal love
cannot be exceeded by anyttdng on earth, and 'we. are jeft to
Jail back upon woman"s nature, purified and enlightened, as the
fovmtairi from which we draw our purest notions of spiritual
love, for ipiiii ofthe spirit pi jWliich we speak when w « refer to
elected exercise of materruM affection. I believe, fronj my
long experience of the finer sentiments of woman, that there is
not a herd thy, happy, religions mother in the world, who hap
perfect faith in God, who is not fully prepared to trust the
everlasting weal of her departed darling to His infinite love.
This she is enabled to do behause she realises in hesreeif the
prineijife of divine love,, Since it is only through
the medium of the affections' and sentiments, enlightened
by reason, that we can understand the love of Gqd ;
I say that as this is the cpso„ there is not a truly
loying in thh worid, is mad upon Spiritism, or
upon something equally unholy, who would exchange the deaf
partner of her earthly heaven, for the highest archangel in the
spheres of the ttiost extravagant of inspirational imaginings.
This lohging, unhealthy, craving to leave the earth and all its
aecompattjuhg pains, penalties, joys, and moral responsibilities,
to be with the angels, is the most degrading exhibition, and
most unhappy feature of Our still unredeemed humanity. This
frailty and ungrateful manifestation of our nature is ever seen
in its most violent form during periods of re vival mania, whether
orthodox or spiritualistic. This trait of htttnan, nature proves
clearly that the divine sentiineuts of religion have not yet
assumed their legitimate and holy purposes-jn the minds o|
the multitude. Hope, faith, charity, justice, reverence, and
brotherly love, will transform this earth into a paradise of love
to God, and of peace and goodwill to men. The comradeship
of the good and the wise, acting under divine law, is the most
perfect heaven which can be conceived; all craving beyond this
which makes men unhappy, is disease, whether it is seen in the
orthodox believer, or witnessed in the feverish unrest of
miserable Sjpiritists. Men find women, who pass their time onl,
rivaling jsipmt comibupioh around dancing tables, or in other
questionable forms, had better look to their brains, to dis-
cover in time the cause of their mental disorders. If they
desire a cure, apd long for a taste of pure spirituality,: |ei them
minister to the poor and the sick, let them practically cultivate
the faculties which promote human happiness, and increase


human knowledge, and their reward will be certain in the dis-
covery that this world teems with blessings which have only
to be wisely gathered, and generously scattered for the happi-
■ ness of all. Mrs. Britten knows the truth of these sentiments
as well as 1 do, and when it suits her to focalize and express
the gems of Christian literature, and to paint a heavenly
picture with the colors and tints she borrows from the Old
and New Testaments, and from eminent writers she is a minister
of things divine, and a complete mistress of eloquence. But
when all that ever has been of good since the world began
must bend on knee, to Spiritism I cry—hold ! this is more than
enough ! and I tell Mrs. Britten frankly that she taxes my for-
bearance too much by aggressively forcing her hobgoblin of inspira-
tional Spiritism ,to the front. Mrs. Britten condescendingly
acknowledges that Christ was good,- that his precept of returning
good for evil was the right thing, but she points .to the present
low state of religion and morals, among men, and asks : What
bah : the Christian religion done for the world during the last
eighteen hundred years ? I answer that question by asking an-
other. Our lecturess says that spirits of departed saints have
hovered around for ages. They have been watching oyer us,
guiding us, inspiring us to the performance of all the great deeds
we have accomplished. If this is true, what were the lazy spirits
.thinking of to leave the world so'long without the spiritual
guidance of Mrs. Britten, and her inspired companions ? Surely
if Christianity is to be taunted and condemned for not improving
the world faster than it has done, as surely, according to the
doctrine of the Spiritualists, we may charge the whole fraternity
of the ghostly spirits with a shaibeful neglect of duty, and may
charge Mrs. Britten’s own guiding angel with remissness fpr not
having begun earlier to initiate the hew religion. If, according
to fiuur, inspired lady, these our suffering, and
left us still to suffer, without spiritual assistance, can we;
do otherwise than grieve, either on account of lack of logic in the ’
mind of the lecturer, or lack of conscience to direct thatmind
aright. My auditors will learn after a little more study of the 1
sciences of phrenology and psychology, that faculties called into
abnormal action'by strong pressure of necessity, by powerful cir-
cumstenceSj have a-tendency to take on a njorbid,action, which
render*-It hard for theirnubject to j
through the distorted mediu m tarising from ' this abnormal
action ; and this state is quite compatible 'with great
talent' and.- great ngxaltaition ‘ and
I frankly confess that I was entranced oy her delivery, and
sympathised with many; of the random shots of truth which she
uttered. I applauded honestly every sennihent which was not
leavened with Spiritualistic prejudice end ptide, and profanity


and bitterness of antagonism to sceptics. When I, however, ask
myself whether Mrs. Britten’s performances have augmented my
faith in Spiritism, I emphatipally answer; —No ! I feel assured
that whet the corapararively occult sciences of physiologv,
phrenology, and psychology become, in time, less obscure, and so
far advanced as to form living revelations of the truth of the
science of man, then it will be clearly demonstrated that
Spiritism, is ah abortion, which will be relegated to the
dark vaults of. ignorance add superstition, from whence it has
proceeded.' Even were the Spiritists able to prove the existence
of the ghostly visitors of Whom they 1 loudly prate, we would
exercise our God-given gifts of wit, reason, and conscience, and
trif then gbosteiiips to theiri iepth, wheh they did appear, that;
as we know 'that HeaVOn is in the mind, and that this earth
could be made,a Paradise by ' the proper use of man’s moral and
religious faculties, we have no desire to shirk our responsibilities
here,, bht wish tb remain ‘ fif hi in fighjahg ' the battle of life
manmlly, ’wiihbtit pethiiftihg. Spirits of any kind to rob ns 'of the
victery. We .have peffbct fifth in Gbd’S infinite power and
goodness, hence we Would tell these epirifs, however high their
pretensions, that none of their vain allurements to bribe us to
barter the real for the doubtful could in any way estrange ns
from. p.or perfect trust in the Creator. Eveh the inspirational
seductions of a Mrs. Britten cannot move us an inch down the
path which leads to the destruction of individual responsibility
and {mre Spirituality. Our inspirational lecturer confesses to the
existence of the power of evil spirits to move us to wrongdoing,
even after having tried their Worst to themselves and society*
whiletheySojourned ph terth; theref6rri.l i beg to part company
with the Inspired hctttrepd;- upon .this 1 SOopttht, and tell her*
plainly; . that libels Obd man % ihe assertion »of such
a damnable doctrine as this,: She Said oh /Priday evening, in
answer friJih; the Sudteiiee regarding the gift of
foreign tengueS in rH^dtjifeSi 1 the spirits l Wetedhwiseiltf acting
upon in this 1 , bxoOph-ih caste in Which dhe
Jangi»a^e‘wai npdriritodd ‘ thbse I to-wbdin’it was addressed.
This Seims' a tenable' answer,, blit; What 1 abbutf.the*faot that in
this instenCe. we are called upon to helitee UK Britten iritther
tjjan.the' 'bf bbfarse, if fiteepted,' hi *to 'upset ithe f
hySteifi/ '
ip’ flfts flesh-r—claims tothe Spirite right- Who, then, aro we
to ov! fhe spirits r : Eor 1 my part <1 should i
trijsttej ' 7 io‘ dpinifflh', bf c -the ;! *unWite j spirits(if I 'eoiildl
ppteibijP %as ttiem) : rathteHhah to s Mcst ! Britten/>f>ddf (felt'i
thevdobt?/
of natdfe, and has hot hid practical ejtporienee xrf the manage
ment of affairs in the ether world. I submit that it is a most


gross and offensive piece of presumption upon her part to dictate
to our ministering angels of the unseen world as to their modus
operandi in guiding the affairs of mortals. I would have asked
several questions, with a view of exposing the audacious egotism
of our fair inspirationalist, but I refrained from Calling forth
further manifestations of her profane pretensions and offensive
self-assurance. Besides, I had no desire to encounter the fierce
antagonism in store for me at the -hands of the great manager of
the most pretentious sensational movement of the day,
the Hon. John Bowie Wilson. Who' has ever heard of any
great or transcendent good which these spirits have ever
accomplished ? Who has not heard of multitudes of great deeds
performed by spirits which have inhabited, and still inhabit,
mortal bodies of flesh and blood ? These spirits of Spiritism,
if ever heard or seen, are surely damned spirits, who come to
us in such ugly and questionable shapes, as not only to push
us from our stools, but to drive us into asylums as incurable
lunatics. Good men and women afford tests in daylight of
their spirit power, but these goblins, damned of Spiritism, hug
the darkness, and from their dismal hiding-places gloat upon
human misery, which we are taught to believe they desire to
relieve. How can we reconcile a system so inoperative for
good, and so pregnant with evil, to our ideas of common sense?
How audacious the attempt to lure us from Christ by a doctrine
so covered by the darkness of. superstition, and so heavily laden
with the vain imaginings and conceits of men ? Are we to
rob the glorious spirits of our race, the pillars of the state, the
salt of the earth, that so-called lying spirits may bear the palm
in the great work of the world’s redemption from ignorance,
sin, and suffering ? God forbid that Spiritism, the theme of
the wild delusionist, should be set up in our midst in the shape
of a religion, instead of the God-spirit of the only true Saviour
of men, who taught the divine doctrine of forgiveness, the
doctrine of the returning of good for evil, which if truly taught
and faithfully practised, would leave this fair earth, morally
speaking, without spot or blemish! How grotesque in impu-
dent assurance inspirational lecturers become when they try to
appear solemnly in earnest in their pretensions to unfold the
mysteries of the other world, but there is more than one touch
of the ludicrous in the scene when the most talented of lecturers,
with an assurance worthy of an angel of the lower regions, tells
us that she kfi'ows better what the angels should say and do
than they do themselves, who have crossed the bourne from
which it is said no traveller returns. It is in these ebullitions
of abused self-esteem that I perceive the necessity to correct
and instruct Mrs. Britten and the Spiritists. They owe me many
thanks for generously avoiding to take advantage of opportunities


for the public exposure of Mrs. Britten’s false logic, and her
profane assertions of divine inspiritation in matters which she well
knew were but truisms repeated by her for the hundredth time.
If there is meaning in the word profane, it is profanity to talk of in-
spiration in connection with Mrs. Britten’s addresses. Perhaps the
word sacrilege is the only one that can fully convey the idea of
the violence committed in the name of religion against the sacred-
ness of spiritual truth, by her pretentions to inspiration. Nothing
can exceed in spiritual arrogance the claims made of divine
assistance on behalf of spiritualistic mediums and lecturers. If
Mrs. Britten is not clearly mentally cognizant of her inconsistency
in claiming to be inspired, I am driven to account for this
psychological defect in her character by the influence of the very
abnormal circumstances in which she has placed herself by practices
and associations, which always, if long continued, tend directly to
the perversion of conscience, and to the limitation of the exercise
of reason. Too much attention to the supernatural which? is
inevitable in the study and practice of Spiritism, cannot leave the
mind or conscience in a wholesome state, hence it is that the
further the victims travel the decline which debases reason,
the more audacious are their claims put forth to the
possession of a spiritual or supermundane power. It is utterly
incompatible with healthy mental functions to become too much
absorbed in the occult and mysterious, and I could afford you
examples innumerable in the old faith, and also many in the new,
which prove the danger to reason and conscience, by an almost
total giving up of the energies of the soul to the study of the
marvellous, especially as it regatds matters appertaining to theology
and religion. I cannot, on behalf of Mrs. Britten herself, conclude
that “ she is so weak” as to be unable to perform the common
functions of intellect without the officious assistance of disembodied
spirits, or the aid of the angels. I know her to be grandly gifted
in body and mind ; therefore I know that grand effects must
follow from the normal action of her faculties. Even with average
advantages she would shine in intellect, and when I see the
symbols of special faculties of memory, perception, language,
imagination, and comparison stand out in full relief upon her
majestic head, I clearly realise the innate power of her natural
gifts, and feel sorrowful (even while I admire) that these gifts are
tested by a false, issue, —that natural capacity is degraded that
spirits may be exalted—that the angel, woman, whose mission is,
under proper culture, to transform this earth into a heaven, is
debased to the character of a mere talking-machine, to gratify the
officiousness, or whim, or fancy, of some restless, spirit, who, no
doubt, if the truth were told, had quite enough to do to attend to
her own business in any other world to which she might belong.


I believe that Mrs. Britten has sincerely tried to bejieve in the
doctrine which she preaches. Her’s is an analytical intellect,
naturally and powerfully perceptive, practically experimental,
scientific, and a true seeker after the real and substantial,
therefore all the more likely than most persons to seek for physical
or tangible demonstrations of the truth of another world, and of a
life beyond. Mrs. Britten must be aware, from her extensive
reading in psychological science, that the very strength of her
perceptions, heightened in action by a lively imagination, render
her liable to see visions, and enable her,, under certain conditions
of body and mind, to realise in imagination, or to print, as it
were, upon her brain, the forms, colours, and all the attributes of
the objects she desires to see. The very force of her scepticism
would assist to make her believe in the existence of what she most
illogically calls disembodied spirits. This may to the uninitiated
seem paradoxical, but it is clearly descriptive of mental states to
which those persons are subject who struggle hard in their very
unbelief to rend the veil which separates the seen from., the
unseen—to unravel the great mystery of the future life—to realise
the personal presence of God and his angels. Perhaps I may be
accused of vanity in making reference to Mrs. Hamilton, as I
have done; but, seeing that the school in which I have been bred
since boyhood has afforded favourable opportunities fo* the study
of the subject to which your attention is called in this evening’s
lecture, you may pardon me for introducing my mother’s name;
knowing the manner of Mrs. Hamilton’s study before she
attempted to lecture, —how she concentrated her mind’s best
powers to enable her to conquer *her subject succes^Rilly—how
absent in mind she often seemed from the intensely inverted
action of her faculties —looking inward rather than outward-
reading, as it were, over and over again, the lessfcn she was
stamping upon her brain. I mention this mode of my mother’s
preparation for public lecturing as ap illustration which applies to
the manner practiced by many piblic speakers, and which all,
either more or less, undergo. It must be admitted that I have
had superior opportunities of learning something of the varied
conditions of body and mind essential to verbal memory, and to
power of delivery; also as it regards the utterance, of matter
which flows into the mind under a sublimated action of the
faculties from pressure of high excitement from without. Under
this pressure there is an exaltation and sublimation of the
faculties which appear like inspiration, but of which I have not
found one trace in either the practices of Mr. Walker, or in the
higher intellectual performances of Mrs. Britten. All they did
was deeply preconceived, and pre-written upon the brain, therefore
totally independent of and separated from inspiration, or spiritual
control. Under the dictates of this truth lam bound to declare


that the practices of these performers are as dishonouring to
themselves as they are hurtful to society. I denounce the whole
system, as far as Sydney performances are concerned, as a libel
upon religion and upon the divine constitution of man. If the
magnificently gifted lady would only direct her powers to the
pressing duties of life, as she finds it here, leaving the mystery of
hereafter to the disposal of the God she professes to worship, she
would employ her talents to much higher uses, and reap a higher
reward of happiness than she can possibly now reap by the abuse
of her God-given gifts. If she exercised perfect faith in the
perfect fulness of creative goodness and power, she would find it
go well with her soul, without feverish unrest about things of
another world. There is another aspect of extraordinary folly in
the conduct of Spiritists, when they talk with sneering scorn about
the pretensions to infallibility Of the Pope, while they literally run
mad with spiritual extacy over the revelations of dancing tables
and the mysterious alphabetical communications of spirit-rappings.
These psychological disturbances might be amusing were-it not
for the fact of the moral and intellectual degradation by which
they are accompanied, and the chronic aberrations by which they
are followed. To sneer at “ clerical gymnastics,” and rejoice
over dancing tables, may be perfectly congruous to the intellect of
the Spiritist, but can only excite commiseration in the mind of the
generous philosopher. On the plea of delusion, therefore, I make
allowance for what is offensive to the moral sense in the system of
Spiritism. Yet I cannot help grieving for the woeful abuse of
the great gifts of Mrs. Britten, , which are unhappily, yet
successfully, forwarding the cause of Spiritism in Sydney and
other places. I cannot help thinking that some tricksters behind
the scenes assist to keep the game of Spiritism alive in Sydney.
It is well known that the multitude are much influenced by the
appearance of respectability which attaches to many who pretend
to hold this faith. I know, from conversation with some of the
most intelligent and well-to-do people among the Spiritists, that
they do not believe in the trance state of Walker, nor in the
inspirational state of Mrs. Britten, yet in their hatred of orthodox
doctrines, and in their admiration of some of the free-thought
sentiments of these lecturers, they allow a lie to go forth to
the public as a trujth. Is it necessary for the salvation of
the world that a new religion should be established upon a
falsehood ? Can we respect those men who, to destroy one
faith in which they do not believe, insist on forcing upon
the public that which they know to be false ? In defence
of the common rights and the common sense of the
common people who have not much leisure to properly examine
the subject, I protest loudly against the untruthful conduct of the
men who say it matters not whether she is inspired or not, as long


as she speaks the truth. I bewail the effects of Spiritism upon the
unthinking and the credulous, and do not believe that these men
who patronise a sytem which is based upon a lie are less morally
guilty than the trickster who assists the impostor to defraud the
public. I say shame upon those who aid the system by acquiesing
in falehood and confusion to those who know that they are
enriching themselves by an intellectual trick to the injury of the
credulous and the destruction of the weak. I now approach that
portion of my subject which affords at least negative, if not
positive proof, of the utter fraud of spiritism as far as it has been
indicated by its professors and performers in Sydney. I call
upon you to attend carefully to the following description of
character which 1 give of Mr. Thomas Walker, of Lancashire,
before he appeared as a trance lecturer, in the Victoria Theatre,
on Sunday evenings, and before I had received any intelligence
of the existence of such a man. The following sketch was given
three days before the delivery of his first trance lecture on Sunday
evening. I examined his head in the presence of my amanuensis,
a lady who three days after accompanied me to the theatre, and
who was with myself much astonished to find that our patron and
visitor three days previously was the veritable Thomas Walker,
the trance medium. In my verbal description I even gave him a
fuller account than I did in writing. After a most complete
analysis of his character, we entered upon a conversation, which
lasted nearly two hours, in the course of which he acknowledged
that my description was wonderfully correct, and he added that I
was the only one in Sydney who took him for anything more than
a fool. We talked upon human physiology, cerebral physiology,
phrenology, psychology, Darwinism, and free thought, after which
we parted, and my astonishment and pleasure may be imagined,
when I saw that the man whose conversation was so versatile and
entertaining was the same person who lectured in the affected
trance state on the following Sunday evening. I possess now the
original printed chart of the relative proportions of his organs, and
the sketch I will now read is the deduction from the develop-
ment originally described. It is fortunate for me in this
instance that I possess a correct copy of the original character and
relative -degrees of the organs. Some people are ungenerous
in -their scepticism. I have a lady witness to the truth of
ray statements, who will, if necessary, publicly verify them.
It is strange, yet nevertheless true, that I told some of the leading
Spiritists of my examination of Walker’s head. I even showed
some of them the character I drew of him, and told them that he
could, by natural gifts, do all —and more—than he affected to do
under the control of spirits. They nevertheless, in spite of all the
evidence of his natural abilities as indicated by phrenology, forced
him before the public as a fool—a young man who, according to


the Hon. J. Bowie Wilson, did not know “a b from a bull’s foot.’’
The strange appearance of Walker, to the common observer, did
certainly tend to aid the swindle of spiritual control; but though
he did not look highly intellectual or spiritua 1 , he certainly had
all the vigilance of look and evidence of great observation and
language which are often possessed by successful mountebanks or
superficial lecturers. The following is a faithful copy of the
written characterSir, —You have a small but wonderfully
“compact head. Your size of hat, however, is not a proper
“ criterion for the size of your brain, that organ being much larger
“ than is indicated by mere measurement of the circumference of
‘‘ your head. The tape measurement from individuality to the
‘‘ spinous process of the occipital bone is 14 inches; opening of
‘‘ ear to ditto over the head, inches; from opening of ear to
centre of individuality, 6 inches. These measurements are all
“as large as they are in heads of medium size; the last is even
larger than I find it in many large heads; therefore, though
“ your circumference of head is one inch below the average,
“your other measurements are rather above than below it. Your
“ temperament is one fitted to sustain the tear and wear of mental
“ labour much more than is common. Although your vital
“ powers, as a whole, have no appearance of superior strength,
“yet there is such a fine balance of.parts, and so much toughness
“ and elasticity of temperament, combined with so much courage,
“ continuity, self-esteem, and firmness, that, the actual result is
“ the possession of something more than average force of character.
“ When to these physical and moral qualities are added perceptive
“ powers of a high order by- nature, and greatly cultivated by
“ practice, there is in this combination capacity to acquire, retain,
“ and to communicate a large measure of general and scientific
“ knowledge. By reference to the relative degrees of the organs
“ marked upon the printed form you will perceive that comparison,
“ language, individuality, time, locality, size, and weight, are all
“ large, combined with active order, eventuality, number, and wit.
“ This group, if highly cultivated, will give you extraordinary
“memory, excellent capacity to master the details of science,
“ superior fluency and accuracy of language, and impart abilty to
“ observe, analyse, generalise, and classify with readiness, clearness,
“ and fertility. Your causality, though not large, is nevertheless
“ active, because of its continual association with much vigilant
“ and extensive perceptive power. The ability and power
“of causality must continue to gradually increase by the
“direction given to it by your thoroughly practical intellect.
“You will remember that in my verbal description of your
“ character, I pointed out at great length the thoroughly practical
“ effect of your remarkably vigorous perceptive faculties. You
“ will also remember that I told you that you had a highly active


“ and cultivated forehead, and that your memory, language, powers
“of observation, and illustration, were so large, uniform, and
“ powerful, that you could readily become an actor, a successful
“ teacher, and a fluent lecturer. All these things, and many more,
“ you could do well, though you could never become eminent
“ for force of character because of your small size of brain, and
“ the only moderate developement of the organs of causality and
“imagination. You will remember that I pointed out your ready
“ power'of repartee, your peculiar capacity to quickly perceive near
“ and remote resemblances, and also your extraordinary versatility,
“ and to your gift, as it were, of phreno-typing your ideas, and
“ reading, as from a book, the impressions made upon the leaves of
“ your brain. You can, from large acquaintance with the world,
“ act with some degree of tact, and veil your real character, yet you
“ are naturally open, frank, and social, freely communicative, and
“ have as much honesty, and more courage, than the average of your
“ fellows. There is no craven fear, no weak wavering of purpose,
“no deep calculations of consequences, no nice scruples of con-
“ science, or sense of congruity and consistency, but /there is con-
“ tinuity, fixedness of purpose, self-sustaining self-reliance, great
“ vigilance and rapidity of observation, readiness of application,
“ wonderful retentiveness, excellent verbal memory, and a range of
“ comparison which enables you to perceive the analogy of things,
“ and the resemblances of events, arid gives you large capacity to
“ become superficially clever, versatile in illustration, and
“ready in the use of figures of speech. This is only a mere
“ sketch. I cannot afford time for a more complete portraiture
“of your very peculiar lights and shadows of character.”
I now put the question fairly before you,—Can you, if you believe
in the truthfulness of the character just given, think otherwise than
that Walker was an impostor of the most transparent kind? Can you
justify the conduct of those men who thrust him before the public
as a trance-medium of divine truth, after they had the evidence of
science that he was playing upon their credulity ? The scientific
evidence which proved his intellectual capacity, proved also to his
supporters that they did not understand the science which unfolds
the character of man by reference to his organisation. Are we
not all guilty of criminal self-deception in some measure to tolerate
a pretentious system like- Spiritism, in our midst, even for one
week, without at least the protest of critical examination. This
system —degrading to society and destructive to its victims—
would have been hunted out of Sydney ere this but for the lack of
moral courage in the press in neglecting to report its proceedings,
and in refusing to publish the sketch of character which I have
given you of Mr. Walker. It may be asked, what is the cause of
all this religious excitement in connection with Spiritism ? The
answer is at hand. The estrangement of the faith of the people


from the old faiths and worship underlies all other causes, and is the
chief cause of Spiritist folly ; unbelief in orthodoxy is the moving
spring of all popular infidelity, and Spiritualists grasp this ghost of
Spiritism as a substitute for the old faith. The educated intellect
seeks for logic and eongruity in their religious beliefs, the
uncultured crave for sensational religion, and it must be con-
fessed that both classes must be presented with a simpler
faith, and a more rational worship before either can be satisfied.
The present clumsy formula of religion must crumble, and be
succeeded by a system more in harmony with the spirit of
research now moving the public mind to inquiry upon
religious philosophy. The majority profess to believe, but do
not —hence the moral degeneracy of men —hence thier selfishness
and hypocrisy—hence the ghost of Spiritism that haunts minds
weak in faith, unstable in principle, and devoid of critical in-
telligence. Having drawn Walker’s character before I knew him
personally, and having now, at great length, endeavoured to ac-
count, upon scientific grounds, for the extraordinary phenomena
presented by Mrs. Britten, I respectfully ask you to weigh
reflectively the arguments I have adduced, and to bear in mind
they are all based upon physiological, phrenological, and
psychological principles. Altogether apart from this morally
ugly pretence of Spiritism, the constitution of man, as unfolded
by science, is the most sublime subject to which your
attention can be directed. I feel assured that if your children
are taught to study their own capacities, through the science
of cerebral physiology, they will find no empty chambers in
their brains to entertain the ghostly ghosts of Spiritism.
Happily for you who are as free from the delusions of Spiritism
as you are from the enslavement of rigid orthodoxy, there is a
fountain from which you can all drink the water of life freely.
That fountain is—knowledge derived from the scientific study
of man’s constitution—a knowledge of his moral and spiritual
nature. This knowledge teaches that whatever our speculations
may be regarding Spiritualism or Materialism, the existence of
our moral powers, and their influence upon our characters,
remain the same. The innate perceptions that trutji, justice,
humility, compassion, and purity are better than their
opposites, remain as evidences of the action of our moral
powers; and our reverence and admiration for the Great Power
who presides over the universe which we behold is not
weakened by our speculative views regarding the nature of
spirits or spirit-worlds. In the midst of all our doubts and
beliefs, our knowledge of ourselves, revealed by the study of
the constitution of man, as indicated in the science of
phrenology, will afford us firm assurance of the existence of a


higher world for the perfecting of our spiritual faculties.
Now let us glance at the performances of spirit mediums as
lately seen in Sydney. Mrs. Britten’s first lecture in the
Temperance Hall was a remarkably clever effort of special
pleading for superstition since the earliest history of man. Its
delivery was grand, and the adroitness with which she spiced her
eloquent defence of the ghosts by the introduction of scientific
illustrations and of mastery of details and technical terms, was
something to be remembered,—as deeply interesting to the student
of the natural history of man, and pregnant with interest to the
psychologist, as affording him evidence of special capacity under
high culture, which he can only witness perhaps once in a long
lifetime of study. Her discourse on the following Sunday evening
was an eagle-flight into the highest realms and most varied regions
of modern science, sceptism, and freethought. She skimmed the
surface of scientific literature —ancient and modern—with an ease,
dexterity, and confidence, which made the credulous wonder, and
elicited the admiration —almost respect —and sympathy of. those
who had scoffed at the puerile displays of previous mediums.
Fragments of our readings, from “ Vestiges of Creation,”
“ Bridgewater Treatise,” “ Essays and Reviews,” Darwin, Richter,
Spencer, Tyndal, Strauss, Huxley, Renan. Combe, and Mill, were
literally thrown in heaps in our faces, blinding our mental eyes,
and leaving us no second of time for selection or assortment,
criticism or reflection. The lecturess is magnetic in her influence,
commanding in her manner, and rapid and unfaltering in her
utterance —hence irresistible in attractiveness on the mere ground
of special gifts these you must admire even where you cannot
morally approve. When I witness the credulity of the people, as
manifest in the character of the questions they put to these
mediums between God and man, and when I think of the open
flagrant sin of those who profess to answer them as if they received
them immediately from the Creator, I morally shudder at the enormity
of the imposture, and while I grieve over the folly and ignorance
of the infatuists, I cannot help feeling and thinking that some-
thing should at once be done to arrest the progress of this most
foul delusion, this totally uninspirational and grossly materialistic,
ghostly pretence of religion. These spiritualists treat with scorn
and disrespect the claim that Pio Nono set up for popish infalli-
bility, yet have the audacity to ask you to lend your spiritual ear
and listen to the well acted performances of mediums, who we
are told are the instruments of angelic power of communication
from a higher world, and whose ministrations are to lead us up to
a higher conception of God’s ways to man. Were I only disposed
to treat this subject satirically, I could picture it in such a ludicrous
light as to put to shame those who are not too far gone in the
delusion, but it is in the serious aspect of the system that I desire


to treat it, so that I may arouse the earnest attention of eyery
sane man and woman to the dishonour heaped upon themselves
by those who follow it, not excluding the very talented lady now
at the head of the movement in this colony. It will be
observed that I am not irreverent enough at this stage of the
discussion of this subject to enter into the phenomena of spirit-
rapping or table-turning in their claims to be associated with
either physical or mental science,—with chemistry, electricity,
magnetism, animal magnetism, mesmerism, electro-biology, phreno-
magnetism, or clairvoyance. These are all branches of study
which may be legitimately followed up with sojie pretence of
scientific argument, but with which at present I have nothing to
do in my strictures upon Mr. Walker’s and Mrs. Britten’s
performances in Sydney. These performances have been, to my
perceptions and reflections, so palpably absurd and fallacious, that
the good effect of my discourse might be lost, were I to deviate
from the straight path of argument pointed out, by a strictly
physiological and phrenological analysis of the respective characters
of these spiritualistic performers. When I point out upon
scientific grounds all that can be ascertained regal'ding the natural
capacities of mediums, it must be admitted that I heve made my
case good if I prove that, by virtue of natural capacity alone they
can perform all the wonders which are supposed to proceed from
spirit-power. I submit that I have proved most satisfactorily that
the natural capacities of Mr. Walker and Mrs. Britten were more
than enough to account for all they did ; therefore, there was no
need of supernatural aid. I believe you will agree with me when
I say that in all the displays of spiritualistic performances there
was, from first to last, a clear and strongly-marked expression of
self-conscious acting of a part, and that this was more particularly
evident in the part played by Mrs. Britten. Let us glance at the
manner by which the Sydney Spiritists manage their sensational
business. To me the whole plan is so transparently significant of
trick that I have felt surprise that no man had the courage on
any evening to stand up boldly and question the truth of the
statements made by the chairman with regard to Mrs. Britten’s
inspiration and Mr. Walker’s trance. I was known by the
audience as an opponent to the whole system, therefore was
violently opposed by fcpiritists whenever I showed front of
opposition. Several times, without success, I attempted to put
questions to Walker; the abettors on each occasion hissed me
down. Some parts of the performance were so palpably
fraudulent that they would' have been denounced at once but
for the coolness and gravity with which they were enacted, this
gravity and coolness being a peculiarity characteristic of the
leaders of the system, which always exercises great influence
with the audience in subduing the first promptings of opposition.


Remembering that the proceedings commenced with an invocation
for the Divine blessing, it seemed unkind and irreligious to
interrupt the business. Even while conscience and reason gave
conviction of the fraud practiced before our eyes, we felt bound
to tolerate for the time being that which we inwardly condemned.
The chairman announced that his trance-lecturer and his
inspirational orator would speak upon subjects chosen by the
audience, and answer questions at the conclusion pertinent to the
subject. The audience —especially those who were strangers to
the tricks practiced—seemed delighted with the perfect fairness of
the proposition, but when it was further stipulated that the
subjects chosen should be all of a theological, metaphysical, or
Spiritualistic character, there were tokens of disappointment
expressed in the countenances of the critical, and murmurs of
disappointment were heard. A committee of gentlemen having
been’ chosen to select the subject for lecture out of the large
number—amounting to fifty or sixty—sent up for examination
seemed a fair proposition ; but bearing in mind the nature of the
subject to be chosen, the whole thing was a farce, or a clumsy
design to deceive, inasmuch as the talented lady was intellectually
wide awake upon any subject in the category named. The
subjects named, except a very few, were all of a character which
none but a Spiritist under the ■ assumed guidance. of heavenly
power would dare to talk about authoritatively. The subjects
were all nearly related to each other, and all utterly beyond
human ken, or so involved in mystery that they must have been
sent up by persons far gone in the craze of Spiritism, or labouring
under wild imaginings beyond the control of reason. The subject
chosen must, of course, be one with which the lecturess
was familiar, and one upon which she had bestowed
much pains throughout many years of reading. As it respects
Walker, I found him to be the best read man in popular
science that I had met for years. He was so pleased and
interested with my verbal delineation of his character that he
talked with me for nearly two hours upon his first visit, and was
frank enough to confess that though I gave him credit for great
culture of a certain kind, and lor great brainal activity most
other people believed him to be a fool. I found him well versed in
human physiology, in phrenology, and in modem ideas upon
psychology. All our conversation hinged upon the facts which I
stated in connection with his own organism, its extraordinary
activity, and the character resulting therefrom, and it was only
after I had noted his various points of development, and com-
mented largely upon them that he confirmed the truth of my state-
ments by acknowledging his peculiar traits of character. .My
examination and our conversation took place in the presence of
a lady, therefore living testimony is at hand, if required,


to verify what I now state. I give the following ac-
count as the result of my experience in connection
with these lectures, and also with the lectures of Mr.
Walker. After having heard more than twenty discourses by
these celebrities, I found that portions of each discourse were
mixed up with portions of all the others, and that in fact the
entire course, including all the lectures of Mr. Walker and Mrs.
Britten consisted of only one subject, with slight variations here
and there, but with titles skilfully contrived, to make them appear
as different as possible—“lmmortality “The world bejond
“ Heaven and Hell ;’’ “The Destiny of the Righteous; ” “The
Destinyof the Wicked ; ’’“Eternal punishments ; ” “The Creation of
the World;” “The Spirit World;” “The Avocations in the
Spirit World ; ” “ Who was Christ?” “Was Christ the Son of
God?” “What is Man’s relation to God, as taught by
Spiritualism ? ” “ The Theory of Evolution; ” “ The Darwinian
Theory ; ” “ What is the Pate of Suicides in the other World ? ”
“ What is the Fate of Lunatics ? ” “What becomes of Children
who die in Infancy ? ” “ Have we lived before, and shall we live
again ? ” “ What is Man’s fate after death ? ” “ How do Spirits
minister to us in this world ? ” “ What are the distinctions or
degrees in the Spirit world ? ” “ What are the occuptions of the
Spirits ? ” “ Are evil Spirits around us in this world ? ” “ What
will be the ultimate destiny of the race under Spiritualism ? ”
“Do Spirits suffer in the world beyond ? ” “ Are there more
worlds than one beyond this life ? ” “ The personality of God ; ”
“What place or office does Jesus hold in the Spirit world ? ”
“ The ultimate result of Man’s progress; ” “Is Man a portion of
God, or will he become absorbed in the infinite ?’’ When I give
you these questions as specimens of hundreds of others of a
similar character, and when I tell you that heaven and hell,
suicide, and the fate of babies and lunatics in the spirit world,
formed the staple articles of Spiritist curiosity, you will, of course,
draw your own inferences as to the tone and capacity of mind of
the questioners. There were two or three lectures of a pretentious
character delivered by Walker, one upon chemistry, which excited
considerable interest, but the chief portion of the matter of which
had been repeatedly given by him in lectures of other names.
One lecture of Mrs. Britten's upon Joan of Arc, an extraordinary
performance as a test of memory was also given, but the chief
matter of all her other lectures belonged to each one, and could
be used in illustration as argument with almost as much appro-
priateness in one lecture as another. The finest passages of every
discourse were not only of the same character, but in most in-
stances literally the same. I have read many works upon Spiritism
by different authors, and three of Mrs. Britten’s. From these works
the lady cited passage after passage, paragraph after paragraph, word


for word literally. She borrowed freely without acknowledge-
ment, and repeated many times over the same passages in different
lectures, and all this was done according to her pretention in what
she was pleased to call her inspirational orations. It would ex-
tend the prescribed limits of this discourse were I to quote largely
from her own or other’s works on Spiritism, but the two following
pages of matter copied from Mrs. Britten’s work, the creed of the
spirits will give a superior sample of the kind of spiritual philo-
sophy and religion which is taught by the lecturess ;
Spiritual Commandments, given by the Spirits through Emma Hardinge.
I. —Thou shalt search for truth in every department of being—test, prove,
and try if what thou deemest is truth, and then accept it as the Word of God.
11. —Thou shalt continue the search for truth all thy life, and never cease
to test, prove, and try all that thou deemest to be truth.
111. —Thou shalt search by every attainable means for the laws that
underlie all life and being ; thou shalt strive to comprehend these laws, live in
harmony with them, and make them the laws of thine own life, thy rule and
guide in all thine actions.
IV. —Thou shalt not.follow the example of any man or set of men,- nor
obey any teaching or aecept of any theory as thy rule of life that is not in strict
accordance with thy highest sense of right.
V. —Thou shalt remember that a wrong done to the least of thy fellow-
creatures is a wrong done to all; and thou shalt never commit a wrong
wilfully and consciously to any of thy fellow-men, nor connive at wrong done
by others without striving to prevent or protesting against it.
VI. —Thou shall acknowledge all men’s rights to do, think, or speak, to
be exactly equal to thine own; and all rights whatsoever thou dost demand,
thou shalt ever accord to others.
VII. —Thou shalt not hold thyself bound to love, or associate with those
that are distasteful or repulsive to thee ; but thou shalt be held bound to treat
such objects of dislike with gentleness courtesy, and justice, and never suffer
thy ant pathies to make thee ungentle or unjust to any living creature.
VIII. —Thou shalt ever regard the rights, interests, and welfare of the
many as superior to those of the one or the few ; and in cases where thy welfare
or that of thy friend is to be balanced against that of society, thou shalt
sacrifice thyself or friend to the welfare of the many.
IX. —Thou shalt be obedient to the laws of the land in which thou dost
reside, in all things which do not conflict with thy highest sense of right.
X. —Thy first and last duty upon earth, and through all thy life, shril be
to seek for the principles of right, and to live' them out to the utmost of thy
power; and whatever creed, precept, or example conflicts with those
principles, thou shalt shun and reject, ever remembering that the laws of right
are—in morals, Justice ; in science, Harmony; in religion, the Father-
hood of God, the Brotherhood of Man, the immortality of the human
soul, and compensation and retribution for the good or evil done on earth.
The Ten Laws of Right.
I. —Temperance in all things, whether physical, mental, moral,
affectional, or religious.
11. —Justice to all creatures that be—justice being the exercise of
precisely the same rules of life, conduct, thought, or speech that we would
desire to receive from others.
111. —Gentleness in speech and act —never needlessly wounding the
feelings of others by harsh words or deeds ; never hurting or destroying aught
that breathes, save for the purposes of self-defence.


IV. —Truth in every word or thought spoken or acted ; but reservation
of harsh or unpleasing truths where they would needlessly wound, the feelings
of others.
V. —Charity—Charity in thought, striving to excuse the failings of
others; charity in speech, veiling the failings of others ; charity in deeds,
wherever, whenever, and to whomsoever the opportunity offers.
VI. —Almsgiving visiting the sick and comforting the afflicted in every
shape that our means admit of and the necessities of our fellow-creatures
demand.
VII. —Self-sacrifice, wherever the interests of others are to be
benefitted by our endurance.
VIII. —Temperate yet firm defence of our views of right, and protest
against wrong, whether for ourselves or others
X.—Love—above and beyond all seeking to cultivate in our own
families, kindred, friends, and amongst all mankind generally the spirit of
that true and tendar love which can think, speak, and act no wrong to any
creature living ; remembering always that where love is, all the other principles
of right are fulfilled beneath its influence and embodied in its monitions.
We should ever hold the above-stated principles of right to be obligatory upon
all men, as they are the deductions evolved from thelaws of being, and therefore in
strict harmony with the divine order of creation. All views of science are depen-
dent on human intelligence and the unfoldments of intellectual knowledge. All
views of theology are dependent upon intuitive perceptions, faith, or testimony
derived from varying sources—hence, man’s opinions concerning science and
theology are subject to change, and dependent on the circumstances of
nationality, intellectual training, or incidents peculiar to personal experiences ;
but the religion of right, morality, and love, and the commandments of
life-duty, originating from the fundamental principles inherent in life and
being, can never change until man ceases to be, or the harmonies of the
universe are themselves changed or annihilated.
After carefully reading the extracts herein given, ask yourselves the
question—whether there is anything in the matter you have read,
which tends to make you believe that Mrs. Britten received these
“ Spiritual Commandments,” and the “ Ten Laws of Right ” direct
from the infinite Father of Spirits, as she says she did. Is there
evidence of intelligence in these passages superior to anything the
world knew before ? Have you ■ not higher notions of divine
intelligence than you find in Mrs. Britten’s inspirations 1
These passages contain nothing that has not been popularly known
to the world for ages, and as the matter they contain is said to
have been given to Mrs, Britten by inspiration, we have a right to
ask ourselves seriously whether we are not guilty, if silent, of keep-
ing back the truth when we feel morally assured that mere egotism
and irreverent assumption thrust such pretences to inspiration
before the public. Our Sydney Spiritists insist that we should
believe the testimony of thousands of witnesses all over the world
in favour of their system, but they are too knowing to experiment
before the public in search of evidence of the existence of what
they most absurdly term disembodied spirits. The quotations
given, and all others which could be given ad libitum, are destitute
of everything calculated to inspire belief in their claim to be
considered as immediate inspirations from spirit-world. Hi future


lectures I will meet the question in the light of physical science,
as far as has been ascertained. I will also discuss its claims to
be connected with mesmerism, magnetism, animal magnetism,
electricity, electro-biology, phreno-magnetism, and clairvoyance.
Having studied these subjects by reading and by experiment for
thirty years, I think I will be able to prove that Spiritism has
but little in common with the phenomena produced by the
mysterious sciences mentioned; and as far as Sydney lecturers
and mediums are concerned, they have never produced anything
worthy of the name of science, nor have- they any claim whatever
to the confience of intelligent citizens for anything they have done
in the name of Spiritism. I have examined Walker thoroughly,
and tested Mrs. Britten completely. I have been present at
seances in which Mr. Walker and a lady trance medium from
Victoria officiated in the ministration of divine things. In
Wynyard Square I have witnessed the grotesque burlesque of
planchette-writing, and it was my good fortune to witness
performances in Melbourne almost nightly for six months, and I
never witnessed anything that inspired me with moreconfidencethan
the transparent sham I have seen in Sydney. Having sat for
examination repeatedly in London and in Brighton, under those
Spiritists who professed the gift of healing, and in no instance
have I seen anything to warrant me in having faith in vulgar
Spiritism. I cannot even commend the practice of experimenting,
except with the view of showing the world how easy it is to get
up a craze concerning the marvellous in the minds of the
credulous and uncritical. Whatever work is performed in the
world, whether physical or mental, has its appropriate machinery
for its performance. Those who have followed my line of argu-
ment in regard to the organisations of Mr. Walker and Mrs.
Britten, will have perceived that these organisations were exactly
the instruments suited for the execution of their work. The
spirit-oraole Walker and the inspirational orator Britten possessed
powers by nature expressly adapted to their work. The
surroundings of both from early life have perfected the mental
functions which, in their public displays, have bewildered, deluded,
and defrauded the people. By the law of reaction—compensation—
the actors have lost in moral influence what they have gained in
popular applause, by ventilating the hallucinations of Spiritism,
which has endeavoured to set up, in the name of science and
religion the grossest religious fraud since thedaysof Brigham Young.
I feel encouraged to believe that the interest now taken in the
subjects of human physiology, in phrenology, and psychology, will
soon enable men to perceive that there is a diviner spirituality
within them than is taught by modern. Spritism in its highest
form. Men will see that a continual increase of knowledge will
be followed by increase of moral and spiritual powers, when they


understand and apply the principles of science, based upon
cerebral physiology. They will see that those things that seem
evil are only so oecause of ignorance, and that out of seeming evil
men may by knowledge transform this glorious and much abused
earth into a paradise more fruitful of happiness than the heaven
imagined by the most frenzied hallucinations of Spiritists.
Spiritism originated in ignorance and superstition ; it has been, and
is still perpetuated by self-delusion, aided and abetted by the
efforts of cunning imposture, such as have been recently exposed,
and such as I now most solemnly denounce in connection with all
I have witnessed in this city, either by resident lecturers, or by
itinerants of the trance lecture or inspirational stamp. lam
fully prepared for all kinds of reproach, reproofs, and accusations
and false statements at the hands of Spiritists, therefore, tell them
at once that I do not retract one word of condemnation which I
have uttered against the system ; nay, I go further, and say that
no language can convey to the minds of others the utter contempt
which I feel for much that has been palmed upon the public as
genuine Spiritism in the form of spirit-control and inspirational
oratory. I feel satisfied that had my knowledge of Walker and
my opinion upon Mrs. Britten been thoroughly ventilated before
their performances attracted crowds of listeners, the results would
have been very different in a pecuniary sense, and many who have-
been bewildered and partially deceived, would have been spared
the trouble of repentance, which is sure to follow in the cases of
all who have enough of mental balance left to perceive their folly,
and conscientiousness enough to acknowledge their errors. The
mental capacity to perceive one’s error is often much stronger
than tbespiritof moral magnanimity to frankly acknowledge it, there-
fore, I cannot hope that all will confess that they have been
wrongiuaffordingunreasoningsupporttoSpiritism. Idonotdesireto
realize the uncomfortable mental and moral friction 6f a broadside
contact with Messrs. Wilson and Tyerman, but if forced into
opposition and public discussion on this subject, I promise that
these apologists .for the delusion will feel the full force of the con-
cussion, as I have resolved to bring to the front all I think, know,
and feel upon the subject, with special reference to Sydney sen-
sational pretensions of spirit-mediums and their bottle holders.
I may say that when Mr. Tyerman snsers at my lack of power to
grasp the phenomena and tjie philosophy of Spiritism, I feel
bound to tell him that as I have studied these things for thirty
years, that is, nearly twenty years before he broke loose from his
straight-waistcoat of old orthodoxy, he may find me equal to the
task of exhausting and rebutting all the evidence which he can
bring forward in support. As the Hen. J, Bowie Wilson is a
phrenologist, and has been a great support to me in my profes-
sional career in Sydney, 1 deeply regret to find him identify him


self so strongly with everything in the shape of Spiritism. As
Mr. Tyerman is not much of a phrenologist I will give him, if he
desires it, the necessary instruction, whereby he may become
enabled to understand the mental groups of organs which give
special talent for all that has been put forth by him as trance and
inspirational lectures. It is supremely grotesque to find a hard-
headed man like Mr. Tyerman declare as he did last Sunday
evening, that Spiritism is a fact, a science, a philosophy,
a religion. My auditors may think what they like of this statement
of Mr. Tyerman’s, but I reply in opposition as far as Spiritism has
been manifested in Sydney, it has been a fallacy, a juggle, a
snare, a delusion, a disease, and imposture, just in degree to the
relative development of moral and intellectual capacity of credu-
lous believers, tricksters, performers, and victims. In conclu-
sion, I feel assured that my lectures have given great offence to
some Spiritists, and have not been even kindly received by many
who have no faith in Spiritism. The former look upon me as an
enemy to their new religion, and the latter who are Free Thiiikers
merely in name, tell me that I should leave the Spiritists alone,
as they are antagonistic to the old creeds. Ido not desire to have
the support of the one class or the other, except upon the basis of
truth—unless I am perfectly at liberty to speak as reason and
conscience dictate. This I have ever done, and am prepared for
the consequences. Some of the more generous of the Spiritists
beg of me to give over my opposition and join their ranks, that I
may be remembered in history as one who assisted to establish
the new religion of Spiritism. lof course reject, upon principle,
to advocate the claims of the system in any of its phases, and I
tell its supporters boldly, that after patient reflective research, I
have come to the conclusion that all honest Spiritists are
deluded, aud that the millions of professed believers in it are
so not because they have real evidence of its truth, but
because they have perfect evidence that much that passes for
orthodox Christianity is totally opposed to the example of its
founder. lam glad to be able to assure Spiritists that in the
multitudes of kinds and degrees of mania, there are some
kinds and degrees which appear chronic but which are simply
periodic and intermittent. Some cases which I might
mention resemble some of the worst specimens of Spiritist
hallucinations witnessed in Sydney, therefore I hope soon to
see indications of a perfect and permanent cure. There is no
doubt in my mind of the rapid decline of Sydney Spiritism when
it is fortunate enough to be separated from the evil influences
of trance mediums, trance and inspirational lecturers, and
from the artful designs of far-seeing medical clairvoyants, who
fill their, purses to repletion out of the open, gaping, generous,
and crecmlous side of ignorant humanity. It will be acknow


ledged that I have battled hard in the uphill struggle to
direct by the light of the science of cerebral physiology
the minds of the public to self-examination, self-knowledge,
and self-improvement, so that they .might be enabled to detect
and separate the sham from the reality. They know that I
have, at great trouble and expense, endeavored to prevent the
folly of table-dancing and of spirit-rapping, and the madness
of Spiritism, from taking further hold of the human mind,
especially that portion of it which forms the Sydney public.
When we reflect seriously upon the claims set up on behalf of
Spiritism, fle can scarcely believe in the sincerity of those who
state their faith in the system, unless upon the supposition
that their self-esteem and self-respect are defective, or that
there is a peculiar twist in their intellects which causes them
to distort the common face of nature. For what uses were our
faculties given if not for the grand uses to which they have
been applied in all the Characters of great men and women,
who have by their intelligence and goodness moved the world
onward 1 Why ascribe to angelic influence that which springs
from the legitimate exercise of our faculties ? Why give to
Spiritism the honor of introducing into, the world the evidence
of a future life, which is a portion, however infinitesimal, of
the nature of every human being, and which has ever been
and still is the main-stay of the spiritual life of all who labour
long against difficulties for the benefit of the world, for the
spread of truth, and increase of human happiness 1 Would it
add a stimulus to my exertions in my crusade against
Spiritism, were I to believe that angels or spirits, good or bad,
urged me to my work 1 My consciousness tells me, after
many years reflection on the psychology of my own mind, that
a belief in the presence and interference of spirits, according
to Spiritism, would destroy the entire order of my being, and
extinguish my sense of individuality, and consequently weaken
my sense of responsibility. When I enjoy spiritual extasy
arising from conscious performance of noble acts, is it neces-
sary that a disembodied spirit should be near me, to whisper
in my ear the righteousness of my conduct I If I ponder for
years over the idea that it is possible to discover a mechanical
principle, which will enable me to invent, and to perfect a
sewing machine for the saving of human toil, is it in the order
of nature, or in harmony with my organization, that an angel
or spirit should guide me onward to the perfect completion of
my work ? When Watts perceived the effects of steam upon
the lid of the kettle, did one angel guide his perception to the
phenomenon, and another angel or spirit overrule his reflec-
tion, while he matured his discoveries and applied them to the
practical purposes of life in the economy of labour f Were


Bruno, Galileo, Caxton, Bacon, Newton, Harvey, Davey,
Faraday, and Gall, guided and controlled in their glorious
discoveries by disembodied spirits ? Complete answers to these
questions would fill an interesting volume, all the matter of
which could be made to prove the utter fallacy of Spiritism,—
but enough for the present. Spiritism, with its clumsy invention
of materialized spirits, robs our heroes of their birthright, and
degrades the man that it may pay homage to ghosts of imagina-
tion ; it invents angels or spirits whose functions are to steal the
well-earned and long-hoped for fruits of intelligence, and thus
the honors of our greatest men and divinest women are plucked
from their brows to garland the phantom heads of disembodied
spirits. It may be thought by some ungenerous Spiritists that
I have spoken with too severity of their system as
witnessed in Sydney. I beg most earnestly to assure them
that I feel perfectly confident that the voice of the Infinite
Spirit has overruled my utterance, because of its accordance
with truth.
S, GLASSOP, West City Machine Printing Office, 92 Clarence-stree


Highest Commendation from Commissioners of
Sydney Exhibition, 1876.
“Mr. Thomas Liddell contributes some elegantly bound Works, noticeable amongst
which are some very handsome Bibles, with centre pages for names and photographs of
family,” Ac.— Sydney Herald, May, 1876.
THE ORIGINAL
TIME-PAYMENT BOOK DEPOT
Of AUBl^AtiA.
ijj’ew and flails ererg
SUPPLIED BY
T. LiB.B&LL, '
Publisher and Importer.
First-class Works, beautifully printed, handsomely bound, and
illustrated with Numerous Choice Engravings, regularly imported
from'the extensive publishing firms of CASSELL, COLLINS,
&*c., and delivered complete on easy modes of payment.
m trill ke added to tlie Jfoetn, time to time.
Including the now publishing.
Purchasers of the Bible will receive a magnificent Steel Engraving
of the “ Rescue,” originally published at two guineas ;
purchasers of Livingstone, a beautiful portrait.
FIVE PER GENT. DISCOUNT FOR GASH
ALLOWED FOR PAYMENT IN FULL ON DELIVERY.
CENTRAL OFFICES-
SYDNEY-401 GEORGE STREET,
MELBOURNE-107 QUEEN STREET.
Agents in all theprincipal Towns and neighbouring Colonies.


T. H. VAUGHAN
AND
gabies’ Ornamental gate ’Marker,
66 MARKET STREET,
NEXT AMERICAN NOVELTY COMPANY,
Late of 209 Pitt-street, nearly opposite the City Bank.
LADIES’ COMBINGS WORKED INTO ANY STYLE.


S? XX
t* LL
PROFESSOR OF PHRENOLOGY,
19 HUNTER STREET.
BENEFITS OF PHRENOLOGICAL EXAMINATION :
Self-examination; Self-knowledge ; .Self-improvement ; Self-perfection up to
the measure of your capacity ; Legitimate and profitable application of talent :
Direction in choice of trade, calling, or profession ; A guide to health. -
physical, moral, and intellectual--and saving of much misery, sickness, and
crime, by a hording scope for the happiest exercise of the physical and
intellectual powers ; Directions in 'hoice of servants, apprentices, assistants,
partners in business, and partners for life.
C Verbal Examitu tion and Advice, ss. ; Written
Character and Advice, 1C . ; Full Study of Character, £l.
West City Machine Printing .Office.
Hlercautilc nuti General printer,
92 CLARENCE STREET,
S Y D N E Y.
Every Description of Printing Executed with Xeatness and .
I Hspatch, at the Lowest Prices.




