

IS Science anl the Bible;
i
ii
|
■®l
ipi LOIS DON;
SOCIETY'FOR PROMOTIN'? CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
fevfjll ' SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORIES! y
, 77, Great Queen Street, Lincoln’s Inn Fields;
tl 4, Royal Exchange; 48, Piccadilly;
' ANU BY ALL 100K8ELLBRS ‘
& ■ ■ ■




SCIENCE AND THE BIBLE:
A LECTURE
BT THE
RIGHT REV. CHAS. PERRY, D.D.,
LORD BISHOP OP MELBOURNE.
, DELIVERED BT REQUEST, ON MONDAY, SEPT. 20, 1869.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE
TRACT COMMITTEE,
LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE :
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORIES;
77, GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS J
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE ; 48, PICCADILLY; ,
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.


PRINTED
For the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge


o'o r i
i 3 h--n
SCIENCE AND THE BIBLE.
In accordance with a request made to me by some
of my clerical brethren, I am going to address yon
this evening upon Science and the Bible. Their
request has imposed a somewhat arduous task, not
only upon me who have had to write, but also upon
you, my friends, who will now have to listen to
my lecture. For you must not expect to be enter-
tained with anecdotes, or amused with pleasantries,
or charmed with eloquence, as some of you have
been on former similar occasions in this building.
I am not a good story-teller, nor am I a wit or
an orator. Indeed, even if I could hope to do so
with success, my present business is of too grave
a nature to permit me to assume either of these
characters. All that I shall aim at will be to
communicate to you in clear and homely language,
and at the same time as briefly as possible, some
results of my reading and reflection, not within
the last few weeks only, but during many past
years; and that which I ask of you —and your


presence here encourages me to ask it with con-
fidence—is, that yon will give me your patient
attention for the space of at least an hour and a
half. Less than this will not suffice for what I
have to say.
Before entering upon my subject I would beg
you to observe that I have not come forward as
the champion of the Bible against Science. In my
opinion the Bible has nothing to fear from Science.
There is no quarrel between them. Some unwise
friends of one and the other have tried to set them
at variance, but I believe they are, and always
have been and will be, inseparable friends. A man
is not to be regarded as a disbeliever in the Bible
because he is a votary of Science; nor, on the
other hand, is one who upholds the authority of
the Bible to be supposed to look on Science with
suspicion. While I receive with the most perfect
confidence all that God has told me through the
Bible, I receive with the same confidence whatever
He has enabled me to learn from Science. I have
no more doubt of the diurnal and annual motions
of the earth, or of the monthly revolution of the
moon, or of the leading facts of geology, than I
have of the birth, life, and death, the resurrection
and ascension, of our Lord and Saviour Jesus


Christ. I cannot for a moment entertain the idea
of Science contradicting the Bible. For what is
the Bible? It is a volume of writings inspired of
God for “our learning,” or instruction. And what
is Science ? —I use the word throughout this lecture
in its widest and most comprehensive meaning. It
is the accumulation of all that man has been able
to discover by the use of his unassisted reason con-
cerning this visible world, and concerning the events
which have occurred and are occurring in it. The
knowledge acquired from one of these sources can-
not, therefore, but harmonise with that which is
derived from the other. Any disagreement between
them is impossible. This harmony, however, al-
though it must always subsist, may not be in all
cases discernible. Science may appear to contra-
dict the Bible; and during the .present century, in
which such great progress has been made in all its
various branches, it has made us acquainted with
a number of facts relating to this earth and its
inhabitants, which, from their apparent irreconcila-
bility with the Bible, have not only given occasion
of triumph to -unbelievers, but have shaken the
faith of many weak, and greatly perplexed the
minds of some established, Christians. Theories,
also, directly opposed to the statements which are


contained in the Bible narrative, have been pro-
pounded by men whose names stand high in the
scientific world. My object, then, in this lecture
will be to show that these facts and theories afford
no real ground for exultation to the adversaries,
or alarm to the lovers, of the Bible.
In consequence of the wide extent of the field
over which I must travel, I have found much
difficulty in determining how to arrange what I
have to say upon the several branches of my sub-
ject in an orderly manner. The method I have
chosen as most suitable for my purpose is to state
to you four distinct propositions, the truth of which
I shall endeavour to establish. These will serve
as so many heads, under which I may collect the
various facts and arguments that I wish to bring
under your consideration. I will now, therefore,
proceed to state my first proposition, viz.:—•
That much of what is called Science is nothing
else than arbitrary and unphilosophical hypothesis.
The ablest inductive philosophers may put forth
theories which are subsequently found to be erro-
neous. Newton’s theory of light—the corpuscular—
which was for some time generally accepted, has
now been quite .superseded by another—the un-
dulatory. In like manner, geologists have been


repeatedly compelled, in the progress of their re-
searches, to put aside, or greatly modify, their
earlier conclusions. It is, therefore, no discredit
to a scientific man to have suggested, upon grounds
of reasonable probability, an hypothesis which has
ultimately been disproved; but those to which I
now refer are not of this kind. They are such
as rest upon no reasonable probability whatever.
The instances that I shall adduce are the several
theories which have been successively proposed, in
place of the account given us in the Bible, con-
cerning the origin of all the infinite variety of
vegetables and animals that abound on the earth.
Of these, the first in order of time is the atheistic
atomic theory, of which the remarkable work of
the Epicurean philosopher and poet, Lucretius—a
name lately made familiar to the English reading
public by our own poet laureate —contains the
fullest exposition. His notion was, that all this
beautiful and well-ordered universe was, to use
Matthew Henry’s expression, “a chance hit,” com-
ing into existence by the accidental agglomeration
of an infinite multitude of material particles. This
theory—although no one, I suppose, would now
accept it—appears to me to be not one whit more
absurd than those modern ones contained in the


anonymous work entitled, Vestiges of the Natural
History of Creation , and in Darwin’s book On the
Origin of Species. I am aware that in speaking
thus of these latter works I may be charged with
very great presumption, and may be reminded that
I am assuming to judge of and condemn the
reasoning and conclusions of men of far higher scien-
tific attainments than myself. My reply is, that
I readily acknowledge their superiority in their
own departments of science; but that superiority
does not entitle them to a deferential submission in
matters which lie outside of those departments. A
man may attain the very first rank as a naturalist,
an astronomer, or a geologist, and yet may be
entirely destitute of those higher faculties, which
are required in an inductive philosopher. Besides,
in the investigation of truth we must always use
our own independent judgment. Herein the only
deference that a great name can claim from us is,
that, as to matters with which he is conversant
and we are not, we should take his word for what
he says; and that as to other matters, on which
perhaps we are equally able with him to form a
correct opinion, we should not come to a decision
different from that at which he has arrived, with-
out bestowing on them careful attention and exer-


cising due deliberation. For myself, Ido not pos-
sess extensive scientific knowledge; and therefore,
in reading the work of such a man as Darwin, I
implicitly believe, on his authority, whatever he
describes as observed facts of natural history. But
I can follow a train of reasoning, and therefore
judge for myself of the correctness of any inferences
which he may draw from those facts. And that
which I can do, every man of ordinary intelli-
gence—every one of you, my friends —can, if he
will, do also. Now, what we can judge of for our-
selves, we ought not to accept upon the authority
of others. I do not therefore feel it necessary to
offer any apology for the expression of my opinion
concerning these two works. Of the correctness
of that opinion you are now to be the judges. If
I succeed, as I trust I shall, in convincing you
that these two theories deserve to be designated
as arbitrary and unpliilosophical hypotheses, you
will acquit me of presumption; if I fail, I must
bear the reproach.
You will observe that my reason for examining
the arguments of these two works is, that the
theories proposed in them directly contradict the
statements of the Bible, both as to the independent
creation of all the various kinds of plants and


animals which now exist, or have formerly existed
on the earth, and also as to the limitation of the
generative power of each plant and animal to pro-
duce only those which are of the same kind with
itself. But in conducting my examination I shall
take no notice of any such contradiction. I shall
put away altogether the consideration of the bearing
of these theories upon the truth of the Bible, and
test them simply by the natural reason. For
when our object is, as at present, to ascertain what
Science says upon a particular point, we must listen
only to its voice. To allege the authority of the
Bible, or to take any account of its statements,
would be very right on another occasion, but not
on this. We have now to do with nothing but
the facts which are adduced as premises of the
argument, and the conclusions which are deduced
from those facts.
To begin then with the earlier of the two works,
The Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation.
The author describes himself as “a private person
with limited opportunities for study;” but his book
shows him to have acquired large scientific know-
ledge, and to possess great acuteness and literary
ability. It is written in an agreeable style; and,
except that it altogether ignores the Bible account


of the creation, there is nothing in it, so far as I
have observed, calculated to offend the religions
feelings of a reader. No one can recognise more
distinctly than he does the evidence, which the
phenomena of the physical world afford to the
existence of “a Being (I quote his own words),
beyond nature —its author, its God—infinite, in-
conceivable it may be, and yet one whom these
very laws (the laws of the physical world), present
to us with attributes shewing that our nature is,
in some way, a faint and far-cast shadow of His,
while all the gentlest and beautifullest of our emo-
tions lead us to believe that we are as children
in His care, as vessels in His hand.” The hypo-
thesis which this writer proposes to us for explain-
ing the existence of the present animal and vegetable
world is progressive development hy means of natural
generation. He conjectures that God has imparted
to plants and animals the power, not only of
propagating their own respective species, as we
see to be ordinarily the case, but also of producing
occasionally, at long intervals, under special cir-
cumstances, plants and animals of a higher species
than their own. In this manner, according to his
idea, during the ages which have passed since the
creation of the earth, all the varieties of organic


beings which now people it have been produced—
one higher species, genus, family, order, and sub-
kingdom following after another, until the highest
of them all—man —was reached. Here, for the
present, the series ends.
Now, what are the facts on which this hypothesis
is grounded h I shall take pains to state them fairly.
First of all, there is the universal existence of
law in inorganic nature from the beginning of
creation. The same law of gravitation which now
exists on the earth’s surface keeps, and, as he says,
produced (but this is only an hypothesis, not an
observed fact) the earth itself, and the planets in
their forms and in their orbits. This law also
governs the most distant stars; and not only so,
but it, and every other whereof we have any know-
ledge, have ruled in the world from the beginning.
Secondly, in the animal life of the globe there
has been a regular progression, not only of grades,
or sub-kingdoms—as from invertebrate to the low-
est vertebrate, fish; then from fish to reptiles, and
afterwards to birds and mammalia, and finally to
man—but also of orders and genera; the inferior
forms, which appear in the lower, being succeeded
by superior forms in the higher strata.
Thirdly, in “this revelation of organic history”


are to be noted the following particulars :—l. That
“the initial genera of all the various orders are
always perfect animals, well fitted by creative wis-
dom (I quote his own words) for the part they had
to play in the field of life.” 2. That throughout
large groups there is observable a fundamental
unity of organism, as if all were constructed upon
one plan, though in a series of improvements and
varieties, each having a strong affinity to others
which have preceded or succeeded it in the series—*
e. g., the form of man represents in many particulars,
some very minute and curious, the forms of other
mammalian quadrupeds. One instance which he
mentions of this unity is that the number of
cervical vertebrae is the same in all mammals;
the long neck of the giraffe having no more bones
in it than the necks, or no-necks, of the elephant
and pig. 8. That while this unity of organism is
preserved, particular organs, which correspond to
each other in different animals, are sometimes put
to different uses — e.g., in the elephant the snout
is extended into an “instrument serving all the
usual purposes of an arm and hand.” k 4. That,
further, there are sometimes to be found in what
the author calls “the original plan of the animal
structure” a double set of organs, one or other of


which is selected for development according to the
needs of the particular animal. The most remark-
able and best known instance of this is found in
the twofold arrangement for breathing in air and
in water—lungs and gills; but the remarkable
circumstance is that at an early stage of the foetal
process mammalia have no lungs, but a bronchial
apparatus, and that afterwards, as the author says,
this goes back, and the lungs are developed from
a different portion of the organism, 5. That,
lastly—and this is perhaps “the most remarkable
circumstance” of all—there exist in many animals
what are called rudimentary organs — i. e., organs
which are developed to a certain extent, but are
wholly useless; e. g., the mammae of a man, and
the process of bone which in female marsupial
animals supports the pouch, but which in the
male is of no use whatever.
Besides these there is another class of facts of
a different and very curious nature, concerning
the progress of embryonic development; which, as
the author lays great stress upon them, I must
not pass over. According to his statement, the
correctness of which I do not at all doubt, all
animal organisms commence with a simple cell, of
which it is impossible {i. e., impossible for man in


the present, and probably in any future, state of
science) to tell to wbat form it is destined to ad-
vance. In this cell a series of changes takes place,
whereby the scientific observer is enabled succes-
sively to determine, first, to what sub-kingdom
the embryo belongs; then, if it be of the vertebrate,
whether it belong to the fish, reptile, bird, or
mammal class ; next, if it be of the mammal class,
what is its particular order, and afterwards what
is its family, genus, species, and sex. “ Thus,”
the author remarks, “the embryo of each grade
of being (i.e., each animal sub-kingdom) passes
through the general conditions of the embryo of
the grades beneath it,” In this statement, however,
he appears to me to affirm more than the facts
which he has mentioned strictly warrant. All that
they show is, that embryos are at first undistin-
guishable from one another, and that afterwards,
at different stages of their growth, the character of
their particular orders, families, and so forth, be-
come successively discernible, I do not, however,
object to his speaking of these facts as “tending
to establish a parity or identity of plan between
the succession of animals on the earth and the
stages of embryonic development in those which
have last come upon the scene.” It is obvious to


every thoughtful observer of nature that, amidst
their manifold diversity, there is a marvellous
mutual resemblance and closeness of connection
one with another pervading all the works of God.
Such a “parity or identity of plan” is therefore
very probable.
But the question before us is, Will these facts
support the hypothesis which the author has founded
upon them % They are really all that he alleges;
and I trust that I have stated them, although
necessarily with great brevity, yet with sufficient
clearness to enable you to judge whether it is a
reasonable suggestion which he grounds upon them,
that “ embryonic development shadows forth the
principle which was employed, or followed, by the
Uncreated in filling the earth with the organic
creatures by which it is inhabited /” When this
idea is proposed to us, does it “appear,” to quote
his own words, “as if the clouds were beginning
to give way, and the light of simple unpretending
truth about to break in upon the great mystery'?”.
Can you, my friends, with the author “embrace,
not as a proved fact, but as a rational interpretation
of things as far as Science has revealed them, the
idea of progressive developments ” Can you, with
him, “contemplate the simplest and most primitive


types of being as under a law, to which that of
like production ( i.e ., the production of animals of
a like kind with their parents) is subordinate, giving
birth to a type superior to it, this again producing
the next higher, and so on to the highest?” Can
you, for example, imagine a kangaroo, in a quite
natural manner, without any “circumstances of
some startling or miraculous kind,” bringing forth—
it might be a deer, or a horse, or some mammal
of a species altogether unknown? This is the au-
thor’s theory of creation. He frankly admits, that
“ in nature’s government there is no observable ap-
pearance of such promotionbut he thinks “that
it does not seem, after all, a very immoderate
hypothesis.” To me it does seem a very immoderate
and, as I have said, an altogether arbitrary and
unphilosophical hypothesis. Do you agree with
him or with me? or, I would rather ask, do
you agree with him or with the Bible, which says
that God created “every living creature after his
kind?”
Darwin’s book On the Origin of Species was
published some years subsequently to the Vestiges.
I will now endeavour to state, as clearly as is
consistent with extreme brevity, the hypothesis
which he propounds, the grounds on which it is


based, and some of the most conclusive objections
to its acceptance.
The author rejects the idea proposed in the
Vestiges as an assumption, which does not explain
the phenomena ; and he proposes in its stead
another, which he calls “ natural selection .” This
phrase he uses to designate “the preservation of
favourable, and the rejection of injurious varia-
tions,” which he supposes to have been going on
continually throughout all past ages in the visible
world. Its operation, according to his conception
of it, is described by him as follows: —“ It may
metaphorically be said that natural selection is
daily and hourly scrutinising throughout the world
every variation, even the slightest, rejecting that
which is bad, preserving and adding up all that
is good, silently and insensibly working whenever
and wherever opportunity offers at the improvement
of each organic being in relation to its organic and
inorganic conditions of life.” In this manner he
imagines “ species have been modified during a long
course of descent by the preservation, or the natural
selection, of many successive slight favourable
variations.” And not only species in the scientific
meaning of the term, but also genera and families
and orders; so that all “ animals have descended


from at most only four or five progenitors, and
plants from an equal or lesser number. I shall
here omit all notice of plants, for the truth of the
hypothesis can be tested as surely and more simply
by confining our attention to animals only.
The grounds on which this hypothesis is based
are substantially the three following—the order in
which I place them is different from that in which
they occur in the book, but appears to me the
more logical. The first is the struggle for existence,
caused by the high rate at which all organic beings
tend to increase, in connection with the fact that
the greatest amount of life can be supported by
the greatest diversification of structure. The second
is the variability observable in what are called
the varieties of particular species in the animal
world; and the power of man, by care in breeding
and other means, to produce in domestic animals,
such as sheep and cattle, and especially pigeons,
changes so great as to form, in appearance at least,
new species. The third is the care which nature
takes of all organic beings. This last is not ex-
pressly mentioned by the author, but is evidently
implied throughout his work.
Now, assuming all this—that such a struggle
for existence is continually going on upon the earth,


that man has been able to produce such wonderful
results, and that nature does take care of all that
are under her keeping—it does not prove, it does
not even furnish any argument for, such a gradual
development of all the various kinds of organic
being as is supposed by the hypothesis of natural
selection. It may have suggested the idea, but it
can do no more. Unless the author can adduce
some facts in evidence of its truth, his proposed
solution of the problem of creation must be re-
garded as at least merely conjectural. Has he then
adduced any such facts'? I have looked carefully
through his book, and can find none —none what-
ever. He certainly relates a large number of very
curious and interesting facts concerning the struc-
ture, habits, and instincts of different animals;
some as illustrating, in his opinion, the action of
natural selection, some as showing the advantages
of intercrossing, some as exhibiting the manner in
which he supposes varieties may have been intro-
duced, and others for various purposes. Also, in
relating these he frequently points out how, as he
thinks, they elucidate or accord with, or may be
explained by, his hypothesis. But after very care-
ful examination I do not hesitate to affirm, that
no one of them alone, nor therefore the whole of


them together, in any the slightest degree corro-
borates it. The most plausible is the following,
and what weight ought to be attached to it, you will
judge for yourselves. There exists, the writer tells
us, in individual animals, a tendency to revert to
some of the characteristics of their ancient pro-
genitors. Thus several breeds of pigeons (which
you will remember are all only varieties, not distinct
species) are descended from an ancestral pigeon
of a bluish colour, having certain bars and other
marks upon it; and when any breed assumes by
simple variation a bluish tint, these bars and other
marks invariably re-appear, but without any other
change of form or character. Now, the horse, the
ass, the hermionus, quagga, and zebra, are species,
not varieties, of the same genus; and, among' other
characteristics by which they are distinguished from
one another, are certain bars and stripes in different
parts of the body, which are peculiar to some, and
wanting in the other species. But Darwin states,
on the authority of certain persons whom he names,
that mules and other hybrids have in a number
of instances been known to be marked with bars
and stripes, not to be found in the species to which
their parents belonged. He also mentions that in
the north-western part of India there is a breed


of horses, the Kattywar, so generally striped, that
a horse without stripes is not considered as purely
bred. From these facts he draws a conclusion,
which he states as follows ; —“ For myself, I ven-
ture confidently to look back thousands and thou-
sands of generations, and I see an animal striped
like a zebra, hut perhaps otherwise very differently
constructed, the common parent of our domestic
horse and ass, the hermionus, quagga, and zebra.”
Am I not justified in saying that a theory, which
rests upon no stronger argument than this, is
no more than an arbitrary and unphilosophical
hypothesis h
But this theory of Darwin is deserving of yet
stronger condemnation; for it is not only unsup-
ported by any facts, but it is liable to several
obvious and insuperable objections. Some of these
the author himself mentions; and he frankly ac-
knowledges, that, although he does not think them
fatal to it, he can never to this day reflect upon
them without being staggered. Some of them are
indeed sufficient, one would think, to stagger his
most unreflecting partisans, I will briefly enume-
rate the principal.
First, by natural selection , the author must mean
some faculty naturally inherent in animals, and


exercised independently of any external influence,
whether of man or any superior being. It is also
clearly a faculty, which implies forethought; for it
looks forward to the future well-being of the animal,
or community of animals, on whose behalf it is
supposed to be exercised. But, with the exception
of man, no animal appears to be endowed with
any forethought beyond that which is required for
providing food and other necessaries for itself and
family. We have no example in any of such look-
ing forward to futurity. This appears to me a fatal
objection in limine to the hypothesis of natural
selection.
But passing by this, and not stopping to inquire
how far the aggregate amount of animal life has
been increased by the production of carnivorous or
insectivorous animals —the swallow, for example,
which devours I know not how many thousand
insects in a day —or to ask whether it was for the
benefit of the antelope, that its flesh was made such
tender and tasty food for the lion or tiger—not
stopping to waste your time with such trifling ques-
tions as these, I proceed to the consideration of those
difficulties and objections to which he has himself
alluded. Among them are the following : —the dif-
ficulty of conceiving how the peculiar structure and


habits of each particular animal ( e.g ., the bat), and
how the most perfect and wonderful organs (as, for
instance, the eye) could be formed by any such
gradual modification; the difficulty of accounting
for the acquisition and modification of the peculiar
instincts of different animals, as the hive-bee; and
the difficulty of explaining how the various races of
animals became distributed over the earth. These
are certainly such as primd facie render the hypo-
thesis of gradual development of species by natural
selection extremely improbable ; but still they are
not such as might not be overcome by a sufficient
number of well-authenticated facts. Does, then, the
author attempt so to overcome them ? No; all that
he tries to prove is that, while they render this
hypothesis extremely improbable, they do not prove
it to be impossible. Thus he argues, that remem-
bering the great variety of animals existing upon
the earth, and the dissimilarity of habits among
those of closely allied species [e.g., the upland and
the common goose), we should be cautious in con-
cluding that the most different structures and habits
of life could not graduate into each other. Again,
he alleges that if we know of a long series of gra-
dations in complexity, each good for its possessor,
then under changing conditions of life there is no


logical impossibility in the acquirement of any con-
ceivable degree of perfection (of any organ) through
natural selection. He does not, however, mention
any instance of such a series of gradations existing
in the animal world. His manner of dealing with
the difficulty of accounting for the present geo-
graphical distribution of the various kinds of ani-
mals over the earth on the hypothesis of all having
descended, through modification by natural selec-
tion, is very characteristic. As is his custom, he
frankly acknowledges the difficulty to be “grave
enough,” “Nevertheless,” he says, “the simplicity
of the view that each species was first produced
within a single region captivates the mind;” and
then he adds, “He who rejects it, rejects the vera
causa of ordinary generation with subsequent mi-
gration, and calls in the agency of a miracle.”
But, besides these difficulties, there are two other
acknowledged facts, each of which would alone dis-
prove his hypothesis. The one is the absence of all
transitional forms, either among living or fossil
animals; the other is the very general if not uni-
versal sterility of hybrids produced by crossing
between species of the same genus, and the absolute
impossibility of crossing between different genera.
These facts constitute objections, which no evidence,


if any existed, for the probability of the hypothesis,
however strong, could overcome. They are abso-
lutely insuperable. Tor, if this natural selection
had been going on in the world during the long
succession of past ages, the earth would now neces-
sarily be filled with a multitude of transitional
forms. If the hive-bee, the comb of which is such
an exquisite structure, had been developed by na-
tural selection from the humble bee, which uses its
old cocoons for holding its honey, there must have
been between these two kinds, besides the Mexican
mellipona, which alone Darwin mentions, an in-
numerable series of intermediate bees. But none
such are known to exist. Again, if all the various
kinds of animals have been gradually developed by
natural selection, what reason can be assigned for
that sterility of hybrids, by which nature now seems
peremptorily to forbid the formation of any new
species, and for that impossibility of crossing be-
tween animals of different orders, which yet more
strongly shows their distinctive peculiarities of struc-
ture to have been originally inherent and indelible 1
The answers which the author attempts to give to
these objections are really undeserving of notice.
Your patience has, I fear, been severely tried by
this long discussion, but I could not abridge it.


The hypothesis against which I have been contend-
ing holds so important a place in the pseudo-science
of the modern sceptical school, that I have felt
obliged to scrutinise it, and the book in which it is
propounded, very carefully, for the purpose of show-
ing you that it is altogether unworthy of the favour
which has been accorded to it. To what that favour
with the public generally, and with some men of
high scientific character in particular, is to be attri-
buted, cannot easily be explained. I can only as-
cribe it to one or other of two causes, or to a com-
bination of them both. The one is, that the multitude
of curious and interesting facts of natural history,
with which the book abounds, draws off the reader’s
attention from its argument, and at the same time
disposes him to take for granted whatever a Writer,
who appears to have such a perfect acquaintance
with his subject, chooses to assert. The other is,
that there exists a credulity of scepticism which
makes men who are disposed to reject the authority
of the Bible blind to the fallacies of any argument,
and ready to accept any theory which may help to
confirm them in their unbelief. They have not
received the love of the truth; and, therefore, ac-
cording to the prophetic saying of St. Paul, God
sends them strong delusion that they should believe a


lie. I would ask those who possess Darwin’s hook
to compare the description of his idea of creation,
in its last two paragraphs, with the 104th Psalm,
and the 38th, 39th, 40th, and 41st chapters of the
Book of Job, and then say whether his theory or
that of the Bible most commends itself to the
natural reason.
Protoplasm. —Another work, entitled Protoplasm,
the Physical Basis of Life, by Professor Huxley—■
as it has lately excited much attention, and, in fact,
suggested the request that I would deliver this lec-
ture —must not be passed unnoticed by me; but I
shall not occupy much time by my remarks upon
it, for the aim of its author is not so much to con-
trovert the Bible, as to root out those instinctive
convictions of human nature, which are the founda-
tion of all religious belief. I will state to you the
result of a careful analysis of his pamphlet. He
professes “to demonstrate that a threefold unity,
namely, a unity of power or faculty, a unity of
form, and a unity of substantial composition,” per-
vades “the whole living world.” This unity is
produced by “ protoplasm,” “ a single physical basis
of life, underlying all the diversities of vital exist-
ence.” What this protoplasm is he illustrates by
two particular instances,, the hair of a nettle and a


drop of human blood, which he takes occasion to
introduce. I will quote his words : —“ The whole
hair (of a nettle) consists of a very delicate outer
case of wood, closely applied to the inner surface of
which is a layer of semi-fluid matter, full of innu-
merable granules of extreme minuteness. This
semi-fluid lining is protoplasm,” and “ when viewed
with a sufficiently high magnifying power, is seen
to be in a condition of unceasing activity.” Again,
in a drop of blood, similarly viewed, are seen a
“number of colourless corpuscles,” which likewise
“ exhibit a marvellous activity. These, also, are a
mass of protoplasm.” In another passage he states,
that “ all the forms of protoplasm which have yet
been examined contain the four elements, carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, in very complex
union.”
Now, these may be observed facts; and as they
are perfectly consistent with the statements of the
Bible, that “God made man (and doubtless all
plants and other animals) out of the dust of the
ground,” and that “the blood is the life,” I am not
concerned about them. But how does he demon-
strate the threefold unity that he speaks of? Leav-
ing out all extraneous matter, his argument is
simply this ; —As to the unity of power and faculty;


“ all the multifarious and complicated activities of
men are comprehensible,” he tells us, “under three
categories. Either they are immediately directed
towards the maintenance and development of the
body, or they effect transitory changes in the relative
position of parts of the body, or they tend to the
continuance of the species.” “But the scheme,
which is large enough to embrace the activities of
the highest form of life, covers all those of the lower
-creatures. The lowest plant or animalcule feeds,
grows, and reproduces its kind.” Therefore (here
follows the Q. E, D. of the geometrician), “ the acts
of all living things are fundamentally oneand, to
use his own illustration, there is “a community of
faculty” between “the bright-coloured lichen” on
the rock “and the painter to whom it is instinct
with beauty, or the botanist whom it feeds with
knowledge.” Again, as to form; “ beast and fowl,
reptile and fish, molusc, worm, and polypa,” together
with plants of every kind, “are all,” as he informs
us, “ composed of structural units of the same cha-
racter, viz., masses of protoplasm,” either with or
without “a nucleus.” Hence he concludes that
there is between all living things, “between the
animalcule and the whale,” and “between the fungus
and the great pine of California,” “ a community of


form or structure.” Lastly, as to substantial com-
position ; bis proof of this consists simply in the
statement already quoted, that all forms of proto-
plasm contain the same four elements, and further
that “ they behave similarly to several re-agents.”
Hence, according to his conception, there is, as to
their substance or material composition, no difference
between “ the flower which a girl wears in her hair,
and the blood which courses through her youthful
veins.” Such is his mode of demonstrating this
threefold unity. Does it not remind you of the
reasons by which a horse-chestnut can be most
conclusively proved to be a chestnut horse ?
But it may be asked —what has all this to do
with the Bible, or with our religious belief? No-
thing whatever. But the author, whose object evi-
dently is not to teach science, but to propagate
infidelity, grounds upon it the inference, that all
vegetable and animal life, including therein what
we usually call spiritual life, is “the product of a
certain disposition of material molecules,” and that
“matter and law have swallowed up spirit and
spontaneity.” At the same time he assures, us that
he is “no materialist;” for that, in fact, he does not
believe in the real existence of either matter or
spirit. Nevertheless —so inconsistent are writers of


this kind with themselves—he does not hesitate to
use such phrases as “I do not think he has any
right to call me a sceptic,” “ I conceive that I am
simply honest and truthful.” What does it signify
that a man calls him a sceptic, or what is to be
honest and truthful, if “spirit, gesture, and every
form of human action, are,” as he tells us, “ resolv-
able into muscular contraction, and muscular con-
traction is but a transitory change in the relative
positions of the parts of a muscle 1 ?” Again, he says
that “our volition counts for something as a con-
dition of the course of events.” But what is volition
if law have devoured spontaneity ? I will only re-
mark further that, although I could not undertake
to prove the existence of matter and spirit, there is
certainly nothing in his pamphlet to shake my
belief in the Bible statement, that not only did God
form “ man of the dust of the ground,” but He also
“breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and”
so “ man became a living soul.”
I now gladly turn from this painful branch of my
subject. If I have spoken of these three works with
severity, it has been because the object of the wri-
ters obviously is to produce in their readers a dis-
belief of the Bible; and, therefore, it appears to be
a plain duty for the lovers of the Bible to point out


that herein—observe, I only speak of them in refer-
ence to this particular matter —herein they have
shown themselves, to use the language of the apostle
Paul, “fools.”
The next proposition which I have to submit to
you is this :
Science, although it sometimes has, for a while,
appeared to contradict the statements, and, in many
instances, has necessitated modifications of the re-
ceived text and interpretation, yet has always home
not only negative, hut, upon every question which has
been thoroughly investigated, positive testimony to the
truth of the Bible. You will hear in mind that,
although the Bible is a volume of writings inspired
of God, yet the copyists by whom these writings have
been transmitted to us, and the translators who ren-
dered them into our language, were liable to err
equally with the copyists and translators of other
ancient books. We have, therefore, no reason to be
surprised or troubled if Science have shown, as un-
doubtedly it has, both that the Hebrew and Greek
text from which our English version was made is,
in many places, corrupt, and also that in that ver-
sion many words and sentences have been incor-
rectly rendered. On the contrary, it is a strong


confirmation of our faith that not only do not the
errors, although numerous, seriously affect any
point of faith or duty, but the correction of them
has frequently furnished an answer to some previous
objection. You will also remember that, although
the diligent and humble student of the Bible may
confidently expect, in answer to prayer, that the
Holy Spirit will teach him and guide him into all
truth, yet he cannot so depend upon divine inspi-
ration as to be able to say that his interpretation
of every particular passage is certainly correct; and
this liability to error, which attaches to every Chris-
tian individually, attaches also to the whole Church
collectively. We cannot wonder, therefore, that
Science, as it has detected spurious readings and
false renderings, so likewise should have shown
some generally received interpretations to be incor-
rect, At the same time we can readily understand
how, when these various errors were first exposed,
an outcry arose that the truth of the Bible was at
stake; and that if Science were permitted to teach
such things, man’s belief in the sacred volume
would be gradually undermined and destroyed. But
it has not been so. We now have no difficulty in
believing that the earth is a globe suspended in
space, and that it rotates daily about its axis, and


revolves annually round the sun. The language of
the Bible, which seems to represent it as a vast
stationary plain, and to ascribe day and night to
the motion of the sun, we now readily interpret with
reference to things as they appear to us, not as they
are in reality. Such language is not inaccurate,
any more than it would have been for one of us,
when leaving England for Australia, to speak of the
shores of our native land rapidly receding from our
view. In the same manner we are now quite con-
tent, I suppose, to give up 1 John v. 7, although
some of our fathers of the last generation con-
tended most earnestly for retaining so distinct an
affirmation of the doctrine of the Trinity in Unity.
I, therefore, have no difficulty in admitting, not only
that Science sometimes has for a while appeared to
contradict the statements, but that in many instances
it has also necessitated modifications both of the
received text and interpretation of the Bible.
I now proceed to consider the testimony of Science
to the truth of the Bible. This testimony is both
negative and positive. The negative has been usually
overlooked; but it is very remarkable, and..to my
mind in itself quite conclusive. Reflect for a moment
of what a variety of writings the Bible consists.
In the Old Testament we have a collection of dis-


tinct books of the most diversified kind—historical,
didactic, devotional, prophetical, in prose and in
poetry —written at intervals extending over a period
of about 1100 years, by men of the most various
characters and in the most different circumstances.
In the New Testament also we have another collec-
tion of a very various, although not so various,
description. Yet, if we except the first eleven chap-
ters of Genesis, there is no one portion of the whole
volume, in which it can even plausibly be alleged
that Science, has found a flaw. There are many
things difficult to be explained in the Bible. There
are discrepancies, real or apparent, between the
books of Kings and Chronicles, between the narra-
tives of the several Evangelists, between the his-
torical references of the martyr Stephen and the
apostle Paul. But all these difficulties and dis-
crepancies lie upon the surface. They have not
been brought to light by scientific research. Any
reader of ordinary intelligence may perceive them.
Science, so far from adding to, has, by the explana-
tions which it has suggested, greatly diminished
both their number and their force. In not a few
instances where Science seemed to have detected an
error, Science has itself confirmed the accuracy of
the Bible. Some of these I shall mention presently.


What I now want to impress on yonr minds is, that
neither the science of history nor that of language,
neither the investigation of the archaeologist nor
that of the geographical explorer, neither natural
history nor natural philosophy, has convicted one of
the sacred writers of any actual mistake. In the
v/' Bible there is found no such fabulous animal as
the phoenix, referred to in the Epistle of Clement to
v the Corinthians, no such absurd reasoning as that
of Plato for the immortality of the soul, no such
V contrariety with any trustworthy historian as
Xenophon’s Cyropedia exhibits to the narrative of
Herodotus. It is quite true that the Bible was not
written to teach us general history, or geology, or
natural history, or natural philosophy; but state-
ments relating to these several branches of science
incidentally occur in it, and what I now assert is,
that Science has not shown any of them to be false.
Taking into consideration the character of the Bible,
this negative fact is alone conclusive testimony to
its truth; and I might add, not only to its truth
but its inspiration also.
But, further, Science has, upon every question
which has been thoroughly investigated, borne posi-
tive testimony to the truth of the Bible. The time
at my disposal does not permit me to adduce proofs


of this assertion from the discoveries of Layard in
the ruins of Nineveh, the large additional knowledge
we have recently acquired of Egyptian history, and
the inscriptions upon the rocks of the Sinaitic desert;
hut I will notice one or two particulars which can
be briefly told, as showing in a remarkable manner
how Science has removed difficulties which itself
had suggested. You remember that a king of Baby-
lon is related to have sent messengers to Jerusalem
-to congratulate King Hezekiah upon his recovery
from his sickness, and his success against the As-
syrians. But, during a long period of years before
and after the reign of Hezekiah, Babylon was under
the government of the kings of Assyria. Here,
then, seemed to be an historical mistake. But the
more exact knowledge recently acquired has shown,
that, precisely at the time when the Bible mentions
this king, Babylon had revolted from Assyria, and
Baladan had established in it an independent monar-
chy, which, however, was overthrown a few years
afterwards by the Assyrians. I will take another
instance from the New Testament history, Sergius
Paulus, the ruler of Paphos when Paul and Bar-
nabas visited the island, is described as the deputy,
i. e., the proconsul, of the country. This was the title
of the governors of those Koman provinces which


were under the Senate, and was never given to the
rulers of provinces which were under the direct
government of the Emperor. The rulers of these
latter were called propraetors, or legati. Now, Paphos
was originally an imperial province, and so it was
thought that the title of proconsul was incorrect.
But it has since been pointed out that a Eoman
historian relates the Emperor Augustus to have
exchanged this with the Senate for another pro-
vince ; and hence the title is proved to be correct.
The following instances are of another kind: —
The ancient idea that the earth was enclosed by a
solid concave canopy, in which the stars were fixed,
has been shown by science to be erroneous, and,
therefore, the word “firmament” used in Gen. i.,
which expresses that idea, is clearly wrong. But
while the science of natural philosophy condemns
our English Bible, the science of language clears
the original Hebrew of all responsibility for the
error; the word used in it meaning, not a “ firma-
ment,” but an “expanse.” Again, natural history
has taught us that whales do not belong to the class
of animals related in Gen, i. to have been created on
the fifth day, but to the order of mammals, which
were created on the sixth day. Here appears an
incongruity; but again the science of language


helps us, by pointing out that the word rendered
“whales” properly signifies “monsters,” and aptly
describes those saurians which occupy so prominent
a place in that geological epoch.
Two other proofs of the confirmation of the truth
of the Bible by Science I will mention. One, which
I have never seen noticed, and which, therefore, may
perhaps not strike others as it strikes me, is afforded
by the discovery of Galileo, to which I have already
alluded —the rotatory motion of the earth, by which
the alternations of day and night, and the rising and
setting of the sun and moon, are produced. Through
this rotation of the earth the apparent motions of
the sun and moon are so connected with each other,
that, if the one was stayed in its course, the other
would be stopped likewise; whereas, if the earth
were stationary and each of them revolved round it,
their motions would be independent of each other,
and there would be no reason why, if one were
stopped, the other should not go on its course as
before. Now, we have an account in the Bible of
the sun being miraculously stopped, and we are
expressly told that fhe moon, in accordance with
the true theory of the earth’s motion, was stopped
also : “ Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou,
moon, in the valley of Ajalon. And the sun stood


still, and the moon stayed, until the people had
avenged themselves upon their enemies.”
The other, and the last that I shall refer to, is the
most remarkable of all; inasmuch as it distinctly
demonstrates not only the truth, but the inspiration
of Genesis i. It is the correspondence of the geo-
logical with the Bible record of the creation. Bear
in mind that Moses, or whoever wrote that chapter,
must have been wholly ignorant of geology, for
there is not a trace of the existence of this science
among mankind in the early ages of the world.
Bear in mind also, that he could have obtained no
information concerning the creation of the woild
from any human source. Upon this subject neither
he nor any other man could have known anything,
except by revelation from God. His account, there-
fore, must have been either inspired of God, or else
a pure fiction of the imagination. Now, that it was
not the latter is irrefragably proved from the con-
firmation of its statements by geology. Suppose any
one thoroughly acquainted with geology to be re-
quired to give a summary history of this earth, the
succession of plants and animals upon it, and the
laws which have regulated their production. Could
he do it in the same space—with the same accuracy 1 ?
I will venture to affirm that he could not. Let us


just call to mind the several steps in the work of
creation as they are related in Genesis, and observe
how graphically they describe a series of events,
each of which is verified by the discoveries of
geology.
The Bible history commences by telling us that
“ In the beginning God created the heavens and the
earthand it proceeds to represent the earth as
entirely destitute of all vegetable and animal life,
and immersed in darkness. This description exactly
agrees with the conclusions of geology ; the dark-
ness, doubtless, being occasioned by the thick va-
pours, through which the sun’s rays could not pene-
trate. The creation of light upon the earth, which
we can conceive to have been produced by the thin-
ning of those vapours, is afterwards related; but, in
the mention made of the Spirit of God brooding
upon the face of the waters, there is an intimation
of animal life having been previously produced in
them; and this is quite consistent with the geo-
logical record. Next comes the creation of the
expanse, the space occupied by the air, when the
larger portion of the surrounding vapour was ga-
thered into clouds, forming the waters above the
expanse, which were thus divided from the waters
under the expanse. The latter still continued to


cover the earth. But the Bible story tells us that
the next step in the progress of creation was the
gathering together of those waters, and the conse-
quent appearance of the dry land. This would be
the natural result of the upheaval of all the great
chains of mountains, which geology tells us occurred
at that particular epoch. Here, again, the two
records agree. Upon the earth being thus pre-
pared, we read that the dry land was immediately
covered with vegetation; and this fact, too, is at-
tested by geology. And now we come to a very
remarkable part of the Bible story: the making
of the two great lights, or rather luminaries, for the
earth—the sun and the moon. At first we are per-
plexed at this statement; for we cannot doubt that
the sun and moon were created with the earth at
the beginning. But this perplexity is removed by
the explanation, that then these luminaries first be-
came visible—shone clearly forth upon the earth.
And it is very remarkable that the effect of sun-
shine is, at that epoch, first distinctly indicated by
geology. The manner in which it is indicated is
exceedingly curious. During a long series of ages
the plants (I use the word as including all manner
of trees), with which the earth was thickly covered,
were all of a character that required for their growth


heat, moisture, and shade; arid hence we may infer
that the earth was then still overhung with thick
fogs, which the rays of the sun were unable to
penetrate. But at the end of that period, as their
fossil remains show, there began to appear forests of
trees, the hardness of whose wood, and their season
rings, proved that the earth was then in sunshine.
On the fifth day, as it is called, our Bible record
relates the creation of all manner of aquatic rep-
tiles and birds, and this likewise agrees with the
geological history. For it was at -this epoch that,
as it tells us, all the great saurians abounded upon
the earth, and that birds first began to fly in the
heaven. Hitherto, according to both records, no
mammals, i. e., no animals of the highest class of
being, existed upon the earth; but now in this sixth
and last era the Bible describes their introduction,
and geology also bears its testimony to the fact.
Nor is our comparative review yet complete. There
is still one point more to be noticed. Whatever
disputes exist among them about the antiquity of
man, all geologists are agreed that he was the last
created animal upon the earth. Thus they confirm
the Bible narrative in this also, that, when all else
was finished, and God saw that it was good, He
said, “ Let us make man.”


Thus the brief record in Genesis is confirmed in
every point by the results of geological science.
That record may suggest many questions as to details
which we are unable to answer; hut this inability
does not in the least impair the force of my present
argument. What I affirm is, that such a perfect
correspondence between Science and Genesis i., in so
many particulars, upon a subject on which nothing
could have been known except by divine revelation,
can be explained only by the truth, and therefore
the divine inspiration, of this portion of the Bible.
I can only just remind you of the controversy upon
this subject, and the doubt and perplexity occasion-
ed by it, even up to a few years ago. Even now
many hesitate to accept the interpretation which
geology seems to me to render necessary, and to
which I see no reasonable objection, that the days
in the Bible record do not mean periods of 24 hours,
but long eras of time. I must also content myself
with simply mentioning that geology affords no
countenance whatever for the hypothesis of Darwin
and the Vestiges of Creation, but, on the contrary,
confirms the statement of the Bible that God cre-
ated every plant and every animal after its kind.
The following out of this argument has compelled
me to draw very largely upon your patience; but I


trust, my friends, that I have succeeded in proving
to your satisfaction the truth of my proposition—
that Science, although it sometimes has for a time
appeared to contradict the statements, and in many
instances has necessitated modifications of the re-
ceived text and interpretation, yet has always borne
not only negative, but, upon every question which
has been thoroughly investigated, positive testimony
to the truth of the Bible.
The third proposition, which I shall now en-
deavour to establish, is this ;
There is no reasonable cause for us to doubt that
all recent scientific discoveries, and the speculations
to which they have led, will likewise issue in the
confirmation of the truth and inspiration of the
Bible. The discoveries and speculations to which
I particularly allude, are those relating to the an-
tiquity and original condition of man, which have
lately excited so much attention. A few weeks ago
my friend Dr. Bromby delivered a very interesting
lecture upon them in this building. The hypothesis,
by which he would reconcile the facts of science with
the Bible story, is not in my opinion admissible;
and there were some expressions used by him in his
lecture which I greatly regret, as seeming to indicate


a doubt respecting the title of the Bible to our un-
qualified belief in matters of history, and as likely
to be misapprehended by many of his brethren*
But while I feel bound to say thus much, I am not
going to run a tilt against my friend. lam quite
sure that, although he may differ from me in some
particulars, he has an equal reverence with me for
the Bible as the divinely-furnished treasury of all
religious truth, and, with respect to all matters of
Christian faith and duty, would be equally earnest
with myself in contending for its inspiration of God.
From the great variety of particulars compre-
hended in it, this branch of my subject is exceed-
ingly difficult to compress within the short space
that I am able to allot to it, and I must therefore
strictly confine myself to those matters which are
essential to my argument. The course which I
shall adopt will be, first, to bring together the
several classes of facts which Science presents to
our consideration for determining the two points
that I have mentioned—the antiquity and original
condition of man, and to notice some of the infer-
ences which have been drawn from them; and
afterwards to examine what the Bible tells us upon
the subject. We shall then be able to compare
together the respective testimony of these two wit-


nesses, and observe whether the conclusions of
Science disagree, and if so, in what particulars and
to what extent, with the statements of the Bible.
Several quite distinct classes of facts relating to
the early ages of man’s existence upon the earth
have recently caused scientific men to attribute a
very great antiquity to the human race. Of these,
the first to be considered is the evidence which his-
tory and tradition furnish of the existence at an
extremely distant period of highly-civilized nations,
and the establishment of powerful empires, such as
those of Egypt and China. Little doubt appears
to be entertained by persons capable of forming a
correct opinion, that the Egyptian kingdom dates
from at least 2700 b. C-. an( l that the authentic
records of the Chinese empire extend back upwards
of 2000, and probably 2300 or 2400 years, before
the Christian era.
Next, there is another class of facts, described at
some length, and with much graphic power, by
Dr, Bromby, in his recent lecture, which are thought
to indicate that man was an inhabitant of the earth
very long before that time. For my present pur-
pose it is necessary that I should briefly re-state
them. In England and France, in certain strata,
and among the bones of certain extinct animals, of


a kind that geologists had previously regarded as
long anterior to the existence of the human race,
have recently been discovered flint and other stone
implements, known now by the name of celts, together
with tools of bone, and broken pieces of a very rude
species of crockery, which clearly show that a race
of men in a very low state of civilisation was coeval
in that part of the world with those extinct races of
animals. Also in the extensive peat-bogs, which
are found in various parts of Denmark, have been
discovered implements of stone, bronze, and iron,
lying in the successive strata of the bogs —the stone
being in the lowest, the bronze in the next, and the
iron in the most recent strata; and what is especially
noticeable, in the lowest strata with the stone imple-
ments are found the prostrate trunks of Scotch firs;
in the next higher, with the implements of bronze,
the trunks of oaks; and in the most recent, with the
implements of iron, the trunks of beeches. Hence
it is inferred that there was in the country a succes-
sion of forests of fir, oak, and beech, with which the
successive races of men who used these various ma-
terials were respectively contemporary. But neither
the fir nor the oak has been for the last 2000 years
known to grow, or can now be made to grow, in
Denmark; and therefore it is argued that many


ages must have elapsed since the existence of these
ancient forests, and consequently since those ancient
races of men dwelt in or near them. Denmark
likewise furnishes other remarkable relics of its
primeval inhabitants. The shores of its islands
“are dotted” with numerous mounds composed of
gnawed bones and shells of fish, such as are not
now to be found in that neighbourhood, interspersed
with stone implements. From the circumstance that
in these old “kitchen heaps,” as they have been
appropriately called, no remains of any extinct
animals, with the exception of the urus, or wild
bull, which was alive in the days of Julius Caesar,
are found, and also that the flint knives and
hatchets are of a more finished description, it has
been inferred that these mounds belong to a later
period than the relics in England and France, of
which I spoke just now. This is therefore called
the second stone period. In Switzerland, again,
there exist very curious remains, which are of
quite a different character, but which tell a similar
story of its ancient inhabitants. A large number
of the lakes in that country contain the ruins, if
they may be so termed, of villages, which were
built on platforms raised upon piles, in water from
sft. to 15ft, depth. The sites of these villages— i. e.,


the mud under the platforms on which they were
built—afford abundant evidence of the condition
and habits of the people who dwelt in them. In
some—principally those of the Eastern lakes—no
implements, except of stone, horn, and bone, have
been found; but yet, in these are indications of
an advance in civilisation beyond the people of
the stone age in Denmark. In others, which are
confined to the Western and Central lakes, bronze
weapons and utensils have been dredged up, some
of them bearing a close resemblance to those which
have been found in Denmark. The inhabitants
of all these villages appear to have domesticated
the ox, the sheep, the goat, and the dog, and to
have cultivated wheat and barley. But in those
of the stone age, hunted beasts seem to have been
eaten more commonly than the domestic animals,
and the reverse in those of the bronze age.
There is yet another class of facts which are
adduced in this argument, viz., those which eth-
nology and the science of language have made us
acquainted with. It appears to be now generally
acknowledged that, while all the manifold faces of
mankind blend into one another, they may be
classified under three types: the Caucasian, which
includes the principal European and many Asiatic


nations; the Mongolian, of which the Chinese may
be taken as representatives; and the negro. There
seems also to be no reason to doubt that these three
great divisions of the human family were charac-
terised 3000 or 4000 years ago by the same broad
distinctions as at present. This, as respects the
negro, is actually proved by ancient Egyptian pic-
tures, in which he is clearly portrayed, and it may,
I think, be not unreasonably assumed of the Mon-
golians also. In correspondence with this threefold
division of mankind, there is likewise (and this is
a very curious coincidence) a threefold division of
the various languages of the human family. Science
has now grouped these also in three classes; one
of which, the Aryan—or, as it is sometimes called,
the Iranian or Indo-European —constitutes, in its
many modified forms, the language of the Caucasian
race, and includes the Sanscrit, the Greek, and the
German. Another, the Turanian, is the language
of the Chinese, and (strange to say) that, although
with some peculiarities, of the American Indians;
and the third is the language of the negro race.
Each of these families of languages may be re-
garded as having existed as long as the race of
men which uses it.
In this brief summary of the principal facts


which modern science has brought to light, relative
to the antiquity and original condition of man, I
have merely put together results, which I have
taken, and which you might any of you have taken,
from the common popular works upon the subject.
I have not examined, and in many cases I should
not be able to judge of, the evidence —historical,
archaeological, geological, ethnological, and gram-
matical—from which these results have been de-
duced; but I accept them, as I accept the pheno-
mena of natural history described by Darwin, upon
the authority of the various scientific men who have
made these several branches their peculiar study,
and whose characters justly entitle their statements
to credit. They certainly present to us a problem
the solution of which, while it is a matter. of no
small interest, is one of very great difficulty. I
do not pretend to be able to solve it; but I trust
to be able to satisfy you that, if it ever be solved,
it will be in a manner consistent with the truth
of the Bible.
But, before proceeding to compare these facts
with the statements of the Bible, it is necessary
to notice some of the inferences which have
been drawn from them, and which, although all
conjectural, and some in my opinion certainly


erroneous, are usually assumed to be as certain
as the facts themselves. This is one: from the
circumstance that Denmark, and perhaps Switzer-
land (although this is by no means certain), was
occupied successively by races which used stone,
bronze, and iron for their tools and weapons, it has
been inferred that in the history of mankind a
stone has everywhere preceded a bronze, and a
bronze preceded an iron age. But this is a quite
unauthorised generalisation, and, so far as I know,
entirely unsupported by facts, I am not aware
of any traces of a stone age in Egypt, or in any
of the ancient Eastern empires. No celts or kitchen
heaps have been found in those countries, which
appear to have been the earliest abodes of man.
No argument has been adduced against the hypo-
thesis that, at the very time when the inhabitants
of Denmark were forming their kitchen heaps, and
those of Switzerland dwelling in their lake villages,
the Egyptians and Assyrians had already attained
a high state of refinement and skill in the arts.
As has been remarked, the stone age has continued
here in Australia even to our own day, and lake
villages are mentioned by Herodotus to have existed
in his time. The fact, therefore, of a people using
only implements of stone or bronze does not prove


them to have been more ancient than others, which
had learnt the art of smelting and manufacturing
iron.
Again, it has been inferred that those ancient
people, who at the first only used stone implements,
gradually advanced in their knowledge of the arts —•,
first finishing more highly their tools of stone, then
discovering the art of manufacturing bronze, which,
as bronze is a compound of two independent metals,
would require no small degree of knowledge and
skill, and afterwards becoming artificers in iron.
But I have found no evidence whatever of any
such gradual progress. The lake villages of Swit-
zerland were certainly destroyed by a hostile race;
and the earlier races in Denmark may have been
in like manner exterminated by others more war-
like, and more skilled in the arts than themselves.
Of a similar character is a third inference, which,
in my opinion, is utterly groundless—viz., that all
the most highly civilised nations of the world
emerged from the same original state of barbarism,
and gradually advanced to their present condition
of civilisation. Of this, the facts that I have stated
afford no proof whatever. So far as we learn from
Science, there never was a period, at which the
Egyptian and the Chinese were ignorant of the arts.


Nor would such ignorance, if it existed, necessarily
imply a state of barbarism. It would not imply
any moral or intellectual deficiency. We might
as well speak of our great Alfred as a barbarian
because he was ignorant of the use of the compass,
and the art of printing, and the manufacture of
gunpowder; or describe Bacon and Newton as
living in a barbarous age because men were then
unacquainted with the use of gas, the power of
steam, and the electric telegraph, as infer that a
race of men were barbarians because they could
not manufacture iron or bronze. Science really
gives us no date for determining, with certainty,
what was the moral and intellectual condition of
man, or what knowledge of the arts he possessed,
when he first appeared upon the earth. It does
not enable us positively to decide whether the
savage races who have heretofore existed, or who
now exist, have gradually sunk into their present
low condition, or whether the civilised nations of
the world have gradually risen out of a state of
barbarism. For myself, however, I should have
no doubt, even if I had only the light of Science
to guide me, that the former alternative contained
the true explanation of the phenomena. The in-
dications of ancient civilisation in America and


other parts of the world, the traces which many
existing savage tribes exhibit of having formerly
held a higher rank in the human family, the
instances which history has recorded of the de-
generation of nations —all appear to show that
the natural tendency of man is to fall rather than
to rise. I have dwelt at some length upon this
question, because the view which we take of the
condition of primeval man has a direct hearing
upon his antiquity. If we assume that man origin-
ally was in the condition of the aboriginal Dane,
or, to make the nature of the assumption more
clear, the aboriginal Australian, we may certainly
conclude that it must have taken many thousands
of years for him to raise himself to the condition
of the ancient Egyptian. I do not believe that
he ever could have so raised himself. On the
other hand, if we believe that man in his primeval
condition was a being of high intellectual power,
then there is no difficulty in conceiving that within
comparatively a few years —so soon as the race
had begun to multiply upon the earth—cities and
empires, like those of Egypt and China, were built
and established.
The inferences which have been deduced from
geological calculations respecting the age of the


relics in the caves at Brixham in England and
at Abbeville and Amiens in France, and of those
in the mounds and peat-bogs of Denmark, and in
the lake villages of Switzerland, carry with them
more authority. But the calculations from which
they are drawn are based upon hypothetical data
of a very uncertain nature, so that even they cannot
claim to be regarded as certain conclusions which
we are bound to accept as Science. At the best
they are only probable conjectures.
One other circumstance I wish you particularly
to observe, viz., that Science, although it traces
up the characteristic differences which now exist
between the various races of man, and the lan-
guages spoken by them, to an unknown antiquity,
does not enable us to discover the origin of these
differences. In respect to language, Max Muller
appears to have traced out with wonderful skill
the affinities which exist between them, and the
modifications which some of them have experienced
in the lapse of years; but so far as I can learn
from secondary information (for I have not been
able to find time to read his works), he has not
established the possibility, still less, has he proved,
the fact, of all having grown out naturally from
a common parent stock. Science, therefore, does


not disallow tlie belief that the diversities both of
race and language which now exist all originated
at one and the same period, and not according to
the order of nature, but by a supernatural agency.
Here let us pause, and before we turn to the
Bible, let us review the classes of facts we have
to deal with. First, there is the acknowledged
existence of the Egyptian and Chinese, and the
probable existence of other empires at a period of
not less than, say, 2700 years b. c. Secondly, there \
are the visible remains of a race of men who lived
before many species of animals had become extinct,
and when the surface and climate of the earth,
at least in the northern parts of Europe, were
very different from what they now are; also the
remains of one or more uncivilised races, which
inhabited Denmark and Switzerland in prehistoric
times. Thirdly, there are the differences of races
and languages, which can be traced up as far as
we have any knowledge of the human family.
These are, I think, the only facts which Science
has, as yet, established. The length of time since
these several races inhabited the countries where
their remains have been found, the condition of
primeval man, and the origin of existing races and
languages, are all matters only of more or less
probable conjecture.


And now what does the Bible tell ns 1 ? It tells
ns, first of all, that God said, “ Let us make Adam”
(so it is in the original Hebrew, without the article)
“in our image, after our likeness; ” and in the
following verse, “So God created the Adam” (here
the article is prefixed) “in his own image, in the
image of God created He him, male and female
created He them.” In the next chapter of Genesis
we have a more particular account of man’s creation.
“ The Lord God formed the Adam of the dust
of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the
breath of life; and the Adam became a living soul.”
I may here notice, in passing, that the Hebrew
word for ground is Adamah, which, as you will
observe, is closely allied with Adam. The Adam
was formed out of the adamah. The narrative
proceeds to tell of God placing the Adam in the
garden of Eden, of the provision made for him,
and the commandment imposed upon him; and
then it relates how God brought all the various
animals to him that he should name them, and
how he gave them all their distinctive names. But
it tells us that there was not found for Adam (not
the Adam) an help meet for him, and therefore
God took one of the ribs of the Adam, and of it
He formed woman. From this account it is evident


that Adam, or the Adam, was, according to the
Bible, no savage, hut a being of great intelligence,
as well as of a perfect moral purity. Afterwards,
as is related, by his transgression of the divine
commandment he lost his moral purity, and so sin
entered into the world, and produced its baneful
consequences on all his descendants. Cain, who,
as we infer from the Bible narrative, was his
first-born son, became a fratricide, the murderer of
his brother Abel, Thenceforward the corruption
of morals rapidly increased, until the wickedness
of the Adam became so great upon the earth that
God, we are told, destroyed the whole race, with
the exception of Noah and his family, by a great
flood of waters.
This catastrophe, which in reference to our
present subject is the second great event related
in the Bible, took place, according to the chronology
of the Hebrew text, which is retained in our au-
thorised version, in the 1656th year after the crea-
tion. We are able to fix this date from the genea-
logical record in the fifth chapter of Genesis, and
a similar genealogical record in the eleventh chap-
ter enables us to calculate the period from the flood
to the birth of Abraham. According to our English
Bible, this was 352 years; and from other data


which the Bible supplies the period from the pa-
triarch’s birth to the commencement of the Christian
era has been calculated at 1996 years. Thus, by
this reckoning, it appears that less than 6000
years have elapsed since the creation, and less than
4400 since the deluge. Both these numbers make
the origin of man to be of a much more recent date
than the facts which I just now stated, in the
opinion of scientific men, indicate. Hence, as for-
merly in respect to the six days’ creation of the
world, different attempts have been made to bring
the Bible narrative into agreement with the received
theory of Science. For effecting such an agreement
two suggestions have been offered. One is, that
in the account of the creation the word Adam,
which appears to have been often used by the
Hebrews of man in general, and is frequently ren-
dered by “man” in our English Bible, denotes, not
an individual called by that name, but the human
race; and that many years may have elapsed,
and many countries of the world may have been
peopled, before Cain and Abel were born into it.
This is the hypothesis of my friend, Dr. Bromby.
The other, which has been proposed by M’Causland,
in a work called Adam and the Adamite , and by
an anonymous writer in a book entitled Genesis of


the Earth and Man, is of quite an opposite charac-
ter, It supposes Adam and his descendants to
have formed only one of the races of mankind—•
the Caucasian; and that the two other races —the
Mongolian and the Negro —existed long previously,
but that of them the Bible tells us nothing.
But besides others, whi<sh I need not now stop
to mention, there is one objection to both these
hypotheses, which appears to me quite conclusive,
viz., that they are inconsistent with the doctrine
of the New Testament Scriptures, For, first, in
his Epistles to the Romans and Corinthians, St. Paul
makes the personal individuality of Adam, which
he assumes as an acknowledged fact, to be the
foundation of his argument concerning our re-
demption by and resurrection with Christ. If you
look at Romans v. and 1 Corinthians xv., you will
see that not only the correctness of the apostle’s
statement, but the truth of his doctrine, would be
invalidated by supposing that the first Adam by
whom sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, was not one man in the same sense as was
the second Adam, our Lord Jesus Christ, who re-
deemed us from sin and death, and obtained for
us the gift of everlasting life. Again, if there
existed upon the earth races of men not descended


from Adam, such races would be excluded from
redemption by Christ. For only those who die in
Adam shall be made alive in Christ; only those
who have home the earthy image of the first man
shall bear the heavenly image of the second man.
That none are so excluded we have also, blessed
be God! experimental proof in the actual turning
of men of every race from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, by the power
of the preached Gospel. I have therefore no hesita-
tion in pronouncing each of these hypotheses to be
inadmissible.
Nor does it appear to me that either of them is
needed. For the facts of Science which we are
now considering do not furnish any sufficient cause
for rejecting the plain statement of the Bible, that
all the races of mankind now existing on the earth
have descended, not only from one common parent,
Adam, but also from a second common parent,
Noah. What has Science to allege against this
assertion? I have already pointed out that the
ages of the aboriginal races, as we usually call
them, in England and France, in Denmark and
Switzerland, are at present altogether conjectural;
and no mere conjecture can reasonably be urged
to invalidate the truth of the Bible. There is,


however, real historical evidence of the establish-
ment of the kingdom of Egypt and the Chinese
empire some hundreds of years before the date
which our English Bible assigns to the deluge;
and there is also the existence within a short space
after that date of the same different races of men
and families of languages, as at present, to be
accounted. Can we reconcile these facts with the
Bible story 1 ? Yes, I think we can; not, however,
with the chronology of our English Bible. But
here is to be noticed one of those providential cir-
cumstances which teach us, while we put entire
confidence in the Bible as inspired of God, not to
pledge the truth of God to the correctness of every
particular word or sentence contained in the volume,
which we call by that name. Our English .Bible
was translated from certain Hebrew manuscripts,
the oldest of which is not older than the fourth
century after Christ; but there is a Greek version
of the Pentateuch —the Septuagint —which was
certainly made from manuscripts of a much earlier
date; and there is also the Samaritan Pentateuch,
the manuscripts of which are likewise older than
the Hebrew. Now in both of these the number
of years from the flood to Abraham is sufficiently
lengthened to answer the requirements of Egyptian


and Chinese history, and it has long been a ques-
tion in dispute among Biblical scholars whether
the Hebrew or the Septuagint numbers are the
more correct. You have doubtless observed that
in many editions of the Bible the dates are given
according to two different systems of chronology—
the one being that of Archbishop Usher, which is
founded on the Hebrew manuscripts; the other
that of Hr. Hales, which is based chiefly on the
Septuagint version. If we assume the latter, which
we very properly may, to contain the true ren-
dering of the Bible, the historical difficulty alto-
gether vanishes. For when we reflect that Noah
and his sons probably possessed all the knowledge
of the arts acquired by mankind during the period
of 1656 years between the creation of Adam and
the deluge, and when we reflect further that during
the next thousand years the length of man’s life
was only gradually shortening from 600 to 200
years, and, therefore, the increase of population
must have been very much more rapid than at
present, it is perfectly credible that great cities
should have been built, and mighty empires founded
within a very little while after Noah and his sons
went out from the ark. Indeed, the Bible itself
tells us as much; for it mentions the kingdom of


Nimrod and the cities that he built, and Nimrod
was only a great-grandson of Noah, and was pro-
bably born within fifty years after the flood.
There remains, however, for us to account for
the differences of race and language which existed
at so early a period. Science, as we have seen,
does not in the least help us to explain their origin.
Does the Bible ? It does; for the next great event
after the flood, which is recorded in the Bible
concerning man, bears directly upon the question.
In the accounts which the Bible gives of the con-
fusion of tongues, and the simultaneous dispersion
of the human race “ upon the face of all the earth,”
we have, as is pointed out in a very able book
written towards the close of the last century, and
lent to me some time ago by a friend, not- only a
positive statement of the origin of all the varieties
of language, but also another fact on which we may
form a very probable explanation of the origin of
all the different races of men now existing on the
earth. The importance of this portion of the Bible
story seems to have unaccountably escaped notice in
the present controversy, but it well deserves that we
should spend a few minutes upon its consideration,
As to language; The affinities which have been
found to connect all the manifold languages of the


world with one another, and their consequent
arrangement into divisions and sub-divisions, are
sometimes regarded as indicating a natural growth,
and inconsistent with a sudden supernatural origin.
But the affinities between all the manifold kinds
of animals, and their classification in orders, fami-
lies, genera, and species, might in like manner be
regarded as inconsistent with their creation in the
manner related in the Bible. Such a notion has,
in fact, led to the absurd theories of progressive
development and natural selection. But there is
really nothing in such affinities inconsistent with
a divine origin. On the contrary, they are in
analogy with all the works of God, in which he
has been pleased to combine a wondrous unity with
the greatest imaginable diversity, and to connect
together by an innumerable number of intermediate,
links things which appear most strongly'contrasted
with each other.
Again, as to the various races of mankind; —The
arguments for the unity of the human family,
independently of the Bible, appear to be generally
admitted as conclusive; but Science can address
no evidence of the possibility of the European ever
sinking into the Mongolian or Negro, or vice versa
the Mongolian or Negro ever rising into the


European. Such a change I believe could only
be effected by a supernatural agency, or, at least,
by an agency of whose operation we have now
no knowledge; yet it is to be observed that these
races, widely different as they are from one another,
have nevertheless, like the languages which they
speak, their intermediate connecting links. Of many
nations or peoples it is difficult to say to which race
they properly belong. It is not unreasonable, then,
to conjecture that when God changed men’s speech,
and “scattered them abroad (in what manner we
do not know) upon the face of the whole earth,”
he also changed their bodily construction, so that
they became fitted for the different climates in
which they were thenceforth to live. The description
of the peopling of the earth by the descendants of
the sons of Noah, in the 10th chapter of Genesis,
seems to favour this conjecture. It gives the result
of that confusion of tongues which is related in the
following chapter; and the points to which I would
direct your attention are the systematic manner
in which the dispersion appears to have been
effected, and its great extent. Thus, of the descen-
dants of Japheth it is said, “By these were the
isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands, every
one after his tongue, after their families, in their


nations.” Observe the gradations—nations,
tongues; and the same expressions are used in
describing the settlement of the descendants of Ham
and Shem—they are distributed in their lands
after their families, after their tongues, after their
nations.
So far we have been following the Bible history.
Let us turn once more to Science. Has it any-
thing more to tell usl Yes; it furnishes very
remarkable testimony in confirmation of the fact
for which I am now contending, that the whole
earth has been peopled by the descendants of Noah,
and that every race of man has sprung from some
one of his sons. It tells us that a tradition of
the deluge, from which Noah and his family alone
were saved, has been preserved in every quarter
of the globe—from China in the east to America
in the far west; that it existed among the civilised
Chaldeans and Greeks, among the Syrians and
Armenians, among the Persians and Indians, and
that it now exists even amongst the savages of
the Fiji islands. Of all the great ancient nations,
the Egyptian is the only one among whose records
there is not found some trace of it. In the tradition
current among the Chinese, the resemblance to the
Biblical narrative is said to be extraordinarily close.


How could such a tradition have originated, except
in the fact that their progenitors had actually-
witnessed that great flood of waters, and been
preserved in the almost universal destruction of
the human race occasioned by it ? You will observe
that the tradition does not show the deluge to
have extended over the whole earth, which seems
to have been disproved by geology. It only shows
that the waters overflowed all that portion of the
earth which was then inhabited, and that all exist-
ing nations have sprung from the remnant of
mankind that escaped from them. This traditional
evidence in favour of the descent of all mankind
from Noah alone appears to me greatly to out-
weigh the argument to the contrary, which has
been drawn from the long periods of time calculated
to be necessary for the changes in the earth’s sur-
face and destruction of extinct animals in the caves
of England and France, for the formation of the
kitchen heaps and peat-bogs in Denmark, and for
the rise and fall of the series of lake villages in
Switzerland, Hereafter Science will probably en-
able us to determine with more certainty the length
of those periods. When it does, I, for one, shall be
prepared to accept the result without any fear that
my belief in the Bible will be at all shaken by it.


There is one other proposition which I think
necessary for the due completion of my task to
submit to you. It is this :
The evidence which we have of the whole Bible
being inspired of God, and, therefore, substantially
true, is so conclusive, that we cannot conceive of
any facts discovered by Science, or any theories
grounded upon such facts, being able to invalidate
it. To adduce in detail the proofs of this would
be to try your patience for another hour and a half;
but I trust to be able within a very few minutes,
by briefly bringing under your review the several
kinds of evidence which combine to prove the
divine inspiration of the Bible, to show you that
I am not making an unphilosophical or irrational
assertion.
The evidence to the inspiration of the Bible is
manifold, and its weight can only be duly estimated
by bearing in mind its cumulative character. First,
there are the historical and philological proofs, by
which the authenticity and credibihty of the several
books of the New Testament, regarded simply as
human writings, are established. They are of the
same kind as those on which we receive the works
of Herodotus and Thucydides, Demosthenes and
Cicero, Horace and Virgil, and other ancient


authors; and I may affirm without fear of con-
tradiction, that they are stronger than can he
alleged on behalf of any of the standard classics.
Similar proofs, not equally strong, yet conclusive,
attest the authenticity and credibility of almost the
whole of the Old Testament. As I have remarked,
this evidence in itself only proves the various
writings to be genuine and trustworthy; but in
proving this it really proves also the truth of the
miraculous events which they relate; for these are
so interwoven with their context that it is impossible
to separate the one from the other. We must
receive or reject all together. Hence this external
evidence would alone be a sure foundation for our
belief in the New Testament Scriptures, and in
the chief portion of the Old Testament Scriptures
likewise, But besides this, there is the corro-
borative evidence which the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament' mutually bear to each other.
For it is to be remembered that, although we
rightly regard the Bible as one whole, it consists
of two parts, and that one of them contains the
sacred books of the Jews, who do not believe in
the Lord Jesus as the promised Messiah. The
harmony, therefore, which subsists between the Old
and New Testament, the express testimony which


the writings in the latter hear to the truth and
inspiration of the writings in the former, and the
fulfilment which is recorded in the one of the types
and prophecies contained in the other, all afford
strong presumptive proof of the truth and in-
spiration of both. Then, again, there is internal
evidence of many various lands— e.g., the com-,
position of such a perfect whole out of so many
diverse parts; the oneness of mind in so many
writers of different ages, characters, and conditions;
the numerous undesigned coincidences which have
been observed both in the Old and New Testament;
the morality which characterises the entire volume,
and which, as fully set forth in the New Testament,
is not only incomparably superior to that of any
of the ancient schools of philosophy, but is in many
particulars of quite a distinct character; and (not
to mention any more) the unique, and in all the
several narratives of Him, perfectly consistent,
character of the God-man, Jesus Christ. Lastly,
in addition to all these, there is in every true
Christian the inward witness whereof the Apostle
speaks —“He that believeth hath the witness in
himself” This, although it cannot be alleged in
argument with an unbeliever, is to him that hath
it indisputable.


Now, what I affirm is, that no argument based
upon any discoveries of Science can at all impair
the force of such cumulative evidence. Nor is this
an unphilosophical or irrational assertion; for
evidence of one kind may be so conclusive that
no evidence of another kind, however strong, can
shake our belief in it. Although we may not
be able to rebut the one, we do not the less con-
tinue to believe the other. Whoever, then, is fully
convinced by such evidence as I have referred to
of the truth and inspiration of the Bible, will not
be shaken in his belief, and ought not to allow
his mind to be disturbed, by any allegations which
may be made in the name of Science to the
contrary. If he cannot answer these allegations,
he may put away the thought of them, and may
quiet himself with the assurance that they are
grounded upon some false assumption, or some
illogical inference, which will sooner or later be
discovered.
But some of you, perhaps, may be disposed to
ask whether the inspiration of the Bible, as a
whole, necessarily implies the correctness of every
statement contained in it. I think that it does,
but herein, I am aware, all true lovers of the
Bible may not agree with me; and, therefore, I


would not condemn every one who does not think
so as a heretic or unbeliever. It is, however, to
be observed, and on this account I attach so much
importance to my present proposition, that the
object of these writers who are now endeavouring
by means of Science to disprove particular state-
ments of the Bible, is not merely to persuade their
readers that the Bible cannot safely be relied on
in scientific matters, but to undermine the whole
edifice of the Christian faith, and to banish from
the minds of men in this enlightened age the
unphilosophical idea (so they regard it) of a revela-
tion from God. All who read their works must
perceive that they disbelieve the New Testament as
well as the Old, and that they would, if possible,
make all other men unbelievers like themselves.
And now, if I may venture to do so, I will
assume the privilege of an old man, and conclude
my lecture by giving my younger friends in this
assembly some advice, which has been suggested
by its preparation.
In the first place, if you would escape having
your faith shaken, or your minds disturbed, by
unexpected discoveries of Science, and by the use
made of such discoveries by sceptical writers, take
pains to acquaint yourselves with the evidences,


external and internal, for the truth and inspiration
of the Bible. For this no great labour is needed.
Any popular work upon the evidences of Chris-
tianity, such as those of Archbishop Whately and
Bishop M’llvaine, will give you all the information
that you require; only you must really apply
your minds to the subject, so as to understand and
remember what you read, and thus be able to
give an intelligent answer to every one who asks
you a reason of your belief.
Secondly, if you are desirous of satisfying your-
selves as to the relation in which Science stands
to the Bible, read some of the excellent books
which have recently been written upon this subject
by true Christian philosophers, such as The Bible
and Modern Thought , by Birks; Modern Scepticism
and Modern Science, and Science and Scripture,
by Professor Young; and The Beign oj Law and
Primeval Man, by the Duke of Argyle.
Thirdly, if any works such as I have been re-
viewing this evening, or any of the many pamphlets,
now so common, impugning the veracity of the
Bible, come in your way, do not read them cur-
sorily ; and do not, because of the scientific re-
putation of any author, assume the truth of his
conclusions. Analyse every argument, distinguish-


ing between what is an ascertained fact, and what
a mere conjecture, what the record of an obser-
vation and what an idea of the imagination, what
a crude hypothesis and what an established theory.
You will thus be able to determine their real
character, and the weight which is to be attached
to them.
Fourthly, if any facts of science seem to con-
tradict a statement of the Bible, do not at once
assert that they cannot be true; but compare the
facts and the statement carefully together, and see
whether they do not admit of being reconciled with
one another. If any new reading or interpretation
of the text be proposed in order to reconcile them,
give it due consideration, and if it appear rea-
sonable, accept ; if unreasonable, reject it. If no
satisfactory solution of a difficulty can be found,
regard it as intended to try your faith, and patiently
wait. You may be sure that all questions relating
to science will eventually be settled without any
discredit to the Bible.
Lastly, and above all, read constantly, day by
day, the Bible itself • and not only read the Scrip-
tures, but “ mark, learn,” and pray that God will,
by His Holy Spirit, enable you to “ inwardly digest
them.” Then shall you be armed against all the


wiles of the devil, and having heartily embraced,
shall continue to “hold fast, the blessed hope of
everlasting life” which God has given us in His
Son, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
,I M \
ifi
|fr|- , .




Australia’s Heroes;
Being a slight Sketch of the most prominent amongst the
band of gallant men who devoted their lives and energies
to the cause of Science, and the development of the fifth
Continent. By C. H. Eden, Esq., Author of the
‘ ‘ Fortunes of the Fletchers, ’ ’ &c. With Map. Crown 8 vo
cloth boards
5 o
Brave Dame Mary; or. The Siege of Corfe Castle.
With three full-page illustrations on toned paper, Crown
8vo cloth boards
2 O
Butterflies and Fairies.
On toned paper, with six full-page illustrations. Royal
i6mo cloth boards
2 O
Effie and her Ayah; or, The Faithful Monkey and
his little White Mistress.
On toned paper, with four full-page illustrations. Royal
16mo ..' cloth boards i 6
[i. 12. 75.] [Fcap. 8vo.
PUBLICATIONS
OF THE
Smell for JptMrimg Clmstfon
Most of these Works may be had in ornamental bindings,
with gilt edges, at a small extra charge.
s. d.
A Child of the Glens.
iBmo cloth boards i o
Adventures of Marshall Vavasour, Midshipman.
With three full-page illustrations on toned paper. Crown
Bvo cloth boards i 6
Alice in the Country.
On toned paper, with three full-page illustrations.
Royal x6mo cloth boards i 6
Castle Cornet; or, The Island’s Troubles in the
Troublous Times.
A Story of the Channel Islands. By LOUISA Hawtrey.
With four illustrations on toned paper. Crown Bvo
cloth boards 2 o
Charlie Tyrrell, and other Tales illustrative of the
Lord’s Prayer.
By C. E. Bowen, Author of “New Stories on Old
Subjects.” Three full-page illustrations on toned paper.
Crown Bvo cloth boards 1 6
Dick Ford and his Father.
By the Author of “ Looking Up.” iBmo ... cloth boards 1 o


PUBLICATIONS OF THE SOCIETY
;j ‘ ; Price.
Ellen North’s Crumbs.
By Anna H. Drury, Author of ‘ ‘ Richard Rowe’s
Parcel,” &c. With three full-page illustrations on toned
paper, Fcap. Bvo cloth boards i 6
First Hector of Burgstead, The.
A Tale of the Saxon Church. By the Rev, E. L.
Cutts, 8.A., Author of “ The Villa of Claudius," “St.
Cedd's Cross, ” &c. With three full-page illustrations
on toned paper. Fcap. Bvo cloth boards i 6
Fortunes of the Fletchers, The; a Story of Life in
Canada and Australia.
By C. H. Eden, Esq. With three full-page illustrations
on toned paper. Crown Bvo cloth boards 2 6
Gather up the Fragments.
Two full-page woodcuts, on toned paper. Fcap. Bvo
cloth boards i 6
Golden Gorse, and Uncle Mark’s Snowballs.'
By Florence Wilford, With three illustrations on
toned paper. Crown Bvo cloth boards i 6
Heroes of the Arctic and their Adventures.
By Frederick Whymper, Esq., Author of “Travels
in Alaska." With Map, eight full-page illustrations and
numerous small woodcuts. Crown Bvo cloth boards 5 o
His Heart’s Desire.
With three full-page illustrations on toned paper.
Crown Bvo cloth boards 1 6
Honest Owen and his Blind Sister.
iBmo cloth boards 1 o
In and Out of London 5 or, The Half-Holidays of a
Town Clerk.
By the Rev, W. J. Loftie, 8.A., F.S.A., Author of
“A Century of Bibles," &c. With four full-page
illustrations and numerous small engravings. Post Bvo
cloth boards 2 6
Janetta; or, The Little Maid-of-all-Work.
With three illustrations on toned paper. Crown Bvo
cloth boards 1 6
King’s Namesake, The.
A Tale of Carisbrooke Castle. By Catherine Mary
Phillimoke. With four full-page illustrations on
toned paper. Crown Bvo cloth boards 2 o
Klatsassan, and other Reminiscences of Missionary
Life in British Columbia.
By the Rev. R. C. Lundin Brown, M.A. With Map,
and three full-page illustrations on toned paper. Post Bvo
cloth boards 3 o
Ling Bank Cottage: a Tale for Working Girls.
With two illustrations on toned paper. Crown Bvo
cloth boards 2 o


Lofty Aims and Lowly Efforts: a Tale of Christian
Ministry.
With three full-page illustrations on toned paper.
Crown Bvo cloth boards 3 o
Mary: a Tale of Humble Life.
With three illustrations on toned paper. Crown Bvo
cloth boards 2 0
Meg’s Primroses, and other Stories.
By H. M. Chester. On toned paper, with four full-
page illustrations. Royal i6mo cloth boards 2 o
Message, The, and other Stories.
With three full-page illustrations on toned paper. Crown
Bvo cloth boards 2 o
Michael Penguyne; or, Fisher Life on the Cornish
Coast.
By W. H. G. Kingston. With three full-page illustra-
tions on toned paper. Crown Bvo cloth boards 1 6
Narrative of a Modern Pilgrimage through Palestine
on Horseback, and with Tents.
By Rev. Alfred Charles Smith, M.A. Numerous
illustrations and four coloured plates. Crown Bvo
cloth boards 5 o
New Stories on Old Subjects.
By C. E. Bowen, Author of “Stories on My Duty
towards God and My Neighbour," &c. With four full-
page illustrations on toned paper. Crown Bvo cloth boards 3 o
Panelled House, The : a Chronicle of Two Sisters’
Lives.
By M. Bramston. With three illustrations on toned
paper. Crown Bvo cloth boards 3 6
Parables of Life.
By Author of *“ Earth’s Many Voices." Royal i6mo, on
toned paper, with seven illustrations, cloth brds,gilt edges 2 o
Postmaster of Prenzlau, The, and other Tales.
From the German. With two page woodcuts, on toned
paper. Crown Bvo cloth boards 1 G
OVU LU/VU VUUf WJ A Cf
Stories of Success, as illustrated by the Lives of
Humble Men who have made themselves Great.
By James F. Cobb, Esq., Author of “Silent Jim. 1 ’
With four illustrations on toned paper. Crown Bvo
cloth boards 3 o
Stranger than Fiction.
A Story of Mission Life. By the Rev. J. J. Halcombe,
M.A. With eight full-page illustrations on toned paper.
Post Bvo cloth boards 2 G
The Children of Seeligsberg: a Tale of the Lake of
Lucerne.
By the Author of “Madeleine’s Forgiveness,” “The
Cathedral Organist" 1 6


The Story of the Old Plank, and other Wonder Tales.
Translated from the Dutch, By the Rev. John Widdi-
combe, late Master of St. Andrew’s Grammar School,
Bloemfontein. xBmo.. cloth hoards x o
Thousand Years, A; or, The Missionary Centres of
the Middle Ages.
By the Rev. John Wyse. On toned paper, with four
illustrations. Crown Bvo cloth boards 2 6
Uncle Tom’s Stories; or, Buzzes from Insect Land.
On toned paper, with four full-page illustrations. Royal
x6mo cloth boards x 6
Village Beech-Tree, The; or. Work and Trust.
With four full-page illustrations on toned paper. Crown
Bvo cloth boards 2 6
Wreath of Mallow, The, and other Stories more or
less true.
By Mrs. Jerome Mercier. With three page wood-
cuts, on toned paper. Crown Bvo cloth boards 2 o
Year in the Country, A: a Tale of the Seasons.
On toned paper. Royal x6mo cloth boards 1 6
New Series of 3s. 6d. Books.
Post B vo, with Coloured Frontispiece and Title, Four Full-page
Woodcuts, and numerous small Engravings,
A Cruise on the Bosphorus, and in the Marmora and HSgean
Seas.
By the Rev. G. Fyler Townsend, M.A., Author of “The
Sea Kings,” “ Siege of Colchester,” &c.
Away on the Moorland: a Highland Tale.
By A. C. Chambers, Author of “ Robin the Bold,” &c.
Julian’s Dream. A Story of A.D. 362.
By the Rev. Gerald S. Davies, Author of " Gaudentius,” &c.
Rosamond Perrarg.
By M. Bkamston, Author of “ The Panelled House,” &c.
The Settlers: a Tale of Virginia.
By W. H. G. Kingston, Esq., Author of “ The Two Ship-
mates,” “ Michael Penguyne,” &c.
Two Campaigns: a Tale of Old Alsace.
By A. H. Engelbach, Esq., Author of “Lionel’s Revenge," &c.
:
77, Great Queen Street, Li-ncoln’s-Inn Fields ;
4, Royal Exchange ; 48, Piccadilly ;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.




m
Si
n
Science mid The Bible:
A LECTUEE
Bt the RIGHT KEY’. CHAS. PERKY, D.D,
LORD BISHOP OF MELBOURNE
DELIVERED, BIT REQUEST , O:,V MONDAY. SEPT. 20, 1860.
'icCvT
m
M .. |
LONDON •,
P\ | SOCIETY PUR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
SOLD AT the DEPOSITOI;ies :
77, Great Quels Street. Lincoln's Inn Fields;
s§®J
(<D(\
4, Royal Exchange; 48, Piccadilly;
and by all booksellers.
London : Printed by J<ul Truscott & Son, Suffolk Lane, E.C.
