

perv Pfttn
SCIENCE AND RELIGION
PAHS
Delivered in St. John’s Church, Camberwell, on
Sunday Evening, iqth August, 1883
Bang a Review of Mr. Justice Higinbothanis Lecture
Rev. A. W. CRESSWELL, M.A.
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
1883
PRICE SIXPENCE.


y r>
if ' t , v ’ ;
\'/:A i'-J
V>*
VI v r w
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAT, AND CO.,
9 MACKILLOP STREET.


SCIENCE AND RELIGION.
You are aware that a very interesting lecture on “ Science and
'Religion” has lately been delivered in the Scots’ Church, Melbourne,
which has been circulated far and wide in the newspapers and in
pamphlet form, and has attracted a good deal of attention—not only
on account of the important subject it deals with, but also because
of the eminent character and ability of the Lecturer. It contains a
great deal of heart-searching truth that must appeal to every thought-
ful Christian, and yet a great deal, we must add, that must cause much
pain to everyone who has the interests of religion at heart. We
deeply deplore, with him, the decay of faith that is said to be increasing
in the minds of the laity, and also the divided and distracted state of
the Christian Church; but we must venture to differ totally with him
as to the reasonableness of the grounds that he gives for the one evil
and as to the remedy he proposes for the other; and this being so,
we think it to be our duty to endeavdur to point out, as God shall
help us, the fallacies in his reasoning, and to guard our people
against the danger of being carried away by them.
First, as to the decay of faith, as we prefer to call it, but
which the Lecturer describes as “the waning influence of the
Churches ” The foremost of the causes he assigns for this is
“the influence of modern science,” and more especially the
revelations of “astronomy and geology, which have so enlarged
our ideas of space and time as to put a very great change between
the condition of the mind of an educated man who may have
lived between the 2nd and 16th centuries and the condition of the
mind of a student of science in the last quarter of the 19th century.
The former,” he says, “ had been taught to look upon the earth as the
centre of the universe, and that the sun and moon and stars revolved
in order round it, all having been created for man’s convenience
alone, and that about 6,000 years ago, whilst the latter has learned to
know that the earth itself is but the merest speck in creation, that it
is the sun and not the earth that is the centre of our planetary
system, and that the fixed stars that spangle the midnight heavens,
innumerable though they be, are all supposed to be the suns of other
systems of planets, and that all have existed for untold millions of
years.” Now, why this enlarged knowledge of an educated layman
of the present day should alienate his mind from the teaching of the


Clergy we are at a loss to conjecture, unless it can be shown that we
are all fossil relics of the mediteval ages, who obstinately turn our
backs on all science, and shut our eyes to all discovery, and that we are
quite at one with the Spanish Inquisition in condemning Galileo for
asserting that it is the earth that moves and not the sun. But is it not
notorious that the very reverse is the fact, and that the clergy them-
selves, so far from being behind the age, have ever been at the fore-
front in making and verifying these very discoveries of modern
science. Sir Isaac Newton, though not himself a clergyman, was a very-
devout Christian layman, who wrote as much in elucidation of Scrip-
ture as he did on astronomy, whilst two of the brightest lights that
have written on that science in the beginning of the present century
were both clergymen, viz., Professor Whewell and Dr. Chalmers.
Again, have not two clergymen, Dr. Buckland and Professor Sedgwick,
been among the very fathers of English geology ?—whilst the two
pioneers and leaders of Australian geology have also been clergymen,
viz., Rev. W. B. Clarke, Church of England clergyman, of New South
Wales, and Rev. Julian T. Woods, Roman Catholic priest, of South
Australia, but whose names are in all the colonies. But a far more
important question than whether there is anything in the discoveries
of modern science to alienate the minds of the laity from the clergy is
the question as to whether there is anything in these discoveries that
can be proved to be irreconcilable with the Bible itself, upon which
the clergy base their teaching. The Lecturer admits there is no
opposition between science and what he chooses to call religion, but
implies there is some opposition between science and the Bible. This,
then, is the real point at issue—ls it so? In answer to this ques-
tion we fearlessly and unhesitatingly answer No, and will proceed to
give reasons for this assertion.
First, then, as to the discoveries of astronomy, spoken of just
now as enlarging our ideas of space. Is the Bible committed
to any false theoiy of the earth as the centre of the universe?
It is perfectly true that those who lived in the dark ages
had put such an interpretation upon certain metaphorical expres-
sions of Scripture, as to make them accord with their own
ignorant conceptions of things, and hence translated the word
“ expanse ” —the word used for the air or atmosphere —by the word
“ firmamentum ” in the Vulgate, so as to give the impression of the
theory of a solid vault, in which the sun and moon and stars were
immoveably fixed ; but however this may have been the theory of
the middle ages, this could not possibly, as Dr. M‘Caul, the London
Professor of Hebrew, has shown,* have been the Mosaic idea of
the relation between the earth and the sun, moon and stars.
The Old Testament certainly speaks of sunrise and sunset, but
to “infer that the Scripture teaches the immobility of the earth
because it speaks of sunrise and sunset, or because Joshua said,
‘Sun, stand thou still,’ is just as fair as to attribute the same
error to compilers of nautical almanacs and astronomical tables, or
* “ Aids to Faith,” p. 223.


to scientific men, in their common parlance—tor there are certain
popular phrases ” conveying relative truth “ which no universality of
science will ever banish from among us.” Now, we are not of those
who suppose that the Bible was given to reveal science ; on the con-
trary, we endeavoured to point out a few Sundays ago some reasons
why it should not do so, but we should be left to our own resources
on the subject ; and so we believe that Holy Scripture is not
committed to any scientific theories at all, and that when, in teaching
its moral and spiritual lessons, it has occasion to allude to the pheno-
mena of nature, it does so, for the most part, in the language of
everyday life; still we believe that the Bible has been remarkably
preserved from saying anything contrary to science, but so speaks as
to “ run round the outer margin of all possible scientific discovery,”
while instances are not wanting that, when illustrating, by an appeal
to natural phenomena, the power and wisdom of the Creator on the
one hand, or the nothingness of man on the other, it often uses
language which soars up to a wondrous height, and seems to speak
for all time and for all discovery— e.g., where we read in the Book of
Job of the Almighty, “that He stretcheth out the north over the
empty space and haugeth the earth upon nothing.” Or where David
exclaims, in language which seems to have been expressly inspired to
meet that condition of mind which the fullest discoveries of astronomy
beget—“ When I consider Thy heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the
moon and the stars which Thou hast ordained, what is man that
Thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that Thou visitest him ?”
If these words had any force in David’s time, with the inadequate
notions of astronomy that are supposed to have prevailed then, how
much stronger force have they now under the fuller light of science
we possess!
This last quotation from the Psalms brings us to remark that
the fact that the earth is not the physical centre of the
material universe is no reason whatever why it may not have
a moral and spiritual centrality, as the scene of the great drama
of Redemption—for globes of mere material matter, innumerable
and ponderous though they may be, cannot be brought for one
moment into comparison with the moral and spiritual worth of the
human race. What, for instance, said our blessed Lord of a single
individual ?—“ What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world
and lose his own soul, or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul ? ” And even supposing all the other worlds in the universe to
be inhabited, which as regards the planets of our own system is
not to be so readily assumed as many seem to think, no creature
at all like man—unless there be some special atmospheric provision
to counteract the effect of heat—being able to exist on the interior
planets, such as Mercury and Venus, so near are they to the sun; whilst
as for the exterior planets, Mars alone is comparable with the Earth,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune being, on account of their low
density, regarded by many astronomers as mere rotating globes of
water. But, even supposing, for the sake of argument, what no one
can prove, the fixed stars to be suns, and to have systems of


planets revolving round them, inhabited by beings akin to man—•
it would not necessarily follow that this earth might not have
been chosen out as a very wonderful instance of God’s election,
to be the scene of the great events connected with the great
scheme of redemption, in the benefits of which other worlds might
share, just, for instance, as it was a very remarkable instance of
God's election that He should have chosen out so insignificant a
village as Bethlehem in the world itself to be the locale of the Incar-
nation of the Son of God, as expressed in the well-known words,
“ And thou, Bethlehem-Ephratah, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall He come forth unto me that
is to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from old, from
everlasting.”
The next science which the learned and eminent Lecturer
adverts to as wonderfully enlarging our ideas of time—of which,
of course, the clergy are all living in sublime ignorance—is the
science of geology, and which goes to show that the age of our earth
itself must be measured “ not by thousands, but by scores and even
by hundreds of millions of years.” Now, conceding this to be a fact,
as it very possibly may be, though we must remind our readers that
geology is not by any means one of the exact sciences, and therefore
that its measurements of time can only be taken in a very loose, rela-
tive, and approximate sense —but, granting it as a fact, is there any-
thing in this wonderful discovery which necessarily conflicts with any
statement of Holy Scripture ? Nothing whatever, for it is a principle
universally agreed upon amongst all students of the Bible that, as
Dr. Chalmers has so well expressed it, “ the writings of Moses do not
fix the antiquity of the globe.” The opening words of that sublime
account of the Creation we have in Genesis are, “ In the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth,” and the very same phrase
is used by St. John with reference to the pre-existence of the Son of
God— 1 “ In the beginning was the Word.” If the phrase is wide
enough to embrace the eternity of the Son of God, it is surely wide
enough to comprehend all those millions of years which geologists
claim as the proper measure of the antiquity of the globe. There is,
however, one statement of the Lecturer, in connection with geological
science, to which we must utterly demur, and that is the statement
about the antiquity of man, viz., “ that the evidence yielded by the
earth’s strata points with reasonable certainty to the conclusion that
man has existed on the earth during a period anterior to history of
about 200,000 years.”
Now, here it is much to be regretted that the Lecturer has left
the ground of fair induction, and stated as a fact that which
in the opinion of a large number of geologists of high standing
is regarded not only as not proven but as a very improbable theory.
Now, it is obviously quite impossible within the limits ot a sermon
to review the arguments by which that theory has been advocated;
otherwise it would not be difficult to show how completely they
fail to prove the point at issue, and how all the facts relied on
are perfectly consistent with the generally received belief that man


has only existed on this planet for about 6,000 years, as Scripture ap-
pears to teach. # There is, however, one truth which in the opinion of
all geologists the facts and arguments do establish, and that is that
man was formerly coeval with some of the more recently extinct
animals, e.g., the mammoth and the mastodon; but the question is,
may not this circumstance be taken with far more probability as
tending to bring the age of these animals forwards rather than as
carrying the age of man backwards. And, in order to show that this
is the far more likely explanation of it, many years ago there was
found encased in ice in Siberia the entire carcase of a mammoth, the
flesh of which was in such a perfect state of preservation as to afford
food for the wolves and the bears, and, a very short time ago, the
skeleton of a mastodon was discovered in the United States of
America, and between the ribs, filling the place of the animal’s
stomach, there was found an undigested mass of fragments of herbs
and grass precisely the same as those now growing in the im-
mediate neighbourhood ; and as a Southern and colonial illustration
of the comparatively late existence of some of the extinct animals, we
have evidence, in regard to the moa, or giant wingless bird of New
Zealand, to show that though now extinct, yet within comparatively
recent times its flesh was eaten as food by the Maories. There is
one point about the antiquity of man, however, that I should like to
draw your attention to, and that is, that Sir C. Lyell, its chief and
ablest advocate, belonged to the extremest section of what is called
the Uniformitarian school of geologists — i.e., he was one of those who
believe in the unvarying uniformity of existing causes, or that, in
other words, “ all things have continued as they were from the begin-
ning of the Creation f and that the rate of deposition, upheaval,
excavation, and so forth, that is now going on is just precisely the
same as that in which those processes took place in former ages, and
so all his calculations were based upon that supposition; but this is
a theory that of late years geologists have found to be getting more
and more untenable, and which a very short time ago the investiga-
tions of the Challenger completely exploded, by showing—though this
is a fact which applies more to geological calculations in general than
to the question of the antiquity of man —that the effect of denudation
does not extend for more than 200 miles from the coast line, and that
nothing is now being deposited at the bottom of the mid-ocean that is
at all comparable with the formation of the strata of rocks we see
everywhere around us, and consequently that many of these latter
were formed under conditions and by causes differing totally, not
only in degree but in kind, from those we see now going on.f
But to proceed. The next scientific dictum of the lecturer we have
to criticise is that in which he so eloquently descants on the “ order
and development that are observable in the history of plant and
animal life upon this planet as revealed by geology in that formless
matter changing into crystallized inorganic matter, inorganic matter
developing into organic 'matter instinct with life, plants and animals
* See. Note 1, Addenda. . + See Note 2,, Addenda.


of various degrees following one another in an ascending scale.”
Now, it is important for us to observe that although this is the very
language of extreme Evolution and Progressive Development, still, to
his credit be it said, the lecturer does not hold the atheistic form of
the theory that Haeckel and Huxley do, but expresses in glowing and
beautiful terms his belief in the original creation of matter by the fiat
of the Almighty, and that “ every movement of every particle of
matter ” is controlled by a Supreme Intelligence. Still, let us inquire,
will this assertion about this continuous chain of development stand
examination ? Of course we believe, as much as the lecturer or any
one else, in the beautiful order that is to be found throughout the
whole realm of nature; but, let us ask, has the order of God’s work-
ing in introducing life upon this planet been that which is commonly
taught by the theory of evolution; and, first and foremost we must
challenge the assertion about “ inorganic matter developing into
organic matter instinct with life.” For, in the words of Professor Lionel
Beale, the president of the Royal Microscopical Society, and one of
the best English authorities on the subject of biology, “ there are
no scientific facts which at all warrant the conclusion that non-living
matter only, under any conceivable circumstances, can be converted
into living matter, or at any previous time has by any combination, or
under any conditions that may have existed, given rise to the forma-
tion of anything which possesses or has possessed life.” *
But, again, when life had made its appearance, has the order of it,
however introduced, been that of progressive development ? We
distinctly and unhesitatingly answer No. A volume might be written
on this topic to show how completely the theory is refuted by
geology. Suffice it, in a mere popular address like the present, to say,
that although it is true that on the great scale, to speak of the vertebrata
alone, fish appear first in the lowest tier of rocks that contain them, rep-
tiles appear next in the series, then birds, then quadrupeds, and, lastly,
man, and so, on the great scale, there is a getieral order of progres-
sion, still, when you come to go into detail, you find it is not the
lowest orders of fish that appear first but the highest, not the lowest
orders of reptiles that appear first but the highest; and so on, also,
in the case of birds and quadrupeds.! Some higher, larger, and more
fully developed examples of each of these two classes appeared before
the present races that now inhabit the earth, so that, to use the
expression of Hugh Miller, “ the magnates walk first” in the great pro-
cession of life in each particular class ; whilst, even in regard to man
himself, there seems good reason for believing that, physically at
least, he was of robuster frame and of nobler proportions when he
first appeared upon the earth than now, reminding us of the Scripture
statement that, in the times before the flood, “ there were giants in
the earth in those days.” So much, then, for the theory of evolution or
progressive development in general.
The Lecturer next adverts to Darwin’s theory, which we all
know is a particular form of the theory of evolution, by which
* “New Materialism,” p. 30.
f See Note 3, Addenda.


he seeks to show how through natural and sexual selection man
may have been developed from the infusorial point up to a
monkey, and then from a monkey to man. The Lecturer does
not speak of this theory except for the purpose of putting it forth as
an illustration of the change that has taken place in the attitude of
what he terms “ ecclesiasticism” towards what he calls science, but
which, we fear, is oftener “science falsely so called,” the change of
attitude consisting in the fact that whereas when the theory was first
broached it was denounced on all sides by the pulpit, yet when Mr.
Darwin died his life and labours were referred to with respect both in
Westminster Abbey and in St. Paul’s. Now that Mr. Darwin has
propounded a theory of the origin of species, which, whatever mea-
sure of truth there may be in the principle of it within certain limits,
is in itself an inadequate account of their genesis, and especially, as
applied to the origin of man, inconsistent with Holy Scripture, has
been the unvarying opinion of the clergy as a whole from the first
day it was put forth until now; and in this opinion, so far at least
as regards the scientific aspect of it, not the clergy alone, but such
eminent scientists as the Duke of Argyll, Professors Owen, Agassiz,
Dawson, Dana, Beale, St. Mivart and M‘Coy, together with a host
of lesser lights, have distinctly joined. That Mr. Darwin was,
nevertheless, an eminent naturalist, who has laid the world under
an obligation to him in many respects, and that he was, above and
before all, a man of unblemished character and excellent life, the
clergy, however, have been first to acknowledge, and so could con-
sistently pay him the tribute of respect they afterwards did at West-
minster Abbey and St. Paul’s. Nor is this the first or only instance
in which the clergy, chivalrous to acknowledge the excellences
of those who are in error and even hostile towards them, have
shown that when a man’s heart is better than his head, his practice
better than his theory, and his life better than either his science or
his theology, they can respect him. Witness, for instance, the respect-
ful attention which the Lecturer’s own character and position have
won for his utterances at the Scots’ Church, utterances which, if
reckoned at their own intrinsic worth, either in a scientific or theo-
logical point of view, would not have claimed that attention.
The last of those pseudo-scientific assertions which run throughout
his Lecture we have yet to notice. It is that there is an irreconcilable
variance between modern science and the doctrine of the Christian
Churches on the subject of the fall of man and the entrance of death
into the world, and that science has undermined our teaching on
these two points, by proving—ist, That man did not fall from a
higher state, but that he rose from a lower ; 2nd, That what we call
death existed millions of years before man came into the world. Let
us briefly investigate these two points. The first is probably based
upon the scientific dogma (for science has its dogmas as well as theo-
logy, though often not half so well founded) —the scientific dogma
(connected with the antiquity of man) of there being three dis-
tinct ages in the existence ot the human race on earth—the
stone age, the bronze age, and the iron age—and that those


who lived in the stone age were necessarily far inferior in
moral and intellectual culture to those who lived in the suc-
ceeding ages. But even supposing these ages to have succeeded
one another in regular order (a supposition which is, however, very
doubtful indeed, for they may in a great measure have been contem-
poraneous—the stone age, for instance, still exists in Australia, New
Zealand, and many other parts of the world, and the Druids and the
Jews are known to have used stone instruments in some of their reli-
gious ceremonies), but even supposing, for the sake of argument, that
these ages did succeed one another in regular order, no argument can
be drawn from the fact that because man may have used inferior tools
and weapons in the earliest ages cf his existence, that therefore he
must needs have been in an inferior state of moral and intellectual
perfection. To take an illustration from the different means of loco-
motion in different periods of history, Shakespear and Sir Isaac
Newton, I suppose, used to travel in stage coaches, and you and I
travel in a railway train, but does that prove that Shakespear and
Newton were morally and intellectually inferior to you and me. What
says the Duke of Argyll on this subject—“ No proof, if proof there 1
be that primeval man was ignorant of the industrial arts, can afford
the smallest presumption that he was also ignorant of duty or igno- 1
rant of God ; ” and it is very instructive to notice in this connection
that the industrial arts are recorded in Scripture to have come to the
human race, not through Seth and the more faithful branch of the
human race, but through the descendants of the renegade Cain. Ib
was “Tubal Cain, who was the instructor of every artificer in brass
and iron.”
As then we deny that there is any scientific fact to prove that man
was originally a barbarian (and here let me remark that the oldest'
human skull yet discovered—(Engis)—belonged to a being of a'
high order of moral and intellectual development) so do we deny that
there is any scientific fact to disprove, not only the teaching of Scrip-
ture but the tradition of the whole human race, that man was originally
created upright and innocent, and that being put on a simple proba-
tion, “he by transgression fell”—whilst the fact that the whole human
race have inherited an evil nature and tendency to sin is a matter of
direct consciousness, and may be proved by daily observation ; it is
not a dogma but a demonstrable fact, let men call it in question as
they please; and here I will add, with reference to the Lecturer’s
assertion that the fall, and the hereditary sin of man resulting from
it, are not so much as once mentioned by the Founder of
Christianity Himself, that it may be perfectly correct that our Lord
never asserted this great historical truth formally and in so many
words, but irrespectively of the fact that His very advent into the'
world and mission amongst men are based upon the assump-
tion that man had fallen and needed redemption—surely the
following declarations of His sufficiently imply it—“ God so
loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son that whom-
soever believeth on Him should not perish, but have ever-
lasting life.” “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting:


life, and he that believeth not on the Son shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abideth on him.” Again, in a controversy with the
Pharisees about Moses’ permission for a man to divorce his wife
“ Jesus answered and said unto them, for the hardness of your hearts
Moses suffered you to put away your wives, but from the beginning
it was not sofor “ from the beginning of the Creation God made
them male and female, for this cause shall a man leave his father and
his mother and cleave unto his wife.” Whilst more to the point still,
as has been well shown by the Rev. A. J, Campbell in his address to
the students of Ormond College on this subject, which appeared in
yesterday’s Argus, the Lord Jesus said to the Pharisees, “Ye are
of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do : he
was a murderer from the beginning ; he is a liar and the father of it,”
“ where it is evident the Lord was alluding to the devil’s lie in tempt-
ing our first parents, and to his murder through the hands of
Cain.” And how frequently the apostles of the Lord speak of the fall
I need hardly remind you ; there is, however, one passage from St.
Paul to the Romans which I will quote, as bearing upon that other
alleged discrepancy between science and Scripture in regard to the
entrance of death into the world—“ By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin.” Now, the Lecturer tells us that science has
undermined this doctrine by proving that death existed in the world
amongst the lower animals millions of years before the comparatively
recent date of man’s first appearance. But does the Apostle intend
us to understand that it was the sin of Adam which brought death
upon the irrational aswell as the rational creation? Well, all that we can
say is, that some of the best expositors do not think so, but think that
the lesson we are intended to learn from this passage is not that death
had never passed upon the lower creatures before the fall of man, but
that in that fearful event sin had degraded God’s moral and intellectual
creature down to the level of the brutes that perish, and that “ death
received its horrors when its sentence fell upon man, who alone was
made in the image of God.”* Enough has been said, I trust, by this
time to show that the reasons the Lecturer assigns for the waning
influence of the churches in the spread of modern science are very
ill-grounded, and that it is not true science based on induction and
buttressed by fact that we have to fear, but false science, sciolism,
mere theory, conjecture, and hypothesis ; and if I have not succeeded
in showing you this as well as might have been wished, you must
attribute it not to any want of strength in my cause, but to the weak-
ness of the pleading, and to the impossibility ot treating on so many
subjects within so short a space of time, so as to do much more than
meet statement with counter statement, and assertion with denial.
Having spent so much time in considering the evil the Lecturer
complains of, I can do but little more than just glance at the remedy
he suggests. If, however, we have succeeded at all in refuting the
science of the lecture, I think we may safely leave the theology
of it to refute itself. Suffice it to say, that after speaking in the most
* Pratt’s “ Scripture and Science Not at Variance,” p. 74.


exaggerated terms of the divided state of the Churches—exaggerated,
for, to judge by the terms used, you would suppose there was no one
truth they held in common, whereas, as we all know, they all hold by
the Apostles’ Creed, confessing substantially the same “ faith,”
believing in the same “ Lord,” having the same “ baptism,” and
acknowledging the same “ God and Father of all,” and the points on
which they differ, though by no means so unimportant as some would
represent, are comparatively trivial when compared with the great and
eternal verities on which they are agreed—after speaking in this lofty
and exaggerated strain about the influence of modern science and
the divided state of Christendom, the remedy he proposes is to
abolish, not merely all creeds, but, as it would seem, the greater
part of Scripture also, and to reduce all religion to two command-
ments, love to God and love to our neighbour; or, in other words,
throwing overboard the great historical truth about the fall of man, and
consigning the grand scheme of redemption to the winds, we are all
to become Deists, saving pnly a mere sentimental regard for Christ
as a great teacher, as if in such case we should not soon make ship-
wreck of the small fragment of faith the Lecturer still allows to us,
without the great and kindling example of Divine love which the doc-
trine of the fall and redemption of mankind set before us. Despair-
ing, however, as well he might, of ever getting the clergy to carry out
this programme, and after having previously confessed “ how perilous
it is for a layman,” even as well educated as he is, to set on the path
of evolving a theology for himself, he now proposes that all laymen,
most of whom are still less educated, should rise up in a body to the
rescue of the Church’s ills, and, with one fell swoop, “ pull down,
root up and destroy,” or, as he would express it, “reform” the
Church. We are not at all insensible to the evil and divided condi-
tion of the Christian Churches —our own branch of the Church
humbly confesses and honestly deplores it, both in her public prayers
and her hymns—but if there is to be any reform, it is not to man, we
believe, that we must look for it, but to God ; it is not by calling in
the aid of the ultra-democratic principle that is already working such
ruin in politics, but by appealing to a power from above, even the Lord
Himself, who is the Founder and the Master Builder of the Church,
and who in His own time and in His own way will re-unite, rebuild
and reform “ His spiritual Zion,” and make “ her once more a name
and praise in the earth.” Meanwhile, let us “ keep the word of the
Lord’s patience,” and be found neither as accusers nor as judges, but
as confessors and intercessors on her behalf before God and man.
In conclusion, I would not say one word that could be construed
as being at all disrespectful either to the personal worth of the Lec-
turer or to the high office which he has the honor to bear; but,
speaking generally, let me observe that it becomes a man to be very
careful how he ventures, without mission, without qualifications, and
without, perchance, even ordinary reverence, to assume the office of
censor of God’s Church. A man may be a very good judge in things
pertaining to earth, but the Church, being a Divine and heavenly
institution, however fallen, is out of his jurisdiction altogether. Her


sins may be very numerous and her failings very great, but they are
known unto God, and let no man usurp his judgment-seat, for Satan
is the accuser, and Christ is the intercessor; who, therefore, shall be
the Judge but God Himself?
In publishing the foregoing, at the wish of some members of his
congregation, the writer desires to add the following notes in
reference to some of those general statements which alone, of course,
could be used in the address itself.
1. Those who may desire a detailed criticism of the arguments
which have been adduced by Sir C. Lyell, and Sir J. Lubbock, for
the immense antiquity of the human race, are referred to the
following works : —“ Primeval Man,” by the Duke of Argyll; “ The
Antiquity of Man, an examination of Sir C. Lyell’s recent book,” by
Mr. Pattison, F.G.S.; “ Not Quite so Old as the Hills,” a pamphlet
by Rev. J. T. Woods, F.G.S. The whole subject is well stated too
on both sides in Pratt’s “Science Not Contrary to Scripture.”
2. The writer is aware that the naturalists of the Challenger are of
opinion that formations somewhat analogous to the chalk are now
being deposited at the bottom of some parts of the Atlantic and
Pacific oceans, but he is alluding here to those mechanically formed
rocks that are supposed to have been derived by erosion from the
continents, e.g., the Silurian sandstones and mudstones on which Mel-
bourne is built, for if the principle of the uniformity of existing causes
can be shown to be untenable for the rocks of any age, it equally
serves his purpose.
3. A few isolated exceptions tothis statement as regards quadrupeds
must be noted in the case of the marsupial remains ( Microlestes ,
Amphitherium , &c.) that occur in the Trias and Oolite, but still the
general law holds good that as soon as we ascend to the Tertiary
rocks, where quadrupeds begin to appear in full force, more highly
developed types, at least in point of size, come first on the stage;
e.g., the Palseotherium of the Eocene, as compared with existing
tapirs; the Megatherium of the Post Pliocene, as compared with
existing sloths ; or, to take Australian examples, the Macropus titan
and atlas, the Diprotodons, and the Thylacoleos, as compared with
our recent kangaroos, native bears, and native cats.


■~
•' * V '
• i /
i t
*■ >■. •! [ • j, w ; ; r I ; ».•
f' ' - , ■:(; i ' 1 f
"• 1 - V t : f- ■ ■■
L- - . * - • jf'. • ... * •; /I,. i t * *
A * ■ v ' ! ' ’ ■ “ , • ' ' ■ :v *.r ‘y • )
i : - •• ' ■ v. ■ • •. 1 5
- • *
1 '.'
’• ' •• ♦' . J
o’!
’ ' 1 • ••
■ J - . •»
I . . . * ■* ■*
X ' . .. 1 ’ ’ i
X'. r )
1 • " ' ' .■ ■ : .... f«-;




