

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY
ENDOWMENT FUND
Notes on the
ADMINISTRATION OF THE FIND
established by the
Science and Industry Endowment Act 1926
MELBOURNE. 1927
By Authority:
H. J. Green. Government Printer, Melbourne
C.110V.
Issued by the Trustees


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY
ENDOWMENT FUND.
A. General.
1. By the Science and Industry Endowment Art 1926 a sum of
£lOO,OOO was appropriated out of the Consolidated Revenue I'und, and
a fund, known as the; Science and Industry Endowment Fund, was
established. The fund consists of—
(a) the amount appropriated and the income derived from the
investment of that amount, or any part thereof; and
(h) gifts or bequests given or made for the purposes of the
fund and the income derived from or proceeds of the
realization of the property so given nr devised.
2. The fund is vested in and placed under the control of trustees,
who are the members for the time being of the Executive Committee
of the Commonwealth Council for Scientific and Industrial Research.
3. The income derived from so much of the fund as represents the
amount appropriated by the Act is to bo applied to provide assistance -
(a) to persons engaged in scientific research; and
(h) in the training of students in scientific research.
Income from gifts or bequests is to be similarly applied unless it be
otherwise provided in the conditions under which such gifts or bequests
are made.
4. While the trustees consider it advisable to retain considerable
freedom in their administration of this fund, particularly during the
first years of its application, and hence do not propose at this stage
to frame set regulations, they think it desirable to lay down a few
general rules for their own guidance, and for the information of those
workers iu science who will, it is hoped, take an active interest in
making this fund of real value in the development of research work in
Australia.
5. The present income from the fund is approximately £5,000 per
annum, hut it will be some months before sufficient interest has
accumulated to enable the trustees to set their plans in full operation.
0.1107.


B. The Training of Students in Scientific Research.
]. The main obstacle in the way of development of the Council’s
activities is, and will be for some years, the lack of trained scientific
workers. The trustees, therefore, are of the opinion that for the present
their main object in administering the fund should be the provision of
assistance in training Australian students for positions as research
officers of the Council. It is anticipated that about four-fifths of the
present income of the fund (i.e., about £4,000 per annum) may very
properly be applied to this end by the establishment of Research
Studentships tenable by distinguished honours graduates of Australian
Universities or Technical Colleges who have proved to the satisfaction
of their professors or. other supervisors that they are capable of taking
full advantage of an opportunity for intensive training in scientific
research. As a rule such studentships will be held abroad, but the
trustees do not wish to debar themselves from choosing an Australian
University or other institution as a field for training.
2. It is proposed that such studentships shall be tenable for two
years and shall carry an allowance of £3OO per annum, together with
such additional allowances for travelling fares outwards and home-
wards as may be required. It is estimated that on the average £l5O
will cover the latter, so that the annual cost of a student will be about
£375, or, say, £4OO, after allowing for any special expenses (fees,
travelling, &c.) incurred while abroad, and not rightly chargeable as
personal expenses. The expenditure of £4,000 per annum will thus
permit the maintenance of ten students abroad. Such students will be
expected to give the Council an option upon their services for three
years, on their return to the Commonwealth, at salaries specified at the
time of appointment. In the appointments already made, the minimum
salaries proposed have been £4OO for the first year, £450 for the second,
and £5OO for the third year.
3. The trustees will make appointments to studentships as occasion
arises and as men or women of the requisite ability are available. They
will be grateful to University professors or other teachers who bring
to their notice students of outstanding capacity, whether or not at the
time public announcement has been made of an intention to make
appointments.
4. In making appointments the trustees do not desire to receive
from candidates formal testimonials from a number of teachers or
others. They prefer to rely almost wholly upon the personal report
of the professor or other supervisor under whom the candidate has
received his higher training and carried out investigations. In effect,
this means that leading scientific men of the Commonwealth are asked
to assume personal responsibility in advising the trustees as to the
selection of suitable men.


C. The Assistance of Persons engaged in Scientific Research.
1. At first the trustees will have about £l,OOO per annum available
for the assistance of persons engaged in scientific work; but in the
course of time the pressing need to send students abroad for training
will no doubt abatCj thus freeing further money for the other main
object of the fund. It is hoped, too, that public and private benefac-
tions will materially add to the sum annually available for this purpose.
2. The trustees retain the right to obtain what in their opinion is
the best advice available to assist them in dealing with any applications
under this head.
They propose, for the present, to follow somewhat closely the lines
which have been proved satisfactory by the British Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research, and to invite applications for grants
for any of the three following objects; —
(i) To provide personal payments to investigators to enable
them to give whole or part time to a research con-
ducted independently or in collaboration with a professor
or person interested in the development of such research;
(iij to provide laboratory, clerical, or other assistance to persons
engaged in research;
(iii) to provide grants for special equipment and other special
expenses incidental to research.
3. In no case will the trustees entertain applications for assistance
when, in their opinion, such assistance should be provided by existing
institutions. Thus, they will not consider applications for personal
payments to members of the staffs of Universities or other institutions
having research as one of their functions, holding, with the British
Advisory Council, that “ research, no less than teaching, is a primary
function of these institutions, and the salaries attaching to posts on
their staffs ought to be sufficient to enable the holders to devote a
reasonable proportion of their time to the advancement of knowledge
within their respective departments.” Nor will they provide technical
or clerical assistance of a general kind in a research laboratory, or
apparatus which should be part of the normal equipment of a labora-
tory used for teaching purposes.
4. Applications should be made by the Ist of November in any year
so that decisions may be announced well before the commencement of
the next academic year; but, subject to funds being available, applica-
tions will be received after that date.
5. The results of research may he published as may he deemed
best, and a copy of the publication must be sent to the trustees.


6. No commercial use may be made by tbe investigator of the
results obtained unless the consent of the trustees has been obtained.
7. Forms of application may be obtained from the secretary to the
trustees.
The following additional rules apply to the three types of grant
respectively:—
I. Personal Payments to Investigators.
1. Personal payments will bo made only to investigators of proved
power’s to enable them to devote to some specific research time which
would otherwise he giveu to paid work.
2. Preference will he given to persons whose careers lie in research
work. It is not intended, for example, to assist persons who are
seeking research degrees as avenues to employment which will not
include research.
3. At the end of the period for which payment is made, the in-
vestigator will he required to submit to the trustees a report on the
progress of the investigation. Interim reports may he called for if
the trustees so determine.
11. Grants Tor the 7 Provision of 7 1 aboraton/ or Clerical Assistance.
1. The trustees will recommend grants under this heading only for
the purpose of assisting an investigator in a specific research in which
he is personally engaged.
2. The trustees will require a report at the end of each year upon
work for which they have provided assistance.
111. Grants for Equipment, &c.
1. All apparatus of a permanent character purchased out of a grant
is and remains the property of the trustees, who will determine, in
consultation with the investigator, its disposal when the research is
completed.
The trustees will he glad at any time to receive suggestions calculated
to render more effective their administration of the fund.
G. A. JULIUS, Chairman \
W. J. NEWBIGUST, > Trustees.
A. C. D. EIVETT, )
GERALD LIGHTFOOT, Secretary.
314 Albert-street, East Melbourne.
February, 1927.


SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY ENDOWMENT.
No. 21 o! 1926.
An Act to constitute a Final to be utilized for the purposes
of Scientific and Industrial Research.
[Assented to 21st June. 1920.]
EK it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, the Senate, and the
House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, as follows:
1. This Act may be cited as the Science and Industry Endowment Act 1926.
2. In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears, “the Fund” means
Ibe Fund established by this Act.
3. For the purposes of this Act there is hereby appropriated out of the
Consolidated Revenue Fund the sum of One hundred thousand pounds.
4, — (1) A fund is hereby established which shall be known as the Science
and Industry Endowment Fund.
(2) The fund shall consist of —
(a) the amount appropriated by this Act. and of income derived from the
investment of that amount or any part thereof; and
( h ) gifts or bequests given or made for the purposes of the fund and
the income derived from or proceeds of the realization of the property
so given or devised,
5. The fund shall be vested in and placed under the control of the trustees
appointed by this Act.
6. The members for the time being of the Executive Committee of the
Commonwealth Council for Scientific and Industrial Research appointed under
the Science and Industry Research Aat 1920-1926 shall be the trustees of the
fund.
7. So much of the capital of the fund as represents the amount appropriated
by this Act shall, and any income derived from the investment of that capital
which is not immediately required for the purposes of this Act may, be invested
by the trustees in securities of the Commonwealth or of the States or in any
other manner for the time being allowed by any Act or State Act for the
investment of trust funds in Australia.
8. — (1) The income derived from the investment of so much of the fund
as represents the amount appropriated by this Act shall be applied to provide
assistance—
(a) to persons engaged in scientific research; and
(6) in the training of students in scientific research.
(2) Assistance provided under the last preceding sub-section shall be
provided in such cases and subject to such conditions as the trustees determine.
9. The trustees shall deal with and apply so much of the fund as represents
gifts or bequests or the income arising from the investment thereof in accordance
with the conditions upon which the gift or bequest was given or made, or, where
no conditions are attached to a gift or bequest, shall deal with and apply so
much of the fund as represents that gift or bequest, in the manner provided
by sections seven and eight of this Act.
10. — (1) The accounts of the fund shall be audited from time to time by
the Auditor-General for the Commonwealth.
(2) A report of each audit shall be made to the Treasurer, who shall cause
a copy of the report to be laid on the table of each House of the Parliament.
By Authority : H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne.
