

SCOTTISH
AUSTRALIAN EMIGRATION SOCIETY.
Unto the Honourable THE COMMONS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
IRELAND, in Parliament Assembled:—
The Petition of John Keppie, Chairman, John Crawford,
Secretary, and the other Subscribers hereto—Members of The
“Scottish Australian Emigration Society”—
Humbly Shewetii,
That the Scottish Australian Emigration Society was established at
Glasgow, in February, 1853. Its leading or principal object was the enrolment of Working Men of all descriptions,
(Hand-Loom Weavers included,) with a view to obtain “Assisted Passages” to Australia, and especially to the
Colony of New South Wales, in accordance with the Colonial Act 16 Viet., No. 42, for those Members who were
willing to contribute £5 each adult towards the cost of their Passages, provided the balance were paid by the
Colony; and “Free Passages” for those other Members, such as the Hand-Loom Weavers, who could not contribute
anything from their own resources towards the cost of their Passages. There was no limitation as to the number
of Members who might join the Society, which was not of a temporary, but of a permanent character; one of its
regulations being, that all right of Membership should cease on Members receiving Passages, their places being
supplied by new parties who might be enrolled.
In July 1853, the Society, including Wives and Children, numbered 540 adults, or thereby; and a Memorial
was addressed by a Committee, in name of the Society, to His Excellency, the Governor General and Executive
Council of New South Wales, praying that “Assisted Passages” might be given by the Colonial Government to
those Members who were willing to pay £5 each adult, and “Free Passages” to the Hand-Loom Weavers and
others who could not pay anything towards the cost of their Passages.
In June 1854, the Committee received a despatch from Mr. Riddell, the Acting Colonial Secretary, in name
of the Governor and Council, in answer to the said Memorial. The purport of the answer was, that His Excel-
lency was sorry that with advice of his Council he could not give Free Passages to the Hand-Loom Weavers,
but that if they paid £5 each male adult, and the like sum for their Wives, and also for every two children under
14 years of age, they would receive “Assisted Passages” the same as the other Members; and the balance of the
cost of their Passages would be defrayed from Colonial Funds on their arrival in the Colony. His Excellency
was pleased to say “ The Society is most praiseworthy, and is entitled to support from the Local Government ;” and he adds,
“the same advice and assistance will be afforded to Emigrants introduced under their auspices as are afforded to those
forwarded by the Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners, and Single Females will be received into the Depot, and
will be provided with situations .”
This special power conferred on the Society to send out Labouring Men and their Wives and Children to
New South Wales, on payment of £5 each statutory adult—the balance to be defrayed from Colonial Funds
was in accordance with the Report of Mr. Browne, the Colonial Immigration agent at Sydney, dated 21st January,
1854, in which Report Mr. Browne says “the Colony may fairly be expected to bear the cost of introducing less
eligible labourers, (Weavers, Artisans, &c.,) provided the cost be less than the cost of introducing most eligible
emigrants,” (Shepherds, Ploughmen, &c.;) and as £5 would be paid in the former case, and only £1 in the latter,
the balance to be paid by the Colony would clearly be less for the introduction of Weavers than of Shepherds.
It was in accordance also with the foresaid Colonial Act 16 Viet., No. 42, which provides for the‘introduction
of Labouring Men of all descriptions, Weavers included, into the Colony, on payment of £1 and £5 respectively
in this Country, and £l2 and £lO in the Colony, according to the description of the Emigrants, as they may be
Shepherds and Ploughmen, or Artisans and Weavers, Wives and Children getting Free Passages, and they repaying
the said balances of £l2 and £lO out of their wages within two years after arrival, in terms of the said Act, which
was enacted inter alia for the purpose of “facilitating the operations” of Emigration Societies, such as the Scottish


les [Section 10] that its enactments “ shall be applied, as
wised in the United Kingdom, or any part thereof, for the
ial Government of New South Wales to send out Em-
issioners. In the authority conferred, there was no
ader its auspices, nor any limitation as to the number
>t that the cost of the introduction of the Members
amber of Agricultural Labourers, or Immigrants of the
at the Society might, if they chose, or if they failed to
Emigration Commissioners to take out the members, at
rival in too great numbers of Emigrants “not previously
)t just so likely to meet with immediate engagements on
terms, to Her Majesty’s Colonial Land and Emigration
ready and cordial co-operation on the part of that
to say the Commissioners have, from the first, treated
erything in their power to thwart its operations, and to
prejudice its Office-Bearers in the minds of the public, and of the Home and
Colonial Authorities.
For instancein order to prevent the Society getting a ship to take out
the First Body of Emigrants, last
Autumn, the Commissioners wrote to the authorities at Glasgow to keep a watch on the proceedings of the Society,
and they insinuated that the Society was imposing on the public by pretending to have the sanction of Government,
whereas it had no such sanction. The seeds of suspicion and distrust being thus sown in the minds of Glasgow
Shipowners, the Society was prevented from getting a ship, and commencing a regular system of Scottish
Emigration from the Clyde, by means of Colonial Funds, and enabling Clyde Shipowners to participate in the
benefit of the expenditure of those Funds, hitherto almost exclusively confined to the Shipowners
of London.
Being thus foiled in getting a ship, the Society was obliged to apply to the Commissioners to take out the
Emigrants in their ships. This the Commissioners agreed to, but not until the Secretary of State had been
written to on the subject; and then it was under conditions which the Colonial Government never contemplated,
and which even their own Regulations did not require; and as these conditions could not in every case be complied
with, a great many of the Members who belonged to the Society from its commencement were excluded from
the privilege conferred by the Colonial Government ; and they remain till this day without having got Passages,
though highly eligible Emigrants in every respect. Moreover, when the Emigrants went to Birkenhead, there
to embark in the. ships provided for their conveyance to Sydney, the agents of the Commissioners openly accused
the Office-Bearers of the Society of having imposed on and robbed the Emigrants, and they created in consequence
a deal of dissatisfaction amongst them, and caused them to write to their friends in Scotland, informing them what
had been said—it being intended that this false and calumnious statement should reach not only to Scotland, but
should be conveyed to New South Wales, and so prejudice the minds of the Colonial authorities against the
Society and its Office-Bearers.
After the departure-of this First Body of Members from Birkenhead, the Society commenced the enrolment
of a Second Body, to sail in the course of the present Spring, 1855. This enrolment the Commissioners have
done everything in their power to frustrate.
The Society meant to conduct the Emigration of this Body “independent of the Commissioners,” as they are
authorised to do. In the beginning of January last, when about 300 adult members were enrolled, the. Society
had all but formally concluded an agreement with Messrs. Pilkington & Wilson of Liverpool, the owners of the
White Star Line of Packets, for the conveyance of the party in their fine Clipper Ship “Golden Era,” to sail in
March or early in the present month of April, But the Commissioners-hearing of this, wrote to Messrs. Pilking-
ton & Wilson, stating that the powers conferred on the Society were exhausted, and that they had no right to
send out any more Emigrants, until new authority was received, from the Colonial Government, Messrs.
Pilkington & Wilson hesitated in the face of this official announcement to go on with the arrangement, and they
wrote the Secretary of the Society accordingly-, but before the Secretary could have an opportunity of re-assuring
them,, and inducing, them to proceed with the arrangement,, the Commissioners: had put it out of his power, by
having chartered the “Golden Era” themselves for th&conveyance. of Emigrants of their own to Sydney; they chuck-
ling,.no doubt, at the idea of having check-mated the Society, and prevented them from commencing an inde-
pendent system of Scottish Emigration to New South Wales by means of Colonial, Funds.


Au s * fcuiu viiicn expressly provides [Section 10] that its enactments u shall be applied, as
far as they can he applied, to the operations of all Societies organized in, the United Kingdom, or any part thereof, for the
promotion of Emigration to the Colony of Neio South Wales.”
The Society was thus fully empowered by the Colonial Government of New South Wales to send out Em-
igrants independent; of Her Majesty’s Emigration Commissioners. In the authority conferred, there was no
restriction as to the number of Emigrants to be sent out under its auspices, nor any limitation as to the number
of Children in a family, nor any condition whatever, except that the cost of the introduction of the Members
should be less than the cost of introducing an equal number of Agricultural Labourers, or Immigrants of the
“Most Eligible class.” It was suggested, however, that the Society might, if they chose, or if they failed to
obtain a ship of their own, make arrangements with the Emigration Commissioners to take out the members, at
intervals of time, in their ships, in order to prevent the arrival in too great numbers of Emigrants “not previously
accustomed to Agricultural employment,” and therefore not just so likely to meet with immediate engagements on
arrival in the Colony as Agricultural Labourers.
Being thus authorised, and accredited in commendatory terms, to Her Majesty’s Colonial Land and Emigration
Commissioners, the Society naturally expected to receive a ready and cordial co-operation on the part of that
Board. Instead of this, however, the Petitioners are sorry to say the Commissioners have, from the first, treated
the Society with jealousy and enmity, and have done everything in their power to thwart its operations, and to
prejudice its Office-Bearers in the minds of the public, and of the Home and Colonial Authorities.
For instance :•—in order to prevent the Society getting a ship to take out the First Body of Emigrants, last
Autumn, the Commissioners wrote to the authorities at Glasgow to keep a, watch on the proceedings of the Society,
and they insinuated that the Society was imposing on the public by pretending to have the sanction of Government,
whereas it had no such sanction. The seeds of suspicion and distrust being thus sown in the minds of Glasgow
Shipowners, the Society was prevented from getting a ship, and commencing a regular system of Scottish
Emigration from the Clyde, by means of Colonial Funds, and enabling Clyde Shipowners to participate in the
benefit of the expenditure of those Funds, hitherto almost exclusively confined to the Shipowners
of London.
Being thus foiled in getting a ship, the Society was obliged to apply to the Commissioners to take out the
Emigrants in their ships. This the Commissioners agreed to, but not until the Secretary of State had been
written to on the subject; and then it was under conditions which the Colonial Government never contemplated,
and which even their own Regulations did not require; and as these conditions could not in every case be complied
with, a great many of the Members who belonged to the Society from its commencement were excluded from
the privilege conferred by the Colonial Government; and they remain till, this day without having got Passages,
though highly eligible Emigrants in every respect. Moreover, when the Emigrants went to Birkenhead, there
to embark in the. ships provided for their conveyance to Sydney, the agents of the Commissioners openly accused
the Office-Bearers of the Society of having imposed on and robbed the Emigrants, and they created in consequence
a deal of dissatisfaction amongst them, and caused them to write to their friends in Scotland, informing them what
had been said—-it being intended that this false and calumnious statement should reach not only to Scotland, but
should be conveyed to New South Wales, and so prejudice the minds of the Colonial authorities against the
Society and its Office-Bearers,
After the departure of this First Body ofi Members from Birkenhead, the Society commenced the enrolment
of a Second Body, to sail in the course of the present Spring, lsso. This enrolment the Commissioners have
done everything in their power to frustrate.
The Society meant to conduct the Emigration of this Body “independent of the Commissioners,” as they are
authorised to do. In the beginning of January last, when about 300 adult members were enrolled, the. Society
had all but formally concluded an agreement with Messrs. Pilkington & Wilson of Liverpool, the owners of the
White Star Line of Packets, for the conveyance of the party in their fine Clipper Ship “G-olden Era,” to sail in
March or early in the present month of April! But the; Commissioners hearing of this, wrote to Messrs. Pilking-
ton & Wilson, stating that the powers conferred on the Society were exhausted, and that they had no right to
send out any more Emigrants, until new authority was received from the Colonial Government. Messrs.
Pilkington & Wilson hesitated in the face of this official announcement to go on with the arrangement, and they
wrote the Secretary of the Society accordingly-, but before the Secretary could have an opportunity of re-assuring
them,, and inducing, them to proceed with the arrangement,, the Commissioners had put it out of his power, by
having chartered the “Golden Era” themselves for themonveyance. of Emigrants of their own to Sydney; they chuck-
ling, no doubt, at the idea of having check-mated the Society, and prevented them from commencing an inde-
pendent system of Scottish Emigration to New South Wales by means of Colonial Funds.


The statement which the Commissioners made to Messrs. Pilkington & Wilson, that the powers of the Society
were exhausted, was wholly unwarranted. The Commissioners knew they had no grounds to say so, for they
knew that in the preceding month of December, Sir George Grey, Colonial Secretary, had written to the New
Governor General of New South Wales, Sir Charles Dennison, suggesting that the authority given to the Society
should be withdrawn by the Colonial Government, clearly implying that until withdrawn, and the withdrawal
duly notified, the Society’s powers are not exhausted, and that the Commissioners have no right to interfere with
or interrupt the full exercise of these powers in any way.
The Petitioners say nothing here as to the Colonial Secretary in Downing Street interfering in a matter of
-the kind, and instructing or hinting to a newly appointed Governor of New South Wales to recall powers conferred
by a predecessor in office, in conformity with a positive law enacted by the Colonial Legislature.
There may be some instances in which a Colonial Secretary may be justified in so interfering with the
administration of Colonial affairs; but the Petitioners feel certain no adequate reason existed, or now exists, for
the Despatch in question written by Sir George Grey, in which Sir George demands the recall of the powers con-
ferred on the Society.
That Despatch was written at the instigation of the Commissioners of Emigration:. It was founded on a
Report to them by Sir George Grey. In this Report the powers of the Society are not said to be “ exhausted.”
They are only said to be “exceptional.” They are said to be “productive of inconvenience.” The Office-Bearers
of the Society are said to be “unknown.” It is alleged they exact fees, and “derive a profit;” and that “ tile
humble classes” are “ misled;” and “ the lower orders” have “injuries inflicted on them” by such a system of
“ private and irresponsible emigration”—all which allegations, so far as the words have any meaning, are the
merest assumptions, as regards “The Scottish Australian Emigration Society;” for the Society is not
“ exceptional,” but the reverse. The Office-Bearers are not “ unknown”—they do not “ derive a profit”-—the
“humble classes” have never been misled by them, nor the “lower orders” injured; nor are they a “private”
Body, nor are their operations “irresponsible” in any conceivable sense of the-term.
The Commissioners in their report also accuse the Society of holding out “greater facilities” to Emigrants
than they themselves do. The Petitioners do not see where the harm of this is if they be empowered so to do.
But it is not the case, unless payment of £5 in this Country, and £4O in the Colony, which are the Society’s terms,
be more favourable than payment of £1 in this Country, and £l2 in the Colony, which are the Commissioners’
terms; Wives and children, besides, getting Free Passages
In short, the Report of the Commissioners, on which Sir George- Grey has asked for the recall of the powers
conferred on the Society, is most unfair. It contains statements and accusations which are wholly without
foundation, and by which the Colonial Secretary was misled, and induced to write a despatch which otherwise,
it is- to be inferred, he would not have written. In framing such a report, the Commissioners have evinced their
jealousy and hostility to the Society ; but the Petitioners submit to your Honourable House, that the people of
this country do not suffer themselves to be taxed to pay extravagant salaries to Commissioners of Emigration,
who, from jealousy and ill-will, and for their own selfish interests, misrepresent facts, and mislead their superiors
in office in so flagrant a manner, as has been done in the present case. Working men, as the Petitioners are,
belonging to the “humble classes,” or “lower orders,” as the Commissioners say they do, they would feel ashamed
if they had been guilty of anything of the kind; and they are amazed at the mode of conducting public business,
and the low tone of official morality which the conduct of the Commissioners displays.
Being prevented a second time from getting a ship, by the devices of the Commissioners, the Society appealed
to them to take out the Emigrants who were enrolled to sail in March, or during the present month oi April,
either in the “Golden Era,” or in any of their other ships, in obedience to the recommendation of the Colonial
Government, to make arrangements to convey their members, from time to time, should the Society not be able to
send them in a ship of their own. But the Commissioners absolutely refused. Various applications were made
through Members of Parliament and otherwise—still they refused. “The Society’s powers were exhausted,” this
was the first excuse. The second excuse was, the Society had no right to use Schedules of their own, leading to
the belief, that if the Society had used the Commissioners’ Schedules, there would have been no objection, although
both Schedules are essentially the same; and it is impossible to see what purpose the one Schedule can serve more
than the other, unless it be to put fees in the pockets of the Commissioners, or of their Secretary, which they
would not get were their own Schedules not used. One thing is self-evident, the Commissioners cannot possibly
judge of the eligibility of Emigrants through the medium of written applications, better than the Office-Bearers
of the Society, who have seen the parties face to face, and have had opportunities of examining them as to their
statements, qualifications, &c. A third excuse was, that the Colonial Funds remitted from New South Wales,
(and which in January 1854 amounted to £300,000,) are now exhausted—an excuse which is somewhat incon-


sistent with the previous excuses—and which the Petitioners are inclined to doubt is well founded. The fourth
and last excuse—which there was no need for if the previous excuses were correct—is, that Scotland has had far
more than her share of Assisted Emigration, compared with England and Ireland, and that until the disproportion
be rectified, and the proper ratio restored, no more Emigrants can be sent from Scotland.
The intending Emigrants were enrolled for Assisted Passages to the Colony of New South Wales, through
the special and appointed agency of the Society; yet, though refusing them Passages to that Colony, on the various
and inconsistent grounds just stated, the Commissioners have notwithstanding offered the greater number of them
Passages to South Australia, on “more favourable terms” than they could get to New South Wales, and they have
taken advantage of the Lists forwarded to them by the Society, and have issued new Schedules of their own to
be filled up, although those already returned by the parties, as Members of the Society, contain all the requisite
information; and it is occasioning a most unnecessarry degree of trouble to fill up the new ones—a trouble and
annoyance of which they all loudly complain.
This offer the greater number of the Members of the Society have no alternative but to agree to, because
they have given up their houses, and have otherwise made preparations for their Emigration. But others cannot
agree, therefore they still require Passages to New South Wales.
The consequence of all this is, that the Colony of South Australia will be benefited at the expense of the
Colony of New South Wales, for which the Emigrants were expressly enrolled; and which Colony, if the Com-
missioners had not been actuated with jealousy and ill-will, and had not refused to co-operate with the Society,
would have received the benefit of their labour and services, instead of South Australia.
The conduct of the Commissioners, it is submitted, in this, as well as throughout, has been not merely incon-
sistent, but narrow-minded and unjust. The Petitioners, in their own name, and in name of the Society,
complain of that conduct; and the object of the present Petition to your Honourable House, is to induce you to
institute an inquiry into the proceedings referred to, so as to fix responsibility on the quarter where it really
exists; and to prevent any undue interference with, or any unauthorised obstacles in future by the Commissioners,
to the full exercise of the Society’s powers.
May it therefore please your Honourable House to take this Petition into consideration, and, by the
appointment of a Committee, or otherwise, to inquire into the statements made by the Petitioners, and the
proceedings to which these statements refer. Thereafter to find that the powers of the Scottish Australian
Emigration Society are not exhausted—that no reason existed for asking the recall of these powers that
the Society is entitled to enrol working men of all descriptions for assisted passages to the Colony of New
South Wales—that the Commissioners are bound to receive the Society’s Schedules, and to make arrange-
ments for the conveyance of the Members, should the Society not be able to send them in a ship of their
own—and that they are responsible for all loss or damage which has already been, or may be, sustained
by the Society, or by intending Emigrants, Members of the Society, through refusal to give them Passages,
or having prevented the Society taking up a ship and sending them “independent of the intervention of
their Board,” which the Commissioners themselves have admitted the Society is entitled to do,
And your Petitioners, as in duty hound, will ever pray.
