

“SCOTS’ CHURCH PROPERTY BILL.’’
pfcfjj olhAj
Notice has been given that a Bill is to be introduced into Parliament
during next session, to transfer the property connected with the Scots’
Church from the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, to 'sc portion of
the Scots’ Church Congregation who intend to secede and constitute
themselves into a new Denomination.
The following brief statement is submitted by a Committee of
the General Assembly appointed to watch over this matter, and resist
such procedure, in order that the Legislature, the public, and sister
Churches may be informed with regard to the tenure of the property,
the alleged reasons for separation, the obligations binding on the late
minister of the Congregation the Rev. C. Strong, so long as he was a
minister of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, the recent action of '
the General Assembly with regard to him, and especially the insidious
character of the proposals contained in the threatened Bill. The
Committee in adopting this course wish it to be clearly understood
that they strongly maintain that the proposed Bill is not one which the
Legislature should for a moment entertain. The Church is a voluntary
association governed by laws framed by its members for their own
government; the property belonging to the Denomination is held
subject to these laws, any infraction of which can be dealt with by
the Supreme Court and through it by the Privy Council. Such being
the position it would be a violation of the principle of non-connection
and non-interference with Religion or Churches, which was fully estab-
lished by the adoption of the State Aid Abolition Act, if the Legislature
were to interfere in any way with the property or the internal manage-
ment of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
1.-TENURE OF THE PROPERTY.
The site was granted in the year 1843, for the erection of a
church, manse, and school, under the superintendence of the Synod
of Australia, in connection with the Church of Scotland, by the New
South Wales Government, in accordance with Act 8 William IV.,
No. 7, and 4 Victoria, No. 18.
By these Acts it is provided that occupation of the church or
manse by the Minister shall cease when he is removed from his office
by the decision of the Synod, and that the powers and privileges and
advantages conferred on the Synod shall cease unless the said Synod
continue to adhere to the Confession of Faith and other formularies
of the Church of Scotland.


After the separation of the Colony of Victoria from New South
Wales, the Victorian portion of the Synod of Australia separated from
that Synod and constituted themselves into the Synod of Victoria, a
distinct Church, “separated from and unconnected with any other
Church or Ecclesiastical body whatsoever.” This Synod united with
the other Presbyterian bodies in Victoria in the year 1859, to
form the Presbyterian Church of Victoria ; and they adopted as their
standards and formularies, The Westminster Confession, the Larger
and Shorter Catechisms, the Form of Presbyterial Church Government,
the Directory for Public Worship, and the Second Book of Discipline.
It will be noted that the slight connection which had previously
existed between the Synod of Australia and the Church of Scotland
was thus given up by the Synod of Victoria long prior to the union
which subsequently was legalised in Victoria. All hereditaments, estates,
and temporal privileges belonging to the former Synods and Congrega-
tions of Victoria were conveyed by Act 22, Victoria No. 82, known as the
Union Act, to the “Presbyterian Church of Victoria and the several Con-
gregations thereof,” to be administered according to the Acts and Deeds
under which they had accrued to the uniting bodies, “ subject to the
decisions and judicatories of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria only.”
This Act was passed at the request of all the parties concerned, and
the right of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria to the continued
possession of the property—the subject of the proposed Bill —cannot be
impugned.
11.-ALLEGED REASONS FOR SEPARATION, AND FOR
THE ALIENATION OF THE PROPERTY.
The discontented portion of the Scots’ Church Congregation have
never given to the Presbytery or General Assembly any reasons for their
threatened schism, nor sought redress of any supposed grievance, nor
made any complaint to them, though this is the only constitutional
course for members of the Church who feel aggrieved to pursue.
The Committtee, therefore, can only conjecture the nature of their
reasons by reference to statements made through the press by the
promoters of this bill. Their reasons or complaints appear to be two.
(1) That the Presbytery and General Assembly have persecuted
Mr. Strong; and (2) That they, the dissentients, want more theological
liberty and breadth than they have under the Standards and control
of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
1. With regard to the first of these allegations, it is to be
remembered that at his admission to the pastorate of the Scots’ Church,
and as a condition of his induction, the Rev, C. Strong, solemnly, and


in the presence of the consenting Congregation, answered in the
affirmative to the Presbytery the following among other questions :
“ Do you acknowledge and approve of the Articles
of Union adopted by this Church on 9th April, 1859, as
the basis of its constitution, and declare your cordial
acceptance of these Articles V’
“ Do you own and believe the whole doctrine con-
tained in the Standards of this Church, as an exhibition
of the sense in which you understand the Holy Scriptures,
and do you engage firmly and constantly to adhere thereto,
and to the utmost of your power assert, maintain, and
defend the same, and the purity of worship as practised
in this Church 1 ”
“ Do you promise to submit yourself willingly and
humbly, in the spirit of meekness, to the admonitions of
the brethren of this Presbytery, and be subject to them
and all other Presbyteries and superior judicatories of this
Church where God in His providence may cast your lot;
and that according to your power you shall maintain the
unity and peace of this Church against error and schism,
notwithstanding of whatever trouble or persecution may
arise, and that you will follow no divisive courses from
her doctrine, worship, discipline, and government 1 ”
Further, by the law and practice of this and all other Presby-
terian Churches, the Presbytery are bound to see that these vow r s are
faithfully kept, and are responsible to the Supreme Court of the
Church for the performance of this duty. And when a complaint is
formally made to them against the doctrine or character of any minister,
they are also bound to enquire into and deal with it.
The Presbytery of Melbourne has not at any time taken notice
of the teaching of Mr. Strong, except when some published writings
or public act of his forced it on their attention. After the delivery
of Mr. Justice Higinbotham’s lecture, which was so antagonistic to
the main truths of Christianity that clergymen of almost all deno-
minations felt called upon publicly to expose its errors, a formal
charge of publishing and promulgating heresy was lodged with the
Presbytery against Mr. Strong by one of their most experienced
ministers. The circumstance that, after receiving notice of this
charge, Mr. Strong laid his resignation on the table did not absolve
the Presbytery from their duty of enquiry, nor could the resignation
be accepted consistently with Church law and practice, and with
faithfulness to Mr. Strong and the Church, until the charge
f-] 33SS
- t/2.


of heresy was in some way disposed of. This charge was received
by the Presbytery, but not dealt with. On the motion of
Mr. Strong’s friends, it was referred from the Presbytery to the
General Assembly, and the Assembly, with the view of enabling
Mr. Strong to clear himself, invited him to appear and disavow com-
plicity with the errors of Mr. Higinbotham’s lecture, and to declare his
faith in the true Deity of our Lord, His Atonement and real Resurrec-
tion from the dead. Mr. Strong, by letter declined this invitation,
and added complaints against the procedure of the Church Courts.
From these Courts he had voluntarily absented himself for several
years, though part of his ordination vow was “to give conscientious
attendance on the Courts of the Church.” He was a member, with the
right to speak and vote, and it was his duty to be present and to point
out any irregularity should it occur. The morning following his refusal
he sailed from the colony while his case was still pending, and without
assigning any reason for his abrupt departure. The General Assembly
thereupon adopted the most lenient finding consistent with justice to
all interests, in declaring Mr. Strong no longer a Minister of this
Church, and dissolving the pastoral tie between him and the Scots’
Church Congregation.
"When these proceedings are viewed in the light of the fact that
Mr. Strong had entered into the most solemn obligation to submit to
the Courts of the Church, and to “ assert, maintain and defend her
doctrine,” it will be seen that there is not even a semblance of truth in
the complaint that he was persecuted.
2. With regard to the claim for more theological liberty and
breadth, the Committee would direct attention to the fact that within
the limits which the Standards permit, every man is allowed per-
fect liberty, and no one has, in the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
been called to account for small matters, on the principle that
Be minimis non curat lex. It is also perfectly free to any minister
or member of the Church to move, in a constitutional way, for
an alteration of the Standards, or of the method of adherence to them,
so far as he considers anything wrong or defective. But lawlessness, or
every man teaching or doing what is right in his own eyes, irrespective
of promises and engagements, cannot be tolerated in any Church, or,
indeed, in any corporate body, without involving its destruction.
The extent of the liberty desired by the discontented portion
of the Scots’ Church Congregation is indicated by the occasion
of the present trouble, namely, Mr. Higinbotham’s lecture. The
doctrine of that lecture is a very negative form of Unitarianism ;*
* This term isj used in no invidious way, hut simply to describe “ as nearly as
may be " the teaching of_the learned judge.


for the whole of the Apostles’ creed is repudiated in it, except the first
article; and, apparently, it is because teaching of this sort was not
allowed to pass unchallenged in the Scots’ Church, that the Legislature
is to be asked to confiscate the Church’s property. To permit such
teaching within the Church would be a complete departure from the
Standards, adherence to which is the one condition on which the
property was granted. And any separation from the Church because
such liberty is refused must needs be a separation from the Standards
in the true and natural sense in which adherence to them is required.
Further, any new denomination formed by dissentients whose sole or
chief complaint against the action of the Church is, that the Presbytery
and General Assembly endeavoured to get Mr. Strong to disavow
complicity with the errors of that lecture, cannot be Presbyterian and
cannot have any right to the property of the Presbyterian Church.
III,—THE BILL OF WHICH NOTICE HAS BEEN GIVEN.
It is proposed by the Bill to bring the Scots’ Church, to “ occupy
as nearly as may be the position of a Congregation of Presbyterians
under the Act of the Governor and Legislative Council of New South
Wales 8 William IV, No. 7, before the passing of the Act of the Governor
and Legislative Council of New South Wales, 4 Victoria, No. 18.”
1. This is a proposal to revert to a state of things which had
ceased to exist before the site of the Scots’ Church Manse and
School was granted, and therefore involves an attempt to escape from
the responsibilities under which the land was granted. The elastic
phrase, “as nearly as may be,” is fitted to gloss over the impossibility
of occupying a position which has for ever passed away. The land was
granted to a congregation under the superintendence of the Synod of
Australia which, though in connection with the Church of Scotland, was
not a part of that Church, but possessed independent jurisdiction.t The
present church building was erected in 1874, fifteen years after the union,
and when the Congregation was in full connection with the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria, and previous to Mr. Strong’s arrival in the colony.
2. The Established Church of Scotland possesses no jurisdiction
in Australia; and could exercise no real supervision or control over
+ The following resolution was unanimously adopted by the Commission of Assembly
of the Church of Scotland, on the 12th Dec., 1839, and subsequently by the General
Assembly, in 1840 :—“ That the Synod of Australia is the supreme legislative and
judicial court for the Colonial Presbyterian Church, and enjoys in fact what it is
entitled to of right, the power of regulating the affairs of that branch of Christ’s
Church, in accordance with their views of His will, under the guidance of his Spirit
—the Synod, nevertheless, considering themselves bound by the most solemn
engagements to adhere to the doctrines of the Confession of Faith, and the other
Standards and formularies of the Church of Scotland and to administer discipline
agreeably to the laws of that Church in so far as they are applicable in the
circumstances of the Colony.”


a Congregation so far away. The Presbyterian Church of, Victoria in
in full communion with the Church of Scotland, though independent
of her control, and “the nearest that may be” in this land to connec-
tion with the Established Church of Scotland is connection with
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. On Presbyterian principles
the proposed secession is not only schism, but schism without, so
far as yet appears, even the vestige of a plausible excuse.
3. The Constitution proposed in the Bill for the new denomina-
tion is not Presbyterian, either as regards doctrine or discipline, and
the assumption of the name serves only to conceal the facts. The
proposal in the Bill that the Congregation “ have for its Standards
of religious belief the Standards of the Established Church of
Scotland, and for its ecclesiastical government the formularies and
rules of discipline, as near as may be of the said Established Church,”
is nullified by the proviso, which immediately follows, viz. : “ With
power, nevertheless, to the Kirk Session of the said Congrega-
tion to make, adopt, alter or repeal rules and forms of procedure for
the management of its own affairs.” The committing of such power
to a Kirk Session is utterly unknown to the Church of Scotland or
any of her sister Churches. It subverts Presbyterianism without
introducing a real or safe Congregationalism. It permits the formal and
legal introduction of any teaching, however indefinite or antagonistic
to the Christian faith, which the Kirk Session for the time being may
fancy, and makes professed subjection to the Standards of the Church
of Scotland a mere empty form.
4. The proposal to give back their subscriptions to such surviving
subscribers to the church building as may not agree to the proposed
schism is in itself so paltry that it requires no notice, except to state
that it may serve to disguise the fact that the great value of the property
arises, not from the church fabric, but from the land gifted long ago by
Government, greatly augmented by the permanent improvements of
tenants, and that a large portion of the cost of the building is still
owing on the security of the freehold. The land was given for the benefit
of the Presbyterian residents in the neighbourhood, and the Scots’
Church is the parish church of the Presbyterian people of the district
where it stands. At the instance of a number of discontented men, who
happen to be seatholders, but many of whom reside at a distance
from the church, the attempt is now to be made to take from
loyal Presbyterians their parish church, and to turn it to the uses of
a new sect, who are departing both from the discipline and doctrine
of the Church of their fathers, that is, so far as they are persons of
Presbyterian birth ; for we have reason to believe that in a consider-


able number of instances the dissentients were not, and are not now,
Presbyterians at all.
IV—BEARING OF THIS PROPOSAL ON THE RIGHTS OF
PROPERTY.
By the Act of Union, adherence to the standards of religious
belief and of ecclesiastical government of the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria is required to entitle the Church to continued possession of its
properties. This Bill proposes to deprive the Church while adhering
to that condition, of a large and valuable portion of its property, and to
hand it over to a section of persons who, by their promotion of the
Bill in opposition to the orders of the General Assembly of the Church,
and by their other actions prove that they have no moral or legal claim
or right whatsoever to the property. The passing of such a Bill would
unsettle the security of tenure of all property, as there is no difference in
principle between the rights of ownership of property of a Church or a
Corporation, and of an individual. It cannot be pleaded as a reason for
such legislative interference with the rights of property that the proposed
Bill is for the public safety or welfare, as no possible consideration
of public safety or welfare demands the confiscation of the property of
orthodox and law-abiding Presbyterians in favour of persons seeking
endowment for a new denomination.
Were it possible for the promoters of this Bill to succeed in their
object, many of them who are understood to be wealthy men might, ere
long, have serious cause to regret the course they have taken in thus
heading a movement so utterly antagonistic to the rights of property.
V.—BEARING ON THE OTHER DENOMINATIONS OF THE
CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
It will be apparent, with regard at least to all the Churches
which consist of more Congregations than one, that what is the danger
of the Presbyterian Church to-day may be theirs to-morrow. The
majority of a Congregation may, in circumstances easily conceivable,
become alienated in feeling from the Church to which they belong.
In any large city, for example, it is possible for the
Minister of a Congregation, avlio is of average ability and plausi-
bility, by advocating views that are novel or extreme, to attach
to himself a majority who sympathise with him. For, if he act
cautiously but persistently, people who like the strange doctrines
will gradually be drawn to the Church, while those parishioners
who dislike them will withdraw to more congenial places of worship
without making any public complaint. By this means, if a change


.33 Wf •
' SliLlO
A/ s
r v f fjL JtsJ
in the pastorate occur, or the exercise of faithful discipline be
attempted, there may be a majority in the Congregation ready for
resistance or for secession, if they do not get their own will in
everything. And, if the Legislature were to chance majority
to take the property with them, it would simply put a premium on
“ divisive courses,” and actively promote the disintegration of all
organised Churches.
If Parliament says “ aye ”to the demand of the Scots’ Church
dissentients they cannot consistently say “no” to any similar demand,
and the success of this attempt would be sure to encourage other endeav-
ours of the same sort. If* the State pass such a Bill the present
professed attitude of neutrality toward the different Christian denomi-
nations will be at once changed into one of antagonism to all existing
Church organisations.
Even Congregational Churches will fail to recognise in the govern-
ment of the proposed New Denomination anything parallel to their
own ; and they must also object to the principle of allowing a chance
majority, obtained after angry speeches, in a meeting which was open
to anyone who might choose to enter, to have the power of taking
Church property from the denomination to which it belongs, and
appropriating it-to themselves.
v The Committee invite the co-optation of all the Christian
Churches in resisting this audapious attempt to take away
property from its legal possessors ; and request their assistance, by
petition or otherwise, to prevent it. It is ■ often said by members
*. ( . ** '•*’ * !s*■’’ '
of all denominations it is impossible that such a bill should be
passed. But the promoters hi this bill have boasted that they have
support from certain Members and that
no money or pains to accomplish their purpose' The
co-operation of the other Churches and of the thoughtful and
honourable portion of the community will, however, easily render
their success impossible, and, therefore, in the interests of truth and
justice, we earnestly request it.
By order of the Special Commission,
‘JOHN GARDNER,
Melboijene, May , 1884.
Moderator.
Fergusson ami M«ore, Printers, 41 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
