

Vic . 3
mis
Stor nuts Jlikr-sik gambles
VICTORIA;
BEING A HANDBOOK FOE THOSE SEEKING BECEEATION DURING
THE SUMMER MONTHS.








SEA
RIVER-SIDE RAMBLES
VICTORIA;
BEING- A HANDBOOK FOE THOSE SEEKING EECEEATION DURING
THE SUMMER MONTHS.
sA.K*ct*C •
r
“ The winds of heaven blew, the ocean rolled
Its gathering waves—ye felt it not. The blue
Bared its eternal bosom, and the dew
Of summer night collected still to make
The morning precious: Beauty was awake!
Why were ye not awake?” Keats.
©Wlona :
HEATH & CORDELL, MALOP STREET.
M.D.CCC.LX.




DR. FERDINAND MUELLER,
GOVERNMENT BOTANIST OP VICTORIA,
Cfjt's UittU liooft,
IN APPRECIATION OP HIS GREAT LABOURS IN THE CAUSE OP SCIENCE,
HEBE AND ELSEWHERE,
IS DEDICATED, WITH MUCH FRIENDSHIP,
THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS.
Chaptee I.
Initial Letter : Growing taste for Marine Zoology ; Cheap
Books on the subject necessary ; Occupation at the Sea-side.
Chapter 11.
Chaptee 11.
Mind and Body Exhausted by constant toil, 3 ; Change of
Scene necessary, 3 ; Decide on Visiting Lady Bay, 4 ;
Voyage there, 4 ; Sand Hummocks, 5 ; Warmambool, 5 ;
Book Pools near Merri Elver, 6 ; Diatoms, 6 ; The
Beach, 6 ; Portuguese Man-of-war, 7-; Suicidal Starfishes,
9 ; Their Suckers, 9 ; Shells, 10.
Vignette : Whalers' Bluff, Portland Bay.
Chapter 111.
Chaptee 111.
Conchology, 11 ; Mollusca, 11 ; Cuttle Eishes, 12 ; Spirula,
12 ; Gasteropoda, 12 ; Their Opercula or Covers, 12 ; Sea
Snails, 13 ; Truncatella, 13 ; Pheasant Shell, 13 ; Boat
Shells, 14; Air-breathing Mollusca, 14; Shellfish for
Aquaria, 14 ; Tongue of Limn sea, 15 ; Eggs of lAmncea,
15 ; Sea Slugs, 17 ; Bubble Shell, 17 ; Lamp Shell, 17 ;
Lantern Shell, 17 ; Teredo at Williamstown, 18 ; Long
lived Molluscs, 18 ; Shell Cabinets, 18.
Vignette : Group of Serpulce on a valve of Area shell.


CONTENTS.
Chapter IV.
Ramble coastwards to Hopkins, 20 ; Wild Flowers, 21 ; Emu
Wren, 21 ; Shells in Pertrobe Lagoon, 22 ; Gentiana
montana, 22 5 Wombat, 23 ; Botanic Gardens, 23 ;
Sea-Anemones, 24 ; Their Voracity, 25 ; Prehensile
Tentacles, 26 ; Urticating Organs, 27 ; Used as Food, 28;
Alyxia luxifolia, 29 ; Wedge-tailed Eagle, 29.
Vignette : Terebella.
Chapter V.
Chaptee V.
Sea Eggs—their spines and suckers, 31 ; The Caves, 33 ;
Purpura; and Ear-shells, 33 ; Hermit Crab, 34 ; Crab
clothed with Algae, 35 ; Birds of the Sea-shore, 36.
Vignette : Hippocampus or Sea Horse.
Chapter VI.
Chaptee VI.
Corio Bay, 38 ; Naturalist at home everywhere, 38; Occupation
at Seaside, 39; Gulls, Cormorants, Pelicans, Oyster Catcher,
Greenshank, and'Grebe, 39 ; Collecting Paraphernalia, 41;
Avicuhe, 41 ; Planaria, 42 ; Its Eyes, 42 ; Nereis, 43 ;
Terebella, 43 ; Serpulse, 43 ; Kangaroo Crab, 46 ; Pipe
Fishes —male performs duties of incubation, 47 ; Sharks,
Sea Cucumbers—their strange habits, 48.
Vignette : Kangaroo Crab (Ibacus Feronii.)
Chapter VII.
Chaptee VII.
Hobson’s Bay, St. Kilda, Brighton, 50 ; Coast Plants, 51 ;
habits and structure, 52 ; Mighty
55 ; Sfing-Ray, 55 ; Zoophytes, 56 ; Errors of early
Naturalists respecting them, 58.
Vignette : Fossil Spatangi and Terebratuloe.


CONTENTS.
Chapter VIII.
Evening Studies, 61 ; Starfishes again, 61 ; Dental Apparatus
of 'Echini , 62 ; How to preserve Echinodermata, 63 ; Sea
Squirts, 64; Stormy Petrels, 64; Actinise, 65 ; Jelly
Eishes, 65 ; Parasites on them, 65 ; Cunning of Octopus,
66 ; Shells as Microscopic Objects, 67.
Vignette : Wedge-tailed Eagle.
Chaptee IX.
Chapter IX.
Strides of Science, 69 ; Difficulty of preserving Marino Objects,
69 ; Aquaria, 71 ; Their Construction, 71 ; llow to Form,
72 ; Seasand and Eockwork, 73: Double Aquaria, 74 ;
Artificial Sea-water, 75 ; Seaweeds, 76 ; Respiration of the
Lower Animals, 77 ; Climbing Fish, 78 ; Stock, 78 ;
Portable Microscopes, 79 ; iEration, 80 ; Maintenance, 81;
Eemoval of Objects, 81; Freshwater Aquaria, 81.
Chaptee X.
Chapter X.
Seaweeds, 83 ; Queenscliff Pools, 84 ; Melanosperms, 84;
Ehodosperms, 85 ; Clilorosperms, 86 ; White ones to
be rejected, 86 ; Marine Sensitive Plant, 86; Uses of
Seaweeds, 87 ; Eoots of Seaweeds yield hosts of microscopic
objects, 88; to Collect, 88 ; to Preserve, 89 ; to Forward
by Post, 89 ; to Lay Out, 89 ; Subsequent Arrangement
and Examination, 89.
Rxvee-Side Rambles.—'Vignette .- Caliban Falls.
Chapter XI.
Chaptee XI.
The Moorabool, 94 ; River-Side Wanderings at Home, 95 ;
Flycatcher, 96 ; Reed Warbler, 97 ; Bitterns, 97 ; Spicy
Mints, 97 ; the Damasonium, 97 ; Freshwater Algie, 98 ;
Unio and other Shells, 99 ; Fishing, 99 ; Life in the
Woods, 100; Fossils, 100 j Mosquitoes, 100; Barwon
Falls, 101 ; Clematis, 101 ; Betony-leaved Violets, &c,,
102 ; Bullrush Caterpillar, 103.
Group of Sphcerice, Page 109.


CONTENTS.
Chapter XII.
The Hopkins, its rise, 110 ; beautifully Timbered, 111 ;
Marsupialia, 111 ; Acorn Shells, 113 ; Barnacle Geese,
114 ; Nankeen Herons, Blue Crane, Egrets, &c., 115;
Black Swans, 116 ; Butterfly Gurnard, 116 ; Sweet-scented
Plants, 118 ; Seaweeds as Objects of Design, 118.
%
>


CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY
reatly as a taste for Marine
Zoology has been diffused by
the numerous beautifully illus-
trated and charming- books,
which within the last few
years have appeared from the
English press, they are nearly
all costly, and many of them
of too technical a nature to
prove of real value to the masses,
who at the approach of the hot winds of Summer flock
to the Sea-shore, and we pen these pages with the
hope that the chatty form in which we have
endeavoured to impart a few of the gleanings made
during several years’ rambling in the Colony, may
take this Book into the hands of many, who, perhaps,
having a lurking taste for the subject of which it
treats, would be deterred from its perusal, were it of a
more precise or scientific character.
“ Great cities,” remarks Professor Harvey, in the
Preface to his splendid Work on the Seaweeds of our
Coast, “ are springing up in the Australian Colonies ;
and watering places, to which the citizen takes his
family to enjoy the sea breeze during the summer
time are coming into being,” still, a residence at the


Sea-side soon becomes very monotonous where the
mind has not full occupation, but following out a few
of the hints contained in the following pages,
inducements will be found for taking exercise in
search of some of the many beautiful objects of the
Sea-shore, and so all the functions, bodily and mental,
may be maintained in a healthy state.
« Not lost the time in Sea-side ramble spent,
Braced is the frame, and mental health is gained.”
With such glorious teachers as Gosse, Lewes,
Harvey, and Rymer Jones, we have often preferred
giving a vividly written passage from softie one of
their Works to anything of our own, and in the
preparation of this Work have wished indeed “ that
some ’one more skilful had undertaken it, but «till
it is better even we should undertake it than it be
left undone.”*
* Cicero.


CHAPTER 11.
To one who has been long in City pent,
Tis very sweet to look into the fair
And open face of heaven, —to breathe a prayer
Full in the smile of the blue firmament.”— Keats.
There are certain times and seasons when the mind,
so dependent on a healthy state of the body for a
vigorous development, worn out by constant toil and
anxiety,' becomes thoroughly unstrung, and unless a
change of scene and companions can he at once
obtained, it soon becomes impaired, and sooner or
later the consequences are seen in one of the many
tedious nervous diseases unfortunately so prevalent in
this country. A change into the interior is scarcely
likely to prove as beneficial to the man of sedentary
habits as a run by the sea, where the “ stormy winds
do blow,” and where the long lost appetite quickly
returns, and the mental faculties resume their wonted
spirit and energy.
We write from experience, for rendered irritable by
long confinement, and as a climax, the intense heat of
the anniversary of the well-remembered Black-Thurs-
day, when the inhabitants of our tank, one after
another, were found lying, not “ scentless ” certainly,
hut u dead,” and the numerous fresh-water Algse, so
carefully preserved, each in its separate bottle on our
mantel piece, waiting until we had leisure to investi-
gate them, had withered, we hastily packed up a few
choice books, a good supply of glass sample bottles,


the use of which will be apparent by and by, a few
quires of blotting' paper and muslin strapped between
well-seasoned boards, and our microscope, determined
to explore some of those glorious dark crannies and
sheltered nooks which for months past had formed
the subject of our dreams, day and night, and
which add so considerably to the charm of
Sea-side rambling. But where to go then became
a matter of grave consideration, Hobson’s Bay,
Geelong, Queensclilf, all had something to recom-
mend them, but we wanted companionship and quiet
as well as fresh air, and so Warrnambool was
decided on to be visited first, with a hope to call,
as our leisure would allow, at all these places on our
return. The trip to Lady Bay, a few years since one
of so much discomfort, having to be made in diminu-
tive crafts, not particularly well provisioned, is now
really an enjoyable one, and where it formerly occupied
from a week to an indefinite period at the caprice of
the winds, is now performed in about eighteen hours
in steamers, well officered and well furnished in every
way. The weighty point “ where to go,” being thus
decided, we were before many hours had passed over
our heads safely ensconced on board the “ Lady Bird,”
and in spite of the gloominess of the morning, the
mere anticipation of what we knew to be in store for
us soon dispelled all the feeling of “ hippishness ”
which had beset us for many weeks previously.
Althouglrv steaming along the coast for a considerable
portion or the passage, there is nothing of interest to
observe after passing the Heads, except the few chance
vessels which may be sighted, and the Cape Otway


Light, always anxiously looked for. So far then on
our way, after watching’ awhile the phosphorescence of
the waves as our vessel dashed through them, we turned
in, and were awakened at an early hour in the morning’
by the announcement that Warrnamhool was in sight;
our toilet quickly made, we went on deck just as
we steamed past Curdie’s inlet, where, it will be
remembered, the “Schomberg” was wrecked, and
in a short time the pretty little town which was to be
our temporary abiding place, loomed out from its
shelter of thick timber. We now pass the mouth of
the river Hopkins (about a mile from the port,) which
is barred by a reef of rocks whereon the surf dashes
heavily, it is a pretty object, the rugged crags dotted
here and there, on which rest lazily enough a group
of Cormorants, and the little blue Heron, reminding
us of the singular tail pieces which illustrate some
of Bewick’s works. The white sand hummocks
thrown up on shore are objects of interest to the
stranger; but the anchor drops as we steam into the
snug little Bay, so well protected by the dense bed
of Kelp, and the Guils and Terns fly screaming over-
head, indignant apparently at our intruding into their
usually quiet haunts, but we shall make acquaintance
with them anon we dare say. After being landed
by the worthy Harbour Master, we prefer, having
suffered severely from the feeling of mal-de-mer , worse
infinitely than the reality, to walk to the town,
to the residence of an old friend, where the inner man,
a dreadful sufferer on these occasions, being recruited,
we saunter out through the town. We had resided
here for many years, but in a comparatively brief


absence observed marked improvements, thanks to the
Local Powers, (the Road Board, and the Municipality,)
good roads, Government buildings, a Light-bouse,
Obelisks to serve as land-marks, and a tramway to the
Jetty, all proving the importance, from the large
agricultural population surrounding it, of this little
town. There are now too several respectable hostelries,
where but a few years since there was only one, and
the visitor will find comfort in any of them.
We have an intense horror of being idle, so adopting
the advice of Goethe not to
“ Defer
Until to-morrow, what may to-day be done,”
We call upon, and capture a Correspondent on Natural
History topics, whose zeal in scientific pursuits we
had long been aware of. Greetings interchanged, for
Naturalists require no formal introduction, we started
with the intention of exploring the rock-pools
westward of the town. Arrived at our hunting
ground after crossing the Merri River, noticing as
we climbed the hill a species of the rush-hke
Xerotes in flower, we found tht sea far too rough,
and the sky too unpropitious to allow' of our peering
into the haunts of such creatures as we are in search
of; yet nothing daunted we recross in our frail punt,
bottling by the way a pretty species of a Diatom, (a
OompTionema), which fringed its sides, and away by
the beach towards the Hopkins, to see wdrat might
turn up, Wee we verily believe with Wilmot, whose
delightful u Summer Time in the Country, we wmuld
wish was more generally known, that u open eyes are
always learning,—a garden, a wood, even a pool of


water encloses a whole library of knowledge, waiting
only to be read.” How much more will the wide
expanse of Ocean afford us, so densely filled with
vegetable and animal life, that the mind grows fairly
u dizzy wi the thought.”
Unpromising as were our first glances, we walked
along, sniffing the delicious odour of the seaweed,
chatting of and arranging our plans for future rambles,
when our friend exclaimed exultingly, “ Quo minime
credas gurgite, piscis erit,” and truly here, where and
when we least expected, our attention was arrested by
millions of minute gelatinous-looking objects ; we take
up one, banded with pink of the faintest hue, another,
and another finds its way into bottle No. 2 5 these
were evidently a species of Acalepha or Sea-blubber,
but we were unable to identify them ; intermingled
with them, and somewhat alike in appearance, though
differing in shape, were numerous specimens crested
with purple, of the bladder of the Portuguese man-
of-war, (PTiysalia,) included by Cuvier amongst the
Acalephes Ilydrostatigues, from its large swimming-
bladder, which, being easily compressed, enables it to
regulate its specific gravity at will—to rise or sink
at pleasure; hanging too from its under part are
cilia or arms, and various other organs, which probably
serve the purpose of nutrition and reproduction.
According to Owen,* these appendages are of three
kinds—indicating, digestive, and (probably) generative.
The urticating tentacles being the longest, hollow,
and provided with muscular fibres, of which the most
conspicuous are longitudinal, and serve to retract
* Comp. Auat. Inverteb., p. IT6.


them ; they contain many corpuscles of a reniform
shape, and are richly provided with thread-cells,
whose filaments are of the spiral kind. The gastric
appendages are shorter and wider, and are provided
with stomata, which are applied to the prey, seized
and benumbed by the tentacles. If the prey be small,
it is sucked bodily into the gastric sac; if large the
sac becomes distended with its juices and dissolved
parts, the gastric secretion being a very rapid and
powerful solvent. The mouth of each sac is wide,
with a broad everted lip, armed with a series of
“ nettle cells.” The whole gastric appendage is highly
contractile, and in constant motion in the living
animal. Great was our joy as we sat examining
these gem-like creatures, quite forgetting the old
adage, that “ time and tide tarry for no man,” until a
huge wave compelled us to decamp hastily, and when
well beyond its reach we observed on looking round,
our collecting bottle into which our treasures had been
placed, floating away high on the crest of one wave,
now deep down in the trough of another, fairly out to
sea, —a sad loss! for before it could be replaced, the
tide would have carried away thd very specimens we
were so anxious to procure. After mourning awhile,
and at length somewhat appeased by the consolations
of our companion, we set to work anew. Anon,
something very much like the object we had lost so
prematurely appeared about fifty yards a-head, but
bottles are unfortunately too common objects of our
shores, so) we sauntered slowly towards it, hoping
at the best to find the wherewith to make an
impromptu aquarium, when to our great joy, here,


uninjured, well-stoppered, and with its inhabitants none
the worse for their trip hack to their native element,
was our lost one ; this inspired us with fresh vigour,
and not finding much that we cared for on the beach,
we set to examining the huge Kelp roots, and they were
well worthy of it, as the keener eyes of our fellow-
labourer soon detected. We had but a moment since
been recalling poor Forbes’ amusing account of his
suicidal Starfish, (Luidia), (see his “British Star-
fishes,” page 138), and we had an illustration of it
with an Ophiurus , also a Starfish, but so named from
the lizard-like appearance of its arms, which we had
turned out from one of those same densely-matted
kelp-roots;—off went first the extremity of one arm,
as it lay in our hand, —then, with an impudent twist,
the smallest bit in life of another, whilst horror-stricken
we called hastily for a collecting-box to receive him, or
rather all that was left of him, —little enough indeed, —
since all that was secured entire was his disk, and on
a glass-jar on our mantel-piece he wandered for many
weeks amidst his rejected members, which still
maintained their vitality, frequently protruding their
suckers. Sir John Daly ell mentions having picked
up a single ray of a Starfish, which in a few days
reproduced four additional ones, all smaller than the
original, • but this after a time dropped off, leaving the
animal more perfectly symmetrical, and the renovated
creature entered vigorously on its new career. *
But let us examine these suckers more closely, since
they seem to act pretty much in the same manner as
the leather toy we, as school-boys, amused ourselves
* “ Aquarian Naturalist,” p. 267.


with, and by them there can be little doubt that
progression is effected. Their mechanism, we learn
from Gosse, * is very simple. At the bottom of a
furrow in each ray are rows of minute pores, through
which the suckers are protruded, the base of each
sucker being expanded into a little globular vesicle,
which lies above the pore in the interior of the ray;
the walls of this vesicle are muscular, and therefore
contractile, and it is filled with a fluid. When an animal
wishes to protrude and extend any given sucker, it
contracts the vesicle at its base by an effort of the
will ; the fluid is thus forced into the tubular stem
which is therefore compelled to elongate, and on the
removal of this contractile force, the fluid returns to
the bladder, either by the elasticity of the tube, or
probably by its muscular action, and the sucker is
gradually withdrawn.
We are treading shells under our feet at every step,
and as yet have said nothing 1 of them, beautiful as
they are, and must reserve it now for another chapter,
since we cannot dismiss forms varied as they are
graceful, with any hurried remarks.


CHAPTER 111.
“ There are curious things of which men know
As yet but little.
Which ocean flingeth forth from off her billows
On the low sand.
Unfortunately for our knowledge of Conchology,
collectors content themselves too frequently with
gathering the dead and empty shells washed up by
the tide, as if they, fractured, waterworn, and
colourless, could give any idea of the glorious
creatures which had inhabited them; —as well might
they judge of a man’s habits and character by walking
through his house; —and it is the mere formation of
cabinets for the beauty of the shells which has led to
this being considered a frivolous study, aud so, without
knowing the habits of the animal, and its conformation,
affecting the form of the shell so very materially, it
is. Still collectors often hunt up objects which had
escaped the eye of those more educated in scientific
pursuits, so instead of criticising the past, we will
rather give a brief digest of the peculiarities which
characterise this division of the Natural Kingdom,
as well as some few hints for the guidance of the
Amateur Naturalist in his researches for the future.
Shell-fish then, be it known, belong to that division
of the Natural World called “ Mollusca,” from the
Latin word mollis (soft), their bodies consisting
universally of a 'soft consistence and generally


protected by a bard shell, Univalve or Bivalve.
Taking first now the Univalves , which have a distinct
head, eyes, and tentacles, the month being- armed
with jaws, we find that Cuvier has arranged them
into three classes, the animals belonging to the
first of which are termed Cephalopoda (from
Cephale the head, and poda feet), because their
feet, or rather arms, which are attached to the head
form a circle around the mouth • the Cuttle fish is a
familiar example, and its shell, which is internal, as
in almost all comprised in this class, is constantly
thrown upon our shores; —the beautiful little discoidal
chambered shell of the Spirula, is not uncommon on
the Warrnambool and other of our coasts, the animal
itself would indeed be a prize, for although an
inhabitant of all the warm seas, it is not often
met with.
The animals of the second class, or Gasteropoda, of
which the common garden snail is a good type, creep by
the successive expansion and contraction of their broad
muscular foot, which is formed by the under side of
the body, and thus the name of the class is obtained
from paster , the belly, and as before poda, feet. Some
breathe air, (pulmonifera), others water (branchifera.)
Many of the individuals of the latter division close
their habitations with a horny or calcareous covering
called an operculum, and it presents strange modifica-
tions of structure ’, we find it in some, spiral, in others
concentric, and occasionally claw-shaped ; that of a
Natica found on the Western Coast, is commonly used
as card counters, and we have seen them polished
and tastefully mounted as wrist Studs and shawl pins.


Our shores give us many Carnivorous Gasteropods, for
example, Murex; Fusus, or Spindle shell; JVassa, or
Dog-whelk ; Purpura, or Purple shell, (some species of
which afford a dye); Conus or Cone shell; Valuta;
Mitra or Mitre shell; Cyproea , (Cowrie), &c., &c.
Livnigstone, in his entertaining travels tells us that
the chief Shinte, as a last proof of his friendship came
into his tent, which he closed to prevent the possibility
of there being any witnesses to his extravagance, and
then presented him with the conical end of a Cone
shell, adding as he did so, u There now you have a
proof of my friendship,” So high a price was set on
these shells, that five of them would be a handsome
sum for an Elephant’s tusk worth £lO.
In brackish water we may find many of the Sea-
snails, the pretty little mottled Natica, the long spiral
Cerithium , and on the rocks at Lady Bay we have
seen specimens of the Siliquaria or Pod shell, which
is longitudinally slit all along its twisted spire ; the
Litorina or Periwinkle, is always found within the
action of the tide, as it feeds on sea-weed, and the
brackish lagoons afford us the pretty minute Looping-
snail (Truncatella) in abundance, and it has one
recommendation that it can survive for a considerable
time in the mud, when the water has been dried up by
the Summer’s sun.
The richly-colored Pheasant shell (Phasianella)
should be sought after eagerly on the Warrnambool and
other shores, since it forms so lovely an object for the
Cabinet; its generic name has its origin in the
resemblance of the markings of the shell to the
plumage of the Pheasant (Phasianus) : the hoop shells


Trochi, are found attached to rocks on all our coasts ;
of the Ear shells ( Raliotis ), and Boat shells (Chiton),
we shall have much to say hereafter when we meet
with them.
Of the Pulmonifera or air-breathing Mollusca, some
are terrestrial, others fresh-water, and many inhabit
damp places near the sea; their respiratory organ is so
simple a form of lung, that this order is called by Gray,
“ concealed lunged,” as the orifice is small and valve —
like to guard against the entry of water in the aquatic
tribes, and to prevent the rapid desiccation in the
land snails.
The latter do not abound in Australia, hut we find
abundant interest in the beautiful shells which exist
in the Yarra, the Moorahool, the Merri, and other of
our rivers, lurking on the large, ovate, floating leaves
of the Nymphaea-like TJamasonmm, or the broad
paler Potamogiton (Pond-weed), which is always so
gay and refreshing an object, hut these we must needs
put into an Aquarium to watch with the aid of a pocket
lens their structure and habits. We place along with
them some of the green scum which covers the surface
of the water (we say scum, but it is in reality a
beautiful freshwater Alga,) a Zygnema in conjugation,
and a few plants, such as Char a, the velvety Azolla rubra
or pinnata, one or the other of which is to be met
with on the Merri, at Warrnamhool; the Moorahool,
at Geelong ; on the lagoon in the Botanical Gardens,
Melbourne, and such like situations. The flat many-
whorled shell, so brittle, —is a Planorbis, this other,
ovate-shaped and also very thin with a large aperture,
is a Physa, so called from its resemblance to a pouch;


and the one, with the aperture on the right, which
distinguishes it from the former is an allied genus,
Limncea, or Pond-snail. All these are widely distri-
buted throughout the world. Now then let us watch
how industriously they are cleaning off the dark
coating of Conferva, which has already commenced
growing on the sides of our Aquarium, and with this
lens see how they use their tongue ; the upper lip with
its mandihle is raised, the lower lip which is horse-shoe
shaped, expands, the tongue is protruded and applied
to the surface for an instant, and then withdrawn ; its
teeth glitter like glass paper, and in Limncea it is so
flexible that frequently it will catch against projecting
points, and he drawn out of shape slightly as it
vibrates over the surface. *
Both these last species crawl beneath the surface of
the water with their shells downwards, the Limncea
depositing its eggs, some fifty or sixty in number, in
small sacs, and Mr. Hogg, in his valuable work on
the Microscope, (Edition 4, p. 423,) gives us some
interesting information on their subsequent develop-
ment, u When examined soon after they are deposited,
the vesicles appear to be filled with a perfectly clear
fluid ; at the end of twenty-four hours a very minute
yellow spot, the nucleus or germ, may be seen near
the side of the cell-wall. In about forty-eight hours
afterwards, this small germ has a smaller central spot,
rather deeper in color, which is the nucleolus. On the
fourth day the nucleus has changed its position, and
is enlarged to double the size ; upon viewing it more
closely a depression or fissure is seen, —this on the
* Woodward’s “ Manual of the Mollusca.’, p. 161.


eight day most distinctly divides the small mass into
the shell and soft part of the future animal. It is then
detached from the side of the cell, and moves with a
rotatory motion around the cell interior; the direction
of this motion is from the right to the left, and is
always increased when the sunlight falls on it. The
increase is gradual up to the sixteenth day, when the
spiral axis can be made out, and it presents a striking
difference to the soft parts in appearance. On the
eighteenth day these changes are more distinctly
visible, and the ova crowd down to the mouth of the
ova-sac ; by using a higher magnifying power, a
minute black speck, the future eye, is seen protruded
with the tentacles. Upon closely observing it, a fringe
of cilia is noticed in motion near the edge of the shell.
It is now apparent that the rotatory motion first
observed must have been in a great measure due
to this, and the current kept up in the fluid contents
of the cell by the ciliary fringes. For days after the
young animal has escaped from the egg, this ciliary
motion is carried on, not alone by the fringe surround-
ing the mouth, but by cilia entirely surrounding the
tentacles themselves, which whips up the supply of
nourishment, and at the same time the proper aeration
of the blood is effected. Whilst in the ova it probably
is by this motion that the cell contents are converted
into tissues and shell. From the twenty-sixth to the
twenty-eight day, it appears actively engaged near
the side of the cell, using all its force to break through
the cell wall, which at length it succeeds in doing,
leaving the shell in the ova sac, and immediately
attaching itself to the side of the glass vase to


recommence its ciliary play, and appear in a still
more advanced stage. It is still some months before
it grows to its perfect form. One of these snails may
deposit from two to three of these ova-sacs a week,
producing’ in the course of six weeks or two months
from 900 to 1,000 young’,”
It is to the Microscope then we owe this pithy
description of the progress ab ovo, of a species allied
to the common Limncea of our rivers.
We now turn to the Sea-slug’s, whose shell, where
it exists, is small and thin, slig’htly rolled and pearly
white, and partially concealed by the animalj in
Bullosa (Bubble shell,) we find an org-an resembling’ the
gizzard of a fowl, paved with calcareous plates capable
of crushing’ the shell-fish on which it feeds. Many
specimens of this shell we have obtained on the shore
at Geelong 1 . The Bteropoda our readers are seldom
likely to meet with; —the Lamp-shell ( Waldheimia ) is
not uncommon, attached by its pedicel to the oysters
from Western Port, and its structure is worthy of
examination; it belongs to Cuvier’s 4th class,
Brachiopoda, commencing’ the bivalve section, the
animals comprised in which take their name from the
ciliated arms on the side of the mouth, wherewith
their food is obtained.
The well known bivalve shells of the Oyster and
the Cockle are good types of the ConcTiifera, the
animals of which are, with few exceptions, aquatic,
and range at all depths on almost every coast and
every clime. There are amongst them some burrowing
shells, as the large white oblong Anatina (Lantern
shell ?) such splendid specimens of which are found in
Corio Bay, a species of Solen, or Razor shell, and the


borers are well represented by a Teredo which abounds
on the piles at Williamstown.
The ability of many molluscs, especially the fresh-
water, to sustain life for a considerable time, is recorded
in some remarkable instances; indeed it is probable
that they become torpid in warm climates during- the
hottest and driest part of the year.* Mr. Gray, of
the British Museum, received from this country a Pond
mussel which had been more than a year out of water,
and it still lived ; some pond snails have been found
alive after five years, although in the warm climate of
Jamaica, and an individual of the Desert snail which
had been affixed to a tablet in the British Museum in
1846, was found, on some suspicion having arisen as
to his having made determined efforts to escape from
confinement, still flourishing after being immersed in
tepid water, f
A Cabinet of Shells is necessary for those who
desire to study Conchology, and we may therefore
hint, that to obtain, specimens, perfect in shape and
colour, dredging is the only good plan ; but this may
not be feasible, if so, the collector should wade amidst
the rocks, examining the heaps of seaweed thrown on
the sand after a storm, or carefully grope about all
dark fissures, where many good species congregate, or
are driven, nolens volens. Chitons and Limpets are
only detached from the rocks by the aid of a strong
bladed knife, as the former especially repel the air
and on all sides to produce a vacuum and so
obtain a firmer hold, and they will sooner part with a
portion of their shells than leave their places of attach-
ment. Bivalves, and all live shells should be boiled
* Woodward’s “Manual of the Mollusoa.” + Ann. Nat. History, 1860.


and the soft parts removed when the valves separate
or gape, hut in doing this care should be taken not
to injure the hinge, as it is often of material importance
in the determination of genera; to preserve it therefore
it is well to tie the shell round with some light thread.
The operculum of Univalves must also be preserved,
and should the contents of the shell at any time emit
an unpleasant smell, a small quantity of chloride of
lime will quickly and effectually remove it.
The arrangement of a collection of Shells is a mere
matter of taste, much depending on the space that can
be afforded to it. We who lead a somewhat nomadic
life, prefer keeping the smaller species in small pill
boxes, which can be purchased in nests at a trifling
cost, the name of each species being carefully recorded
on the lid; but a pair of each shell arranged on a
cardboard, with the operculum glued down alongside,
facilitates easy classification and subsequent exam-
ination.
We have not deemed it necessary to enter into a
technical description of the columella, the hinge , and
other portions of the shell, as this may be found in
any elementary Work on the subject; to the amateur,
Miss Catlow’s little Manual will be of interest, but to
the working Conchologist, we recommend Woodward’s,
u Manual of the Mollusca of which we need only
say, that it is one of Weale’s series, a sufficient
testimony to its excellence.


CHAPTER IV,
Now then having progressed so far that we have
some knowledge of the shells with which we are
likely to meet, let us again wander this bright
morning to the Hopkins River, where we left our
readers awhile since ; but an hour ago as we peeped
from our chamber window the rain mizzled thickly
down, and we had well nigh given up all hope of a
country ramble ', hut this was only what the Irish
peasantry call the “ pride of the morning,” and any
anxiety we might have felt was soon dispelled by the
bright gleams of sunshine, pouting out at first, but
soon bursting forth in full splendour; so having made
a hasty toilet let us start before the heat becomes
oppressive. Well supplied with all that is needful
for any thing that may turn up, we are soon away,
shaking the dewdrops off the grass, the pink flowering
Convolvulus, and the pale blue Veronica, or Speedwell.
The Hopkins River is about a mile and a-half to the
eastward of the town, and the walk to it is full of
interest, but as the day is young yet, we may even
linger on our way. Let us visit the little spring
exuding from the rock near the tunnel, and gather,
u en passant,” specimens of the Colobanthus Billar-
dierii, Tyhich though an uncommon plant, abounds
here, and then descend towards the Pertrobe Lagoon,
noticing on the embankment of the hill cutting the
shining-leaved Trachycaryon Klotschii. We stay on
the water’s edge for a time to note the elegant little


Triglochin decipiens, (Arrow-grass,) the blue Mimulus
or Monkey flower, and other plants which choose such
moist situations ; nor can we resist the pleasant shrill
chirp which issues ever and again from the dense cover
of the rushes ; it is that of an old friend, which from
its habit of flitting through the reeds and low
grasses is only imperfectly known, and it cost us, we
remember, some years since, many hours of patience
before we could ascertain from what source the Grass-
hopper-like chirp emanated. With us it is an especial
favorite, like the Blackcap, more frequently heard than
seen, so retiring indeed that it seldom emerges from the
concealment afforded by the plants common to low
lying wet lands, but occasionally may be seen clinging
gracefully to the heads of the rushes, where probably
it obtains its food. Its wings are remarkably short
and ill adapted for flight, still it appears to flit from
place to place with marvellous rapidity; the beak is
nearly black, with strong bristles at its base; crown of
the head ferruginous; back and wings of dark olive
with black markings ; a streak of very pale blue
extends from the base of the bill over the eye on each
side. Throat, pale blue in the male, but rufous in the
female j the tail, which is three inches in length,
nearly as long again as the whole body, consists of
six feathers with slender black shafts webbed on each
side with minute hairy filaments at equal distances;
and so like are these feathers to those of the Emu,
that this bird has received the name of the Emu Wren.
Its nest is of grass lined with feathers, and is in
fact a perfect ball concealed in tufts at the trunks
of trees


Walking around the Lagoon, which is now nearly
dried up, we collect shells of the Cyclas, JVassa,
and Trvmcatella , and we also discover here a rare
Diatom, Meloseira nuvimuloides; towards the Merri
River w'e find Ruppia maritima (Tassel grass,) and the
Brookweed, Samolus liftoralis, a small white flower
ever so slightly tinted with pink on a slender rigid stem.
Passing near the Jetty, where are dense beds of
the beautiful spathulate-leaved blue flowered Sccevola
suaveolens, we wander over the low sand hummocks
which are so conspicuous a feature here; keeping all
the way in sight of the sea, we observe the shrubby
Pimelea serpyllifolia flourishing all along their ridge,
and the gay scarlet flowering Kennedya , forming a
gorgeous carpet, with here and there the flesh-tinted
Caladenia, with its long lance-shaped leaf. Resting
awhile to inhale the exhilarating breezes so tantalisingly
appetising, which are wafted in from the ocean, we
remember that we must take the track over the hill, to
obtain two plants of interest, which we saw blooming
there many seasons back without at the time gathering
specimens,—the one is the blue, leafless, waxy-looking
Lobelia gihbosa, the other (and its abundance in this
spot will prevent any doubt in identifying it) the
Gentiana montana , which has delicate white or straw
colored corollas, beautifully veined with blue of the
palest imaginable tint. These secured, we clamber
over the steep hill, passing by numerous deep holes,
concealed almost by the thick bushes of the wild
Raspberry, the Forget-me-not, and other of our
indigenous plants ; —they are the burrows of that
uncouth creature, the Wombat, which is very


numerous along the coast. A worthy friend in the
town has taken much pains in endeavouring to rear
the young of this and others of the Marsupialia.
Great, indeed, was the gi’ief of the townsfolk, when
his first protege, “ Peter ” died; a general mourning
when the second of the same name drowned himself
in some soup; but now to console him, he has
successfully brought up two young Wombats, taken
from the pouch of the mother which he had shot,
and these “ puir mitherless bairns ” follow him about
in his peregrinations, without exhibiting any of that
timidity which, in their wild state appears natural
to them.
The summit of the hill being gained, we have a
pretty peep of the river through the clusters of
Casuarince (She-Oaks), Cherry trees, (Exocarpi,) and
Boxwood (Bursaria), which are left to ornament and
protect the Botanical Gardens in course of formation
on the bank higher up. Breaking through a thick
low scrub of Beyera viscosa, we approach the Hopkins
River, through whose mouth the stream rushes by a
narrow channel into the sea, but, ye stars ! Look
upon the heap of fine silvery bream and yellow
speckled salmon trout, our companion, who was to
join us here, has secured !!; “its the early bird,” says
he, still we had not been idle, and these made us look
forward to breakfast hour with some eagerness, and
an appetite which many would envy. We try our
luck j but not a nibble can we get, and we verily
believe these cannibals of fish are finishing their
morning meal elsewhere, so we stow away our fishing
tackle, form our rods into handles for landing nets,


and as the morning air is still chilly, light our pipes
and roam away amidst the deep holes, startling myriads
of crabs and small fry of all kinds. Our friend hears
with amazement that the Actiniae (Sea Anemones)
are unknown to us in this locality, so we hasten to
where the waves are dashing in over low flat rocks,
glittering with the tasselly bead-like Conferva
Darwinnii, and the dark green Codium tomentosum,
of which there is also an attenuated form in the same
or similar situations. We endeavour to reach one, in
fact the spot, but are driven back by the heavy waves,
yet by perseverance it is at last attained, and oh! the
charms which a hasty glance revealed to our wondering
eyes, so rapid, indeed, that any attempt at describing
species would be entirely out of the question, —there
were —
“ Living flowers, that rooted to the rock,
Late from the thinner element,
Shrunk down within their purple stems to sleep,
Now feel the water, and again
Awakening, blossom out
All their green anther necks.”
And well has the Poet Southey described this habit of
these beautiful creatures ; seeing them hanging either
like deep-red gelatinous masses from some dark rocky
recess, or concealed entirely under every ledge where
they may lie unharmed, it would be nearly impossible
to recognise any affinity to the lovely tinted forms
expanded here before us, crimson, green, pink and
white strrned, olive spotted with dark brown, white
with yellow tentacles, all eager to clutch any small
Mollusca or Annelida, which the returning tide may
bring within their reach ; for delicate as they appear,


they are voracious enough, take our word for it, and
Johnston in his “History of British Zoophytes,”*
relates, that a specimen of Actinia crassicornis which
had been originally two inches in diameter, had
somehow contrived to swallow a valve of Pecten
maximus, (Scollop Shell) of the size of an ordinary
saucer. The shell, fixed within the stomach, was so
placed as to divide it completely into two halves, so
that the body stretched tensely over had become thin
and flattened like a pancake. All communication
between the inferior portion of the stomach and the
mouth was of course prevented, yet instead of emaci-
ating and dying- of an atrophy, the animal had availed
itself of what undoubtedly had been a very untoward
accident, to increase its enjoyments and its chances of
double fare. A new mouth, furnished with two rows
of numerous tentacula, was opened up on what had
been the base, and led to the under stomach; the
individual had indeed become a sort of Siamese twin,
but with greater intimacy and extent in its unions !!
Let our lady readers, who are so enthusiastic about
pets of this kind, have a care of their crockery, more
particularly as Lewes also informs us, that “ anything
and everything is carried straightway into its stomach
to be there tried, and rejected only on proved
incompatibility, f
It is from Gosse, Rymer Jones, and others, whose
beautiful Works on all the objects of the Sea-side display
evidence of such untiring research into their habits
and economy, that we place the utmost reliance in
* Vol. 1, page 235, 2nd Edition. + Sea-side Studies, p. 127.


them, we learn that the tentacles of these creature are
prehensile, and this power depends on the presence of
tiny barbed weapons coiled in elastic cells, which are
found in inconceivable multitudes in the tissues of
the tentacles, of the lips, of the stomach, of the frilled
ovarian bands, and especially in some species, in long-
threads or filiferous capsules, which are protruded from
pores in the integument of the body.
The structure of these weapons is as follows : Each
consists of an oval or elliptical sac of transparent
membrane, within which is seen a thread coiled up,
and in some instances an oblong or lozenge-shaped
chamber. At the pleasure of the animal, or under
the stimulus of pressure, this thread is shot forth from
one end of the cell with great force, until it extends to
a length from twice to fifty times that of the cell.
When fully extended it is seen that the thread is but
a continuation of the cell itself, that when it was
dormant it was turned in, and that in the process of
expulsion, every part of its length has actually been
turned inside out like the finger of a glove. Sometimes
the thread appears simple, but in those cases in which
a chamber appears within the cell, it is furnished with
an armature of barbed weapons, which, after expulsion
of the threads, project from their sides in all directions.
The propulsion of these small threads is sufficiently
forcible to enable them to enter the tissues of animals,
and the barbed structure enables the weapon to retain
its hold iij the flesh, which facts Mr. Gosse (from
whose Work* the foregoing has been sketched) thinks,
Lifp,” page 09.


warrants the presumption, that a highly poisonous
fluid is injected at the same time, capable of arresting
and destroying animal life.
At a recent meeting of the Dublin University
Zoological and Botanical Association, Dr. McDonnell
stated in reference to the urticating organs of the
Actiniae, and on the spasmodic action caused by them
when suffered to touch the nerves of a frog prepared
for electrical experiments, that at one time he had
thought this was caused by electricity generated in
these animals 5 but that further experiments and the
use of a very delicate galvanometer had caused him
to abandon this view, and to ascribe these movements
to the local irritation caused by the poison contained
in the cells of the Actiniae.*
These stinging properties are mentioned by various
authors from Aristotle down to Johnston; but Mr.
Lewes agrees with Sir John Dalyell, that the tentacles
do not secrete any poison, as from experiments repeat-
edly tried, he finds that animals frequently escape
unhurt after being* seized by the tentacles j probably,
however, it may be present to a greater degree in some
species than in others, and more fully developed at
certain seasons; hence the diversity of opinion amongst
so many really observant men. The grasp of
the Hydra is, as Johnston remarks, “ eminently
poisonous,” small water-worms which this polyp is
only able to attack, are so tenacious of life, that they
may be cut to pieces without their seeming to receive
any material injury or pain; yet the poison of the
Hydra instantly extinguishes every principle of life
* Year Cook of Facts, 1859, p. 244.


and motion.* From analogical reasoning then we
may fairly conclude that the Actiniae do possess the
powers attributed to them, at any rate there can he
no doubt of the peculiar rasping sensation experienced
when the finger is touched by the tentacles. Lands-
horough f mentions that the Italian epicures eat many
kinds of Actinice as food, and adds, that they smell
like a large lobster, and form to their taste a savoury
repast, and we should certainly give them a decided
preference to the Cephalopoda, (Cuttle fishes, &c. &c.)
which are so much appreciated in the Indian, or the
Trepang (Sea Cucumber), in the Chinese market.
And so we sit chatting, until fairly driven away by
the incoming tide, the spray from which has already
given us wet jackets, nor by the way are our knees
one whit improved by kneeling’ on the sharp muscles
which cover every part of the coast, and the sun is
getting high too, so we get ferried across the river,
and wander along its banks, festooned with the yellow
Zygophyllum Billardierii, the eleg’ant Myrtle flowering
Myoporum, and the blue Dianella, until we arrive at
the house of a friend, whose hospitable door is ever
open to the traveller, and here we were entertained with
much kindness, and even as Isaac Walton’s hostess
dressed his fish after his heart, so did ours, quite in
accordance with our ideas of gastronomic skill. But
we must not linger here longer than is necessary, and
once more buckling on onr knapsacks, we are in a
short time our way with light hearts to the
precipitous cliffs, overhung with dense clusters of the
* Smellie’s Phil. Nat. History, 11, p. 462.
+ History of British Zoophytes,” page 241,


red-leaved Bbagodia nutans, the sweet-smelling white
flowering Alyxia buxifolia, and the handsome Com-
posite, with Eosemary-like leaves OzotTiamnus turbi-
natus, and now scrambling down where a small
declivity presents itself, at the immense risk of being
immolated on the rocks beneath for our daring, we
are once more on the sea beach, not without startling
a splendid Wedge-tailed Eagle, which had evidently
been in search of food here. He alights again not far
off, —take this glass, and see what a splendid fellow
he is, standing so proudly erect in his dark-brown
coat, and with such vividly bright eyes. From the
middle tail feathers exceeding the outer by some four
inches, the tail has a wedge-shaped termination, from
which the Eagle gets its popular name. The earliest
account of this bird was given by Collins in his
“English Colony in New South Wales, in 1802,” but
no mention is there made of the wedge-shaped tail.
The individual there engraved was captured by
Captain Waterhouse near Broken Bay, and showed
his immense strength by sending his talons through a
man’s foot, whilst lying at the bottom of a boat with
his feet tied. The head, too, is beautifully figured in
Mitchell’s “Australian Expeditions,* and the brilliancy
of the eye admirably delineated. We remember once
at a pic-nic near this spot, whilst luncheon was being
spread out on the grass, a splendid fellow hovering
over us for some time, decamping only when a rifle
ball was sent through his tail feathers, as an intimation
not to try closer quarters, but little did he seem to
heed this so courteous a message. Magpies are
* Vol. 2, page 264.


evidently at feud with this as with all birds of prey,
and buffet him as he flies along- without making much
impression.
The mode adopted by the Wedge-tailed Eagle of
capturing the Opossum is interesting; —he goes to a
hollow tree in which it is probable his victim may be
located, and with his talons, scrapes the bark, until
the Opossum becoming alarmed, rushes out and is soon
pounced upon by its crafty foe. The natives aware of
this ruse , resort to a similar plan; they take a piece
of rough wood, and scrape it over the surface of the
tree, with precisely the same results.
But the sun is over the yard-arm, so we, like other
of our fellow-workers and travellers, cry a spell-ho,”
until our next chapter.


CHAPTER V.
“ Pale glistening pearls, and rainbow-coloured Shells,
Bright things that gleam unreck’d of.”
Before again starting, our party is reinforced by some
friends wbo desire to be initiated into the wonders of
tbe Sea-shore, and we ramble along ancle deep in the
sea water, now enricliing our own vasculum, and now
explaining to some of the younger of our companions
the habits and construction of many curious things
with which they load themselves. One of them
gathers some very beautiful Echini (Sea Eggs or
Urchins) to which the spines are still adhering, and we
save some for microscopic examination since they are
important in the identification of species, varying
probably in each. We mentioned before, (page 9),
the peculiar suckers of the Starfishes, and those of
the Sea-eggs are very similar. The beautiful (so
called) shell of this creature is but little known, or it
would surely Be more appreciated ; it is composed of
five pieces admirably joined together, so as to form its
habitation, and is perforated at each extremity by two
large openings, one of which is the mouth, from which
project five polished pointed teeth, better adapted, we
should have thought, for large Molluscs than a
vegetable diet of Algae and Desmidiae. The calcareous
plates (which are more easily examined when the
spines are rubbed olf), may be divided into two sets,
varying as well in shape as in their use, —the larger
being studded with hemispherical tubercles of consid-


erable size, attached externally to articulate with the
moveable locomotive spines. Each of these large
plates has somewhat of a pentagonal form, those
situated near the mouth and apex being considerably
smaller than those at the centre of the shell; —there
are ten rows of these tuberculated plates, but being
disposed in pairs, each row of large pieces being-
united by a zig-zag suture with another of a similar
description, there are in reality but five large segments
of the shell, each supporting a double row of tubercles.
Nor are these the only parts to which spines are
affixed, a vast number, though of secondary importance,
being disseminated over the surface. In addition
to the plates supporting the tubercles, there are a
number of ambulacral bands which support the
myriads of suckers protruded after the manner of
the Starfishes. -‘ln a moderate sized Urchin,” Forbes
tells us,* “he reckoned sixty-two rows of pores in
each of the ten avenues.” Now as there are three
pairs of pores in each row, their number multiplied by
six, and again by ten, would give the great number of
3,720 pores; but as each sucker occunies a pair of
pores, the number of suckers would be only half that
amount, or 1,860. In other parts its structure is not
less complicated, —there are above three hundred plates
of one kind, and nearly as many of another, all dove-
tailing together with the greatest nicety and regularity,
bearing on their surfaces above 4,000 spines, each
perfect in of a complicated structure, and having
a free movement in its socket.f
* British Star Fishes, p. 152.
+ “ The Spines are at first immovable, and stand out like processes from the
tubercles; the joint is not developed until after they have acquired a certain
size.” Owen’s Comparative Anatomy, Invertebrate,” p. 201.


We now come to the “ Caves,” which are the
“ lions ” in this part of the country ; —we enter the
first, which has a double opening-, high, but not
particularly deep;—here, much to the joy of our
party, we find magnificent groups of Purpura and
Haliotidea (Ear Shells), and we were soon all on our
knees intent in admiration of them, calling down
vengeance on some irreverent beings who had been
hacking and hewing away and mutilating many
splendid specimens, without, as we could perceive,
obtaining one entire. The Haliotis is a flat, brick-
dust coloured shell, so similar in shape to the human
ear that it is commonly known as the Ear Shell ; and
the generic name given above is composed of two
Greek words having a similar signification. The
natives call it Munja, or big-mouthed. The aperture
is nearly as large as the shell itself, one end being
slightly spiral, and horn the spire to the other
extremity is a row of holes, for the passage of the
animal’s mantle, which are made at regular intervals
as it increases in size, the one nearest the spire closing-
up as each new one is formed, leaving seven or eight
generally opeti ; the interior of the shell is beautifully
iridiscent, and in much request for inlaying purposes.
The animal itself is exceedingly worthy of attention,
its head and side-lobes being fringed or festooned.
The natives of the South Sea use the shell to ornament
their boats, and to make some kind of musical instru-
ment, —the thick portions of the lip are also formed
into fish hooks. Mr. Swainson * corrects a remark
* Proceedings Eoyal Society of Van Diemen’s Land, Vol. 3, part 1, January,
1855, page 4C.


of Mr. Reeves in his Monograph on this genus, that
“ It is a curious circumstance in the Geography of the
Haliotidece , that few, if any, are to be found where
Chitons (Boat Shell) abound, as if they exchanged
places to a certain extent in the two hemispheres
and we have found as he has, that both these genera
do inhabit not only the same latitudes, but almost
precisely the same localities, the Chitons being common
in the rock pools on the coast, the Haliotidecß remaining
onlyin deeper water, feeding occasionally on shore
vegetation.
The author of the u Curiosities of Food ,” mentions
that the natives of most of the islands in the Chinese
seas dry the soft parts of a species of this animal as
an article of food.
It is here may be found, in some of the deep holes,
that singular creature called the Pagurus, or Hermit
Crab, from its invariably inhabiting the empty shells
of some of the Mollusca; the body and tail are
wanting the usual shelly covering, or possess it hut in
a rudimentary state, and have only a membranous bag
for their protection. We well remember the surprise
we felt on first beholding a specimen of this strange
Crustacean which had been captured by a gentleman
whilst Cray-fishing somewhere in this locality, and we
were at first inclined to think it was undergoing the
process of the periodical moult, after the habit of its
kind, the new shell being only in a semi-developed
state, hut .a careful search subsequently along the
sea-shore revealed numerous individuals in the same
rudimentary condition, ensconced generally in the
water-worn habitation of the Fusus, or Spindle-shell,


with in all the instances we observed, the protruded
claw considerably longer and larger than the other,
yet this may not he a permanent characteristic of
the species.
So perfect is everything which has been created,
that we naturally ask ourselves the question, how may
this seeming defect be accounted for; was the crab so
created originally, or has this practice (as Mr. Lewes
suggests*) resorted to at the outset as a temporary
refuge from more powerful enemies, now become an
organised tendency in the species ? It is not easy to
conjecture, but we incline to the opinion of Mr. Kirby,f
that this singular form and habitation enables these
uncouth animals to prey on creatures, which were they
to wear the livery of their own tribe would be on their
guard and escape them. We find too, that to adapt
themselves thoroughly to their dwelling place, what in
other species would be the tail, is in them transformed
into an apparatus by which a firmer grip of it is
obtained, and so carried more easily along whenever
they take their walks abroad for pleasure or from
necessity.
Whilst groping about in shallow water not many
days since for the green Algae which grow attached to
the rocks, an object moving freely about, —apparently
vegetable,—arrested our attention; it was speedily
captured and taken home inter alia, but so thickly
was it covered with small fragments of red Algce, and
the violet colored zoophyte, Catenicella aurita, that it
required long and very careful examination before we
• “ Seaside Studies,” page 47.
+ ** History, Habits, and Instincts of Animals.” Bridg. Treat,


discovered that it was a small crab, which had
evidently so disguised itself the better to obtain its
prey. We were unable at the time to refer to our
books to decide the species which had adopted this
plan, and rapid decomposition set in subsequently, so
that to this moment we remain in ignorance; but a
writer of a paper in Volume 8 of the “Naturalist,”
(1858, page 7), called “Notes on Crustaceans,” men-
tions having observed this peculiarity in crabs of the
genus Hyas; and in one instance he was amused at
seeing a fine fellow stalking along with all the
majesty which borrowed plumes often produce;—it
was in a large deep pool round the edge of which
abrupt rocks stood, one affording a shelter for some
very fine tufts of Delesseria sanyuinea, amongst which
he had established himself; but noticing, no doubt,'that
the color of his shell was an unpleasing contrast to the
handsome weed, he proceeded to array himself with
small bits of the extremity of the frond, which he
detached, and stuck upon his carapace in an extremely
irregular manner, giving him a most ludicrous appear-
ance. This author had another opportunity of
observing this process in a specimen which he had in
his Aquarium
But we should not omit to say a few words of the
Birds of the Sea-shore, since they tend so much to our
enlivenment —we could not forget them if we would :
there are first the Gulls, ever restless, screaming their
shrill note just over our heads, and anon flying
far out to sea in search of food, in the choice of which
they do not seem very particular, preying greedily
upon Fishes, Crustacea, Mollusca, and almost any


carcase which is floating. When in search of food
they sustain themselves, as many of our readers may
have observed, by a quivering motion of the wings,
now and then touching the water with their feet, —they
swim well but cannot dive: then we have that splendid
fellow the Swallow-tailed Tern, with his long red bill,
jet black pate, and pale dove-colored wings, darting
down into the sea after his prey with unerring accuracy
and the rapidity of an arrow. Tripping nimbly along
to the water’s edge is the elegant little Dotterel, one
of the most graceful of our sea-shore birds, and occasion-
ally the Penguin will glide out from shelter of some
seaweed bank • the Ibis is a common visitor to the
Hopkins, as is also the splendid Australian Pelican,
whose wings expand to a width of eight feet; the
White-headed Fish-hawk or Osprey too may often be
seen lurking about the rocks, feeding on some fine fish,
captured by means of his spine-covered feet; the
Cormorant frequents the rivers near the sea, and it will
afford the sea-side stroller much and lasting pleasure
to carefully watch the habits of any one of them,
which he may easily do by concealing himself behind
any low scrub or rock that presents itself.


CHAPTER VI.
“ Of gay and curious shells
Corallines and fresh seaweeds spreading forth their
delicate branches.”
But we must not forget that other parts of the coast
demand our attention now, for although we prefer the
bracing breezes of Warrnamhool, there are many who
run down from the hot streets of Melbourne to spend
a few days or weeks in the quietude of Geelong, for
gloomy though it may appear to some, the searcher
after a knowledge of Marine objects will find plenty
that is novel, much that will interest him in Corio Bay.
“ However dull,” says Edward Forbes, “ a country may
seem, however uninteresting its human population, the
creatures that live on its surface, or swarm amid the
waves that wash its shores, afford a constant and
inexhaustible source of amazement and instruction.
The Naturalist is at home everywhere, and finds a
museum where the ordinary voyager sees nothing hut
a waste. In the Polar regions he is intensely happy,
but in the tropics he is in Paradise itself. No district
is so poor and barren, hut it has treasures for him,
and none so rich, hut that all its gold would fail to
prevent his rushing after a new butterfly, or climbing
the rocks aftp a new flower.”* To impress this fact
on our readers is the aim of these pages, which will
we trust assure them that there is much to be learned,
* “ The Naturalist at Home and Abroad.”—Forbes.


—great happiness in store for those who will follow
our advice. To be at the Sea-side without some
occupation is one of the dreariest things which can
fall to a man’s lot, —by occupation let it be remembered
we do not mean the abominable pastime, —
novel-reading, —so often indulged in, and called
recreation, but that in which the mind can participate
and be prevented from falling into that listless state
which too often succeeds a season of idleness and
desuetude.
A more beautiful little Bay than this can scarcely
be imagined,—a perfect basin surrounded by high
bluffs on the town side, above which are the Botanical
Gardens, and over the water, in the back ground, are
the pretty Anakies to complete the landscape. Here
the sea is ever calm, and seldom disturbed by the huge
waves and bleak winds which form so unpleasant a
feature at other parts of the coast. This now is a
piping hot day, so we are glad enough to leave the
dusty streets to embrace any stray puff of wind lurking
about. The Shore birds are silent enough; but
see how the water birds are sporting about in the
greatest enjoyment, perpetually turning over and over
in the water, now diving and only raising their bills
just above the surface to breathe, their bodies still
remaining submerged. How we envy them as we
pant here, shrivelled up almost by the sun’s rays.
The Bird Bank across the Bay is covered with Pelicans,
their bills pressed down on their breasts, Gulls,
and Cormorants, —the latter have a loose piece of skin
under the throat, but not as is the case with the
Pelicans, for storing their food, but rather to admit of


their swallow being extended when meeting with some
tit-bit rather larger than usual; we expect they are
pretty well gorged now from the indifference with
which they regard us, and our endeavours to get them
on the wing. There too in addition to the White Ibis
and the Dotterel, which we have mentioned previously
as frequenting the Warrnambool Coast, we have the
Sooty Oyster Catcher, ( Hoemotopus fuliginosus ) from
Lake Connewarre, and the delicate Greenshank ( Glottis
glottoides.) We can scarcely particularise the species
of Ducks which occasionally wheel over our heads as
we progress, but we have seen near the Lakes, the
Mountain, the Black, the Teal, the pretty pink-eyed
membranaceus) (Sow,) the Shoveler,
and many more. Look through this glass now at that
group of silvery-breasted Grebes ( Fodiceps ) gliding
along the surface of the water as they alight; out of
the water they are (except on the wing) perfectly
helpless, only standing with great difficulty; but once
in their own natural element, their broad oar-like
lobed feet enable them to swim and dive with great
facility; a specimen of the lesser Grebe ornaments our
shelves, presented by a friend who had picked it
up under the light-house at Queenscliff, against which
it had flown, and by its side, standing’ about nineteen
inches high is the very beautiful Stone Curlew,
( (Edicnemus grallarius ), whose brilliant dark markings
looming out from its light cinereous plumage, render
it a prize to the Ornithologist, —let him look for it
here !!
But to work, yet let us first remark to our readers,
(as we should have done earlier), no matter of what


sex they be, that searchers after sea-side treasures must
not regard their personal appearance, nor hesitate to
adorn themselves with the paraphernalia of the craft
in the shape of sundry sized “ billies,” or tin cans,
suspended on a strap or string, for collecting j a
hammer, such as is used by Geologists, is indispensable
—one end tapering to a fine point, the other blunt,
and let the handle be tolerably long and well seasoned;
a cold chisel is often of very great assistance, and a
small muslin net made so as to fasten to a walking
stick is the most useful instrument the Sea-side
collector or diver into Ocean’s mysteries can employ;
wet feet, as a matter of course, will fall to our lot,
but no matter so long as we keep moving and the
spoil is plentiful. The rocks just left dry by the
retreating tide, with here and there a few very shallow
pools we will search first; Tops ( Trochi ), Cerithium ,
Natica, and the brilliantly-colored bivalves Aviculce,
are in profusion s—taking'5 —taking' up the stones, one by one,
we meet with so many interesting forms that we must
needs be moderate in our gatherings or our pots will
soon be overcrowded, —it is well therefore to select
only such as cannot easily be obtained at any other
time, leaving the more common to be collected as
leisure offersto arrive home after a day’s fag on the
rocks, to reach which we may have had a preparatory
row, or a tedious walk on a soft sandy beach, with
hosts of creatures to u bed and board,” which to do
successfully inculcates some acquaintance with the
habits of each, is indeed a bore, and likely to damp
the ardour of even the most enthusiastic of our
readers. Strolling quietly along “ improving ” (we


hope) “ the shining hour, ” by recounting past
experiences, we turn over those stones under which it
is probable what we are in search of may be lurking;
—for a time we are unsuccessful, but at last our zeal
meets with its reward. We find a thin flat ribbon-
shaped gelatinous creature of a dirty white colour,
writhing about into all manner of crevices to prevent
its being detached, twisting itself into curious shapes,
but always adhei-ing so tenaciously to the rock, that
it is scarcely possible to remove it without mutilation;
—however, Naturalists have a certain amount of perse-
verance, and done will we never be, so at last when the
patience of our companions is well nigh exhausted,
we have a specimen fairly bottled. But what is this
creature, do you ask ? One glance through our pocket
lens, shows us it is a Planaria —we know it at once
from its Hydatid appearance. Under the higher
powers of a microscope the digestive apparatus is well
worthy of examination, it will be found to be arbores-
cent, the nutritive juices being dispersed along the
sides of the animal. These creatures, though belonging
to the JSntozoa (internal parasites), are not parasitic,
but creep about on the 'Conferva and Alga, found in
situations similar to those we are now working in.
The small specks on the anterior part of the body,
have been said to be eyes, but Bymer Jones* thinks
their claim to such an appellation not only unsubstan-
tiated, but actually “ negatived by experiments,”
which go to prove that in the pursuit of prey, no
power of detecting the proximity of their food by the
exercise of sight is possessed by any of them. Be
* “ Animal Kingdom,” page 147.


this as it may, we secure a few specimens to mount for
the Microscope, and again to work ;* away wriggle ere
we can lay hands on them, myriads of the small pink
Nereis, not very unlike the Centipede in appearance,
having legs regularly disposed on each of the numerous
segments of which its body consists, but belonging, as
will readily be seen, to the Annelida, a class named
from Annellus (a small ring), in which are comprised
creatures whose bodies are composed of a succession of
rings, the leech and common earthworm being familiar
illustrations, but there is even yet a more interesting
type which inhabits those small elongated tubes which
are so abundant in low water on this beach •, these
tubes are apparently made of grains of sand, particles
of which, from being waterworn, shine out like
diamonds, and are cemented together by some
substance (what it is we know not) which exudes
from the body of its occupant, a Terehella belonging
to the division Tubicola of Cuvier. Our own experience
enables us to confirm the remark of Mr, Lewes, that
“ Amateurs are not fond of Worms,” but the peculiar
structure of some of them, the beauty of their tentacles
when expanded (in Terebellce or Serpula for instance),
demand careful examination from those having a love
for Natural History. The Keeper of one of the bathing
houses here has lately exhibited to the frequenters of
his establishment a tiny impromptu Aquarium, in
which, amidst other things, were groups of Serpula,
whose tentacles carefully expanded when everything
* There are also terrestrial Planarice, no less than 12 species of which
Darwin (Nat. Voy., p. 27), speaks as having found in different parts of the
Southern Hemisphere, some obtained in Van Diemen’s Land being kept alive
for nearly two months on rotten wood.


around was quiet, were withdrawn with great rapidity
on their being touched or otherwise disturbed.
The wonderful process of the Terebella multiplying
itself by gemmation, described in such a spirited
manner in the u Sea-side Studies, (page 61,) is far
too interesting not to find a place in our Work; —it is
quite a new feature in its history, although it has been
long known to occur in nearly allied Annelida , the tail
of the Nereis, for instance, being still the tail of its
offspring, and however often the body may divide,
still the same tail remains attached to the hinder
portion, so that this part of the animal may be said to
enjoy a kind of immunity from death.* “ When,”
says Lewes, u the animal ( Terebella) reproduces by
this budding process, it begins to form a second head
near the extremity of its body. After this head, other
segments are in turn developed ; the tail or final
segment being the identical tail of the mother, but
pushed forward by the young segments, and now
belonging to the child, and only vicariously to the
mother. In this state we have two worms and one
tail. It is as if a head were suddenly to he developed
out of your lumbar vertebrae, yet still remain attached
to the column, and thus produce a double-headed
monster, more fantastic than fable ; or suppose you
were to cut a caterpillar in half, fashion a head for
the tail half) and then fasten this head to the cut end
of the other half—this would give you an instance of
the budding. But in some worms the process
does not stop here. What the mother did, the child
does, and you may see at last six worms forming one
* Rymer Jones, Animal Kingdom, page 313.


continuous line, with only one tail for the six. The
tail indeed is the family inheritance, but reversing 1 the
laws of primogeniture, it always descends to the
youngest; like that elaborate display of baby linen
which was worked with such fondness for the first-
born, and has become in turns the costume of succes-
sive pledges as they appeared on this scene of life with
a constant diminendo of interest in all but parental
eyes. The separation finally takes place, and then we
perceive the children and grand-children are not quite
the same as their ancestor.” As we have before
mentioned, the fact had not hitherto been observed in
the group Tubicola , (or animal flowers), yet two of
our author’s Terehellce gave him a sight of it. “ The
first,” he tells us, “died before the separation took
place ; the second, after a day or two’s captivity,
separated itself from its appendix of a baby, and
seemed all the livelier for the loss of a juvenile which
had been literally in that condition of ‘ hanging to its
mother’s tail,’ which I have heard applied in meta-
phorical sarcasm to small boys anxious to be with their
mothers. The young one only lived four days.” We
need not apologise for this long extract, it is the most
graphic description we have met with for many a day,
and we only wish we could follow out the author’s
learned arguments in confirmation of the experiments
of Bonnet and M. Peltier.
But what means that piteous cry from our companion
on a-head who is w'ading about sans shoes, sans
stockings ? Has a monster Poulpe taken fancy to his
posterior extremities, or has some daring young
Mollusk, caught in the act of showing her pretty foot,


retained one of his fingers in her grasp (he is a
bachelor) as she closes her habitation t We hurry to
the rescue, hut he has only stepped on “ this nasty
thing” we discover, and he holds it up to us with a
derisive look, as much as to say, “ catch me beach-
combing any more!! ” but it is a prize indeed which
has caused him this alarm, a Crustacean, very unlike the
Lobstei’s and Crabs generally met with; it is the lhacus
Feronii of Leach, and belongs to an order of Macro-
rous Decapods ( Scyllaridece ), or in plainer terms,
long-tailed, ten-footed Crustaceans, —feet all of equal
length. When full grown it measures about five
inches, the carapace much wider than it is long, with
a lamellar prolongation on each side which covers the
feet. The eyes instead of being situated near the
external angle of the carapace are far distant from it.
The abdomen is short, suddenly narrowed from before,
backwards. It is commonly known as the “ Kangaroo
Crab,” from a habit of striking the water with its
flabelliform tail, and bounding into the air, and with
the same apparatus it swims rapidly—it being, as in
many other Crustaceans, specially constructed for that
purpose. Our bathing-house acquaintance has captured
many fine specimens, of one of which a sketch is given
at the end of this chapter.
Swimming’ about occasionally amongst the seaweeds
the pretty Syngnathus may be met with; —the common
name of Pipe-fish it receives from its tubular snout,
and long)attenuated body : this is the marsupial fish
which formed the subject of a paper read by Mr.
Becker, before the Philosophical Institute of Victoria,
(Transactions, Vol. 1, page 14, 1857,) but the fact


that the ova were hatched in a pouch attached to the
male, had long previously been known, the female
transferring them to her Lord and Master who performs
all the duties of incubation j* here alone is an inter-
esting process for the Aquarium keeper to watch.
Allied to the Pipe-fish is the Sea Horse (. Hippocampus )
so called from its snout resembling the head of
a horse ; it is a great pet, as was instanced by
the crowd of persons visiting the bathing-house when
a specimen was exhibited there, and will well repay any
additional care which the Naturalist may bestow on it.
We give elsewhere a sketch of this singular fish, but it
must he seen alive before any idea can be formed of
its quaint way of poking its snout into all manner of
crevices, and twisting its tail around any object which
may present itself ; pity that we cannot convey to
our readers the beautiful rapid rotatory motion of the
dorsal fin, not unaptly compared to the screw of a
steamer. The Male Hippocampi like the Pipe fishes
take an active part in the reproductive economy.
Let not our readers rashly venture into the water
here, for the fish-stall of Mr. Baker, in Malop-street,
has revealed to us that such things as Tiger and Ground
Sharks of most uncomfortable dimensions are to be
met with, still much may he gained by carefully turn-
ing over the rubbish washed up by the tide. Seaweeds
are seldom met with, if we except the beautiful olive
Sargassum, with its broad oak-shaped sinuate leaves,
and the grape like brown clusters of the Hormosira
Banhsii, in all its several forms, so carefully figured
by Professor Harvey in his History of the Seaweeds
* Proceedings Zoological Society, 1834, p. 118.


of Australia ; the Jelly fishes always abound, but are
generally in a state of decomposition, and the slug-like
creatures from the touch of which one almost shrinks,
are worthy of more attention than we are at first
inclined to give them. It will astound some of our
readers to hear that these slimy creatures ( Holothuria ,
or Sea Cucumbers,) belong to the same division as
the Starfishes and Sea-eggs, and like them have
suckers, varying perhaps in different species, by which
progression is effected, and for plumose tentacles they
have the most beautiful that can be imagined. There
is one habit however they have, which is more singular
than pleasant, —the getting rid of their intestines
whenever handled. Forbes does not think this is the
case, but our own experience confirms the statements
of other writers, and Rymer Jones gives as a reason,
that “ the slightest irritation applied to the surface of
the body causes such powerful contractions of the
integument that the thin membranes of the cloaca
unable to withstand the pressure, become lacerated,
and large portions of the intestine and other viscera
are forced from .the anal aperture.” Sir John Dalyell
however states that thgy have the power of reproducing
the alimentary canal.
For the mode of manufacturing these creatures into
a substance much used by the Chinese, and called
“ trepang, we must refer to the “ Curiosities of Food,”
a work of much interest, not long since brought out
by Mr.') Simmonds, remarking only that a large
quantity is annually exported, we believe, from Northern
Australia, and only a few years since a Company was
started in Western Australia for carrying out this


Fishery, but its operations were limited during the
brief period of its existence.
But the rapidly rising tide puts an end to further
exploration for to-day,—we have scarcely lost sight of
the Town —so panoramic in its appearance —and yet
we have had occupation enough, and our collecting
bottles are full, so leaving our companions to rest
awhile to sniff the evening breezes in quietude, we
saunter homewards, recruited in health and spirits,
and infinitely the wiser for our intercourse with Nature,
cordially agreeing too with Bryant that—
“ To him who in the love of Nature holds
Communion with her visible forms, she speaks
A various language ; for his gayer hours
She has a voice of gladness and a smile,
And eloquence of Beauty, and she glides
Into her darker musings with a mild
And healing sympathy that steals away
Their sharpness ere he is aware.”


CHAPTER VII.
All is barren !
Why so it is, and so is all the world
To him who will not taste the fruit it offers.”
How fully replete with pleasant thoughts is the
memory of our wanderings along the shores of Hobson’s
Bay, by St. Kilda and Brighton, accompanied by a
chosen friend, whose pursuits though not quite identical
with our own, were sufficiently akin to admit of our
entering into them with a zest but little less than that
which he professed, —he ever and again rushing
frantically away after some one of the many
“ Little bright-eyed things
That float about the air on azure wings.”
and returning breathless after a while to exhibit his
spoil, in re Lepidoptera or Coleoptera, whilst we, not
to be outdone, displayed to his wondering sight the
many handsome forms, animal and vegetable, which
had found their way into our collecting pouch and
bottles. There is an intense charm in having a com-
panion on these excursions, one really devoted to the
work, and ready for any thing’ that may turn up, and
moreover, social converse, the application of two heads
to any debatable point, and skilled assistance when
needed, acfe wonderful helps to such work as ours.
What adds so very materially to the beauty of this
part of the coast is the very many lowly shrubs rooted
deep down in the sandy soil, such as the yellow Hihher-


tias, the silky Pleurandra , many species of Geranium,
the lovely pink and white Epacris or Native Heath,
the bitter Eryihroea australis and others, whilst in
moist places such as the hanks of the lagoons trail the
tiny Lobelia and the Myoporum, with its refreshingly
green, shining, spatulate leaves, and then coming to
St. Kilda, we wander through dense bushes of the
beautiful white-flowering Piccinocarpus sidoeformis. It
is well to pause awhile here, were it only to observe
the constant arrival and departure of vessels from all
parts of our own coasts, and from every quarter of the
globe, whilst the Bay itself is thronged with ships
more in number than perhaps any other port in the
world can boast of; —truly the progress of this Colony
is a matter for wonder, when we reflect that hut some
twenty-five years since, the hold pioneers slowly wound
their way up the Yarra, and laid the foundation of the
handsome, densely-populated City of Melbourne, yet
in the stirring scenes which have passed panorama-like
before us, since the gold discovery, the energies and
indomitable perseverance of those men have scarcely
even been a matter for a passing thought; the time is
yet to come when we shall duly appreciate them, and
the dangers they have past will he as familiar to the
Colonists at large as u Household Words,” more par-
ticularly if some enterprising Publisher would give us
cheap editions of the Travels of Batman, Mitchell,
Sturt, poor Leichardt, and a host of others. We
eagerly devour the last new novel, and the discoveries
in and histories of other lands, but to our shame be it
spoken are singularly apathetic to a knowledge of that
in and by which we live.


But we have arrived at a part of the beach suffi-
ciently undisturbed to admit of our commencing
operations, and we arrange in our coat of many
pockets the various bottles, —large and small, which
we hope to fill by and by ; this is apparently a tiivial
matter, hut take our word for it, some such methodical
arrangement often facilitates the securing a rare
specimen, which otherwise would wriggle away whilst
the peculiar bottle to suit it was being" terretted out.
Here now we have one of the Cephalopoda , so called
as we have previously informed our readers, because
the only organs it has, which can he compared to feet,
are attached to the head, and are employed in minis-
tering to the mouth, and pretty actively they minister
too !!
In the Octopus (the name of the specimen we have
captured) there are eight of these feet, as may he
implied by its generic title, but in the Decapods, as the
Cuttle-fish [Sepia) or Squid ( Loligo ) there are in
addition two long tentacles which not only serve to
capture prey beyond the reach of their true feet, hut
to anchor themselves by when the seas are agitated.
The Chinese fishermen on our shores dry these for
food, and we have often been astounded at the vast
numbers which are, day after day, drying around their
establishments. In the former, the shell is hut rudimen-
tary, and the only approach to a skeleton is a cartil-
aginous ring, whilst in the Sepia it is large, and in the
Squid or (Warnary, as it is often called, it is reduced to
a horny or quill-shaped plate, and of both we have
frequent examples on our shores. The feet are flexible
and muscular to a high degree. Along each edge of


the inner surface, which is flatfish, while the outer is
rounded, is a row of circular sucking discs, amounting
in number to upwards of one hundred in each foot;
once let these suckers get a firm hold of anything that
is worth retaining, and farewell to all hope or chance
of its ever getting free, so long as their owner pleases
to operate on his prey with these perfect cupping
glasses. Examine any one of them, says Rymer
Jones, * “It is an admirably arranged pneumatic
apparatus —an air-pump. The adhesive disc is com-
posed of a muscular membrane, its circumference being
thick and fleshy, and in many species (the Decapods,
or ten-armed) supported by a cartilaginous circlet, so
that it can be applied most accurately to any foreign
body. In the centre of the fleshy membrane is an
aperture leading into a deep cavity, at the bottom of
which is placed a prominent piston that may be
retracted by muscular fibres provided for the purpose.
No sooner therefore is the circumference of the disc
placed in close and air-tight contact with the surface
of an object, than the muscular piston is strongly
drawn inwards, and a vacuum being thus produced,
the adhesion of the sucker is rendered as firm as
mechanism could make it.”
The ten footed Cephalopoda or Decapods have a
pair of fins by which they swim in all directions, hut
the broad web connecting the feet of the Octopods
enables them to swim in a retrograde direction, a
peculiarity we but recently noticed in a specimen kept
for our observation by the Keeper of the bathing
houses at Geelong (Mr. Rigney), and in our investi-
* Structure of the Animal Kingdom, p. 558.


gation of its habits we became acquainted with a
peculiarity which it in common with other Cephalopods
possesses, viz., of changing its color, Chameleon like,
to harmonise with the surface on which it rests, blue,
brown, and pale pink being displayed according to
circumstances, the blue and pink being retained in the
animal, now some time in spirits before us as we write.
The mouth of the Cephalopoda is singularly formi-
dable,—it is armed with a pair of powerful horny jaws,
having within them a fleshy tongue, the whole
apparatus being not unlike the bill and mouth of a
parrot, forming, as may readily be imagined, most
destructive instruments amongst the young crustaceous
and testaceous animals on which they prey at the
bottom of the ocean, where by day they establish
themselves, but roaming gregariously after nightfall.
The Octopus , many will be aware, is the animal
fabulised under the name of the “ Kraken,” and
formerly thought to have such size and power as to
qualify it for attacking shipping, and most wonderful
stories are told by nautical men of its bulk and
strength. It is in fact as a friend remarks to us the
Sea-serpent of the old, as the Gulf-weed, has been
that of the modern maresnesters.
And not only have these creatures such formidable
weapons of offence, but they are provided with means
equally efficacious for defence; we have heard of
impudent cases of theft being committed, snuff having
first been rown into the eyes of the victim, but these
animals possess a bag containing a dark inky secretion
which can be ejected at will, either to favor their
escape from foes, or to enable them to carry out certain


designs more artfully and successfully under the pro-
tection which it affords. That charming writer on
Zoology, Mr. Broderip, attempted with a hand-net to
catch an Octopus that was floating by with its long
and flexible arms entwined round a fish, which it was
tearing with its sharp hawk’s hill ; it allowed the
net to approach within a short distance before it
relinquished its prey, when, in an instant, it relaxed
its thousand suckers, exploded its inky ammunition,
and rapidly retreated under cover of the cloud which it
had occasioned, by rapid and vigorous strokes of its
circular web.*
An amusing anecdote is also told of a gallant Officer
who was inconsiderately collecting shells in a pair of
immaculate white trousers, and came suddenly upon
one of the naked Cephalopods snugly harboured in a
recess in the rock. They looked at each other, and
the cuttle, who had his eyes about him and knew well
how to use them, upon seeing the enemy advance took
good aim, and shot so true, that he covered the
snowy inexpressibles with the contents of his ink-bag,
and rendered them unpresentable either in drawing-
room or dining-room.f
Pocketing our Octopus after this long yarn about
liim and his fellows, we stroll onwards to a heap of
Seaweeds, evidently thrown out from the Fishermen’s
net, and soon were on our knees groping amongst it,
when a loud snort made us rise somewhat hastily
(visions of mighty Krakens , enveloping us in their
huge arms, flitting lightening-like before us), and then
* Lectures, Comp. Anat. Invert. Owen, p. 611.
+ English Cyolo. Nat. Hist. Sect,, Article Sepiadea.


discovered, what in our eagerness had escaped notice,
that we were kneeling on the tail of a huge Sting-Ray,
which had by this means testified his displeasure at
our freedom with his extremities, —dangerous quarters
with such formidable spines as he possesses there. We
wished to make closer acquaintance with him, and
remove him out of our path, but a renewal of this loud
snort was all the welcome we obtained, and so leaving
him to his fate we resumed our algologising.
Of the Seaweeds we collect here we shall speak in
their proper place; —it is of the many beautiful
Zoophytes growing on them with such plant-like form
and stillness, that we must now direct the attention of
our fellow ramblers. What are Zoophytes? Well,
without •entering into the nice distinctions between
what is animal and vegetable, that having received the
attention of abler hands, we may notice some of their
various forms, —the Anemones are Zoophytes, and the
most commonly known probably, but let us examine
together the ribbony Kelp fronds on the beach, —we
need not search long before many little silvery spots of
the size of a threepenny piece are pretty sure to arrest
our attention, —admire them you will we know, but
look at one through a pocket lens, and thousands of
pearly cells will be observed, each having a distinct
aperture, uniform in appearance ; —it scarcely be
credited that each and every one of these forms the
habitation of an animal ! ! sensible to outward
stretching forth its tentacles in search of
prey, and performing the functions of digestion
through all
a species of JKembranipora, and not an uncommon one ;


there are many others on our coast, presenting a
variety of forms which Art would fail to imitate ; the
Plumularias and Sertularias resembling small bushes,
must contain some tens of thousands of Polypes on
each bush, —the Plumularias have polyp cells on one
side only of the branch, the Sertularias on both •
some, as the Campanularias, creep closely to old shells
and seaweeds, jointed at regular intervals, the joints
being ringed, and throwing out pretty campanulate
cells 5 others as PEtea, winding along seaweeds, such as
Pallia and Callithamnion , and resembling the head of
a snake without its lower jaw, from which cause the
genus was called by Lamarck Anyuinaria (. Anguis —a
Snake), but the former appellation bestowed upon it
by Lamouroux, has again been generally adopted : in
a common Victorian species ( dilitata ,) specimens of
which the Rev. Dr. Landsborough in his manual of
the British Zoophytes, mentions as having received
from his and our esteemed friend Dr. Daniel Cur die, of
Tandarook, Camperdown, the head instead of termin-
ting like that of a serpent, is shaped like a ladle ;
the Lepralice or Sea-scurf are abundant enough on
rocks and stones, and most puzzling the student will
find them ; then there is the Serialaria or Nit
Coralline, not a pleasant object to the naked eye, but
under the microscope displaying its cells, disposed in
rows at intervals, so as to resemble Pan-pipes, whilst
in another species (convoluta) they are whorled.
The Catenicella is widely distributed in the
Australian Seas, each cell divided by a short corneous
tube, and variously marked with fenestrae or vittae;
almost every collection of Algae will afford some


species, all well worthy of careful study, but to
enumerate the charms of one quarter of them would
occupy more of our space than we can consistently
afford them. Those who will collect them, will by
getting a few leading ones named to serve as types,
very soon master the most common species, and will
find too much that will assist them in Landsborough’s
very pretty Book, to which we have before alluded,
“The British Zoophytes,” by Johnston, the very
excellent Catalogue by Mr. Busk, of the Zoophytes
in the British Museum, with most carefully drawn
plates, which supplemented by the papers * but lately
read before the Royal Society of Victoria by our much
valued friend, Dr. Macgillivray, of Williamstown,
will give all our Australian species.
But say some of our companions, “we always
fancied these were Seaweeds,” nor is this a novel idea,
since the very name given to the class— Zoophyta —
(Zoon, an animal, and phyton , a plant, owes its origin
to the doubts originally entertained by Naturalists as
to the true place of the animals comprised in it, in the
Natural Kingdom : why even Tournefort and Ray
described and arranged them amongst the Seaweeds
and Mosses !! In 1599, an Apothecary of Naples,
Ferrante Imperato, published his “ Historia Naturale”
wherein he mentioned as the results of his observa-
tions, — the animals of Corals and Madrepores.
Peysonnel (to whom a genus of Algae has been
in the year 1727, had seen the Polypes of
Coral and of Madrepores, had witnessed their motions,
* “On some New Australian Polyzoa.” 3rd Aug., 1859.
« Notes on the Cheilostomatons Polyzoa of Victoria.” 26th Oct., 18u9.


the extension of their tentacles, and the contraction
and opening of the oral apertures, and moreover he
discovered, what to most minds should have been
conclusive, that their corruption exhaled the odour,
and their chemical analysis discovered the constituent
principles of animal matters ; still, when submitted to
the Academy of Science at Paris, it was coldly and
doubtingly received by the Members. Jussieu, some
twenty years subsequently, confirmed the observa-
tions of Peysonnel, and extended his own to Sertularice
and Flustrce.
Reaumur also in an able manner reviewed the
ground already gone over, and declared in favor of
the animality of Zoophytes, and predicted that many
then unexamined would have to be added to the list.
There were still many disputants on the subject, so
loth are men to give up opinions already formed ; but
a merchant of London, Mr. John Ellis, who was
particularly fond of Natural History, and had amused
himself with making landscapes of Seaweeds and
Corallines (?) on paper, was induced to look more
minutely into the structure of the latter by aid of the
miscroscope, and he discovered that these so called
Corallines, on examination, indicated more of an
Animal than Vegetable nature, an opinion which
subsequent investigations fully bore out, and any
statement made by Ellis was valuable, since he only
detailed facts, ex visu, or an inference from them.
And so from this time up, in spite of many contra-
dictory hypotheses, the animality of the Zoophytes has
been firmly established.


Many of the polypidoms or habitations of the
Zoophytes are so minute as only to be accurately
discerned under the microscope ; —lucky will the
investigator of them be if its powers will reveal the
Polyp itself ; and there are many methods of
preparing them for the purpose ; —the Sertularice,
Plumularice, and similar ones may either be mounted
in Canada Balsam, or in distilled water, and the
Flustra , Membranipora , Lepralia , Gatenicella , &c.,
as opaque objects, gummed down in cells made of dark
cardboard, covered with thin glass.
Most earnestly do we recommend our readers not to
pass lightly by these many lovely forms of Marine
life, such as we have only casually and but faintly
depicted here, so sure are we that they will soon
exclaim with the Poet—
Can such things be,
And overcome us like a Summer’s cloud
Without our special wonder ? ”


CHAPTER VIII.
“ When I have my hooks,” says that eloquent
writer, Jonathan Freke Slingsby, “ I have old friends,
whose cheering’ looks make amends for coldness in
men; ” and we echo his thoughts, for no matter what
our toils may have been, mentally or bodily, throughout
the day, there is always a quiet hour or so before
retiring to rest, which we invariably devote to our
books, and it is particularly enjoyable too after a day’s
rambling, such as is described in our last chapter,
when with wearied limbs we draw our chair a trifle
nearer to the fire, —for have one we must, and a cigar
too, after wading for so many hours, —and acquaint
ourselves with the habits of such creatures as may
hitherto have been unknown to us, or comparing our
own observations on them with those of other writers,
our Microscope at our elbow, should any important
point have to be cleared up or any specimen require
aid to decide its status in society.
We had laid aside from our former gatherings, some
very lovely specimens of the Echinodermata , and we
have them now before us for examination. Amongst
these EcUnodermata, or hedgehog —skinned creatures,
belonging to the division Hadiata, we have first the
large spiny Starfish, taken from near the bathing
houses at Geelong, and a splendid fellow he is,
measuring as much as eight inches from the tip of one
ray to the extremity of another, each (and he has ten)


bristling with spines on the upper part, and alive with
myriads of suckers below. Then we have the true
types of this class in the Sea Urchins, or Sea-eggs,
covered with spines—purple in colour, —most exqui-
sitely fluted, and with a rim at the base of each
regularly crenated. There are few who gather the
denuded, so called shell of this animal as it is thrown
up on our shores, would own the relationship between
them. And such jaws as they have, with which our
own cannot compare for one moment; here now is a
specimen before us from which we have extracted the
whole dental apparatus,-—it is, to own the truth, the
first time we have so carefully observed it. In the
living animal merely the five triangular teeth closely
fitting together can be noticed, and we were scarcely
prepared for the large jaws in which we found them.
These jaws are, as the teeth, five in number, and form
a five-sided cone, and in a socket passing through each
the teeth are imbedded; when examined separately,
they are found to resemble in figure a triangular
pyramid, the external surface being smooth, with
eminences for the attachment of muscles, whilst the
other two sides are flat and marked with groovings
resembling a very fine file. When fitted together,
these grooved flat sides of each jaw are in apposition
with the corresponding surface of two others, so that
there are in fact ten grinding surfaces formed, between
which the food must pass preparatory to its introduction
into the canal. The food of the JEchinidce
consists of shell fish, but in an allied family the
Spatangideoe or Heart Urchins, some magnificent fossil
specimens of which we took some years since from


the cliffs at Portland Bay (p. 60,) there are no teeth, and
they subsist on the animal substances contained in the
mud on which they feed, and in which they live. There
is something intensely grotesque in the habit which
some of the Starfishes have, as we already have re-
marked, of wriggling themselves about until scarcely
anything is left, as much as to say, “ very well, if you
are determined to persecute us, we have made up our
minds that you shall have as little for your pains as
possible.” There is an immense deal of spitefulness in
the whole operation. What next, we exclaim ? Are
we to see a realisation of Forbes’ vignette, where an
aged Ophiurus is leading out one of his own race, of
tender years and of different sex, to dance ashore to
the music of some water elf or other, comfortably
seated on a pookawn —qui salt ?
But in spite of this propensity, the majority of the
Starfishes may be preserved without much difficulty;
if brought home in seawater they will expand them-
selves, and they should then be plunged quickly into
a basin of cold fresh water, when they will die so
rapidly as not to have time either for consideration, or
for breaking themselves into pieces, and Forbes
(British Starfishes, p. 32,) recommends that after
remaining in this freshwater for an hour or so, they
should be dipped, for an instant only , into boiling
water, and then dried in the sun or a current of air.
The Sea Urchins may also be plunged into cold water,
(hot loosens their spines), the dental apparatus carefully
removed, and tHe animal disembowelled with the aid
of a piece of stick to which a wad of cotton wool is
attached, and frequently rinsed until perfectly sweet,


—when so, the jaws may be recced in a layer ol
cotton wool.
In turning over the broken fragments of Algae thrown
up in heaps on the coast, we not unfrequently find an
oblong, leathery, red, shapeless substance, which will
no doubt puzzle some of our readers, as to whether it
may be regarded as animal or vegetable ; —take it up
and not unlikely you may have a jet of water squirted
into your face. Would you believe now that this is
one of the Mollusca , and of the class Tunicata, or
Tunic-clad, having, instead of a shelly case to its
body, a strong coriaceous covering, with certain
orifices —generally two —one branchial, the other anal ?
They lead an apathetic kind of life, seldom moving
from the stones or seaweeds to which they may have
attached themselves, but deriving nourishment from
the microscopic creatures contained in the currents of
water, which they draw in by means of their ciliated res-
piratory organs, below which is the mouth; the stomach
according to Woodward, (Manual, p. 336,) contains
chiefly minute particles of the articulated seaweeds,
and diatomaceoe. These animals are not unaptly called
u Ascidians,” from asJcos, a flask or skin bottle, and
are vulgarly known as “ Sea-squirts.” The rocks at
the Barwon Heads, left dry by the retreating tide, are
covered with them, and no Aquarium should be
without a specimen or two.
Whilst sauntering along the beach at Corio Bay a
few since, we noticed a pair of the delicate little
Storm Petrels flitting about over 'the waves, just
skimming them, and dipping their tiny feet into the
water as they paused awhile to secure the small fishes,


Mollusca, or greasy substances which form their food.
These birds, as far'as our own observation goes, seldom
visit the coast, although probably some of the islands
serve as breeding places for them. Those who like
ourselves have journeyed hither from other lands, will
hail them with a kindly welcome whenever met with,
since no matter how boisterous the winds, or how
rough the sea, they, ever gay, cheered our long
imprisonment on the vasty deep.
But whilst we write, the animals which we had laid
aside in a small basin have assumed a very different
aspect; the tide being low during our late ramble in
the same locality, we had contrived, after exercising
a vast deal of forbearance, and making all manner
of useless blows with our hammer under water, to
detach a very pretty dark-green Actinia , and with
it another little gem, —its colour, a very pale grey,
with lighter stripes; now its tentacles are expanded
—very short and white, —remark too the beauty of
this other species from the piles at the Bathing
house, handsomely marked with malachite tints, and
throwing out pure white tentacles, pink tinted at
their base ; all these can be easily obtained, and
will add very materially to the attractiveness of an
Aquarium.
When examining a fine specimen of the Jelly Fish
(Bhizostoma) which the Superintendent of the Bathing
house was keeping in a large tub of water, we noticed
with surprise under its delicate blue umbrella, many
parasitic lice upwards of an inch in length, with
four antennae, the feet terminated by hooks, and
the extremity of the abdomen widened out


into a regular caudal fin. Detaching one, it rolled
itself up in a manner similar to the Woodlouse
( Oniscus ), and they both belong to the same order,
{lsopoda —equal footed). Large as many of the Jelly
Fishes are, the quantity of solid matter which they
contain is wonderfully insignificant, and they rapidly
become deliquescent on exposure to atmospheric
influences, so that we can only liken the chances of
good fare which parasites on them entertain, to the
Chinamen, who were observed by a friend somewhere
in the Chinese Seas, making most persevering efforts
to fry these creatures, and evidently sorely puzzled to
find how utterly without success their endeavours were.
An Octopus was also placed in the same tub with the
Jelly Fish, but although the sides were high, and
before the water could be reached, several feet of the
platform had to be traversed, it managed to effect its
escape and regain its native element. Many of its
habits displayed a vast amount of apparent cunning, as
if it was perfectly aware that we were watching it.
Darwin mentions the amusement afforded him by the
various arts to escape detection used by an individual
to which his attention was directed. “ Remaining for
a time motionless, it would then stealthily advance an
inch or two like a cat after a mouse, sometimes
changing its colour ; it thus proceeded, till having
gained a deeper part, it darted away, leaving a dusky
train of ink to hide the hole into which it had
crawled.’’ *
who are geologically inclined, may spend
many a pleasant day in examining the soft argillaceous
* Naturalist’s Voyage, p. 7.


mud, of which the cliffs on Corio Bay are composed:
it is full of fossil specimens of Dentalium or Tooth
Shells, curved tubes open at the extremities, and either
smooth or striated longitudinally; splendid Terehratula
(Waldheimia probably,) are also there in abundance,
some Pectenidece, &c. The Terebratuloe are the shells
commonly called “Lamp Shells,” from the aperture
through which the pedicle, whereby the animal
attaches itself to submarine objects, passes, having
some similarity to the hole which in a lamp admits the
wick. A species is figured at page 60, in company
with the Spatangus from Portland Bay. Microscopists
will find a beautiful object in the shell of the Wald-
heimia, and many other JBrachiopoda.
But we have yet to speak of the Marine Algae, and
the Aquarium, so that our Sea-side chattings must
for a while cease ; in all our ramhlings in search of
the many wonders of Nature we have been forcibly
impressed by a vigorous sentence in one of Emerson’s
Essays, wherein he suggests the advantage which a
country life possesses for a powerful mind, over the
artificial and curtailed life of cities. He says:—“ We
know more from Nature than we can at will commu-
nicate. Its light flows into the mind evermore, and
we forget its presence. The poet, the orator, bred in
the woods, whose senses have been nourished by their
fair and appeasing changes, year after year, without
design, and without heed, shall not lose their lesson
altogether, in the roar of cities or the broil of politics.
Long hereafter, amidst agitation aud terror in National
Councils, —in the hour of revolution, —the solemn
images shall re-appear in their morning lustre, as fit


symbols and words of the thoughts which the passing-
events shall awaken. At the call of a noble sentiment,
again the woods wave, the pines murmur, the river
rolls and shines, and the cattle low upon the moun-
tains as he saw and heard them in infancy.”
May the Sea-side rambles we have enjoyed together
be the means of lightening our hearts here and hereafter,
—truly the oftener we wander on the shores of our
vast seas, the more diversified our investigations, shall
we have reason indeed to own that —
Things innumerable, both small and great are there.


CHAPTER IX.
THE AQUARIUM.
There is something highly satisfactory to the
Naturalist in the reflection that science has taken
rapid strides within but a few years, and in no depart-
ment more so than in Marine Zoology,—here, where
but a brief period back all was little better than
conjectural, there is now ocular demonstration, not
only of the many creatures inhabiting the ocean, the
one dependent on the other, hut also of their habits,
minute structure, and mode of living. From our
childhood up we had been accustomed to see and have
Gold and Silver Fishes in globular glass bowls, hut
the pleasure was in almost every case a temporary one,
the inhabitants dying from the exhaustion of that free
oxygen which had existed in the water, hut which had
all been absorbed, and its place taken by carbon, —
before a fresh supply could be given by renewing the
water. Collectors have long had their glass bottles
wherein to convey to their study such creatures as
they desired more nearly to cultivate the acquaintance
of, hut here too the duration of life was but brief, and
soon they had to be transferred to a bottle of Goadby if
their preservation was an object. No wonder then that
it became a matter of such importance to obtain the
means of preserving in health and brilliancy of colour
such creatures as we wished to cultivate, and with whose
economy we were almost entirely unacquainted. How


this could be achieved, was a matter for long 1 and
untiring experiments and trials and repeated failures.
But Chemistry was at last applied to the case, and
instead of the troublesome operation of perpetually
changing the water, ever in dread that a case similar
to that we have quoted above might occur, the long
sought end was attained; by what is called compen-
sation, animals may be kept alive for an indefinite
period, —viz.: by thoroughly understanding the relations
between animal and vegetable life on the principles of
Priestley, followed up by Ingenhouss, and finally
adapted to the present purpose by Mr, Ward, the
inventor of the glass cases which bear his name,
Johnston, the learned author of Histories of the
“ British Zoophytes,” “Sponges,” &c., Warrington and
Gosse. It was Mr. Bowerbank, however, who gave
the hint to the Secretary of the Regent’s Park
Gardens, from which arose the beautiful tanks which
are now in full operation there. We have often before
had this process of respiratory interchange explained,
but who has brought it so vividly before us, as our
often quoted friend and companion (his charming
writings have made him so,) Mr. Lewes. “ Let us
stand apart,” he says, “ and contemplate this marvel
no longer as an animal function, but rather as a
planetary phenomenon; let us endeavour to picture to
ourselves the silent creative activity everywhere
dependent on this interchange. The forests, the
prairies, the meadows, the cornfields, and gardens, —
the mighty expanse of plant-life covering mountain
and valley—these subsist on the carbonic acid which
is exhaled from the lungs and bodies of animals.


Plants take up this carbonic acid from the atmosphere,
mould the carbon into their own substance, and set
free the oxygen, once more returning it to the
atmosphere. Animals reverse the process, taking up
the oxygen, and giving out carbonic acid for the
nourishment of plants,” and so as Keats beautifully
says,—
“ Keeping up an interchange of favours
Like good men in the truth of their behaviours,"
It is to the want of an acquaintance with these first
principles that so many of the failures in attempting
to form Aquaria may be attributed; the mere filling
them with animals will not suffice, —and secondly to
an abominable system of overstocking,—specimen after
specimen dying from an insufficiency of those gasses
which are essential to life.
How this necessary balance may be attained, we
shall endeavour to show as we progress,—meanwhile
we can go in detail through the various matters
required for the establishment of an Aquarium. Its
form must depend very much on the taste or caprice
of the owner ; the square one with glass sides is
perhaps the most common, but we question whether it
is the most desirable, for Mr. Warrington has
discovered that it is absolutely necessary the sun’s light
should fall directly from the surface on those Algae,
which have been removed from the deeper recesses of
the ocean, where they were but partially exposed to
light, to ornament the tank and afford sustenance to
its inhabitants. The tank used by this gentleman is
four-sided, —the back and sides being composed of
slate, —the back gradually sloping upwards from the


bottom at an angle of 50 degrees. By this plan not
only does the light fall directly from the top, hut the
water more freely absorbs atmospheric air. This object
is also attained by staining a portion of the glass
placed next the light of a sea-green, —a plan adopted
successfully by many practical keepers of Aquaria in
England.
Were we to decide, we should prefer the form
suggested by Mr. Shirley Hibberd, in his very concise
little Work on the “ Aquarium,” viz., that of the
double cube, the length of the tank being just double
its width and depth, so that if cut into two equal parts
two cubes would be formed. The glass should be set in
grooves in the slate, and bound outside with tastefully
turned pillars of wood, or any other substance which can
easily be obtained or may suit the whim. White lead
putty may be used for cementing, but to prevent the
water being in any way poisoned by the lead, a coating
of shell-lac dissolved in naptha, and made into a paste
with whiting, must be laid over it.
The formers of Aquaria are generally in too great a
hurry to set their tanks going, but much trouble and
very considerable disappointment, not to say expense,
(where the party lives away from the seashore, and
may have to depend for supplies of stock on some
zealous friends, or those, if there are any such, making
it a means of livelihood,) would be saved, by allowing
water to remain in the tank for several days at a time,
changing it occasionally, so as to sweeten the tank
before commencing operations, and even then go
gradually to work. First, then, there should be a
bottom of good sea-sand (not too finely disintegrated)


and pebbles laid on thickly, as many fishes, Crusta-
ceans, Molluscs, and other creatures love to burrow in
it, and besides, it contains a host of minute atoms
which will afford sustenance to some one or the other
of our pets ; —this layer having well settled down,
now comes a matter involving much taste, the
formation of rockwork, —not such fantastical grottoes
as we have observed in some Cockney Aquaria, but
certain nooks and crannies wherein those which delight
in seclusion may ensconce themselves. The shore at
Geelong affords abundant material in densely clustered
masses of Serpulce adhering to the stones, fragments of
which may easily be detached with a good hammer such
as we have already described, —this, while ornamental,
adds thousands of interesting and graceful inhabitants,
whose elegantly fringed ciliae will be protruded the
moment they feel the water, and about St. Kilda
and similar places along the coast, scarcely a stone
can be taken up that is not covered with the lovely
Lepralia or Sea-scurf, minute eggs, &c., so it will
only require prudent arrangement, without crowding,
which in a tank of small dimensions is undesirable, as
not only does it render the detection of dead or dying
animals a matter of difficulty, but by displacing a
certain portion of water, the animals are to some
extent robbed of the means by which they
should be supported.
When the tank is covered by one of the elegant
domed lids which we have occasionally seen, and
which we recommend to exclude dust, and to preclude
the escape of such creatures as, like ourselves, are
given to roaming, the rock-work as we may term it,


may project above the surface of the water, to allow
such animals as desire it the means of gratifying
themselves. The author of “ Ocean Gardens ”
suggests a kind of double Aquarium, and a
contrivance by means of which a large portion of
water should flow gradually from one tank to the
other at fixed periods, in imitation of the ebb and
flow of the tide. Many interesting phenomena he
anticipates would thus be exhibited, such as the
closing of the Sea Anemones ( Actinia ) as the water
receded, and their expansion on its return ; —this,
change too might be found highly advantageous to the
health and development of those animals whose
natural habitat lies between high and low water mark,
and whose constitution is therefore framed to require
entire or partial exposure to the air at certain intervals
of time. A pretty idea, which we trust some ol our
readers may carry out.
Well now, these preliminaries being settled, we
may add more water to the tank,—obtained wherever
it is possible fresh from the sea, and if at all dirty,
filtered through charcoal before being used. Densely
populated as seawater is with minute animal life, it
must necessarily be more conducive to the success of
an Aquarium than that artificially made. Mr. Hibberd
argues the question in this way, that in the latter, the
very absence of organic matter is advantageous, since
the water is less likely to get out of condition than the
seawater, \>here the germs may decay and putrefy,
spreading destruction in all directions, —nevertheless,
give us seawater with life in as many of its infinites-
imal germs as possible. We can by care guard against


casualties, but we cannot always obtain specimens.
Yet after all there are many who must resort to this
artificial water, and so we give Mr. Gosse’s receipt for
it; giving some little hope in the experience of Mr.
Hibberd,* that it serves all the purposes admirably,
there being no diminution of vigour or beauty in the
plants, or of gambolling playfulness in the animals.
Strange, however, if such was his opinion in the book
from which we have quoted, that only a brief time
after in his “ Book of the Aquarium,” page 59, he
states, how quite unsuited for animal life of any kind
is this artificial seawater, until it has been brought
into condition by means of growing weeds for eight or
ten days, and for Crustaceans , Starfishes, and Fishes
proper, it is not suitable till it has been in use for
many months, and even then some species lose their
health in it, and at last perish. These, however,
are the constituents of the artificial seawater; —
Common Salt, 3J ounces.
Epsom Salts, J ounce.
Chloride of Magnesium, 200 grains (troy).
Chloride of Potassium, 40 „ „
or, according to Mr. Hibberd: —
15J Quarts Fresh Kiver Water, (beer measure).
14 Ounces Table Salt, (avoirdupois).
1 „ Epsom Salts, (ditto).
800 Grains Chloride Magnesium, (troy).
160 „ „ Potassium. „
This should be tested by the hydrometer until it
reaches a specific gravity of 1-028, being that of
seawater.
* Rustic Adornments.” page 24.


And now we may enliven the appearance of the
Aquarium, by adding- some seaweeds preparatory to
stocking it with such animals as may be most desirable,
—nor is this portion of our operations lightly to be
passed over, for on its proper regulation depends
almost entirely success or failure. The collection of
materials will afford much pleasure and healthy
exercise, and when they are flourishing and spreading
out their delicate fronds in the waters of our tank, we
can recall with delight the rambles we had in search
of them.
The green Seaweeds are the most desirable, not
only as Dr. Badham remarks on account of their great
beauty, but because they do not, like the red or brown
kinds, render the water turbid by decomposition, and
what a glorious selection we have on these shores !!
the feathery Bryopsis , looking under a microscope like
spun glass, the ribbony Viva , the green bullion-
shaped tassels of Codium tomentosum, fringing the
sides of the rock-pools—you will have to bare your
arms to reach them, —the many varieties of Caulerpa,
JEnteromorpha , —the lovely Apjohnia Icetevirens , which
extends along the whole Southern coast, —the glassy
Cladophora, with a host of others. In the use of Red
Algae, the experimenter must take his chance, —any
way he must have many failures ; but there is one, the
Oriffithsia, which Dr. Harvey recommends, and there
is nothing to compare with it for beauty. The pools
about Quefenscliff, St. Kilda, Warrnambool, Armstrong’s
Bay near Port Fairy, Portland, and other of our Sea
coasts, will afford abundance of specimens in addition
to those already enumerated, which are the best to


commence with, but in no case must they be used
unless adhering to the rocks or other substances on
which they may be growing, as otherwise they would
rapidly decompose and render the water quite unfit for
animal life. Some taste too may he used in this
matter, for glass bottles, old hoots, and sheep’s skulls,
not unfrequently form the basis of attachment. Olive
seaweeds cannot he recommended, although in an
Aquarium , which we very lately had the pleasure of
inspecting, the necklace shaped Hormosira BanJcsii,
was the special delight of a dozen or more young and
old Hippocampi or Sea horses (p. 37), which twisted
their tails around its chain-like vesicles, evidently quite
at home.
The best test by far of the tank being in a fit state
for the introduction of stock is, when small crystal
globules of oxygen appear on the plants. This happy
condition being arrived at, we may proceed,—and yet
on second thoughts it is as well to know something of
the mode of respiration of the aquatic animals, since
that will be of sure service in making a selection for
the tank. The lower animals should he the first
chosen, for one very good reason, that their respiration
is far less active than in those of a higher organisation,
and this applies pretty generally to all creatures
inhabiting the watery element; in them respiration is
performed by branchiae or gills, varying much in form,
and by the air with which the water is impregnated;
thus in the Fishes we observe the mouth frequently
opened to admit the water, which passing out through
the gills serves to oxygenate their blood a fish on


dry land does not die from any want of oxygen, but
from being asphyxiated in consequence of the absence
of that element on which the gills are dependent for a
due performance of their functions; but this is not the
same in all fishes, for in some (the shark for example)
there are simple openings, varying in number to allow
of the exit of the water, whilst in some where the
opercuhm or covering of the gills is but narrowly
cloven, a certain quantity of water is retained, by
which they can continue out of their natural element
for some considerable time, and even perform migra-
tions overland, from one place to the other, and the
Climbing Perch ( Perea scandens), “ quits the water
and ascends the roots and branches of the Mangrove
trees, an effort it accomplishes by using its ventral fins
as feet.”
Of course we must to a certain extent be dependent
on the part of the coast to which we may be near; —
some neighbourhoods are poor in comparison with
others, but there are none so barren as not to afford
abundance of live stock. We have already mentioned
the lovely Terehellce and Serpulce, the Sea Cucumbers
(.Holothuria ), the centipedal Nereis, the ribbony
Flanarice, pop them all in, and for Fishes, the tiny
Hippocampus or Sea horse, the slender Pipe fish
(Synynathus), if there is room, are the most
desirable ; by all means have a Hermit Crab for
his comical ways, and there are many others which
may be experimented on, such as our Seaweed-
wearing friend mentioned previously in these pages,
• Swainson’a “Habits and Instincts of Animals.’’ page 116,


but there are some species which on account of their
voracity must not be admitted ; a few of the smaller
Starfishes must go in, since they will quickly get rid
of any decomposing substances : [they flock to the
slaughter-houses on the Bay at Geelong, to feed on
the debris there.] Agassiz has observed that the eggs
of the Starfish, after they are laid, are taken up by
the parent animal, and kept between its tubes below
the mouth. The Starfish bends itself round them,
surrounds the eggs with its suckers, and moves about
with them. When the eggs have been removed to
some distance, it has been noticed to go towards them,
take them up again, and move off with them, showing
that these animals so low in structure, and apparently
deprived of all instinct, (if any animal can be supposed
to be without it,) really watch over their young. A
Sea-egg or two will be great pets. Of shells we should
select specimens of the Fusus or Spindle shell, their
bright red feet rendering them very attractive, as they
crawl up the sides of the tank 5 the less rare JTEurex;
Top shells or Turbo; Trochi or Hoop shells to keep
down the confervoid growths which otherwise would
dim the glass sides of the Aquarium, small Haliotidece
or Ear-shells; some of the Bonnet Limpets, the lovely
gaudily-colored Aviculas; ( Geelong), Chitons, and
others which we cannot mention here.
With a small pocket lens, or with the Portable
Microscope which Mr. Warrington has invented for
the easier examination of living objects contained in
glass bottles or Aquaria, not a day or an hour will pass
without something new being discovered, fresh beauties
coming to light, which will amply repay any labour


or expense which may have been incurred, and we
shall at once own the truth of the Poet’s saying’,
that—
“ Each drop of water is a world containing
Creatures more numerous than the men of Earth.”
Before proceeding to treat of the Freshwater
Aquarium, we may briefly mention a few matters —
which, though apparently trifling, are yet essential
to the success of the Marine tank, as also the well
being of the inhabitants of it.
It has already been stated that it is quite unneces-
sary to change the water, but it may be well
occasionally to aerate it by dipping up a small
quantity and pouring it rapidly hack into the tank,
but even this is opposed to the true principles of
“ compensation,” and need only he resorted to where
the animals become sluggish, and the fishes find their
way to the surface to obtain there what they should
find in their own element. A small syphon of gutta
percha or tin will be handy, should it be necessary to
draw off or replace the water. The short end must be
placed below the surface of the water in the tank, and
the mouth applied to it until the water flows, which it
will continue to do without further trouble so long as
the short end remains under water.
It may so happen, (it is but human nature) that
certain species do not dwell amicably with their mates,
and others from some cause or the other (not at once
apparent) may sicken, —in such a case, remove them
without delay to small glass vases where they may be
treated as circumstances require. The readiest mode
of removing them to and fro is, by means of a small


muslin or fine netted bag-, attached to a long- handle,
(the small utensil used for poaching eggs will explain
what we mean). We have grieved to see many fine
specimens destroyed on removal, and this makes us
give a few words of caution on the subject.
And now having a family about us, we must needs
feed them, or we may have to appear before the Bench
for maintenance ; “an unfortunate Hippocampus
and fourteen little ones,” or “ a poor old crippled
Starfish, (rendered blind by disputative authorities)
and a family of orphans ” would settle the matter
unfavourably for us very speedily, in which event we
should decidedly have to sue for a divorce a mensd , to
say the least of it •, but most of the inhabitants find
ample sustenance in the water, and for those which
desire something more nourishing, a small portion of
raw meat may be lowered by a string into the tank
daily, so as to be withdrawn at will, and thus
decomposition be prevented.
To remove or secure any small objects, a small glass
tube of a diameter of about a quarter of an inch will
be of service • to use it, the forefinger should be placed
on the top, and the tube placed over the object, which,
on the forefinger being withdrawn, will rise into it,
and the finger being again applied, it may be removed
in safety.
The formation of the Freshicater Aquarium will
vary but little from that already described : a few
inches of sand wherein the plants may root, and a few
stones laid on it is desirable, but rock work is not
necessary, in fact to our taste, decidedly objectionable
and unsightly. Good well water, the experience of
many writers has proved to be as well adapted to the


purpose as river water, but the same caution that we
recommended in stocking- the Marine Aquarium should
be observed here. Our readers will have frequently
noticed the floating feathery green scum in our rivers
attached to stones and pieces of wood, or the bottoms
of boats, —this under the microscope displays forms as
lovely as they are various, of what are scientifically
called Freshwater Algae ; have some, by all means, —
a small plant of the Damasmium —
“ Its white canopies,
Upward turn’d to catch the heaven’s dew! ”
will be a prize, and its large lobed leaves will form a
delightful shelter for many of the creatures we shall
select for our tank, —the slender Crowfoot ( Ranunculus
inundatus) of our Melbourne lagoons and marshes, the
pretty Myriophyllum of all the lagoons and sluggish
rivers ; small u pond weeds ” Fotamogiton, with the
lovely floating Azollarubra or pinnata , soft as velvet,
their tiny hair-like roots pendent in the water, are all
desirable.
As for stock, it is scarcely necessary to give
instructions, since almost everything we can lay hold
of, at all compatible with the dimensions of the
Aquarium, will be likely to thrive; —those who will
accompany us in our “ Rambles by Rivers,” may glean
some information on the subject which it is unnecessary
to repeat here.
There are many minor details as to the management
of Aquarfy, for success in which our readers must use
their own discretion ; —patience, we have already said,
will have to be exercised, but above all things avoid
overstocking, and never allow the water to become
tepid.


CHAPTER X.
“ Each rook pool has its treasure, every tide
Strews on the yellow sand, from Ocean’s lap
Weeds than our flowers more fair.”
Graceful as are the Wild Flowers which we have
culled to adorn these pages, how much more from
their elegant forms, varied structure and surpassingly
bright colors, are the plants of the Ocean to be
admired ; the more we gaze on them, the greater is
our regret that they have received so little attention
and consideration at the hands of scientific men, until
of late years when such writers as Harvey and
Landsborough have opened out the way to a proper
investigation of them. “So endless are they ” (remarks
the former author in the introduction to his Nereis
Australis ) “in these favoured latitudes, and yet so
imperfectly explored, that in no country equally
accessible can the Marine Botanist find a field to work
upon which will yield him better fruit, or furnish to
the science which he cultivates more important and
interesting results. Here Nature appears in new and
sportive forms, in aspect startingly dissimilar from
what we of the old world are conversant with, but
connected by the delicate web of afiinity in a manner
often little expected by the common observer, and
only discernible by those who delight to trace in the
endless variety of natural forms, the unity of design
which characterises the whole.” And if our learned
friend had reason so to write, when he published the


Work from which we have quoted, how much more
reason has he now after a recent visit to these shores,
when he records having collected “ 20,000 specimens of
600 species of Seaweeds, besides incidental collections
of Marine Zoology ” to laud the richness of our seas !!
Already in the beautiful publication which is the result
of this visit, have appeared above two hundred figures
of the most lovely of our Algae from various parts of
the Australian coast, and most sincerely do we wish
the labors of Dr. Harvey may be appreciated as they
richly deserve.
Seaweeds, as doubtless many of our readers are
aware, differ from land plants in having no true
flowers, without any proper roots, but nourished through
their entire surface by the water in which they grow,
and propagated as many others of the order Crypto-
gamia, to which they belong, by means of spores
arranged in various way on the frond.
Algce are divided, into three series; the first of
which is termed Melanospermece , from the spores
of the plants comprised in it being black or olive
colored. They generally grow at half tide level,
becoming less frequent towards low water mark,
and gradually getting darker in color the deeper they
grow. In this series there are many interesting
plants, such as Saryassmi, Seirococcus, the Sporochnus ,
distinguishable by the tuft of soft hairs which
crown —brush like—the tips of the branches, the rare
Bellotia yEriophorum, Padina from the Queenscliff
pools, and several species of the Zonaria.
Many of the Fucaceoe were at one time, and perhaps
to some extent now are, valuable for the manufacture


of kelp,—some useful as food, and a nutritive diet for
invalids, and many yielding- lodine so extensively used
in medicine, in great quantity,
“ Comforting the tossings of pain with its violet tinctured essence.”
In the second series, or Phodospermece, almost all
the plants are purple or rose-colored and some of the
most elegant forms which our Nereis affords are found
here. For delicacy what can compare with the various
forms, like spun glass, of the Griffithsia, a genus named
after that talented Algologist, Mrs. Griffiths, and the
pretty banded Ceramics. Chrysimenia has its repre-
sentative in the rock pools at Queenscliff in the species
obovata, which, when cast ashore and bleached,
Professor Harvey fancies has some resemblance to the
egg clusters of some of the Gasteropodous Mollusca,
so frequent on our beaches, the little horny branchlets
{ramuli) being invariably ruptured. The Rypnoea
episcopalis is sure to be met with, and may he at once
known by its long and naked hooked branchlets or
tendrils, deep crimson at their tips; from which color
and their peculiar form, they have been fancifully
supposed to resemble a bishop’s crozier—and hence
the specific term— episcopalis. The varied forms of
Plocamium will give work enough to the student, but
their extreme elegance will amply repay him. The
family Bhodomelaceoe abounds in beauties, —the hairy,
blood red Basyas ; the dark brownish purple
Lenormandia , from the midrib of which spring obtuse
leaflets ( phyllodia ) ; the bright Polyzonias , parasitic on
Gelidium glandulcefolium and other Algae; the oak-
leaved TTmretia, and the tessellated Amansia linearis
are amongst the prettiest of the Australian Algae, the


former composed of a delicate rose-colored network,
spread out on the stems which serve as midribs as in
an oakleaf; a microscope only will reveal their beauties,
no words can adequately describe them.
Amongst the Chlorospermece there are few which can
vie in beauty with the Apjohnia Icetevirens (named
after Mrs. Apjohn, a very zealous Algologist) ; it may
be found growing in rock pools at Queenscliff, Lady
Bay and elsewhere : in its young stage the plant is
composed of a number of club-shaped stems about
three inches in height, and of a dark green color, but
later trichotomous branches grow from these and form
an umbel ; at first they are glossy, but afterwards
become incrusted with carbonate of lime.
The Gaulerpas which abound here, afford, we learn
from Berkeley, (Cryptogamic Botany, page 162),
nutriment to a host of smaller animals. It is these
lovely plants that ornament so richly the sides of all
the rock pools at the sea-shore. G. Muelleri in its place
of growth, freely waving its dark green fronds under
the clear water, so much resembled the branches of
the Norfolk Island Pine, that Dr. Harvey had named
it O. Araucaria, and G. scalpelliformis is named from
the knife-like form of its pinnae. A strang’e peculiarity
in this species is recorded in the “ Phycologia
Australica,” noticed by Mr. Henty, of Georgetown,
Tasmania. After having been dried, it will on being
subsequently moistened on one side, curl up like the
sensitive made out of horn shavings, and Mr.
Henty has named it the “ Marine Sensitive Plant.”
The green Algae ( Chlorospermece ) inhabit shallow
water, but the Red {Bhodospermece) must be sought


for at a much greater depth by means of the dredge,
should the collector desire them in really good
condition j the pretty white specimens which our Lady
Algologists consider so great a boon, are valueless, —
that color, as in the Corallines, being but the condition
of death j the Apjohnia loetevirens, naturally of a pale
green, and the black Melanthalia with many others,
are frequently found in this state, but they should be
rejected, or retained only until more perfect specimens
are obtained.
Already in our chapter on the Aquarium, our readers
will have seen how necessary Seaweeds are to maintain
the purity of the waters, and thus the lives of the
dwellers therein. It is scarcely possible to give any
true picture of the vast amount of life dependent on
these marine plants. “ The great forests of Fuci and
Seaweeds,”* (remarks Mrs. Sommerville, —Physical
Geography, 4th edition, page 412) “ are everywhere
a mass of infinitely varied forms of animal life, either
parasitical, feeding on them, or seeking shelter among
them.” Darwin too in his interesting book to which
we have elsewhere referred, says, that “ a great
volume might be written, describing the inhabitants
of one of these beds of Seaweeds : often as I recurred
to a branch of the kelp, I never failed to discover
animals of new and curious structure.” Who now
then will question the uses of Algae ? Each one
indeed—
“ Holds a rank, which, lost,
Would break the chain and leave a gap behind
Which Nature’s self would rue! ”
Absolutely necessary as it is that Algae should not
be subjected to the action of the sun, which causes


rapid decomposition and loss of color, the collector
who, to a certain extent, will he dependent on drift
weeds, must be up betimes in the morning to take
advantage of such specimens as may have been driven
in, either by the early tide, or are found floating in
the pools which it has left; there are many species,
however, which may be taken from the rocks on which
they grow, and thus more favourable conditions he
obtained, and good specimens of the Melanthalia
will frequently be found so firmly imbedded in the
sand, as only to be dislodged with difficulty. The
roots and fronds of all Seaweeds should be carefully
searched by aid of a pocket lens, for they are sure to
yield some valuable objects for microscopic inves-
tigation, Membranipora , laomedea , Plumularia,
Sertularia , Campanularia, &c.
It will not require much practice to ‘enable the
amateur to discriminate between what is really worth
culling from the dense heaps he will sometimes find on
shore ; those he selects may for a time be placed in a
small gutta percha bag or covered basket, and on
arriving home they should be carefully sorted before
proceeding further; the species of some genera (as
Sporochnus ) decomposing other plants with which
they may happen to come into contact. If it is
intended to send specimens home, they may be spread
out thinly to dry without squeezing or washing, until
completely shrivelled, but sufficiently dry to prevent
fermentation ; the salt preserves them from decay,
and keeps them by its slight deliquescence in a pliant
state.* If to forward through the post to a friend,
* Nereis Australis.


the most delicate specimens wrapped in very fine
muslin and enclosed in thin gutta percha or tin foil,
will travel safely and last for some days ; hut when
required for the Herbarium , no time should he lost in
their preparation, so soon does decomposition set in,
more especially in those of delicate structure; the
process is a simple one, and practice will teach more
than a volume on the subject; yet we will give some
concise instructions which will no doubt be beneficial.
The specimens to be preserved having been sorted,
so as to keep together the smaller and more mem-
branous kinds, place them for a few minutes into a
large bowl of freshwater, and whilst they are soaking
there, cut into different sizes some good white thick
cartridge paper, (the better it is, the more beautiful
will be the specimens); then selecting any one plant,
transfer it to another dish of clean water, taking care
that all sand and extraneous matter has been removed
by the first ablution, and when it is properly expanded,
place one of the papers underneath it, and gradually
withdraw it so as not to disarrange the natural position
it has assumed. A forceps or quill is often used to
correct any slight defect in the specimen, but we do
not recommend it, —a soft camel’s hair brush will
answer every purpose. The specimen should now be
placed on white blotting paper, each sheet being filled,
when layers of several sheets must be placed on them,
and then more specimens, and more layers of soaking
paper. Many collectors place calico or muslin over
their plants to prevent the paper adhering to them, but
it frequently marks the specimen, and we seldom use
it, preferring to give the sheets but a gentle pressure


at first, increasing it gradually as they become dry.
Presses and weights are used to press the specimens in
the drying sheets, but we in preference use well
seasoned boards of about the size of an ordinary sheet
of blotting paper, secured round the sides and middle
by buckled straps. Every morning, fresh dry sheets
must be substituted for the wet ones, and the straps
buckled tighter. A few boards and paper are easily
carried by the tourist wherever he or she may go, and
they have one great advantage, they occupy far less
room than any other apparatus which can be used for
the purpose.
The specimens being dry, the student will proceed
to an examination of them with a view to their
classification ; so alike apparently are many of the
Algae, that it is well before sitting down to work to
obtain a good collection; and without being in a hurry
to arrange them specifically, first sort them into their
various genera, whereby much subsequent confusion
will be saved. Many plants (Bryopsis, for example,)
are so variable that it requires the eye of a skilful
Algologist to decide what are species or what merely
varieties. It is always desirable to have a few good
typical specimens named, and the others can be more
readily worked out by means of some good Manual;
that of Dr. Landsborough for instance, will afford
much information on the British Genera, many of
which are well represented in the Southern Ocean.
The aid o$ the microscope is necessary to identify very
many species, and small fragments of the frond may
either be fastened down in a cell filled with distilled
water, or moistened when required.


The arrangement of species must now be thought of.
A few portfolios of limp cardboard with loose cloth
back should include all the species of one genus, and
more durable ones again receiving all the genera com-
prised in a Family, and finally these Families may be
stowed away in any manner most convenient for ready
access.
The study of Seaweeds has been deemed frivolous
from the days of Horace and Virgil, but we are proud
to be their champion, and hope that these brief pages
may instil a taste for the “ countless laughing gleams
of deep seaweeds ” into many who peruse them.




RIVER SIDE RAMBLES.
“ Fairest sight in creation are these Eivers, whether small
in their childhood, and found far among the mountains ; or
in rich manhood, sweeping through the open plains ; or joining
the Ocean at last in slow and exhausted old age—lovely are
they at all times ! And of the hymn of thanksgiving, which
Nature sends forth from her many-toned voice, mounting up
to her Creator’s throne, the burden is borne by the Eivers.”


CHAPTER XL
THE MOORABOOL.
“ Know ye not that lovely river ?
Know ye not that smiling river ?”
Early morning, or a summer’s evening such as Keats
describes as —
“ Full loth this happy world to leave.”
is the time for river-side wanderings, when we can
divest ourselves of our cares and—
“ Bare our foreheads to the cool blue sky,”
for it is at such times the whole world of Nature
which retires during the fierce heat of mid-day
comes forth in search of food and enjoyment. Let the
true lover of Nature, intent on enquiring into her
mysteries be stirring early; an hour after sunrise by
the river’s brink will give him matter for reflection the
whole day long,—it is then the joyous matin song of
the feathered tribes may he heard ; then the innumer-
able families of insects issue forth from their many
abiding places to fulfil their destined ends; —the finny
tribes too intent on breakfast, as doubtless we shall be
ere long,—rise greedily to prey on any stray bonne
louche, which has been wafted on the surface of
their element, and the cattle return eagerly with that
soft pleaSpnt lowing, which sends our memories back to
farm-yards of the old country, from the close stalls
wherein they have been pent up for the night, to the
grassy dew-sprinkled pastures which they love. How


we long with them to wander “ ankle deep in flowers”
all the day through, casting off the feeling that there
are such things as petty jealousies and rivalries every
where surrounding us in our contact with mankind; —
surely the communing with nature does much to soften
down these feelings to which unhappily we are all
more or less prone, and teaches us what mere specks
we are in creation, and how much enjoyment might
be had during our comparatively brief existence did
we go the right way to work to find it. The lover of
Nature becomes imbued with a kindly feeling to every
living thing, and this surely must in a great measure
be extended to his fellows.
There is a truth in the saying of old Isaac Walton,
that the mere sitting by a river’s side, is not only the
quietest and fittest place for contemplation but will
invite one to it. A Spanish writer too says, that
“ Rivers, and the inhabitants of the watery element,
were made for wise men to contemplate, and fools to
pass by without contemplation.” Now, although we
do not for one moment pretend that our Rivers
rival those of Epirus, or Selarus, or the dancing waters
of Elusuria, mentioned by our quaint piscator, or even
those by which we have strolled at nightfall in the
old country —the shrill scream of the Otter, the chorus
of the Night-jar, the heavy splash of the Water-Rat,
and the hoot of the Owl, the only sounds which
disturbed the stillness, save and except the rising now
and then of a splendid trout to our fly (for a lover
have we been too of the gentle craft, and a paper of
hackles even now recalls all the old scenes and
excursions), still they have their own beauties, believe


us, so we will be their champion. Have you ever
visited the Moorabool ? If not, then take advantage
of the first fine day which offers itself, and away with
you afoot to judge for yourself of the natural charms
of this much maligned stream ; we had heard it called
slow, and sluggish, and paltry, hut to it nevertheless
we went, for we are not of those who are led away by
popular prejudice, and there we beheld enough to
clear it, in our eyes at least, from the slur cast upon
it; truly —
“ Hie gelidi fontes, hie mollia prata." —Virgil.
“ Here are cooling springs, here grassy meads.
Let us walk now to the bridge at Fyansford, some
two miles from Geelong ; passing on our way the
junction of the river which forms the subject of our
paper, with the Barwon, just below the Falls:—here
the banks remind us of the dark glen-like scenery of
some parts of Ireland, —high hills, whose declivities
reach to the water’s edge, dark hollows intersecting,
into which the daylight scarcely seems to glance, and
for the various forms, animal and vegetable, which add
to the charms of the picture —
“ No breathing man
With a warm heart, and eye prepared to scan
Nature’s dear beauty, could pass lightly by
Objects that look out so invitingly
On either side.”
First now are the glittering Dragon flies, either
fluttering over the plants which grow here, or striking
us withv amazement at their rapid hawk-like flight,
and there is the black fan-tailed Fly-catcher, whose
breast is pure white, and the remainder of its plumage
jetty black, restlessly darting from one spot to the


other, wagging- its tail as it alights, and we cannot
but pause to listen to the liquid notes of the Reed
Warbler, hiding—
“ And abiding
From the common gaze of men,
Where the silver streamlet crosses
O’er the smooth stones, green with mosses,
And glancing,
And dancing,
Goes singing on its way.”
We walk awhile up the stream, and small as it is,
the banks are indeed lovely to behold, planted as they
are, despite the sad havoc made by cattle to which we
may owe the barrenness of much of our river scenery,
with rich dense masses of the fresh green Sea-rush,
Scirpus maritimws, known to many by rivers near the
sea at home, from the cover of which start a fine pair
of Bitterns, who fly heavily and lazily away. Every-
where we are treading under foot the spicy Mints, the
more fragrant the more they are crushed • the delicate
Convolvulus is twining elegantly round the stems of
the Loosestrife, the pink flowers of which are always
attractive, and the lovely white crimson petalled
flowers of the Damasonivm just peep above the surface
of the on which its dark green leaves float so
refreshingly • our old friend, the Vervain, is here too,
and the pretty pink Melaleuca paludosa. The crows’
nests deposited on the few high trees which are left,
show how the residences of the settlers on the margin
of the river must have been despoiled of their palings
and brushwood during the winter floods, which on
some occasions have risen above the bridge at
Fyansford. How merrily rushes the stream over its
pebbly bed, musical as a young girl’s laugh, anon,


widening and becoming deeper, flowing quietly and
gently, like the more mature thought of manhood.
The very scum in some parts teems with animal life,
skimming the surface of the water —
Flumina libant
Summa leves.” —Virgil.
and we carefully place portions of it in our bottles, —
and in your leisure, beauties such as few of you have
ever imagined, may he discovered therein ; hair-like
filaments of the most exquisite patterns conceivable, —
long tubular cells containing beautiful green spiral
coils, or numerous spherical granules or zoospores,
moving restlessly about, and frequently striking against
the walls of the cell, as if anxious to escape from
confinement. This point gained after a while, they
speedily begin to move hither and thither, now
wheeling round and round, now oscillating from side
to side, and now as if from sheer fatigue remaining
quiescent. “ Truly wonderful,” says Hassell, in his
“ Freshwater Algae,” “is the velocity with which these
microscopic objects progress, their relative speed far
surpassing that of the fleetest race-horse. After a
time, however, which frequently extends to some two
or three hours, the motion becomes much retarded,
and at length after faint struggles, entirely ceases,
and the Zoospores then lie as though dead; —not so,
nevertheless —they have merely lost the power of
locomotion, —the vital principle is still active within
them, anijj. they are seen to expand, to become
partitioned, and if the species be of an attached kind,
each Zoospore will emit from its transparent extremity
two or more radicles, whereby it becomes finally and


for ever fixed. Strange transition from the roving life
of the animal to the fixed existence of the plants.”
Of these Freshwater Algae, we may find here specimens
of Conferva, Char a, Zggnema, Draparnaldia, Glado-
phora, (JEdogonium, and many others, probably many
species of each. Not useless are these minute plants
either, affording as they do, food to so many tiny
inhabitants of the water, and acting as purifiers to the
water in which they dwell, decomposing and removing
all that is noxious, and restoring to the water oxygen,
which as we have previously strfted, is essential to
animal life.
In a former chapter we have recorded the Limnm,
Physa, and Planorbis as being abundant here, hut on
every one of the trees lying half in, half out of the
water, are long dark shells ( Unio), and from the way
in which one end is invariably broken, they are
evidently brought there by some creature which feeds
on the dwellers within them, either the Bittern or
the Water-Rat.
We have been fishing during our stroll, but it is
sorry work, not a nibble scarcely but from a host of
tittlebats or some such small fry, which at every cast
of our bait have been raising our hopes to the highest
pitch of expectancy; —we have changed it a dozen
times, and our hooks as many more, but without
success ; still we can recommend our friends devoted
to the sport to make a trial on the upper portions of this
river, where Trout, Black Fish, and Eels may be
taken and afford some sport. Well, if we cannot fill
our creel there is nothing which so thoroughly refreshes
us as a ramble away from the conventionalities of town


life, where we can breathe freely, and we cannot but
think with the agreeable author of u Life in the
Woods,” that one degenerates without frequent
communion with Nature. “A single tree,” says he,
“ standing alone, and waving all day long its green
crown in the summer wind, is to me more full of
meaning and instruction than the crowded mart or
the gorgeously built town.” Many is the happy
hour we have whiled away here, half dreamy quiet
thoughts stealing over us as the stream glided
onwards, until the setting sun and—
“ The flitting
Of divers moths, that aye their rest are quitting.”
reminded us that we had many miles to go before
reaching our destination. These were happy days
indeed, on which we look back with pleasure not
unmingled with sadness, for whose dreams are ever
realised ?
The higher up the “ reedy stream ” we go, the
more beauties are unfolded to us; the Dog Rocks at
Batesford of themselves will well repay the visitor, and
the Geologist may load himself with fossils from them,
and in every little indentation in the mud made by the
footsteps of cattle by the river side, look well out for,
(and bottle when found,) specimens of Desmidiae and
Diatomacese, which they generally contain. Were it
not for the horror we in conjunction with others
entertain of the Mosquito tribe, we would say have
some in Aquarium, for in their various stages they
are interesting creatures, —in the larva state, having
their heads always downwards, and their tails which
are provided with a fan-like apparatus serving in some


measure for respiration, on the surface of the water;
whilst in the more advanced pupa stage the order of
things is reversed, and the head takes the place of the
tail, coming uppermost to the water’s edge, and the
respiratory organs are modified accordingly. Not a
day passes in Summer, but we have unfortunately too
frequent opportunities for witnessing the metamor-
phoses of these pests —in our ewers and our water
barrels : to remedy the annoyance occasioned by their
presence in the latter locality, a friend suggests a
covering of very fine wire gauze, which if it would not
prevent their development into the imago or perfect
stage, would at any rate effectually put a stop to
their roaming abroad, seeking whom they may devour.
The roaring of the falls on the Barwon, just above
where the two rivers meet, tempts us to stroll thither
on our way homeward, and truly it is a sight which
would gladden the heart of any real lover of the
picturesque, the water dashing impetuously and
musically down over the rugged rocks, lying in the
river’s bed, whilst on each side are cliffs, whereon
one might botanise to his heart’s content—
“ Through meads and groves now calmly roves
The stream with many a bending;
In rippling song, through rushes long,
And pendent willows wending.
But groves at last and meads are passed,
And still with ceaseless motion,
The water glides, to pour its tides
Into the trackless ocean."
That feathery looking plant which covers yon bush,
is a Clematis, belonging to the natural order,
Banunculacece or Crowfoot, and as much deserving


the popular name of “ old man’s beard,” as its twin
sister of England and Ireland, where the field mice
pull the feathered awns as soft linings for their nests.
Of Violets, there is the large blue Betony-leaved
(Viola betonicifolia ) not certainly “stealing and giving
odour,” but playing the very mischief with us as it
brings back to our mind’s eye the groups of white and
blue sweet-scented flowers well nigh hidden in their
dense leafiness which tempted us to wander abroad in
the fields and hedgerows of England, ere the chilliness
of winter had disappeared. The green and scarlet native
Fuschias may be gathered here, the Sida pulchella ,
Indigofera sylvatica, the cream-colored Stackhousia
monogyna, with many of the Geraniacece. Turning
aside to get a better and fuller view of the falls, which
with the stream swollen by the late floods are grander
and more impressive than usual, we observe the Ladies
Bedstraw, JEuryhiopsis, Gotula, so frequent by every
wall and roadside, and of Goodeniacece , many species,
which will be the better recognised, if the large
leaved bushy one with ovate-dentate leaves and yellow
flowers which is overhanging the stream, is first
carefully examined, as it is one of the most conspicuous
of the tribe. To embody here any idea of the many
gems to be collected in this locality would be but
tedious, but there are some rivalling the choicest
plants of which our green-houses at home can boast,
and all to the very tiniest, forming an important link
in the Vegetable Kingdom ; and as for Ferns, —not a
dark or sheltered nook is without them. Well has
Christopher North said, that “Nature does not spread
in vain her flowers in flush and fragrance over every


obscure nook of the earth, —simple and pure is the
delight they inspire. Not to the Poet’s eye alone is
their language addressed. The beautiful symbols are
understood by the lowliest minds.”
And although diverging somewhat from our path,
the temptation of obtaining some good specimens of
the Caterpillar Fungus tempts us up to Montpellier,
and thence away to the Barrabool Hills where they
abound; —this singular vegetable production springs
from the neck of the dead larva of a moth, which,
though when living, of a soft or fleshy character,
when dead becomes perfectly hard and almost horny,
so that it seems to form one substance with the
parasite. This parasite is termed Sphceria, and species
of it are dispersed through the Temperate Zones,
growing generally upon decayed vegetable matter,
and apparently immersed in the substance on which
they are found, and so abundant that scarcely a
decaying stick, leaf, or even grass stem, but presents
some form or other of them ; some too are met with
on plants which are still living, but this may be looked
upon as indicating a loss of vitality in the part of the
plant so attacked. Hooker in his u leones Plantarum ,”
(Yol. 1, Tab. xi., published in 1837,) figures a New
Zealand species (a), named after its discoverer,
“ Bohertsii,” and it is described as “ black and cork
like, the stipes or stem elongated, flexuose, simple or
branched, the head acuminate, wormshaped.” The
native name of this plant is Areto or Hotito, and the
residents in New Zealand call it the Bullrush Cater-
pillar, to which plant, more particularly in mature
specimens in a state of fructification, it has some


resemblance. The Caterpillar on the larva of which
this grows is that of the Hepialus virescens, a moth
belonging to the section Heterocera of Doubleday,
and from its rapid flight known as the Swift Moth.
In 1857, a species differing in no way, so far as we
can judge from dried species, from the former (although
the larva is somewhat more attenuated than that
figured by Hooker,) was discovered in Tasmania, and
we are indebted to the kindness of W. K. Hawkes,
Esq., of Franklin Village, Launceston, to whom the
scientific world owes much of what is known on the
Natural History of this interesting family, for a very
well selected series of specimens, the plant arising in
all, as in the former case, from the nape of the neck,
and in one individual also from the lateral spiracles, a
circumstance to which our attention was called, prior
to receiving any specimens so attacked, in a very
obliging communication on the subject from Professor
Me Coy. The larva varies from two to three and a
half inches, and the fungus from one to seven inches.
Another species (figure b), the S. Gunnii, was
found in 1844, very abundantly at the back of Mr.
Hawkes’ garden in Tasmania, —it is totally unlike the
former, the larva being of a lighter color, and varying
from one to three and a half inches in length, and the
fungus from one to eight inches, very black at the
head, which is clavate ; in some instances two stems
arising from the same source. Of this species Mr.
Hawkes : “lt is found generally under
young Wattles or Gums, immediately after the first
autumnal rains (about March). The Fungus with one
to five stems, but generally with only one, usually


shoots from the nape of the neck, in rare instances
from other parts of the body, very seldom from the
neck and tail. (In thousands of specimens four or five of
these only have come before me.) The Chrysalis is found
too with one stem from the upper part, and sometimes
also encircled with rings of Fungus. The burrow
made by the larva is about eighteen inches deep, the
direction inclined ; at the mouth the Larva and
Chrysalis may be seen on the least alarm to retreat
with precipitation. The perfect insect is a large
grey moth coming forth in April or May.”
Our specimens from the Barrabool Hills (c) appear
to differ from S. Gunnii , only in being considerably
smaller, as far as our own observations have extended,
—in one individual the stipes rises as usual from the
nape, whilst another from the same source creeps
downwards to almost the whole length of the
larva (d).
At the August meeting (1854) of the Royal Society
of Tasmania, a communication was read from Mr. H.
Hull, on a paragraph in the writings of Christian
Franc Paulinus, in the 9th century, which states that
certain trees in the island of Sombrero (e i) have
large worms attached under ground in place of roots,
and Mr. Hull considered this as an indication of the
knowledge at that early period of some species of
plant Caterpillar; any way one species S. sinensis
(Berkeley) found in Thibet, has been described in our
Pharmacopeias. It is figured in Lindley’s “ Vegetable
Kingdom,” the stipes being made up in bundles for
the market. Redgood remarks of it, that it is
developed on the neck of a Caterpillar, (probably an


Agrotis,) and is considered to possess strengthening
and renovating properties, but owing to its rarity is
only employed in the Emperor’s palace after this
fashion ; —a duck is stuffed with five drachms of the
Fungus and roasted slowly, and after the flesh is
thoroughly impregnated, it is to be eaten daily for
eight or ten days.
The doubt arises in our mind, whether the larva is
attacked when living and eventually killed by the
germination of the plant, or does its dead body afford
that peculiar stage of decomposition favorable to the
growth of the Fungus ? In support of the former
opinion, we know of one species of Fungus, the
Botrytis Bassiana pausing the disease called mus-
cardine, and resulting, as C. E. Bree, Esq., in a paper
on the “ Diseases of Silkworms,” (Naturalist, 1868,
p. 216,) explains, from an excess of acidity attacking
the worm before its entrance into the chrysalis state,
and in the West Indies it is not at all uncommon to
see a description of Podistes flying about with plants
of a fungoid nature streaming from its body, the
germs as Carpenter (“The Microscope,” page 379,)
suggests, having been probably introduced through the
breathing pores at their sides and taken root in £heir
substance, so as to produce a luxuriant vegetation.
A specimen of this wasp with a Sphceria attached, from
Jamaica, was exhibited at the Botanical Society of
Edinburgh, in August, 1858, Nor is the human
frame exempt from such growths, for Sarcim ventriculi
is the cause of some painful forms of dyspepsia,
and Dr. Carpenter speaks of the probability of its
inhabiting the stomach in large quantities, and for a


considerable time without causing l inconvenience; and
in animal tissues the Fungi are produced more
especially in certain diseased conditions of tbe
epidermal system, or of the mucous membranes, and
their presence in such cases seems to cause an alteration
in the phenomena of disease. (Balfour’s u Class Book
of Botany,” Vol. I, p. 346.)
Dr. Hooker, whilst in the “ Erebus,” collected
specimens, and all the information he was able, but
still confesses himself at a loss to account for its
development. Mr. Taylor and Mr. Colenso, he adds,
being of opinion that in the act of working into the
soil to undergo their metamorphosis, the Caterpillars
get the Fungus spores lodged in the first joint of the
neck, and finally settle head uppermost. So far, the
opinion of our friend, (Mr. Hawkes) is corroborative,
but he further adds, that “ having gained access to
the interior of the body, the spores germinate at the
expense of the fat which lies beneath the skin of the
animal, growing’ rapidly on the'material that ought to
feed the grub, and at last killing it by exhaustion.
The growth of the plant proceeds, —all the soft parts
of grub are progressively consumed or appropriated
by the plant, which, after thus distending the
integument of its prey, bursts forth at the weakest
point, usually that piece of fine skin which connects
the head and body of the grub ; the plant, now
requiring lig’ht, shoots out of the earth, develops its
spores which are dispersed in the air and fall to the
soil, prepared to take advantage of any similar nidus
into which they may be accidentally introduced.”


Even with these opinions before us, we are disinclined
to believe that any insects in a healthy state can afford
those conditions which are essential to the development
of fungoid growths, for as is remarked in Art.
“Enterophyta.” Nat. Hist. Sect. Engl. Cyclo., “a
failure of the ordinary vital powers to carry on the
healthy processes of life seem ordinarily to be the
inviting cause of such a development of these plants
as would constitute a disease,” but we conceive that it
is only after life is destroyed and decomposition set in
that the Sphceria commences to germinate,—our friends
however must observe and judge for themselves.
But our ramble has occupied more time than we
anticipated, so we will only descend the hill towards
the Barwon on our way homewards, gathering as we
go some specimens of the remarkable 'Polygonum
junceum or the Crantzia Australasica growing
submersed in the water.




CHAPTER XII.
THE HOPKINS.
“ Ignota videre
Flumina gaudebat,”— Ovid.
Westward ho ! Further away from the haunts of
men to where, undisturbed by anything but the sweet
sounds of Nature, with lovely wild plants around us,
giving odour as we press them, we may ruralise at will.
We have long had a friendship for this River, for
years have wandered, day by day, on its margin, have
seen it in all weathers and in all moods, —now gliding
along with scarcely a ripple but that caused by the
wing of the swallow as it skimmed its surface, or the
masses of Jelly fishes which at some seasons abound
here, at other times disturbed by winds and floods;
which was its grander aspect we never could decide,
since each had its peculiar charms to enchant us, but
glancing now round our study walls and recalling from
the representations thereon, the companions of our
rambles there, how pleasingly we are reminded of the
happiness we enjoyed—red letter days indeed !
This pretty stream rises in the Pyrenees and flows
near Mount Ararat, but passing somewhat away from
the Gold Fields, does not prove of service for washing
the precious metal, —on it flows through high banks
and low, with here and there a steep rock on one side,
and rich arable land on the other, the former densely
covered with festoons of the bright pink Mesembryan-


themum or “ pig’s faces,” the green Corrcea or native
Fuschia, the russet flowered Pomaderris, and many
others. Numerous are the tributaries to the stream in
its course, —Muston’s Creek, the Salt Creek from Lake
Bolac, then about ten miles from the sea, Black’s River
or Emu Creek, and further on, Cudgee or Brucknall’s
Creek : these with freshwater springs supply the
current flow. A little lower down we come to the
Falls of the Hopkins, whose limpid waters sparkle in
the sun, and a few miles further still, to the Allansford
Bridge, past which the stream glides musically along,
like the murmur of a pebbly brook in the old country,
through rich black soil, well stocked with flowers, and
tenanted by industrious hard-working men. On the
margin of another waterfall, about a mile onward, up
to which the tide flows from the sea, is Tooram, the
station of J ohn M. Allan, Esq., one of the earliest settlers
in the district, thickly surrounded by Eucalypti,
Cherrytrees, Box and Light wood, old and young,
such as we may travel a long distance without again
seeing in such luxuriance.
Nor are these richly foliaged trees, quiet as they
seem to us now, destitute of animal life ; come you at
nightfall, and under the guidance of one of the many
Natives who invariably camp here, watch the merry
gambols of the Flying Squirrels and Opossums, leaping
from branch to branch ; listen to the heavy munching
of the Wombat, who is feeding timidly on the grass
which surrounds his burrow, into which, if he observes
us, he hastens with a celerity which his looks belie ; the
slothful Koala, or Native Bear too, comes forth to feast
on the young leaves of the Gumtree, and the long-


snouted Bandicoot (Pcrameles nasuta), climbs about
the fallen timber. We have a specimen before us as
we write; it measures from the tip of the snout to the
end of the tail 16 inches, the tail itself being 2J inches.
Iris very dark brown, upper parts of the body dark
grey, the lower white, the tail slightly hairy, certainly
not scaly, as some writers state (at least in the
individual before us), head very long, with slender
naked muzzle; fore feet with five toes, the two middle
very long, with long claws, the third much shorter,
and two clawless rudimentary ones placed some
distance behind the others. The hind foot has four
toes, the middle one remarkably long, those on each
side being only half the length, and the fourth some
way back, also rudimentary. One of the claws on the
side toe is bifid. We have taken the young from the
pouch about September, at which time also the Flying
Squirrel breeds.
The Natives avow that the Koala, ( Fhascolarctos
cinereusj never drinks water, and as we have elsewhere
remarked, we are inclined to believe that not only it,
but all the animals of this country can subsist for a
considerable time without; yet in confinement we have
frequently seen it thrust its head into a pan of water,
probably to supply the moisture which it missed in
the dry long gathered gum stalks and leaves which
formed its food, —when these were not fresh, the stems
were always devoured first, but when new and moist
the leases were eaten with infinite relish. There
always appears to us something cruel in keeping any
animal of this kind in confinement, where not only it
is deprived of its requisite food, but is unable to follow


its natural habits and instincts, and what food it does
get, is doled out at prolonged and irregular intervals,
by the hand of some child to whom it has been given
as a pet. They are remarkably fond of being noticed,
and when scratched on the head, utter a low sort of
growl, expressive of their gratification.
Singularly lazy is this creature in all its movements,
crawling from bough to bough, with its young one
grotesquely holding on to its neck, and even when
fired at, it scarcely deigns to notice, certainly does not
attempt to evade the danger.
Down the river but a few hundred yards, and we
reach a pretty well timbered hillock, which is a
favourite resort for holiday folk, who pic-nic here on
festive days. We notice shells of the Oyster in
abundance, which has evidently existed here in former
days ; but no trace of any beds can now be discovered
by the enterprising fishermen who reside here about,
and on the stones we get fine specimens of the Acorn
shell or Balanus; this belongs not to the Mollusca or
true shell fish, but to a class called Cirrhipeda, from
their cirrhi or arms, the true position of which in the
Natural Kingdom has awakened much discussion. In
this Balanus so called from the Greek balanos (an
acorn,) you will observe that the shell is sessile, being
firmly attached by its base, and consisting of six
different pieces or valves, varying much in size, but
forming a hollow cone : in the opening of this cone
are four other valves which serve as an operculum or
covering;—wait until the tide returns and you will see
issuing from an aperture formed by the opening of two
of these valves, the most beautiful plume of feathery


like cirrhi, which are so densely covered with hairs
that the minutest thing cannot pass through them.
“ Poor unthinking wight,” remarks Gosse, u whoever
he may be, Infusory, or Annelid, or Cypris, or germ
of Sponge, that meets the clutch of those enclosing*
fingers ! The bristles that pass across the interspaces,
locking into each other, shut out all chance of escape ;
the living net is whipped in, the valves close over the
orifice, and the ill-fated wretch presently finds himself
in the cavernous maw of the hungry Cirrhiped,” And
there is an allied genus which may be found
shorewards—the common Barnacle, adhering by its
long flexible and contractile peduncle to pieces of
timber, bottles, &c.; its shell which is milk-white, is
almost flat and composed of five pieces, two of which
on each side are triangular, with an elongated piece at
the hack •, the cirrhi in them are very like those of the
Balanus, being rolled and unrolled with such rapidity
that a whirlpool is formed into which minute objects
are drawn and captured. This Barnacle is interesting,
as having been the subject of an egregious error on the
part of some of our old Naturalists, who gave it the
name of Anatifera, from an idea that the Barnacle
Goose (Anas erythropus- Penn.) was produced from it,
—old Gerrard so mentions it in his Herbal, and
figures it in all its stages from the shell to the bird.
Aldrovandus too gives a quaint picture of the Barnacles
hanging from a tree, and the u Goslings hatched on
trees,” Swimming about under the shade thereof, with
this superscription.
A little picturesque island next meets the eye,
endeared to many from its having been chosen as a


burial site in early days for near relatives. Further
on, after passing some lovely spots in the bends of
the stream, overhung cypress-like with the drooping
foliage of Casuarincc, we arrive at Bethv/ngall , where
reside more hospitable friends, to whom we never fail
to pay our respects in passing, and from this point it
is an easy walk to the “ Caves ” on the coast, alluded
to at page 33. Herds of Wallabies frequent this
neighbourhood, and even now the Emu is not
unfrequently met with, finding abundance of food in
the young shoots of the Brake Fern (Pteris esculenta.)
On the high banks here, where flourish some gay
flowering plants, the Fish-hawk rears its young-, and
the tracks of the Native Cat are everywhere conspi-
cuous. The Cormorant ( Phalacrocorax leucogaster)
with its olive brown plumage and white breast, mopes
on any snag which may rise out of the water, taking
flight for a few yards as our boat disturbs him, but
anon perching again the moment all is quiet. The
pretty Night or Nankeen Heron, the Blue Crane, and
also the White Egret are met with here.
At last, having been steadily sticking to our oars for
a few minutes, we catch sight of—
“ The sea ! The sea ! The open sea !
The blue, the fresh, the ever free.’’
but before we reach it, let us rest awhile and light our
pipes, as the air blows keenly in from the coast; —here
is a spot for the Naturalist ! ! Look out on the mud
flats yonder, there is a splendid Ibis picking its steps
carefully, and keeping a sharp look out for any small
Crustacea which fall in its way,—some noble Pelicans
too with well crammed pouches we see, —in the shallow


water are myriads of the long 1 turreted shell CeritMum ,
Trochi, and others, and where the stream deepens
there is a fine Black Swan ( Cygnus atratus ) floating
majestically along. Certainly no u rara avis ” is this
bird in Victoria, inhabiting all the Western lagoons in
flocks, varying from two to six or probably more; —
they generally move from one place to another at
night, uttering most discordant cries as they fly.
Bishop Stanley in his “ History of British Birds,”
p. 393, remarks that although this bird cannot dive,
it contrives to immerse itself so deep in the water, as
to render its body nearly invisible, and thus avoid
detection.
The boat-house of the “ Faugh-a-ballagh ” Club,
reminds us of happy days we have spent with its jovial
crew on this stream, and it is worth while to land here
to stroll through the Cemetery which is so well cared for,
—no ostentation whatever in laying out the grounds, but
a quiet rural simplicity pervading everything connected
with it, and wild flowers springing up spontaneously
to deck the graves of those lying there.
Next we come to the Fisherman’s hut and punt; —
let us rest again on our oars, and see the result of his
haul. Here are Bream, Mullet, Salmon Trout, and a
stray Herring (which fish is generally taken with a fly
higher up the stream), in plenty surely to augur well
for the success of any Fishing Company properly
organised. We observe specimens of Paludina , or
MarslJ) Shell : and in flower the pretty Myoporum,
tightly embraced by the dodder-like Cassytha. We
have a specimen of Trigla, or Gurnard, captured here
some few years since, which if not identical with the


Flying Gurnard, which darting from the sea is able
to sustain itself for some time in the air, as in the
Exoceti, or Flying Fishes, is at any rate nearly allied
to it. This pretty fish was about a foot in length,
head covered by a bony plate, terminating just before
the first dorsal fin in a spine on each side, teeth much
crowded, upper jaw defended on each side by short
projecting spines. The eyes are also protected on each
side by two sharp spines, arising out of the bony plate
before mentioned. The first dorsal is pinkish, about
three-quarters of an inch behind the termination of the
bony plate an 9-ray ed. Second dorsal immediately
behind, silvery, with two pink lines across, extending
to within half an inch of the tail, 15-rayed. Both
these are placed in a furrow, with a row of spines on
each side ; the pectorals are divided, the upper being
very large, dichotomously ribbed, of an olive green,
with ultra-marine spots ; three cirrhi-like processes,
attached at the base by a membrane, form the second
pectoral; ventral fins immediately under the pectoral,
6-rayed and pinkish. Anal commences at termination
of ventral and extends to tail. Head and upper parts
brown, with occasional dots of black, sides slightly
silvered, under parts white, mingled with a reddish
tint.
But coming to the sea, the channel of the river is
somewhat narrowed, consequently the stream rushes
down with greater rapidity, now forming deep pools
which have formed our bathing places in the morning,
and our fishing ground later in the day, from which, as
long as crabs were to our hand to serve as bait, we
never failed to secure a dish of Bream. The entrance


to the river from the sea is barred by a reef; but it is
about this locality that we can collect such magnifi-
cent Alga, driven in here by the high waves. Let us
see now ; here is a mass which we pull in on our oar’s
blade, and we find Areschougia conferta, Acrotylus,
Apjohnia Icetevirens, Ballia Brunonia ; and in a heap
thrown up on the beach we discover no less than six
different species of Caulerpa , viz. : — geminata , Jtlifolia,
sedioides, hypnoides, scalpelliformis, and obscura,
Codium tomentosum frequent, Callophyllis, Bryopsis,
Curdiaea, Conferva. There are little rocks at the
mouth of the river on which grows elegant box-
leaved Alyxia , the wood of which is most fragrant.
We once nearly lost our life whilst algologising on the
beach near this place ; the wind had been blowing a
perfect hurricane for many days, causing such a
commotion along the coast, as those only who reside
westwards can understand, —a lull came, and we
ventured forth, tightly buttoned up, staff in hand, to
make fresh discoveries amidst the dense masses of
seaweed cast on the shore. We noticed at a few paces
distance a lovely Caliihamnion left dry by the retreat-
ing waves, and rushed forward to secure it ere their
return. We succeeded. Another met our eye, and
whilst stooping to grasp it, we were thrown down by
a crested wave, covered from head to foot with sand,
and had we not saved ourselves by thrusting a long
stick which we carried info the ground, we should
hardly been here to-day to speak of the beauties
of the Hopkins. Before closing this chapter, and
bidding farewell to our readers we must turn to a
very pleasing article by Mackie, on u Seaweed as


Objects of Design,” which lately appeared in the
“ Art Journal: ” —Bright are the flowers of the earth,
the first and choicest ornaments ; pure, simple, and
holy, their charms can ne’er decay, though familiarity
and inconsistency may vulgarise, and innumerable
misappropriations make us sometimes wish for the
contrast that other less showy objects would afford.
While the fields are radiant with their beauty, and the
gentle zephyrs fragrant with their scented odours, the
great tide ebbs and flows over the flowerless plants of
the sea. Around the huge rocks the perennial fringes
of the olive Fuci, undulate in graceful folds among
the swelling waves. I do claim for the neglected
vegetation of the Sea-side, an elegance of form and
structure, a suggestiveness of mathematical designs, a
poetry of association and typical expression, a sim-
plicity and modest gracefulness, which will entitle
them to the best efforts of the designer.”
Then Designers, Conchologists, Algologists, or pure
lovers of nature, whoever and whatever ye are, go to
the banks of the Hopkins.










Under the distinguished Patronage of his Excellency
the Governor, Sie Henuy Barely, K.C.8.,
and the Agricultural
and Horticultural Societies of Geelong and Melbourne.
THE VICTORIAN
# fiffrtkultirral (Settle.
Published on the 21st oe each Month,
Seven Shillings per Annum.
®jrt Cjrartjr of dniglaik Hkcotlr
FOR THE
DIOCESE OF MELBOURNE.
Published at the Commencement of each Month.
6s. per Annum. Postage Is, extra.
