





1855.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SEARCH BY H. M. S. SHIP “TORCH”
TOR THE SERVITORS OF THE “NINGPO,” AND FOR THE REMAINS OF THE LATE MR. STRANGE
AND HIS COMPANIONS.
Ordered by the Council to be Printed, 31 July, 1855.
RETURN to an Address from the Legislative Council of New South
Wales, dated 24 July, 1855, praying that His Excellency the
Governor General would he pleased to cause to he laid upon the
Table
“ Copies of the Report of the voyage of H. M. S. Ship
“ Torch,” (Lieutenant Chimmo, R. N., Commanding,) in
“ search of the Seamen of the ship “ Ningpo,” and in search
11 of the remains of the late Mr. Frederick Strange and his
“ companions.”
137—-A


SEARCH BY H. M. STEAM SHIP “TORCH”
FOR THE SURVIVORS OP THE “ NINGPO ” AND FOR THE REMAINS OF THE LATE MR. STRANGE
AND HIS COMPANIONS.
See Plan.
REPORT of Proceedings of H. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,” in search of the Survivors
of the Schooner “ Ningpo.”
H. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,” (Tender to “ Herald,”')
Sydney, 1 December, 1854.
“ Newcastle ”
Sir,
Having been ordered from my usual duties by the Senior Naval Officer, to
perform a service for the Colony, I consider it my duty to lay before you, for the information
of His Excellency the Governor General, the result of my proceedings, while so employed,
in endeavouring to rescue the shipwrecked crew of the “ Ningpo” schooner.
Starting from Sydney late on the night of the 3rd October, the day on which I
received my orders, I arrived at “ Newcastle” next morning to coal, and the morning follow-
ing, viz., the sth, was steaming for “ Huon’s Reef,” distant 1200 miles, using all the
despatch necessary on so humane an occasion; strong and unusually adverse winds from
north and north-west retarded my progress considerably, and it was not until the 11th day
after leaving Sydney, that the true winds (the S.E. trades) commenced; we then progressed.
Notwithstanding these disadvantages, I am happy to say that on the 20th day the ship-
wrecked crew were all safely and comfortably housed on board, to the number of nineteen.
There was much difficulty in concluding which the spot really was on which the
“ Ningpo” was wrecked, having been named “ Huon’s Reef,” “ Burns’ Reef,” “ Ewart’s
“ Island,” and “Titt’s’psland,” and, from want of means of the survivors, neither place could
be decided on as certain ; (the latitude given by the mate was 18° 36', we found it 18° 17'—
nineteen miles in error;) however, fortune favoured us, and after a minute and anxious
search of six days, we found them as they had landed, alive ! on “ Middle Huon Island.”
They now required our watchfulness and attention, and, in order to ensure comfort and a
return of health, I issued the memoranda enclosed, which was strictly adhered to; this
prevented any contagious disorder coming in the vessel, and the trifling duties they per-
formed kept their minds alive, and spirits up, and prevented their reverting to past calamities
and misfortunes.
I was compelled to perform a great part of my voyage with sail only, keeping my
coals for the better purpose of moving among the reefs ; on the 16th we passed five or six
miles to the westward of the reef, intending next morning to get the steam up, and go
among it, to look for the aforesaid Islands; but during the night a gale came on from the
eastward and blew us off, and it was not until the 20th that we regained our position;
the steam was got up, and before noon of that day we had the satisfaction of seeing “ North
“ Huon Island,” where we anchored in the afternoon, after winding our way through many
dangerous patches of coral, not shewing themselves above water, and not more than two or
three feet beneath its surface. On this Island I expected to find the shipwrecked crew,
from the accounts of Mr. Tough, the 2nd mate, but he acknowledged “ never having seen
“ the Island before,” and there were no signs whatever of the crew from the ship. I lost no
time in dispatching three exploring parties to search minutely the Island and sand-spits, and
endeavour to trace any object that would lead to their whereabouts. The boats returned at
sunset unsuccessful, having found only a piece of a very old canoe, a paddle, a charred stave,
and nothing recent that would give us any information. The orders I issued to Messrs.
Hixon and Smith are annexed, and I led the third party myself; I intended starting at
daylight next morning to search every Island and sand Islet within the reef; the weather
now changed again to strong N.E. winds and heavy rains, and prevented my moving from
this anchorage among so many hidden dangers. It was, however, very consoling to us all
to know that were these unfortunate people at all in this vicinity they had plenty of water,
and many turtle, fish, and birds, —my crew having turned 56 turtle in one afternoon and
night, each weighing 3 cwt. The


The rains and strong winds continued for five successive days, and during the short
intervals of fine weather, I made a plan of the anchorage, a copy of which also accompanies
this Report; one of our boats was capsized, but, by the expertness displayed in lowering
boats to her assistance, I am happy to add no lives were lost.
On the morning of the 26th, the weather cleared, and at dawn of day we started in
search of other Islands. At noon, about 16 miles south of North Huon Island, two others
were observed, and we entered a deep and spacious bay to close them; these I called Middle
Huon and South Huon Islands; as we neared the former, I could observe a smoke, then a
flag-staff \vith a red Ensign, . Union downwards, and, finally, about six miles distant, the
wreck of the “ Ningpo,” (a Chinese junk). All glasses were now rivetted to the spot, and
we had the satisfaction of seeing Europeans on the beach with our glasses; I immediately
got all the boats ready, (fearing a sudden change of weather, which would compel me to
haul off,) provisioned for two days, and despatched them with the orders marked No. 3,
under the direction of Mr. Hixon (my first lieutenant), Mr. Smith, the Doctor, and
Mr. Tough; by them you will perceive there was some danger to be apprehended, and
I hoped I foresaw all. Before sunset, to our extreme gratification, they were safely on
board, without a single mishap. [Here follows a list of all names and ratings—Europeans,
including the Master and two Mates, and Chinese—in all, 19.] They were indeed over-
whelmed with joy, and so were we at our success. They had given up all hopes of relief,
having been three months on the Island. The first man who saw us dropped from a tree on
which he had been looking out, and ran to his tent, without being able to communicate what
he saw to those beneath the tree with him.
I remained at the anchorage next day, to enable them to wash and air their clothes
and bedding, and to return to their huts to see if they had left anything behind in their
hurry; and on the morning of the 28th I left these scenes of danger, glad to get out of
sight of them. It was indeed an anxious and an arduous task for us all; if the, vessel had
touched a coral patch or a sunken rock, with which the reef abounds, we should have
required a vessel to come in search of us. I quite agree with Monsieur D’Entrecasteaux,
“it is the most dangerous reef I ever beheld.” None but a steam vessel could have at-
tempted it.
I victualled all the “ Ningpo’s” crew at full allowance, which their distressed condi-
tion required, and when they settled down, I gave each a portion of duty to perform as
pastime; they enjoyed the same advantages and privileges as my own crew.
Accompanying this Report you will find, —
1. A Chart, shewing our track from Sydney to D’Entrecastaux’ Reef and back.
2. A Plan of North Huon Island anchorage.
3. Plan of the Reef, with the changes found by the “ Torch.”
4. Memos, for the Exploration of North Huon Island.
5. Order for the rescue of the crew from Middle Huon Island.
6. Account of the Reef and Islands in general.
7. Native productions of the Isles, by Dr. Macdonald.
8. A brief Account of Mr. Tough’s Voyage to the Coast of Australia, in a 13-feet
skifl*, and his reception there.
9. An outline of the loss of the “ Ningpo,” and adventures of the crew on “ Middle
“ Huon Island,” until rescued by Her Majesty’s steam vessel “ Torch.”
On my voyage south, I called at “ Balade,” New Caledonia, for water, and hoping to
obtain sufficient coals to take me to the Feejee Isles, to meet Her Majesty’s Ship “ Herald,”
which vessel would be put to much inconvenience and delay at my absence, and to send the
shipwrecked crew on to Sydney by the first vessel; but I was disappointed in both. The
coals, although abundant, were an enormous price, and rather than put the Colony to such
an unnecessary expense (£700), I purchased but 15 tons for ballast, and sent my crew to
cut sufficient wood to take us clear of the reef; this occupied us only four days, during
which time we wooded and watered; the former, the people had to bring some distance on
their shoulders, after cutting, and the boats had to proceed miles for the water, and only
to be obtained at high tide: this was a labour therefore much felt. The French authorities
stated,
See Plan,
See List,


stated, “it was impossible to receive the shipwrecked crew, as they had but sufficient pro-
“visions for the people of the Poste.” The French authorities were, however, most
obliging, and lent their boat to bring off the wood, while large canoes brought the coals,
(two of which sank—one alongside, the other near the shore); by this assistance I was
enabled to water the ship with the ship’s boats, and proceed myself in my gig to superintend
all; during which I had the ill luck to be upset, with the unfortunate loss of five Govern-
ment Surveying Instruments and my private sextant, with other smaller articles ; but lam
happy to say no lives.
The French vessels of War the “ Constantine” and “ Prony,” were at “ Unami,”
south-west part of New Caledonia, building a fort in that beautiful harbour, which appears
to absorb all their attention, even from Balade. The Poste of “ Balade,” in charge of
Lieutenant Bailly, and 30 men of the “ Prony,” is capable of resisting all the Islanders on
New Caledonia. The Mission, which is 2-| miles from the fort or poste, has three missionary
gentlemen, who have now 100 Christians converted, and 200 in training, who have pro-
mised, but are not yet baptized. At “ Puebo,” they have nearly 400, but I would wish to
have seen them surrounded by more comfort, and a little more cleanliness.
The crew of the “Ningpo” were found on “ Middle Huon Island,” “ D’Entrecasteaux
“ Beef,” in latitude 18° 17' south, but the longitude cannot be correctly ascertained, until
errors and rates for my chronometers are obtained at Sydney. They had given up all idea
of being rescued, and contemplated building a raft from the portions of their late vessel, and
proceeding to some inhabited place. The l'eef contains an area of about 1000 square miles,
and encloses four islands about from two to three miles in circumference, abounding with
animal life, and a few small sand Islets.
In concluding this service, I have but to hope for my officers and crew, having been
selected for this humane mission, that it has been performed to the entire satisfaction of the
Colonial Government; and it is in justice to them to add, that I never saw them start on a
duty with more spirit and zeal than this, although foreign to their regular duties; the
satisfaction of having accomplished it with success is exceedingly gratifying to us all, and
I have, &c.,
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
To The Hon.
The Colonial Secretary.
at Sydney, N. S. W.
[Enclosure No. I.]
REGULATIONS for the distribution and comfort of the Crew of the ct Ningpof while
on board the “ Torch.”
1. On their first coming on board, their clothes are to be mustered by the corporal,
and kept on deck until well shook, washed, and aired; they will then be supplied with hot
water to wash and clean themselves, before they can go on the lower deck—this will prevent
any disagreeables being brought in the ship.
2. They will be provided with beds, blankets, and articles of wearing apparel, if
necessary.
3. They will be victualled at full allowance, which their distressed state requires, and
if the petty officers and men have no objection, they will be distributed among their messes,
which will give them the advantage of savings.
4. They will form a division every forenoon, at 9'30 a.m., to see they are properly
clean for the day, and at evening quarters with their night rig on.
5. There will be a duty set apart for each man, more as a pastime than labour, except
those who are suffering from sickness, when they will be under the Doctor’s care and atten-
tion, giving them every necessary their case may require.
6. They will also be divided into watches by day and night, except those who are
artificers, who will have a day duty to perform.
7. Each mate will do quartermaster’s duty; this will excuse the “ gunner’s mate,”
who will have to attend to the gunnery department and drilling the men.
Given under my hand, on board the “ Torch,” Tender to “ Herald,” at
Sea, this 26th of October, 1854.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
To Mr. Francis Hixson,
Acting Second Master,
H. M. S. Y. “ Torch.”
[Enclosure


[Enclosure No. 2.]
Her Majesty's Steam Veesel “ Torch," Tender to “ Herald,"
off' Huon Island, 21 October, 1854.
Memo.
Take charge of the cutter, with party, and explore the north side of Huon Island,
meeting me on the east side, examining minutely every particle of wreck or other material
that will lead to the discovery of the crew of the “ Ningpo,” schooner.
Any officer that will assist in the search may accompany you.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
To Mr. Francis Hixson,
Acting Second Master,
H. M. S. V. “ Torch.”
Beturn to boats by sunset.
Her Majesty's Steam Vessel “ Torch," Tender to “ Herald,"
off Huon Island, 21 October, 1854.
Memo.
Take charge of the galley, with party, and explore the north-west sand-spit of Huon
Island, examining very minutely every particle of wreck or other feature that will lead to
the discovery of the “ Ningpo’s ” crew.
Any officer who will assist in the search may accompany you.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
To Mr. C. Gr. Smith.
Passed Clerk,
H. M. S. Y. « Torch.”
Be turn to boats at sunset.
[Enclosure No. 3.]
Memo.
Having searched “ North Huon Island” for the survivors of the crew of the
“ Ningpo,” schooner, on which we were led to suppose they were to he found, (without
success,) and it being necessary and expected, that every islet and rock in this vicinity
should he examined, before we abandon this humane cause, or at least as long as our coal
will permit;
It is my direction that you take under your charge the boats of this vessel, and
proceed to make a minute and careful search of the islands and islets now in sight, to
endeavour to trace the unfortunate survivors already alluded to; the boats will be manned
and provisioned for two days.
Should you be fortunate enough in rescuing them, you will immediately return to
the ship, not allowing them to detain you one instant after embarkation, and your experience
in crossing the reef (which is at least most dangerous, and which can only be attempted in
boats during most tranquil weather,) will guide you as to how deeply you ought, consistent
with the safety of the lives of those under your charge, to load your boats with any articles
belonging to the people.
Should you, on the other hand, be unsuccessful, after you have made the detour and
examination of the islets, when you see that no further hope can be entertained, you will
return to the ship; but do not attempt to cross the reef after nightfall, unless you see
displayed—
By day,—Bed ensign at main,—Cross the reef ” ;
Ditto, —Negative flag,—Do not attempt ditto;
By night,—Two lights, “ vertical,” at fore or main,—Cross if practicable to
yourself.
By night,—One light at main or fore, (where best seen), with muskets every
10 minutes, —Do not attempt to cross the reef!
Although you are provisioned for two days, this is only in case of emergency, as I
hope for your return this evening; your supply of water will be doubled.
You will take with you the boats’ rain awnings, anchors, and cablets, compass,
signals, and signal books; the crews will have their blanket frocks and night clothing with
them.
The boats are not to part company, but keep alongside each other for mutual support,
except in making the circuit of an island; should any unforeseen accident befal one, the
other is to return immediately for assistance; where a fringe reef is in much extent round
an island, land, and perform the search on foot, this will save much time and inconvenience
with boats.
Doctor Macdonald will accompany you, to render aid to any of our crew, or those of
the schooner, that may require it, as well as to add to his collections.
On your return you will find me at this position; but, to be prepared for any contin-
gency, if weather should compel me to leave, remain at one of the Islands, and do not on
any account cross the reef, and put to sea in search of me, until my return, or until you see
the “ Torch ” in the offing, and you are convinced by signal I can see you.
Before


Before leaving the ship, yon will obtain hearings of all objects in sight from the
mast head, taking care to compare your compasses before shoving off, and to have them
trimmed for night work; your sextant, a watch, spyglass, as well as navigation books, should
accompany you.
Should you be successful in your mission, on sighting the vessel, you will display, at
the yard-arm of the boats’ yards, your ensigns ; if unsuccessful, do not show any colours;
this will give'me notice on board to prepare for the reception of the distressed crew, or not ;
do not be diverted from your orders by hearing the report of guns, as I may consider it a
good opportunity for “ shot practice.”
William Tough, the late second mate of the “ Ningpo,” will also accompany you :
when you place him on the island, he will at all events point out the encampment, and
perhaps save you much loss of time.
As I have no executive officer to put in charge of the “ galley,” I will place Mr.
Smith under your orders in charge of her, and he will assist you in every way you desire.
By information that I have, the island is surrounded by an inner fringe reef, dry at
low water, do not wait for the tide to flow to enable you to reach the beach, but make the
people walk down to the boats, the crews assisting to carry any traps they may possess.
You will take into consideration the present critical position of the “ Torch,” as well
as the unsettled state of the weather, to hasten your return; the vessel being blown off in
such weather as we have lately experienced, may endanger your own lives, as well as cause
the greatest anxiety to those on board.
I must again repeat, that “ my most positive injunctions to you are, if the vessel is
“ out of sight, that you do not go in search of her;” five minutes may change the weather
so that all communication would be cut off between us; if the quantity of coals then should
not enable me to regain my position, I would go to “ Balade,” replenish, and return to you
without delay, therefore, under such circumstances, do not allow my absence to cause you
any uneasiness or anxiety.
I need only add, that you carry with you my best wishes for your safety and success.
Given under my hand on board the “ Torch,” (Tender to “ Herald,”)
at Sea, this 26th day of October, 1854.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
To Mr. Francis Hixson,
Acting Second Master,
H. M. S. Y. “ Torch.”
[Enclosure No. 4.]
SHIPWRECKED CREW AND PASSENGERS OF THE LATE NINGPO
SCHOONER.
Names. Qualities.
William Billings ..Captain.
William H. Maynard Mate.
William Tough Second Mate
John Barratt Quarter Master.
Alfred Spencer Steward.
Charles Henning Able Seamen.
Ansel Little Ordinary Seaman.
Daniel Butcher Passenger.
Affoo Caulker.
Ajain A.B.
Achice A.B.
Ahow A.B.
Achear A.B.
Amao A.B.
Assan A.B.
Allae A.B.
Sheoll A.B.
Accow Servant.
Accum (Female) Passenger.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
[.Enclosure No. 5.]
NOTES Collected by Mr. William Tough, Second Mate of the Ningpo Schooner.
Sailed from Hongkong on the 14th April, 1854, and arrived at the Bonin Islands
30th May, to get supplies of wood and water; sailed on the sth of June for our port of
destination; nothing remarkable took place until the 24th of July, when one Chinaman
died, named Afoong. On the night of the 28th, about half-past eight, we struck on a reef;
as soon as we struck I got the boat out and sounded; found only six feet of water round the
vessel; we then did all we could to get her off; threw the ballast overboard, but found she
would not move. Next morning commenced to make a raft; got it ready that afternoon; put
20 bags of rice on, when part of the crew started for the shore; made the inner reef about
* 12


12 o’clock that night, when we were obliged to come to anchor. Next morning we landed;
found plenty of sea fowls, but no water; that afternoon I went on board the vessel again,
and told the Captain how we got on. We found we could not manage the raft, the tide
setting so strong over the reef; we were then obliged to get all the things out of her we
could, with the .boat only; she was then hauled on the beach, and had some repairs which
were required, and a small sail made for her; when all was ready, Mr. Daintry, myself, and
one seaman started for the mainland of Australia, on the 26th August. On the 28th we had
rain and a strong breeze from the S.E. On the 6th October sighted land in 26° latitude
south. Being short, of water we proposed to land; when near the shore we could see natives
on the beach ; when close in two swam towards us, one of them we took into the boat; he
seemed very friendly, and could speak a little English; told us we could get plenty of water,
and to come on shore ; they assisted us to get out of the boat, and then wanted to take the
clothes off our backs, but we would not let them do so; they then struck us with clubs,
being so weak we could not defend ourselves; they broke my right arm, and cut my head
very severely; the other two were wounded likewise, and all left insensible on the beach.
I was the first to come to, when I found I was lying with my head and shoulders just out
of the water ; I found I could not stand; I crawled on my hands and knees to some water;
brought some to Mr. Daintry. He then came round, but the seaman did not appear sensible
till the following morning. We then started for Moreton Bay. For four days we had
nothing to eat. We fell in with a native named Moysa, who took us to his hut, and gave
us some fish. He told us he would take us to Moreton Bay. Next morning we started
early, and after walking about half a mile, Mr. Daintry and the seaman .could not go any
further. They told me to proceed, and send them assistance, if I. could. After walking two
days, we met another tribe, who said they would see me safe to Moreton Bay. I then sent
Moysa back to see what he could do for Mr. Daintry and the seaman. I then proceeded
with one native for six days, during which time we had to swim several bays and creeks,
which I found very difficult with my broken arm, and the skin off my back with the sun.
Two days before reaching Moreton Bay, they gave me a few clothes, which were very accep-
table, for I had been naked for ten days. As soon as we arrived, I was taken to Captain
Wickham, who sent me to the hospital, where I stayed one week, and also sent two boats off
to look for Mr. Daintry, which returned the night before I left for Sydney. By their
account they had found one man only, which I knew to be the seaman from their description.
They were told the other one had gone to Wide Bay. I was then sent to Sydney, and
placed on board Her Majesty’s steam vessel Torch, commanded by Lieutenant William
Chimmo, which vessel was sent, by the Senior Naval Officer, at the earnest request of the
Colonial Government of Australia, to rescue the survivors of the Ningpo, 18 in number,
from Huon Island, which she successfully accomplished on the 26th October, 1854, and
carried them all safely to Sydney.
Signed by the Second Mate of Ningpo.
Approved, WiLLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieut. Commanding.
\_Enclosure No. 6.]
Wm. chimmo,
Deputy Commandant, “ Torch.”
NOTES of the Proceedings of the Ningpo.
The Lorcha Ningpo, of 78 tons, William Billings, Master, owned by William
Davidson, Esq., at Ningpo, sailed from Hongkong, April 15th, 1854, bound to Port Phillip,
in ballast, there to be employed as a lighter.
Experienced light, variable winds up to the 21st, when it came on to blow a heavy
gale from the N.E., which continued until the 23rd, the vessel labouring heavily.
April the 26th, passed between Orange and Monmouth Islands, when I found my
chronometer had altered its rate, having gained 2 minutes 50 seconds on the original rate
given, which I attributed to the violent motion during the gale of the 21st, 22nd, and 23rd.
Wood and water getting short, I determined upon going into Port Lloyd, Peel’s
Island, one of the Bonin Group, at which place I arrived on May the 29th, in company with
the Exchange, Chinese Coolie ship, 39 days out from Hongkong, bound to San Francisco
with 697 passengers.
On making the land I found my chronometer still gaining, having increased its
error to 5 minutes 45 seconds over the original error.
While at this Port, I procured a supply of wood, water, sweet potatoes, and turtles.
It was my intention to have beached the Ningpo, to fire and black her bottom; but,
owing to the barrier presented by the reef, and the rise and fall of the tide not being
sufficient, I was prevented from doing so.
Sailed from Port Lloyd June sth, with a strong breeze from the S.W., with heavy
rain, which continued until June 20th.
The Ningpo’s bottom not being coppered was now very foul, greatly impeding her
rate of sailing, in addition to which she began to make a deal of water; it was therefore my
intention to call in at the Isle of Pines, to endeavour to remedy these evils, but the foulness
of the bottom, together with the leakage daily increasing, I deemed it more expedient to
shape a course for Moreton Bay.
July ‘ELnd. —Passed close to the westward of Tricopia, or Barwell’s Island, the wind
blowing strong from the south-eastward, with a high and confused sea. At midnight of the
24th passed Cape Cumberland, it still blowing half a gale of wind, together with thick
heavy rain, which continued until the 28th
July 28 th. — Noon. —Strong breezes, and cloudy, with a high sea; the N.W. end of
Bond’s reef, by account, S. by E. 25 miles; wind E.S.E., steering S.W., in order to give
the


the N.W. end of the reef a clear berth. 4 p.m. —Ordered a masthead “ look out,” which was
kept until sunset, when I went aloft myself, but could see nothing. As the vessel had
been going six knots since noon, T now felt convinced I had passed all dangers; but as my
chronometer was incorrect, kept steering the same course, viz., S.S.W., until 8 P.M., when I
hauled up to S.S.E., in order to get a weather gauge of the reefs shoals, &c., which extend
to the S.W. of Bond’s reef. After seeing the watch relieved and the look-outs stationed, I
went below, in order to consult my chart, leaving order with the Chief Officer, whose watch
it was, to keep a good look out for breakers, until I came on deck, and to put the vessel
round immediately if he saw anything suspicious; the vessel at this time was going about 5
knots through the water.
I had not been more than ten minutes below when I felt a slight shock. I imme-
diately rushed on deck, and, to my great dismay, found the Ningpo stuck hard and fast om
a coral reef.
Although going so fast through the water the shock was so trifling that my first
impression was that we had run foul of some portion of a wreck, more especially as we had
the day previous passed the wreck of a large vessel’s lower mast. On the time of her striking
no surf or breakers indicated the proximity of danger, and the vessel went on as easy as if
she had run on a shingle beach.
This idea, however, was quickly dispelled, on looking over her side, where the bottom
was distinctly visible, with several rocks showing above the water. Having got sail off the
vessel, after fruitlessly attempting to back her off, I commenced with one watch to discharge
the ballast, while, with the others, got up and bent one of the anchors, which was taken aft
and let go to prevent her from drifting further on the reef. This was hardly done, when
the vessel began to make water rapidly.
Commenced getting up everything from below, sails, provisions, &c.; in less than 15
minutes the vessel was half full of water. Daylight at last came, and discovered to us the
hopelessness of our position, the vessel lying with only two feet water alongside at low water,
with her stern projecting over a ledge outside of which was no bottom at 45 fathoms the
vessel’s bottom stove in, so that the tide flowed in and out.
We were, however, within six miles of two small, low, sandy Islets, bearing west
from us, when I made immediate preparations for landing the provisions and crew, and at
10 a.m., of the 29th despatched the first load on a raft made of the spare spars, &e. This
raft did not reach the island until next morning, the water being too low on the reef. The
remaining part of the provisions had to be headed up in water casks and towed ashore, as we
were unable to get the raft off to the vessel, and the only boat we had was too small to carry
anything, consequently it was not until the fifth day after the vessel struck that everything
was on shore.
Commenced to sink holes in different parts of the island in search of water, but
without success, for we always came to salt water at the depth of about 10 feet. This was
a source of great uneasiness to us, as we were only able to save two casks and a half from
the wreck, one of which got spoiled coming ashore, by the salt water getting into it.
In regard to provisions, I was under no immediate apprehension, as the island was
covered with various kinds of sea-fowl, the reefs swarming with a variety of fish, including
sharks of an enormous size, having captured one 16 feet in length with a harpoon • and
turtle, of which we had seen two or three, and succeeded in taking one weighing over
600 lbs. We had now only to procure water, in order to be safe as far as provisions were
concerned. This difficulty was at last surmounted by condensing water by means of the
ship’s coppers and a musket barrel, using a small water cask for a condenser; by this means
we could condense 18 gallons of water in 24 hours. Fortunately we had only to trust this
twice, as, during our stay on the island, it rained three times, when we saved sufficient water
to serve us.
Having now brought all the provisions on shore, and being unwilling to trust the
boat any more in going off to the wreck, as she had been stove in once in coming on shore,
and well knowing that all our hopes depended upon her, commenced fitting her with a canvas
deck and wash-boards, &c., for a passage to the Isle of Pines, that being the nearest port I
had any knowledge of, where assistance could be procured. This design, however, I was pre-
vented from putting into execution, as the men, who had volunteered to go with me, after-
wards refused, saying, “ they were afraid of the natives of New Caledonia and the adjacent
islands, but, if I would go to the coast of Australia, they would go with me.” This, in a
boat 13 feet over all, and very lightly built, I considered to be utterly impossible, and for
some time refused, as the boat could not carry provisions and water for so long a passage.
At last, after some days spent in a fruitless endeavour to induce them to abandon this appa-
rently mad scheme, I consented to attempt the passage to Moreton Bay, provided they would
wait until the middle of September. This was agreed upon, and I thought every thing was
going on all right until the 27th of August, when I, according to custom, went out at day-
light on the reef at the north end of the island to look for turtle, &c., where I remained until
7.30 or 8 o’clock.
On returning to my tent, I was informed that part of the men had been for some of
my books, spyglass, &c. This at first I thought nothing of, until I found it was my charts
and Nautical Almanac that they had taken, when the horrible suspicion flashed across my
mind that they contemplated running away with the boat. lat once started to go, and if
possible, prevent such a proceeding, but, when I got down to the beach, found my fears were
too well founded, as the boat had already shoved off and was out of musket range.
Heart-sick, and in a state bordering upon despondency, I returned to my tent to see
what they had taken with them. I found that my charts, navigation books, and spyglass
were gone, leaving me without the least guide to go by in the event of our being able to
construct anything in the shape of a boat.
The


The crew now came to me, one by one, to excuse themselves for the share they had
taken in the affair, alleging as their excuse that they were afraid that, when I got off from
the island, I should proceed to the Isle of Pines, and that they were afraid of the natives of
that island and those in its vicinity.
I now tried to induce them to join me in the attempt to build a boat out of the
wreck of the “ Ningpo,” (as I never expected to hear anything more of the boat) but without
avail, as they said “ they had no tools, and that the whalers would be coming about in a
short time, and that they would be sure to see the flagstaff we had erected on the north end
of the island.” This I considered a very poor chance of getting away, as no sailing vessel
would ever come near such a place, if it was possible to keep clear of it.
I now made every preparation for a long sojourn on the island, by keeping a vigilant
look out for turtle, which now began to come on shore in great numbers • we built two large
turtle pens, and put in upwards of 80 turtle, weighing on an average from 5-| to 6 hundred
weight. The pens being full, we next commenced drying the flesh of others to provide against
the time when they should desert these shores for some other locality, it being the custom of
these animals to do so when the laying season is over, which is on these sand islands in the
months of November and December. They begin to come in as early as July, and con-
tinue increasing daily; indeed in September they were so numerous that one morning I
could have turned twenty-seven without wetting my feet, and I counted 18 more asleep in
about six inches water which could have been captured without the least difficulty. In ad-
dition to turtle, we caught quantities of fish of different kinds, all of which proved excellent
food. These fish were principally of the cod species, but much larger than any I had
hitherto seen ; I harpooned one which weighed upwards of 700 pounds ) it was of a black
colour, with lai’ge scales of an inch in diameter • the flesh was palatable, but tough and full
of sinews.
We now took the canoe, which I omitted to mention as having been found in the
centre of the island on our coming on shore, fitted it with outrigger, sail, &c., and were thus
enabled, from time to time, to go off to the wreck, which had not yet broken up, although
we had several pretty heavy blows.
We now had been two and a half months on the island, and lost all hopes of receiving
assistance from the boat, which every person now gave up as lost; when one of the men,
Little, who had been always very willing to second me in anything I might propose, agreed
to venture in the canoe over to an island we had seen to the south-eastward. This island
I afterwards found to be “Surprise Island,” bearing S.S.E. about 30 miles from the one on
which we were. Everything was therefore arranged, and on the morning of the 7th of
October we started at 4 a.m., but had to put back, the sea being too rough and the canoe
filling, but at about 6.30 started again with the intention, if we could discover land
to the S.E. of “ Surprise Island,” to stand on and endeavour to make New Caledonia. We
arrived at Surprise Island at sunset that evening, completely exhausted, having had to
paddle all the way against a head sea, but could see nothing like land to the southward.
Remained the next day on the island and returned the day following.
I now again proposed to try and build a boat, and was warmly supported by Little
and Spenser, the steward, whose conduct had been of the most respectful and obliging nature
during the whole period of our stay on the island. The rest, however, refused to lend their
assistance, on account of not having any saw or chisels. I therefore made two very good
saws out of a stout, new iron hoop, which upon trial answered pretty well; we next fashioned
two chisels out of a cutlass, when the others volunteered their assistance.
We were now very short of that necessary article, water, and it was agreed to
postpone operations until we should get a supply, especially as the sky was overcast, and we
were in hourly, expectation of seeing it rain ; nor were we disappointed, for in two days it
commenced to rain heavily, and continued for seven days, enabling us to fill every available
receptacle, and succeeded in saving a sufficient quantity to last us with economy about
two and a half months.
During this period the wind, which continued to blow half a gale, raising a high sea
on the reef, prevented us from going to the wreck.
On the 26th we were about to commence our boat, when I was informed that a vessel
was in the offing. At first sight we took her to be a whaler trying out. In order to attract
notice, we immediately made fires on each extreme of the island, where quantities of wood
had been previously placed for this purpose, and the ensign was hoisted on the flagstaff union
downwards. From the various movements of the vessel, we were thrown into great suspense,
fearing that our fires had not been seen, and that we were doomed to remain on this island
without the hope of rescue. However, on her nearer approach, the report of a gun gave us
intimation that our signals of distress had been observed, and the vessel soon advanced
towards the island as near as was practicable, and sent her boats to our assistance. Our joy
may be more easily conceived than expressed, and the same evening we were all safely on
board Her Majesty’s steam vessel “ Torch,” commanded by Lieutenant William
Chimmo, H.N.
(Signed) WILLIAM BILLINGS,
Late Master “ Ningpo.”
Brief Sketches of the Natural History, &c., of North, Middle, and South Huon Islands.
The basis of these islands appears to consist of a coarse-grained yellowish-brown
sandstone, and superimposed coral beds, upon which broken shells, fine sand, and hetero-
geneous matters continually accumulating, have formed the nidus for a scanty vegetation.
The great profusion of small masses of pumice stone sufficiently indicates the elevating
cause, which, however, must have been very gradual in its operation.
137—8 On


Tachypetis, Sula,
Megalop terus.
On “ North Huon Island,” especially, the vegetation is exceeding poor; the few
herbaceous plants to be seen, are only such as “love a dry and sandy soil,” and the spare
foliage of the stunted trees scarcely afford any shelter to the young of the fish-hawk
(Tachypetis ), booby (Sula), and noddy (Meg adopter us), whose rudimentary nests, composed
of a few dead leaves matted together, are generally fixed on well selected branches; the
masked gannet (Sula Personata), scorning even this incipient approach to the exquisitely
constructed dwelling of the land bird, brings forth its downy and trembling offspring on the
open sand flat, alike exposed to the sweeping storm and the potent rays of a tropical sun.
This species is also plentiful at “Lord Howe” and “Norfolk” Islands, but specimens are rare
in European collections of ornithology.
Sula personata.
Sterna.
The fish-hawks, or frigate birds, and noddies take up their abode a little way in the
bush ; and a handsome cream coloured gannet, with a bluish beak and red feet, perches on
the trees near the beach, which is lined by an unnumerable host of sea swallows ( Sterna )
in every stage of growth.
During our stay at this island, we had rather extensive practice at “ turtle turning,”
these animals coming up in considerable numbers to reconnoitre the ground for depositing
their eggs.
Puffinus.
“ Middle Iluon Island,” upon which we found'the master and crew of the “ Ningpo,”
presents a striking contrast, in the character of its soil and vegetation, to the sterile
monotony of the former; the brown mould covering the coral beds is about two feet in
depth; and so burrowed and undermined by mutton birds (. Puffmus ), which do not frequent
the Northern Island, that it is quite impossible to walk through the bush without stumbling
continually into these deceptive pit-falls.
Phaeton.
Rallus.
In addition to the “ mutton bird,” this island is visited by the tropic bird ( Phaeton ),
which forms its nest at the roots of trees in sheltered places; but the most interesting of
the feathered tribe, is a species of land rail ( Radius ) which Mr. Billings states, occurs also
on both “ South Huon ” and “ Surprise Islands.” On arriving at New Caledonia, we found
that the bird was well known there, but how it could have found its way so far to the north-
ward, with wings so ill adapted for flight, is not so very easily accounted for.
Labrid®, Scom-
berid®, Mur®-
nid®, Echeneis
The fishes observed included sharks of large size, numbers of the wrasse family
(Labridce), and the mackerel family ( Scomberidae ), the eel-like fishes ( Muraenidae ), large
sucker fishes ( Echeneis ), and a great variety of brilliantly tinted species; and, in particular,
the little “ emperor of Japan,” sporting amongst the iridescent patches of living coral on
the reefs.
Leguminosse,
Goodeniaceae,
Malvaceae, Cap-
paridace®, and
Composite.
Of the botanical orders represented in “ Middle and South Huon Islands,” the more
important are Leguminosce, Goodeniacece, Malvaceae, Capparidacece, and Gompositce.
Reef.
“ A brief Sketch of D'Entrecasteaux, or Bonds Reef, by Lieutenant William Ghimmo,
Commanding Her Majesty's Vessel “ Torch.”
This dangerous and extensive reef, north of “ New Caledonia,” occupying a space of
upwards of 1000 square miles, is an invisible coral reef, with but a few large rocks or stones on
its margin, one of which, in particular, on its south-west end, is nearly 20 feet high. This
reef has two openings on its western face, and one (?) on its eastern; the former lead to
small sand Islets; and, from the centre Island, I think, there is a passage through the reef.
The north part of this reef was first seen by Captain Bond, at which time he also
saw “ North Huon Island,” in 1792 ; and the same year the south portion of it was discovered
by Admiral D’Entrecasteaux, as well as “ Surprise Island.” Monsieur D’Entrecasteaux
states, “ it is the most dangerous reef he ever beheld.”
Lat. 18° 02' 00"
south.
Lat. 18° 18' 37"
south.
This reef encloses four small islands of about two and a-half to three miles in circum-
ference, viz. :—“ North Huon,” in latitude 18° 02' 00" S.; “ Middle Huon,” in latitude
18° 18' 37" S.; and “ South Huon,” with “ Surprise Island ” on its south extreme; also
a few sand islets, and the rocks above-mentioned.
“ North Huon.”
North Huon has a good and safe anchorage from easterly winds, but is dangerous of
approach for sailing vessels, having many sunken patches of coral two to three miles from
it W.N.W., which is the channel; the landing is good on a steep sandy beach, having eight
feet water over the boat’s stern, when her bow is on the beach. This island abounds with
turtle, fish, and sea-fowl; but no water.
“ Middle Huon.’'
Lat. 18° 18' 37"
south.
Middle Huon is safe to approach, but the anchorage is bad uneven coral ground, in
12 fathoms close to the fringe reef, which surrounds the island and renders it difficult and
dangerous for boats to cross, it is in latitude 18° 18' 37" S., and abounds with turtle, sea-fowl,
fish, and land-rail. It was here the crew of the “ Ningpo ” lived for three months; but the
island has no water, although wells were dug 18 to 20 feet deep.
South Huon.
South 4 miles.
“ South Huon ” has also a fringe reef around it, and is still more dangerous of
approach for boats than Middle Huon Island, being more to the westward has not the
advantage of the shelter of an outer reef, as the other islands—this island lays about south
four miles from Middle Huon.
Surprise Island.
S.S.E. 26 miles.
“ Surprise Island,” so called by Monsieur D’Estricasteaux when he thought he had
weathered the north reef of New Calidonia, is S.S.E., about 26 miles from Middle Huon.
The master of the “ Ningpo ” landed on this island, and describes it the same as the other
islands —(I have not seen it.)
Current.
xY.N.W.
The “ current,” found on the west face of this reef, was mostly influenced by the
winds, and sets to the N.N.W. in general.
Rise and fall.
The “ rise and fall ” of water for five days, hourly observations, was found to be two
to three feet.
Set.
The “ current ” set through the reef round the sand-spits and islands, two to three
miles per hour,
From


From the “ Ningpo,” another wreck can he seen, shewing its fatality to more that
one vessel; her name I could not ascertain, nor is anything known whether the crew hac
landed or perished ) they were not, nor had been, on any of the islands in this reef.
Directions for approaching the Island.
We found that the west face of this reef, instead of being a continuous line
north and south, forms two deep bights. The north-west extreme may be known by several
rocks 15 to 20 feet out of the water, one, the highest, much resembling a boat’s lug-sail.
The N.W. extreme forms one arm of a deep bay, strewn with patches of coral
awash, in the bight of which lays “ North Huon Island,” of crescent shape, magnetic
north and south, and forming, with its sand-spits and coral patches, a good anchorage
open to the westward or ten points of the compass. (Nee plan. )
The course for this anchorage, is to bring the centre of the island E.S.E., distant five
or six miles, and steer for it, keeping (with the sun, to the west) a good look out for the
small patches awash directly in the entrance, and distant from the island two to three
miles —gradual soundings, from 50 to 10 fathoms, will be carried to the island anchorage.
The centre portion of the reef has not so much western extent, and forms the south
arm of “ North Huon Bay,” it is a detached reef from the main which is connected with
the islands.
“ South Huon Bay ” is of much greater extent, the depth of which is formed by
Middle Huon and South Huon Islands, and two sand Islets; here the anchorage is not so
safe or good —the ground foul; the islands entirely surrounded by a “ fringe reef,” only
passable for boats on their lee or N.W. side, at high water, which renders it dangerous to
cross, a heavy sea rolling in over it. I had not time to examine “ Middle or South Huon
Islands,” but the late master of the “ Ningpo ” stated, “ it was more dangerous of approach
“ than Middle Huon; but contained more soil, and a similar abundance of turtle, birds,
and fish.
The south-west point of this reef, forming the south arm of South Huon Bay, is an
abrupt point with deep water close to it; between Middle and South Huon Islands, there is
an apparent clear passage, as far as the eye can reach, through the reef, to the eastward;
but I had not an opportunity of examining it, nor would the unsettled state of the weather
allow me to take the “ Torch ” through on our return.
Admiral D’Entrecasteaux was on the safe side in making the whole outline of the
reef unapproachable by a continuous line, as no sailing vessel should attempt to near it.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding “ Torch.”
SEARCH FOR Mb. STRANGE AND HIS COMPANIONS.
REPORT of the Proceedings of H. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,” in Search of Mr. Strange
and his Companions.
H. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,” at Sydney,
12 March, 1855.
Sir,
I have the honour to lay before you an account of my proceedings, while
carrying out the orders of the Senior Naval Officer, at the request of the Colonial Govern-
ment, to ascertain the fate of Mr. Strange and his companions.
The unfortunate gentleman and his three associates were savagely murdered by the blacks
on second Percy Island, and their bodies taken to sea in a canoe, and thrown overboard, with
the exception of Mr. Spurling, the remains of whose body we found in a mangrove swamp,
and which were finally interred in the burial ground at “ Port Curtis,” with due respect
and solemnity.
This is the result of the object for which I was sent. I will now endeavour to detail,
day by day, my proceedings, in order to show my reasons for coming to the above conclusion.
I was unavoidably detained ten days at Moreton Bay for coals, and failed in my
endeavour to obtain information, and interpreters; consequent on the absence of the British
representative.
Therefore, I was compelled to call at Port Curtis for the latter, and succeeded in
obtaining, through Captain O’Connell’s willingness and influence, two, one of which could
speak Port Bowen, the other English.
I was detained in this Port five days by strong S.E. gales ; but succeeded in
anchoring at No. 2 Percy Island on the afternoon of the 29th of January, on the same spot
occupied by the Vision.
I immediately sent an armed party, under the orders of Mr. Hixson, to search the
vicinity of the landing and watering places, and also a large fishing party to attract the
natives. They returned at sunset, after an unsuccessful search, and not even seeing the
traces of a black fellow. I hoisted Hutch colours, to lull suspicion as much as possible.
That


That night I made my preparations, and issued orders for a general search to be
made throughout the Island by 30 armed men, under the orders of Mr. Wilds.
However, to my astonishment, at daylight, eight blacks appeared on the beach, armed
with spears, waddies, and boomerangs. This number answered exactly to that given by the
Survivors, nine blacks having attacked them, one of whom was shot by Mr. Strange, eight
remaining.
This circumstance altered all my previous night’s plan, and I now saw that by
stratagem alone could we gain any information, I therefore issued the orders marked No. 3.
I had during the day the satisfaction of seeing our people mix freely with them, give
them pipes, tobacco, fish-hooks, and other presents, and finally one came off to the ship • lie
was clothed, loaded with presents, and allowed to go on shore again, when he wished to do
so, it was a strange characteristic of their truly savage state, not knowing the use of pipes
or tobacco. During the time that these boats were diverting them, I thought it a good oppor-
tunity to proceed up the creek to the scene of the late brutal murder; but they no sooner
saw my movements than they all left the fishing party and joined mine, proving something
there they did not wish me to see in their absence; however, the water being too high, I
could not land.
The only questions I put to this black fellow were, If he had ever seen a ship or
white men ? to both of which he replied in the negative. On his reaching the shore, they
all suddenly went over the hills.
I do not know any place more suitable for carrying on their murderous practices
than this creek; at high water you ascend in your boat, carrying 10, 12, and 14 feet water;
but, on your return, it is a dry mud-flat, with a sandy bar, high rocks on either side form a
narrow escape, and here a few natives could make dreadful havock on a party unarmed, and
it was here poor Strange and his party met their horrible fates.
They had now evidently suspected the intention of our visit.
That evening I sent an armed party to search a few bark huts, about 3 miles in the
interior; they returned unsuccessful, having only found the neck of a black glass bottle. I
visited the small islets in the offing myself, and found traces of their having visited them by
their fires, remains of turtle, shells, &c. This showed me they had canoes belonging to
them.
On the last day of the month, I sent all hands to search the mangrove swamp, at
dead low water, to endeavour to pick up any traces of our murdered countrymen. The
natives suspected something of this sort, for they did not appear all day.
At sunset the party returned, having found among the mangroves, half buried in
mud, the remains of the body of poor Spurling. I issued a memorandum to Doctor Macdonald to
acquaint me with his opinion on this subject, and the result you will see marked No. 5. (A
canoe was also taken and brought off.) His death must have been an awful one, as his skull
shews, lower jaw broken on one side, right side of skull entirely smashed, left leg altogether
gone.
Another canoe was espied before dark, with a paddle in it, evidently intended by its
position for an escape during the night ; it was seized, brought off, and destroyed.
Having now clear evidence of the murder of these unfortunate persons, I knew what
what my plans must be; I had carried out my orders in ascertaining they were murdered:
but I could not leave this horde of murderers without an attempt to capture them, and bring
them to justice; I therefore issued my orders, marked No. 6, and, under Mr. Hixson’s
directions placed 25 armed men, to carry them out: the result you will see, No. 7.
From the women I obtained sufficient information to condemn every black on the
Island. The men were sulky, and would hardly answer a question; when they did, it was
not the truth, in many instances. A sheet containing the examination of all these people—
questions and answers—you will find marked No. 8.
The European articles found at their huts, were—
Sleeve of a white shirt (and button).
Several pieces of black bottle.
; Loom of an oar.
An iron slice, sharpened.
'l An iron splitting wedge. From


From this it will be seen that about four months since, a “ gondole” (ship) arrived,
and the crew proceeded up the creek in a boat for water; that for some reason (as yet un-
known —except Mr. Strange shooting the black fellow,) they first knocked them down with
boomerangs and spears, then finished them with the waddy; that, fearing detection, they
took them out in a canoe, clothes, musket, and every thing belonging to them, and threw
them overboard, except the body of Spurling, which was too much trouble, having got in
among the mangrove swamp, and mud; they burned his clothes. The bodies of the two
blacks killed by Mr. Strange (as they say), were eaten by their friends and buried. One
woman says, “ they burned their clothes in a heap.”
The day after this search, 5 blacks appeared on the beach, and I sent the interpreters
with one gin (woman), to talk to them, and tell them if they did not come off and confer
with me, I would send men with muskets and bring them off; but all the persuasions, with
the addition of presents, were of no avail, and I did not like to shoot them, hoping I may be
able to take them alive; shooting was too good a death for them, and no example would
follow.
The next day I sent all the gins (women), with their children and interpreters, on
the beach, as well as the fishing party, guarded by a guard boat, but they would not even
■speak, although near at hand in the bush.
One of the prisoners now attempted an escape, casting his lashings adrift and jumping
overboard; two rifles with small shot were fired at him, but did not stop him, and a boat-
picked him up ; he was so much exhausted that his recovery was some time doubtful. This
was the man who confessed “ having speared one white fellow.” In the meantime one of
the others was caught by the heel in endeavouring to jump overboard, and the third made
an attempt to cast the seizings of his friend off. They were then all effectually secured in irons.
The weather, which had for some time been beautifully fine, now changed to north
winds with thunder, lightning, and rains; and knowing that even now I had exceeded my
time, I made my final arrangements, determining, as I had commenced this work, if possible
to complete it, and rid this picturesque and beautiful island of as dangerous and murderous
a set of blacks as could possibly inhabit it, and render it accessible for further visitors; I
therefore intended to weigh at daylight on the morning of the sth.
No. 9.
No. 10.
The morning being fine, I landed 33 armed men, and proceeded myself in the ship
round the island to pick them up, and also to draw off the attention of the natives from
them. At noon I anchored in a snug and spacious bay in 7 fathoms, within two cables
length of the beach, without seeing a black. The party returned, having scoured the island;
the blacks having escaped by swimming to other islands. It was a satisfaction to know there
was not a living person on the island.
Having now been a week among the Islands, and daily endeavouring to capture every
one who participated in these murders, but without effect, I sailed, having done everything
that was in my power to do, without incurring further delay.
I had now secured three black fellows, three women who know the whole story, and
their children. That these three men participated in the murder lam convinced, for these
reasons: —The survivors say they were attacked by nine men, and one was shot by Mr.
Strange; on the day after our arrival eight appeared on the beach; on the day we took the
prisoners, after having secured them, nine people were seen by the returning party, two of
whom were children, and one woman —there were therefore six men; one of these was after-
wards brought off, and Jive were left there, which, with the three prisoners, made the re-
maining number eight, and these were the only men on the island. This is what we our-
selves saw —the natives corroborate it.
The man, who appeared to be the chief, was in reality a savage. I could not get him
without shooting. He had lost all his front teeth, perhaps from a blow.
No. 11.
No. 12.
I arrived at Port Curtis on the 7th February, to return the interpreters, and I thought
it a good opportunity to make an impressive ceremony of interring the remains of poor
Spurting in the Christian burying-ground. I therefore addressed a letter to Captain
O’Connell, begging his assistance in this cause to collect the blacks, and order in the native
mounted police to join the funeral. My letter to him and his reply you will find enclosed.
'This is another of the many instances in which the Government Resident cheerfully assisted
me


me in forwarding my views to carry out my orders. Another was his getting six cords of
wood cut by some of the very few available hands at his disposal, to enable me to steam to
Moreton Bay, my coals having been nearly expended.
Thus concludes my narrative of the search for the unfortunate four persons, and I
now await directions for the disposal of the prisoners— three men, three women, and four
children; and, in concluding, I have only to hope that the service has been performed to the
satisfaction of the Colonial Government.
I have, &c.,
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
To the Honorable Lieutenant Commanding.
The Colonial Secretary,
New South Wales.
[Enclosure No. I.]
H. M. Steam Vessel cc Torch,”
2nd Percy Island, 29 January, 1855.
Memo.
It is my direction you take under your charge the “ cutter ” of this vessel,
and with her crew and two marines, armed, proceed to search the immediate vicinity of the
landing-place, to ascertain, if possible, whether any of Mr. Strange’s party still exist. On
your observing natives, you will immediately return to the vessel for further orders.
The negative flag at the fore, accompanied by a gun, will denote (during our stay
among these Islands) that natives are approaching, and to prepare for them.
To lull suspicion as much as possible, No. 4 flag will be hoisted in lieu of our ensign;
the boats will therefore hoist a similar flag as long as the natives remain peaceable; but, if
unfortunately they compel us to act on our own defence with arms, our colours will then of
course be displayed.
No mention whatever is to be made as to the object of our visit, which may have the
effect of putting them on their guard, and causing us much trouble and delay.
If you should unavoidably be brought in contact with the natives, you will avoid as
much as possible any unfriendly act, but treat them in the kindest manner, as the only
means we have of rescuing our countryman, whose existence appears still doubtful.
You will be supplied with presents for this purpose.
After performing this service, you will return to the ship and report to me the result
of your search.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
To Mr. Francis Hixson, Lieutenant Commanding.
Acting Second Master,
H.M.S.Y. “ Torch.”
[Enclosure No. 2.]
11. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,”
2nd Percy Island, 29 January , 1855.
Memo.
Notwithstanding our unsuccessful search on the afternoon of our first arrival
at the island, it is necessary, before we finally give up all hopes, that a thorough search be
made throughout the island for the remains of the unfortunate Mr. Strange and his com-
panions
You will therefore take a party of men, properly armed, under your orders, and pro-
ceed on this service. Your knowledge of the circumstances of the case will guide you in
what is required.
You will have the advantage of the two interpreters (Micky and Bobby, from Port
Curtis), who will quickly guide you to traces of our people or of natives.
Although we cannot hope to find any of the lost people living, it will nevertheless be
a melancholy satisfaction to all, if you can find the remains.
I intend, with my boat’s crew, to search the two Islets in the oiling for a similar
purpose.
WILLIAM CIIIMMO,
Lieutenant Commandingv
To Mr. Edward Wilds,
Second Master,
H. M. S. Y. “ Torch.”
[Enclosure No. 3.]
11. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,”
No. 2, Percy Island, 30 January, 1855.
Memo.,
The unexpected appearance of eight natives on the beach this morning, has
altogether altered my arrangements and orders of last night.
You will now take charge of the guard-boat, “ the cutter,” armed, and anchor her in
a position so as to closely cover the seizing party ) no arms are to be displayed, but the men
are to fish with lines.
The


The jolly boat will first shove off, and anchor, under charge of Mr. Marsh, to fish,
a good ship’s length from the shore, and on no account to land until joined by the guard-
boat 5 this will be to divert the natives and talk to them, he will have the two interpreters.
The seizing party will then commence their fishing, but on no account to go above
high water-mark, their object will also be to treat the natives friendly and kindly, by dis-
tributing presents.
Not one word is to be mentioned as to the real object of our visit, our only hope of
recovering the dead bodies of our countrymen, being stratagem.
It will be a great object gained, to find out the huts of these people, and also to
entice them on board, if possible.
Mr. Stutchbury has kindly volunteered his services on the occasion, and, from his
long knowledge of these people, will, no doubt, render valuable assistance in our cause; he
will go in the jolly boat to see the interpreters do their duty honestly.
All that can be expected to be performed to-day, will be, gaining the confidence of
the natives previous to renewed searches to-morrow.
Presents will be issued to the crews for distribution.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
To Mr. Francis Hixson, Lieutenant Commanding.
Acting Second Master,
H. M. S. V. “ Torch.”
[Enclosure No. 4.]
11. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,"
2nd Percy Island, 31 January, 1855.
Memo.
Having had the melancholy satisfaction (during to-days’ search), of finding
the remaing of one of the four persons murdered by the blacks, on this island, about two
months since.
I beg you will favour me with your opinion on this subject, with regard to affording
the remains “ Christian burial,” and also to guide me in my further search.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
To Doctor John D. Macdonald, Lieutenant Commanding.
H. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch.”
[Enclosure No. 5.]
Id. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,"
‘2nd Percy Island , 1 February, 1853.
Sib,
Having carefully examined the cranium, and the other bones of the skeleton
found by the exploring party, in the mangrove swamp in the interior of this Island, I have
no hesitation in pronouncing them to be those of a young white man, between the ages of 20
and 24, and judging from the account given by Mr. Hill, there can be little doubt but they
are the mortal remains of the unfortunate Mr. Spurling.
The cranium is extensively fractured on the right side, the fracture extending in a
direction upwards and backwards through the squaminous plate of the temporal bone, the
parietal and upper angle of the occipital.
The eighth superior maxellary is also broken, close to its articulation with the malar
bone.
In the upper jaw, the anterior bicuspid tooth of both sides, the two incisors of the
right, and the second incisor of the left side are wanting, but the sockets appear quite nor-
mal, or at least unchanged, after the destruction of the teeth.
The inferior maxella was found in three pieces, one fracture occurring through the
aloeolus of the first bicuspid of the left side, and the other immediately behind the right
wisdom tooth, all these injuries it would seem were inflicted with the club or nulla-nulla, and
could not possibly have been the result of one blow.
The parts of the skeleton recovered, were found to be as follows: —
Head.—The cranium and lower jaw complete, with the exception of the absent teeth
above noticed.
Trunk.—The first and third cervical, ten dorsal and all the humbar vertebras, nine-
teen ribs, the sacrum and both ossa innominata.
Upper extremities. —Two scopuloe, two humeri, two uluas, and one radius, the second
metacarpal bone of the left hand, and one digital phalanx.
Lower extremities. —Two femurs and the left libia and fibula, the oscalcis astragulus
navicular, and the 2nd 4th and sth metacarpal bones of the left foot.
It now only remains to determine, at least approximately, the age of the individual
from the characters afforded by particular parts of the skeleton :
First then, the posterior molars or wisdom teeth of both jaws are yet deeply sunken
in their sockets, but although these teeth usually make their appearance before the age of
twenty, their evolution may be delayed much longer in particular cases.
Secondly, the epiphysis of the acromion process of the scapula, and that which covers
the tuber of the esehium have not coalesced with their respective bones; now in both these
cases, bony union is established about the 25th year, and thus the limit of age in one direc-
tion may be very safely drawn.
Thirdly, the epiphysis composing the head of the humerus, and the inferior extremity
of the radius and ulna, remain quite unattached in the dry bones, whereas each is perma-
nently knit to its appropriate shaft at about the 20th year.
From


From these facts therefore, the age of the individual would appear to he between 20
and 24, but having no knowledge of the age of Mr. Spurling, I cannot determine that this
deduction is applicable to him.
I may here notice that a considerable quantity of rather lightish coloured hair was
found in the immediate neighbourhood of the skeleton, strongly confirming the first of the
above conclusions, although some of the hair has been more or less decolorized, and appa-
rently even turned grey by maceration in even 7 returning tide, other portions seemed to,
retain their original character with very little change.
I have &c.
(Signed) JOHN D. MACDONALD,
Assistant Surgeon.
Lieutenant William Chimmo, It. N.,
Commanding 11. M. S. V. “ Torch.”
[Enclosure No. 6.]
H. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,”
2nd Percy Island, 1 February, 1855.
Memo.
Having succeeded in your search yesterday, in finding the remains of one of our-
unfortunate murdered countrymen; and with the additional evidence before me, convincing
me that these are the people who committed the murders, and all our efforts at conciliation
failing,
It is necessary for the public good and for the protection of white people that
examples be made, and that these people be brought to trial.
You are therefore directed to proceed with an armed party from this ship and capture
them, 25 men will form your escort, and you will have provisions for two days.
You will on meeting or seeing them “ lay down arms ” mutually, as is the custom of
their country, and with the assistance of the interpreters, who will accompany you, com-
municate the following; that,
Ist.—They must come to the beach, and hear what I have to say.
2nd.—lf they do not come voluntarily, you have the power of making them.
3rd.—lf they run away, they must take the consequences.
4th.—When I shall have communicated with them, if I have reason to believe they
are innocent, they shall go to their homes with presents.
sth —lf I have reason to suppose they are guilty of murder, they will be brought
to the ship, thence to Sydney.
On your reaching their huts, your first object, after talking to them, will be to secure
them; then proceed to search every dwelling in and out, in order to ascertain if any things
are there belonging to the unfortunate murdered parties. In the evidence of one of the
blacks, he says, “ they have neither seen ship or white men,” if you therefore find any thing
European, it will condemn him ; let your search be most diligent and careful.
Endeavour to perform this service without firing a musket (it will redound much
more to our credit if we do so), and only use your arms in your own defence.
If you trace these people, but are not able to capture them within the specified period,
do not give up, if there is a chance, but send a small party back for a further supply of pro-
visions.
The extreme lowness of the barometers indicate a sudden change of weather, which
prevents my accompanying your party; if, therefore, you observe this change, return to the
beach for embarkation without delay.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
To Mr. Francis Hixson,
Acting Second Master,
H. M. S. V. “ Torch.”
\_Enclosure. No 7.]
H. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,”
2nd Percy Islsnd, 4 February, 1855.
Sir,
I have the honor to report, in accordance with your memo, of the Ist instant,
I landed with twenty-two men from this ship, and succeeded, with the assistance of the
interpreters, in tracing the natives until about noon, when a fire was observed, apparently
near the beach, on the N.E. side of the Island; I now halted to refresh my men, also with
a view of surrounding the natives during their mid-day renose.
In this I was, however, frustrated, the natives having left their fire and retired to my
extreme left; the consequence was, I had only two or three men to act upon them, and
succeeded only in capturing nine—(two men, three women, and four children.) Three men
having made their escape, these were followed ; but our men being encumbered with arms,
and exhausted with their long march, were obliged to give up the pursuit.
A most diligent search was made for articles of European manufacture —the only
articles procured, were those I sent by the Petty Officers.
Two men were afterwards seen on the beach, at about a mile distant from our party,
but retired on my approaching them singly ; an attempt was also made by some of the men,
to cut them off, but without success; a canoe was, however, captured and destroyed; the
party that surrounded the fire also cut off two canoes, and a fourth was destroyed the next
morning. I


I now made preparations for passing the night; the next morning the prisoners were
sent, in charge of three Petty Officers’ parties, to the ship, Avhilst I, with the remainder,
Avent in pursuit of the men Avho had been seen on the beach, and followed until your signal
Avas observed. I have, &c.,
(Signed) FBANCIS HIXSON,
Acting Second Master H. M. S. V. “ Torch.”
To Lieutenant Chimmo, R.N.,
Commanding H. M. S. V. “ Torch.”
[Enclosure No. B.]
It appears that Mr. Strange and his companions, on account of the extreme
heat of the weather, had left their coats on board the vessel, and went on shore in their
shirt sleeves. One of the Avhite men, so dressed (Mr. Strange ?), is described as being of
tall stature, and full habit, with a long beard. He is said to have been speared by a black
whom he instantly shot —(the women here very distinctly placed their hands on their fore-
heads, to show Avhere the ball, or charge, had taken effect.)
Mr. Spurling’s clothes were burned, obviously Avith the vieAV of escaping detection ;
but the body was alloAved to remain where the skeleton was found. The dead bodies of the
other three Avhite men, Avith all their clothes and Mr. Strange’s gun, which both men and
women seem to remember very Avell, were taken out some distance from the shore and thrown
into the water; and, when all these things were accomplished, the blacks retired to their
camp, feasted on the body of their companion who Avas killed, and deposited his bones some-
where in the neighbourhood. Assisted by a few of the men composing the last exploring
party, I made diligent search for these bones, with the hope of inspecting the cranium,
which, I believe, would bear its Avitness and evidence on the forehead, if found; but the
great extent and diversified surface of the country, rendered our efforts fruitless.
(Signed) JNO. D. MACDONALD,
Assistant Surgeon.
Information Collected, and Examination of the Murderers of Mr. Strange arid his three
Companions on Percy Island, October, 1854, in the Ketch “ Vision.'’
First Examination.—First Day.
There are now 8 persons on the Island,
including 1 gin, 1 child. SaAV gondole
(ship) 4 months since. Then saw 10 Avhite
men who came for Avater. Blacks speared
them; 1 black killed. The oar came
J from the place the body of Spurling was
j found. The shirt sleeve belonged to white
fellow. They all live in one place, in bark
huts.
I
Five persons now on Island (? men).
Gondole seen four months since. Saw one
white man killed. Then four white felloAV
killed, take them in canoe and threw them
in salt water, clothes and all, and the gun
v too.
Ist Woman
2nd Woman.
3rd Woman.
/ * V
' f
Could not understand her.
V.
Ist Man.
Seven black fellows now on the Island,
one gin, two children. Saw a gondole three
-< months since. Four white fellow killed,
I (speared).
{Name, Barangata, fighting with another
island black, was sick during the visit of
the “ Vision ” in October, 1854.
3rd Man.
Ist Visit. —Never saw ship. Never saw
white fellow. Does not smoke, nor know
the use of pipes, tobacco, or clothes.
2nd Visit.—He was at the camp when
the other blacks speared the white man.
When the skull of Spurling was shewn, he
confessed having speared one man ; said
one Avas taken out in canoe, and thrown in
salt-Avater, gun with him ; two blacks killed
this body; but four white man killed.
137—C
Cross-examination.—Second Day.
They burnt all the clothes ; many blacks
gone to another Island; the white men
were speared between 4 and 5 months
since. Big man killed (Strange ?), buried
at sea; three men put in salt water, on
the beach. Eight white fellows seen;
three white fellows killed; came with a
boat for water; black fellows came over
the mountain and speared him; then
leave one body; two in salt water. Killed
two black fellow (eaten). No man on
Island white.
Nil.
These three women say their country is
Gundan, or Drundon, (near Port Bowen.)
Was captured with much difficulty, and
when on board endeavoured to escape by
jumping overboard, but was caught by the
heel, by the Corporal. Lives at Umbanay
(near Port Bowen).
Endeavoured to liberate No. 1, by cast-
ing his seizings off. Lives at Umbanay or
Grundan (near Port Bowen).
This man endeavoured to escape, by
jumping overboard, and had nearly reached
the shore; two muskets with small shot
were fired to bring him to, but he did not
attempt to return; a boat then picked him
up, and on his return to the ship he was
so much exhausted that his recovery was
for some time doubtful; they were all then
secured in irons, and during the night they
made another ineffectual attempt to knock
the forelock out with an iron scraper which
they had concealed.
Story
2nd Man.


Story gathered by Doctor Macdonald from the Interpreters,—being an Abstract of the
Examination afterwards.
The following is an abstract of the information obtained, on interrogating the inter-
preters quietly, the incomplete or uncertain parts of their narrative being supplied by
reference to the women, who appear much more worthy of credence! than the men.
No satisfactory reason could be assigned for the murder of Mr. Strange and his
party; and there is no evidence to shew, that the white men were even in the slightest
degree the aggressors. When the blacks observed Mr. Spurling near the watering place,
quite unprotected, two of them in particular advanced, and at the distance of about thirty
yards, one threw a boomerang with fatal skill, and Mr. Spurling fell to the ground, when
the other, still closing in, fixed the smaller end of his nulla nulla, or throwing club, in the
right side of the victim’s skull, the weapon entering a little behind the right temple. (Now,
while this account affords a full explanation of the cause of the fracture of the cranium,
described in my Report, the whole character and appearance of the fracture itself strongly
support the truth of the statement. It is highly probable, also, that the fracture of the
lower jaw, entered in the same report, and the deep wound in the throat, noticed by Mr.
Hill on passing the dead body of Mr. S., were produced by the boomerang in the first
instance.) The blacks acknowledge that three more white men were speared and clubbed on
this occasion, (i. e.) between three and four months ago.
[Enclosure No. 9.]
IT. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,”
2nd Percy Island, February, 1855.
Memo.
Mr. Wilds will take the galley and seine party, and endeavour to collect the
black fellows now in sight around him (not above high water mark). The jolly boat armed
as a guard boat.
When I see from the ship a favourable opportunity, I will send Hixson with the
marines to the rear to prevent escape.
Mr. Wilds will take the interpreters and one female (gin) with him to collect the
people around her.
When he sees he can make sure of every man , particularly the chief, seize them, and
bring them to the ship; but do not attempt a surprise. If it should appear to be a failure,
we must wait another opportunity.
Mr. Wilds will in no-wise allow the gin (woman) to depart, but place a man as a
separate guard on her.
It will be better to collect the blacks on the south side of the beach.
I will hoist the ensign at the main, when the marines with Hixson are in a position
to commence the manoeuvre.
WILLIAM CIIIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
To Mr. Edward Wilds,
Second Master,
H. M. S. V. “ Torch.”
• [Enclosure No. 10.]
11. M. Steam Surveying Vessel, “ Torch,”
2nd Percy Island, 4 February, 1855.
Memo.
You are hereby directed to take under your orders the scouring party (named
on the accompanying list), and proceed to bring as prisoners to this ship every living person
you can find on the island. Your number will consist of 33; if they are, therefore, dis-
tributed to advantage, there can hardly be a chance of escape.
To avoid harassing and fatiguing the men more than necessary, I will proceed in the
ship and pick you up on the opposite beach (on the eastern side) when your work is complete.
This will divert the attention of the natives from your parties, and enable you more easily
to surprise them ; act, therefore, accordingly. I will heave in sight about 11. a.m.
The attention of one party, under the superintendence of Dr. Macdonald, should be
directed to the graves found by the gunner’s mate; their jealousy at an attempt to disturb
them has excited my suspicion. Although I do not doubt how the remains of our unfortunate
people were disposed of, you may find the native who was shot by Mr. Strange in the
forehead.
Your knowledge of the island, and the locality of these remaining now, will better
enable you to carry out your intentions for their capture. It appears to me, that by dispersing
your parties at certain distances, particularly where they before escaped, and throwing out a
line of some extent, will be a better method to adopt, than keeping them in close order.
If you have time before I heave in sight (perhaps the dinner hour), halt and lay out
your plan of advance, letting every one know his work. Read my orders, also, to officers
and men; it will stimulate them, and lam sure their exertions will be renewed in so great
a benefit for the public good.
Time not permitting of any further delay among these Islands, this will be the last
endeavour by us to rid this island of one of the most treacherous bands of murderers that
could possibly disgrace the face of the earth. It is therefore sincerely to be hoped that not
one will be left to retaliate this their retribution on any persons, who may hereafter visit this
island. The signals previously adopted will be in force.
If


If any person not mentioned in the list should volunteer for this service, he will be
permitted to go, provided he can be spared from the working of the vessel.
At seven to-morrow morning (sth February), weather permitting, I should wish the
party to shove off, after weighing the vessel’s anchor, taking with them the day’s provisions,
arms, and ten rounds of ammunition each ; the steam will therefore be ready by quarter to
seven.
WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
To Mr. Francis Hixson,
Acting Second Master,
H. M. S. V. “ Torch.”
[.Enclosure No. 11.]
11. M. Steam Vessel “ Torch,''
Port Curtis, 7 February, 1855.
Sir,
Having brought the remains of the body of Mr. William Spurling (one of the
unfortunate four persons murdered by the blacks, on Percy Island,) to this place for
Christian burial,
I have the honour to request your assistance, in order to make his funeral as impres-
sive as possible in the presence of the blacks of this place, and also of those who were his
murderers, whom I have now on board, that a good, and I trust beneficial effect, may be
produced.
Perhaps you will be good enough to inform me, what would be the most convenient
time for the funeral to leave the ship, so as to be joined by those on shore wishing to ac-
company it.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) WILLIAM CHIMMO,
Lieutenant Commanding.
Captain M. C. O’Connell,
Government Resident, Port Curtis.
[Enclosure No. 12.]
Gladstone,
7 February, 1855.
Sir,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of this morning,
acquainting me that you have brought the remains of Mr. William Spurling, one of the
unfortunate persons murdered by the blacks on Percy Island, to this place for Christian
burial; and requesting my assistance in making his funeral as impressive as possible in the
presence of the aboriginal natives, and of those of his murderers, whom you now have on board
of H M. S. “ Torch.”
I shall be glad on this melancholy occasion to afford all the assistance it is in my
power to give, to make impressive a ceremonial which may lead even the untutored savage
to comprehend the vastness and energy of that protective power which watches over Her
Majesty’s subjects, even in the most remote corner of her dominions, and which H. M.’s
Navy, through the services of your vessel, has, in this instance, been the successful means of
displaying.
If it meets your convenience, I would name half-past one o’clock to-morrow, as the
hour for the funeral.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) M. C. O’CONNELL,
Government Resident.
William Chimmo, Esq.,
Lieut. Commanding H. M. S. “ Torch,”
Port Curtis.


















