









SECONDARY PUNISHMENTS.
THE MERITS
OF A HOME AND OF A COLONIAL PROCESS,
OF A SOCIAL AND OF A SEPARATE SYSTEM,
OF
CONVICT MANAGEMENT
DISCUSSED.
BY
FREDERICK MAITLAND INNES.
“Penal legislation has hitherto resembled what the science of physic must have
been when physicians did not know the properties and effects of the medicines they
administered. ROMILLY.




TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD STANLEY,
Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Colonial
Department , &c, &c.
My Lord,
The writer of the following pages had his
attention drawn to the question attempted to be
discussed in them, during a residence of between
two and three years, ending in 1839, in one of
the penal colonies of Australia. He has since availed
himself of every means in his power to appreciate the
operation of systems of criminal management in the
mother country; and now presents the result of his
inquiries.


If any apology be required for addressing these
pages to your Lordship, the writer refers to your
Lordship’s official position in connection with the
conclusions he advocates.
With the utmost respect he subscribes himself,
Your Lordship’s obedient
humble Servant,
FREDERICK MAITLAND INNES.
17, Beaufort Buildings.


SECONDARY PUNISHMENT.
The question proposed for discussion in the following
pages is, Whether a Home or a Colonial process of Secon-
dary Punishment, is to be preferred, in relation to those
criminals, whose conviction renders them obnoxious under
British law, to punishments embracing a series of years in
their duration? I begin by observing, that this question has
not been determined by any experiment to which it has been
reduced. The Archbishop of Dublin, and some members
of the Transportation Committee of the House of Com-
mons (1837-8), have, indeed, assumed its determination
from the evidence elicited by that Committee. But if that
evidence be, with only ordinary discrimination, examined,
it will be found to embody results not of the cause so loosely
alleged—Transportation—but of a particular system of con-
vict management, of the features in detail of which system,
those results were the distinct and even minute reflection ;
a system instituted on the spot, at a time when even here in
England our secondary punishments were all rude and
unscientific in character ;* a system never amended in prin-
ciple, or more than modified in arrangement; a system
with which transportation is not of necessity more identified
B 2
* New South Wales was founded in 1786, by Act of Parliament. In
1784, Howard published his Appendix to the State of Prisons in England
and Wales, from which Appendix we collect such details as the follow-
ing : —“ Bridewell at St. Alban’s : In the work-room were two
soldiers and a girl, who were sentenced for a year’s imprisonment, locked
up all the day together.” — “ Chelmsford County Bridewell ;At my
last visit there were several sick and dirty objects on the floor, with little
or no covering.” —“County Jail, Southwark; Many were sick on
the dirty floors; one of the turnkeys had lately died of fever.”—“ Kings-
ton-ufon-Thames : One woman was in a bed on the men’s side, and


than prisons, in the abstract, arc, with the vicious manage-
ment and results, exposed by Howard.
Assuming the question, then, to be practically unre-
solved, what are the a priori objections to a mode ol punish-
ment of which Transportation is the preliminary feature?
A leading objection made is, that the influence for pre-
vention or determent, is thereby sacrificed. It were desi-
rable to understand whether this alleged property of penal
systems, in the meaning of the objectors, results from the
actual observation of the process, or from the general know-
ledge of it merely. Taking the latter view of the objection
first, it seems purely presumptive to conclude, that such
general knowledge cannot be as widely begotten of a pro-
cess executed in one of our colonies, as of the same process
executed at home, so far as the publication of the details
belongs to the Government. The preventive value con-
tended for, it may be, however, is the result not of official
report, but of the observation of the crime-disposed, or of
the testimony of the punished. In the first sense, —that
which refers to the testimony of the crime-disposed, —the
two women in the room for faulty apprentices, but they pay for this
privilege.”— “Warwick County Gaol: The justices of this county
have taken the gaol and bridewell under consideration, and propose that
debtors and felons, and also men and women, in both, shall be entirely
separated. ... At my last visit, 1 was informed there had
Divine service, except to the condemned, for nearly two years.”
“ Leicester County Bridewell : In a former edition, I suggested
that if a wall were built with brick, instead of the clay wall, there would
he no need for a chain and a log to secure the prisoners in the court.
“Worcester County Gaol: The magistrates may be fully convinced
of the impropriety and indecency of having only one day-room, if they
examine the women sent from this gaol to bridewell. .. . The uneasy
situation of the prisoners at night in the horrid dungeon, has, I doubt
not, been one cause of their illness; for even in this strong and deep
dungeon, prisoners (as in too many other gaols) are all night chained
together by a heavy chain, through the links in their fetters, and iron
rings fastened to the floor.”—“ Exeter Gaol : I found the men toge-
ther, encouraging and confirming one another in wickedness ; and the
women are obliged to associate with them in the day time.”—“ Liver-
pool Bridewell: Near this room, in the men’s court, is a pump to
which the women are tied every week and receive discipline.”-— 11 Man-
chester Bridewell : The keeper’s salary is raised to £BO, in lieu of
the tap.”—“ Leicester Bridewell :By order of the Court of Easter
Sessions, 1778, no ale or beer is brought into this prison on a Sunday ,
nor after seven o’clock in the evening on a week day.”


objection goes too far for those by whom it is urged ; it lies
as much against any home system, which they would sub-
stitute, as against a colony-executed system. The objectors
are the patrons of the silent, or of the separate, system of
punishment, both of which, as well as every modification of
the penitentiary system, exclude the convict from the gaze
of the public at large as completely as transportation does.
But the objection is not only inconsistent as it proceeds
from those by whom it is alleged ; it is founded on prin-
ciples exploded from the science, and nearly so from the
practice, of convict discipline. It contemplates exposure,
in a state of punishment, to the observation of those not
identically situated, as a recommendation ; whereas, instead,
its effects are found to be vitiating and hardening, pro-
voking to the exhibition of an insurgent spirit, to the
obtrusion of an apparent, where time has not produced a
real, indifference to punishment; and thus it contradicts
the principle that punishment should embrace as little, in
reference to the convict, but appear to embrace as much, in
reference to the crime-disposed, as need be, of suffering.
The principle holding good, that men learn to estimate
the harshness of circumstances, untried by themselves but
familiar to their observation, not by the circumstances
abstractedly, but by their apparent effects on those placed
in them—exemplai’y, public, or exposed punishments, for the
most part, fail as completely in deterring from crime, as they
succeed in hardening against reclamation.* The last sense,
however, may be that in which the argument is intended
to apply. The effect of prevention may be contemplated
* Exposure in a state of punishment was introduced into Pennsylvania
in 1786. In the year 1790, four years after its commencement, this
shocking practice was abolished, and the effect was astonishing; for at
the end of another period of four years, that is to say, 1794, the popu-
lation having in the meanwhile increased at the rate of four-and-a-half
per cent, per annum, and the penal law in other respects having re-
mained unaltered, crimes had decreased by two-thirds. The increase of
recorded crimes, after the introduction of exposure, was too great and
too continuous to be accounted for, to any great extent, by an increase
of prosecutions otherwise than by reason of an increase of crimes. And
no part of the subsequent decrease of recorded crimes can be so ac-
counted for. We have remarked in this instance one fact, which seems


through the medium of those who, having suffered thepunish-
ment, are fitted to spread the tale of its terrors. If this be
the sense of the argument, the argument itself is conceived at
the expense of a principle prominently urged in favour of
the separate system of penitentiary management, (the
favourite one of the day, and the substitute proposed by
the opponents of transportation), and at the expense of the
released, —the quasi reformed subject of that system. The
principle in question is, that a criminal passing through
separate discipline needs never be recognized in the world
again as having been the subject of punishment; and in the
compromise of that principle, whether directly, through the
released criminal, or indirectly, through the witnesses of his
shame, is deemed to be involved (I quote the argument of
the separatists)* the liability, the tendency, to renewed
to speak for itself enough to settle this question. The decrease of crime
in the town of Philadelphia, where, doubtless, most of the exposures
were made, was much greater than the decrease of crime in the country,
great though that was.”—Pp. 87-8, Report of the Committee on Prison
Discipline to the Governor General of India. Calcutta, 1838.
♦ “ The prisoner’s self-respect, his character in the eyes of the world,
his exemption from future exposure on the part of his fellow-prisoners,
and from all the disheartening apprehensions to which the fear of such
exposure must give rise, all depend upon the completeness of his exclusion
from the sight, even more than from the hearing, of those who are fellow-
occupants of the same prison.”' — Inspectors' of Prisons Report for 1838,
p. 4.
“We will next consider the evil of recognition, with reference to its
effects upon a prisoner who may be led or inclined to repent of his guilt,
and to resolve upon an honest course of life. Whether the man really
repents, or feels an inclination to return to honest courses, or to listen
with serious attention to the admonitions which he may have received,
this evil will operate upon him with a disastrous influence. In the
former case, by steady perseverance in the path of industry and honesty,
he may succeed in gaining the character of a useful member of society;
but he will live in constant apprehension of having his good name sud-
denly and irremediably forfeited by the recognition of an abandoned
fellow-prisoner, who may be tempted to expose the past delinquencies
of the penitent, of whom, but for the previous acquaintance in prison,
he might never have had the slightest knowledge. In the latter case,
the mischief is not less prejudicial or less to be deprecated; for the
liability to subsequent exposure must act as a great discouragement to
reformation; it has a tendency to repress the very rudiments of virtuous
resolution in the individual; and thus he is discouraged by the con-
sciousness that he is surrounded by witnesses of his disgrace, who would
feel no obligation to abstain from spreading the report of his former
guilt to his disadvantage or his undoing,”— Repart of the Inspectors ,
1837, p. 14,


disgrace of the individual, in the publication of whose mis-
fortune is entailed a confirmation of his discredit with
society, and the probability of his renewal of criminal
habits and associations. But it is still left for granted, that
the terms in which the released convict will refer to his past
process of punishment are such as to prove obnoxious to
the fears of his neighbours or associates; and there are
those who will cherish the end even at the price indicated.
It may, however, (and the reply meets the silentists, or the
advocates of any other home system,) be confidently affirmed,
that society will never have a benefit, so to speak, in the
representations of subdued or of reclaimed convicts. The
influence which such persons will be made to exert on their
former associates in crime, or on society, will at best never
be more than negative —the influence inspired by their
shrinking, after release, from the renewal of the criminal
connection. The pride of the half-subdued, the altered
principles of the really reformed, revolt from all reference
to the punishment, which is obnoxious to remaining
pride, or a remembrance of former guilt and shame. The
only trumpeters of sustained punishment will ever be from
among those whose insurgent spirits are gratified by ex-
pressions of contempt for its conceived severities, and whose
vicious inclination, by the minds of others being impressed
with like contempt.
Having endeavoured to meet the opponents of Transporta-
tion on their own ground, determent wrought by the
example of the sufferings of others, —I may now be per-
mitted to question the abstract and practical merits of that
principle. First, practically:
The Crime Class is divisible into three obvious sections:
habitual or professional criminals; accidental criminals;
occasional criminals.
The characteristics of the first have been repeatedly
drawn. Excitement is the animating principle of their
existence; its forms of gratification are drinking, adven-
ture, women, gambling, every habit obnoxious to calm and
reflection. “ A purse of gold most resolutely snatch d on


Monday night, and most dissolutely spent on Tuesday
morning; .. . now as low as an ebb, at the foot of the
ladder, and, by and bye, in as high a flow as the ridge of
the gallows,” is the allusion to the character of life of an
habitual thief, which Shakspeare puts into the mouth of
Prince Henry. The First Annual Report of the Con-
stabulary Force Commissioners, in the narratives obtained
by chaplains of different penitentiaries from criminals under
punishment, furnishes detailed illustration of the correct-
ness of the. above reference of the great painter of human
life and manners:—
“ My being of a gay turn of mind, and given to pleasure, and
my not being in the way to get a sufficient supply, I was induced,”
&c. —p. 68 ;
is the account given by one convict of the germ of his
Criminal career.
“ I have lost more than my wages in play at the Tom and Jerry;
and I have had to steal to pay my losings,”
is the account of another.
A third says, he was “ much addicted to liquora fourth,
that he gave himself up to “ associating with girls of ill-
fame a fifth, that he was led into crime “ not from dis-
tress, but to gratify his inclination.”
Following the principle, of which these quotations indi-
cate only so many different forms of manifestation to its
maturity of action, in the life of an habitual offender, we
have farther illustration from the Constabulary Commis-
sioners’ Report;
“In fact, in all parts of the country,” (says a thief), “ and in all
towns, there have been a great number of Jerry shops started by
thieves, to get the custom of ‘travellers.’ ‘Travellers’ spend
more money at such places than other customers, oftentimes
drinking and gambling all day.”
The same absorbing feature of mental character, which,
in freedom, is nourished and gratified by alternate hopes
and fears, dissipation and dangers, when the outward cir-
cumstances of the criminal are changed, still manifests its
unyielding ascendancy. Referring to a period of his his-
tory, spent in Cold Bath Fields Prison, a convict says;


“ Silence was then introduced partially, but we could speak ;
ten bedded cells ; used to tell their lives of a night ; might talk all
night long; used to say how we got money, and how spent.”
Again :
“ I can, for the last two years, since I have taken to thieving,
‘ rightly ’ tell almost the days of the week of any transaction. We
often tell our stories to each other in and out of prison .”
The very language of these men reflects their gambling,
uncalculating, hap-hazard, improvident character:
“ I once saw a man, for whom I had been concerned, the day
before his execution; and, on offering him condolence, and ex-
pressing my concern at his situation, he replied, with an air of
indifference, ‘ Players at bowls must expect rubbers!’ ”
The Ordinary of Newgate, in reply to a question put by
a member of the same Committee on Punishments, which
elicited the above in reply, from an Old Bailey solicitor,
said:
“ The old and experienced thief says, the chances have gone
against the man who has suffered.”
Now, determent generated in the mind, and consequently
in the action of an individual criminally disposed, implies
calculation, deliberation, balancing of advantages, and, if
the passages quoted indicate correctly the principles and
habits of criminals by profession, may that effect, as the
result of any multiplication of prospective, and always
uncertain evils, not he doubted in respect to them—at least
so far as to reduce it as an object of pursuit, to a place
subordinate to other objects of a more tangible nature, in a
good penal system ? A writer, who has brought the results
of considerable and various enquiry to bear on the question
of the character and treatment of criminals, speaking of the
apprehension of punishment entertained by them, says:
“ Disgrace or punishment is regarded only as it deprives them
of a continuance in an abandoned and licentious course of life ;
neither stripes, hard labour, or harder food, enters into their cal-
culations of secondary punishments.”— Old Bailey Experience,
p. 214.
And, again, (p. 236):
“ Pass a law to mangle them, to deprive them of a feature,
limb, or member of the body, every time they committed an


offence, and you would have the limbless trunk brought into
court for judgment at last, if they survived their former punish-
ments.”
Mr. Bentham, in a note to his “ Rationale of Punish-
ment,” gives the following:
Are you not aware that we are subject to one disease more
than other men?’ said a malefactor upon the rack to his com-
panion, who shrieked from pain. When one observes the courage
or brutal insensibility” (continues Bentham, by way of comment,)
“ when in the very act of being turned off, of the greater part of the
malefactors that are executed at Newgate, it is impossible not to
feel persuaded that they have been accustomed to consider this
mode of ending their days as being to them a natural death—as
an accident or misfortune by which they ought no more to be
deterred from their profession than soldiers or sailors are from
theirs, by the apprehension of bullets or of shipwreck.”
Yet, in another chapter of his Rationale (B. 1, c. vi.
Rule xiii.), with some degree of apparent warmth, does
Mr. Bentham disclaim the principle which one must deem
to be prima facie sustained by the above incident,, with its
following comment. He remarks:
“ The observation of rules of proportion between crimes and
punishments has been objected to as useless, because they seem
to suppose that a spirit of calculation has place among the pas-
sions of men who, it is said, never calculate. But, dogmatic as
this proposition is, it is altogether false. In matters of import-
ance every one calculates. Each individual calculates, with more
or less correctness, according to the degrees of his information,
and the power of the motives which actuate him; but all calcu-
late. It would be hard to say that a madman does not calculate.
Happily the passion of cupidity, which, on account of its power,
its constancy, and its extent, is most formidable to society, is the
passion which is most given to calculation. This, therefore, will
be more successfully combated, the more carefully the law turns
the balance of profit against it.”
The present argument does not necessarily involve any
objection to rules of proportion between crimes and punish-
ments, and, in reference to the above passage, is confined
to the broad assertion it contains of the calculating prin-
ciple in criminals, and the subsequent assertion by which
the first is fortified, that the passion of cupidity, “ the most
calculating of passions,” is that of the habitual offender.
Mr. Bentham’s statement allows of some latitude in the


interpretation of the word “ calculate ” and its co-relatives,
as the introduction of the case of a madman illustrates;
and in this latitude consists the fallacy of the position taken
by him. The “ calculation ”of the habitual offender is of
that kind which leaves it to the determination of his pas-
sions arbitrarily to assign so much weight or value to one
side in a given case, and to deduct so much from the other;
to add or multiply here, and to reduce to a fraction there.
But surely such a licence is not consistent with the
common sense interpretation of the word, and the daily
habit of thus reversing the rules of moral arithmetic must
reduce the ‘‘calculations” of the criminal to the character
of the “ chances ”of a desperate gamester.* That the pas-
sion of cupidity is the impelling passion of the criminal I
deem a position equally liable to dispute. The passion of
the thief is not for those objects which the law prohibits;
those objects are only means subservient to the ends of his
passion. It is not the money or property to be obtained
by crime which impels the professional criminal; it is a
prior feeling; a longing for sensual or exciting indulgence
of some kind. Were it simply an acquisitive principle
which animated him, it would only be consistent to expect
to find him provident of his gains; but the dissipated way
in which they are squandered, indicated more unsettled
and unsatisfiable principle at work. The calculation of the
man set out in crime is seldom more than once made, and
it is of that character supposed by Beccaria, and given by
him as the “ reasoning of a robber“ A day of pain and
repentance may come, but it will be short; and for an hour
of grief I shall enjoy years of pleasure and liberty.”f
* “ It can scarcely be doubted that the main body of convicts are under
mental delirium; they see and appreciate everything through a false
medium.”— Governor Arthur’s Instructions for the Control of Road
Parties in Van Piemens Land,
f “ The following circumstance I find stated by a gentleman at a
public meeting in Southampton, in England, as having been detailed
by Mr. Buxton : ‘An Irishman, found guilty of issuing forged Bank
notes, was executed, and his body delivered to his family. While his
widow was lamenting over the corpse, a young man came to her to
purchase some forged notes. As soon as she knew his business, for-
getting at once both her grief and the cause of it, she raised up the dead


£f Accidental ” criminals constitute the second class
referred to. An “ accidental” criminal is one who from
some temporary combination of unfavourable circum-
stances, from some momentary impulse, some cause
neither corresponding with the habitual principles of the
individual, nor the usual tenor of his life, is betrayed into
crime, and from a station and character hitherto respectable
and respected, into the condition of an offender. What
influence, in the sense of determent, do penal institutions
exercise in reference to individuals of this class? It is
admitted that they deliberate; does their deliberation turn
on the nature and amount of the law’s penalties ?or does
it not refer to the chances of their losing their character,
position, and respect in the eyes of men ? During the
embarrassment of temptation and fear, is it the variety of
punishments to which they will expose themselves that pre-
sents itself to the imagination of these men ;oris it not
rather their shame in the eyes of those on whom they have
been accustomed to look with unblushing countenance ? the
secret influence which restrains them, is it not that of a
police more vigorous than any devised by human laws, in
the sympathies and relations of society?
“ I, from the influence of thy looks, receive
Access in every virtue; in thy sight
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on,
Shame to be overcome or over-reach’d,
Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite.” —Paradise Lost.
The third class of criminals 1 have designated “ occa-
sional” criminals. By this distinction I mean to imply
body of her husband, and pulled from under it a parcel of the very
paper for the circulation of which he had forfeited his life. At that
moment an alarm was given of the approach of the police; and, not
knowing where else to conceal the notes, she thrust them into the mouth
of the corpse, and there the officers found them.’— Livingstone's Penal
Code of Louisiana , note, p. 121.
The above cannot be taken as an illustration of indifference conse-
quent to uncertain punishment; as little can it be deemed illustrative of
indifference incident to a despised form of punishment; it finds only
one explanation,—in the blind infatuation of habitual offenders—infatu-
ation which renders them unsusceptible in reference to the means by
which it is sought to deter them.


that class of offenders which is supplied from the ranks of
the unemployed, of the indigent, and of those whose moral
principle is weak, without their habits being matured into a
desperate career of crime. Is it particular forms of punish-
ment more than others which excite the apprehension of
individuals of this class ? or is it not merely the general
consequence, upon conviction, of restraint and discipline?
And how slight and temporary is this indefinite apprehen-
sion likely to prove in the case of the unemployed and the
indigent, when opposed to the relief of immediate and
pressing wants; are not these the very circumstances which
generate reckless indifference to punishment, and mature
the errors of misfortune into the crimes of habit and pro-
fession ? and, in the case of those who yield alternately to
the suggestions of bad principles, and of fear inspired only
by causes (physical sufferings in the form of punishment)
which make their fears a reflection upon them, how soon is
the transition made either from successful crime to the
infatuation of its heedless commission, or from the tem-
porary penal consequences of one conviction to the same
result inspired by contempt for consequences which re-
quired only to be experienced to be despised ? How
fictitious, partial, temporary, and equivocal in character,
is example as the end of penal infliction!
But another view of the immediate point in discussion
has been indicated, Wherein consists the justice of punish-
ing not in alleged retribution for offence; not, or only
secondarily, for the reclamation of the prisoner from those
habits and principles which are calculated to render him
always a vicious member in society; but, for the sake of a
third party, embracing an indefinite class of individuals,
whom it is thought to deter by sufferings under which the
convict is placed?'* This question leads to another, What
* Parkhurst Reformatory, in the Isle of Wight, was established in
1839, for the reception of convict youth; the ages of these youth pre-
clude the idea of the treatment pursued here being justifiable on the
score of retribution; the justification of any degree of severity which
may he found to distinguish the future proceedings of this insti-
tution is contained in its alleged objects. “The objects sought to be
attained at the Parkhurst prison are two-fold, viz.: the penal correction


are the foundations of the right to inflict punishment? or
What are the ends and limits of that right ? Society is
constituted for the greatest good of the greatest number.
Punishment is the alternative to which is opposed the
compromise of the greatest good. Either society must
submit to the injuriousness of individuals, or must sanction
and enforce a restraint upon their injuriousness. The
natural obligations of benevolence between man and man,
between society and its parts, are, however, independent of
the relative character of individuals; they exist in virtue of
the susceptibility of all to happiness or misery; these obli-
gations can never be forfeited; their practical demonstra-
tion in any particular case can only be limited by the
claims of a greater number with which, in an indefinite
sense, the former cannot be reconciled.* The limits, then, of
the right to punish are the limits without which the good
of society cannot be protected ; the end of punishment is to
convert by the restraint of physical circumstances, or by
of the boy with a view to deter, not himself only, but juvenile offenders
generally, from the commission of crime, —and the moral reformation
of the culprit.”
In carrying the first of these objects into effect, the utmost care must
be taken to avoid any species of discipline which is inconsistent with the
habits and character of youth, or calculated in any degree to harden
and degrade. The second object can only be effected by a judicious
course of moral, religious, and industrial training; but the means adopted
for this purpose should not be of such a nature as to counteract the
wholesome restraints of the corrective discipline. In the general treat-
ment of the boys, every comfort and indulgence, not necessary to pre-
serve the health of the mind and body of the offender, should be excluded.
There should be nothing, throughout the arrangements at Parkhurst, of
a tendency to weaken the terrors of the law, or to lessen in the minds of
the juvenile population at large (or of their parents) the dread of being
committed to a prison.”— First Report relating to Parkhurst Prison, 1839.
* “ It is not man’s being a social creature, much less his being a
moral agent, from whence alone our obligations to goodwill towards him
arise. There is an obligation to it prior to either of these, arising from
his being a sensible creature; that is, capable of happiness or misery.
Now this obligation cannot be superseded by his moral character. What
justifies public executions is, not that the guilt or demerit of the cri-
minal dispenses with the obligation of goodwill, neither would this justify
any severity, but that his life is inconsistent with the quiet and happiness
of the world; that is, a general and more enlarged obligation neces-
sarily destroys a particular and more confined one of the same kind
inconsistent with it.”— Bishop Butler’s Sermons —Sennon IX.


the power of moral causes, an injurious, into a useful, or at
least an innocuous individual.
Retributive punishment has been hinted at above.
Punishment, based on the principle of retribution, to be
equitable, requires an appreciation of the infinitely varied
and interwoven circumstances of physical constitution, birth,
association, &c. &c., which render the same external per-
formance in two individuals, entirely different in criminality.
All this is beyond the powers of man; it is competent only
to God; and the exclusive province of Divine Justice,
arising out of this omniscience, is asserted in the language
of Scripture—“ Vengeance is mine ; I will repay, saith the
Lord.”
Example, as an incidental effect of punishment, is not
excluded in the idea of its not being the end of punish-
ment ; but, it is important to fix its merely incidental cha-
racter ; its practical tendency, when invested with an
importance greater than this, being decidedly at variance
with what is just in theory, and desirable in practice.
Thus, it is a familiar corollary from the principle of
exemplary punishments, that, in proportion to the uncer-
tainty of conviction, should be the severity of punishment;
the justice of which is that D shall suffer not merely for the
crime proved against him, but for the same crime (of which
they escaped conviction) in A, B, and C.*
And the injustice of the law’s sentence is consistently
followed up by arrangements conflicting with themselves,
and with the proper ends of penal infliction, devised to
reconcile, in the same process, the redemption of individual
character with the excitement of general terror. The effort
made is, as it were, to blow hot and cold at the same time;
to go east and west by the same road. The results are
successful neither in one sense nor in another; the water
spoils the wine, and the wine the water. The mitigations
* A man who was sentenced to death, at Maidstone, for horse stealing,
before the late Judge Buller, exclaimed against the severity of the law,
as he was leaving the dock, and said it was a cruel law, that took away
a man’s life for a horse. “You are to he hanged,” said the Judge, “ not
because you have stolen the horse, but that horses may not be stolen.”


partially introduced, in compliance with the moral claims
of the prisoner, are enough to incur the blame of stripping
the law of its fears; the studied aspects of penal severity
are enough to preserve in vigour that insurgent spirit in
the criminal, which brooks not to appear terrified, and
condescends not even to the hypocrisy of reformation. An
illustration of this conflict between two inconsistent objects
is aptly supplied in a passage in the “ Report of the Com-
mittee on Prison Discipline to the Governor-General of
India, (Calcutta, 1838).” This Report, in the preparation of
which a distinguished member of the late Cabinet is under-
stood to have taken a considerable share, is not deficient in
expression of sympathy in the reformation of criminals. In
one passage, which follows the condemnation of road-gangs,
on account of their demoralizing influence, this sympathy
finds unequivocal expression—“ Such would be our recom-
mendation if we thought that a financial loss would be the con-
sequence ; for we cannot think that the duty which a state
owes to those whom it is obliged to deprive of liberty can
properly be abandoned because of a small charge which the
misuse of those unfortunate people might save. We can-
not, therefore, but rejoice that it is in the power of Govern-
ment to do so great a moral good, with direct pecuniary
advantage.” Yet will this Report be found to contain, in
sober earnestness, an argument against employing prisoners
in trades, “ because labour, under the ordinary incitements
of honest industry, is not what is intended in punishment.”
The passage, which I quote, is introduced into the Report
with a side reference —“ Opinion against trades absolutely ;
For what reasons ,” —to distinguish the objections in question
from the purely local ones which precede and follow: —
“ On the question of the limited employment of convicts on
trades, after full consideration, we have come to the opinion, that
such a course is, in any case, unadvisable, for the following
reasons —
“ A common handicraft cannot be profitably conducted, still
less can a new handicraft be advantageously introduced, without
interesting the mind of the handicraftsman, and making him feel,
from one cause or another, pleasure in success. It would seem,


therefore, that either the work must be unsuccessful, or a certain
part of the pain, which it is the object of imprisonment to inflict,
and which it does inflict, must be neutralized. In the former
case, no advantage is gained by a very complicated system; in
the latter, the law undoes with one hand what it does with the
other. If trades be successfully conducted, as the working at
them will be much less irksome than heavy monotonous exertion,
it seems to follow that the imprisonment must be made the longer,
in order to produce the same deterring effect. And the time
must be increased more than proportionally to the decrease of
irksomeness, because it is certain that pain condensed as much
as possible seems greater, both in anticipation and in recollection,
than the same amount of pain dispersed over a long term. Thus
an offender is made to suffer more actual pain than is necessary to
deter, which is a mere useless cruelty. Even in point of eco-
nomy the less expensive confinement for a longer term may cost
a larger sum than the more expensive confinement for a shorter
term. It is held by those of the contrary opinion, that the plan
of trades possesses a peculiar advantage, inasmuch as the habit
acquired in prison, by working at trades, may lead to habits of
industry out of prison. But we do not admit the soundness of
this argument. If the labour be not compulsory, but of a sort
to which the prisoners are stimulated by the ordinary incitements
of honest industry, it certainly is not what is meant by a sentence
to hard labour, and a prison becomes a workshop ; if it be, it is
very doubtful how far compulsory labour ever inspired a man
with habits of industry.”
My object does not lead me to discuss the argument of
the above passage; it is confined to its leading principle,
and how melancholy is the character of that principle !
vindictive throughout. Knowledge in handicraft, however
calculated to prove auxiliary to moral reformation, de-
nounced, because the convict is made “ to feel pleasure in
success,” —and that is not penal; because “it is less irk-
some than heavy monotonous exertion,” and that were not
penal; because “ stimulated by the ordinary incitements of
honest industry,” and the incitements of honest industry
are not penal! *
c
* A former governor of one of the penal colonies advised the employ-
ment in separate parties of refractory convicts, in digging deep trenches
and conveying the soil from one trench to another and refilling if. The
motives of honest industry , it was thought too lenient to act upon ; work
must be hateful. But, what short-sighted wisdom there is here ; as if the
association of the prime preventive of crime, labour, with ignominy and
suffering could ever diminish crime!


Ihe conclusion to which the preceding argument leads,
that the legitimate end of punishment is the reformation,
or the constrained submission, of an offender, is supported
by other considerations. Under what circumstances are
the principles and habits of the great mass of our criminal
population formed ? The first Report on the Parkhurst
Prison, in a return of the ages, crimes, convictions, &c. of
the boys confined there, furnishes a reply to the question.
I submit the “ remarks ” attached to the first twenty names
on the list:—
“ I- Mother transported, as receiver of property stolen by her
son. 2. Indulgent mother; kept bad company. 3. Bad manage-
ment on the part of parents ; vicious acquaintances. 4. Want of
early correction; made worse by prison contamination. 5. Tempt-
ation through master’s carelessness, and temptation of fellow-
servant. 6. Bad company; ignorance ; beer shops. 7. Very
early robbed parents ; not punished ; subsequently bad company.
8. Slothful; early habits desultory ; very ignorant. 9. Disregard
of parental advice ; bad associates. 10. Bad company, and neg-
lected by parents. 11. Tempted by carelessness of employers ;
encouraged by not being detected. 12. Ignorance; want of
parental attention; bad family habits. 13. Bad company; not
corrected by parents ; stubborn temper. 14. Parents both drunk-
ards ; cruelly used by them. 15. Commenced robbing parents
early; bad company. 16. Bad company ; placed by mother in
a workhouse. 17- Long career of crime undetected; bad asso-
ciates. 18. Robbed parents of clothes and money; not corrected.
19. Parents poor; not corrected ; latterly destitution. 20. Sent
out to beg and steal by mother; forced into crime.”
Where is the justice of applying vindictive severity to
beings thus destined to crime by the overwhelming power of
circumstances, to them inevitable ? and where is the wisdom
of seeking to control the tendencies of such circumstances,
by exemplary inflictions, which only assimilate to, and fall
in with, the usual current of a criminal’s career, —present
nothing contrasting with, or calculated to arrest it ? Such
treatment can only be paralleled by that of the physician
who would attempt to control, or reduce, the rage of mad-
ness or of fever, by processes imitating his patient’s
malady.


It is remarked, by a distinguished authority,* that “ the
great error of our laws is an obstinate refusal to consider
an offender against them as moved by the same impulses,
guided by the same motives with the rest of the community—
refusing, in short, to consider him as a man. They suppose
him a demon or an idiot, and their provisions are accord-
ingly calculated for a being actuated by perversity too
incorrigible to be amended, or by folly incapable of pur-
suing his own happiness when the path is pointed out.”
Penal systems would thus appear to be framed on a prin-
ciple at variance with the constitution of the human mind;
a principle implying a uniform moral complexion in its
different faculties; a complexion of unmixed vice in those
of the criminal, instead of a derangement only of his moral
or intelligent nature. Proceeding on this principle of the
character of the criminal being “ all evil,” the machinery
of convict management is designed for repression only,
instead of, as well, by stimulating the elements of good,
to bring about that balance of different passions and
affections in which the average virtue of the world consists.
Subjection unqualified and fearful subjection rather
than self government, is sought to be produced. The
essential condition of a criminal’s reclamation, his own
acquiescence and co-operation in the process contemplating
that end, being thus overlooked, a positive and serious
injury, condemned by religion, and social expediency, is
the consequence. The criminal is alive to the injustice by
which his entire nature is presumed to be reflected in the
act which has made him obnoxious to punishment, and he
wars against vir.ues, which survive his errors, not to pur-
chase from the world or the law any mitigation of blame or
punishment, but, by attaching his sympathies to his kind,
to make him more painfully sensitive to the indiscriminate
odium which is affixed to him ; and he makes a rapid transi-
tion from that excessive and undistinguishing obloquy which
c 2
* Livingstone—Penal Code of Louisiana.


anticipates or exceeds his demerits, to the principles and
practices which apparently justify it: *
“ ‘ Fear’d—shunn’d—belied—ere youth had lost her force
He hated man too much to feel remorse,
And thought the voice of wrath a sacred call,
To pay the injuries of some on all.’ ”
The reformation of the criminal is the only direct object
of Secondary Punishments which can be consistently and
thoroughly pursued with a reference to all the interests
concerned. Mere vindictive severity is evaded on every
side; it is either uniform in its mode of exhibition, or it is
varied; in the first case it is soon deprived of its effect by
the law of accommodation in human nature; fin the second,
it finds resistance in the human sympathies of those on
whom the efficiency of law ultimately depends—judges,
juries, prosecutors, witnesses— men, to whom ingenious
infliction is a hateful thing. And these objections are not
* There is such a thing as men’s being honest to such a degree, and
in such respects, but no further. And this, as it is true, so it is abso-
lutely necessary to be taken notice of and allowed them; such general
and undistinguishing censure of their whole character, as designing and
false, being one main thing which confirms them in their self-deceit.
They know that the whole censure is not true; and so take it for
granted that no part of it is.— Butler’s Sermons —Sermon X.
f It is woefully confounding penal institutions with human nature to
refer every repetition of offence on the part of a released criminal to
some error in the mere penal arrangements of the prison or system
through which he has passed. It is not the system which is not severe
enough; but it is the law of accommodation in human nature, which
accounts for the failure of processes merely penal, end this principle of
accommodation will defeat the science of the separate as of every other
system, in a ratio not to its leniency or severity, but to its incidental
success or failure, in implanting new principles and habits. The sepa-
rate system is, in the light in which it is viewed by some of its disciples, the
last discovery in the science of alarming criminals by administering some-
thing uncomfortable to them. But viewed in that light, its failure may be
confidently enough predicted. Messrs. Beaumont and De Tocqueville
in their account of American prisons, introduce passages from their
conversation with prisoners confined under the separate system. One
of these says, “he finds a kind of pleasure in solitude;” — another, that
“he loves solitude;”—a third, that he “ has been eighteen months in
the Penitentiary; health excellent; at first solitude was insufferable;
hut custom gradually reconciles one to it ;” and so on. It will not be the
dread of re-encountering the separate cell that will prevent these or any
other men, from being returned to it; hut, as before remarked, the suc-
cess with which new motives and habits have been implanted.—On this,
not that, hinges the question.


evaded by such fictions as that the apparent is greater than
the real punishment. The sources of ineffectiveness are in
appearances, and if the appearances he credited, let the
reality be what it may, the same results will continue.
Or, the reality being seen through the disguise of its ficti-
tious exterior, the law which is sustained by an imposture
becomes contemptible. But, with the reform of the cri-
minal, as the end in view, there needs be no compromise,
no disguise, no fiction in the machinery employed. —No
compromise, or disguise, or fiction, on the score of severity,
because severity is not excluded from a process contem-
plating reform; it is not even necessarily included within
nicer limits than are expedient with the object retribution,
or example, in view; but, avoiding the aspects of merely
exemplary or vindictive infliction, evincing itself as
a subservient means only, in a process whose end is bene-
volent, it becomes elevated in character, and obviates
those evil consequences, both in the criminal and in the
world, which attach to punishment, merely as such.—
No compromise, or disguise, or fiction, on the other hand,
on the score of determent, because the end determent
is not pursued by the exhibition of a process, but by
its triumph over individual obstinacy and crime. The
law is sought to be vindicated by the conversion of noxious
into well-disposed members of society; the fiction is not
acquiesced in, that an example has been made, however
great the suffering he may have been subjected to, in the
man who is only liberated to proclaim again his contempt
of the law.
The Archbishop of Dublin has pre-eminently distinguished
himself in his writings and speeches on secondary Punish-
ment by the bitterness of his contempt for that misplaced
compassion ” which it seems is “ one of the most baibarian
features of the character of a great part of the nation.
Men will be determined in the adoption of opinions by
motives or reasons very opposite ; and it is not to be
denied that a mere sickly sentimentality may have con-
cluded some persons in favor of a mild, and in aversion


to a coercive, system of Convict management. But
principles are not to be discarded because of the follies
of their disciples—follies which affect not their true value,
else wheie would scepticism end, and faith or agreement
begin ? Sympathy for the criminal is indeed “ misplaced ”
the expression is strong, but, it may even be “ barbarian ”
if its essential tendency be hurtful to society. The “ feature
in the character of the age is easily accounted for, how-
ever ; it is one of those reactions, generally in the extreme,
by which society vindicates itself from another extreme.—
Had our penal arrangements never been so entirely deficient
in compassion for the criminal as they have been, the
excesses of a “ misplaced ” and “ barbarian ” compassion
would never have provoked the indignant censure of the
Archbishop of Dublin. But, is there any such conflict be-
tween the true interests of the criminal and of society as is
implied in the Archbishop’s censures ? I think not. The
more completely great social interests are understood, the
moie palpable does their identity become. And how, in the
piesent case, is this identity to be proved ? Surely not by
any process whose first principle and pervading spirit, are
in direct and fatal violation of one of the interests con-
cerned, that which is most tangible, most within the power
of criminal institutions, —the interest of the criminal ?
Mere vindictive punishment (call it exemplary or what you
will, I speak of an essence) can never contribute to the
improvement of the criminal; the evil done to him cannot
evolve good ; it must react upon society. The interests of
society so far as they are connected with penal arrange-
ments do not begin to be promoted with the infliction of
injury upon, but with the extension of good to, the criminal.
A feeling is spurious, or “ misplaced,” or, to give the
Archbishop the benefit of his own word, “ barbarian,” only
as it interferes with a good and legitimate end ; and when
did compassion (in an intelligent embodiment of that prin-
ciple) in the spirit of Convict management, justify to itself
this odium ? By the testimony of all experience, without
any exception, the condemnation recoils upon his Grace’s


grand principle of punishments. c< Formidable punish-
ments have been the ingenious study of centuries of the
world’s history, of people of all climes, all religions, govern-
ments, manners, and social conditions, of lawgivers, of
philosophers,—aye and of Gospel ministers, in which last
capacity it would seem that the Archbishop of Dublin was
induced to consider the question (Letter to Earl Grey, pp.
3, 4) and after all, what is the history of “ formidable ”
punishments, but a history, of barbarity impotent for
good, efficacious only in its own reproduction ? The
principle of formidable punishments is barbarian by the
verdict of experience ; that of reformatory (intelligently
compassionate) punishments is only paradoxically, and by
conjecture so.
But, the most hardy advocate of “ formidable ” punish-
ments will scarcely assert that that is a legitimate exercise
of the right of punishment which necessarily leads to the
aggravated demoralization of the convict ? Every mode of
criminal treatment then, which does not mainly pursue
reformation is chargeable with that consequence. The con-
dition of subjection to punishment, merely such, is degrading;
and a vicious effect upon the heart and mind of the criminal
can only be obviated in connection with penal arrangements
by a system imbued with the spirit of reformation. Re-
formation, it needs to be repeated, cannot be accomplished
independently of a man’s own consent, own active co-
operation ; and it is in vain to expect this cooperation unless
it be evident to his mind that his own good is sought, not
in a secondary, casual, or subordinate, but in a primary and
an ultimate sense.
Returning to the general question proposed to be dis-
cussed, another objection familiarly quoted against Trans-
portation, is that which is interpreted to be given by Lord
Bacon, in the Essay on Plantations, “ that it is a shameful
and unblessed thing to take the scum of people, and wicked
condemned men, to be the people with whom you plant;
and not only so but it spoileth the plantation, for they will
ever live like rogues, and not fall to work, hut be lazy, and


do mischief, and spend victuals, and be quickly weary, and
certify
plantation.” The objection conceived to be embodied in
these words has obtained greater weight, from the name of
its author, than, from any applicability to the present case,
it is entitled to. The reply to it is simple ; Ist, Transpor-
tation does not imply what is presumed in the above
passage the formation of a plantation or colony. 2nd, The
kind of transportation referred to, is that which was in prac-
tice in Lord Bacon’s own day, to a place in which the convict
was not subjected to discipline. 3rd, The objection, even
as popularly quoted and interpreted, overlooks the powerful
moral influence for evil or for good, incident to old, or to
new, local associations, and the use to which this fact may
be converted. 4th, It is a hard conclusion, in reference to
men once convicts, implying an acquiescence in that very
state from which it should be the main end of discipline to
redeem them, “ that they will ever live like rogues, and
not fall to work,” &c. sth, The same reasoning by which
this conclusion is made out in the case of men whose disci-
pline has had the preliminary circumstance belonging to it,
of transportation to a colony, is established in reference to
those whose discipline, and eventual liberation, are accom-
plished at home; and this, perhaps, with more conclusive-
ness in the latter than in the former case, because a colony
provides a sphere of exertion in which the rewards of good
conduct are greater, and the temptations to criminal conduct
are less, than in an old and highly artificial condition of
society. It may, perhaps, be replied, that in an old and
dense community, a vicious influence is more likely to be
counteracted—is less likely to infect—than in a colonial or
young community. But that were taking large numbers
to be identified with a power of resistance, and small num-
bers with a tendency to yield to, a given influence;
abstracting the power or tendencies of numbers from the
general circumstances favourable to vice or virtue, in which
they relatively stand. In the present case, are large num-
beis educated to artificial wants, contending with limited


employment, poverty, and temptation, not more liable to
moral degeneracy, than small numbers separated from like
temptation, stimulated by high wages, abundant employ-
ment, and great prospects ?
It is objected, that independently of what its subseouent
processes may be, that part of the sentence of transportation
which is included in exile must operate very unequally
upon different individuals. But it is not implied, in the
continuance or adoption of a Colonial system of Secondary
Punishment, that a Home system shall be laid aside; or,
that in reference to particular classes of criminals, and, indi-
viduals of those classes obnoxious to transportation, a home
discipline may not be preferable; the difficulty suggested
is of a practical kind, and cannot be obviated by the laws,
but by the judges to whose discretion, in appreciating the
different cases which come before them, the right applica-
tion of the laws is left. r
The importance of inspection, it is deemed, is underrated
m a system by which criminals are trained at a remote
colony. The inspection contemplated is either general or
official. If the first, may it not be asked what influence
such inspection has exerted at home? what public has
been engaged in it ? The names of Howard and of Elizabeth
Fry stand almost alone; they scarcely recal to the mind an
associate. Is it official inspection which is meant ? It was
only the other day that Inspectors of Prisons were appointed
at home: their Reports evince that their functions were
not called into exercise before there was a demand for
them; and is there any insurmountable obstacle to the
provision of the same check upon the execution of penal
arrangements in any of our colonies ?
Several objections, which are frequently alleged to
Transportation, are disposed of under the head of example;
such as, that it is vague in the light in which it presents
itself to criminals whose operations are conducted at a
distance. the general argument, respecting the
principle of determent (pp. 4—12) a two-fold reply may be
made to this objection : first, that the healthy part of a


community are, for the most part, always ignorant of the
precise nature of punishments; the unhealthy, on the
other hand, soon become acquainted with their details. —
This is proved by the evidence on the very defective sys-
tems of working out transportation in New South Wales
and Van Diemen’s Land; regular thieves were as familiarly
acquainted with them, as, independently of experience, they
could be of home systems: secondly, is a precise and
detailed knowledge of punishments more calculated to
work upon the mind than general impression? I think
not; ignorance or indefinite knowledge is generally more
identified with the fears. In the one case, the mind
familiarises itself to each element, and by habit, as well as
desire, strips it of what at first appeared formidable in its
character, and reconciles the individual to its submission.
In the other, it is deprived of the materials on which its
principle of accommodation can work; the fears are kept
alive, because their object not being distinctly understood,
no relief can be applied. A writer, from whom I, have
quoted before, gives me the suffrage of his opinion again
here : “ The mind, especially of the vulgar,” (he says) “ is
always prone to magnify realities, having ever a strong
taste for hyperbole.”* The Report of the Committee on
Prison Discipline to the Governor-General of India (sec-
tions 186-7), will be found to favour the same conclusion;
and the Committee claim, “as witnesses, that their evidence
on this point, which turns upon a simple matter of fact,
ought to be allowed a weight to which the mere belief of
no writer can, as evidence, be entitled ;” for they “ are
living at an immense distance,” &c.f
* Old Bailey Experience, p. 217. , , ,
+ Apart from any opinion of slavery in the abstract, has the system
ever appeared so repugnant to those familiarised to its minute details
and its every-day operation, as it has to those who have heard at a dis
tance of it, and been obliged to supply the deficiencies of observation,
by the power of conception ? The greater apprehension with which
punishments are regarded before a first conviction, than after they have
been experienced, and in the prospect of the individual a second time
exposing himself to them—a fact so generally adduced in parliamentary
evidence on this question—it is assuming too much to explain ex-
clusively and entirely by referring to the modes of punishment; it is a


The question, however, which has been proposed in this
pamphlet is one of comparison, and supposing more weight
than has been allowed, to belong to the objections quoted
in reference to a Colonial, are there no objections which
may be urged against a Home, system of punishment ?
It is not disputed that a large amount of the crime which
figures in the statistics of this country is immediately or
remotely a consequence of the pressure of population upon
subsistence ; that if the relation of labour and population
were the reverse of what it is, there would be much less
crime. J Criminals, then, are, in a certain sense, redundant
labourers; men for whom there is no employment in the
fact which may be confidently predicted under every variety of disci-
p me; tor, it is merely natural that, in a comparative sense, familiarity
either of knowledge or of actual experience should, in more senses than
one produce contempt.
* “ Res pecting, their (the convicts’) disposition to reform, there appears
to me, a difficulty in speaking decisively; but I think that their uniform
submission to the rules and restrictions to which they are subject, favours
such a hope; and were it not for the trials to which they are exposed
when liberated for want of employment, many who revert to dishonest
practices, would support themselves by honest labour.— Henry Wynter
Ghaplam, ‘Fortitude’ Hulk, 7th January, 1841.”—Mr. Capper’s Reports
ordered to be printed by the House of Commons, 3rd March 1841
Fhe writer of this pamphlet, when on a visit to the hulks at Woolwich
a tew months since, was allowed to inspect the books in which the record
ot the prisoners’ conduct, &c. is contained. He found so many as
/r/rmi convictions recorded against men enduring punishment there
Ihe officers with whom he conversed united in referring the obstinate
return to evil courses of the convicts to the force of unfavourable cir-
cumstances when they were liberated,—a damaged reputation, the com-
petition of other labourers, &c. At Cold Bath Fields and Westminster
Bridewells, on a visit to those establishments, the writer found a cor-
responding display of reconvictions, and obtained the same explanation
ot the tact. Ihe Inspectors of Prisons, in their Report for 1837
(p. 60.) testify to the force of circumstances unfavourable to the released
criminal, even supposing his intentions to be the best; and they quote
the authority of the Committee of the Refuge for the Destitute, “ who
have been compelled to have recourse to emigration as the channel by
which they can best dispose of the objects of their care.” J
See, also, Mr. Chesterton’s (Governor of Cold Bath Fields Prison )
Fvidence before the Select Committee on Secondary Punishments
1831 ; Mr. E. G. Wakefield’s Evidence, (question 1479) before the
same Committee; Mr. Hoare’s Evidence before the Lords’ Committee
(1827).
It may seem superfluous to endeavour to prove a position so Obvious-
but it is otherwise when home punishments, and ultimate release upon
the home community, are advocated in opposition to transportation.


free labour market. They are, let it be supposed, sen-
tenced to so many years imprisonment, in gaols established
in the proximity of free workshops ; they are employed in
productive labour; the results of their labour are intended
for sale. Must not the labour of the prison tend to throw
so much of the free labour out of the market, supposing
the demand to remain the same—not increased? Mr.
Mills* treats this objection in its bearing upon labour,
and in the light of its producing a glut of any commodity
in the market. But in the first sense, his argument turns
upon the alternative of labour or no labour, supposing
home prisons to be the exclusive domiciliation of criminals,
and taking no account of the outlet afforded by trans-
portation. In the second view his solution of the objection
is this :—“ If he (the capitalist) produces more of some one
commodity than the market requires, and reduces the pro-
fits on producing it, capital leaves that employment till the
inequality is redressed.” This conclusion may be con-
sistent enough with the principles of economical science,
and with experience; but is the exemplification of it
the process of a day ? It is surely not at once that in-
dividuals find a new direction for their capital; and still
less is it at once that an artizan acquires a profitable
facility in a new trade or kind of manual industry. There
is a period, often of slow, irregular, and painful trans-
ition, in which the individual, familiarized with wants
hitherto liberally supplied, is called upon to suppress
those wants; exposed to temptations, has to withstand
the sophistry by which hunger justifies, or seeks to justify,
crime; shamed by poverty, first seeks an oblivion to
shame in intoxication, and, in the end, is apt to lose the
last citadel of his virtue, self-respect. Is it wise, or just,
to incur the danger of results like these if they can be
obviated? is there not an inconsistency in provoking them
by the very machinery from which the prevention of
crime, and the reclamation of criminals, is hoped ?f Nor
• Encyclopedia Britannica;- —Art. Prisons,
t “ It is, indeed, one of crotchets of the political economists to dis-


let the objection which has been taken be deemed too
refined, or wiredrawn. A note at the end of this pamphlet
will afford some idea of the amount of penal labour, which
British crime may bring into competition with free labour.
The objection, however, does not stop here ; it contemplates
the ultimate interests of the convict, —when released. Are
the descriptions of manual industry, in which he is likely to
be trained in a Home establishment for offenders, those in
which there is the best chance of his succeeding when free?
If the question refer to his future employment in the parent
country, the argument which has been pursued above, would
imply,
may be arrived at from grounds slightly different. Seden-
tary employment, such as is pursued in prisons, is in com-
paiatively limited demand. The industry which is wanted
there the industry whose rewards will give new and
healthy stimulus, is that which converts the dense un-
profitable forest into the smiling field, and supplants the
wildness of nature with the milder aspects of rural taste
and art. The labour of a prison, if it does not unfit, at
least does not qualify for this (all things considered, best)
sphere of future exertion. Its tendency is thus either
useless or hurtful in the aggregate of cases, to the released
convict.
Lord John Russell, in his “ Note on Transportation and
Secondary Punishments,” Bth January, 1839, contemplating
other modes of employing prisoners in the parent country,
suggests another objection, which may be appropriately
introduced here : “ But, in order to employ the additional
number of convicts,” (arising from the (supposed) abolition
of transportation) “ works would probably be undertaken
which would otherwise be postponed or dispensed with.”
As it has been affirmed in a previous page that Transpor-
tation is not to be estimated in connection with any parti-
cular mode of working it out, with which it is not neces-
regard all human sufferings in the transition from one state of society to
another, provided it can be shewn by a rigorous course of reasoning
from data assumed by themselves, that the country will finally benefit
by the change.”—Col. Napier on the Corn Laws.


sarily identified; so, it may be argued that the advantages
or disadvantages of a Home system of convict manage-
ment are not to be determined in exclusive connection
with any one system. Admitting this, it may yet be fairly
objected, that in a populous country, with a soil not
merely reclaimed from waste, but reduced to high cultiva-
tion, there are limits in the choice of arrangements designed
for the discipline of a large number of men, which do not
obtain in a colonial sphere of operation. The employment
which the former circumstances dictate is almost exclu-
sively sedentary and dissocial; in the latter, it may be as
various as the wants of man can suggest. But this objec-
tion will be treated in itself as no objection, by those whose
utter and unqualified condemnation is reserved for every
discipline implying association. Association is the bug-
bear in their eyes ; and to obviate association is the high
aim of their science, the triumph of their practice. It may
be well to consider the force of the objection to this prin-
ciple, and not prematurely to acquiesce in it. Association
is not, as is implied, necessarily vicious; on the contrary,
it is the source and sustenance of many virtues. It is not
vice which at once betakes itself to association; but, more
often its opposite. No sooner does any virtue whose ex-
ercise seems peculiarly called for, impress itself on the
mind of individuals, than they form a society for its pro-
motion. Religious societies, temperance societies, &c.
are all illustrations of the force of the principle; and had
the objects of such associations been left to the isolated
sympathies and exertions of individuals, there is no com-
parison between the insignificance of the results which
would have been achieved, and those which now figure far
and wide. Lord Bacon, acknowledging the power for
good as well as evil in this principle, remarks. Never-
theless, as Cato the censor saide, that the Romanes were
like sheepe, for that a man were better drive a flocke of
them than one of them. For in a flocke if you could
get but some fewe goe right, the rest would follow.
(^Advancement.) And, consistently with this observation


many testimonies of fact might be quoted. In an account
of the revivals in Kilsyth, in Scotland, about two years
since, given by the pastor of that parish, I find the follow-
ing passage recognizing the practical influence for good of
association:—
The social nature of naan is an important element in his
constitution, and exerts a powerful influence on the state of the
church and of the world. There are those who view the
weavers shops as objects of unmingled aversion—as hotbeds of
anarchy ; but when a good influence is made to bear upon the
minds of the operatives, the facilities for good are proportional to
those for evil —the reviving interest spreads much quicker than in
a rural district.”
Mr. M‘Arthur, an old settler in New South Wales,
a very intelligent witness before the Transportation Com-
mittee (1837), no friend to the system of convict manage-
ment established in the above colony, testifying respecting
that system which in principle was vicious, and only acci-
dentally allowed, as it were, of good being imparted to its
objects ; yet thus discriminatingly speaks of association
as an incident in it:
3088. Have you observed the effect of association with
other convicts upon those who have been of a better class of
character ?—I have seen instances in both ways ; I have seen
instances of men apparently of good disposition, who have
become corrupted by the arrival of a new party of convicts of
bad character upon the establishment: and on the other hand, I
have seen instances of those ill-disposed individuals, whose con-
duct had become improved by being upon the establishment, and
by the example of their comrades.”
The Rev. Dr. Ullathorne, a Roman Catholic priest, who
visited Norfolk Island on different occasions, in reply to
the question following, has testified to the esprit du corps
excited for good no less than evil—for good, even, in the
midst of arrangements from whose spirit it might have been
apprehended that a blight would shed itself upon every
moral interest of man, —which makes the evidence in ques-
tion, still more remarkable:
“ 277. — Who is the Commandant of Norfolk Island? —Major
Anderson ; he inquired very particularly and minutely into the


conduct of those under his charge. Whilst he was severe upon
those who persevered in their crimes, he was always ready to
reward and encourage those who exhibited any improvement.
For this purpose, when a prisoner had distinguished himself by
his good conduct for a certain time, generally one chain was
taken from one leg ; if he continued for a certain period longer,
perhaps twelve months, a lighter chain was given; after that the
chain was removed altogether. As a further encouragement,
those who conducted themselves well were allowed small patches
of land, upon which they grew potatoes and pumpkins for their
own use ; and this gave them a little property in which they felt
a pride; and whatever leisure time they had between their meals
and their occupations, they were seen always labouring in those
gardens ; it gave the men occupation during the hours of recre-
ation, and I believe did much to put evil ideas out of their
minds. The result has been very remarkable indeed; in cases
where prisoners conducted themselves remarkably well, they
were altogether removed from the rest, and assigned as servants
to officers, or employed as shepherds, or in some situation sepa-
rate from the great body. This they felt as a mark of great dis-
tinction, and that induced them to continue their good conduct; and
when that conduct still continued good, it was generally recom-
mended to the Governor at Sydney to deduct one or two or three
years from their sentence. They had then hope before them ; and
it was a great inducement to them to labour. Another means of
reformation which I conceived to be very effective was this :
those men, who were disposed to conduct themselves particu-
larly well, whom I had attended, requested as a favour, and were
allowed a separate ward for themselves; there they performed
their religious duties regularly every morning and evening ; and
I was told, on my second visit to the island, by the Commandant,
that it had had a very beneficial effect indeed. These men found
they were separate from the rest, and an esprit du corps was
created for good, where before there had been an esprit du corps
for evil.”
Association then, is one thing, and association for
certain purposes is another, and the condemnation which
has been undistinguishingly, ought to have been only
conditionally or discriminatingly, applied. Thus much
may be granted, that association for vindictive or ex-
emplary punishment is an evil, or rather the aggravation
of an evil; and that any association of criminals can
only escape proving degrading, or, what is synonymous,
deteriorating, by the principle of treatment being made


individual reform, the extension of a benefit, not the inflic-
tion of an injury.
But, not only is association under certain circumstances,
an auxiliary in a course of training to virtue, it would
appear to be an essential part of such training. Man is a
social being ; his duties are in society ; those duties are not
dependent for their discharge on sentiment or reflection
merely; they have to encounter friction of various kinds
and the measure in which they will be performed is the
measure of the acquired habit of the individual. A system
which keeps a man out of all society, to qualify him for
society, and from solitude casts him, with powers of action
or resistance long untaxed, into the very furnace of
temptation, seems to me most extravagantly to over-
calculate the force of mental impressions, and to oppose
every analogy of nature. Caution is a part of practical
virtue, and how is that caution which withstands the
inroads of temptation to be acquired where no temptation
is allowed entrance ? Development, not merely repression,
in reference to the principles of right and wrong in the
character, is required in the virtuous toning* of the mind ;
D
* “ Upon the whole, it may be said properly to be the same with the
affections or passions, in an animal constitution, as with the cords or
strings of a musical instrument. If these, though in ever so just pro-
portion one to another, are strained beyond a certain degree, it is more
than the instrument will bear: the lute or the lyre is abused, and its
effect is lost. On the other hand, if, while some of the strings are
duly strained, others are not wound up to their due proportion, then is
the instrument still in disorder, and its part is ill performed.” Shaftes-
bury’s Enquiry concerning Virtue.
1 he whole chapter “ Of a state of Moral Discipline,” in Bishop Butler’s
Analogy might be here introduced ; let the following passages suffice :
“ But going over the theory of virtue in one’s thoughts, talking well,
and drawing fine pictures of it; this is so far from necessarily or cer-
tainly conducing to form an habit of it, in him who thus employs himself,
that it may harden the mind in a contrary course, and render it gradually
more insensible, i. e.form an habit of insensibility to all moral consider-
ations. For, from our very faculty of habits, passive impressions, by
being repeated, grow weaker. Thoughts, by often passing through the
mind, are felt less sensibly; being accustomed to danger, begets intre-
pidity, i. e. lessens fear; to distress, lessens the passion of pity; to
instances of other’s mortality, lessens the sensible apprehension of our
own. And from these two observations together, that practical habits
are formed and strengthened by repeated acts, and that passive im-
pressions grow weaker by being repeated upon us; it must follow, that


how can the first he effected, or the last proved, without
a sphere of action? It is not intended to depreciate
impressions, or new resolutions, as elements in a man’s
recovery, but alone, they are fallacious things with which
to turn him upon the world, —unproved either to himself
or to others. They are, besides, purchased at an unne-
cessary price by years of solitude, if they are not even
lost by the length of time expended in seeking to produce
them ; for, it is of the nature of our passive emotions to
lose their susceptibility under the continued action of the
same influence; —while again, it is of that of our active
principles to gain strength by exercise; an admitted fact
in our constitution, from which a twofold lesson on this
subject may be deduced.
active habits may be gradually forming and strengthening by a course
of acting upon such motives or excitements, while these motives or
excitements, themselves are, by proportionable degress, growing less
sensible, i. e. are continually less and less sensibly felt, even as the
active habits strengthen. And experience confirms this; for active
principles at the very time they are less lively in perception than they
were, are found to be, somehow, wrought more thoroughly into the temper
and character, and become more effectual in influencing our practice.”
Again: “Nor do we know how far it is possible, in the nature of
things, that effects should be wrought in us at once, equivalent to habits,
i. e. what is wrought by use and exercise.”
Again, in a note, Butler combats the idea of self interest supplying
the place of acquired habit: —
“ It may be thought, that a sense of interest would as effectually
restrain creatures from doing wrong. But, if by a sense of interest is
meant a speculative conviction or belief, that such and such indulgence
would occasion them greater uneasiness upon the whole than satis-
faction ; it is contrary to present experience to say, that this sense of
interest is sufficient to restrain them from thus indulging themselves.
And if by a sense of interest is meant a practical regard to what is upon
the whole our own happiness ; this is not only coincident with the prin-
ciple of virtue or moral rectitude, but is a part of the idea itself. And
it is evident this reasonable self-love wants to be improved, as really as
any principle in our nature ; for we daily see it overmatched, not only
by the more boisterous passions, but by curiosity, shame, love of imita-
tion, by any thing, even indolence; especially if the interest, the
temporal interest, suppose, which is the end of such self-love, be at
a distance.”
And in a subsequent chapter he remarks :
“ Temptations render our state a more improving state of discipline
than it would be otherwise : as they give occasion for a more attentive
exercise of the virtuous principle, which confirms and strengthens it more,
than an easier or less attentive exercise of it could." Analogy, Chap. VI.
Edition Oxford, 1836.


Association presents itself here in two lights ; first in that
of probationary training for the criminal, and secondly, in
the light of an assurance derived from his passage through
probation, that he will not again incur the sentence of the
law. The nearest approximation in convict arrangements
to a system having these ends, is perhaps the Ticket-of-leave
incident, in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land.
None but a qualified conclusion is to be drawn from any
branch of a system the preliminary process of which was so
little calculated to promote any good end, as assignment;
yet, the ticket-of-leave feature has obtained approbation
where the entire of the other arrangements in the penal colo-
nies have been reprobated: the transition here,however, was
too rapid, and in the report of the Chief Police Magistrate
of Van Diemen’s Land, published by order of the House of
Commons, I find it recommended that an intermediate
stage of probation should be made to precede this indul-
gence. The Director-General of Roads in the Colony, an
experienced and humane officer, concurs in principle on
this head, while differing from the Chief Police Magistrate
on almost every other. His idea is, that every convict
should “ step by step, as it were, be allowed a longer
4 tether ’ until at length set loose.” Colonel Arthur, late
Governor of Van Diemen’s Land, in reply to a question
(4321) of the Transportation Committee, states, that there
is a large class upon whom no punishment appears to have
any effect whatever, “ because the moment they are released
from the chain gang or released from a ‘penal settlement,
they fall again into crime upon the slightest temptation .”
The same results are witnessed to, by Dr. Lang, and Dr.
Ullathorne ; and the wholesale conclusion arrived at by
other witnesses, from the fact, is, that the men are irre-
claimable. But we are not authorised by any principle of
reason or of religion to acquiesce in such a conclusion until
it has been proved that every means ordinarily calculated
to accomplish a change in human dispositions have been
employed. Neither Port Arthur nor Norfolk Island are
associated with the idea of such means; according to the
D 2


(approving) testimony of the Chief Police Magistrate of Van
Diemen’s Land, the discipline at the former place is such
that a man sent there “ would come up after his probation
more vicious and more hardened in guilt than he was when
he arrived; ” at the latter it has been even worse, though
now it is hoped novus ordo nascitur. An explanation, less
harsh, and it is believed more sound, is offered by another
witness, a plain, practical, but shrewd and reflecting man,
for the facts in question :
“ 1565, And what is the effect of the punishment of a penal
settlement on their habits ?—Certainly not to reform, I think.
“ 1566. Has it a contrary tendency ; does it make them hard-
ened ?—My own theory on that subject is this, that the men have
been so accustomed to be wound up as if it were by machinery,
that when they come out again to the world, where they are un-
wound, they have not moral influence enough to resist anything ;
that they become useless, and sink; that their physical force is
gone by starvation, that their moral force is gone by the discipline,
and that they become mere useless machines, in nine cases out of
ten : that is my theory.
“ 1567- When you say it is your theory, do you consider it
confirmed by facts that have come under your own observation ?
—I have adopted it from facts ; I have not heard many people
that were prepared to agree with me in that.
“ 1568. Colonel Arthur states as a fact, that he has generally
found that the Convicts punished at penal settlements, although
they behave very well there, as soon as they returned to the Colony,
and were exposed to any temptation immediately relapsed ? — Yes,
very many ; I see he says so. The difference is, that I think he
and I would apply different reasons to the same conclusion ; he
would say it is the worst characters that are sent there ; I think
it is from the prostration of the energies of the human mind that
they become so.”
Mr. Murdoch's Evidence — Transportation Committee, 1838.
The objection now stated to the transition of a criminal
from isolation to society, or from severe restrictions to
sudden liberty, may perhaps be evaded, by the advocates
of a separate system, on the score of the evidence brought
in support of it. It will be said, no wonder this imme-
diate return to crime, when exposed to temptation, under
such systems as are identified with the penal colonies. So
far, however, from deeming the force of the objection


diminished in reference to men under a separate system, I
am disposed to think that its principle applies here even
more strongly;—that it would apply infinitely more so,
were an ordinarily encouraging and improving social system
pitted against it, —inasmuch as the virtues which a separate
system can produce are those only of a child, —the equivo-
cal virtues of weakness, —easily led, easily trampled upon,
easily driven. The intelligent explanation of the criminal
relapse noted by the witnesses before the Transportation
Committee, is not that the convicts were kept in association,
but that they were kept in degrading association; and
“ that,” in Mr. Murdoch’s language “ they were so accus-
tomed to be wound up, as if it were by machinery, that when
they came out again to the world, where they are unwound,
they have not moral influence enough to resist anything.”
Again, it is generally remarked —it was remarked to me
a few months since on board one of the hulks —that the
men who soonest yield under a coercive management are
those who are most sure to return to punishment again.*'
The loose inference generally drawn from this, is, that these
men are hypocrites, and that the worst are generally such.
Now that there is much hypocrisy among convicts is not to
be questioned; but is it morally certain that this pliancy is
hypocrisy, and not very often, just the illustration of a
facility of character for evil or for good, the result of the
individual never having been trained to choose between the
two ? The man who has scarce ever been a free agent, but
has been at one time the slave of criminal associates; at
another, under the coercion of a gaoler, without any alter-
native but to obey each in turn, is not likely to possess
other than the virtues —vices—of a slave. The hypocrisy
or weakness of the criminal should be tested ; and without
the systematic application of a test, the first is not likely to
be eradicated, or the last overcome. The sons who most
* “ A man will keep out of punishment and you will not find any tiling
in the hook against him, and yet that man may be going back; he may
be restraining himself only that he may obtain his liberty; therefore
that must not be taken altogether as a criterion.”—Evidence of Rev.
Whitworth Russell, Report on Secondary Punishments, 1831.


excite parental solicitude are not always those whose vicious
energy demonstrates itself, but sometimes those whose
vicious pliancy. It is not wickedness only, but weakness,
which wars upon society.
The principle of probation (in which sense association is
contended for) in criminal management, has with more or
less fulness, and in one or more views of it, been recognized
by different writers, though it has scarcely ever been
reduced to any practical details. Livingstone thus acknow-
ledges it:—
_ “ Lessons of this nature (reformatory) inculcated by men of
piety and benevolence ; enforced by a life of temperance and
labour, and not counteracted by any evil associations, I firmly
believe will make many a discharged convict a more worthy
member of society than some who have never committed any
offence of sufficient magnitude to incur the same discipline. But
reformation is not enough ; although sincere it will not be lasting,
if the distrust of society shall drive the repentant sinner from its
bosom, deny him the means of subsistence, and force him to seek
it in a new association with his former companions in guilt. To
avoid this consequence means must be found to test, by a proper
interval of probation, the sincerity of his reformation ; to give
him an opportunity of regaining confidence, by acts of gradual
intercourse with the public, and after repeated trials, if it be
found that he can withstand temptation, to assign him a place in
society which will enable him to submit without reproach.”—
Penal Code of Louisiana, p. 44.
The Archbishop of Dublin, in his Letter to Earl
Grey, says:—
“ It seems to me perfectly reasonable, that those whose mis-
conduct compels us to send them to a house of correction, should
not be again let loose on society, till they shall have given some
indication of amended character. Instead of being sentenced,
therefore, to confinement for a certain fixed time, they should be
sentenced to earn, at a certain specified employment, such a sum
of money as may be judged sufficient to preserve them on their
release from the pressure of immediate distress; and orderly,
decent, submissive behaviour during the time of their being thus
employed, should be enforced, under the penalty (besides others,
if found necessary) of a proportionate deduction from their wages,
and consequent prolongation of their confinement.”—p. 37.
Bentham, in the Panopticon , has gone further than either
of the writers quoted :


** He has paid particular attention to the dangerous and critical
situation of discharged prisoners, when re-entering the world after
detention perhaps for many years ; they have no friends to receive
them; without reputation to recommend them; with characters
open to suspicion ; and many times, perhaps in the first transports
of joy for recovered liberty, as little qualified to use it with dis-
cretion, as the slaves who have broken their fetters. By these
considerations the author was led to the idea of an auxiliary esta-
blishment, into which the discharged prisoners might be admitted
when they leave the Panopticon, and be allowed to continue for
a longer or shorter period, according to the nature of their crimes,
and their previous conduct This transient sojourn,
this noviciate, would serve to conduct them by degrees to their
liberty; it would be an intermediate state between captivity and
independence, and afford a proof of the sincerity of their amend-
ment. It would afford a just precaution against individuals in
whom an immediate and absolute confidence could not be reposed
without danger.” —Rationale of Punishment, b. v. c. iii.
The principle of probationary discipline thus glanced
at by Livingstone and the Archbishop of Dublin, —by
Bentham partially reduced into detail, —has been more
fully developed by a recent writer on the question of
convict management, of the principles and detail of whose
scheme, some account may he here given. Capt. Macono-
chie conceives the fundamental error of existing systems
of convict discipline to be, the non-separation of the pro-
cesses of punishment and reform, each of which, in his
opinion, ought to be distinctly contemplated and distinctly
pursued. By punishment, he does not mean vindictive or
exemplary infliction; but the sobering of the mind so as
to fit it to benefit by the moral influences which he would
bring to act upon it. Thus, it should not he degrading ;
it should be “ in seclusion from the gaze of the free popu-
lation altogether—“ at stations which he would have so
fitted as to be removable at will, according to the scope or
demand for useful labour, or other circumstances should
suggest:”—“ The process should consist of hard labour
(enforced if necessary by physical means); with instruc-
tion, moral, religious, mechanical, and agricultural, so as to
fit the prisoners for constituting afterwards a good rural
population.” This stage of the discipline may or may not.


accoi ding to Capt. Maconochie’s theory, embrace a period
of separate confinement; but it must embrace a period of
social discipline.
The reformatory or probationary process he recommends
should be regulated by “ the most stringent system of
moral influence. “ The prisoners should be brought from
the punishment stations to this stage of their sentence in
parties of six (more or less), who should choose each other
and agree to run the chances of their probation together.
Thus, after a man has completed the period during which,
according to his original sentence, he must remain under
direct punishment, (physical restraint) he would remain
indefinitely longer until he could persuade other five
men, similarly circumstanced, so far to believe in his good
intentions as to be willing to connect their own fate in pro-
bation with his, and to rise or fall, as afterwards explained,
according to his and their own conduct jointly.” Captain
Maconochie contends, that “ the necessity which would
thus be imposed on all, even in their first stage, to culti-
vate the good opinion of their fellows, would of itself pro-
duce a good moral effect, and advantageously prepare them
for their further trials; for it would give a value to the
social virtues , usually excluded from the receptacles of
criminals; and w r ould prevent favour or hypocrisy from
deriving undue advantages.” “ These parties wdrerr en-
tered on their probation, he proposes, “ should be reckoned
with, every evening, by the superintendent under whom
they may be employed in the Government works; and
should receive marks in his book to their credit or dis-
credit, according to their conduct. If they have been
orderly, obedient, sober, zealous, attentive, active, indus-
trious, cleanly in their persons and rooms, civil, temperate
under provocation (should such have been offered to them),
punctual in their attendance (at prayers, school, work, &c.)
or have in any other way deserved commendation, they
should be gainers accordingly; and if on the other hand, any
one deserve censure, his party in proportion should suffer.”
The stations, Captain Maconochie thinks, should resemble


common life in their different arrangements. He says : “ I
would not confide the good conduct of those who, from their
position, must be considered short-sighted in their views of
permanent advantage, solely to the support of distant in-*
ducements ; but for their benefit, I would make the marks a
mere current coin ... I would open stores at each station, at
which supplies of every kind, even spirits , could be obtained
in exchange for marks as registered in the superintendent’s
book, — hut for no other consideration. I would thus obtain
a strong immediate as well as distant stimulant, —a strong
deterrent from evil, —a means of paying wages, and impos-
ing fines, which could not at the same time be itself stolen,
or clandestinely transferred, —a means also, by which in-
dulgences could be legitimately obtained,—-yet a strong
remaining interest in each of the parties to exercise eco-
nomy and self denial, —for only the residue (fixed in
amount) of their marks, after paying for these gratifications
(and ordinary expenses of living) would go to purchase
their ultimate liberation. The scope and inducement to
good conduct w r ould be thus indefinitely extended; and
the temptation to evil would be indefinitely narrowed.
The first would aim both at the acquisition and economy of
marks; and the second would scarcely exist, for miscon-
duct would lose them, and gain nothing in exchange, they
only having avowed and current value. In this way a
species of Savings Bank system in regard to marks, (a
habit of hoarding them at the sacrifice of present enjoy-
ment with a view to future good,—and this not by com-
mand but from free will, —and with a social, not merely a
selfish purpose), would speedily grow up at the stations,
and be invaluable as a source of moral improvement. It
would have almost every good property as a system of
management, and not one bad as regards the prisoners
themselves, for it would be in the highest degree morally
coercive, yet not physically obligatory at all. Every one
would think he enjoyed full freedom of will, —yet every
one would be under the almost absolute control of im-
pulses, common to all, yet personal to each, and which


could not fail, therefore, of generating an esprit de corps
productive of harmonious effect.” Contemplating a colo-
nial sphere of operation for his system, Captain Maconochie
suggests that the next step in a convict’s progress to liberty,
should be the possession of a “ ticket of leave,” unclogged,
however, by any of the restrictions imposed on the holder
under the existing transportation system—(attending mus-
ters, proceeding in a body to church, being in-doors by
certain hours, &c.) —and not liable to forfeiture, but by a
sentence solemn and judicial.”
The system sketched in the above outline, nearly
throughout in the language of the author himself, is novel,
but novelty cannot constitute a final objection, where every
system that has been tried has failed, and the question to
be determined waits the result of further experiment. Per-
haps, the very novelty of a scheme in such circumstances,
is an argument in its favour; it is not unreasonable to ex-
plore east after fruitless travel west; to try emollients
where stimulants have been found to aggravate the disease.
A more important point is, whether it agree with nature;
for, as Beccaria has remarked : “ It is not only in the fine
arts that the imitation of nature is the fundamental prin-
ciple ; it is the same in sound policy, which is no other
than the art of uniting, and directing to the same end, the
natural and immutable sentiments of mankind.” I pro-
ceed then to reply to this question. It is natural, in the
first instance, in being social; in the second, by the con-
version of social relations to the purposes of moral restraint
and direction—attaching a social, as well as a personal
value to good conduct, a social as well as a personal penalty
to bad; in the third place, by calling into exercise not the
fears only, but the hopes, rendering the last as well as the
first, subservient to moral improvement; fourthly, by act-
ing not on the mind or feelings only, but on the habits;
fifthly, by being gradual, accommodating the measure of a
man’s trial to his strength, as in a process of physical reco-
very ; sixthly, by its direction, not counteraction, of free-
will agency; lastly, by its end being the good of those sub-


jected to it, not any other object to which their present
any more than their ultimate advantage, is an implied
sacrifice, e. g. example. This system is a modified type
of society, and the objection to which any one of its features
is liable, must apply to its antitype in real life. Is the
mutual responsibility feature objected to? What is marriage,
what is copartnership, what are the relations of family
or of class ; but so many centres identifying us with the for-
tunes or misfortunes of others ; or, by the unfailing verdict
of human instincts, with the honour or the shame of others,
whom our own mere will has not guided, or could not
control. Presuming on its consistency with nature as well
as its practical value in moral discipline, Bentham, in his
Panopticon has suggested its application to the manage-
ment of criminals in terms which rob Captain Maconochie
of any claim to originality in it, —although as it appears,
the coincidence was entirely accidental:— *
“ The Panopticon (says Bentham) is the only practicable plan,
which admits of the prisoners being divided into little societies,
in such a manner as to separate those whose vicious propensities
are most contagious. These associations can hardly fail to
afford opportunities for the performance of reciprocal services,
for the exercise of the affections, and the formation of habits
favourable to reformation. The relation of master and scholar
will gradually be formed among them ; opportunities will thus
be given for bestowing rewards for instruction; for exciting
emulation in learning, and the creation of a sentiment of honour
and self-esteem, which will be among the first fruits of applica-
tion. Ideas of improvement and lawful gains will, by degrees,
supplant those of licentiousness and fraudulent acquisition ....
These little societies present an additional security, arising from
their mutual responsibility. It is both just and natural to say to
them : ‘ You live together, you act together, you were able to
have prevented this crime, and if you have not so done, you are
accomplices in it.’ Thus the prisoners would be converted into
guardians, and inspectors of each other. Each cell would be in-
terested in the good conduct of every one of its members. If
any one of them should be distinguished for its good order, some
* Sir George Gypps, the present able Governor of New South Wales,
without having seen Captain Maconochie’s book, or receiving the sug-
gestion from any one, was led to adopt the same feature in some road
parties in that colony. The fact 1 find mentioned by himself in the
Legislative Council, at its sitting August 20th, 1839.


distinction should be bestowed upon it which should be visible to
all. By such means a feeling of honour might be excited even
in the abode of ignominy.”
The principle which would allow of spirit shops in a
school of training will appear to some persons both vicious
and absurd. But, is society not again to receive the crimi-
nal? Will he not there meet spirit-shops? Will they not
tempt him there ; and can it be vicious or absurd to expose
a man when fortified by every moral appliance—the sym-
pathies of others for his and their own good, the desire of
liberty, that strongest instinct of nature, —all restraining
him—to a temptation to which it is not vicious or absurd
to expose him, without such aids to resistance ?
Again, crime is the triumph of immediate desire or impulse
over ultimate interest; and the training necessary to with-
stand temptation would consequently appear to be a train-
ing leading to providence as well as self-command. This
habit cannot be well acquired, without, not only a sphere
of action, but one embracing the main diversities of cir-
cumstance, in which its exercise will be demanded in real
life. There are, indeed, individuals who exert self-control
in reference to duties, more strictly speaking, moral, who
have no habit of the kind in reference to the concerns of
life which turn upon substantial expense and saving: but,
the healthy condition is that which is found to unite
pecuniary with moral foresight; the just with the provi-
dent man; and in Scripture, the union of the respective
virtues is frequently insisted upon, in terms which imply
that they may be found separate, though the individual
who combines them, is most safe from falling, and acting
most in accordance with what is abstractly right. Im-
providence, as a state of mind, or in its practical tendencies,
is so near akin to active vice, that this is easily understood.*
* The Inspectors of Prisons speaking of the “actual condition of
the great majority of prisons in the kingdom,” remark, “ During the
day, Ins (the prisoner’s) labour, if he has any, is often lighter than that
of any honest artificer or agricultural labourer : his diet is often better,
his relaxations are more numerous, his anxieties are often less : at night
he retires earlier to repose, and enjoys more conveniences ; and he rises
in the morning without a thought as to the wants of the day, which are all


Now a process of moral discipline which should overlook
this connection, which should fail to exercise the provi-
dence which refers to the use of the rewards of industry,
as well as that which appreciates the consequences of
moral acts, would be imperfect. Captain Maconochie’s
scheme, however, is calculated for both. He excludes
rations , (a system which takes from a man all care for, and
all discretion in, the detailed supply of his wants) proposes
that the prisoner should be paid for his labour, and taught
to exercise economy, by the benefits which attach to it,
and the consequences on the other hand of neglecting it.
Systems of management only half probationary, imitating
life in some things and not in others, might be quoted,
where the partial imitation has involved the trials without
the advantage of probation. The improvidence of “ ticket
of leave” men and “ emancipists,” is well known; their
extravagant “ sprees,” in which they spend the hard
earnings of many months in a few days or hours, are fre-
quently mentioned, and their deplorable chain of conse-
quences pointed out, in the evidence before the Trans-
portation Committee; and while, no doubt, such results
have been aggravated by other incidents of the convict
system of the penal colonies, they are directly traceable to
the men being entirely kept, for years of their life, on road
parties, in assignment; and afterwards, when they receive
their “ ticket of leave,” and are engaged on wages, to their
being still housed and fed by their employers. The counter-
part of such results will always be connected with the same
principle, however modified. The minute dependence of
childhood can never qualify for the providence and self-
government of manhood. Real life must be imitated,
modified, and reduced to miniature, not reversed, in a
school of training for those who are designed to be re-
supplied with regularity, and in sufficiency: thus cherishing and con-
firming that very recklessness about the future, which is the usual vice of
criminals, who seem to have no such day as to-morrow in their calendar
Report for 1838, p. s.—Yet so far from providing any correction for
this vice, the Inspectors seem directly to sanction its cause : in page 7,
I find mention of the quality, &c. of rations which they recommend.


stored to it. By real life, I, of course, mean its healthy
conditions, not any of its monstrous forms, slave com-
munities, black or white, convict or captured.
Passing over other views in which this system recom-
mends itself, it appeals to hope, a principle honourable
and improving to the character, not degrading; the prin-
ciple which animates the exertions of ordinary life. Other
systems acting upon the fears only, their consequences
are degrading, and the mechanical restraint which they
exercise, is for that reason no sooner got rid of than the
individual relapses. His pride is at war with habits
identified only with humiliating coercion. Mr. Chesterton,
(Governor of Cold Bath Fields Prison,) concludes a cata-
logue of vices incident to labour coerced, or extracted from
the fears, with remarking —“ I feel it right to express my
own persuasion that many of these observations will apply
to any species of labour imposed on prisoners as a task,
and without offering some sufficient inducement to its per-
formance.”
A question which I do not pretend to discuss, is that
of the relative expense of different systems of managing
criminals. The solution of this question without being
pursued into detail, it seems necessary should be coincident
with that of a prior question, the relative efficiency of
different systems; and an endeavour to anticipate the
determination of the latter by that of the former question,
would be more likely to mislead then to enlighten. Yet,
in connection with the principle of Captain Maconochie’s
system last adverted to, the principle of hope or encourage-
ment, a partial ligjjt may be reflected on the question of
economy. An indispensable element in comparing the ex-
penses of opposing systems of criminal management, would
be the relative amount of work performedunder each.—
Amount of work is itself positive value, and it is also a
criterion of outlay; for, if only a small amount of labour be
done, insubordination is implied, and consequent expense,
either in the prolongation of the convict’s restraint, or in
additional coercion of some kind. Now, that a system


which would leave the criminal not merely to the govern-
ment of compulsion, but should give him the stimulus of
reward, would prove in the highest degree a productive
one—incomparably more productive than one of coercion—
is a fact established not only by the analogy of slave and
free-labour, but by experience in the discipline of convicts.
Major Barney, an officer of the Engineers, now Director
of Public Works in New South Wales, in which capacity
some thousand convicts are under his control, in an ex-
amination before the Governor and Council of that colony,
gives the result of an experiment on the principle in
question, which I extract from a Sydney paper. —{The
Herald , August 26th, 1839.)
_ “Do you consider moderate rewards hurtful to convict
discipline ? —No, the contrary.
“ You are aware of an experiment lately tried at Parramatta;
will you inform the Council of the result, and your opinion upon
it ? (His Excellency here explained, that in the experiment he
had in view a higher principle than the quantity of work to be
done—it was the effect it would have upon convict discipline.)
—The experiment to which you allude, was undertaken at your
Excellency’s desire. A large quantity of cut stone was required,
and no return was kept of the quantity of stone cut hy each man
per week. The mechanics had small allowances of tea and sugar
granted to them, which were stopped, and they were told that if
they did so much work they should have a small allowance for
all they did over. At first they thought there was some deceit,
but when His Excellency visited them, and told them that they
should have this allowance, the men came to the opinion that
they had better attend to the offer, and consequently every
return shows that they do twice, and sometimes three times the
quantity that they did previously, and their conduct, both in the
stockade and at work, is reported to have been better.
“ Do you recollect how much stone they used to cut per week?
—Twenty-nine feet: and after the reward they cut seventy-eight,
and in some instances, ninety feet per week.
“ The principle of the experiment was, I believe, that the men
used to cut thirty feet per week ; the task was fixed at forty feet;
after that they were to be paid for all they did over, at one-sixth
of what a free man would receive, and at the end of the week
they were to be paid, not in money, but in such articles as, under
limitations, they chose to have; such as bread, meat, sugar, and
latterly, tobacco, which was very much prized.
“ How this operated with regard to the quantity of work, we are


quite sure ; but I want Major Barney’s opinion how it has operated
with regard to convict discipline ?—Clearly it has done good;
that I am positive of.”
To the system suggested by Captain Maconochie, as to
every other system involving association of criminals (it
would appear to be of no consequence what the principle of
association is,—exemplary infliction for others’ (supposed)
good, or reformatory and industrial training for their own)
there is one subordinate argument of the advocates of the
separate system which may appear to possess some weight.
Now to this argument which will be found stated at full
length, and in the unexceptionable terms of those who em-
ploy it, in the notes, p. 6, of this pamphlet, all the weight
that is claimed for it may be conceded on either of two con-
ditions ; —that, consistently with justice, the incarceration of
an offender can he made to take place without the cognizance
of any beyond the walls of the separate prison ; or, that his
liberation should not involve a renewal of any of the associa-
tionsof place or person, calculated to spread the knowledge
of his former error. The first of these conditions, however, is
plainly unattainable, supposing it were even desirable ; the
last, if attainable, implies a species of death in a sentence
to separate confinement, which outrages nature. True, as
the Inspectors urge, the circumstances calculated to facilitate
recognition, if they cannot be obviated, may be indefinitely
narrowed. But does the effort on the part of the criminal
to cooperate with the system under which he has passed, in
preventing his recognition, not involve an unhealthy spirit
of deception, always liable to extend its contagion? And
is it not hanging a dagger by a thread to suspend a man’s
chances on the ignorance of society of some former crime of
which he has been guilty, for which they will judge of him
all the more severely on discovery, because they have not
before suspected him; and contribute to plunge him into
the crimes of despair again, all the more because of the
reputation to which he had risen—of which an accident is
made to deprive him ? Miss Martineau, in her very
engaging account of American Prisons, incidentally confirms


this reasoning, by the case of the schoolmaster, whose former
imprisonment and crime accidentally getting wind, plunged
him into the habits which led him again to prison. The
more dangerous position in society is not his whose reputa-
tion is qualified by known former transgression of which he
has repented, and from the like of which he has been
reclaimed; but his, whose reputation standing high and
unchequered, is liable every instant to the blighting ex-
posure of some early fact of his history,—which, however
repented of, and however atoned for, has been concealed
from the knowledge of those among whom he lives, and in
virtue of their ignorance of which his position has been
assigned to him. The former has taken a middle place in
society, with the sanction of its prejudices, and he is undis-
turbed ; the last has been raised to an elevation which those
prejudices would never knowingly allow, and from which
it is not so easy to decline to a proper level, as it is, appa-
rently, to revert into hopeless crime again. Instead of rest-
ing on a species of imposture, how much better is it to
remove a man from the locality of his crime, where charity
and forgiveness are always coldest or most unwilling, to
another, where its odium will be less ; and where (as in a
new country) the prejudices of society in reference to the
criminal will be counteracted by the wants of society in
reference to the man.
Waving again as in page 27 the modification to which
the principle of example has been reduced, how is a system
like that of Captain Maconochie likely to tell on the mind
of a criminal population in the sense of determent ? Is
there anything in reformatory training tending to pro-
pitiate the feelings, or allay the fears, of criminals ? I
apprehend not. A sentence to reformation is the most
obnoxious one to the man evilly disposed. Criminal pro-
pensities are his enjoyment; a sentence of divorce from
them, or prolonged restraint, he can less patiently submit
to contemplate, than one to temporary bodily coercion.
In the thirty-fifth volume of the Edinburgh Review , (p.
332) this conclusion is sanctioned by a writer who seems
E


to have studied the question : “ Depend upon it,” he says,
“ there is nothing that inspires such dread in all this class
of persons (from the highest to the lowest) as the idea of
subjecting them to any ordeal that is likely to end in
reform.”
1 now draw these pages to a close. The observations
contained in them have insensibly grown upon me, and ex-
tended this pamphlet to a length beyond what I originally
contemplated. To expect that the conclusions I have
attempted to maintain will meet with ready, or very general,
assent, were too sanguine. They conflict, many of them,
not only with existing practice and established prejudices,
but with principles, some of which are seldom questioned,
and others, considered to be the most authentic inferences
of modern science. Yet, as those conclusions have not ob-
tained a rapid, but a very gradual, and 1 may say, a reluc-
tant, assent in my own mind, during three or four years,
every day of which has been more or less given to the con-
sideration of such subjects; as they have not anticipated,
but have arisen out of, facts and comparisons, it is not easy
to dismiss them as unsound. They are referred to the test
of nature, to the test of social interest, or of Christian duty.
In the mean time, they are being referred also to the intel-
ligible verdict of experiment. Norfolk Island, hitherto
identified with the cruellest processes of infliction, and with
the lowest depths of human debasement; Norfolk Island,
where a man used, in the expressive language of the evi-
dence before the Transportation Committee, “to lose the
heart of a man and get the heart of a beast,”—is being-
made the theatre of trial, under the enlightened and bene-
volent superintendence of Captain Maconochie himself, of


the system of Convict Management suggested by him.
Whether Norfolk Island is the most suitable spot for the
trial of Captain Maconochie’s system —whether the con-
sistent application of his plans has been sanctioned, even
overlooking the character of those who are made their first
objects—and what the success of his labours has been—are
all points on which little is yet known. But, as it is pain-
fully evident that the whole theory of Criminal Manage-
ment is yet in its infancy—that farther experiments are
needed to determine the difficult problem of how to dimi-
nish crime; it must be the wish of all who are more anxious
about the end than about any particular class of means to
which their partialities attach them, that such experiments
may be made in fulness and fairness. From Her Majesty’s
Government this is no less expected than it is earnestly
hoped.
I am well aware of the scorn with which the main prin-
ciple recognized in these pages —the reform of the culprit,
is regarded by many persons. I know that the task is
pronounced a hopeless, visionary one. But, that a being
lives, is a Divine authority for believing him not to be
beyond hopes, in which his own reclamation is implied.
That the task is not an easy one, is admitted; but that is
the case in reference to every other end of penal institutions
as well; and, is it really so very much more difficult to
reclaim a criminal than any other man given to vice ?
I believe notcriminals, I think, will be found even more
accessible to religious influences, sympathizingly applied,
than those whose errors have had a less equivocal stamp.
Their apparent hardness of heart is not always the native
hardness of the rock, but more often the frozen hardness of
the ice, which the sun of human sympathies may melt
again.* The world, accustomed to judge them harshly, to
see only their crime, and to see it without its palliations—
to out-cast them, makes them what they become ; when in-
stead, a discreet humanity might have converted many,
after a first transgression, into useful and honoured mem-
bers of society.


“ The tainted branches of the tree,
If lopp’d with care, a strength may give,
By which the rest shall bloom and live
All greenly fresh and wildly free :
But if the lightning in its wrath
The waving boughs with fury scathe,
The massy trunk the ruin feels,
And never more a leaf reveals.”
And can it be said that the experiment of reforming
criminals has ever been tried ? Has it ever yet been the
main principle of convict treatment in any of the institu-
tions of our country, to do a good to, not to inflict an injury
on, the criminal ? Has there yet been in operation any
mode of discipline from which with a knowledge of human
nature not more than ordinary in its depth, it might not
have been predicted, that it would harden and deteriorate ?
If then the answer to these questions be what it is, is it
not the purest, and most harsh, presumption, to pronounce
the principle visionary, the task hopeless ? I claim a first
trial to the principle of reforming criminals; I connect that
principle with the system of Convict Management suggested
by Captain Maconochie ; and I urge that its fair, full, un-
fettered application to practice, in a suitable field, be sanc-
tioned. Every interest is now outraged by the penal
arrangements in force in this country ; those undei which
Transportation has hitherto been carried out, stand con-
demned ; and nothing can be lost by this experiment.
* “ The holding out my hand to them (the convicts) at parting
brought every one of them to tears.”—Miss Martineau, Prisons in
America.


Note. Page 31.
From Mr. M'Culloch’s Statistical Account of the British Empire, it
appears that the numbers sentenced to death ; to transportation for, from
four years, to life ; and to imprisonment for, from a few months to five
years, in the seven years ending with 1834, amounted to 95,455 in
England and Wales: in reference to Scotland, the returns are for the
year ending in 1834 only, and they exhibit under corresponding heads
about 764 : it will not be extravagant, for seven years, to estimate the
number at 4000 : in Ireland, the shewing for seven years is 73,681.
Many of the death sentences in the above returns refer to crimes now
punishable with transportation or imprisonment, and making the de-
duction for such as do not, there would yet be left a gross total for the
three kingdoms of upwards of 170,000 olfenders. Besides these, our
prisons have a population of minor offenders, who, though sentenced for
short terms, yet leave no vacancy on the expiry of their sentences
which is not almost immediately filled up. The foregoing numbers are
increasing more than proportionately to the increase of the population
every seven years. An idea may thence be formed of the number of
prisoners, which, under the present duration of sentences and exclusively
Home Punishments, a few years would accumulate.
Since the page to which these notes refer was thrown off, I find the
following passage in the Report of the Commission under the Lower
Canada Act, 4th William IV. c. 10, to visit the United States Peniten-
tiaries, Quebec, 1835, p, 8 :
“ The Auburn system besides has given rise to very general com-
plaints among tradesmen and manufacturers, on account of the compe-
tition which they have to sustain against State Prison labour in trades
and branches of industry similar to their own.”
Connected with the occupations which may be pursued under the
separate system, the following list is from the Report of MM. De Metz
and Blouet, Paris, July sth, 1837, published in the Appendix to the
Report of the Inspectors of Prisons for 1838, p. 147 : —“ Manufactures,
of polished steel, clasps, hooks, scales, whalebone ; jewellery in copper;
bonnets ; boots and shoes ; cork-cutters; purses; buttons in metal, silk,
mother o’pearl, moulds; bronzes; brushes ; picture-frames ; cages;
canes ; pasteboards ; baskets ; girdles ; chairs ; woollen shawls knit;
footstools; light shoes, pumps; chimney-pieces; chenille; carving;
corslets, stays; spun and twisted cotton ; cutlery ; pencils ; glasses ;
leather breeches ; thimbles ; ebony-works ; fans ; tin-work ; fringes;
scabbards ; lace ; gloves; engravings in wood ; for types; laces; lamps;
spectacles and eye glasses; mother o’pearl ornaments; tea and coffee
services; slippers : umbrellas ; combs ; pearls ; rackets ; paper rulers ;
cloth and paper bags; sandals; bellows; mouse-traps; snuff-boxes;
aprons; tailors; turners; furbishers; furriers; sculptors in wood;
weaving; straw-work; carpets; basket-making.”


LONDON I
PRINTED BY P. WHITE AND SON,
Devonshire Square, Bishopsgate.












