

Sedition in N.S.W.
What Is It?
S.F. of A. Pamphlet, No. 5.
A Question for the People.
Harry Holland’s Trial at Albury.
PRICE, 2d.
SYDNEY :
Socialist Federation of Australasia,
274 Pitt Street.
1909.




H. E. Holland,
General Secretary Socialist Federation of Australasia, who
was condemned to two years’ hard labor in Albury Gaol.


Government for not prosecuting the mine-owners. He is supposed to
have used words which he and his witnesses said he did not use. The
jury, consisting of squatters, farmers, and one clerk, found him guilt",
after a retirement of forty minutes, doubtless due to the judge’s sum-
ming up.
Holland claimed, in his speech of defence, that the law of sedition
was a law of the dead past, and a judge-made law. The judge said
in his summing up that there is no judge-made law, and then quotes a
law that a Judge Fitzgerald laid down. Why did he not quote the Sta-
tute, if there is one ?
We as Socialists know that Harry Holland was one of the first
victims of Class Justice in Australia, but let us show, like him, the con-
tempt we have for the machinations of the ruling classes. His speech
to the jury shall stand as their condemnation.
. • * * *
Albury, May 4,
In the Circuit Court to-day Harrv Holland was charged with sedi-
tious utterances at Broken Hill on February 14. The indictment set
forth tnat Holland made use of the following false, wicked, seditious
and inflammatory words :—“ We read of thousands of you men, who
call yourselves Unionists, being there, and allowed Tom Mann to be
arrested and taken to gaol, and not one of you attempted to rescue him,
and only 300 policemen in Broken Hill. You have the position in your
own hands geographically. Why, how long would it take you to stop
supplies to the gaol ? Refuse to allow your daughters to wait on me
police ; stop supplies to Broken Hill mine, and send Wade’s criminals
back. If you are going to fight put a little ginger into it. Yes, pepper
if you like, or, to be plain-spoken—dynamite. That’s the way to win.
Do you mean to say that three hundred police are going to frighten you?
Wh" if they hit you with a baton, hit them with a baton; if the" hit
you with a pick-handle, hit them with a pick ; if they shoot at vou with
a revolver, then shoot at them with a revolver, and if they use a rifle on
y OU —well, if you have a catling gun turn it on them.”
When the indictment was read Holland said, “ I decline to plead,
as a protest against the action of the Government in shifting the venue
of the trial. Ido not expect a fair trial away from the place where
the speech was delivered, therefore I decline to plead.”
His Honor entered a plea of not guilty, and the jury was em-
panelled. Holland had exhausted his right when only four jurors were
in the box, and the Crown challenged freelv, most of those who sat on
previous cases being asked to stand aside. Holland, who was in the
dock, said he had to conduct his own case, and asked to be allowed *o
sit at the table; also that he be allowed the services of his clerk. Mr.
Justice Bring said he could sit at the barristers’ table, but could not have
a clerk.
The Crown Prosecutor impressed on the jury the importance of the


case, and urged them to give the accused a fair and liberal trial. Sedi-
tion had been defined twenty years ago as a crime against society.
The Crown had no desire to stifle the right of free speech, but no one
should be allowed to incite to disorder. There was sedition of half a
dozen kinds in the words in the indictment, and if the jury came to the
conclusion that they were spoken they would have no difficulty in con-
cluding that they were seditions.
Superintendent Mitchell was called, and was asked by Mr. Lamb to
describe the situation at Broken Hill.
Holland objected. He was charged with making a certain speech,
and what happened the year or month previously had nothing to do with
him.
His Honor said he had no hesitation in admitting the evidence. In
ordinary times the words might be mere idle vapour of a foolish man,
but might have a different effect when public feeling was excited.
Sergeant Mitchell then described in detail the state of unrest, ex-
citement, and disorder existing at Broken Hill.
A number of police witnesses were called, and deposed to having
heard Holland deliver the words complained of on February 14. Hol-
land submitted each of the witnesses to a keen cross-examination.
After calling a quantity of corroborative evidence, Mr. Lamb closed
the Crown case, which occupied four hours.
Holland commenced his defence by making a long statement to the
jury. He was requested by Mr. Justice Bring to confine himself to the
facts of the case. He said he was a journalist in Sydney, and he had
conducted several newspapers at Grenfell, Sydney, and elsewhere. On
February 14 he went to Broken Hill, on the invitation of the Socialist
Group. Mr. Rosser, the Combined Unions’ organiser, met him, and
asked him to attend a meeting and speak. He did so, and n-ave an outline
of his speech, which consisted chiefly of a violent attack on Mr. Wade
for not prosecuting the Proprietary Company for breaking his own indus-
trial disputes law. He pointed out that Mr. Wade promptly prosecuted
the workers if they broke that law, but absolutely refused to prosecute
employers. When he delivered tnat speech he had in his mind press
reports of illegalities, police outrages, magisterial bias, and iniquitous
sentences. He pointed out in the speech that in 1903 Mr. Wade was a
paid employee of the Proprietary Company in the Arbitration Court
fighting the miners, and he admitted saying that Mr. Wade was still iffie
company’s servant, only now paid by the State. The portions of his
speech that had been worked into the indictment were practically only
brief incidents in the speech. What he said about Mann’s arrest was
“ You allege that Tom Mann was illegally arrested, and yet you allowed
him to be arrested.” He did tell them to put ginger into the fight.
Someone interjected, “Pepper.” There was laughter, and several
interjections of What about dynamite ?” He then said, “Yes, if you
like, put the force of dynamite into your organisation.” He was not a
believer in phvsical force, and never advocated it. He admitted saying,
“ If a policeman hits you illegally hit him back.”
During the statement Mr. Justice Pring observed that Holland was
using notes, and ordered him to put them away.
Holland added that he was under great disadvantage owing to a


number of his witnesses being unable to get away.
Mr. Justice Pnng : I thought the Crown was paying witnesses’ ex-
penses.
Mr. Lamb : Yes, 10s. a day.
Holland : That will not help men’s families.
Mr. Justice Pring : A nice idea, expecting the Crown to help fami-
lies. You made a most misleading statement. You had every oppor-
tunity of bringing witnesses.
Holland explained that the men could not come away and leave their
families in Broken Hill.
Evidence was then proceeded with.
Harry Gray, Austin Beck, and Thomas Broadway corroborated Hol-
land’s statement as to what he said in the speech on February 14.
Broadway, a reporter on the Broken Hill “ Truth,” said that the meet-
ing was orderly and good-humoured. Holland’s remarks evoked more
laughter than anything else.
Holland asked witness what effect the speech had on him.
'Mr. Justice Pring said the effect of the speech was a matter for the
jury.
Holland : the Crown alleges that the speech incited to disorder, and
I want witness to say if it had that effect or not.
Mr. Lamb said he would not object. He desired the accused to
have every latitude.
Witness, in reply to Holland’s question, said that the speech cer-
tainly did not make him feel riotous.
Harry Ivey, ex-Mayor of Broken Hill, gave evidence regarding the
feeling at Broken Hill towards the police. Witness was Mayor when
the first lot of police were sent up. He sent a protest to the Govern-
ment on behalf of the people.
Holland : People of Broken Hill were against the action of the
Wade Government, were they not ?
His Honor (sharply) : The Wade Government is not on trial. I will
have no more of this.
Holland : lam charged with attacking the Wade Government. It
is in the indictment.
His Honor : The Government that is meant is the Government of
the country, officers of law, and so on. I shall not have the time of the
Court wasted with evidence about the opinions of the Broken Hill
people.
Holland : Will your Honor make a note ?
His Honor : No ; I will do nothing of the kind.
Further evidence was given for the defence by William Rosser,
Thomas Dolhavy, Thomas Devitt, and William Levy. All stated that
Holland’s speech on February 14 was just an ordinary one, and the
crowd was orderly and good humoured. Rosser, in cross-examination,
admitted having said that he would like to see the British Empire fall
to pieces.
His Honor : What nationality are you ?
Witness : Welsh.
His Honor : And you have resided in the British Empire most of
your life ?


Witness ; Yes. He explained that he wanted to see a national
brotherhood instead of separate empires.
Mr. Lamb said he had no evidence to call in reply-.
Holland said he wished to apply for an adjournment, He was not
well. * . . '" iJ
His Honor : What is the matter with you ?
Hollands I was awake the best part of last night. lam not used
to sleeping on a cocoanut mat, and have a bilious attack. I have not
my case arranged, and as I wish to address the jury, it is a’ big order.
I would like an adjournment till the morning.
His Honor : I am loth to lose time, but as the man is defending him-
self, and does not feel well, the position is awkward. - In Any case the
jury would have to be locked up for the night.
HOLLAND’S ADDRESS.
Gentlemen of the Jury,— i
I wishr'first of all to apologise for the inconvenience to which you
have been put on account of my having been physically unwell, and
next, to thank the Crown Prosecutor for his extreme courtesy, and
help. I must say the Crown Prosecutor has been as courteous and
as good as his position would allow him to, be.) I wifeb, also, to .thank
the gaol authorities, and desire to take this opportunity of explaining
that when I made a remark yesterday about my not being well, I dic|
not wish it to be understood that I cast any reflection upon them, as
they have given me every help that their position would allow them
to do, , Vr ; ~. b, ,
Gentlemen, — . . r , 7 ■ r( ,
I stand charged under an indictment that ns wrapped up in a huge
mass of legal verbiage, and 1 would like as much as possible to strip
it of that verbiage, and put it ps plainly as. it can be put, and if I do
not make my address as clear as you should wish„ you will understand
the difficulties under which an undefended man labours, especially in
a case, of this kind. i ,
I am charged, in the first place, with being a wicked, seditions,
and malicious person; I am charged with having attempted to stir,up
Strife amongst the people, and with having stirred up the people against
persons in authority. The whole of the indictment is summed up in
one word —sedition ; and labouring, as I have been, ; under all ,j.ne dis-
abilities of being undefended, and being physically unwell, I have tried
to find where one ease of sedition has been heard in Australia, and failed
to find a single record. Ido not say there is no such case,’but that
l have failed to find ope.. Whatever I may. say in regard to the law
you will understand, I say as a layman, and am subject to His Honor’s
correction. While you, gentlemen of the jury are practically the masr
tejrs, we understand His Honor alone pan direct tfs in this Court , . .
Sedition comes under the head of common law, or what is termed
judge-made la'vy, and belongs to that aggregate of laws made hundreds
,of years ago by the judge s » an d practically representsto-dpy the crystal-
lised growth of centuries’ of decisions. It is hard to say when or how


h originated. It is a law which has largely gone into disuse because
the British race especially has outgrown the circumstances under wmch
u came into force. Judges of those times were under the domination
of the reigning sovereign and the Star Chamber, and were generally
coerced in their decisions. •
The prosecution has had to go back to the dead centuries to find
a law under which to prosecute me, for there is no modern law under
which tney can prosecute me with any degree of success.
I wish to refer first to the police evidence, and in going through
that evidence briefly, I am going to throw the weight of evidence
against the weight of evidence, and I would ask you to not only judge'
me on the technicalities, but on the probabilities and commonsense of
the case. With one exception, the police say they did not make notes
together. They talked over my address and then separated, and
separately and individually made notes and. put in reports. Naturally,
the evidence brought up is the fruit of those notes made at the meeting.
Superintendent Mitchell’s evidence does not bear on the speech
itself ; it onlv led un to it and showed the state of Broken Hill at a
time before I went there. There had been several explosions, and
there is one significant thing, so far as is known only police were in
the vicinity of the explosions when they occurred. Ido not suggest
anything about the police, but that is what the evidence showed, and
I wish to make it clear,, without throwing suspicion on the police, that
no one connected with the movement was present on those occasions.
Four men—five now, since the addition of Schaler—attended that
meeting at which I spoke, and sat a short distance away from me.
iL.mse men then went away. They say they did not collaborate, but
tney come into Court and give identical evidence. Much of the evidence
given here was not given in the lower Court, and I regard the larger
part of it as so much packing. But the vital parts are the same.
Brown said : “I heard Holland say, “ When in Sydney,’ ” etc.; and Brown
in the witness box said he did not make notes with the other witnesses.
Then Constable Lingfield said exactlv the same words. He gave word
for word with Brown what was said about the batons. There is not
an adjective or a verb different in the two men’s statement.
also gave word for word in the vital parts with what the others had
said. There was one thing about Sharpies’ evidence, however, to
which I desire to call your attention. He stated in the witness box
that he had not made notes with anybody, and I confronted him with the
Police Court depositions, and showed him where he said he had made
notes of the meeting at the Police Station with Constable Browne. I
also brought two witneses to prove that Sharpies had so said—one Mr.
Harry Gray, who acted as my clerk during the Police Court proceed-
ings, who positively swore that Sharpies had made that admission, and
the other, who was a reporter, while he could not swear to Constable
Sharpies himself ; nevertheless swore that such a remark had been made
by one of the constables. His Honor’s view that Police Court deposi-
tions may not always be relied upon, may be quite right, but the fact
remains that depositions constitute a legal document. To prove this
I might state a local case, here in your own town with which you are
no doubt familiar, where it was possible for a second charge to arise


out of the depositions. This shows such depositions are legal instru-
ments. Sharpies or Brown have lied either here or at Broken Hu .
When we have evidence of that kind, where a policeman deliberate, /
perjures himself, it is time to say that it is evidence which should nc
be credited by an Australian jury. I ask you, .gentlemen of tne jur>,
to bear this in mind when taking into consideration the other parts c :
the evidence.
The next witness was Cuthell, and he repeated, parrot-like, ll •;
story told by the others. Four men came into Court, and in tne vit: i
parts of their evidence rang off the same tale, like so many parrot,
and I ask you, gentlemen, if you can accept this evidence as tne evi-
dence of true men ?
Then Schaler was brought into Court, and he tells us precise /
wnat the others have said. To take his own words, he was seventy , :
eighty yards away at the time. Our witnesses made the distance mo *
—l3O or 150 yards. Schaler, from his position within the gaol yarc
gives the identical words of the others. It is word for word, and i »
variation. Schaler said there were several other police present wJ d
could have heard the words used. If Schaler had heard all, and sui ■
rnitted a report, why was he not put into the witness-box in the low -
court ? Because he came into this Court after, he had had the chan ;
of seeing the evidence of the other police, as published in the nev -
papers. Of course, Schaler said he never read the evidence in t. i
newspapers, and we must take his word for it, but it is, nevertheless, i
significant fact, and I trust the jury will take note of it.
I will brieflv take the details of the charge against me. and endc -
vour to place before you the answers which, so far as I have been al e
in the snort time before me, suffering as I have been, to do.
I am charged with being a wicked, seditious, and 1
person. That is the first clause, according to the way I read it, but
T will pass by that, and go on to the next, which is that I moved t ■;
people to contempt of the Government of the State. Two hundn 1
and fiftv years ago it was laid down by Judgef Holt that anyone wb >
spoke ill of the Government was guiltv of sedition, and Chief Just' ;
Ellenborough gave the same ruling on another occasion. But C ;
“ Encyclopoedia Brittanica ” says that such an interpretation could r t
be accepted at the present day.
My answer to the charge is this: When I made the speech the dire c
attacks were that the Government, and particularly the head of ihe
Government, had neglected or refused to administer a law which v rs
being broken. To break that law is a quasi-criminal offence agar -t
the Industrial Disputes Act. I admit I made a strong accusat i
against the Government, and pointed out that the Government b- I
assisted the Capitalist against the working class, and I submit that >
was perfectly fair criticism.
If the Government is not open to criticism, then where do v :
stand ? Even according to a law laid down many many vears age. a
man could criticise the actions of justices and judges, and if he cc”H
do that, surely we should be allowed to criticise the Government ! f' e
learned Crown Prosecutor might admit this, and say, “Yes, but it rr - c c
be within bounds.” But, I ask, “Where are those bounds, and whe is


I would like now to pass on to the use of the word dynamite. And
at this stage I would like to point out that there was a suggestion on
the part of the Crown that my witness Beck was present near Lew’s’
house when an explosion occurred there. That suggestion, as you,
gentlemen, well know, was not borne out on the evidence. The case
for the Crown says that I said, “ Put ginger into your fight. ....
or to be plain-spoken dynamite. The police have sworn with parrot-
like precision to those words. My witnesses gave evidence in a way
that should convince the jury. I have put into the box men who, in
point of fact, are against me politicallv, and some of these witnesses
swore that they had interjected, the word, “ Dynamite.” Yet tne police
sav they did not hear an” interjection. The word “ Dynamite ”is one
that is very frequently used in Broken Hill. To say, “ Put dvnamite
into it,” is a common occurrence. I would like to call your attention,
gentlemen, to a series of letters from a self-made merchant to his son,
written by G. P. Lorimer, where these words occur : If you want to
get the whole of what is coming to you, you must put ginger, dynamite,
and jound into it.” I absolutely deny that I advocated the use of ex-
plosives. I advocated the force of industrial unionism. We have
proved tnat the women interjected, and we have proved that the word
“ Dynamite ” was used by the crowd. I said, “ Put the force of dyna-
mite into your economic organisation.” It is against all the principles
of the Socialistic movement. Do you think for a moment, that I, the
official head of the Socialist or~anisation in Australia, would delibe-
rately throw away my right to liberty by making statements like that ?
i would have been mad to do the kind of thing alleged against me by the
Crown.
I would ask you to photograph Sharpies’ evidence on your- biain.
Even supposing a policeman is the best of men, still, when I have put
m private citizens who have contradicted them by four to one, you,
gentlemen, can come to no other decision but that the case against me
has broken down. And my witnesses have shown by their character
and conduct that they are deserving of credit.
I now come to the most serious part of the charge against me, that
I said, r< If the police hit you with a baton hit them with a baton, etc.”
My statement was as my witnesses have testified, “ If the police dle-
gally hit you.” This raises a legal argument, which his Honor will
have to decide, as to whether if, a policeman illegally hits a citizen he
is not entitled to hit back. (But, after all, this was one of me merest
incidents of the speech—a three-minute affair. When we have gone
through the whole string of witnesses there is only one (Lew) who
does not allege the word “illegally.” Do you think I was afraid to
put Levy into the box? But even then Levy could not swear that
the word illegally was not used, and in regard to the dynamite incident
looked upon it as of such a trifling character that he did not include it in
his report. But the Crown thought the incident of sufficient importance
to form part of the indictment against me.
I admit saying if a policeman hits you illegally then hit him back
again. This is a point of law, and a point of nature, too, and if any-
one strikes a man illegally in the street, surely he is entitled to hit aim


back, even if his assailant is a policeman. I claim that the law of the
country allows this.
Chief Justice Darling once laid down a ruling that if a prisoner in
the act of escaping is violently attacked by those m authority who w’sh
to detain him, and he retaliates, and even kills those who resist him,
he is not guilty of murder, but justifiable homicide.
His Honor Chief Justice Prmg ; I do not wish to interrupt you, buc
you quite misunderstand that case. No judge in Australia ever laid
down such a ruling that anyone was entitled to kill a policeman, whe-
ther illegally arrested or not.
Surely, it is perfectly fair to say that if a man in the street, and
the police illegally assault him or attempt to shoot him, ne could de-
fend himself. It is well enough to say he has recourse to the law.
But if he waited for the protection of the law in such a case he might
be dead. However, as I said this incident of the police was onlv a
trifling one in the speech, and I ask you, gentlemen to say I did not
commit an act of sedition by saying so.
Had I not attacked the Government no notice would have been
taken of it. It is significant that not one of the witnesses for the de-
fence took the speech to be one of incitement. Some of those men are
not Socialists, and some of them are business men. I might also
point out that out of a crowd of 400 people the police could not produce
a single witness for their side so had to rely upon their own evidence.
those five policemen we have twenty reputable witnesses, and
I claim that their evidence should be taken to outweigh the evidence of
the police.
I would like to emphasise the fact that the law of sedition belongs
to the dead past. In Great Britain there has only been three cases of
sedition during the past 100 years, and these were against the Parlia-
ment, and not the Government, and they all failed. I contend mat if
we have to bring a law out of the dead past it cannot be applied with
reason and justice under the conditions of to-day. Existing conditions
should be met with laws now being made to deal with those conditions.
Justice Windeyer said that in dealing with a new set of conditions it is
very difficult to apply old laws, and the difficulty is not lessened because
they come to us surrounded by all the ignorance and superstition of tne
past.
I ask you to judge the matter in the light of commonsense, and the
probabilities of the case. What sense would there be in my promoting
tumult ? I love my liberty as well as any man, and my home life, and
the kisses of my wife and children are as dear to me as to any other.
As the head of a great movement, I prize the liberty I have, and it
would be foolish for me to throw away the liberty I possess for the
sake of a few rash words.
With reference to the disabilities under which I have laboured, and
to which his Honor has referred, I beg to tell you, gentlemen, that I
had no desire to mislead. I simply wanted to show that we had been
inconvenienced, witness of which is that while waiting for my trial I
have had to approach Sub-Inspector Johnston and the C.P.S. for money
to keep my witnesses in the ordinarv comforts of life—needless to say,
without success. I wished to explain to the jury that the real dififi


culty lay in bringing the people there so far from their homes, and uie
expense has been so great upon us as to debar us from engaging
counsel.
Whether I go to gaol or not is a big matter to me personally, but it
is a very small thing to the community, whether one individual goes to
gaol or not. Through all the ages of that blood-red tragedy that men
call history, the track has been marked by the gaols and gibbets of the
ruling classes. It does not matter whether Igo to gaol, but it matters
to the people if your verdict goes against me, because when the next
election comes along men will have to think hard before attacking the
reigning administration. If you place in the hands of the Government
such a power as that—even to a Government on my own side— it is a
dangerous thing. I say it is a dangerous thing to say, the
people of this State cannot attack the Government of me
country, because it would undermine all the principles of
constitutional Government itself. You will make it a despot T
ism, you will carry it back to the dead past. You will take it back to
the days when a man who dangled his child on his knees and laughingly
said, “ You are the heir to the throne,” was hanged; when a nobleman
whose deer was shot said, “ I wish the man who shot it had the horns
in his belly,” and was executed for it, because it was the King who shot
it. This law of sedition has practically fallen into disuse. If there is
one thing that Britain prides itself on it is its right to free speech. In
England to-da” you hardly ever hear of a prosecution of this kind. If
there is one thing more than another in favour of England to-dav it is
that, when other countries made it impossible for patriots to live in
them, they have been able to find a refuge in England. Karl Marx, the
greatest economic thinker of the age, has been driven out of his own
country to England. It is because England allows freedom of speech
that it has become the refuge of the men who have fought for humanity.
What they have in England, the Government of this conutry does not
want them to have here ; they want to take away the measure of free
speech, they have in England. Men can then be charged with sedition
simply because their speeches are intemperate. Whatever the econo-
mic conditions in England, they have political liberty, and the Govern-
ment of this State is endeavouring to take away that great principle of
free speech, which every Britisher glories in. If the verdict of the jury
goes against me I will not squirm, but I ask you to consider that in
doing so you will be taking away the right of free speech; you will be
saying that the Government can bring the shadow of the gaol walls over
a political opponent, who attacked them. It will be a bad day for Aus-
tralia, for the men and women of Australia, and for the freedom the
people look forward to in Australia. I again ask that tne weight of
evidence oe taken against the weight of evidence, and that I be judged
upon the probabilities of the case. The police lips have leaked lies
during the trial, and if you, gentlemen, realise this and judge fairly, I
shall have no fear of the result.


The Crown Prosecutor (Mr. Lamb), in addressing the jury, said
that the accused had delivered an eloquent address, but unfortunately
for himself it was not on matter which the jury had to try. The burden
of his speech was that he was being prosecuted because he had attacked
the Wade Government. He was indicted for nothing of the kind.
There was not one line in the indictment about the attack on the Wade
Government. There was a clear line of demarcation between sedition
and freedom of speech. The highest law in the land was the safety of
the public, and no person had the right to try to stir up hatred against
the Government, or bring about a state of disorder. People must learn
that under the guise of freedom of speech they must not subvert the
Government and endanger the public peace. There was a big differ-
ence between attacking the individual Ministers of the Cabinet and
attacking the system of government, as the word was used in the in-
dictment. Accused had challenged him to say where the line of demar-
cation should be drawn, and he would reply in the words of Lord Fitz-
gerald, that every man was free to write or speak as he thought fit, but
must take the responsibility for what he says, and not endanger peace
and foment disorder under the pretence of freedom.” He (Mr. Lamb)
recognised that the freedom of speech and the freedom of the press had
given them their liberty and Constitution. God forbid tnat freedom
should ever be stifled; but he impressed on the jury not to be led away
by the eloquence of the accused when he made out that he was prose-
cuted for attacking the Wade Government. There was no truth in that
statement. On Holland’s own admission he had tried to stir up the
people against the police, who were the guardians of law and order.
The jury could judge by what they had seen of Holland that he was a
clever man and a great speaker, and such a man could not be allowed
to incite ignorant unthinking men to disorder at a time of public unrest
and excitement.
Mr. Lamb said he was glad accused had paid him a compliment with
regard to the conduct of the trial. He was Crown Prosecutor, not
Crown persecutor ; and he hoped his tactics would always be fair. At
the same time he had confidence that he had shown that accused had
delivered a speech reeking with sedition.
* * * *
Mr. Justice Pring said at the outset that he wished to clear away
a number of misconceptions created by accused in his speech. Many
of his references were unjustifiable and wrong. Sedition was not the
law of the dead past, as accused had said. Nor was tnere any such
thing as Judge-made law. Judges only had one function—that was to
administer the law on the Statute Book. He knew the phrase was
sometimes used, but it was used wrongly. The law of sedition was at
the very foundation of the legislation of all civilised communities. It
had existed in England from time immemorial, and was found to-day
existing in all great countries of the world. It was the foundation of


civilisation. If every man was a law unto himself, and there was no
respect for constituted authority, where would their civilisation be ?
Free speech was a phrase very much misunderstood. It meant no more
than that every man in the community had the right to criticise the
actions of the Government and all those in authority. To criticise
Judges and their law with intemperate language might even be used ;
but so soon as they incited people to use violence they were going be-
yond the right of free speech. Then there was the question of the dis-
pute between the mine-owners and the men. Accused had repeatedly
called it a lock-out ; but they had nothing to do with what it was.
When such a dispute was on it was the duty of the Government of the
country not to take part either on one side or the other ; but it was the
Government’s duty to preserve law and order, and take care that no
man’s property, life, or liberty was endangered. x he jury had to de-
cide first whether the words in the indictment were spoken by accused.
As a matter of fact, accused admitted having used most of those words.
There were different versions as to the use of the word “ dynamite,”
and the jury had to consider the evidence before them as well as the
probabilities in arriving at their decision, and in the same way regarding
the use of the word “ illegally,” when referring to the police hitting with
batons. The jury had to decide whether the word “ illegally ” was put
in ; and in any case were those references to the police meant to create
a breach of the peace. He could only say that Holland, in advising the
people to hit back if the police hit them, had given very bad advice
indeed.
* * ♦ *
The jury, after a retirement of forty minutes, returned with a ver-
dict of “ Guilty.” Holland was remanded for sentence.
* • * •
The sentence was two years’ hard labor in Albury Jail. .
0. A. ROCK, Printer, 16 K°yal Arcade, Sydney.




