





Picturesque Mersey River at Devonport. Tas
Victoria Bridge, Crossing the Mersey River at Devonport, Tas


Mersey River framed by the trees at Devonport, Tas.


Stewart Street, Devonport, Tas.


Soldiers 7 Memorial River Reserve, Devonport, Tas
The Mersey Bluff Beach, Favourite Bathing Resort at Devonport, Tas.


Outward Bound, Mersey River, Devonport, Tas.
The Lighthouse at Mersey Bluff, Devonport, Tas.


The "Taroona" ioading at the Wharf, Devonport, Tas.


Shipping at Devonport, Tas.


Rooke Street, Main Business Centre of Devonport, Tas.
■
Horsehead Creek, Devonport, Tas.


Glimpse of Mersey River, Devonport, Tas.
A Picturesque View of the Mersey River, Devonport, Tas


Looking towards Devonport from a Scenic Drive, Tos.


Aerial View of Devonport, showing Estuary of Mersey Riv/er, Tas.


The Town Hall, Devonport, Tas.
The Post Office, Devonport, Tas.


DEVONPORT
Qutemcuf, ta a 3.mvm£& 9taHudi6£
Devonport can readily claim this honour, as from here vast numbers of
tourists every year begin their sojourn of this island of Tasmania which holds
so much in beauty and grandeur for those who seek.
Devonport is situated in the middle of the north-west coast of the Island,
and enjoys a mild and temperate climate. The town itself is most progressive
and does not lose an opportunity in entertaining its visitors.
Up-to-date and efficient bus services are available at a reasonable
charge to ensure that the tourists are well served and will have the opportunity
of viewing the many beauty spots which are found in abundance in and around
the town, the principal one being the Mersey Bluff Beach, which is well sheltered from
prevailing winds. Half-day, day and trips of longer duration can be arranged.
Various industries allow inspection of their factories at stated times: these are
always of interest to the tourist.
Devonport has much to offer the fisherman in the many streams and
rivers in the neighbourhood. The River Mersey itself is an excellent ground for
the hand line fisherman, offering a larger variety of the best edible fish.
The fine harbour, which is still being extended to cater for all types of
shipping, interstate and overseas, is proving to be a great asset to the commun-
ity and the tourist.
The modern airport which is being established at Devonport will bring the
town within one hour's travel from Melbourne and observations taken over a
period indicate that the aerodrome is practically free from hampering weather
conditions and in addition the mild climate practically eliminates fog. This in
111 mi I. ill at ilue as it ensures freedom of air traffic at all times.
11l ill expressly for J. fir N. TAIT, Hooke St., Tas.
II 111 I I I 5 ' GYMPIE > <?• SAMUEL LEE & CO.. PRiNTERf
31508023314252 NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
' A ft rr» -7A n/205M /.. . 2


f 5 ’ 0 ' - -
•fHVWI
/ V ;..■ \ y /, ' V " '<' \' ' O 11 I "' v V , ':‘ , ' " '
,
