

SEEING THE
USSR


The largest country in the world beckons Ameri-
can travelersabroad. There is general agreement
that it is also the most interesting. The Soviet
Union contains within its borders almost every
climate, every species of topography and scenic
panorama to be found anywhere. A hundred and
forty-nine languages and dialects are spoken by
eighty-two ethnic groups. Past epochs in the lives
of olden peoples and forgotten races are preserved
in the monuments and relics of bygone ages. Btt
most interesting of all is the spectacle dPSVer a
hundred and sixty million people building a new
social and economic system on a scale and with a
speed unprecedented in history. The limitations
of this booklet will allow only the briefest com-
ment and the showing of but a few outstanding
views touching on a swing around the Union.
Your local agent or an In tourist office will amplify.


LENINGRAD
NEW life grows within the ornate shell of what was
once St. Petersburg. Long perspectives down wide
avenues planned by the greatest designers of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries are flanked by mag-
nificent architectural groups. These include such fabulous
show places as the Marble Palace, the Marinski Palace,
Yousupoff Palace, Catherine’s Palace at Detskoe Selo and
the Summer and Winter Palaces of the tsars —all open to
the public, dazzling the beholder with their fantastic ex-
travagance and incalculable costliness. Priceless canvasses
of Rubens, Velasquez, Raphael, Rembrandt, Titian hang in
the famed Hermitage Museum.
Turning to the people and their works of today one is
impressed by the intenseness of their social and economic
activities. The greenwooded islands that surround the
canal-carved inner city—once restricted parks for the few
—are havens of rest, culture and sport for Leningrad’s
thousands. In the great industrial plants such as the
gigantic Red Pulilov works where new machinery whirls;
in lively debates and meetings in clubs and factories; in the
every-day work of the Soviets; in the schools and university
extensions; in libraries and institutes —everywhere a new
life is being forged. Leningrad stands preeminent as the
The Alexander Column , Winter Palace




The Grand Ballroom in the Catherine Palace at
Detskoe Selo. The interiors of all the great palaces
have been preserved as they were before 1917. Most
of them are museums open to inspection.
The fountains at Peterhof. The parks surrounding
this immense palace are noted for their wooded
groves dotted with fountains and statuary. Workers
and their families spend their free days here.




A group of Soviet sightseers in the grounds of
the famous Admiralty. The spire to the left is
a landmark in Leningrad.
One of the best known streets in the world, the
Nevsky Prospect. It has since been renamed,
“The Avenue of the Twenty-fifth of October,'”
commemorating the day of the revolution, No-
vember Seventh, according to the new calendar.


Soviet Union’s great center of science and learning. One
hundred and fifty scientific institutes have their head-
quarters here; more than twenty universities and insti-
tutes of higher education enroll students from throughout
the Union. A truly great city rearing a giant’s head above
the tinsel and show of another day. It is often the first city
of the Soviet Union the visitor beholds. It is easily and eco-
nomically accessible by sea in comfortable Soviet steamers
from London through the North and Baltic Seas.


In Leningrad one usually makes first acquaintance with
Intourist. At the landing stage is an Intourist pavilion.
Guide-interpreters wait in the large reception room to
assist passengers through customs. A fleet of cars stands
at the entrance to whisk the visitors to one of two large
hotels, the Astoria and Europe. Leningrad completed, cars
speed with Moscow-bound passengers to the great October
station.
A party of American visitors in a fleet of Intourist’s Lincolns
on the outskirts of Leningrad.


MOSCOW
MOSCOW is one of the most significant travel experi-
ences to be found. Its busy, teeming squares are
connected by broad, tree-shaded boulevards fed by
ancient, crooked streets. Vigorous, young life pulses on
every hand. Moscow’s passing show is picturesque with the
dozens of races that eo mingle in Ibe Soviet Union’s capi-
tal and animated by the fresh, young will of a rejuvenated
people.
Shining, new architecture lowers above shadowy and
mystery-laden remnants of the old regime. Eight cen-
turies of history are recorded in Red Square's succession of
monuments, the last of which is the somberly impressive
Tomb of Lenin, inspirer of the revolution.
As the administrative center, Moscow reflects the eco-
nomic, political and cultural changes of the U.S.S.R. The
people’s courts, the factory nurseries, the modern schools,
the hygienic institutes are open to the visitor. On Moscow
River is the Park of Culture and Rest with eight hundred
acres of groves, sport fields, bathing beaches, open air
theaters. Factory and new construction enterprises are
many and varied. Adjoining are blocks of new dwellings for
workers which combine the advantages of private apart-
ments with the fullness of communal life.


Air view of a section of Moscow. The old
Chinese If all is seen surrounding the Kitai
Gorod (Chinese City). The great building in
the foreground is the Palace of Labor, head-
quarters of Soviet Trade Unions.
A view of the Kremlin. This city within a city
is the administrative center of the U.S.S.R.
Most of the buildings are now government
offices but many monuments of an older day,
such as the cathedrals, the chapels; the great
bell and the tsar caution, are maintained as
relics.




The theaters of Moscow are world-renowned ... it is
enough to mention the names of Meyerhold, Tairov, Stan-
islavski. The opera and ballet in the Bolshoi theater are
acclaimed by the foremost interpreters of music and the
dance.
In the Moscow Art Theater, the Kamerny Theater and
the numerous others throughout the city the drama has
been raised to the heights of perfection. The great move-
ment in music led by Shostakovitch and the artistry with
which the leading orchestras perform the works of both
The Park of Culture and Rest, on the Moscow River
A scene from the play, “The Armored Train,” by
Vsevolod Ivanov, as produced by the Moscow Art
Theater. It is indicative of the realistic and
superb stagings of Moscow’s famous theaters.




One of the gates in the
great Chinese Wall of
Moscow.


the younger and older Russians has made Moscow one
of the world’s music centers.
The Tretiakov Gallery reflects the history of Russian
painting for three centuries; the Historical Museum covers
a period of a thousand years. Should you linger over-long
at an antique book-stall in the shadow of the Chinese Wall
or become absorbed in the busy scene under the Kremlin
clock-tower, you may be reminded that Moscow is a city
in which, yesterday, today and tomorrow are dramatically
fused before your eyes.
The dining hall of the Metropole Hotel,
one of Moscow’s leading hostelries
operated by Intourist.


THE NEW U. S. S. R.
A scene on a collective farm. 84 per cent of the U.S.S.R.’s crops are
garnered by collectives and state farms.
The fight against illiteracy is carried into the most remote
sections. These school children are Uzbeks, in Turkestan,
Soviet Middle Asia.
Up she goes! Another link in the industrial chain.
These lads are building a steel plant in the Urals.
Magnitostroi. . . . Pittsburgh in the Urals, a giant of the steel
industry built in five years.
An athletes' demonstration in Red Square. Soviet sportsmen are
preparing for their “Spartakiad” in 1935.
Lenin's Tomb. Every day long lines wait to view the body
of the organizer of the Soviet Union.
Modern Housing —everywhere one goes the Soviets are building . . . these apartments are near the Baku oil fields.


VOLGA
RISING several hundred miles North of Moscow, the
Great Volga flows a winding course 2,300 miles to
the Caspian Sea. Steamers reminiscent of the old
Mississippi packets ply a four-day run between Gorki,
overnight from Moscow, and Stalingrad. The crumbling
Kremlin of ancient Nizhni-Novgorod (now Gorki) looks out
upon a plain shining with the extensive buildings of a
mighty auto plant. A score of limes during the four-day
cruise, the packet docks at cities whose names breath his-
tory . . . Kazan, once a capital of Tamerlane’s horde . . .
Ulyanovsk, where Lenin was born . . . Samara, where the
trains go through to Samarkand . . .At almost every s lop
people speak a different language, are picturesque in the
costumes of twenty nationalities . . . Chuvashi, Mari,
Cheremiss, Mordva and, across from old Saratov, a half
million Germans in a tidy republic of their own. At Stalin-
grad, an old city with a new name, are many historical
buildings and museums of past cultures side by side with
new schools, a new stale opera house, and a gigantic
tractor plant. From Stalingrad, the tourist continues
South to the Caucasus, West to the Ukraine or hack to
Moscow, by rail.
Sunset on the Volga.




CAUCASUS
SCYTHIAN and Hun, Turk and Crusader came and
went across this mighty wall between the Black and
Caspian Seas. The Caucasus present the most amaz-
ing mixture of peoples, languages and customs to be found
under the sun. Railroads pass the barrier only by a coastal
route. Three roads rise to penetrate the high passes. Each
curve on the great Georgian Military Highway presents a
breath-taking vista of rugged beauty. The valleys hide once
glorious and now secluded remnants of historic peoples with
quaint customs and surviving rites of another time. Then
A view of one of the mighty peaks of the Caucasus Range, higher than the Alps.


A former palace, now a rest home,
nestling in a valley of the Caucasus.


to Tiflis, for fifteen hundred years the capital of Georgia.
In the Eastern quarter one is lured to stands where tur-
baned vendors offer steaming Shashlik and shops, heavy
with the perfume of the orient, display jeweled daggers,
—all in sharp contrast to the new life .. . giant factories,
power stations, schools, workers’ clubs, parks and theaters.
On the Caspian shore lies oriental Baku, oil wells towering
on the nearby plain surrounded by rows of modern apart-
ments. To the West, on the Black Sea, flowering Batum,
whence sails the coastwise steamer along the Black Sea
f
Riviera to Poli, Sukhum, Gagri —palm-laden playgrounds
at the base of the mighty Caucasus.
Strange , ancient family towers of
a strange people , the Svanetians ,
a tribe of the Caucasus.


CRIMEA
CRIMEA is an enchanted land. Its sunny shores are
laved hy the warm waters of the Black Sea. A kind
mountain range rises almost sheer from the surf to
protect its numerous resorts from northerly winds. Great
while palaces, shining like jewels, nestle among the cy-
presses in the coastal valleys or are mounted on high
prominences with sweeping, cultivated parks giving on the
surf. These one lime palaces of the nobility and gentry
of old Russia are now sanatoria where thousands from
the far corners of the Union are sent for recovery and
play.
The people of Crimea are a strange mixture of Turk,
Greek, Tartar, Russian and Caucasian. Their picturesque
villages contrast with the mighty palaces and newly huill
sanatoria used hy visitors from the North. Sevastopol is the
usual point of entry by land. Its pocket-like harbor and
gracefully mounting rows of while-walled and red-roofed
dwellings are reminiscent of some Mediterranean shore. A
few kilometers away is Khersones. founded as a Greek
colony 2.600 years ago. Greek, Roman and Byzantine walls
are distinguishable in the ruins.
An auto ride of a few hours skirling the plains of historic
Balaklava and over the high road of the Eastern shore
brings the visitor to Here is a city which, viewed
from the high eminences which surround it. appears
through the lowering cypresses as a town from another


Children at Artek, the Pioneer camp
in Crimea. Five hundred children are
quartered at the camp every six weeks,
recruited from all over the Union.
world. Within short distances are famous Livadia, winter
resort of the tsars; Massandra, high in the hills where the
wine tunnels burrow into the earth; the palace of the
Emir of Bokhara, now a resort for the workers of Turke-
stan; Gurzuf and the Grottos of Pushkin; Artek, the
Pioneer camp where 500 children live a communal life
in fairyland surroundings. High above looms Ai-Petrie,
rocky sentry of the shore from which you may go on to
Bakhchisarai, the “palace of gardens” of the old Crimean
Khans. From Yalta and Sevastopol excellent motor ships
on daily schedule run to Odessa, port of the Ukraine.


Mount Ai-Petrie on the Crimean
coast. The lions guard the staircase
of a palace which once was owned by
a former noble.


A window in Livadia, former
Crimean palace of the tsars,
now a rest home for workers.


UKRAINE
SOUTH out of Moscow and North of Crimea ripple end-
less fields of golden grain. It is the Ukraine. The his-
torical richness of a thousand years is enshrined in
Kiev, mother of Russian cities. The exquisite mosaics and
frescoes of Sophia cathedral are matched in intrigue only
by the mysteries of the great Pecherskaya Lavra on the
wooded hills overlooking the Dniepr. The thousands of
monks who lived and worked in this great monastery over
One of the churches in Pecherskaya Lavra , extensive monastery in Kiev.


the centuries left groups of gold-domed churches, relics of
jewels, gold and brocade, labyrinthine catacombs wherein
rest the mummified remains of forgotten saints. Startling
contrasts of old and new confront one sailing down the
Dniepr in a comfortable cabin steamer. After the feudal
vistas of old Kiev the great wall of the Dnieproges dam
comes into view. You disembark to stroll the streets of a
new city where only three years ago was barren steppes.
From the great hydro-electric station you continue to
Odessa, sunny port of the Black Sea. One is impressed
immediately by the imposing sweep of Odessa’s great stone
stairway, the broad boulevards and flowering gardens in
A boulevard in Odessa. Intourist’s Hotel Conti-
nental is on the right.


The largest office building in Europe , the Palace of State
Industry in Kharkov , capital of the Ukraine.
the city above. Swinging back you come to Kharkov,
Ukraine’s capital, only a few years ago a mere town and
now a pulsing city of new construction graced by a mighty
tractor plant and the Palace of State Industry—the largest
office building in Europe. When you have returned to
Moscow, you may be aware of what the new order means
. . . you will have traversed a great area, a separate republic,
speaking its own language, practising its own customs, a
country within a country.


TRANS-SIBERIAN
SIBERIA is not a desolate land of ice and snow. It is a
rugged and beautiful country of lakes, rivers, forests
and mountains. Busy industrial cities line the way
along the rails: Omsk, Novosibirsk, Irkutsk, Vladivostok.
Lake Baikal, 500 miles long and 25 miles wide, is skirted
by the Trans-Siberian. Linking Europe with the Far East,
this road extends 6,300 miles. The running time from Mos-
cow to the Manchurian border is seven days. Six through
expresses of comfortable cars leave Moscow every week.
The Trans-Siberian skirts Lake Baikal , one of Asia’s great inland bodies of water.


SOVTORGFLOT
Soviet Steamer “Alexei Rykov” in Leningrad Harbor.
COMFORTABLE Soviet motor ships operate on regular
schedule between London and Leningrad twice a
week, mid-week boats calling at Hamburg. Black
Sea cities are served by two lines of steamers. Round trips
between Odessa and Batum are made in ten days with al-
most daily sailings. A Near East division out of Odessa
calls at Istanbul, Saloniki, Athens and Syrian coastal
cities. A Soviet boat is an interesting prelude to a visit to
the U.S.S.R.


INTOURIST SERVICE
STANDARD itineraries ranging
from five to thirty days are ar-
ranged each travel season by In-
tourist. These lours are available for a
standard daily rale in three classes:
first, tourist and special. They vary
from five days in one Soviet City to a
grand lour including travel over the
greater part of European U.S.S.R.
(Literature giving itineraries and
rates on these standard tours may be
obtained from any travel agent or from
the nearest Intourist office.)
The tour prices quoted in connection
with the standard tours include the
following: All transportation between
the first tour city named and the last
city; meals, hotels, guide interpreters,
sightseeing two to three hours daily—
these services are given from the morn-
ing of the first day to the evening of
the last day of the lour. Soviet entrance
and exit visas (easily secured in this
country before you sail) are included in
the tour price. The tour price, how-
ever, does not include the cost of any
travel outside the Soviet Union; rail
fare from Soviet border point of entry
to first city of tour and from last city of
tour to border point of exit; any addi-
tional sightseeing or travel not in-
eluded in the itinerary, beverages,
laundry or special guides.
Tourists who wish special itineraries
with full service or services varying
from those included in the standard
lours may purchase Inclusive Inde-
pendent Tours worked out on the full
service basis. Only cities where Intour-
ist service is available may be included
in such itineraries.
Partial service in the Soviet Union is
arranged for those who wish to secure
hotels, meals and transport service in
the cities and do not desire full lour
service. It is arranged particularly for
business men and those wishing to
confine their attention to one or two
cities. The cost of Soviet visas is addi-
tional with partial service.
For those not desiring to lake a
standard Intourist tour or limit them-
selves to partial service, open service
orders may be purchased. These orders
are issued for all three classes of travel
and for a minimum number of days.
They entitle the holder to select itiner-
aries after arrival in the Soviet Union
comprising various cities in which In-
tourist service exists (all important
centers). Adjustments may be re-
quired to cover additional rail fare or
services.
Lithographed by
Rogers-Kellogg-Stillson Co., New York, U.S.A.


