

iiiDM© ™ EMPiiai




V




Seeing the Empire
Violet M. Methley


"He took it gently and peeled it daintily.” — p. 153.




HE PULLED WITH HIM, AND THERE WAS SALLIE IN SAFETY


Seeing the Empire
the Adventurous Touit
of Steven and Sallie
Violet M. Methley
& RAPHAEL TUCK &l SONS. LTD.
Publisher! to Thtir HajerMct tht King \ Qyttn,


THE “TREASURE TROVE” LIBRARY
Three books uniform in size and price
BRAVE DEEDS BY BRAVE MEN
By Alfred Miles and C. Sheridan Jones. Illustrated by Howard Davie
and R. B. Ogle.
SEEING THE EMPIRE
THE ADVENTUROUS TOUR OF STEVEN AND SAL LIE
By Violet M. Methley. Illustrated by C. E. Brock, R. 1., and
O. Sandreczki.
TRAVEL WAYS
BY LAND, SEA, AND AIR
By G. G. Jackson and others. Illustrated by T. Cuneo and Barnard Way
"Away the sheep galloped, snorting." —/>. 72


PAGE
7
• • • • • . . . . ii
20
23
• • • • • • . . . 26
33
37
**•••••••
45
50
54
56
• . . . . 6o
63
67
72
?6
• • • • • 80
••••••• 84
8 9
..... 93
97
• • • • . . . 102
105
no
115
n8
CONTENTS
PART I—NORTH AMERICA
CHAPTER
I. Westward Ho! 7
11. Beaver Camp ii
111. In the Wilds
IV. Racing the Fire .......... 2 o
V. Sight-Seeing ........... 23
VI. Big-Sea-Waters .......... 26
VII. Wild West .... ..... 00
VIII. Sewellels ........ 37
IX. First Journey’s End ......... 42
I. Going South ........... 45
11. Farther South .......... 50
111. Caves and Craters ......... <54
IV. “Haere Mai!” .......... 5 6
V. Mud and Maoris .60
VI. The Blue Sea-Horse
VII. Up Country ........... 67
VIII. Blackfellows .......... 72
IX. Pearls and Opals ........ 75
X. Bushed . 80
I. Stormy Weather .......... 84
11. The Fowl Farm .......... 89
HI. A Natal Day g ,
IV. Spots
V. Ruins and Rainbows ......... 102
VI. Waterways ........... 10 5
VII. Walking Mountains ~.. . . . _ ,110
VIII. Nairobi
IX. “Good-Bye, Africa”


PAGE
123
i2 8
133
137
143
147
IS 2
156
161
J 7i
Ctewer.
CON TEN TS —continued
PART IV—ASIA
CHAPTER
I. Through the Gateway .
11, Temples—and Bells
111. Dead History and Live Elephants
IV. History and Story
V. The Goat Boat
VI. Meeting Nats
VII. Furthest East
VIII. Head Hunters and a Tooth Temple
IX. Tea and Tanks .
X. The Last of Asia
PART V—EUROPE
I. Shoats and Ships
11. Rock Scorpions
HI. At Home
" Swimming back towards the canoe. />. 21.


SEEING THE EMPIRE
Part I: NORTH AMERICA
Chapter One
WESTWARD HO!
THE towering white side of the Empress of Atlantis looked
like a chalk cliff to Steven and Sallie Wylde, standing on
Southampton Quay. But Steven did not intend that even
forty thousand tons of steamer should make him feel small to-day.
“That flag on her foremast is the ‘Blue Peter;’ it shows we’re
just starting/’ he told his sister as they went up the long gangway,
whilst the derricks clattered and creaked as they lowered the last
crates and cases into the hold at the ends of their long arms.
The decks were crowded with passengers and their friends,
sailors and porters with luggage. Everybody seemed to be talking
at once, to make themselves heard above the whistle of escaping
steam, the tingle-tingle-tingle of the engine-room telegraph, and
the louder jangling as a passing seaman swung a bell, calling out:
“Any more for the shore?’’ Those who were not travelling began
to stream off the ship. There were shouts of: “All clear aft!” and
the enormous hawsers which moored the steamer to the wharf
creaked and tightened with the strain as she drew away, the space
of water between her side and the quay growing wider.
The gangways were raised, the hawsers cast off, Southampton
Water, very blue and sparkling in the sunshine, stretched ahead,
with the Isle of Wight crouching like a watchdog at the gate. And
beyond there was nothing but sea for thousands of miles.


"Well, we’re off!” said Steven.
"Yes, weTe really off,” answered Sallie. “Though it doesn’t
seem as if it could, be true.”
The voyage had begun which would not end until they reached
Southampton again after making a round of the world and the
British Empire, and having who could say how many adventures!
This "Grand Tour,” as our great-great-grandfathers would have
called it, had been promised to them if school reports and the
results of certain examinations were satisfactory in the spring
of this year when Steven was seventeen and Sallie fifteen. They
had both passed with honours, and now they were to join their
parents in India, but not until the boy and girl had first visited
America, Australasia and Africa.
"You’re sure you’ve got the tickets safely? Sallie asked her
brother as they leant together over the rail; and this being about
the twentieth repetition of the question, Steven answered emphati-
cally :
“Yes—l—have, and the list of Company’s Agents at all the
places where we haven’t got friends or relations. Father s written
to the chaps, of course, to tell them to meet us when we arrive
and to show us round.”
" It’s lucky for us that Dad is such a big person in the shipping
way,” Sallie remarked. "I don’t suppose he would have let us go
alone like this, if he hadn’t been able to make arrangements for
the agents to look after us.”
"I’m not so sure about that,” Steven declared in his most
grown-up manner. "Father knows that I can look after myself and
you perfectly well, and he wants us to learn to be independent.
"Yes, but it is convenient to have people to fall back on,
Sallie said. "It’s rather like that game when you stand in a circle
with a ring on a long piece of string and pass it from hand to hand.


Were the ring, and Uncle Dick in Canada is the first pair of hands,
who will pass us on to mothers friend, Mrs. Sayers, in Vancouver,
and so on! Now don’t you think we ought to go and see our cabins? ”
These turned out to be next door to each other, and an hour
was spent in unpacking and examining all the neat ship-shape
arrangements. Then eight strokes on a bell sounded, and Steven
appeared in Sallie’s doorway.
“Four o’clock,” he announced. “We’ll go and have tea.”
“Oh, was that the tea-bell?” Sallie asked, looking up from an
open suitcase.
“I say, don’t let anyone know you’ve never been to sea before!
No, that was eight bells! it shows the end of each four-hour watch.
You’ll have to learn ship’s time, Sallie.”
“All right. I’ll come directly I’ve cleared these things from
the floor. Is it up the big staircase? ”
“Deck, not ‘floor,’” Steven groaned. “And you mustn’t say
‘staircase,’ Sallie: it’s a companion. The other sounds so ignorant.”
Well, you must teach me ship’s language as well as ship’s
time,” Sallie said cheerfully. “And now let’s go to tea.”
It did not take Sallie long to acquire both sea-language and
sea-legs. By the end of the second day it seemed as though she
had been on board ship for years, and she was as proud as any
peacock because she had not felt the least bit ill. And it was all
such fun! There were the deck-games—shovel-board, bull-board
and quoits, with, best of all, deck-tennis, played by throwing a
rope-ring across a net, and not nearly so easy as it sounds. There
were dances, too, and the swimming bath, and the sea itself, which
Sallie was never tired of watching.
Altogether neither Steven nor Sallie was glad when, on the
afternoon of the fourth day, the Captain told them that the Empress
of Atlantis would reach the St. Lawrence River next morning.


((. 1
/ T
“ You’ve got two ~~~~~
nearly there ! ’’ Sallie
looked quite down-
cast.
more days on board
before we reach Quebec, and the trip up the St. Lawrence is some-
thing you won’t forget in a hurry,’’ the Captain said.
That same evening, Steven and Sallie had their first sight of
land, just as it was growing dusk. That dark, rather grim-looking
shape against a red-and-gold sky was not Canada, however, but
Newfoundland, Britain’s oldest colony. Next morning they were on
deck before it was light, to find that they were in the great river.
As the sun rose, the banks on each side turned from grey to green—
hills and forests against the horizon, sometimes stretches of flat
meadow country, then cliffs with brown or white houses perched high
on them, or farms and villages at their feet. The river was smooth


and gleaming as dark green glass and, as Steven and Sallie watched
a school of porpoises came rolling and gambolling alongside, so
near that they could see their little round pig-like eyes.
As the huge white ship steamed steadily on, the wonderful
scenery was like a moving picture, changing all the time, and Steven
said with satisfaction:
“My word, it’s fine to think that we’ve got a thousand miles
of this!
Gradually, as they steamed up that thousand miles of river,
it grew narrower; then about noon on the second day they rounded
a bend, and there, rising straight from the water’s edge, were the
cliffs on which Quebec is built, with the famous Heights of Abraham.
“It’s like a place straight out of a history-book,’’ Sallie said.
“Look at the up-and-down-hill streets and the old-fashioned houses.’’
“The Captain says it’s still got walls round it, which shows
how old it is—the only city in Canada or North America that has
them,’’ Steven told her. “But come on, Sal, we must collect our
baggage and say good-bye to everybody. Remember Uncle Dick
is meeting us here, and we’ve got to find him.’’
Chapter Two
BEAVER CAMP
UNCLE DICK was not difficult to find. Steven and Sallie
had no sooner landed than someone big and brown pulled
up in a car close beside them, with a friendly laugh.
“No need to ask who you are, my boy! ’’ he cried. “Your father
was just such a long-legged, fair-haired fellow at your age. As for
this girl, she s got exactly her mother’s red hair and brown eyes,
and that’s the best compliment I can pay her. Now, come along;


there’s plenty of room for all your luggage in the car; it has to
be a regular Noah’s ark to carry our family about. I’ll just let
you have a look at Quebec, then we’ll be off to Montreal —it’s only
a couple of hours’ run —and I’ve promised to fetch up with the
pair of you at Beaver Camp to-night.”
“That sounds fine!” Steven said, whilst Sallie gave a little
sigh of satisfaction as she snuggled into the car beside this new
uncle, who had a way of making one feel at home from the very first
minute.
“I think Canada’s a lovely place,” she said.
“You’ll be sure of it, before we’ve done with you. Oh, all the
plans are arranged for showing you round, and just for a start
we’ve fixed up a week or so in the woods, at our country camp.
Now, we’ll be off.”
Steven and Sallie found every minute of the hour that followed
interesting. They sat looking eagerly from side to side and listening
to their uncle’s remarks, as they went up and down the steep and
narrow streets, finally reaching the old Citadel, from which there
was the most beautiful view across the valley of the St. Lawrence,
with mountains and forest in the background.
“Quebec is sometimes called the Gibraltar of the West, and
it isn’t a bad name for it,” their uncle said. “The French explorers,
Champlain and Cartier, came here first, when they discovered the
St. Lawrence, thinking all the time that they had reached India
or China. They didn’t know that America was in between! That
was why they called the natives ‘ Indians,’ a name which has always
stuck to them. Now, we’ll drive into the park and have a picnic
lunch under the trees, before we push on.”
On their way, they passed the monument to the two generals,
the English Wolfe and the Frenchman, Montcalm, who both died
in the battle on the plains of Abraham, when the British took Quebec.


“Well, what do you think of Quebec, your first Canadian town? ”
their uncle asked them during lunch.
“It’s not a bit English,” Steven said. “Everyone seems to
be talking French, and there are tricolour flags everywhere!”
“Yes, the people are very French, and like you to know it;
but they’re very British, too; that’s the queer part of it. They’re
just as proud of Montcalm as they are of Wolfe, although they died
fighting each other as enemies. That’s Quebec!”
Soon they were off again, speeding through beautiful country,
with old-world farms, glimpses of the rivers and mountains in the
distance beyond meadows and woods, and old timbered houses,
such as might be seen in many parts of England and France. Mon-
treal, when reached, rather took away the breath of the two travellers.
It was so big and bright, with such splendid and stately buildings,
sky-scrapers as in New York, a Nelson monument very much like
the one in London, and almost as many people speaking French
as there would be in Paris, especially in the old French quarter.
The great centre of Canadian trade is Montreal, or Mount Royal,
as its name means. Here are huge grain elevators on the banks of the
St. Lawrence, and nearby, down the Ottawa River, come immense
rafts of logs from the forests along its banks, which make this one
of the principal places of the timber or lumbering trade. These rafts
reach their destination at Lachine Rapids and Canal, another name
given by the old explorers, who fancied they had reached La Chine,
or China.
They had tea in a very grand restaurant and then went back
to the car, where Uncle Dick provided them with fur-lined rugs
and made them put on thicker coats.
We ve had enough of towns now —two big ones in a single
day, he said. “Now we’re off to the woods —the Wyldes to the
Wilds, eh? It 11 be late and dark before we get to Beaver Camp,


and chilly, too; we’re getting near the Fall and the cooler August
nights, though the days are still so hot.”
By the time they were quite clear of the outskirts of Montreal
the sun was setting, and soon dark masses of trees rose on each side
of the road, shutting out what light there was. But before then,
Steven and Sallie, tired out by a long and exciting day of sight-
seeing in the open air, were fast asleep. It was hours later when
they woke, to find that the car had stopped before a low building
with a wide wooden verandah and scarlet-curtained windows.
A bright light shone out through the door, showing trees every-
where, black against the sky; there was a new delicious scent in the
air, and there seemed to be a great many people all talking at
once.
Still half-asleep, Steven and Sallie scrambled up steps made
of split logs and were greeted by a kind, cheerful voice which belonged
to their Aunt Kathleen.
“You poor things, you’re dead tired! Come to your rooms
at once, and you shall have some soup in bed. These are your
cousins, Pat and Mike and Eileen —but wait till to-morrow to
be properly introduced. Oh, and this is Orson; he’s a bear, but
he’s quite young and gentle.”
Sallie was aware of a black shaggy shape, but she was too sleepy
to be nervous. How she got to bed she never knew; indeed she
remembered nothing else until the moment of waking, with the sun
pouring into a room all filled with that fresh smell of pine and
spruce and balsam.
Floor, walls and ceiling were of bare, clean wood, and there
was very little furniture. But only the view from the window
mattered. All round the log house was forest, the leaves just
beginning to show the marvellous colours of the Canadian “Indian
Summer,” with the crimson, scarlet, orange and gold of maples


and sumachs flaming against the dark green of fir and spruce. In
front was a blue lake; beyond, wooded slopes, and in the far distance,
purple mountains.
“Oh, I was right yesterday/’ Sallie thought. “Canada is lovely! ”
There came a bang on her door and Steven’s voice.
“Come on, Sal; don’t be lazy!—and don’t wait to dress. Just
slip on your swimming suit. We’re all going to bathe before break-
fast!”
Chapter Three
IN THE WILDS
THAT was the good beginning to better days, lived half in
or on the water. Steven and Sallie could swim well already,
but they were taught the mysteries of canoe-management,
both single-handed and in the larger birch-bark boats for three
or more people. They explored the lake and the river which ran
into it, they walked for miles through the forest and met its beasts
and birds and flowers, some old friends, but mostly new.
There were squirrels, but there were also chipmunks, which
were fatter and with less bushy tails and poor climbing powers, who
chattered and whistled. It was exciting to know that they might
meet a bear; the parents of Orson had been shot when he was a tiny
cub, quite near by. Once something huge crashed away through the
undergrowth, and Pat whispered:
“Ssh! That was a moose, or maybe a caribou; they’re about
the biggest sort of deer in the world, you know.”
Their cousins, who were very near to them in age, could teach
the English pair a great deal about wood-craft. There were number-
less half-wild pets about Beaver Camp, but the most interesting
were those who gave the place its name. Steven and Sallie were


introduced to them that first day by Eileen, after Uncle Dick had
announced at breakfast:
"Im afraid Bubble and Squeak have destroyed the furniture
in the Lake House again. You’ll have to find them something else
to play with, Eilie; they’re destructive little beggars.”
"But such darlings!” Eileen said. “Come and see them you
two.” ' y
She led the way to a creek at the back of the house broadening
out into a deep pond, which, Eileen said proudly Bubble and
Squeak had made themselves.
“You see they dammed the stream at the other end so that
the water should make a pool and not ran away. And this is their
Lodge.”
She pointed to a dome-shaped roof of mud rising above the
water, and Steven gave
a sudden exclamation:
Oh, I see! They’re
Of course. People
killed so many that
they were nearly ex-
tinct, but now they’re
protected. We had
these two as kittens
two as kittens,
and they’ve
settled here and
built the dam
and the Lodge.
In winter, they
shut themselves
into it and


hibernate; they make cosy beds and store a lot of wood inside to
eat. The Lodge is partly brushwood plastered over with mud; it’s
frightfully interesting to watch them building. Now, listen!”
She gave a low whistle, and it was answered by a curious mewing
cry. Suddenly scrambling up the bank came a sleek brown animal,
and then another, scuttling towards Eileen, who laughed.
“The greedy things know I’ve got bananas, which they love,”
she said. “Here, Squeak —here, Bubble!”
The beavers sat up, peeling the bananas and eating them daintily,
whilst Steven and Sallie admired their broad, flat tails, thick fur,
and bright, intelligent eyes. When Eileen and her cousins went
towards the Lake House at the edge of the creek, Bubble and
Squeak gambolled after them like lively puppies.
“We often have meals out here,” Eileen said. “But just look
what those little wretches have done.”
The wooden furniture had been badly treated. Two legs of
the table were gnawed half through and one chair reduced to a
kind of short-legged stool, whilst other traces of those sharp teeth
could be seen everywhere.
“They’ll bite through anything wooden,” Eileen lamented.
“They can cut down quite a big tree as quickly as possible with
their teeth. We shall be obliged to have iron chairs and tables,
that’s all. But they are so clever; do you know, they put their
bedding out to air, just as people might, and when they want a
sapling for building and there isn’t one near the place, they’ll cut
it down right on the edge of the pool, so that it will float where
they want it.”
The weather was perfect for those camp days, the hottest end
of a very hot summer; but it was cool on the lake or in the forest
which stretched away on three sides of the house, covering hills
and valleys for hundreds of miles. And it was out of that forest


that the first great adventure of that adventurous tour was to
come.
They were sun-bathing after a swim one afternoon, and Steven,
lying lazily at full length, looked out across the lake.
“There seems to be a sort of mist over everything, heat-haze,
I suppose/’ he said.
“I wonder.” Pat was sitting up and sniffing at the air. “I
sort of fancy . . . hullo, there’s Jake Owen.”
“And what a pace he’s riding on such a hot day! ” Eileen added.
Along the track a horse and rider came at a gallop and clattered
across the little pebbled beach. As he pulled up he shouted:
“There’s a big fire started on Moose Mountain and in Tepee
Gulch, an’ the wind’s blowing it down this way! I just came to
warn ye —best make a guard, or it’ll get the house before the lake
stops it. Can’t wait —there’s danger it’ll reach Sainte Angelique
Village. . . . Good luck!”
He was gone, sparks flying from his horse’s hoofs on the flinty
track, and Pat sprang up excitedly.
“I thought I smelt it. That haze of yours was smoke, Steve.
We must get busy. . . . Mother! Mother!”
As they ran towards Mrs. Wylde, sewing on the verandah, Mike
hurriedly explained:
“Jake’s a Fire Ranger: they ride round to keep a look-out
for forest fires and call up the Fire Fighters. This is a bad time,
everything’s so dry. And Tepee Gulch is too near to be pleasant.”
“We’ll have to burn off a fire-guard as Jake said,” Pat called
from the verandah steps. “It’s the only way to stop it. Hark!
You can hear it!”
From a distance came a low roar, and the tang of wood smoke
could be smelt distinctly. Mrs. Wylde looked very white and
anxious.


“I’m worried about your father, boys,” she said. "He’s fishing
on Caribou Point, where he might easily be cut off by the fire.
And ... he couldn’t swim with that strained knee of his.”
“Somebody must take a canoe and warn him,” Pat said.
“Though we need everyone here.”
“Can’t I go?” Steven asked eagerly. “I went with uncle
yesterday to Caribou Point, so I know the way. And those who
understand fire-fighting ought not to leave.”
“Yes, but ... I don’t like to let you,” Mrs. Wylde hesitated.
“It’s dangerous. The fire may get there first.”
11l race the fire!”—already Steven was running towards the
canoes—“while you’re racing it here, to save Beaver Camp!”


Chapter Four
RACING THE FIRE
QUICKLY as Steven ran do™ to the wooden landing-stage
where the boats were moored, someone else was quicker.
As he loosened the painter of a two-seated canoe and
prepared to jump in, a shaggy black body pushed past him, and
there was Orson, the bear, squatting in the bows.
"It’s no use trying to make him budge,” Pat shouted. “He
always goes canoeing if he can, and he’ll do no harm.”
So Steven reluctantly accepted his queer passenger, and pad-
died at full speed, whilst the cub grinned like a happy dog, his
tongue hanging out. The boy soon forgot Orson and everything
else except that mad race with the fire. Caribou Point was at the
far end of the lake, and before Steven had done half the distance
the flames reached the water’s edge, and clouds of spark-flecked
smoke rolled towards him.
He could not have believed that a forest would burn so fast;
as the Are leapt from one tree to another, great streamers of
orange and red flared high into the air, licking up leaves and
branches with a fierce crackling, whilst a lurid glow ran through
the undergrowth, consuming it like the fiery breath of a dragon.
The roar of the fire was deafening, with occasional crashes when
trees fell; its heat scorched Steven’s face, drying his throat and
lips so that he felt half choked, as he paddled on desperately.
He must reach his uncle in time, but there was Caribou Point,
still far ahead, already curtained with smoke and flames. There
was not a minute to spare. The boy’s arms were aching as he
worked his paddle with bent head; he did not realise how he had


progressed until a voice shouted above the fire’s roar: “Hallo!
Here I am!”
Steven looked up; through the smoke he could make out his
uncle, standing knee-deep in water, with the lake’s surface all
covered with branches and great limbs fallen from the burning
trees.
“Don’t come too near; something might crash on the canoe
and swamp it —then we’re done!’’ cried Mr. Wylde.
“Can you swim off to me?’’ Steven shouted.
“Afraid not; my knee’s given out badly. Hallo! Is Orson
there? He’s our man —here, Orson!’’
He gave a peculiar whistle, and the bear immediately responded,
plunging into the lake and swimming landwards, as though glad
to escape the falling sparks which singed his thick coat. Nosing
away the fallen boughs, he reached his master, and soon he was
swimming back towards the canoe, towing Mr. Wylde, whose
hands were clutching his shaggy fur.
With Steven’s aid his uncle climbed into the canoe and helped
the boy to pull out of the danger zone, whilst Orson continued
to swim alongside.
“Luckily Orson adores bathing, and letting us treat him like
one of those rubber animals. We always say he’s a water-bear.
But you only saved me just in time, Steven; either water or fire
would have got me,” Mr. Wylde said. “How about the camp?
It must be a race there, too; we’ll hurry to help them. Ah, Orson’s
making for the other bank to escape the fire; he’ll land there and
work his way round.”
Meanwhile the garrison at Beaver Camp had been working
furiously. To Sallie’s amazement, the first thing Pat and Michael
did was to set the bushes and undergrowth on fire quite near the
back of the house.


“But —won’t that make the fire worse?” she cried.
“It’s the only way to stop it,” Pat told her. “Burn off a strip
for a guard—then there’s nothing for the big blaze to eat. You’ll
see.”
As the brushwood burnt down, some stamped upon and beat
out the smouldering flames, others fetched water from the lake to
pour upon them. In a wonderfully short time a bare and blackened
strip of “fire-guard” protected Beaver Camp, but none too soon.
For the forest was ablaze now within three hundred yards, terrible
and magnificent to see and hear, and it quickly reached the edge
of the “guard.”
“Now’s the dangerous time,” Pat told Sallie. “We’ve got to
stop the fire from jumping across. Take this big leafy bough and
wet it; then beat out every spark you can reach.”
Sallie obeyed, joining Pat and Mike, whilst Mrs. Wylde and
Eileen hung soaking sheets, blankets and rugs over every part of
the house that they could reach. It was like fighting a cunning
living foe; flames tried to reach across the fire-guard, sparks and
cinders fell in showers, to be stamped away, beaten, crushed out.
At the worst of the battle reinforcements came, for Sallie heard
her aunt cry: “Oh, Dick, you’re safe, and Steven too! I was so
afraid ”
At last the blaze died down, tired out, burnt out. Wet and
smoke-blackened, the fire-fighters had time to look at each other
and to know that Beaver Camp was safe.
“To think that may all have started from a burning cigarette-
end, a lighted match thrown down, or even a broken bottle acting
as a burning-glass!” Mr. Wylde said. “Well, it makes one careful.”
“And here comes the real hero!” Steven laughed, as Orson,
his wet coat tangled with twigs, plunged from a thicket and came
to ask for sugar.


It had been a tiring and exciting day, but as they were all
going to bed, Sallie said earnestly:
"If the fire had to be, I am glad that Steven and I were here
to see it!”
Chapter Five
SIGHT-SEEING
EVEN the lure of travelling round the world did not prevent
Steven and Sallie from feeling sad at the thought of leaving
Beaver Camp, although Uncle Dick and Pat were to
accompany them for the next stage of their journey which would
end at Fort William and carry them, queerly enough, across a
quarter of the great continent by steamship. But before that
there were other sights to see. "For you can’t leave Canada with-
out visiting its capital city,” as their uncle told them, when they
finally waved good-bye to the camp at the lake.
So their next stopping-place was that political capital of the
Dominion, sitting stately where two rivers meet, the Ottawa and
Rideau —Ottawa, now its own name, although it had first the
most un-capital name of By-Town.
Ottawa’s parliament buildings, the Senate and the House of
Commons, with the great Public Library, have been called "a
dream in stone,” and with the splendid "Peace Tower” soaring
high above them they crown the whole city, although there are
many other fine buildings. Then there is the beautiful tree-edged
Driveway which runs right through the capital, joining Rockcliffe
Park, with its woods and views—which Sallie liked best of all —
to the Dominion Experimental Farm, which was Steven’s favourite
sight in Ottawa, and like another park with its wonderful trees.


Next day they drove on to Toronto, once a little village settle-
ment known as “Muddy York,” now stately and prosperous, the
second city in the Dominion, the “Queen City of Ontario,” on the
banks of the lake of that name. But here Sallie thoroughly dis-
gusted Steven by saying that what she really liked best in Toronto
were the two great Department Stores, said to be the largest
in the world, from which they had dragged her with such
difficulty.
“As if we were travelling round the world just to go shopping!”
Steven said disgustedly, and was scarcely mollified by a sample
of Sallie’s purchases in the shape of Toronto’s famous maple-
molasses candy.
But Sallie agreed that she did like the Toronto Museum, where
they saw the dress Queen Mary wore at the Delhi Durbar, with
a pair of Queen Victoria’s slippers, and the smallest of shoes worn
by another more tragic Queen, Mary of Scotland.
Early next morning they took shipping once more to steam
down Lake Ontario, watching the outline of Toronto gradually
receding into the mists of the horizon, and the lake widening on
each bow until no land could be seen. But it was what Sallie
called a ridiculously short voyage, for in two hours’ time they
reached Queenston, and took the electric railway to travel along
the Niagara Gorge.
They landed at Queenston on the Canadian side of the Niagara
River, and from there drove in motor-coaches to the place where
the waters of the four largest lakes in the world, Superior, Erie,
Huron and Michigan, plunge down over a sheer precipice, a hundred
and sixty-four feet high, at the rate of a million and a half gallons
every second —for that, as Pat explained to his cousins, is what
the Falls of Niagara really are.
The Canadian, or Horseshoe Falls, are the higher, a marvellous


curve of jade-green water and fleecy-white foam falling, falling,
with a perfect rainbow arch above. And the noise!
“You can’t wonder the Indians called it Niagara—that means
‘Thunder of Waters,’” Mr. Wylde said. “What spoils the Falls,
to my mind, is the crowds; it’s enough to make them get self-
conscious, and stop falling, the thousands of people watching them
day and night.”
Sallie nodded. It was too wonderful to say much; she was
wishing that she had been the old Frenchman, Father Hennepin,
of whom their uncle had just told them, the first white man to
see Niagara. He discovered
it when there was nothing
but forest all round, and
the native tribes who lived
near, worshipping as a god
the terrible “Thunder of
Waters.”
“No power-stations, no
bridges, no hotels, no people!
It must have been lovely
then!” Sallie sighed.
“But now you shall have
a thrill that the first dis-
coverer missed,” Pat laughed.
“We’ll go under the Falls
and see what they look like
from behind.”
It was certainly most
exciting. First, in the dress-
ing-rooms, they put on
oil-skins, sou’-westers and


gum-boots, then they climbed down through the tunnels, all slippery
with wetness, which have been cut in the rock, and out upon
the railed platforms, only a few feet behind the Falls. There they
were, racing past, a great curtain of water, the air full of the roar
and the spray, as they plunged down to the whirlpool Rapids and
the huge basin of dark green water, fringed by darker green cedar
trees, which is the whirlpool itself.
“Well,” Steven said, when they reached dry land again, “we’ve
certainly seen Niagara—and heard it as well; we shan’t forget
either in a hurry.”
Back down the gorge, back to Toronto by the Lake steam-
boat, and the next stage of the eventful journey was to Port
McNicoll, where Steven and Sallie would part from their uncle and
Pat, and set out upon their voyage across the Great Lakes, Huron
and Superior, to Western Canada.
Chapter Six
BIG-SEA-WATERS
BY the shores of Gitchee Gurnee;
By the shining Big-Sea-Water,”
Sallie chanted, leaning over the steamer’s rail and watching the
gulls which swooped and mewed just as though they really were at sea.
“What on earth are you crooning about?” Steven demanded.
“Why, don’t you remember in ‘Hiawatha?’ it’s where he
stood and waited —Lake Superior is Gitchee Gurnee, the Big-Sea-
Water,” Sallie explained.
“Well, we aren’t on Lake Superior yet; this is Huron, my
good child,” said Steven, resuming his elder-brother manner.
“We’ve got to pass Sault-Sainte-Marie first and go through the


Soo Canal, and the locks which they’re obliged to have because
there’s an eighteen foot difference in level between the two lakes
and ”
"Oh, yeah!” Sallie interrupted impertinently. "You wanted
to tell me all that, didn’t you? And you wouldn’t have known a
word of it yourself if you hadn’t made friends with the second
officer last night.”
"He’s a very decent chap,” Steven said. "And we’re bound
to find out everything for ourselves now that we haven’t got
Uncle Dick to tell us. I just wanted to let you know that a lot
of things might happen before we’re really in that Gitchee Gurnee of
yours.”
"Quite so! And one of those events is the enormous breakfast
you’re going to eat,” Sallie jeered, little knowing how unpleasantly
true Steven’s prophecy was to prove where she was concerned.
"So am I, too; it’s extraordinary how hungry board-ship always
makes one, and that stuff they make out of Indian com—
succotash, don’t they call it?—is simply heavenly!”
Especially when we’ve been up for hours and hours watching
romantic things like sunrises,” grinned Steven.
“And hearing much more romantic stories! That one about
the Flying Canoe was lovely.”
I liked best hearing about all the mysterious shipwrecks, or
ship disappearances,” Steven said.
Steven s new-found friend, the second officer of the steamer,
had proved to have a splendid collection of sea—or rather, lake—
yams, some of which he had told when he found the pair so very
early on deck, watching the distant shores to starboard and the
smooth watered-blue silk surface stretching away to the horizon
on the port bow.
Steven and Sallie had heard that morning of the storms, as


fierce and dangerous as any in the open ocean, which sweep over
these inland seas; of wrecks on the steep rocky coasts, and of the
strange way in which ships have sometimes disappeared on the
Lakes, in calm weather, without any sign of fire or other accident,
and leaving no wreckage.
“Curiously enough, the very first European ship to sail the
Lakes vanished in the same way,” the second officer told them.
“That was the Griffin , nearly three hundred years ago. But she
kept close to the shore, and it’s quite likely that hostile Indians
boarded her from canoes and perhaps sank her and her crew.”
“Tell us about the Indians,” Sallie said. “The old ones, I mean,
like Hiawatha.”
“Oh, there are still plenty of legends about them, especially
in the backwoods, where I come from,” the young Canadian told
them. “The trappers and lumbermen, too, have all sorts of magic
tales, especially the French voyageurs. There’s one about a Flying
Canoe —like those birch-bark canoes, you know. It is said that
one can call it up by using certain magic spells, so that it will
come at a whistle and carry its owner over forests and mountains
to any distant lake or river. But it is ‘Black Magic,’ so if anyone
sailing in it through the air has a good thought or says a prayer
—why, down the canoe will drop to the ground, with all who are
m it.
“I like that story,” Sallie said, “Wouldn’t it be jolly to get
a Flying Canoe by some good sort of magic and travel in it all
over the world!”
After breakfast that morning, Sallie was thinking again of
the magic canoe, just imagining lazily how it would feel to float
through the air with no need to paddle or do any work. Steven
was investigating the ship’s engines, which would interest him
for hours, and the deck was nearly empty, for most of the passengers


were still lingering over breakfast. Sallie and her brother, being
such extra early birds, had eaten theirs in almost solitary state
and as quickly as possible, so that they might get back to more
exciting occupations.
The gulls were still circling and shrieking, or floating like ducks
on the smooth water.
Suddenly Sallie noticed that one of them close to the ship’s
side was chasing another much smaller bird. She caught a glimpse
of the gull’s cruel yellow eye as it swooped and missed, the little
bird fluttering away with frightened chirps and finally settling on
a wire rope over Sallie’s head. The girl sprang to her feet.
“Oh, the cruel gull will come back!’’ she cried aloud. “I
wonder, could I save the poor little thing? ’’
It was clinging to the rope, a ruffled bunch of feathers, seeming
too frightened to move, even when Sallie climbed upon the rail
and stretched a hand towards it. But it was still out of reach,
tiptoe and strain upwards as Sallie might, balancing herself at
last on one foot and leaning outwards. Too far outwards; in a
second her foot slipped, she clutched at the rope, missed it and
fell. . . .
Down, down through fathoms of water Sallie seemed to her-
self to plunge; then she had risen to the surface, gasping and
choking, only to feel herself swept sideways in the wake of the
steamer as it passed steadily on. She tried to shout, but had no
breath for it, and, as she struck out feebly, realised how absurd
it would be to think of swimming anywhere out there in Lake
Huron, miles and miles from either shore.
But if she could keep up, she might be seen. Sallie raised her-
self as high as she could in the water, to look after the steamer,
but it was already some distance away, and there were no signs
of a boat being lowered, or any excitement on deck. They had


not seen her; they would not discover she was gone until too late
to save her!
“Then I must save myself,” Sallie thought desperately. “I
won't lose my head. It’s so calm that I ought to be able to float
a long time, perhaps till another steamer comes.”
She let herself lie back on the water, the sun warm on her
face. It would have been quite pleasant if she had not been so
terribly afraid deep down in herself. Sallie never knew how long
she floated like this; fortunately her clothes were so thin and
light that they did not weigh her down, but she was afraid to tire
herself by swimming.
And then, from nowhere, a strange sound came, a kind of
thud-thud like a great heart beating. Could it be a steamer’s
engines? Sallie lifted her head and looked in all directions, but
could see nothing, although the sound grew louder and louder each
minute. Something passed between her and the sky, something was
swooping down towards the water; but by this time Sallie was too
dazed and blinded by the heat and glitter of the lake to know quite
what was happening. Was it a gull?—or the Flying Canoe?
There was the splash of little waves, and she felt them lifting
her as she floated, dashing against her; then a voice shouted across
the lake:
“Could you swim this way? I can’t get nearer.”
Dazed as she was, Sallie obeyed orders. Turning over, she
began to swim in the direction of the voice.
“That’s right!” it called again. “Keep it up —steady! Only
a few yards more.”
Sallie splashed and floundered on, saw something big and white
resting on the lake and struck out towards it, half blindly. On—
and on, until her hand touched a hard, smooth surface and she felt
arms supporting her, pulling her up out of the water.


She was lying on her back, drinking something which made her
feel better; a rug was wrapped round her and she was swaying
up and down, up and down . . . whilst the voice went on speaking.
“I saw you from overhead, floating; you fell overboard from
the Manitou, I suppose.”
“Yes,” Sallie managed to answer. “Are you . . . are you . . .
a flying canoe?”
“Something like it!” the voice laughed. “This is a small hydro-
plane, a flying boat. She can float as well as fly, and take off from
the surface, too. D’you feel well enough for me to start her again? ”
“Oh, yes!” Sallie spoke eagerly. “Can you take me back to
the steamer? My brother is there, and he’ll be so anxious.”


"Well, I’m afraid I can’t do that. I couldn t alight in the rigging
or drop you on the deck. But we’ll fly on to Sault-Sainte-Marie
and be waiting for the steamer when she reaches the Soo Canal;
she’s due there in another hour or less.”
"That’s splendid,” said Sallie, who by now was well enough
to sit up in the tiny cockpit of the hydroplane and look about her.
The owner of the voice—and the flying boat —was a boy not very
much older than Steven; now he started the engine, and they
skimmed along the surface of the water, rose in the air and flew
steadily on over the lake.
Presently they passed right over the steamer, but it was impos-
sible to send down a message, and they were too high for Sallie,
peering anxiously down, to make out anyone on her decks. It was
lovely up in the air, with so warm a sun that Salhe s clothes were
quite dry before they reached Sault-Sainte-Marie.
Here the hydroplane descended and floated once more on the
Lake’s surface like a huge sea-gull, until a small boat put off from
the quay and took Salhe and her new friend ashore, after he had
moored his craft to a buoy.
There on the quay they waited until the steamer slowly entered
the narrow passage of the canal, and Sallie, watching eagerly, saw
Steven come out on deck. Never could any boy have looked or felt
so startled as he at the sight of his sister, for he had been so busy
amongst the engines until then that he had never noticed her absence!
Now he stared at her across the narrow gulf of water, eyes and
mouth open.
"My goodness! How on earth did you get here before us?”
he shouted, leaning out across the rail; and Sallie answered.
“By the ‘Flying Cancel’ ”


Chapter Seven
WILD WEST
A FTER her exciting experience Sallie might have found the
r\ rest of the uneventful journey through Lake Superior rather
a tame affair, if that same experience had not left her some-
what limp and tired. This being so, she was quite content to sit in
a deck-chair and watch the grey-blue water stretching away to
the horizon all that afternoon and the next morning until the giant
grain elevators of Port Arthur and Fort William rose over the
steamer’s bows.
At these two towns in one, the harvest from the prairies is col-
lected, ready to be shipped on the Lake-steamers for Montreal,
and the harbour entrance is guarded by islands, big and small.
But if there was anything to see, there was not much time to see it;
in about twenty minutes Steven and Sallie were settled in the train
for the twelve-hour journey to Winnipeg.
Winnipeg, the grain city and the capital of the prairies, is a
fine town, but our two travellers did not find it so interesting as
the prairies themselves, when they began to cross them next day
in the Canadian Pacific train, which seemed mounted so high
above the track as compared with English railway carriages.
I wouldn t have believed that flatness could be so interesting,”
Sallie said. “It’s a bit like the sea, stretching away and away to
the horizon in those sort of waves of grass. Only instead of sea-
weed there are such perfectly lovely wild-flowers.”
They grew in patches of colour—blue of cornflowers, mauve
of Michaelmas daisies, pink of fireweed, which in England is willow-
herb, yellow of asters. And then, from the uncultivated prairie,
c


they passed on into the wheat-belt, with the unfenced fields of
grain stretching away as far as eye could reach, in every shade of
yellow, gold and orange, rippling and waving in the wind and sun.
“Isn’t it beautiful?” Sallie sighed.
“Yes, just think of all the bread and buns and biscuits that
com will make when it’s turned into flour,” Steven said. “It quite
gives me indigestion to think of it.”
From Winnipeg, capital of Manitoba, to Regina, capital of
Saskatchewan, another big trading town, and so on to Calgary, in
the foothills of the mountains —two days of travelling across the
plains of the wild west, where once Indians chased the huge herds
of buffalo. But long before they reached Calgary, when they were
still many miles away, they saw from the observation car in front
of the train a range of blue mountains stretching across the horizon
ahead, tiny as toys at first, but very clear, and they knew that
they were the Rockies. Gradually they grew to a great wall of snow-
topped peaks, rocky crags and forest-covered slopes.
Calgary, not a particularly interesting place in itself, was of great
importance to Steven and Sallie, for here they were to leave the
train for a week of exploration, on foot and by motor-coach, in
the Rocky Mountains, before the last lap of the journey by rail to
Vancouver. For most of the time they would be in the great Canadian
National Park, where game is so strictly preserved that many animals
are still to be found wild and in their own natural country.
“We ought really to be able to see things,” Steven said. “And
it will be fun sleeping in the camps at night. The railway runs
them, you know.”
“In tents?” Sallie asked, for, as a Brownie and Guide of long
standing, she felt quite experienced where being under canvas
was concerned.
“No—in log huts. And there’s a bigger hut for meals, only


I hope we shan’t be indoors much for them, unless it rains. So we’d
better be getting ready our shirts and shorts and ruck-sacks.”
The motor-coach run from Calgary to Banff, of about eighty
miles, took them really into the Rockies, with around them some
of the grandest scenery in the world, stretching on all sides of
"Banff, the Beautiful,” as it is quite rightly called.
From the first, Steven and Sallie had made up their minds that
they would explore as much as they could by themselves and in
their own way.
"If we stick about in crowds we shan’t see animals,” Steven
said. "It stands to reason they’ll clear out if they hear a lot of
people talking and laughing. We’ll go for the long-distance trips
in the motors, but once we’re there , we’ll be off on our own.”
This plan turned out splendidly for the first few days, and
Steven, armed with a map and a compass, began to feel confident
that he could find his way anywhere. He had promised both his
father and their Uncle Dick that they would not attempt any actual
climbing, which might have been much too dangerous for inex-
perienced mountaineers, but there was plenty to see and to do on
the lower slopes, in the forest and along the river and the lake banks.
The first day they drove to Radium and spent the night at
the camp there, wandering off by themselves during the afternoon
and the following morning, boiling their eggs for lunch in the famous
Hot Springs, and congratulating themselves on having most suc-
cessfully avoided all the rest of the party until they joined the
motor-coach for the drive back to Banff in the evening.
"We’d never have seen that moose so close if we’d been with
all those squalling women,” Steven remarked. "To-morrow we’ll
do the same when we go to Lake Louise. They say that’s a simply
gorgeous place, and all round the banks of it there’s very wild
country. So we’ll be off on our own, old thing, and leave the others


to hang about round the hotel place and be personally conducted
if they like.”
Accordingly, it was with these independent plans in their heads
that the pair started next day on a drive that carried them first
through some of the most magnificent scenery in the Rocky Moun-
tains. Perhaps more marvellous than all was the sudden and
startling view of Mount Assiniboine, a vast snow-streaked rocky
pyramid, standing up clean above forest and foothills, so bare and
steep that, like the Matterhorn of Switzerland, not even snow or
ice can cling to its topmost peaks. And as though to make it doubly
wonderful, the whole great mountain is reflected from peak to base
in the clear jade green water of a lake at its feet.
“ It doesn’t seem as though there could be anything more beautiful
than that,” Sallie sighed—yet she changed her mind when some hours
later she and Steven, after a stiff climb up a rocky path through dense
forest, came out upon an open slope, with Lake Louise before them.


Chapter Eight
SEWELLELS
THEY had escaped from the crowd according to plan and
taken their own route. Now, hot and tiring as the walk was,
they were well rewarded, as they threw themselves down on
the grass, thick with flowers, in the shade of a great Douglas pine.
Lake Louise lay below them, a marvellous blue-green in colour,
like a slab cut out of a huge turquoise. And all round it the moun-
tains towered up, snow-covered at the top, with great blue-white
glaciers spread down their sides as far as the dark band of pine-
forests, through which gleamed the foam of waterfalls.
“It’s perfect ,” Sallie said.
“Yep; it's sure an eyeful,’’ drawled Steven.
“You pig! Just as bad as those awful women! Ssh —there’s
someone coming! Look, down there amongst the bushes in a dark
sort of coat.”
“Ssh!” Steven’s voice was much more peremptory than Sallie’s
had been, and he gripped her arm tightly. For the someone in the
dark coat had emerged into the open in the shape of a big black
bear. He began to root amongst some plants with his nose in a
pig-like manner, and turned little eyes, also pig-like, upon the
strangers, but otherwise took no notice of them whatever.
“He’s eating whortleberries—they call them huckleberries here,”
whispered Sallie, as the bear moved slowly away out of sight.
“Isn’t it a queer feeling being so close to a real wild bear?”
“Well, we shouldn’t have seen that with the crowd round!”
Steven remarked. “I wish I’d had my camera, though. Hullo —
more somebodies coming, but they are people this time.”


Along the trail passed a straggle of brown-faced people, with
oily black hair and a rather grimy appearance. Some wore European
dress, but some had blankets wrapped round them, and two of the
men rode rough ponies.
“You’d hardly think those were Red Indians,” Steven said
when they, too, were out of sight. “They are, though. They were
about last night and a man told me so. I think he said they belonged
to the Cree tribe, but they’re a grubby-looking lot, anyway. I
wonder who
visitors will
But no
came to
their peace
their straw-
with some
berries for
And after-
went up the
mountains,
and more
views of
picking out
our next
be.”
one else
disturb
as they ate
berries,
wild rasp-
dessert,
wards they
slopes of the
getting new
beautiful
the lake,
the higher
peaks, Mount Leroy, Mount Victoria, Castle Mountain. Every-
where grew wild flowers, which so fascinated Sallie that her hands
were soon full, only to see others still more beautiful. When at
last Steven flung himself down to rest, she still roamed about
searching for new specimens.
“ I want to get every sort I can and press them and mount
them on muslin and silk. Then they look lovely under glass
for tables or trays,” she explained, at which Steven groaned
aloud.


“We didn’t come here for house decoration, and you make me
so hot tearing round,” he complained.
“I’ll go further away if you want to sleep, lazybones,” Sallie
retorted, and left him to the bees and grasshoppers and katydids,
buzzing and churring drowsily, so that before he knew it, Steven
really was asleep.
When he woke up the sun had left him and the long shadows
of the trees reached him where he lay.
“Goodness, it must be late!” the boy thought, sitting up and
looking at his wnst-watch. “Five o’clock! Sallie! Sallie, where
are you?”
But no Sallie answered. There was not a sign of her on the
slope where he had seen her last, or in any other direction. And
—it was two hours since he had seen her. Steven found himself
remembering the bear and the Indians; they had seemed harmless
enough earlier that afternoon, but that was when he and Sallie
were together, when he had been there to look after her. If she
came upon them alone it might be a different matter.
Steven set off up the slope at full speed, shouting Sadie’s name
every half minute or so, keeping a sharp look-out for any sign of
her. As he reached higher ground the long grass and flowers gave
place to short yellowish turf and patches of bare rock, wild, lonely-
looking slopes stretching up to where a glacier’s long pebble-covered
tail fringed the ice.
\et it was there that Steven found his first clue. He came
upon it suddenly and unexpectedly, near a mound of earth —a
bunch of flowers laid on the ground, neatly and tidily, stalks to-
gether, and so fresh that plainly they could not have long been
picked.
At once the thought of Sallie flashed into his mind. She
had been picking flowers when last he saw her; it seemed


quite likely that she might have dropped some here. If so, this
was the right direction to take, and Steven went on quickly,
glancing from side to side for more traces. Soon he saw them,
another little bunch of slightly faded flowers, placed in the
same neat way, as though put there on purpose rather than
dropped.
On purpose! In a flash, Steven began to see a meaning behind
all this. Sallie, who had been picking flowers all day, would know
that he was certain, if he saw them, to connect flowers left lying
on the ground like this, with her. And especially if they were laid
so carefully and deliberately, just like a—what was it the gypsies
called a trail, a message of this sort? Yes, patteran; that was the
word.
What if Sallie had left them as a sign to him, to guide him to
where she was? But if so, that meant she was being taken some-
where against her will, that she had not been able to get back to
him, or to send a proper message. The thought of the Indians
flashed into Steven’s mind again; or perhaps there were gangsters,
kidnappers. . . .
In any case, he must follow to see if she had left more of the
flower-signals, by which to track her. Soon, now, it would be dark.
Then he could not see them even if they were there; well, he must
push on all the faster, that was all.
Within the next quarter of a mile Steven found two more of
the neat little bunches of flowers, but by that time the whole
of the mountain-side was in shadow, the sun well behind the peaks,
though catching the slopes still on the farther bank of the lake.
There were other creatures around, too, besides himself, beasts
which would have interested him tremendously if he had had the
time or the attention to spare. From the mounds scattered over
the slope, small grey-browm owls rose as he passed, with a soft


'•v/
rustle of wings and sometimes a low wailing cry. He wondered
where they came from until he saw a movement in the mouth
of a hole which looked rather like a rabbit-burrow, and one of the
owls emerged and flew noiselessly away.
But these burrows seemed to have other occupants. Erect on
the top of one of the mounds, so that Steven could see it clearly
against the sky, was an animal like a large squirrel, only with a
short stumpy tail and a blunt, almost pug-doggish face, reminding
him rather of Bubble and Squeak, the beavers.
As he came nearer the beast also disappeared into the burrow
beneath it, but Steven forgot to examine into its habits further
when he saw, quite close to the hole, partly inside it, another of
the bunches of flowers —Sallie’s signs, as he had come to think
of them.
Steven stooped to pick it up, but as he did so, a startling sound
made him jump back, dropping the flowers in his surprise. It
was almost like the harsh clatter made by a policeman’s rattle,
most surprising and unexpected in that quiet, lonely place. But
it did not take the boy many seconds to realize that he had been
lucky to be startled.
Something was moving
just inside the burrow,
only a few inches from
where his hand had
been when he gathered
up the flowers, some-
thing dim and
shadowy, uncoiling
itself, gliding forward.
—Even in the twilight,
Steven could see it


plainly enough now, a large snake, rather squat and clumsy-looking,
with a broad flattened head and something queer about its tail.
Then, as the jarring, whirring sound came again, rather like
that made by nightjars on a summer night in England, but harsher,
Steven knew : it was a rattlesnake, and only the brute’s own
warning signal had saved him from being bitten!
It was an unnerving sort of experience, there in the dusk, the
dusk which was now growing so near to darkness that Steven knew
it was useless for him to go on. Yet how could he turn back when
he had every reason to believe Sallie was somewhere ahead, in
need of him?
He stood there, undecided, miserable, in a silence broken only
by faint squeaks, fainter hoots, and once, from a distance this
time, that sinister rattle. Or —were those the only sounds?
What was that other, somewhere down the mountain, in the direc-
tion from which he had come? There!—and it was louder this
time:
“Steven! Steven /”
Chapter Nine
FIRST JOURNEY’S END
EXT instant Steven was running down the slope, to meet
other dim figures coming up towards him —and first and
foremost was Sallie.
“Oh, Steven!’’ She was nearly crying. “I thought you were
lost, and I was so frightened.’’
“And I thought you were lost,” Steven said.
“So I was —when I wandered off looking for flowers. And
I must have gone quite the wrong way, because presently I found
myself right down by the hotel. So then I asked some of the people


there to come with me to find you, and we did, but you were
gone,” Sallie explained, rather incoherently.
“Yes, Fd gone on up the mountain, following the trail you
left,” Steven said.
“The trail I left?” Sallie stared.
“Yes, the bunches of flowers.”
“But I didn’t. I never thought of such a thing. I never went
that way.”
“Then who did? Because I’ll swear those flowers were picked
and neatly laid there by some human being.”
“Don’t you be too sure of that, young fellow,” one of the men
from the hotel who had accompanied Sallie said quietly. “Did
ye happen to see any little beasts up theer, somethin’ the cut of
a squirrel?”
‘Yes, I did —and owls too —and a rattlesnake, but ”
‘An’ were them flowers near their burrows?”
‘Yes,” Steven answered. “Right inside, once.”
‘Aye, I thought so. Well, my lad, those beasts are called
sewellels, a kind o’ a big prairie dog or gopher, they are, and
they’ve got an onaccountable sort o’ fancy for flowers. Whether
they eats ’em or not I don’t know, but you’ll find ’em near their
burrows, as you say, neatly cut off and laid out. And they share
those burrows with owls and rattlesnakes, all living together.
They’re quite happy and friendly with the owls, but I guess the
rattlesnakes are there after the owls’ eggs and the young sewellels,
so it’s a case of two’s company.”
“Well, the rattler nearly got me,” Steven said, and the man
nodded gravely when he heard the story.
“He sure did,” he said. “You’d a narrow escape then.”
It seemed that, after such a day of adventure, the Rockies
determined to show Steven and Sallie only their milder side.


They visited Emerald Mountain, Takakkaw Falls, Ten Peaks,
Golden, and other places, each, if possible, more beautiful than
the last, and found themselves finally in the train once again for
the last lap of their first journey and their first continent, which
would end at Vancouver.
Sicamaris, Kicking Horse Canyon, Spiral Tunnels—these and
other stopping places in the mountains led them on towards the
coast, until they came at last to the city on the Pacific with its
broad bay shut in by snowy mountains.
“And I’m sure I see Mrs. Sayers on the platform.” Salhe’s
head was out of the window. “At least, there’s someone exactly
like the pictures of her when she was at school with mother.
Come on, Steven, we’re here!”
r »
J IIM M
5 Hi'S I •


W:
Part II: AUSTRALASIA
Chapter One
GOING SOUTH
E’RE making quite a fresh start,” Sallie said “We’ve
gone west all the way till this minute; now it’s down the
map to the South Sea Islands—doesn’t that sound lovely?
Coral and coconuts!”
“Copra, coffee, cane and canoes!” laughed Steven. “And
more than a fortnight at sea before we get there; that’s what
appeals to me”
They had just waved good-bye to Vancouver on its beautiful
harbour, ringed round with mountains, the most English city
Steven and Sallie had seen in Canada, very clean and new. At
the wharves as they steamed out, ships were loading wheat, timber
and apples; tinned fruit, too, from the great orchards and “can-
neries which they had seen, for the British Columbian climate
grows most things.
The Pacific behaved according to its name during that south-
ward voyage. “Flying-fish weather,” as sailors call it, when shoals
of those quaint sea-elves rose and skimmed along the surface as
the steamer's bow cut the water. One was even found dead in
Salhe’s cabin, having jumped through the open porthole, and its
lacy wings, saved for bookmarkers, were her first South Sea
trophies.
There were dolphins, too, and porpoises, albatrosses following
the wake, and even a whale, spouting like a fountain, with the
strange milky phosphorescence at night lighting up the sea.


Games, swimming, dancing and sports made the days pass
quickly, and it was of one of those deck sports that Sallie was
reminded as they threaded their way amongst the Pacific Islands.
“It’s like that game of guiding the other person blindfolded
in and out between bottles and boxes on the deck,” she said.
“Some of the islands are such tiny ones, too; our big steamer
could easily trip over them.”
“There are about two hundred and fifty of the Fiji Islands,
and people living on more than eighty,” Steven said. “The
Captain told me so, and that the name is really ‘Viti,’ only the
old discoverers spelt it wrongly. The biggest Islands are Viti Levu
and Tanua Levu, and Suva, the largest town in the South Seas,
is the capital of Viti Levu.”
“It’s the small ones I like best; they’re exactly what coral
islands ought to be,” Sallie said. “A coral reef round a lagoon
with an island in the middle, or sometimes no island at all, just
the reef with palms growing on it.”
“They call those atolls. But some of the Fijis are volcanic,
with tall, peaky mountains. We’ll soon be at Suva, to see for
ourselves.”
And Suva was certainly worth seeing. The beautiful harbour,
with the usual coral reef making a natural breakwater, is sur-
rounded by low hills, whilst mountains rise behind. White against
green, Suva looked, with some fine buildings, and once ashore, it
proved a fascinating town, full of colour and life.
The Company’s Agent, determined to show Steven and Sallie
everything possible in a short stay, was amused when they
demanded coconut milk and breadfruit, remembering their desert-
island books.
“But it isn’t milk at all,” Sallie said disappointedly. “More
like lemonade —nice, though.”


“Bread-fruit’s a fraud, too, if you expect hot rolls,” Steven
declared. “It tastes like fried potatoes, only sweeter. But no
one could be disappointed in the bananas. They never taste like
this at home.”
One of the chief roads in Suva is called “All Nations Street,”
for here can be seen British, Japanese, Chinese, Hindoos, Sikhs
and other Indian races, as well as Fijians, Samoans and natives
of various islands. The Fijians themselves are tall and strong,
with tremendous bushes of frizzy hair sticking straight out and
sometimes bleached with lime to a whitish yellow colour.
A drive inland showed Steven and Sallie the beauties of the


island. From high above the town there was a marvellous view
over the harbour, with the white line of surf on the barrier ree .
and beyond the two-peaked mountain Korambamba.
“That nearest island is Nukulan,” Mr. Grey, the Agent, to
them "The farther one is Bega, where a queer tribe live who
are supposed to be able to walk barefoot over hot stones. Now
we shall see some of the Fijian bush, or jungle, with real tropical
trees and flowers.” ~.„ , ...
They turned inland through lovely wooded hills, covered with
palms, bread-fruit and other trees, whilst everywhere were shrubs
with scented flowers, tube-rose, frangipani, hibiscus, datura and
lovely fairylike orchids like those in the hot-houses at Kew.
Now and then waterfalls cascaded down the hills, or they passed
native houses with mat walls and thatched roofs. Near the Rewa
River were the cane fields, with the great sugar factory at Nanoon,
and the travellers were provided with long green walking-sticks
of sugar-cane and shown how to cut off and chew pieces for the
sweet juice.
The journey back to Suva was by motor-launch down the
splendid Rewa River, a busy scene, with barges of sugar, bamboo
rafts loaded with pineapples, mangoes, bananas and other fruit,
and small native dugouts from which the occupants were catching
fish with long bamboo spears.
Beautiful as this tropical scenery was, Steven and Sallie wanted
to see something else still more, and that, as they explained to
Mr. Grey, was a real “Blue Lagoon coral reef.
“Then you shall this afternoon at low-tide,” he told them.
“But you must wear the oldest rags you’ve got and very ancient
shoes. Coral is most destructive to clothes.”
Accordingly a pair of scarecrowish figures motor-launched forth
that afternoon, speeding across the harbour to Namuka Reef,


part of which was still under several feet of water, so that they
could float above and look down into a fishy fairyland.
Here was live, growing coral in the most gorgeous colours,
rose-pink and crimson, green and blue and yellow, quite unlike
the bleached dead pieces seen in collections. Through these delicate
coral branches and the lovely floating seaweeds, like mermaid’s
hair, fishes of queer shapes and dazzling colours darted to and
fro, some striped black and orange or blue and green, others trans-
parent as glass, or gold and silver. Then there was the colour of
the water, changing from purple to sapphire, from sapphire to
turquoise or jade-green.
“I always loved the Zoo Aquarium,” Sallie sighed delightedly.
‘‘But they can’t grow live coral there. I never imagined anything
like it.”
Perhaps Steven enjoyed himself even more when they landed
on part of the reef which the tide had left. Here the pools were
filled with queer creatures, fish, crabs, and sea-anemones, and
there were shells, coral, and other treasures to discover. It was
a most interesting place to explore, but the coral, as Mr. Grey
said, tore both shoes and clothes.
Sallie excitedly discovered a baby octopus in a cleft, and Steven
had a more unpleasant adventure. Stepping upon a thick mat of
seaweed, his foot went through into what seemed a crack in the
reef—when suddenly he felt the sides of the crack close on his
ankle, holding him prisoner.
Struggling vainly to free himself, he shouted to Mr. Grey,
wondering for a horrible moment if a shark could have caught
him.
‘‘Look here, some beast’s got my foot!” he gasped. “It’s
nipping like anything!”
Mr. Grey pushed away the seaweed.


“HTn: a nasty business if you’d been alone,” he said. "It’s
a giant clam, a double shell as big as a meat-dish. Keep still and
I’ll prise it open.”
He stuck his heavy iron-shod stick into the shell’s jaws, using
it as a lever to force them slowly open, until Steven could with-
draw his foot, stiff and bruised, but not seriously hurt.
“I say, did that brute want to eat me?” he asked.
“Probably it just contracted automatically when your foot
touched it,” Mr. Grey said.
“And wouldn’t you bite if a great clumsy foot trod right in
your mouth?” Sallie added. “It’s the clam I pity most!”
Chapter Two
FARTHER SOUTH
IT would be hard to find a greater contrast than between little
Suva and Auckland, the largest city in New Zealand, which
Steven and Sallie reached a few days later. But Auckland is
beautiful too, with its deep-water harbour where great liners can
moor alongside the quays, and the fine University College rising
high in the middle of the city.
Their Aunt Nancy Hamden, who lived in Auckland and met them
on the quay, told Steven and Sallie what a strange town it really was.
“It’s built on extinct volcanoes,” she said. “There are several
perfect cones right in Auckland, like One Tree Hill and Mount
Eden, and from higher parts you can see sixty-three craters. But
most of the North Island of New Zealand is volcanic, as you’ll
see later. Just a few days here and then we’ll start in my ancient
car to visit wonders.”
Aunt Nancy was tall, thin, and tireless, just the right person


to act as guide. They saw Auckland, from the new War Memorial
Museum to the Windmill, nearly a century old and part of the
first town. They bathed and picnicked on several of the marvellous
beaches—one of which is called “Ninety-mile Beach,” and “that
just tells you!” as Sallie said. They sat in their aunt’s garden,
where roses bloomed all the year round, and heard the clear
chiming notes of the Bell Bird and the Parson Bird, the “Kori”
and the “Tui,” as they cut capers in the air or fluttered restlessly
from bough to bough in their characteristic ways.
Their travels began early one morning, and took them first
through forests of towering Kauri pines, some of the best timber
in the world. This evergreen Bush was like nowhere else: there
were gullies filled with tree-ferns, tall as palms; wonderful flowering
trees grew by blue lakelets, and new and beautiful flowers were
everywhere, exciting Sallie as usual.
When she dashed into waist-deep ferns to pick a crimson creeper,
Steven expostulated.
“I say, Sallie, you are an idiot! Aunt Nancy, isn’t thick under-
growth like that dangerous? There must be snakes and things!”
“Never a one!” their aunt laughed. “New Zealand is like
Ireland in that, only more so! We haven’t a poisonous snake or
insect in the country, so there’s a paradise for you! Our reptiles
are queer, like the Tuitara Lizard, which is really an extinct kind.
In fact, several of our creatures are extinct or ought to be! But
the time to see Bush birds and beasts is after dark, as they’re mostly
nocturnal. That s why it’s so quiet in the daytime.”
Sallie had returned with a thick trail of creeper, which her aunt
took from her.
“You said you were thirsty, Steven; well, here’s a drink for you.”
She cut the vine-stem at a joint as she spoke, and a clear pink
liquid flowed out, which Steven found most refreshing.


“Yes, the rata’s a strange plant,” Mrs. Hamden said. “Here’s
another commoner kind which is tough enough for rope. Still
another is so strong that it strangles forest trees. I say, are you
two game to camp in the bush to-night? Sallie and I will sleep
in the car and Steven in the small tent; then we may see at least
one of our semi-extinct creatures. We’ll boil the billy for tea on the
small oil-stove; a fire would frighten everything away, and there’s
a full moon to see by.”
Needless to say, Steven and Sallie were delighted at the prospect
of the adventure; by sunset the car was drawn up amongst bushes
at the side of a clearing, and the three established themselves on
this “grand stand,” snugly wrapped in rugs. Soon the open space
of grass and ferns was flooded with light from the rising moon.
“Sit quiet, and watch,” their aunt whispered.
The Bush was not so silent now as by day. There were squeaks
and rustlings, whistlings and mewings, and suddenly a weird cry
from close by.
“ More-Pork —More-Pork! ”
“Gracious, what’s that?” Sallie cried
“What it says—a More-Pork,” Mrs. Hamden laughed. “It’s
a kind of small owl. And listen —there’s a Kaka screaming; it’s
something like the Kea: they are both night-parrots, and hop about
on the ground, unlike ordinary parrots. The Kea has a bad name
for killing sheep, but that’s never been quite proved, though it has
a wickedly strong curved beak.”
For some time they sat silent in the aromatic-smelling night,
then there came a rustling in the fern, and a brown bird ran quickly
across the clearing, jerking its tail up and down.
“That’s a weka, or wood-hen,” their aunt whispered. “It
can’t fly, and it’s a common, stupid bird, rather like an ordinary
hen. Ah, listen! We’re in luck. I thought this was a good place.”


A loud vibrating cry came from near by, and was answered by
another. The three waited breathlessly until a creature crept out
into the moonlight and began to move about clumsily, thrusting
its head forward and lifting its large feet high.
“ Oh, / know! It’s a kiwi! ” Sallie pinched Steven’s arm excitedly.
“Fve seen pictures.”
“A kiwi it is, and here’s its mate,” Mrs. Hamden said. “They’re
wingless, really an extinct species, and getting rare, too, so we’re
fortunate. Look at the queer feathers, more like spikes.”
For some minutes they watched the kiwis, moving about and
pecking the ground for grubs with their long curved beaks. Then
the queer birds vanished suddenly.
“Most likely they winded us. They’re shy, and their powers
of smell immensely strong for birds.”
“I suppose they’ve developed it because of being wingless
and helpless,” said Steven.
“Yes, that’s what naturalists
say. Now we had better go to
bed, after having seen so much
night life,” Aunt Nancy said.
“We’re going to have
an interesting day
to-morrow, exploring
caves.”
“I don’t think I
really like caves,” said
Sallie doubtfully.
“They’re so dark and
damp.”
“You’ll like these,”
her aunt promised.


Chapter Three
CAVES AND CRATERS
SALLIE still felt uncertain when they set out next day into
the heart of a wood-covered mountain to see the Waitomo
Caves. Along corridors, up and down steep stairways and
ladders they went until they stood in the “Cathedral,” with a
domed roof and glittering walls and pillars, pure white or palest
pink; then to the “Organ-loft,” with pipes of creamy limestone
exactly like those of a man-made organ; to caves where fairy shawls
of glittering lacework draped the walls and thick soft-looking folds
like a blanket gave ringing sounds when struck. But the greatest
wonder of all came when they boarded a boat and set out on an
underground river, jet-black and mysterious. Slowly they crept
along until they reached a cave where walls and roof were all
covered with glinting stars of blue fire, each reflected in the dark
water and giving a most unearthly light.
“It’s the Glow-worm Grotto,” Mrs. Hamden said. “Yes,
myriads of real glow-worms. Look at the silk threads hanging down
to catch insects who are attracted by the lights.”
“It isn’t real!” Sallie said, gazing with all her eyes. “It’s the
fairiest place I’ve ever seen. I didn’t know caves could be like
this. Are there any more about? ”
There were, it appeared. Besides the Waitomo Caves there
were the Ruakuri and the Aranui Caverns quite near and even
larger, and they set off for them at once. Here they saw the “ Bride’s
Jewels,” like chains, pendants and earrings of diamonds hanging
from walls and ceiling, and the “Bridal Cake,” which was exactly
like an enormous wedding-cake, white and gleaming, in the middle


of a glittering cave, ready for fairy wedding-guests. In Ruakuri,
too, was a hidden waterfall, thundering down somewhere in the
depths of the earth —a waterfall which could only be heard and
never seen.
Aranui held the “Crystal Palace,” the “Fairies’ Walk” and
the “Temple of Peace,” all as beautiful as their names; it was
just a new and marvellous world underground, and Sallie stood
blinking when at last they came out into daylight again.
“I feel as if
Fd lived in caves
for years,” she
said. “And I’ll
never say I don’t
like them again.”
The next stage
of their explor-
ations was very
different: they
spent the night in
a hotel-houseboat
on the Wanganui
and went on by
steamer next day, through gorges curtained with ferns, between
forest-covered mountains, along the river which the Maoris say is
full of magic and mystery.
Here for the first time Steven and Sallie saw something of
these Maoris themselves, the New Zealand natives. Their ancient
earthworks were high on the hills above the river, their new villages
low amongst the trees on its banks, amid flax or tobacco fields, with
carved and painted Meeting houses, and “patakas,” or food stores,
perched on poles like pigeon-houses, out of the way of animals.


“The village names are curious,” their aunt told Steven and
Sallie. “They show the teaching of early missionaries, for ‘Koriniti’
means Corinth, ‘Atene,’ Athens, and ‘Hiruharama’ is the nearest
the Maoris could get to Jerusalem. But now we’re near Pipiriki,
where we’ll leave the steamer to go and see a mountain —the Mountain
of New Zealand.”
They came upon it suddenly at the end of a forest avenue, tower-
ing up from the plain in front of them, the great volcanic cone
with a covering of perpetual snow, which Captain Cook saw first
from the sea and called Mount Egmont, but which the Maoris
name “Tower of Taranaki.”
“The Maoris think each of their volcanoes is a great giant,”
Mrs. Hamden said, “and that they once fought together. Taranaki
or Egmont was defeated and fled nearer the sea-shore, leaving a
deep cleft where he once stood —the gorge of the Wanganui River.
Certainly he looks a giant to-night.”
They watched the snow cap of Mount Egmont turn rose-coloured
as the sun sank, and then gleam silver in the moonlight, before
they once more camped for the night in Aunt Nancy’s faithful
old car, ready for their cross-country run next day to the country
of Craters, Fire and Water, and to at least one adventure which
Steven and Sallie would never be likely to forget.
Chapter Four
“HAERE MAI!”
IT must be rather like living on the lid of a boiler which might
blow up at any minute,” Steven said, gazing thoughtfully
at a basin in which liquid mud was bubbling like hot cocoa,
whilst a few yards away steam was rising in jets from a blue pool.


They had just seen a geyser of boiling water, stones and mud, spout
like a fountain five hundred feet in the air with a mighty roar,
whilst in the distance towered the two great active volcanoes,
Ruapehu and Tongariro, smoke-tipped cones of snow, which they had
passed earlier in the day.
Since then they had motored across the Taupo Plateau, along
the shores of the deep crater Lake Taupo, still edged with pumice
and lava, each mile taking them further into that region of Fire
and Water, which is called the Hot Lake District of New Zealand.
“And once,” Aunt Nancy said gravely, answering Stevens
words, “the boiler did blow up. We shall be able to see the place
very soon, where that happened.”
They turned off from the main road, and presently from a
hill-top looked down into a great chasm, in some parts nearly a
thousand feet deep, desolate and weird, with a dark, flat-topped
mountain beyond.
“That is Mount Tarawera,” their aunt said. “And the Lake
below us is Roto-Mahana. It happened nearly fifty years ago, in
1886, but I remember it well, though I was a small child.”
She told them how that June midnight there came first earth-
quake shocks, then a roar which woke sleepers a hundred miles
away, as Tarawera, extinct for thousands of years, exploded in
flames, carrying up with it all the water of Lake Roto-Mahana,
to fall on the countryside in boiling mud, red-hot stones and choking
dust. Pitchy darkness and an increasing roar lasted for hours and
spread for miles. The dust of the eruption lay three inches thick
fifty miles away. Whole Maori villages with their inhabitants
were destroyed, and on the banks of Lake Roto-Mahana was black
desolation where the world-famous Pink and White Terraces had been.
“I can just remember seeing them,” Mrs. Hamden said. “Like
giant steps of white and rose-pink marble, rising from the lake


with bright blue pools on each terrace, and cascades trickling down
between. It was like fairyland—and it was destroyed in a moment
when the rift over there burst open. Well, we must get on now
and see how the Maoris of to-day make pets of their volcanoes.”
They camped that night in the car between Tikitapu and Roto-
Kakahi, the Blue and Green Lakes, beside a little lagoon fringed
with tree-ferns, and with a white sandy bottom. Such an inviting
lagoon that Steven, waking early, called Sallie to come for a bathe
before breakfast.
The water felt delightfully cool as they ran in waist-deep, but
Sallie gave a cry of surprise.
“Ooh! The sand’s red-hot! It’s burning my feet!”
“I should think so —just look! There’s a boiling spring bubbling
up. Well, I must say this is a most convenient country; H. and C.
turned on free!”
After dressing, Sallie discovered a tiny hot spring in which
to boil their breakfast eggs, and they started directly afterwards
for Whakarewarewa Geyser Valley, with its unpronounceable-
looking name and Maori villages.
Some of the queerest villages in the world, those must be. A
rough wooden stockade surrounds the biggest, the high entrance
gates carved with comical figures. The huts are of wood, with
thatched or mat roofs, and nearly all have private hot springs as
bathrooms, screened with mats or manuka brushwood. The Maoris
bathe, too, in the larger pools, sitting up to their necks in the steam-
ing water, while the brown babies (who fascinated Sallie) tumble
in and out round the margin.
There were beaming brown faces on all sides —good-looking
faces, too, many of them, and cries of “Haere Mai!” or “Welcome!”
Some of the Maori women wore European dress, others native kilts
of grass plaited and dyed in beautiful patterns, a few the kiwi


feather mantles, so much prized for softness and lightness, which
take two years to make.
Everywhere the women were occupied making use of their
constant hot water supply. In one pool they washed clothes; in
others they were cooking, choosing those in which the water was
tasteless, boiling the food in flax baskets, or steaming it in blow-
holes. Ovens called hangi were made by digging holes and filling
them with red-hot stones from the springs, on which the meat or
fish is laid, spread over with leaves, soaked with boiling water
and then covered with earth till cooked.
Seeing that Steven and Sallie wanted to stay and watch a native
dance, their aunt decided that she would go to the Rotorua Sana-
torium.
“ Being ancient and rheumatic, I’ll have a hot chemical bath
while I’m waiting for you,” she said, and drove off.
The Poi Dance, with its graceful poses and rhythmic move-
ments, was very fascinating. The girls who took part in it wore
brilliantly coloured woven-grass petticoats and feather capes and
held a “Poi” in each hand, a kind of white bobbin or spindle made
from the pith of a plant, which they clap together something like
castanets, whilst they sing in a musical chant which is very beautiful.
When it was over, Steven and Sallie planned to walk on to
the other village, Ohinemutu, on the banks of the Rotorua, and set
off across the Geyser Valley, which is fringed by a strip of bush.
Rocks, twisted with volcanic action and striped or blotched
with vivid colours, surrounded pools of water or liquid mud; hillocks
like small volcanoes rose up here and there, and the pair were
examining one of these when Steven’s attention was attracted by
the sudden roaring outburst of a geyser from a blow-hole.
He had only been watching it for a moment when Sallie’s voice
rose above the hissing of the water. “Help! Help!” she cried.


Chapter Five
MUD AND MAORIS
looked round.
Ie had disappeared;
/ her voice gave him
;ion, and next instant
scrambling up the
hillock —to find him-
into a crater at
of which thick
brownish mud
bubbled wickedly.
And Sallie clung
to the curved lip
of the crater some
yards below, her
terrified face up-
turned.
“I slipped
down,” she gasped.
“The edges gave
way.”
“I’ll get you, don’t be afraid,” Steven said, but with all his
stretching he could not reach Sallie’s hands.
“Oh, be careful—you’ll fall, too!” she moaned. “It’s all
crumbling —I can’t hold on much longer.”
“You must” Steven’s face was white as he saw that boiling
seething pool above which his sister dangled, then looked round


desperately. "Just a few minutes, old girl—then I’ll bring some-
thing.”
He slid and scrambled down the hillock and ran into the tangled
bush, not a hundred yards away, where a glimpse of crimson flowers
reminded him of his aunt’s words. The rata —he dragged down the
coils of creeper twisted round a manuka tree, hacking at it with his
knife.
"It’s tough enough, anyway,” he thought. "That’s plenty.”
Back up the hillock Steven sped, and knelt again on the
crater’s edge, lowering the rope-like rata, twisted into a loop.
"Get a good grip: slip it under your arms if you can, but go
slow,” he told Sallie, and she obeyed, gradually working it over
her head and shoulders. But when Steven tried to drag her up,
he found it more difficult than he expected, with the lava edge
crumbling aw r ay at every movement. And there was no way of
fastening the rope; all the w r eight came on Iris arms and shoulders.
Then there w r as the sound of running feet, a pair of wiry brown
hands seized the rata, and Steven could feel that another man
was behind him. He pulled with him, and there was Sallie in
safety, with tw r o Maoris smiling and pressing their hands. One of
them w r as old, with the deep marks like blue scars of moko or
tattooing on his face, the other quite young, but both evidently
delighted at having been able to help. When Steven thought of
what might have happened he found it difficult to thank them
enough, or praise them enough to his aunt when they joined her
later.
Chief Hongi and his son Paka wTote their names in Salhe’s
pocket diary, although she knew she would never need that to
remind her of the two Maoris, and they insisted on taking her and
Steven to the Fairy Springs under Mount Ngongotaha, one of the
loveliest sights of Rotorua.


Here in the blue pool surrounded with ferns and flowers, with
its bottom of silver sand through which a clear spring bubbled
up, thousands of beautiful rainbow trout live, circling round, to
and fro, so tame that they took crumbs from Sallie’s hand.
“That’s certainly nicer as a last memory than the mud crater,”
Sallie said, as they waved good-bye to the Maoris. “But the other
will be exciting to remember!”
The two were remembering that and many other things, as
they sat, a fortnight later, after they had visited South Island
as well as North, on the steamer which was carrying them to
Australia.
“It’s a jolly good thing that we have these plain patches of
sea every now and then,” Steven said. “Otherwise I’m sure we
should get sight-seeing indigestion badly, especially in New
Zealand, where there’s something of everything.”
“And everything beautiful,” added Sallie. “Just think of
the mountains and forests we saw in South Island.”
“Where the wild cattle and sheep and pigs live, whose ancestors
ran away from the early colonists. And Christchurch and the
Downs where New Zealand Canterbury mutton comes from!”
Steven laughed.
“The waterfalls and glaciers ”
“The Sounds, just like Norwegian fiords, Aunt Nancy says—
Doubtful Sound, and Dusky and Milford.”
“And the lakes —have you ever seen water nearly navy-\A\xe
like Wakatipu? ” said Sallie. “Oh dear, New Zealand is a dreadfully
difficult place to leave.”
“Only if we didn’t, we shouldn’t see the other places,” Steven
wisely remarked.


Chapter Six
THE BLUE SEA-HORSE
HAVE you seen our harbour?” The question written across
the sail of a small yacht was the first thing Steven and
Sallie saw as their steamer passed between the North
and South Heads into Port Jackson.
“As if we could help it!” Steven was gazing round at the bays,
beaches and bush which border the biggest and most beautiful
of harbours—at least, that is what Australians say, and there are
very few who will contradict them. And the busy-ness of those
blue waters! Steamers, from the largest liners to the smallest ferry-
boats; sailing craft, from a splendid four-masted barque down to
the tiniest of yachtlets; men-of-war and merchantmen, cargo-
tramps and canoes—all the shipping of the world seems to be
there.
They passed under the huge bridge which now joins both sides
of the harbour, on up to Circular Quay, alongside which the biggest
ships can lie in deep water. Here they were met by their cousin,
Cecil, who was only three years older than Steven and training
to be an engineer. He was to show them round Sydney and after-
wards take them “up country” to his parents’ sheep-run.
Sydney, built round and about scores of bays, points and
inlets, with the Blue Mountains exactly representing their name
in the background, could never be a city like Melbourne, of long
wide streets, straight lines and immense blocks, though there are
plenty of fine buildings and streets.
But while Cecil wanted them to see the Post Office and Art
Gallery, Sallie and Steven preferred those things which could not


be seen elsewhere, the really Australian things. Boating on the
harbour in moonlight as bright as day, picnics up the beautiful
Hawksbury River, surf-riding at Manly, all this was what they
really enjoyed, especially the last. It was so thrilling to sit astride
a kind of sea-toboggan and ride in on the crest of a huge roller —
thrown, and left gasping on the beach, as though by a vicious horse,
unless the mount was carefully handled, and coaxed through the
surf.
Those ocean beaches of Sydney—Manly, Bondi, Coogee—were
very new to the English pair. There were such crowds in every
kind of swimming dress, under brilliant-coloured umbrella tents,
or sun-bathing as on British or Continental beaches; but never
in Europe could be seen that thundering surf, those coral white
sands, sprinkled with small star-shaped shells as thickly as the
Milky Way. Nor would there be volunteer surf-savers, ready to
rescue swimmers in difficulties, nor that queer tower at the top
of which a man was always perched.
“What’s he doing up there?” Steven asked, as they sauntered
with their cousin and some friends along Bondi Beach.
“He’s a shark-watcher —he rings a bell to warn bathers if
there’s a shark anywhere near the beach,” Cecil said carelessly.
“But it doesn’t happen often.”
The mere idea that a shark ever happened kept Sallie rather
quiet for a few minutes, but determined that no one should guess
her nervousness. Once in the water she soon forgot everything but
sun, sea and the surf through which they swam into the smoother
water of a partly rock-sheltered lagoon. Here they raced, dived
and played games with the huge rubber ball and rubber animals
which some of the party had brought.
One of these creatures was a blue horse, large enough to
carry two astride it, and presently a race w r as arranged, out to a


floating raft, Steven and Sallie riding the steed, whilst other
couples bestrode a pink elephant and a purple crocodile. Only
paddling with the feet was allowed, which made it extremely
easy to capsize the "mounts” during this wobbly and uncertain
progress. Cecil, being too lazy to take part, was dozing on a
sun baked rock, whilst others, from the beach, cheered on the
racers.
Steven and Sallie managed to keep ahead and rounded the
raft in good style. It was when they were farthest out that the
sharp clang-clang of a bell sounded, but it meant nothing to them
until they noticed a general movement of swimmers and surf-
riders towards the beach, whilst those ashore were shouting and
waving their arms.
"Steven!” Sallie’s voice was unsteady. "It’s his bell—the
watcher’s! That means ”
Before the word was spoken it was there, the black triangular
fin cutting through the water, only a few yards away.
"Splash with your feet!” Steven ordered. "Make lots of noise,
that’s the thing to do.”
But for all their splashing and shouting the fin came nearer,
so near that now they could see the long grey shape under the
surface.
"Slip off, Sallie—try to swim back to the raft; I’ll keep the
brute here,” Steven said, splashing vigorously.
“No!” Sallie said, and splashed too.
The fin disappeared; there was a flash of white water as the
shark, turning over, shot forward. Steven felt the harsh slippery
surface under his bare feet, then, of a sudden, their rubber mount
lurched sideways.
What happened next was hard to describe; there was a sharp
explosion, a kind of sighing groan, and Steven and Sallie found


themselves thrown into
£ ' accord thev struck out' for t
accord they struck out for the
raft —and reached it.
Scrambling on to the top,
Sallie tucked her feet under her.
“Ooh!” she gasped. “I never
thought I’d get here with all my
legs! ”
Steven sat up, pushing the wet hair
out of his eyes, stared and began to
chuckle.
“D’you know what happened, Sal?”
he said. “The shark bit the poor old horse instead of us —and it
burst! What’s more, I do believe it gave him such a shock that
it frightened him away.”
Certainly there was no sign of the shark anywhere, not so much


as a fin, nothing on the surface of the water except the deflated
blue skin of the rubber horse.
This Sallie retrieved when a surf-boat came off and rescued
them from the raft. As Steven said, they could at least keep
this touching relic of the place where the old horse died.
Chapter Seven
UP COUNTRY
SOMEBODY outside the window waked Sallie; three some-
bodies, big-headed, grey-and-brown-feathered, perched on a
railing, laughing loudly, impishly.
“Why, they’re real Laughing Jackasses —Kookaburras, that’s
the right name.’’ She was leaning out of the window now, and the
air smelt like sunshine, the scent of “up-country,’’ of the golden
wattle, growing in masses over on the hillside.
Beyond the kookaburras’ perching-rail were some of those blue-
grey gum-trees which make the Australian bush so silvery and
mysterious, and amongst the branches furry shapes were moving.
“It looks’’—Sallie screwed up her eyes—“exactly like a
Teddy-bears’ Picnic! I must get up and see.”
Out by the gum-trees, Cecil and Steven found her, hugging
an armful of the cuddlesome comical creatures, so exactly like
live “Teddies” even to the boot-button eyes.
“Oh, couldn’t I have one of the babies for a pet?” she begged,
but Cecil shook his head.
“It’s no good. These Koalas, or native bears, never live long
out of Australia, simply because you can’t get them fresh gum-
leaves, and they won’t eat anything else; after finishing one tree
they move to the next. Now, if you’d like a young Too!”


But Sallie looked doubtfully at the big tame kangaroo in the
paddock, which Cecil called a “boomer” or “old man.” Kangaroos
didn’t strike her as cuddlesome pets, although they had certainly
seen much smaller ones bounding away through the scrub during
yesterday’s travels, Red kangaroos and Wallaroos.
“Wallabies are smaller still, not much bigger than rabbits,”
Cecil told her. “And even kangaroo rats and kangaroo mice are
shaped and pouched like the big ones, so you can have all sizes!”
“A mouse-sized kangaroo would be rather nice—or a possum
with a stripy tail, like the one we saw yesterday,” Sallie said,
and thinking of the opossum made her remember what a lovely
journey it had been up from Sydney, at first through the gorges
of the Blue Mountains, then by hills and rivers, afterwards along
red sandy tracks through endless bush, where pale-blue violets
grew and curious flannel-flowers, looking exactly as though cut
out from grey flannel, stalks, leaves and all. Very quiet the bush
was, except for the cracking cry of a stock-whip bird, or the
screams of the flocks of parrots, pink and grey rosellas, or sulphur-
crested galahs. Queer to be in a country where yellow and white
cockatoos were common, even troublesome, birds!
There were things to learn about Australia. This bush, for
instance, wasn’t so harmless as that of New Zealand; Cecil had
shouted to her at once to look out for snakes, when she began to
pick some crimson waratahs, rather like peonies.
Then, picnicking by the roadside, something nipped Steven’s
ankle; he had trespassed on the territory of bull-dog ants, with
sharp pincers and tempers.
Another lesson for Steven came, too, when, in negotiating a
fence, he put his hand near the hole which held the slip rail.
Something small and dark flashed out, just missing his hand as
he sprang back.


"A whip-snake!” Cecil exclaimed. “Being little, they creep
into holes, and they’re very poisonous. I ought to have warned
you always to take a rail by the middle.”
Later that afternoon Cecil stopped the car.
“If we go along to that billabong—it’s a water-hole —there’s
just a chance of seeing something rare. We’re still quite back-of-
beyond up here,” he said.
“An Emu?” Steven aired his knowledge of Australian natural
history.
“No; you get the big birds farther north, though. This is
different.”
The pool was surrounded by low bushes, and here they hid
to watch, Cecil observing some tracks in the mud with satisfaction.
“Our friend’s about,” he said. “Now keep quiet.”
For a time nothing appeared except a big iguana lizard and
some praying mantises, which Australians call lady-birds. Sallie
was watching one of these “pray,” raising jointed arms to catch
a fly, when Cecil whispered:
“Look!”
A head peered through the water-plants, showing a flat
beak.
“A duck ” Sallie began, and stopped. The body which
followed was fur-covered, with four webbed feet instead of the
expected two.
Plop! The queer creature slipped into the water and swam
across, disappearing on the other side amongst the reeds.
“That’s a platypus, or duck-bill, half-beast, half-bird, sort of
prehistoric, Cecil said. You re lucky to have seen it; many
bom Aussies haven’t.”
Lucky in many ways, Sallie thought now, as she followed the
boys round the garden, full of such a mixture of homely and strange


flowers. This house on Mullabaroomba station was so jolly, with
its wide, creeper-covered verandahs, and their uncle and aunt as
kind as could be, whilst they had already discovered what a good
guide to “Down-under” Cecil made.
“We’ve got two sights for you to-day,” he was saying now.
“The sheep are being driven in from the Ranges; that’s worth
seeing; and there’s a corroboree this evening at the Blackfellows’
camp. Bother! Those wretched rabbits have been at mother’s
begonias again! Just look at that!”
“Are you troubled with them much?” Steven asked.
“I’ll say we are!” Cecil answered grimly. “We put wire
everywhere, but it’s no good. They’ve even learnt to climb trees!
Dingoes—wild dogs, you know—are a great plague, too, to sheep-
farmers. Well, it’s breakfast now.”
Steven had felt rather amused when Cecil described sheep as
a sight, but he changed his mind when they stood, that afternoon,
on the wattle-covered hill, from which the flat plain stretched
beyond Mullabaroomba.
For that yellowish plain seemed to be moving, like shifting
sands, towards the station paddocks, and from it came sounds,
the drumming of innumerable small hoofs, an incessant baa —aa —aa,
baa-
■aa —aa.
Here and there darker and more quickly moving spots showed
up, the smaller sheep-dogs, the larger boundary-riders, adding
barks and the sharp crack of whips to the growing tumult.
“You don’t mean to say those are sheep?" Steven asked
incredulously.
“Yes —just sheep.”
“How many have you, then?” Sallie asked.
“Oh, about twenty thousand,” Cecil answered carelessly, making
the others gasp. “Look here, if we cut down here quickly through


the gully and across the creek, we’ll get to the paddock in time
to see them driven in.”
He was already running down the wattle-covered slope, and
Steven and Sallie followed. The gully proved to be an unexpectedly
steep-sided rocky cutting leading down to the creek, where sand-
banks stood up here and there above the shallow water, and rocks
made stepping stones.
Cecil and Sallie crossed to the further side almost dry-shod,
and waited for Steven, who had lingered to look at a large jew-
lizard who erected curious frills and barked like a dog at the sight
of him. He had not yet appeared round a bend in the gully when
Cecil gave an exclamation.
“My word! Look —listen! The sheep have scented the water,
they’re mad with dust and thirst, poor brutes, by now, and some
have broken away down the gully to get to the creek! That means
thousands’ll follow r —sheep do! I hope to goodness Steven gets
down in time —Hi! Steve! Coo-ee-ee!”
“In time?” Sallie looked frightened.
“Yes. If he’s caught between those unclimbable rocks —and
the sheep, pushed by others behind, can’t stop themselves—don’t
you see he’d get thrown down, trampled on? Stev-en!”
He began to re-cross the creek, followed by the panic-stricken
Sallie, but things had already come to a climax up in the gully.
Steven, diverted from the jew-lizard by the louder clatter of
hoofs down the stony track, looked round —to see the first of the
sheep come tearing down the gully, with thickening masses pressing
on from the rear. A glance told the boy that he could not escape
or get out of their path; they were almost on him, and there were
only smooth rock surfaces to right and left. There was just a second
for action; but Steven crouched, braced himself —and jumped,
just as the first half-dozen beasts, ahead of the rest, raced past him.


He flung himself across a broad-backed sheep, dust and grease
from its thick fleece almost choking him, as he clutched with both
hands and heels, pulling himself up astride the startled beast.
Away the sheep galloped, snorting, down the track to the creek,
and it was in this strange manner that Steven appeared before
the astonished and relieved eyes of Sallie and Cecil, as they stood
in the shallows.
Steven slipped off sideways in mid-creek, and the others joined
him once more upon the further bank.
“I say—what paces! That brute almost shook me to pieces!”
he complained, but Cecil was laughing uncontrollably.
“Well —anyway, you’ve shown what you can do as a rough-
rider!” he gasped.
Chapter Eight
BLACKFELLOWS
SITTING between Steven and Cecil on the log which served
as a dress-circle, Sallie decided that the “ Blackfellows ” of
Australia were not attractive, like Maoris. They had no pic j
turesque grass skirts or kiwi-feather cloaks, and were mostly both
ugly and grimy-looking.
“But then these poor things haven’t hot springs, and they’re
often short of any water at all,” Sallie thought. “The babies are
darlings, and some of the women have nice faces.”
The women, or gins, sat apart beating drums made of logs;
it was the men who did all the dancing at the corroboree, and if these
dances were not so pretty or graceful as those of the Maoris, they
were more exciting. One was a fierce war dance; the men stamped
and shouted round a huge fire, waving their waddies or clubs, and
chanting a wild song which sounded like:


“ Arra—arra—arra
Burra —burra—burra ” and so on, apparently from A to Z
But the next dance was even more interesting.
"It shows how Blackfellows catch emus,” Cecil said. "Here
are the birds themselves.”
Half a dozen queer figures strutted forward, bare black legs
showing under the emu-skins which covered all the upper part of
their bodies. They walked bent double, one arm moving the emu’s


neck and head, making it peck the ground and imitating the bird-
movements wonderfully.
“Now here comes the hunter disguised as an emu,” Cecil said,
and it was thrilling to watch the “sham” bird stalk the supposed
real ones, get nearer and nearer and finally spear one, whilst the
rest ran off squawking.
The Emu-hunt dance was followed by another bird-ballet.
This time the natives represented those Australian cranes, or “native
companions,” who do really dance in a most absurd way at certain
seasons.
The days passed quickly at Mullabaroomba, where there was
so much to see and do; Steven and Sallie could scarcely believe at
the end of a fortnight that it was time to begin their travels again,
in the steamer which took them round part of the Australian coast.
Cecil drove them to Brisbane, through country growing more
tropical after they entered Queensland. First the great wheat-
fields of Darling Downs, then vineyards, afterwards banana and pine-
apple plantations, where the orange-brown fruit with pale green
top-knots grew low like cabbages, and they had the pleasant
experience of eating a whole ripe pineapple apiece.
From the big prosperous capital of Queensland the steamer
carried them eighteen miles down Brisbane River into island-dotted
Moreton Bay, and so up the coast into coral seas again. For part
of that northern coast makes Australia like a continent-coral-island
itself, with the great Barrier Reef guarding it for hundreds of miles,
and lagoons and islets between. On that reef live beche-de-mer,
the huge sea-slugs which the Chinese consider their greatest delicacy,
dried or fresh, so that the slug fishing is quite an important business.
But the greatest thrill of that voyage came from outside
Australia, when the steamer entered Port Moresby Harbour, with
brilliantly green hills down to the water’s edge and the whitest


town imaginable built on and about them. For Port Moresby is in
Papua, otherwise New Guinea, and somewhere amongst those dim
mountains inland lived cannibals and Birds of Paradise.
The Papuans who came alongside in native boats looked fierce
enough for anything with their frizzy black hair, but they seemed
quite friendly, and Sallie and Steven had to leave unsatisfied as
far as Papua’s chief attractions in their eyes were concerned, for
the Company's Agent entirely refused to take them on a personally
conducted tour into the interior.
“Pretty mean, I call it,” Steven complained. “When Dad told
him to show us everything. Port Moresby might be anywhere .”
However, with New Guinea and its disappointments left behind,
Australia was still to provide plenty of thrills for the travellers.
Their next stopping-place was Port Darwin, in the Northern Terri-
tory, the final perch for so many pioneer flyers from Europe to
Australia. Darwin itself was not over-exciting, in spite of its fine
harbour, but one thing stuck in Sallie's memory. For they were
taken to visit a loofah plantation and shown those objects, which
she had always imagined to be a kind of sea-sponge, growing on
trellises, just like cucumbers, of which, it appeared, loofahs were the
fibrous skeleton.
“It’s queer seeing a continent round the edges like this,” Steven
said, one day when they were actually turning the corner of Aus-
tralia, before coasting down its western shore. They had left the
flat country round Darwin behind; now high cliffs rose, against
which the sea beat continually, with numberless islands weather-
washed into rounded shapes, so that they looked oddly like gigantic
stone cannon-balls rising above the surface.
Once well round the corner everything changed again, for
they had reached the region of sandy beaches, hundreds of miles
long, of sand-dunes stretching hundreds of miles inland towards


the bare reefs of the central plateau of Australia and the great Sandy
Desert. The sandy beaches were to give Steven and Sallie a thrilling
experience, and the inland sands an unforgettable adventure. And
the jumping-off place for both experience and adventure was the
town of Broome, the centre of Australia’s pearl-fisheries, which
possessed the most characteristic smell which the two had yet
encountered in all their travels.
Chapter Nine
PEARLS AND OPALS
ROTTEN oysters,” Sallie and Steven were told when they
enquired as to the smell’s origin. “Millions of oysters come
“ to Broome, and they all have to be dead before they’re
any use.”
“The oysters the pearls come from?” Steven said.
“Pearling doesn’t only mean pearls— they're just a sort of lucky
accident. It’s the shells we fish as well, to make buttons and knife
handles and everything mother o’pearl is used for. Pearl counters,
too; they pass for money in some of the islands. Real pearls only
happen once in thousands of oysters,” Mr. Burnley told them.
He was part owner of a pearling lugger, and a friend of Cecil’s,
and had promised to show Steven and Sallie the sights of Broome,
which are chiefly sand and shells, dredged up all along the coast
from shallow water, or brought by luggers and divers from deeper
sea.
It was the sight of Mr. Burnley’s lugger with its pumping and
diving apparatus which gave Steven his idea.
“I say, I've always wanted to go down in a diving-suit more
than anything; do let me,” he begged.


"£7s,” added Sallie firmly.
“W e U ” Mr. Bumley looked doubtful. "Don’t see that
there would be any harm —for a few minutes. We’re going out
to-morrow and you two can come.’’
That was the beginning of the experience. The lugger went out
using her auxiliary motor-engine next morning, over a misty pale-
blue sea of oily calmness. Presently they moored, and a ladder
was lowered over the side.
"It’s not deep,’’ Mr. Burnley said. "You just walk down the
ladder and let yourself be lowered to the bottom. I’ve borrowed
an extra suit so that you can both go down at once."
Dressed in the canvas diving suit with rubber at neck and
wrists one felt very queer; the huge leaden-soled boots, the weight
hung on back and chest, finally the great brass helmet with its
window goggles and pipes leading from it, which shut one off from
the world, leaving only the hands bare and ordinary. A net bag
hung round the neck; that was for any oysters one picked up. Sallie
shuffled across the deck and was helped to the ladder, her feet
lifted on to the rungs.
The Kanaka boys were pumping vigorously; Mr. Bumley
grinned at her through the helmet window; she went down slowly,
step by step.
At the step which took her head under water, a strange thing
happened. Suddenly the greeny-grey water turned to a wonderful
rosy-crimson; it lasted only a few seconds, then all was green again,
and Sallie found herself floating down as though boots and helmet
and all weighed nothing at all. Her feet touched the ground, but
now the difficulty was to keep them there —not to lift them. She
felt as if walking on air, and when she gave a tiny jump she rose
yards from the bottom.
Then she saw Steven, who had gone down first, wobbling towards


II I
her; they met and grinned at each other solemnly, and he pointed
to a little shoal of fish flitting by like grey ghosts.
This under-sea world was not the fairylike place of the coral
reefs; the colours were not bright, though some rocks were covered
with jade-green seaweed. The oozy, muddy sand of the bottom
was greyish, and only firm in patches; half buried in it Sallie saw
some shells which she recog-
nised as pearl oysters. The
two filled their net bags, then
walked a little further before
they received the signal for
going up, after what seemed a
very few minutes.
“It was very interesting,”
Sallie said when her helmet
had been taken off. "I
wouldn’t not have gone down
for worlds. But Ido wish we’d
met sharks or octopuses; divers
always seem to in books.”
“ Perhaps there’ll be a pearl
in one of the oysters we brought
up,” Steven suggested hopefully.
But there wasn’t even the tiniest seed-pearl. Still it was fine to know
what it felt like to be a diver, to have walked on the sea’s bottom.
“And you may have better luck with opals than pearls,” Mr.
Burnley laughed. “I’ll take you on a trip inland to a supposed opal-
reef. Some friends of mine are there, and we’ll camp with them.”
The country through which they travelled, on a rather heavy-
footed light railway after a preliminary journey by motor, was
just sand and scrub for many miles. Then patches of rock began


to diversify the sand, and there were scattered clumps of gum-
trees. Finally the expedition culminated in another bumping
break-neck drive in an ancient Ford, together with a load of stores
in sharp-edged cases, to a camp which was certainly the back of
beyond, but glorified by the most wonderful sunsets imaginable.
“Just look at the colours—exactly like a fire-opal,” Sallie said.
“Perhaps that means we’re going to find some.”
“An omen, eh?” Mr. Burnley said. “Well, here’s luck; we’ll,
drink it in tea to make it really Australian.”
Next morning by daylight the supposed opal-reef showed as a ridge
of blackish rock, with bare sand on one side and sand covered fairly
thickly with gum-trees and spinifex scrub on the other, whilst scattered
rocks ran out in both directions. Steven and Sallie were armed with geo-
logical hammers and set out upon an exciting investigation, chipping
and tapping at what seemed to them promising rocks, with the hope
that, at any moment, a lucky blow might display opal crystals.
Crystals there were sometimes, and Sallie’s pockets were soon
full of rock-fragments showing gleams of colour, any one of which,
in her opinion, might prove, when cut, to be an opal. Steven was
not so easily encouraged.
“Let’s go over to that other ridge,” he said. “It hasn’t been
tried yet and there’s more chance of a find.”
From where they stood the rocks in question were plainly
visible, but after trudging for a long time through sand and gum-
trees they did not seem to be any nearer. In fact they could see
neither rocks nor ridge in any direction.
They were further led astray by a queer little animal which
appeared from a tree-trunk and scurried before them on four short
legs. It was rather like the sewellels of the Rockies, and Steven
ran some distance to get a closer view.
“I’m sure it’s a wombat,” he said, returning breathlessly.


“ Cecil told me what they were like. The blackfellows dig them out
of trees to eat.”
“Is that all you know about them?” Sallie said disgustedly.
“And I’m sure it was white grubs they dug out of trees and roasted.”
“Well, of course, if you know ” —Steven looked offended and
walked on ahead. After a little while he stopped.
“I still don’t see those rocks,” he said in a worried voice. “I
wonder if we’d better go back.”
“Perhaps we had,” Sallie agreed, turning, and as she did so
gave a dismayed cry.
“Oh dear, I’ve dropped all my bits of opal! The pockets of
this dress are such thin stuff, the sharp edges wore holes.”
“You shouldn’t wear such silly clothes—it serves you right,”
Steven said in a superior manner, which was not consoling, and
Sallie relapsed into a depressed silence.
But again, after walking a short distance, Steven stopped.
“I wonder if we are going back,” he said.
Chapter Ten
BUSHED
FOR half an hour neither Steven nor Sallie would say the
thing which was on their tongue-tips. They walked on, look-
ing from side to side all the while, trying to talk casually,
until Sallie came to an abrupt standstill.
“It’s no good, Steve,” she cried desperately. “We’ve passed
that funny-shaped stump before; we’re lost.”
“Perhaps we are just a bit out of our way,” Steven admitted.
“But the camp can’t be far off. We’ll coo-ee.”
They did so, without the least result, except a shriek, which


sounded mocking, from some hidden bird. Until then they had
never realised the sameness of the bush, the unending, unvarying
grey-green gum-trees, stretching in all directions.
“But we must not let ourselves be stampeded,” Steven said.
“Once people who’re bushed lose their heads it gets serious.”
“I think it is serious,” Sallie said, trying to keep her voice
steady. “The sun’s getting low, and it looks as if we’d have to spend
the night out here.”
“Well, that wouldn’t be very fearful,” Steven said cheerfully.
“I shouldn’t mind in the least if we’d got something to eat and
drink.”
“Yes. I’m getting frightfully thirsty already,” Sallie said.
“Aren’t you?”
“Oh, not particularly!” Steven answered airily, determined
not to confess that he had been imagining unlimited iced lemon
squashes for an hour past.
But when darkness fell with the startling suddenness of those
latitudes, and there was still no sign or sound of the camp, it was
almost impossible to keep up a pretence of cheerfulness. They
collected some dry scrub for beds, Sallie watching in terror for the
appearance of a snake, but thirst and anxiety kept them awake
for hours, tossing about on their prickly beds.
It was sunrise when they fell asleep, and the sun quite high
before they woke again, only to find that the rest had done them
no good.
“I feel so idiotically wobbly I can hardly stand.” Steven tried
to laugh at his own shakiness. “But my head’s splitting. I think
we’d better wait a bit before starting off again.”
I I don t think I could start yet,” Sallie confessed.
After that, neither would have found it easy to say what hap-
pened. At intervals Steven found himself saying out loud that


they must get up, they couldn’t stay here any longer, but Sallie
did not answer or try to move.
It was afternoon again when Steven found himself dreaming
—dreaming that he was in some absolutely different country —
Egypt it must be—or Arabia —
“There aren’t any camels —here,” he mumbled, and amazingly
came an answer.
“Aren't there! I say, Burnley, this chap’s all right.”
Burnley? Steven managed to open his eyes again. Yes, there
certainly were camels, tall and contemptuous, but the gum-trees
were there too —and men.
“Have you —found us?” he asked with difficulty.
“Well, it looks like it, old chap—thank goodness!” That
was Mr. Burnley. “Here, you’d like a drink—go easy now! Not
too much at first.”
The effect of even a few drops of water was marvellous. Steven
was soon sitting up, demanding more, and Sallie looking almost
herself again, even if all four of their legs were extremely wobbly.
“However did you find us?” Steven asked. “Are we far from
the camp? ”
“Further than you’d think possible, probably. It’s a wonder
what a distance one can wander when bushed. But what put us
on your track were —Sallie’s rocks.”
“Oh, do you really mean it? My opals?” Sallie cried. “I knew
I’d dropped them!”
“Yes, they gave us just a clue to the direction you’d taken;
we found them in quite a trail and followed them up.”
“Well, it just shows how useful it is to have holes in one’s pockets
—sometimes,” Sallie said solemnly.
The return to camp was made on camel-back, which still sur-
prised Steven.


"I never knew there were camels in Australia/’ he said, and
learnt that there are thousands of them in use, especially in Western
Australia and the Northern Territory.
“No other beast is any good in such dry, sandy country,” Mr.
Burnley said. “ They’re used for gold prospecting into the interior, and
as pack animals, and the climate suits them well —it’s just like their
native lands. Any number of Pathan drivers come over with them, too.
Well, here we are, back in camp, and you won’t be sorry for tucker.”
“I feel as if I’d never stop eating—as soon as I’ve finished
drinking,” Steven declared.
“I don’t think I’ll ever have drunk enough,” Sallie said. “But
all the same, as it’s all right and as you found us, it’s a tremendous
adventure to have had. I’d never
have believed that we should be so
lucky.”


Part III: AFRICA
Chapter One
STORMY WEATHER
AUSTRALIA was behind, Africa ahead, and the longest of
r\ their sea voyages to come between. They had journeyed
down through the forest-land of the Western Province,
where jarra and other huge timber trees ousted the gum, and
teams of thirty or forty oxen hauled the logs. At Perth and its
port, Freemantle, Steven and Sallie said good-bye to Australia —
and almost from the first stormy weather set in, such as they had
not yet seen.
Their steamer, the Boronia, was about the smallest they had
travelled in, and there were very few passengers on board, but
Steven soon made friends with the Chief Officer, and it was he
who showed them something most extraordinary the second
evening out.
Sea and sky were a queer slate-grey except for a strip just
above the horizon, which was pale mother o’ pearl, with a kind
of shimmer over it like heat-haze. It was still calm enough, but
the ship rolled slightly in a heavy swell.
Steven and Sallie were watching the wake spread fan-wise,
when the Chief Officer came up and pointed towards the horizon
astern.
"What do you make of that?” he said.
Dark against the clear pearly sky, well above the sea-line,
were curious shapes; it was Sallie who first grasped their meaning.
"Why—it’s a ship,” she cried. "And —and —isn’t that a


lighthouse —and something like an island —only they’re all up-
side down? ”
“Quite right; they are. It’s a mirage of something on the
Australian coast, hundreds of miles below the horizon, one of the
clearest I’ve ever seen. And if I’m not much mistaken, it means
dirty weather —mirages always do in these parts.”
The Chief Officer was not mistaken. A few hours later a dense
fog closed in, and all night long the Boronia’s syren wailed
unceasingly, as she groped her way along. Then the wind rose, and
before midday the waves were running hills, if not mountains high.
Sallie was pleased to find that she did not feel sea-sick; she
and Steven both made an excellent breakfast, in spite of the
“fiddles” on the table and the acrobatic and juggling movements
of the stewards. It was exciting on deck with waves constantly
breaking over the bows; in fact, as hours passed and the gale
increased, the excitement grew rather hectic, for it was almost
impossible to keep a footing.
Steven and Sallie wedged themselves into an angle, where there
was good hand-hold; they were drenched through, but as Sallie
said philosophically, “Sea-water doesn’t give colds.”
The waves seemed higher each moment and the sky lower, as
though trying to meet them. It was growing dark and chilly, and
Sallie shivered.
“I think tea’s a good idea,” she remarked.
“Right ho!” Steven agreed. “But we’ll have to be careful
about unmooring ourselves.”
They struggled along, clinging where possible, until a moment
came when they had to rely on sea-legs alone. At that instant
a huge wave broke right over the poop and swept along the deck —
swept Steven, stumbling ahead, clear off his feet, carrying him
towards the rail in a swirl of green, foam-flecked w r ater.


Sallie gave a smothered cry, a dive and a grab. She clutched
Steven’s legs frantically, throwing herself down, and for a horrible
moment thought they must be carried overboard together. But
the water receded, to leave them lying in the scuppers, against
the rail, high, if not dry.
They were nearly opposite the companion hatchway, and
crawled to it ignominiously, fearing to stand up. Not until they
were safely inside did Steven speak.
“You brick, Sallie!” he said, and plunged down cabinwards
without another word; but it was more than enough to satisfy
Sallie.
The gale did not blow itself out until the fourth day, and
Steven and Sallie were forbidden by the Captain to go on deck
again in the meantime. But when at last the weather cleared,
sea and sky had such a look of blue-eyed innocence that it was
hard to believe in the past storm. Flying-fishes reappeared, a
pair of snow-white frigate birds companied an albatross in the
steamer’s wake, whilst dolphins gambolled ahead, like playful dogs
out for a walk.
It was in weather like this that the travellers first saw the
former Cape of Storms, now called the Cape of Good Hope.
Nine hundred feet out of the sea the cliffs rise, topped by a
lighthouse which marks the place where the Atlantic and Indian
Oceans join.
“‘This is the most stately thing and the fairest Cape we saw
in the whole circumference of the earth,’” Steven murmured, and
added, seeing Sallie’s surprised look, “No, I didn’t make that up;
it’s what Sir Francis Drake said when he passed here in the Golden
Hind. And there’s something else: this is the very point the
Flying Dutchman in the legend is always trying to beat round,
to get from one sea to another; only he never can.”


“Poor Vanderdecken!” Sallie said. "I'm glad we're going to
see what’s on the other side of the Peninsula.”
Something worth seeing: Table Bay with Cape Town on its
shores, one of the finest cities for situation in the world; behind,
flat-topped Table Mountain, looking to-day a deep grey-purple,
with its curious blanket or table-cloth of fleecy white cloud very
much in evidence.
“Here’s where the first of the three takes us over,” Steven
remarked, for their cousins, Jim, Lawrence and Harry were con-
veniently—for the travellers’ purposes —settled in different parts
of Africa, to serve as starting points.
Under Cousin Jim’s guidance they saw Cape Town thoroughly:
the fine buildings and shops of Adderley Street, where Sallie was
most attracted by the flower-sellers’ wonderful display of every
imaginable colour, for there are no flowers more beautiful than
those of the Cape, and many were new to her, with quaint names
such as “Vygies” and “Gonsblomme.”
Then there was the thrilling trip to the top of Table Mountain
by the Aerial Cableway, which Steven said made him sympathise
with Robert the Bruce’s spider, dangling in the air on a thread
of wire to mount three thousand feet. But the view from the
summit over the whole Cape Peninsula was worth anything, the
town and its suburbs spread below them, with pine and oak woods,
vineyards and gardens, and nearer, the mass of Devil’s Peak and
Lion’s Head to east and west.
Next day they went by motor the hundred-mile circuit of the
great Marine Drive, seeing the splendid coastline and the seaside
suburbs more closely. Then, on the slopes of Devil’s Peak, there
was the University at Rondebosch to visit, and Groote Schur, the
beautiful house given by Cecil Rhodes to the Prime Ministers of
the Union, and reached through a marvellous hydrangea valley.


Nearby is the Rhodes Memorial, grey granite and bronze lions,
with the bust of the great empire-maker himself gazing north
towards his burial-place in the lonely Matoppo Hills of Rhodesia.
“And now, having exhausted Cape Town,” their cousin said,
“I’m going to take you up to my farm on the edge of the Great
Karoo. That will show you a lot more of South Africa.”
“What is your farm?” Steven asked. “Sheep or fruit?”
“No, I go in for fowls, on rather a big scale,” Jim said, with
a twinkle, as usual, in his grey eyes.


Chapter Two
THE FOWL FARM
STEVEN!” Sallie tiptoed along the broad stoep upon which
all the rooms opened, to her brother’s room. “It’s fearfully
early, but do let’s explore. We’ve only seen the farm in the
dark so far.”
“Oh, all right!” Steven yawned. “I’ll be out in half a
sec.
Leaning on the verandah railing, Sallie looked straight down
an avenue of acacia trees into a valley, between green-gold hills,
to the purple mountains which closed it in, with palest lilac and
dim snowy peaks beyond. There were clumps of English-looking
oaks on each side of the square white red-roofed house, and behind,
no doubt, the fowl-yards or paddocks. It was still all unknown,
for they had arrived last night, dead tired, after twenty-four hours
in the train and four in the car. A grand journey, though, first
through the vineyard country just behind Cape Town, then up
and up the Hex River Pass in the Matroosberg, until mountains
disappeared by magic and the great plain of the Karoo stretched
away into the distance, empty, lonely, silent. In this emptiness
they alighted at a station which seemed all sunset sky and marvel-
lously clear air. Most of the drive which followed was in dark-
ness; hence this morning’s exploration, to know just where they
were.
A reconnaissance round the back of the farm disclosed none
of the expected fowls.
“I expect they’re shut up at night for fear of wild animals,”
Steven said. “In those white sheds over there, most likely.”


“Anyway we’re sure to see them to-day—and, after all, fowls
are just fowls,” Sallie answered wisely. “Let’s walk to that little
hill over there, beyond the scrubby-looking wood.”
They set off briskly—for a destination which was not to be
reached that morning. This grassy stretch, with only an occasional
lean thorn-tree to break it, seemed part of a huge paddock, for
they could see fencing in the distance. There were few signs at
first of birds or animals, which disappointed Steven.
“Not even a rabbit!” he said. “You’d never believe it was
Africa.”
“You’re getting spoilt,” Sallie told him. “You can’t expect
wild beasts everywhere.”
“I don’t,” Steven expostulated. “But
“ Gr —r —roar —arr! ”
The sound was so totally unexpected that the two stopped
short, staring at each other.
“What was that?” Sallie asked under her breath. “It can’t
be ? ”
“No, of course it can’t,” Steven declared emphatically. “There
are no lions in this part of South Africa.”
“No, but —it sounded exactly like them in the zoo at feeding-
time,” Sallie began, and was supported by another of the deep,
hoarse roars, coming from the small wood by the hillock, quite
near now, which they had meant to climb.
“I suppose there might be a stray lion,” Steven said doubtfully.
“Or one escaped from something,” added Sallie. “Oh —
listen!”
The third roar was louder and more aggressive, and Steven
looked round quickly.
“Look here, we must do something,” he said. “Sounds as if
the brute might charge —and there’s no shelter between us and


the farm —only these trees. We’d better each climb one. You
take that —it’s nearest and easiest —quick!”
Sallie reached the tree and scrambled to the top, for it was
of a flattened umbrella shape and no great height. She saw Steven
amongst the yellowish foliage of his, within easy shouting distance,
and gave a sigh of relief for their safety when the next hoarse
roar sounded.
But were they safe? Was it certain that lions couldn’t climb?
Sallie had an uncomfortable recollection of seeing a photograph
which seemed to disprove that. And her perch was extremely
hard and uneasy.
“Are you all right?” she called
“Ye-es. Beastly uncomfortable,” Steven answered. “Wonder
how long well be kept here.”
“Till they miss us and come to look, I s’pose. But oughtn’t
we to warn them about the lion? ”
“I was just wondering. They’ll hear it, of course. Let’s try
coo-eeing. Now!”
A combined coo-ee in approved Australian fashion made no
apparent sensation at the farm, but it had another more startling
effect. A louder and more defiant roar came from the scrub,
followed by sounds of movement, and a crashing emergence into
the open.
“Oh!” gasped Sallie.
“My word —an ostrich!” came from Steven.
The great bird paused for a moment looking round, then trotted
briskly across to Sallie’s tree and stood beneath, evil yellow eyes
glaring up from the absurdly small head, so unpleasantly close
to the girl’s foot.
“I wonder if ostriches can jump—like hens,” Sallie thought,
just as Steven called:


“1 say! Bothered if Em going to be held up by a bird. I don’t
think he’s spotted me; I’ll slip down, dash for the farm and bring
help.”
“Oh, Steven, take care,” Sallie began, but her brother was
already running across the grass. Quick as a snake, the ostrich
swivelled round head and skinny neck; then it was off after Steven
at an amazing pace.
The bird ran, neck outstretched and wings half raised, showing
the curving tufts of black and white feathers on them and the
tail. At Steven’s best pace, it gained on him, and Sallie slipped
down and pursued desperately.
But those enormous strides had brought the ostrich close on
Steven’s heels, and suddenly it delivered one of its deadly kicks.
The clawed foot, with that terrific force behind, grazed the
boy’s shoulder, and instinctively, or acting on some memory,
he did the best thing by flinging himself down flat on his
face.
The ostrich strutted round hissing hoarsely, but taken aback,
and at that instant Jim Ensor and some Kaffir servants came on
the scene at a run. The big bird was driven off and away with
sticks, gurgling and hissing, and Jim spoke anxiously.
“You’re not hurt, Steven?”
“Not a scrap.” Steven scrambled up.
“Oh, Jim, it roared! We thought it was a lion!” Sallie panted,
whilst Steven, reddening, muttered:
“I hate being fooled by a bird!”
“You’re not the first who’s been deceived by the roaring of a
cock ostrich,” their cousin said. “And let me tell you, Steven,
I’d rather face a lion than that same bird when angry. They're
dangerous brutes; I didn’t know this one got loose from the sheds
last night, or I’d have warned you.”


*£ 9k „
Jfiys *,4 7* =■, t • "* '
•* * Ti^.
i$r'y* '** I*|r ;
■' ■*
* ’ jS*"\
r~. — %
-
*** U *
liy —
:_., 400$ " V ' \^«
" J
*** j» A *
AT STEVEN S BEST PACE
IT GAINED ON HIM


• *=»


“Is this an ostrich-farm, then?” Sallie asked. “And you said
it was fowls!”
“No. I told you I went in for fowls on rather a large scale,”
Jim said, his eyes twinkling even more than usual. “Well, aren’t
they?”
Chapter Three
A NATAL DAY
I WONDER if you realise that we’ve timed things most neatly
for the day after to-morrow,” Steven said, as they studied
the port of East London from the roadstead wiiere their liner, at
her anchorage, was getting up steam for departure later in the evening.
“How r do you mean?” Sallie enquired. “We get to Durban
then, on Christmas Day.”
‘Quite so. And where is Durban?”
‘Why, in Natal, of course.”
'And w T hat does Natal mean?”
“I can’t say. Do stop being a Child’s Guide to Knowledge,”
Sallie remarked peevishly.
“It means Birthday. And Vasco da Gama called it that
because he discovered Natal on Christmas Day, 1497,” Steven
said in his most informative manner. “So now you see why it’s
so appropriate to arrive at Durban on December 25th.”
That s rather jolly! I’d only thought how funny it w 7 as to
have Christmas at midsummer,” Sallie confessed. “It’s lucky we
didn’t catch the steamer at Port Elizabeth a day later, and upset
it ah.”
After a couple of days at the farm, where they had tasted
ostrich-egg omelet, seen ungainly chicks as big as turkeys, and


watched the loose feathers plucked from grown birds, they had
reached Port Elizabeth, after a short journey, the day before,
leaving the same afternoon. There had been time for its chief
sight, the Snake Park, a creepy place, as Sallie described it, where
hundreds of poisonous snakes were kept in a moated enclosure,
with a native attendant moving amongst them as carelessly as if
they had been worms. A wonderful sight, of course, but Steven
and Sallie preferred the Seal Tank at East London, where they
had been ashore for some hours, seeing an "Oxford Street trans-
planted to Africa, and the beautiful Buffalo River on which the
port stands.
Their cousin was travelling north with them to Rhodesia, where
they would be handed over to his brother, Lawrence, and the
three had become such friends that Steven and Sallie looked for-
ward to the journey immensely.
They were up very early next morning, trying to feel as much
like Vasco da Gama as possible, when the steamer rounded the
Bluff, where the lighthouse stands high above the steep bush-
covered slopes, still haunted by wild monkeys.
The harbour came into sight, with the wonderful sweep of
beach and the slopes of the Berea rising beyond, covered with
gardens and houses.
"It all looks so bright and clean," Sallie said, as the liner
slowly steamed towards the docks. "A nice kind of
"But I don’t feel a bit Christmassy!" laughed Steven. “I
can’t even imagine holly and mistletoe and robins!
Many repetitions of "Merry Christmas, and the unaccustomed
if cheerful sight of crackers on the breakfast-table in the ship’s
saloon, made things seem more seasonable. Then Jim appeared
with parcels—a pair of folding slippers for each, a hand-bag for
Sallie and a pocket-book for Steven, all made from ostrich-skin,


like the softest of leather. The mail had come in, too, and there
were letters and parcels, then a scurry to finish packing and go
ashore, since they were to stay in Durban for a few days before
going north.
“I think I’ll charter a car and take you to pay a visit at a
native kraal,” their cousin said. “And we’ll have our Christmas
dinner on the way.”
Sallie’s first and vivid impression on landing was a group of
Durban s famous rickshaws, pulled by the big Zulus in the most
extraordinary costumes. Some had enormous feather caps, others
huge ox-horns fastened to their head-dresses; they wore feather
or fur capes, bead chains and ornaments, copper bracelets and
anklets.


A ride in one of these picturesque vehicles so attracted Sallie
that Jim went to make arrangements for the car and provender
while she and Steven, each chartering a rickshaw, set off at a trot
along the Esplanade, beside the beach, which was now crowded
with people, the light-coloured dresses and brilliant sunshades
showing vividly against the sand and sea.
After half an hour they met cousin and car at the place
appointed, and turned inland, through fields of waving sugar-cane,
towards the hills. For some distance they seemed transported to
another continent. Eastern bazaars bordered the road, there were
occasional mosques and temples, women in saris with brown
babies, and dark-faced men in paggns India itself. The Hindu
colonies in Natal are large, and make a little world for them-
selves.
On they went, the road rising, past cotton land, wattle-
plantations and clumps of papaws, or pink-blossomed mango-trees.
Once a small family of grey monkeys, father, mother and babies,
scuttled across in front of the car, and a party of Basutos, blanketed,
on rough ponies, rode down from a side track.
In spite of the sun’s heat, there was a breeze blowing from
the sea, and when they reached Inchanga one of the world s most
wonderful views spread out before them, rolling like mountainous
waves into the distance, fold upon fold.
“It’s called the Valley of a Thousand Hills,” said Jim. "That
road would take us to Pietermaritzburg, capital of Natal, but
we’ll stick to our natives to-day. And by the way, I hope you
know your Rider Haggard.”
“We do,” Steven said. “Father has King Solomon’s Mines and
the rest, and used to read them to us.”
“Good! We’re going to see things that will remind you of his
books, and jolly good they still are. The Zulu chief of this village


weTe going to is quite the Umslopogaas type, head-ring and all;
in fact they live here much in the old way.”
They ran down gentle slopes into a grassy valley, and here,
by a river, were the clustered bee-hive huts of a native kraal, made
of woven grass, with flocks of cattle and goats grazing near.
Groups of women were washing in the river, or pounding the
grain from the little “mealie” or maize patches, for the kind of
porridge which is their chief food. Tall men in native dress were
sauntering about, and saluted gravely, speaking in deep-toned
voices, while small children peeped at the strangers shyly.
After speaking to some of the natives, Jim returned to the
car.
“ They’re going to give us some music and dancing later,” he
said. “And in the meanwhile we’ll have our Christmas dinner
under those papaw trees.”
Chapter Four
SPOTS
COLD turkey and sausages, cold potato salad, cold Christmas
pudding—and the nicest Christmas dinner they had ever
eaten, Steven and Sallie both declared. Half-way through,
a guest in the shape of a small furry creature emerged from the roots
of a tree and sniffed round with dainty curiosity, finally eating a
banana, held squirrelwise between its forepaws.
“Isn’t it a mongoose?” Sallie asked. “He’s exactly like the
pictures of Rikki-Tikki, in the ‘Jungle Book.’”
“You’re not far out,” Jim said. “That’s a meercat; they’re
much of a muchness with mongooses, and quite as plucky. The


Zulus often keep them in their kraals as snake-and-rat-catchers,
but I expect this chap is wild. No, Sallie, don’t suggest taming
him, for I can’t see myself perambulating Africa with a meercat.
Here comes our variety entertainment. ”
The meercat slipped into its hole, as two Zulu girls ran up,
carrying an enormous xylophone, made of oil-cans and odds and ends
of wood and metal. This they beat upon, and another girl with
a drum made up the orchestra.
The first dance was also performed by girls, dressed in petticoats
of dyed reeds, with heavy copper or brass bracelets and anklets
and feather head-dresses. But the queerest part was that each held
an old European umbrella, which they waved and twirled as they
danced, hopping solemnly from one foot to the other.
Then came the men’s performance, which was much more
exciting. It was a war-dance, and all carried oxhide shields with
the hair outwards, and long assegais or wooden knobkerries. Round
their knees and on their heads were bands of white feathers or long
hair, and many chains of cowries or ivory beads jangled as they
moved.
Faster went the strange music, faster danced the men, giving
wild yells and stamping in time to the drum-beats, as they shook
the weapons over their heads or clashed them upon the shields.
It was all very thrilling, like something in a book; a flatness fell
when the war-dance came to an abrupt end, the big Zulus showing
their splendid teeth in wide grins, whilst Jim declared it was time
to go.
As Steven and Sallie were getting into the car, two small children
trotted up and presented each with a native-made animal, carved
from solid wood and finished off with “poker-work” stripes, spots
and other features. Steven’s beast was a realistic zebra, Sallie’s
a spotted leopard, and both adopted them enthusiastically as mascots.


"Stripes” and "Spots” went with their owners in this capacity
when they started northwards from Durban, two days later, for
what was quite an historical motor-drive for the two, brought up
as they had been on their father’s South African war memories.
They crossed the Tugela at Colenso, and passed through Lady-
smith, Dundee, Glencoe, in that once well-known district. As
Sallie remarked:
"It’s like seeing Dad’s photographs come to life, and he’ll love
our snaps of the same places.”
They passed from sugar country to cattle and fruit farms, on
to the coalfields of north Natal, then to tobacco plantations and
maize fields, until at Komali Poort they had nearly reached Kruger
National Park, the eight thousand square miles of untouched
country which is a game reserve for South African animals.
Where the Komali River formed shallow pools, huge grey shapes
lay, half submerged, like armoured water-tanks, sometimes with
no more than eyes and nostrils showing. One raised its head in a
vast yawn which showed all its stumpy teeth, and made Sallie
remember stories of boats bitten in two by hippos.
They seemed lazily harmless enough, and Steven left the car
for the river’s edge to examine them more closely.
"I’m sure I could throw this chocolate into that mouth,” he
cried, going still further into the fringing reeds, and prepared to
jump upon a partly sunken log.
“Get hack, Steven!” Jim shouted suddenly, and as the boy
obeyed, almost over-balancing in his haste, the log heaved and
plunged, showing a scaly tail and a cold, evil eye.
“My goodness! I nearly trod on that croc!” Steven scrambled
hurriedly back to the track. “If you hadn’t yelled ”
" Mustn’t wait for yells, Steve.” Their cousin shook his head.
"Look before you leap is a good motto in strange countries.”


After Crocodile Bridge they were in the park, driving slowly
amongst valleys and streams, bush-clothed hills and stretches of
open country.
“Several rest-camps provide shelter for the night, with beds
of a sort,” their cousin said. “And anything we need in the way
of food or petrol can be bought.”
“Oh, but couldn’t we sleep out in the car?” Steven asked,
remembering their New Zealand experiences. “We’d see much
more of the animals that way.”
“Altogether too much,” Jim answered grimly. “No, well stick
to a camp neighbourhood, but you can sleep in the car if we manage
to park it near a shelter.”
When they reached the camp of scattered huts this arrange-
ment proved possible. Sallie had a tiny cabin at the end of a row,
so that there was space for the car close by, whilst Jim shared a


shelter with several others. When supper was over all three were
tired enough for bed, and Sallie was soon sleeping soundly.
When she woke, there seemed at first light enough for morning.
Then she saw that it was a big honey-yellow moon shining through
her window, and she sat up on the stretcher bed to look out. There
was a dull gleam from the stream, a dark wooded outline of hills
beyond; nearer, the motor-car, with hood up to make Steven
a snug sleeping place —only that end of it visible.
Sallie wondered if he were awake too; she slipped out of bed
and stood by the window. Now she could see the whole length of
the car and —what was that on the bonnet, like some enormous
mascot?
«
In that clear brilliance every detail was plain. There, sitting
upright like a huge cat, its black-spotted coat pale golden in the
moonlight, was a leopard. Sallie stared, fascinated; and, as she
watched, the beast moved, crouched, its tail swaying slowly, as it
peered into the shadows where Steven lay. In another second it
would spring; there was no time to open the door, to rouse Jim or
the other campers. Sallie felt along the ledge under the window and
found what she wanted, the only weapon available.
As she lifted it, she must have made a noise loud enough to
reach the leopard, for it turned its head and the golden-green eyes
glared straight into hers. But Sallie did not hesitate. She lifted
the heavy object which she held and flung it with all her might
at the leopard, hitting it full in the side.
With a coughing growl, it sprang down and bounded away,
whilst Steven, roused by the clatter of Sallie’s missile against the
car, jumped out and stood staring round.
“Hullo!” He saw Sallie’s white face at the window. “What’s up?”
“A leopard on the car,” Sallie explained with chattering teeth.
“And —I do hope Spots isn’t hurt!”


“Spots?”
“Yes. I threw him at the other leopard—poor darling 1” Sallie
giggled rather hysterically. “And he drove him off.”
At this moment Jim, roused by voices, appeared from his hut,
to which, on hearing the story, he made Steven accompany him for
the rest of the night. Spot, thanks to his solid heaviness, was quite
unhurt, and from that moment had a higher reputation than ever
as a Grade A mascot.
Chapter Five
RUINS AND RAINBOWS
IN the chilly dawn greyness, Sallie joined the two others outside
her hut. They took a path through the scrub and came out
near a large water-hole, screened on one side by trees.
“We’re all right; the wind’s blowing this way,” Jim whispered.
“Stand close and keep quiet.”
Already half a dozen uncouth wildebeeste were at the water;
immediately some zebra joined them, and a tiny dikker tripped
down daintily. Presently came a koodoo with corkscrew curved
horns, then a whole troop of splendid water-buck, and some graceful
impala.
“Just like a live cinema!” whispered Sallie. “Oh, Jim, I simply
must take some photographs!”
“Well, remember, if you frighten them, you’re done,” Jim
murmured, and even in such excitement, Sallie managed to take the
pictures almost noiselessly. It was a beautiful scene at sunrise,
the pool turning gold, the satin skins of sable and roan antelope
gleaming as they waded knee-deep, birds calling and whistling.
Then, in a second, something scared the assembly and they were
gone, stampeding away into the bush, snorting wildly.


The rest of that day was spent in wandering and photography,
although in too many cases the subjects declined to sit. But even
glimpses were exciting; a wart-hog, with three comically ugly
piglets, crossing the path, the towering dappled shapes of giraffes
nibbling acacia shoots, wildebeeste scrambling and gambolling
grotesquely.
As they sat at lunch, a baboon family came quite near, grunting
angrily as though resenting intruders, but providing Sallie with
another picture.
“A whole dozen films I’ve taken to-day,” she announced that
evening. “And if they’re failures, I’ll die”
They drove the whole length of the Park, leaving it where the
Limpopo River crossed the northern boundary.
“I believe we’ve seen all the beasts in South Africa, except
lions and elephants, and,, of course, one can’t expect everything ,”
Sallie said resignedly.
“Now we’re off to about the oldest city in the world, and there-
abouts I hope Lawrence will join us,” Jim said. “It’s near the
end of my beat, young ’uns—worse luck!”
‘‘Worse
luck!” echoed
Steven and Sallie
regretfully, and
Steven added:
“What is the
city?”
“ King Solo
mon’s Mines —or
something very
like it,” was all
that their cousin


would say, and the day’s drive which followed was like something
taken from a book. At first it was veld, undulating, with sparse
trees; then rugged mountains, cutting off a hidden and mysterious
valley.
“There are signs of ancient mines everywhere,” Jim told them.
“A legend says the gold for Solomon’s Temple was brought from
here —the legend Haggard heard. This is his country, and
the place we’re going to is the dead city of She , which we call Great
Zimbabwe.”
Seen in the light of late afternoon that dead city was strange
and eerie; the walls built of huge blocks of stone, the immense
size of the ruins, all deserted and overgrown by bush, made it
seem a place raised by giants in which giants must have lived.
No one knows the age of the Zimbabwe ruins; all that can be said
is that some time, before history, a powerful race lived there in
a city of vast size, so strong that the walls still stand after thousands
of years, one of the strangest scenes in the world.
Suddenly the sun dipped behind the horizon and night fell,
making Sallie shiver.
“I don’t think this is a place for after dark,” she said, and
as the others thoroughly agreed, they were soon driving the eighteen
miles to Fort Victoria and the railway.
Here, as Jim expected, they were met by his brother Lawrence,
whose farm was near Bulawayo, a day’s journey away, and who
proved to be a silent edition of the younger cousin. Under his
escort, Steven and Sallie were to travel by train, first to Bulawayo,
afterwards the eleven hours’ journey to the Victoria Falls, then on
through Northern Rhodesia towards the great inland sea, Victoria
Nyanza.
“Queer, isn’t it?” Sallie said. “Niagara Falls and Lake
Superior; now something the same thing over again, only more so.”


“Very much more so,” Lawrence Ensor said emphatically.
“The Victoria Falls are twice as wide as Niagara and two and a
half times as high”—a statement which was rather breath-taking.
Next day, Steven, Sallie, Spots and Stripes were transferred
from car to train, leaving Jim upon the platform with many regrets.
But the country through which they passed was interesting,
especially when, towards the day’s end, Lawrence pointed out
the Matoppo Hills, where Cecil Rhodes and his friend “Dr. Jim”
are buried. The night was spent at Bulawayo, and they started
early next morning for the falls.
Chapter Six
WATERWAYS
ORE than six miles away, the white columns of “Smoke
that Thunders” can be seen like a forest fire, and even
T before that its roar heard. For that is the native name for
the Victoria Falls, where the Zambesi hurls itself suddenly into
an enormous cleft, four hundred feet deep —so suddenly that Dr.
Livingstone, the first discoverer, says that in a canoe within a few
yards from the edge he could not see where the water disappeared.
“It had never been seen before by European eyes,” Livingstone
wrote, “but scenes so lovely must have been gazed upon by angels
in their flight.” Forest covers the sides of the chasm, marvellous
rainbows arch over it, day and night, the lunar bows even lovelier
than those the sun makes, and each new view of the Falls seems the
most wonderful.
“There’s no green water curling over like Niagara,” Sallie
said. “ It’s all a fleece of snow.”


“No crowds of excursionists falling over each other either/’
Steven commented. “I say, I want to get nearer the edge.”
“Take care, then; it’s all so slippery with spray,” Lawrence
said. “You’d better keep back, Sallie.”
Sallie, who disliked “edges,” agreed. But even here the air
was full of “Smoke that Thunders” falling in wet mist. As Lawrence
and Steven disappeared she looked round and saw thick trees quite
close, baobabs, palms and cedars.
“I’ll take cover,” she decided. “I don’t want to get drenched.”
Running quickly into the shade, Sallie went some distance
before realising that she was in a shower-bath. Every leaf and
twig dripped; the thicker the tree, the heavier its load; when she
emerged a little later, meeting the two others, she was soaked
to the skin.
“Hullo, drowned rat!” Steven cried, and Sallie said mourn-
fully:
“I thought I was sheltering!”
“In the Rain Forest!” Lawrence said. “I should have warned
you; thick waterproofs are needed there, where the spray falls all
the time. You must change before we take a canoe trip to the
Rapids.”
They stayed three or four days at Victoria Falls before taking
train again, through Northern Rhodesia, into Tanganyika Territory,
by way of its lake, to Kigoma and Tabora and so to Mwanza,
the Tanganyika port at the southern end of Victoria Nyanza —a
fortnight’s journey, full of what Sallie called very indigestible
names, and which Steven described as like the curate’s egg,
“excellent in parts.”
“We ought to have gone by air, direct from Bulawayo to
Mwanza,” their cousin said. “And we will, next time you come this
way! Now for a peaceful few days on the lake.”


Victoria Nyanza seemed altogether peaceful that day, water
pale blue-grey, with low grassy or wooded hills sloping down to
the edge, and the banks fringed by tall papyrus reeds, so thick
and tangled that masses of them, uprooted and drifting, often made
floating islands, solid enough to stand upon.
There are many real islands as well, large and small, in the
two-hundred-and-fifty-mile stretch of the great lake, and on one
of these, close to which they passed in the evening, Steven and
Sallie had the luck to see one of the queerest and rarest animals
of their wanderings.
Lawrence, a keen naturalist, pointed out excitedly the group
of animals standing in the swampy ground by the water’s edge.
“Those are situtunga or marsh antelope,” he said. “One of
the shyest and rarest African beasts. Notice their shaggy coats;
they are so oily as to be almost waterproof, and —look! one of them
is scrambling out of the mud so that you can see the extraordinary
hoofs. They’re elongated and splayed out, almost webbed; that’s
how the creatures have developed through their love of water.”
They watched the situtunga disappear clumsily into the reeds;
noticed, too, how flocks of waterfowl were returning to the islands
for the night, rose-pink flamingoes, cranes, wild-duck, Egyptian
geese and little Pigmy geese, with lovely plumage of green and
white, black and gold. As they discovered, there were always
birds to watch on the huge inland sea, especially at dawn, when
they lay in camp-cots on deck and watched the grey water turn
pink with sunrise.
Bukoba and the other lakeside ports were passed, and near
Entebbe, which is the British seat of Government for the Uganda
Protectorate, Steven and Sallie had an experience.
With some time to spend on shore, they wandered along the
lake-bank towards a village of mud and wattle huts, stopping


to look at a curious dug-out boat. A coal-black native, with bare
legs and arms displayed by his blue cotton shirt, addressed Lawrence,
who shouted to Steven and Sallie:
“Come and see a star turn!”
His audience of three collected, the native went to the water’s
edge and called in curious crooning tones:
“ Lutembe! Lutembe! ”
For a few moments nothing happened, then a great gnarled
head appeared in a swirl of water and an enormous crocodile crawled
up the bank, displaying all his teeth in a most formidable grin.
The native snatched some odoriferous fish from the boat and
thrust one into Steven’s hand.
“Feed ’um,” he urged. “Lady too.”
Doubtfully Steven advanced within feeding range; the crocodile
received the contribution with clashing jaws and asked for more,
which Sallie supplied. When all was finished, Lutembe gazed
round reproachfully, pivoted about and plunged into the lake,
leaving Steven and Sallie amazed.
“Oh, Lutembe’s quite an institution,” Lawrence told them.
“No one knows how old he is, or when he became a man-lover.
But except for three months in the year, which is apparently a
holiday, he nearly always comes when called, and never attempts
to hurt anyone. The natives look upon him as sacred; I believe
he’s become a film star in that capacity. Well, Lutembe deserves
it; he’s probably the world’s only pettable croc.”
Entebbe is near Kampala or Port Bell, capital of Uganda, a
busy place, built, like Rome, on seven hills. Lawrence told Steven
and Sallie that each had its own special interest.
On the tallest, Namirembe, from which there is an amazing
view across Africa, stands the fine Anglican Cathedral, finished in
1919. The equally splendid Roman Catholic Cathedral surmounts


Rubaga, a hill so steep that no cart with building materials could
climb it; so the natives, attending services in a temporary church,
carried up each time a brick or other material from the hill's
foot—and so the cathedral rose.
The palace of the native Kabaka, or king, is built on the hill
Mengo, within a great reed fence, at the main entrance of which
a fire bums. This is only allowed to go out on the king’s death.
From Kampala the journey to Kisimu, the Kenya port of
Victoria Nyanza, was interesting, especially for the last forty
miles, through a narrow gulf bordered with mountains and almost
blocked with numberless islands. Kisimu itself boasts the highest
dry dock in the world, where ships, brought in sections from the
coast, are put together.
But the town’s chief interest for Steven and Sallie was that
here Harry, the Kenya-Colonist cousin, would meet them for the
last stage of their African journey.


Chapter Seven
WALKING MOUNTAINS
THERE’S one thing about Harry,” Steven said, "he does
let us go our own way. We might almost as well be alone.”
"I expect it’s because he’s fended for himself since he was
very young,” Sallie answered, adding, loyally: "But Jim and
Lawrence weren’t fussy.”
"I never said so! Only they thought we couldn’t look after
ourselves —as we certainly can,” Steven declared. "I like being
independent sometimes, and it will be fun exploring the Rift Valley
by ourselves.”
Sallie was silent, not wishing to hurt Steven’s feelings. But
she couldn’t help feeling that in strange countries knowledgeable
people were useful. Still the exploration Steven mentioned was
only to last a short time.
"We shan’t get into much trouble in a couple of days,” Sallie
decided —proving that she had forgotten incidents of their travels
when mischief had needed only as many minutes to materialise.
Harry Ensor had taken them straight up to Eldoret, one of
Kenya’s northernmost towns, on the Uasin Gishu Plateau, where
he had a coffee plantation. It was hard to believe that they were
near the equator, for at this height of 7,000 feet above sea level,
big log fires at night were very welcome.
One thing Sallie found disappointing.
"I thought we’d see snow mountains from here —Kenya and
—and Kilimanjaro,” she said vaguely.
"Kilimanjaro’s in Tanganyika, more than three hundred miles
south,” their cousin laughed. "And the famous Ruwenzori about


the same distance west. Mount Kenya is visible sometimes; it’s
about a hundred miles away; you’ll see plenty of it between here
and Nairobi. But you must remember that African snow-mountains
are elusive. Equatorial heat and ice produce mist, and Stanley
camped on the Ruwenzori slopes never knowing of the snow peaks.
Till quite lately these ‘mountains covered with white stuff’ which
the natives spoke of were considered legends —so were Mount
Kenya and Kilimanjaro for a long time. People have lived for
years near the Ruwenzori and never once seen them; others
caught a glimpse of a white range high in the sky and thought
it a mirage or a vision—hence the mystery about African snow
peaks.”
“When I come back,” Steven said, ‘‘l mean to explore the
Ruwenzori; in the meantime we’ll be content with the Rift. That
sounds interesting.”
It was interesting in more than sound, he and Sallie decided
when, a few days later, having travelled by train some distance
down the line from Eldoret, they stood on the Escarpment and
looked into the huge valley two thousand feet below, so deep that
even fair-sized hills on its floor looked like children’s sand-castles.
Ages ago, volcanic action tore open this gigantic crack in the earth’s
surface, creating one of the most marvellous sights the world con-
tains.
“Look, you can only just see the other side,” Sallie said in
a rather awestruck voice, pointing to the towering ridge which
showed dimly through the haze across the valley.
On the less steep slopes near the top, forests of bamboo grew,
the dry leaves and stems making a rustling noise in the wind which
almost always blows in the Great Rift. Lower down, the side fell
away more abruptly, in bare grey ridges of basalt, with cavities
here and there from which wisps of steam rose.


“Hot springs, like we saw in New Zealand, Steven said.
“There are farms in a district hereabouts, Harry told me, which
get their whole water-supply from them, thousands of gallons a day.
Now I wonder how we get down, and where that fellow Jonga is?
Jonga, one of their cousin’s native servants, who spoke a little
English, had been allotted to Steven and Sallie as a guide, whilst
Harry went straight on to Kijabe further down the line, where
the others were to meet him in a couple of days’ time. He turned
up at this moment, wearing his perpetual grin and an ancient
top-hat, to lead them down into the valley.
The path was steep, running slantwise along a kind of crease,
first through the bamboos, then on the bare slopes. About half-
way down the clouds above the further side of the valley broke,
and in the gap showed, as though hanging in mid-air, a marvellous
white peak.
“Look! it must be Mount Kenya,” Sallie cried, and they paused
for some minutes to make the most of this first glimpse of Africa’s
second highest mountain, before starting again on the downward
journey.
Once at the bottom, Steven decided to explore a side valley
bounded by lava cliffs, only a few hundred yards apart, but Jonga
looked decidedly disinclined for such energy. He declared that
they would find fire-spouts as well as buffalo and rhinoceros, but
discovered that these were attractions rather than drawbacks in
Steven’s eyes and changed his methods.
“Nothing there—everything nothing!” he persisted, and when
they continued their investigations of the gorge, lagged behind
and finally disappeared.
“Fine sort of guide he is,” Steven commented. “We shouldn t
see a thing if we trusted to him."
“ It’s a weird place,” Sallie said, trying to make herself as well as


-•^^WLiWa^^KiF
lZ: S
Steven believe that she liked this twisting valley, where steam hissed
from cavities in the cliffs, whilst hollows and clefts were filled with
twisted thorny trees, low greyish-leaved shrubs and long dry grass.
They turned a bend, beyond which was a shrub-filled clearing,
when Steven stopped so suddenly that Sallie bumped against him.
“I thought Jonga was only lying,” he whispered, dragging
her aside. “But—look!”
A short distance away, horned snout raised to a bough, was
one of those grey brutes which even in a zoo look like prehistoric
monsters.
They could see
dry mud in the
deep skin-folds,
and the gleam
of a wicked
little eye, as
the rhino stood
in a sticky
pool formed
by one of the
springs.
The two could not stir, but some faint sound must have
reached the creature. It lowered its head with a snort, and seemed
staring straight at Steven and Sallie, as they stood pressed against
the rock-face, expecting a charge. But the eyesight of a rhino
is as poor as its smelling power is keen, and the w r ay of the wind
was wTong. After standing for a few seconds motionless, the great
beast w r hirled round with incredible quickness and was gone,
cantering aw r ay up the gorge.
Steven caught Sallie’s wrist; together they ran back on then-
tracks, until they paused breathless at the gully’s mouth.


“Whew!” Steven drew a whistling breath. “Not a nice place,
definitely!”
“A horrible place.” Sallie glanced up at the lowering cliff.
“Exactly like that horrible beast.”
They discovered Jonga, sleeping peacefully behind a rock.
Without revealing their encounter, Steven gave orders that he
was to guide them to the rest-house on the Escarpment slope where
they planned to spend the night. The meeting with the rhino had
been rather unnerving, and it was comforting, after a walk of
another six miles., to sit outside the wooden hut, drinking hot
tea and eating the food they had brought. A good night’s sleep
in the ship-like wooden bunks and a hearty breakfast restored
both, however, and they were ready for Jonga when he appeared,
beaming, from some unknown bower, to lead them farther up
the Rift Valley.
It was a curious world of its own. Here and there tiny round
lakelets marked ancient craters, or miniature volcanic cones rose,
overgrown with vegetation. There seemed birds everywhere, pink
flamingoes by the pools, crimson barbuts and crooning pigeons
amongst the low trees, with troops of white-whiskered monkeys.
After some distance they reached a barer slope dominated by a
much taller cone, with cut-off top which must have been more
lately active, for its sides were unclothed, all blackish-grey and
barren, rising from the valley’s floor.
“I say, I’d like to climb that, and look into the crater,” Steven
said. “Those slopes ought to be quite easy going. There’d be a
splendid view, too.”
“Yes, let’s go up,” Sallie agreed willingly, with the inward
thought that this could scarcely be a haunt of rhinos. Jonga,
distinctly a lazy guide, grumbled audibly, but followed when
they began to climb.


At first the going was good, easy slopes with a firm crust
something like an asphalt surface. Then came ribs of polished
lava, with drifts of ash between, and afterwards—the ash itself.
“Ow!” Sallie sank ankle-deep. “This isn’t going to be nice
walking! ’’
“I expect it’ll get better directly,” Steven said, whilst Jonga,
struggling behind, wailed unavailing protests.
But matters did not improve. Soon the climbers were plunging
almost knee-deep at every step, often carried back and down
several feet in loose, sliding ashes, which gave no foothold. At
each of their movements, too, the pungent powder rose in thick
clouds, blowing into their faces, swirling away up the valley behind
them, filling noses and mouths with the smell and taste of sulphur.
“Hadn’t we better —go back?” Sallie choked.
“Must get—to something —firmer first,” wheezed Steven, for
the surface was breaking away under their feet more rapidly each
moment, a nightmarish sensation, which ended in Sallie plunging
into the ash waist-deep, and struggling desperately to free her-
self, like an ant in a sand-heap.
Before she could get clear, Jonga’s voice sounded from just
below them, strangled, terrified.
“Look! Look! See, the mountain walks —it marches away!”
Chapter Eight
NAIROBI
STEVEN and Sallie, throwing themselves sideways on the
slope, digging in knees and hands, looked round, blinking
their grit-filled eyes. The wind had risen to one of those
squalls which sweep down the Rift, and caught up the clouds of


ashes which their climbing had loosened, carrying them this way
and that, with exactly the same whirling action by which water-
spouts are formed at sea.
Up and up rose the swaying dull-grey pillars of ash, bending,
twisting, turning all the time each on its own axis, and at the
same time moving away down the valley, as Jonga said, with a
strange look of independent life about the columns of dark cloud
that formed, one after the other, from the ash-avalanches sliding
down to the base of the hill.
It was a most uncanny sight; even in the discomfort and
danger of their position, Steven and Sallie could not take their
eyes from the queer, unearthly shapes.
“I know what they’re like!” Sallie exclaimed. “It’s the
Jinnee in the Arabian Nights who came out of the bottle in
smoke and couldn’t be put back. I don’t wonder Jonga’s
frightened.”
Jonga, indeed, seemed half-paralysed with fear. Minus a grin
for the first time, his eyes protruding and rolled up so that the
whites showed, he crouched staring, then suddenly seemed to
lose his head and his hold at the same instant. With a wild yell
he went slithering down the incline hidden in a cloud of ashes,
and, at the bottom, plunged into a huge pile and vanished
completely.
“I say, he’ll be smothered!” Steven cried. “I must get the
poor chap out somehow.”
As he spoke he began to scramble down himself, followed by
Sallie. Perhaps the reckless haste of that descent made it really
less dangerous than greater caution would have done. They found
themselves sliding, glissading down at headlong speed, and arrived
at the bottom in a heap, Sallie uppermost, all the breath knocked
out of them.


I (l
< —
But the conscious-
ness of the unfortunate
Jonga’s predicament
brought back their
senses. They scrambled
to their feet and ran
to the place where he
had disappeared, to see
heaps of ashes heav-
ing and stirring, as
though moved by a
small earthquake.
Plunging their arms
under the surface, they
managed to help the
struggling native, and
his head emerged,
choking and gasping.
Fortunately Steven had a thermos full of tea in his rucksack,
and this seemed to be effective in washing down the ashes. Soon
Jonga was restored, even to his grin, and by that time the wind
had sunk, the ashes settled, and the grim grey pillars disappeared
on their whirling way down the valley, probably to break over
the surface of the big crater lake some miles farther down.
It had been an exhausting experience. Never had Steven and
Sallie so longed for a hot bath as they did during the tramp that
followed, and it is to be feared that the beauties of the Great Rift
Valley were not fully appreciated by them that afternoon.
They could hardly drag themselves up to the Kitale Hotel,
and the sight of their cousin, cool and cheerful, in a long chair,
was almost exasperating. But baths and tea worked miracles,


although Sallie’s annoyance returned at the coolness with which
Harry listened to their story.
She had expected him to show consternation and contrition
at the thought of their danger; instead he merely remarked
cheerfully:
“Well, you were in luck! Now I had a very dull day! Wish
I’d been with you.”
They arrived uneventfully next day at Nairobi, which seemed
quite a stirring metropolis after the quiet of the wilds. But except
for Government House, majestic on its hill, Nairobi has not many
outstanding features, and there was no time to explore the country
round, as their steamer sailed from Mombasa in two days’ time.
“I’ve hired a car to take you down by road,’’ Harry said.
“It’s more interesting than the train—and you may manage to
crowd in another adventure or two.’’
“I bet you anything we don’t!’’ Steven laughed—and was glad
afterwards that Harry had not taken his bet.
Chapter Nine
" GOOD-BYE, AFRICA”
“ you drive a car, Steve?’’ their cousin remarked casually
I next day at breakfast.
“Yes, a bit!” Steve’s face brightened, but Sallie looked
doubtful. “Why?”
“I think you shall take her part of the way to Mombasa.
There’s a chap here wants me to see his sisal plantation; he’ll
drive me out there and then down to a place where I’ll meet you.
It’s a dead straight road and a good one all the way; you can’t
possibly make any mistake.”


“You’ve not driven much, Steven,” Sallie ventured, only to
have her protest loftily disregarded by the two males, who went
off to inspect the car.
So there they were, embarked alone upon the very last lap of
the African journey, driving through coffee plantations, with
“windbreaks” of oak or wattle, through farmland, maize fields
and banana patches, until they were in open country again, with
grazing plains stretching to the horizon, scattered thorns and
acacias. More than mere trees, too: soon moving dots took shape
as herds of koodoo, antelopes and buck; amongst some thin acacias
tall, gracefully grotesque giraffes grazed, then, seeing the car, set
off at a leisurely canter.
“My word, I remember now, of course!” Steven cried. “This
is the southern Game Reserve; the road goes right through it. I
say, look at those zebras.”
He slowed down the car to almost walking pace, so that they
could see this display of African game the better, congratulating
themselves on being alone, so that it was possible to dawdle as
they pleased.
“Harry can jolly well wait for us if he gets to the place first,”
Steven chuckled. “I’m not going to hurry for anyone /”
Which was a dangerous thing to say without touching wood,
as Sallie told him —and remembered her words a little later.
They were nearing a low ridge, thickly tree-covered, when
something moved upon it. Through the long yellowish grass a
tawny head showed.
“Steven!” Sallie whispered excitedly. “A lion!”
“I do believe it is!” Steven peered at it. “Yes, and there’s
another! Look, to the right.”
“And two more down below! It’s—what’s the right name?—a
‘pride’ of Hons. Steven, what luck to see them as close as this!”


7 male lion had joined
' the ot^er * n t^Le roa d>
' and followed her in
“Isn’t it? Look at that big chap with the black mane, a regular
monster. Wonder how close they’ll let us get to them.’’
As the car rolled slowly on, the lions remained motionless,
making no attempt to move away. They were almost level with
the ridge now; level; past —when suddenly one of the tawny beasts
stirred, reached the road in one bound, and stood there an instant,
a splendid lioness, her golden eyes gleaming, before beginning to
lope towards the car
“Steve, do you think
she —she’s going to attack
us? ” Sallie
said, and
even as
she spoke
the big
male lion had joined
the other in the road,
and followed her in
their direction.
“I’ll drive on,’’ Steven said. “Keep a look-out and tell me
what they do.’’
Sallie, sitting rather tensely, watched the lions. There were
five of them now in the road, all trotting at a steady pad-padding
pace after the car —and gaining upon it.
“You’ll have to go a bit faster,’’ Sallie told Steven. “They —
they’re coming on.”


Steven accelerated, and so did the lions. They were coming
on now in great bounds; very soon they must overtake the car.
“You must go quicker—as quickly as you possibly can!”
Sallie’s voice was shaky with excitement and fear. “I —I’m afraid
you can’t go fast enough. And —you said you weren’t going to
hurry for anyone!”
Steve set his teeth and put on speed. The country whizzed
past; to Sallie the pursuing lions looked like blurred yellow
streaks. But they were still following.
Steven, staring ahead with concentration, looking neither to
right nor to left, was startled by a hail. There by the side of the
road, under a clump of trees, a small car was drawn up; and one
of the occupants was their cousin.
“Hi! Don’t pass the rendezvous!” Harry shouted, and Steven
slackened pace, whilst Sallie explained:
“We can’t help it! It’s lions—chasing us.”
At some little distance the group of tawny beasts had paused;
first one and then another w r ent slinking back into the scrub.
“It’s all right.” Harry, leaving the car, strolled forward hands
in pockets. “They only w r ant to be fed; they’ve got in the way of
following cars, so many people bring meat for them, poor beggars.”
Steven and Sallie looked at each other; then Sallie spoke
slowly.
Harry, did you know those lions would follow us?
“Well, I thought they might. And it would have been a pity
if you’d missed such a fine thrill because I was with you,” Harry
answered gravely.
Without further excitements they reached Mombasa on its
green island, the gateway of Kenya, with the white buildings of
its old town and fort and the new port of Kilindini, one of the
finest on the east coast of Africa.


There were a few hours to spare in Mombasa, time enough to
visit the Arab bazaars, to walk along the tree-fringed beaches,
where tiny transparent crabs raced over the white sand, and to
see how Mombasa Island is almost encircled by the two horns of
the mainland, with a narrow entrance between coral reefs.
Then it was time to go on board the steamer, alongside the
deep-water wharf, to say good-bye to Harry —and to Africa, to
steam away into the mysterious East.


Part IV: ASIA
Chapter One
THROUGH THE GATEWAY
LYING in bed, Sallie first saw the new continent, a round
picture, framed in the porthole. Scrambling out of her
J bunk, she dressed with eyes fixed upon the scene, and was
on deck as soon as Steven.
“So that’s Aden —and Asia,” she said.
Bare, treeless, yet alert and prepared, Aden stands at the
gate of Asia, like a sentry guarding Britain’s Empire, khaki-clad
in the desert sands. Strong by nature, stronger through man’s
labour, the place is a cup-shaped peninsula, joined to the
mainland by an isthmus half a mile wide, on which stands
Sheikh Othman village. Aden, built in the cup of the crater,
is partly enclosed by rocky heights, through which the Main
Pass was cut to Steamer Point, now the healthier, residential
quarter.
“There must be a big camp here,” Steven said. “See all those
white tents.”
“Wrong, my son.” The ship’s purser came up behind them.
“Those are salt heaps, but it’s a usual mistake. Look, there are
the famous Tanks; cut out of the solid rock to catch rain for
Aden’s water supply no one knows when; probably two thousand
years ago.”
“Then Aden’s an old place?” Steven said.
“So old that the Arabs say Cain was buried above the Main
Pass. But we’ve only been here since 1839 an d re-made the place.


Here come the boats from the shore; now you’ll see some of the
inhabitants.”
“And a jolly mixed lot they look,” Steven said, as the boats
crews shouted and jabbered, holding up articles for sale.
There were Arabs in blue shirts, Somalis with lime-bleached
fuzzy hair and white togas, Jews, their hair hanging in greasy
black ringlets as they displayed bright coloured silks and ostrich
feathers. It was amusing, too, to watch the method of making
purchases; after preliminary bargaining a basket was let down
from the ship with the money and drawn up containing the things
bought.
Steven and Sallie decided that they could see enough of Aden
from the ship.
“It’ll be much nicer to touch Asia with Daddy and Mother,
Sallie said. “And it’s only a few days now to Bombay.”
A few more days of sea and shipboard; then they were really
there, the panorama of Bombay breaking suddenly into view as
they steamed in amongst the many islands, on one of which the
town itself is built; Bombay with its forts and shipping, houses
seen through trees on the wooded slopes of Malabar Hill, beaches
and buildings, with the sea which has always borne British
adventurers, washing against this entrance to the Eastern Empire,
the Apollo Bunder, on which now stands, in solid stone shape, the
Gateway to India.
Through that great gate the two travellers passed a little later,
Steven and his father in advance, Sallie just behind hanging to
her mother’s arm. It was lovely to be together, but nice, too,
both felt, to know that they had looked after themselves and that
their parents were proud of this successful journeying.
Here was the real East meeting the West in the crowded
Bombay streets —Hindus, Pathans, Sikhs and Parsees, many


dresses and races, sights and smells, all mixed together —and India
herself waiting beyond for their exploration.
“We’re starting in a motor-car for Delhi and the north to-
morrow,” Sir John Wylde said. “That’s the best way of seeing
towns and country, too.”
They were sitting in the lounge of the Taj Mahal Hotel, with
Steven and Sallie trying to put the most impossible adventures
into the fewest possible words.
“We shall have to produce great wonders, John, to outdo
what they’ve already seen in the three Continents,” Lady Wylde
laughed.
“We’ll manage it, my dear! Temples, palaces, mosques —they
don’t know the beauty of ancient buildings and towns in those
three continents of theirs.”
“Oh, Dad —Great Zimbabwe! that’s old enough for anyone!”
Steven protested.
“We’ll match it, my son —and show you forests and wild
creatures, too, ‘Kim’ and the ‘Jungle Books’ come to life.”
“How about volcanoes and caves?” Sallie asked mischievously.
“I should think you’d had enough of the first, and as for the
caves —we’ll produce something in that line to take your breath
away before you’re many days older. And now we must go
shopping; you’ll both need extra kit, and topis, too.”
Steven and Sallie, both rather conscious of their travel-worn
garments, felt like models for a tropical outfitter’s when attired
in neat drill suits and smart solar topis. This last acquisition
especially pleased Sallie, who considered it remarkably becoming,
and it led to her first Indian adventure, with the moral that pride
goes before a fall.
As they left Bombay the next morning, the road rose through
the Ghats, those mountains which border India’s west coast. A


beautiful road, too, where waterfalls in silver streaks fell from
wooded heights, and the distant views grew always lovelier.
“We’re not steering direct for Delhi,” Sir John said. “But
this kink in our route takes in Poona and also those caves I
mentioned.”
Poona gave Steven and Sallie their first sight of a typical Indian
“station,” east and west living side by side. The crowded native
city, with its bazaars, clustered under the mound on which stands
Parbati’s Temple; the European cantonments, barracks, bungalows,
club, polo-ground and public gardens, a self-contained colony. But
it was the native quarter, their first Indian bazaar, that the pair
wanted to see —and here befell Sallie’s humiliating adventure.
The brass-workers and carvers in wood and ivory were fascinat-
ing, handling what seemed such inadequate tools; the plaster toys
and models, the silks, embroideries and leatherwork allured Sallie.
So, in a different way, did the tropical fruits and flowers in their
gorgeous colours. Standing by one of these stalls they watched
a humped Brahminy bull stroll casually through the bazaar, nib-
bling some stolen sugar-cane, for cattle are sacred to Indians,
and do what they please. So are other animals, as Sallie was to
discover, when a hairy paw appeared over her shoulder and her
topi was snatched from her head. With a cry she turned, to see
a big grey monkey take one bound to a wall-top, where he sat,
chattering and adding insult to injury by perching the sunhat
on his own head.
“Oh, you beast!” Sallie almost sobbed, and Steven sprang
towards the monkey, to be stopped by liis father as a murmur rose
from the crowd.
“They think you mean to hurt the creature —and they’d
bitterly resent that,” Sir John said. “I’m afraid Sallie will have
to grin and bear it.”


Sallie failed to be amused as the monkey deliberately tore to
pieces her treasured topi, jabbering derisively the while, and
escaping without punishment. Even the purchase of a new hat
was not consoling; no other, Sallie insisted, could ever be so
becoming as the first. Its destruction was a definite black mark
against Poona.


Chapter Two
TEMPLES—AND BELLS
FTER two nights on the road Steven and Sallie considered
themselves accomplished Indian travellers, talked airily of
Dak Bungalows and Khansamas, and were no longer sur-
prised at carrying about their own bedding.
But Ellora Caves did amaze them.
These were not all Nature’s work, but mountains cut by man
into temples, twelve Buddhist and seventeen Brahmin caves, all
cut and shaped out of the solid living rock.
“They just don’t seem simply possible,’’ Sallie said, standing
before the Kailasa Temple, with its marvellously carved entrance
guarded by two gigantic stone elephants.
“Well, this temple alone took over a hundred years to hew
out,” her father said. “The courtyard it stands in is nearly
three hundred feet long and the walls a hundred feet high, all
carved with gods and beasts and monsters, you see. The
Indians were patient builders fifteen or sixteen hundred years
ago.”
“You’re right,” Steven said solemnly. “These are the most
wonderful caves in the world.”
“These, or the Ajanta Caves, which I’m afraid we haven’t
time for. They’re sixty miles away, the temples carved from a
ravine-side in the heart of the jungle, going back to two hundred
years b.c. Some of the walls there are covered with paintings,
very beautiful and tremendously interesting because they show
the dress and customs of those ancient people. After which
archaeological lecture we must move on.”


There was still another marvel to see before they left EUora.
A few miles away is Daulatabad, one of India’s highest fortresses,
standing atop of a cone-shaped hill and built in the thirteenth
century.
“Some fort!” was Steven’s expressive comment.
They turned north-east now, through the heart of India, taking
mostly less frequented roads, to let Steven and Sallie see some-
thing of the wilder country. Their chauffeur, an intelligent Goanese,
had a wonderful knowledge of highways, byways and rest-houses.
Somewhere on that long road to Delhi Steven made a purchase
in the bazaar of a small town. It was a kind of “Old Curiosity”
stall, brass-work, carvings, skins of animals and scraps of embroidery
lying all piled together. From this Steven extracted his prize, and
came back to the car waving it triumphantly.
“I’m sure it’s some weird, ancient musical instrument,” he
said. “And I got it for half a rupee. Listen!”
There came a tinkling jangle from the tiny brass bells hanging
from a crescent-shaped piece of metal at the top of a pole.
“Sort of sleigh-bell effect, isn’t it?” Steven said proudly.
“‘We shall have music wherever we go’ without needing a motor-
horn!”
He proceeded to perform upon this bargain to his great satis-
faction, especially when passing through villages, where its sounds
caused amusement and interest. Although Steven’s family protested
at first, they grew accustomed to the music, even when, tired of
shaking it himself, he fixed it upon the car’s bonnet as a musical
mascot, so that the tinkling jangle accompanied them everywhere.
One morning Pedro, the Goanese, looked round with his
intelligent grin.
“Show you real jungle to-day,” he promised. “Plenty wild,
plenty wild flowers, plenty wild beasts.”


“Pedro knows your respective tastes,” Lady Wylde smiled.
“Only I daren’t have Sallie seeking her wild flowers and encounter-
ing Steven’s wild beasts.”
The jungle, as jungle, was rather disappointing. The forest
through which they drove was not dense, but thin and scattered,
interspersed by clearings of high yellow grass, big brownish hills
covered with scrub, and sandy rock-strewn water-courses, whose
thready streams would be real rivers in the rainy season. Neither
Sallie’s flowers nor Steven’s beasts were much in evidence at first,
except for troops of monkeys and a porcupine who scuttled across
the road, rattling his quills.
Towards afternoon the scenery grew wilder, the native villages
fewer, and birds and beasts more observable. Peacocks screamed
and strutted, hawks hovered, whistling, a sounder of wild pigs,
startled at their meal of fallen berries, went crashing away through
the undergrowth, and once Pedro excitedly pointed out a kind
of lightning-flash of dark-flecked yellow which he declared was
a panther.
The afternoon shadows grew longer and the jungle more jungly.
There had been no signs of humanity lately, and Sir John spoke
rather uneasily.
“How far to the Dak Bungalow, Pedro? We mustn’t be
benighted.”
“Not too far. We be there plenty soon,” Pedro answered
evasively. But it was soon plain that he was not altogether sure
of his way. He drove slowly and uncertainly, halted often, and
behaved altogether rather exasperatingly.
At one of these halts Sallie noticed a movement in the long
grass, a glimpse of something.
“I’m sure it’s a beast in there,” she declared. “A big
one.”


“Do drive on, Pedro.” Lady Wylde glanced round anxiously.
“It’s getting near sunset.”
Sallie listened and watched, very alert, as the car re-started.
Several times she heard, or fancied, sounds; at last, when a distinct
rustling came from some bushes, she turned as they passed—to
see a huge tiger leap diagonally across the road and come padding
after them, plainly visible for some seconds through the thinner
growth on that side. The beast was gone before Sallie could show
it to the others, and Steven declared she was dreaming.
“Anyhow, my bells will drive any animals away,” he boasted.
“That’s the beauty of a musical mascot.”
This thought rather comforted Sallie, as she stared back in
the dimming light and imagined the tiger leaping out, springing
upon the car.
Ah, there it was again! And this time Steven, turning, too, at
Sallie’s whisper, saw the big beast bounding after them for some
distance before re-entering the jungle.
“It’s chasing us, I’m sure!” Sallie declared. “I expect only
waiting till dark to jump on us. D’you s’pose it’s like those Game
Reserve lions, asking to be fed? ”
But Pedro, grey-white under his brown, shook his head,
evidently convinced that this was a grimly earnest animal meaning
business and not pleasure. He accelerated, and the car sped on —
only to come suddenly upon the tiger ahead of them, crouching
behind a roadside rock as they passed.
After that it kept pace alongside, sometimes seen, sometimes
heard, whilst Pedro drove on, his teeth audibly chattering in time
with the jingling bells.
The car swung round a bend —and there, just ahead, were
the lights of a village, the tang of wood-smoke on the air. As
Pedro drew up, shouting incoherently, a group of natives surrounded


them, while others ran back along the road, yelling and waving
lighted torches, to scare the tiger away from their huts.
Meanwhile the Headman, a dignified old fellow, gave them
directions to the Dak Bungalow, some three miles away, eyeing
the car meanwhile curiously. After he had spoken again to Pedro,
the chauffeur turned to Sir John, gesticulating wildly.
“He says plenty reason tiger follow. Tiger hear bells, he always
follow; he think car postman, he plenty eat postman.”
“If you'll
ing your
ro, and talk
Sir John
and pro-
other burst
tions.
“I under-
lie said at
purchase of^yj|^
Steven, is
carried by
frighten
whilst run-
the jungle.
stop wav-
hands, Ped-
sense ”
protested,
duced an-
of explana-
stand now,”
last. “This
yours,
an affair
postmen to
wild animals
ning through
But tigers
are cunning enough to have discovered that those bells mean a defence-
less man on foot —and that’s why our friend followed us, although
fortunately he couldn’t quite make up his mind to attack a carful.”
Steven removed his treasure from the car’s bonnet and stowed
it away wrapped in a rug. As he took his place beside Sallie he
remarked thoughtfully:
“I should think old Spots and Stripes must have been doing
a bit of mascotry exercise to keep off that tiger.”


Chapter Three
DEAD HISTORY AND LIVE ELEPHANTS
I WONDER why the natives call it Nucklow,” Steven said.
“Perhaps they wonder why we call it Lucknow,” Sallie
remarked.
“The other can’t be right.” Steven spoke in an instructive
manner. “Because the name comes from Lakhsmanpore.”
Sallie, thoroughly snubbed, turned for a last look at what
thrilled her above everything in Lucknow, the Union Jack high
over the Residency. It was splendid to see that flag which is
never hauled down, day or night, in memory of Lawrence and
Havelock and those others who kept it flying all through the
great siege. There were palaces, temples and tombs to see as well,
but Sallie liked best the places and stories connected with the
Mutiny; the Residency gardens and the Martiniere College, whose
schoolboys helped as bravely as grown men in the defence.
At their next stopping-place the Mutiny was forgotten; they
were carried back three centuries, to the time when Shah Jahan
lived and died within the mile-long walls of Agra Fort, and built
the most beautiful tomb in the world for Mumtaz Mahal, the wife
he loved.
“We shall reach Agra late,” Sir John said as they drove through
the Ganges plains. “So you’ll see the Taj first by moonlight.”
“Wish everyone didn’t talk about it!” grumbled Steven. “It
can't be as wonderful as people say.”
But he changed his mind, and said so honestly, standing that
evening by the marble-edged pool in which each exquisite snow-
white dome, minaret and tracery was reflected.


“Why isn’t everything beautiful built near water?” Sallie
asked. “Then it’s there twice over, twice as lovely.”
“It doesn’t look as if it were made by ordinary men—twenty
thousand of them, working for twenty years,” said Steven.
“I don’t believe that’s true,” Sallie declared. “That was built
by magic in one night!”
They saw the inside of the Taj next day, the lovely lattice
screens of marble, the jewelled garlands and silver lamps
around the tombs of Mumtaz Mahal and her husband. Shah
Jahan had meant to be buried in a coal-black Taj beyond
the river, but before it could be built he was imprisoned by his
son in Agra Fort, and died, gazing through a window at the Taj
Mahal.
Steven and Sallie saw that window, and the marvellous buildings
in the fort, the Pearl Mosque, the Hall of Audience. But next
to the Taj itself ranked the wonders of Fatehpur Sikri, the dead
city twenty-three miles from Agra.
It was built by Akbar, grandfather of Shah Jahan, this great
walled “City of Victory”—but fifty years later it was deserted,
and is still.
“There wasn’t any water-supply, though it’s queer they didn't
discover that before,” Steven said. “But— what a gateway!”
The Burhand Darwaza or Gateway of Victory, the highest
gate in India, towers tremendous above its great stairway. Every-
thing inside is in proportion —the huge Hall of Public Audience,
the Temples, Palaces and Tombs, and the Emperor’s stables, with
tethering-rings for thousands of horses and camels, which most
interested Steven.
But Salhe’s favourite place was the Pachesi Court, paved with
red sandstone squares, with a raised seat in the middle. Here
the Emperor used to sit, with an opponent, for a game of chess,


the ‘‘pieces” being slave-girls, who moved from square to square
on the floor as the two players ordered.
‘‘l think you youngsters need a few days out-of-doors before
we go on to Delhi and Amritsar,” Sir John said, as they drove
away from Fatehpur Sikri. ‘‘So we’ll stop half-way for a break
at a jungly spot, where a friend of mine is Forest Officer. You
might get some elephant-riding.”
“Cheers!” Steven said. “There’s nothing like variety, and
Sallie’s gone all poetic as it is.”
“You’re just as bad yourself!” Sallie retorted. “7 saw what
you wrote about the Taj ”
But further revelations were prevented by force on Steven’s part.
The solitary jungle post which they reached two days later
was in real forest-land, on the slopes above a branch of the Jumna.
Splendid timber grew there, and the garden of Mr. Grant’s bungalow
was full of flowers, birds, butterflies, and little black-and-grey
squirrels, whose tameness fascinated Sallie. The forest officer
employed four elephants, so an expedition for Steven and Sallie
was easily arranged.
Starting at dawn, they would have a breakfast-picnic at a
chosen spot in the jungle and be back before the heat of the day.
“But the breakfast here means curry and all sorts, more like
lunch at home,” Sallie commented, as they ate their chota hazri
of tea, toast, jam and bananas. “So you’d better leave some room,
Steve.”
Instead of saddles or howdahs, the elephants had pads like
mattresses strapped to their backs, on which the riders sat quite
comfortably once the trick was discovered, with the mahout perched
on the beast’s neck.
Steven and Sallie rode the biggest elephant, who seemed in a
bad temper in spite of his driver’s petting.


“My lord is angry,” the old mahout said. “Nay, sweet one,
vex not yourself.”
The sweet one responded with shrill squeals, and set off, well
before the other elephants, with a rolling motion, keeping Steven
and Sallie occupied with the business of holding-on. Along a
grassy track between tree-walls they went, white mist rising
everywhere, whilst overhead the grey sky turned dawn-pink and
birds sang up the sun.
The big elephant’s temper grew worse with daylight, and he
grunted constantly. Presently they reached open ground, the
road running alongside a bog where reeds grew, and pools showed
green-scummed. Here the elephant hesitated, rubbing his trunk-
tip on the ground and blowing out air with sounds like a shaken
sheet of tin.
Then, instead of keeping to solid ground, he suddenly threw
up his trunk and plunged into the marsh, the mahout trying vainly
to turn him with shouts and prods of his spiked ankus.
Almost at once the elephant sank chest-deep, squealing with
fear and anger, whilst the mahout wailed:
“We perish! We die!”
The elephant began floundering and plunging, almost throwing
off his riders and sinking lower at each frantic lurch —and it was
at this moment that the rest of the party appeared on the scene,
just when Steven and Sallie were beginning to feel desperate.
Mr. Grant grasped the situation in a moment. He slipped down
from the small elephant on which he was riding and gave orders
to its mahout. The much lighter animal moved obediently into
the bog, then stood ankle-deep, trunk-tip in mouth, after the
manner of undecided elephants.
The mahout, leaning to its ear, coaxed it forward, and the
small elephant advanced slowly towards its struggling comrade,


' ~ * I
until it was along-
side, like a lifeboat
coming to the
rescue of the crew
of a large steamer.
“ Change from
one to the other
as carefully as you
can,” Mr. Grant
ordered, and when
the trans-shipment
was finished, the
small elephant was
guided back to firm
ground with equal
care. Left alone, the big beast managed to extricate itself, but not
until it was daubed from head to foot with mud and slime; it was
then led off, a much subdued rebel, for cleansing by the mahout.
They had almost reached the place chosen for the picnic, and
Steven gave a sigh of satisfaction as he slid down from their
elephant.
“I’m jolly glad we shall get a big breakfast. Bog-trotting is an
exhausting performance.”
Chapter Four
HISTORY AND STORY
A HUGE station, dazzling with electric lights, buzzing with voices
/—\ of Europeans, coolies, sweetmeat-sellers, water-carriers.
DELHI stared boldly in black letters from the name-boards,
but Steven and Sallie were hardly awake enough to be thrilled.


Pedro, with the car, had been sent in advance; the journey
to the North-West Frontier was to be by rail —and this was the
first stopping-place.
Next morning there were at least three different Delhis to
explore. First, Old Delhi itself, rose-red Shahjahanabad, the walled
city with seven gates. The Fort, Palace and Mosque of Jumna
Masjid, where a hair from the Prophet’s beard is preserved, are
all the work of Shah Jahan, builder of the Taj Mahal.
“This is the Palace of the Peacock Throne, lost long ago,”
Sir John told Steven and Sallie. “And that Persian inscription
over the door means: —
“If there is a Paradise on earth
It is here, oh, it is here! It is here!”
“I think it would be truer of the Jumna Masjid; it’s really
more beautiful,” Sallie decided. “But now I want to see all the
Mutiny places.”
Those sights are mostly in the outer city: the famous Ridge
against which the rebel waves broke —and were broken, the Kashmir
Gate, which Home and Salkhed blew up, dying there to save their
comrades, the grave of John Nicholson, whose bravery made the
natives revere him as a god by the name Jan Nikalseyn.
“There are the ruins of at least six more ancient Delhis within
twelve miles,” Sir John said. “But we must see the eighth and
last —New Delhi.”
It lies three miles from the Ridge, in the plain, this new
white Delhi, succeeding the old red city, with its wonderful
vistas and avenues, leading to the Viceroy’s house at the centre
of ah.
“All very beautiful,” Sallie said. “But I don’t believe I shall
really like it till it’s as old as the others.”


Next day they took train again, passing through Umballa and
Jullunder, the capital town of the ancient warrior Rajputs. And
so, at eight o’clock in the morning, they reached Amritsar, the
holy city founded in 1574 by Guru Ram Das, Apostle of the Sikhs,
and built round the sacred tank, that “Pool of Nectar” in which
the Guru is said to have seen a crow dip and turn from black to
shining white.
Here stands the Golden Temple, its roof covered with sheets
of copper gilt, a wonderful sight reflected in the great square of
water.
Before going into the Temple everybody must take off his shoes,
and enter barefooted or wearing socks never used before. These
socks having been bought cheaply at a stall near by, they went
into the sanctuary, with its gilded shrine, covered with verses from
the Granth, the Sikhs’ holy book, from which priests chant aloud
all day.
“You must each have a Kuju Misri,” Sir John said, and in
return for a small offering, Steven and Sallie received the cups of
crystal sugar which traditionally bring blessings.
“And now we’re going to Lahore,” Sallie said with satisfaction
as they left Amritsar. “It’s only thirty miles away, isn’t it?”
“Why this eagerness?” Steven laughed.
“As if you didn’t know! Why, Lahore is Kims town!” Sallie
said impressively. “There’s the very gun the fakir hid in, where
Kim played.”
And that two-hundred-year-old Zam Zammeh gun, or Bhangian-
wali Top, was the first thing that Sallie insisted upon visiting in
the ancient city of Lahore. She patted its muzzle reverently, and
then went off to see the bronze tablet on the newspaper office where
Kim s creator worked for so many years, and wrote the adventures
of the immortal “Soldiers Three.”


“That’s that,” Sallie said with a contented sigh. “And now
I suppose there are forts and mosques and things.”
“There are!” Sir John laughed. “And the famous Shalimar
—the Garden of Pleasure, a beautiful place, so cool and shady,
which I must say attracts me at the moment.”
Going to the Shalimar, Sallie had another thrill, in crossing
the Grand Trunk Road, scene of Kim’s wanderings, which runs
from Calcutta to the Frontier.
“I wish we could go that way to Peshawar,” sighed Sallie.
“Instead of by train.”
“I suppose you’d like to walk it, like Kim!” Steven mocked.
With Sallie resigned to her fate, they travelled northwards
through Rawal Pindi to Peshawar, wildest and most picturesque
of cities.
Here they met Captain Baily, a friend of Sir John’s, who, as
an Indian Army officer, was their best possible guide to the North-
West Frontier. With him Steven and Sallie visited the crowded
bazaars, where shaggy camels hustled them contemptuously and
the clang of the copper-workers was deafening. Tall Pathans,
sometimes fair as Europeans, stalked along, Persians in black
Astrakhan caps, Hindus, Sikhs, negroes, and Tibetans with queer
peaked headgear and sheepskin coats.
“The things one could buy if one had money!” Steven lamented.
“That dagger —or those slippers!”
“The embroideries and beads and —oh, everything!” chimed
in Sallie, whilst Captain Baily laughed and declared that he had
better remove them before acute kleptomania set in.
Peshawar was fascinating, but more alluring still the thought
of going to the Frontier’s very edge. For hardly nine miles away
was Fort Jamrud, at the British end of the most famous pass in
the world.


• “I’m looking forward to this more than anything,” Steven said,
after they had driven across the flat stony plain between Peshawar
and the Hills. “It doesn’t seem true that we are really going up
the Khyber Pass.”
“We oughtn’t to be in a motor-car,” Sallie remarked. “Camels,
like those in the caravans down there, would be more suitable, or
even donkeys.”
“ ‘Well take the high road and they'll take the low road,’ ” Steven
sang irreverently, as the long caravans padded on along the pack-
road which is one of the three roads which now traverse the Pass.
Strings of loaded camels were tied nose to tail, tiny donkeys


leading each detachment, as they do each Tuesday and Friday
in an endless stream, towards the Frontier and Afghanistan.
The motor road runs mid-high, the railway track highest of
the three, all winding and twisting with the Pass, thirty miles
through bare mountains, where only scanty dark bushes grow
amongst the rocks. After about eight miles they reached Ali Musjid
Gorge, the Khyber at its wildest, where the heights close in and
jutting crags overhang the road.
“' There is rock to the right and rock to the left and
low lean thorn between,
And ye may hear a breech-holt snick where
never a man is seen.’ ”
quoted Sallie. “It’s exactly like Kipling. And you can imagine
long-ago armies marching through to invade India —Alexander
the Great and the rest.”
Another ten miles brought them to Landi Kotal at the top
of the Pass, the limit of their expedition, for this was the Afghanistan
border. To the north rose high bare peaks, southward was broken
furrowed ground, with the fort grim and foursquare looking out
over the Frontier, the Union Jack on its flagstaff a bright patch
of colour against the grey-brown landscape.
Beyond the square enclosure of Landi Kotal Fort were the
tribal villages, mud walls circling mud huts and blending with their
surroundings.
The car drew up near the walls; Captain Baily got out and
went into the fort, returning presently with some officers from the
garrison. With this escort the whole party climbed the heights
above Landi Kotal, to see Afghanistan lying in the plain to west-
ward, and the Kabul river twisting away to the capital, hidden
amongst mountains and backed by the tremendous range of the
Hindu Khush.


“That’s Jellalabad; you can just see it through the field-
glasses,’’ Captain Baily said. “The town where the British held out
in 1842, and which Dr. Brydon reached, the only survivor from the
massacre of our troops.”
Steven and Sallie left Landi Kotal reluctantly, but there could
be no dallying after dark on the Frontier, and they had prepara-
tions to make for leaving Peshawar next day.
“And that’ll be the end of Indian adventures,” remarked Sallie
mournfully —and rather prematurely as it turned out.
Chapter Five
THE GOAT BOAT
YOU shouldn’t use a town’s pet-name when you’ve only
just met it. It’s familiar,” scoffed Sallie.
“Everyone calls it D. I. K.,” Steven said loftily.
They had just arrived at Dera Ismail Khan on the Indus, going
down to Karachi, and car-repairs would detain them for another
day, which seemed to Sallie a heaven-sent chance.
“I want tremendously to try one of those goat boats,” she
announced at breakfast. “ You know, the blown-out skins we saw
natives using yesterday.”
“My dear, they looked rather dangerous,” Lady Wylde hesitated.
“The big rafts made with three skins are safe enough,”
Captain Baily said. “Look here, suppose I take you and Steven
duck-shooting, Sallie. There’s a marshy backwater swarming
with birds quite near, and we’ll paddle up on a goatskin
contraption.”
“Great idea!” Steven said, and Sallie agreed enthusiasti-
cally.


The three inflated goat-skins used to support the raft looked
quite pathetic, floating on their backs, all four legs sticking up and
a bamboo seat lashed across their bodies.
Perched on this, with feet resting on the skin’s neck, Sallie
occupied the middle goat, while Steven and Captain Baily on the
others propelled the queer boat with short paddles.
“Keep close in to the bank, out of the strong currents,’’ said
Captain Baily, as they wobbled bravely along. “And don’t get
our sandwiches splashed, Sallie.’’
“They’re quite safe —and this is the nicest boat I’ve ever been
on,” declared Sallie.
Presently they reached the backwater, where numerous water-
fowl could be seen and heard. But their goatskin craft proved
unnavigable amongst the thick reeds, and after firing a few shots,
Captain Baily left it, to pick up the dead birds, scrambling from
one tussocky island to another.
The raft was tied to a stake in the river bank, but the wood
must have rotted. Suddenly there was a sharp crack, and Steven
and Sallie felt the raft swerve and begin drifting down stream,
lopsidedly.
“Get on the outer skin to trim her,” Steven ordered, but before
Sallie could do this and restore balance a current caught them,
and the raft was rapidly carried out into mid-stream, amidst unavail-
ing shouts from its crew, for Captain Baily was beyond sight or
hearing.
They both paddled furiously but vainly. Plainly they could
not return, and the current seemed taking them across rather than
down the river.
“We must let it,” Steven panted. “Once across we’ll manage
to get back somehow. No good fighting a river this size.”
No, Sallie agreed, feeling small and lonely. The opposite side,


wearing sheepskin coats or . jjjk fl .
long tunics, with numerous //
stuck
them.”
rocky and bare, was the nearer now, and they began looking for
somewhere to land.
“Not that we’ve much choice,” Steven said. “But we’ll paddle
when we’re under the lee of the bank.”
They were drifting in towards a tiny bay, when Sallie spoke
uneasily.
“Steven, 100k —those men!”
They climbed down a rocky bank, half a dozen shaggy-bearded,
rough-looking Mahsuds,
wearing sheepskin coats or
long tunics, with numerous
weapons stuck into their
sashes. As they ad-
vanced they shouted
and gesticulated in a
“ They’re
telling us


“Do you think ” Sallie began.
“Well, we’ve heard about these chaps —kidnapping and so
on. It looks very much as if that was their game. If only we could
keep clear of the bank!”
But this proved impossible. In spite of strenuous efforts the
raft drifted steadily inshore, and directly it was in the shallows,
two or three of the fierce-looking men ran into the water and hauled
it ashore, all the time talking and gesturing.
“It’s no good, Sallie; they’ve caught us all right,” Steven
said.
“I suppose they’ll keep us prisoners, for ransom,” Sallie
answered. “I wonder if they speak English.”
“I’ll try.” Steven turned towards the Mahsuds. “What do
you want?” he asked.
Louder shouts and fiercer gestures answered him; all the
hill-men talked at once, but all in their own language, pointing
in a direction which they evidently meant their prisoners to
take.
“We’ll have to go,” Steven said. “Don’t be frightened, old
thing; I’ll look after you.”
“I’m not—very,” Sallie confessed honestly, as they followed
the indicated path, surrounded by their captors.
They went for some distance, the Mahsuds still jabbering away,
sometimes laughing and leaping in a triumphant way, which did
not reassure Steven and Sallie, as they plodded on disconsolately.
To be kidnapped by tribesmen and cost their parents a fortune for
ransom —here was a nice end to their travels!
“ I wonder why we’re going towards the river again, Sallie
said presently. “I thought they’d take us to the hills.”
“They seem making for that big boat,” Steven answered. ‘ I
suppose we’re going by water.”


So it appeared; soon they were seated in the boat, being paddled —
rather surprisingly —towards the farther bank.
“Wonder what’s the idea?” Steven speculated. “P’raps they
mean to negotiate. ... I say, Sallie, isn’t that Captain Baily on
the bank? ’’
It undoubtedly was; as the boat drew to the laud he shouted
to Steven:
“I saw you through my field-glasses; thank goodness you’re
safe ’’ Breaking off, he spoke in Pushtu to the Mahsuds, receiv-
ing an answering flood of speech, as Steven and Sallie were hoisted
and hauled ashore.
“I don’t understand,” Steven said. “We thought ”
“Haven’t they kidnapped us?” Sallie broke in.
“Not they! they’re Khassadars, friendly tribesmen, who act as
a sort of native policemen; they’re delighted with themselves for
having rescued you from the river. But as you couldn’t understand
what they said, it was a natural enough mistake on your part.”
The Khassadars formed a cheerful escort to the resthouse, and
departed, after Sir John had rewarded them, with laughter and
handshakes.
And that really was the last Indian adventure.
Chapter Six
MEETING NATS
OF all the hideous countries —and I thought Burma was
beautiful!” Sallie spoke disgustedly, looking at the mud-
flats, the low mangrove-fringed banks of the chocolate-
coloured river up which they were slowly making their way towards
Rangoon.


“I jolly well wish we hadn’t got up early,” Steven said. “And
I’ve looked forward to this all the way from Karachi!”
“Well, I’m glad we’re only wasting a day or two here,” Sallie
decided.
Mist hung over land and river, with a dim sun struggling to
break through just above the horizon. It succeeded as the steamer
rounded the last bend, and there on a low hill ahead, gleaming
in the first beams, was a wonderful golden building, a dazzling
fairylike thing.
“Oooh!” Sallie whispered.
“My word!" said Steven under his breath
And that was their first sight of the famous Shwe Dagon, the
Golden Pagoda, one of the world’s wonders. From that moment it
rose above everything else in Rangoon, and Steven and Sallie
said no more concerning Burma’s ugliness.
The Shwe Dagon drew them when they were left to their own
devices, whilst their parents paid some business calls. They dis-
covered the beautiful gardens, where it rises above a lake, patterned
with pink and blue lotus; they climbed to the platform on
which the Pagoda stands, and saw the curious carvings and
paintings, and the throngs of gaily-dressed, cheerful-looking
Burmese.
“They seem always laughing—jolly sort of crowd,” Steven
commented, when they were back in the gardens wandering amongst
gorgeous flowers, until Sallie collapsed upon a seat.
“ I must rest a bit,” she said.
“I'll go and see what those boys are doing; seems to be footer
with a basket-work ball.” Steven strolled off, whilst Sallie watched
huge, brilliant-coloured butterflies hovering over the flower-beds,
and a striped squirrel, bold enough to take a chocolate from her
fingers.


Suddenly the little beast bounded away, making a clicking
noise, and Sallie saw a Burmese child standing near, wearing a
skirt of brocaded-pink silk and a white jacket, an adorable small
person with serious dark eyes and a rose-bud mouth.
“Does you know why squids say ‘Tclick—Tclick’?” she asked
in the quaintest, prettiest English.
“No,” Sallie said. “Won’t you tell me?”
The child stood upright, tiny brown hands demurely folded.
“De squid an’ de owl an’ de mole has a cart,” she lisped, “but
no oxes. So dey harnesses two tigers an’ two monkeys, an’ de squid
drove an’ said: ‘ Tclick! Tclick!’ an’ de owl was flightened —dat’s
why he’s eyes so big! An’ de mole laughed and laughed—dat’s
why he's eyes so small!”
She imitated the squirrel’s click, made big eyes as the frightened
owl, and screwed them up in laughter as the mole, so deliciously
that Sallie longed to hug her.
“It’s a lovely story,” she said. “What’s your name, dar-
ling?”
“Ma Min Tyee,” the little girl told her. “ Look! ”
She pointed to the squirrel, perched now on the queerly twisted
bough of a tulip-tree with mauve-pink flowers.
“Shall I coax him to come down again?” Sallie asked.
“ No /” Ma Min Tyee was emphatic. “That bad tree. Nat
live there.”
‘A gnat?” Sallie felt puzzled.
‘Yess! Nats naughty—bite—pinch. Live in tree.”
'‘But I don’t see anything,” Sallie said.
“Not see Nat!” the Burmese child declared. “P’raps you give
chock’lit, Nat pleased.”
So Sallie placed a piece of chocolate under the tree —thus hearing
for the first time of Nats, mischievous spirits whom the Burmese


fancy as living in trees, streams or huts, and propitiate with fruit
and sweets.
An English nurse came hurrying along the path and led Miss
Ma Min Tyee away, telling Sallie that she was the child of a Burmese


doctor, who had studied in England and meant to send his small
daughter to school there. At that moment Steven returned, describ-
ing the curious game he had watched, played with a round wicker-
work ball, which was struck with the hand, head, knee, foot, or any
part of the body.
“Seemed quite good fun; Ed like to get a ball and try it,”
he said. “Let’s go to the gate and wait for the parents; hope they’ll
come soon, for I’m ravenous. I believe I’d eat that awful-smelling
stuff made of bad prawns.”
Fortunately for Steven he was not reduced to that favourite
Burmese delicacy Ngpai, which is certainly an acquired taste.
That afternoon they drove round the coast to the famous “Old
Moulmein Pagoda,” standing near the beach, all the tiny brass
bells hanging under its eaves tinkling in the sea-breezes. There,
too, were the elephants piling teak in the timber-yards, obedient
monsters placing the logs, which have been floated down
the rivers in rafts from the forest, exactly in the right positions
with their trunks, using their foreheads to push the heaviest
weights.
Over the sands and the wet mud scuttled hundreds ofjtiny
red crabs, which, as an old yellow-robed Buddhist priest told them,
were once the soldiers brought by an evil god to fight against the
Buddha, and which were transformed by the great Teacher into
this harmless shape.
Steven and Sallie had quite changed their minds about Burma
when they stood on the steamer’s deck next evening and saw
the glow of sunset on the Shwe Dagon, making the Golden Pagoda
their last as well as their first vision and memory of Rangoon.


Chapter Seven
FURTHEST EAST
Ido think Penang is one of the nicest places we’ve been to,”
Sallie said earnestly, and Steven laughed.
“It’s the umpteenth time I’ve heard you say that,” he
remarked.
“And I mean it every time!” Sallie retorted shamelessly.
They had travelled along the fringes of the Malay Peninsula,
discovering how little they knew about it from books.
“I’m sure we never heard at school about the three sorts of
governments here,” Steven said. The Straits Settlements ruled
direct from England, the Federated Malay States only adminis-
trated, and the States like Johore, protected. And as for knowing
where Kuala Lumpur was ”
“Well, we do now,” Sallie said. “And it’s got the most beautiful
station I ever saw.”
They had left Kuala Lumpur, chief town of the Federated
Malay States, in the evening, and the snow-white domes and minarets
by moonlight suggested a palace more than a railway station.
Then came the all-night journey to Penang, through jungle that
gleamed with fireflies as the sky did with stars, and was full of
spicy scents.
When the sun rose it showed a broad, splendid river, beside
which the train stopped that the passengers might board the
Penang steamer, flying the unfamiliar flag of the Malay States,
a tiger on a background of black, white, red and yellow.
Down the river to sea, across the narrow straits to Penang
on its island amongst a brood of little ones, with miscellaneous


ships at anchor—Chinese sampans and junks with eyes painted on
their bows and slatted sails like Venetian blinds, European steamers,
and Malay fishing-boats, high at stern and bow.
“Penang has a queer history/' Sir John said, as they landed.
“Captain Light, R.N., annexed it in 1786, and it’s said he played
a trick to make people build here. He scattered sacks of silver
dollars in the jungle, and there was quite a rush to clear the trees
and find the treasure. Once it was cleared, they settled, and some
of those eighteenth century buildings still survive.”
That is the charm of Penang—the contradiction of a Georgian
church and houses, side by side with the gorgeous oriental dwellings
of rich Chinese, all green and yellow dragons and elaborate gate-
ways. And everywhere are glimpses of the sea between trees,
feathery coconut palms and scarlet-and-gold-blossomed flamboy-
ants ; no wonder that Sallie, seeing the town from the height above
it, found the view beautiful. They had reached the hill with the
Buddhist monastery, where tortoises of immense age are kept,
by way of Penang’s world-famous gardens, where numberless
varieties of bamboo grow, amongst them those which produce
Malacca canes and “Penang Lawyers.” There were rubber trees,
too, but the travellers had already seen these on a large scale in
the plantations near Kuala Lumpur, with cups tied under the cuts
in the trunks to catch the liquid rubber.
“I wish we could stay here longer,” sighed Sallie. “But I wish
that so often. There’s not enough time anywhere; we ought to
be at least a year in each continent.”
“And then some!” ejaculated Steven. “But I suppose it’s a
bit ungrateful talking like this, when we’ve still got Singapore—
and Borneo—and Ceylon.”
Singapore, however, turned out according to Steven’s apt
description, a wash-out”; they could recall nothing afterwards


of city and harbour but sheets of steady rain such as is only seen,
heard and felt in the tropics. The inhabitants of Singapore were
indoors in more senses than one.
“ I believe every beast, bird, beetle and bug in the Malay
Peninsula thinks it’s the Flood and this hotel the Ark, Steven
grumbled. “Certainly they’ve all taken refuge here.”
Dejected birds, ruffled squirrels, mice and rats sheltered in
every perch and cranny of the verandahs, snakes crawled into
roofs and bath-houses; lizards, scorpions, centipedes, mosquitoes
and insects of all sorts and kinds, less troubled by shyness, invaded
the rooms, crawled over walls and ceilings, clung to curtains or
mosquito-nets, swarmed round lights and fell dead or dying upon
the tables at meals.
The garden flowers were battered down, and the noise of
the rain was incessant. All sights were blotted out by wet mist,
there was nothing to do but make the best of a bad job, and
be thankful that their steamer left for Borneo in two days
time.
But the rain continued; in it they arrived; in it they left,
Singapore was just a memory of dank wetness, of steaming clothes
drying on wicker frames over charcoal braziers.
Once at sea everything changed; soon all was blue sky and
bluer water, and Borneo, when they reached it, was the greenest
of green lands, trees covered with red berries growing everywhere
down to the beaches.
Like most of the towns of this country, Sandakhan, capital
of British North Borneo, lies up a broad tidal river, reached by
small steamers, or native boats called prahus. It is a pleasant
town, with rubber-plantations and tobacco-fields round about, and
inland, forests rising to the slopes of the high cone of Mount
Kinabalu.


Sir John knew an important official in Sandakhan, and they
stayed at his big white bungalow, with a crowd of soft-voiced,
velvet-eyed Malay servants established in the verandahs.
The chief ornament of the collection gave Sallie something
of a shock, come upon suddenly in the dusk. She saw only a dark
shape, squatting in the shadows, and took it for a native. Then
as she passed there was a snarling sound, a grabbing hairy hand,
a hideous face
"Don’t be afraid!” Mr. Miles, their host, called to her. “Tomo
isn’t fierce really, and he’s chained round the waist.”
"I thought he was a man!” Sallie said.
"So he is—by name. Orang-utan means ‘man of the woods.’
We ve had Tomo from baby-hood, and he’ll make friends for a
banana.”
Sallie found this true when she timidly offered one to the huge
ape next morning. He took it gently and peeled it daintily, making
a crooning, grateful noise. Bananas proved ingratiating, too, with
Bing, the large red squirrel, and Matilda, the hombill.
"She’s the weirdest, ugliest bird on earth,” Steven declared,
as she waddled about the verandah with the enormous top-heavy-
looking double beak, one part curved up backwards, which explained
the name Rhinoceros Hombill.
"She’s so ugly that she’s rather lovely, eh, Matilda?” Sallie
said. “But I couldn’t pet that baby python, though Mrs. Miles
says he’s quite gentle.”
"And lets him curl round her neck—ugh!” shuddered Steven.
"Are you ready? We’re going up one of the rivers to-day.”
These river expeditions were a fascinating part of their stay
in Borneo. Sometimes they went in steam launches, sometimes
in prahus, rowed by natives, wherein the passengers lay luxuriously
on mattresses, under awnings.


In this way they travelled miles between forest-clad banks hung
with gorgeous creepers and orchids, where land-crabs crawled on the
mud-covered tree-roots and snow-white egrets flew across the river.
Once they landed to see some wonderful caves, reached through
miles of dense jungle. Standing in the high arched entrance they
looked up to shadowy depths, with an enormous population. For
in these caves thousands of bats live by day, clinging to walls and
roof, and at evening, when they go a-hunting, are replaced by
innumerable swallows who roost there nightly. These swallows
nests are the edible kind prized in China, and collected by the
natives for exportation.
Another time a sago factory was visited—for most of the
world’s sago comes from Borneo.
“I always thought it was a sort of fruit,” Steven said, as they
watched a palm cut down and split lengthways, showing the pith,
which is sago. “Look, they’re scraping it into a wooden trough
and —what on earth 1”
“He’s going to dance in it!” Sallie chuckled.
A Dyak began solemnly to dance in the trough, to the
accompaniment of drums, pounding the pith into a creamy mass
under his bare brown feet, from which the liquid part ran into
another trough. This, when washed and dried, is sago.
Chapter Eight
HEAD HUNTERS AND A TOOTH TEMPLE
ND do these Dyaks, whose village we’re going to visit, still
hunt heads?” Steven asked, as their steam-launch entered
another wilder river.
“No, head-hunting is illegal now,” Mr. Miles said. But until


quite lately no Dyak maiden would look at a young man unless
he could produce an enemy’s head as a wedding-present. The
Dyaks are attractive people, though, friendly and humorous when
they know you. They’re the real aborigines; the Malays only
settled here. There are Land and Sea Dyaks, the latter fishers and
sailors, swimming like seals in the water from babyhood. But
here’s our village.”
“Just one house!” Sallie said
“But look at
the length of it,”
Steven added.
It stood on
piles raised above
the mud of the
bank, an im-
mensely long
thatched wooden
building with a
door in each end.
Underneath
fowls, pigs and
goats wandered.
Yes, they always live in a single hut, or sometimes one for
the men and the other for the women,” Mr. Miles said. “This will
have a matting division inside, making it two.”
The visitors landed near the hut, and a group of Dyaks came
to welcome them and lead them up a ladder; usually, they were
told, this was merely a tree-trunk with notches cut for the toes.
At last they were safely in the long hut, the floor of which
was just pieces of round bamboo laid several inches apart to
simplify sweeping, but covered with a narrow strip of matting


in honour of the visitors, for whom, too, the screen between the
men’s and the women’s quarters was removed, and wooden mat-
covered seats set ready.
There was no furniture in the long room except the mats,
rolled in comers, upon which all the villagers sleep, but the woven
reeds and canes of the walls and the floor covering, all shaded
browns and yellows, had a pleasant cool effect in the dim light
filtering only through cracks.
When the five Europeans were seated on the stools in the
middle of the hut, the Dyaks greeted them in turn, the headman
and his wife carrying on a conversation through Mr. Miles, and
the women crowding round Sallie and her mother, examining their
clothes and ornaments with admiring murmurs.
And it was then, with everyone gathered round the strangers,
that catastrophe came about. The weight of the assembled village
on one spot was too much for the frail floor. There was an ominous
cracking sound, a frightened movement, and the bamboos gave
way, in a cloud of dust which darkened the already scanty fight.
Sallie felt herself falling, clutched wildly at nothing, and held
her breath, expecting a sickening thud. But nothing happened;
she seemed suspended in darkness, with cries and cracklings coming
from all round.
Then she heard Steven’s voice:
“All right, Mother, take my hand—now, be careful! You’re
up! Where’s Sallie?’’
“Here!’’ Sallie managed to gasp, and a minute later found
Steven’s hand gripping her wrist, pulling her to safety. For
although the floor had given way, the tough matting broke the
fall, hanging hammock-wise, and no one was much the worse,
when disentangled from the heap in which they were piled, whilst
the villagers looked upon it as a huge joke.


“And they’ll have the floor mended by to-night,” said Mr.
Miles. “Building in Borneo is a simple matter.”
“Yes; it’s another place I should like to live in,” Steven
declared. “Instead of leaving to-morrow, worse luck!”
A mania for authorship filled Steven and Sallie during the
voyage Ceylonwards. For hours they sat on deck writing up their
logs from the scrappy notes and diaries kept during their travels,
an occupation which Lady Wylde saw with satisfaction.
“I shall really know something about your adventures if it’s
all written down,” she said. “Instead of hearing bits of them
in bursts.”
Perhaps it was this pursuit of literature which made the days
pass so quickly; it seemed hardly believable to be nearing Ceylon
and, aided by a little imagination, actually smelling its spicy
breezes, as Sallie declared she could.
But there was no doubt about the spicy smell when they landed
at Colombo, especially in the cinnamon gardens. They went in
rickshaws pulled by white-dressed coolies, very unlike the gaudy
Zulus at Durban, over bright red roads, under bright green trees.
Demure Cingalese trotted along, the men in long petticoats
and white jackets and hair fastened in a knot with a big comb,
looking very womanly, carrying usually a black umbrella.
Then they sat outside the Grand Oriental Hotel, where all
travellers are supposed to arrive sooner or later, and were pestered
to buy ivory or ebony elephants, moonstones or sapphires.
Steven and Sallie began to see Ceylon’s beauty in the train
half-way to Kandy. At first it was paddy-fields, afterwards coffee
and rubber plantations as the line rose higher, then tea-gardens,
neat rows of low shrubs striping the hillsides.
Higher still, the train suddenly turned a comer, seemed about
to plunge over a precipice—and there was a wonderful view down


over misty jungle valleys, with a strangely-shaped mountain
rising above them.
“That’s Adam’s Peak,” Sir John said. “It’s a very sacred
pilgrimage place for the Cingalese, because Buddha’s footprint—
about six foot long, too—is supposed to be on the top.”
Kandy lies circled by hills round a lake, or tank—a pretty,
flowery town with a great building near the water’s edge.
“The Dalada Malagawa, the Tooth Temple,” Sir John told
Steven and Sallie, who immediately asked:
“Whose tooth?”
“Buddha’s. It’s nearly as big in proportion as the footprint,
kept in a magnificent shrine, and rarely opened, so I’m afraid you
won’t see it. But we’ll go over the Temple.”
They mounted the broad steps, up and down which people
passed all day long, visitors, Buddhist priests and nuns with yellow
robes and shaven heads, worshippers carrying flat baskets of creamy
sweet-scented “Temple Flowers” or frangipani. Inside were curious
paintings and the carved and decorated shrine of the Tooth. Steven


w
and Sallie took away as souvenirs dried skeleton leaves from the
sacred 80-tree, under which Buddha sat to teach; but Sallie kept
an even more vivid memory of the Tooth Temple, supplied to
her by one of the Temple elephants.
These elephants take part in Peraharas, the religious processions
and ceremonies in honour of the Tooth, and are decidedly spoilt
and petted beasts. Steven and Sallie saw them led down to bathe
in the Mahawelaganga, the red-brown river flowing between high
banks, and followed to watch.
The elephants enjoyed themselves thoroughly, squirting water
over themselves and each other from their hose-pipe trunks. One
was quite small, and Sallie went near to offer it a banana. Perhaps
the little elephant was too young for pretty manners, perhaps
it was in a bad temper; instead of behaving nicely, it gave a squeal
and blew a trunkful of water over Sallie’s clean dress, to her disgust
and Steven’s amusement.
“Probably someone with a face something like yours once
teased the little beast,’’ he declared. “As you know—an elephant
never forgets!”
Chapter Nine
TEA AND TANKS
HAT S so jolly about Ceylon ...” Sallie began, only
to be interrupted by Steven.
Now, don t say that it’s the nicest place we’ve been
to.”
“I wasn’t going to, though I really think . . . it’s so sort
of cosy ... no, I don’t exactly mean that, but it isn’t so large
as India or Africa. ...”


“Rather what 'Punch' would call a glimpse of the obvious,”
Steven said in his loftiest manner. “Really, my child, you do talk
the most terrible drivel.”
“It isn’t, if I could only explain properly, but . . . oh, well!”
Sallie turned her attention to the selection of a particularly fine
mango from the big basket of fruit which a native servant in a
petticoat and a huge tortoiseshell comb had just offered to her.
They were at a picnic, a very glorified picnic with knives and
forks and good manners, as Sallie described it to herself, sitting
rather stiffly in a summer-house. But outside that summer-house
were the lovely Peradenia Botanical Gardens, and they made up
for any amount of stiffness. Every tree and flower in the world
seemed to grow there, and Sallie had just been thrilled by the sight
of a flying-squirrel skimming like a glider-aeroplane from tree to
tree and by the taste of water from a Traveller’s Palm, running
into a cup from a cut in the trunk.
“I thought that was only a story, like hot-rolls-breadfruit and
coco-nut milk,” she said. “It’s nice to find that some book-things
are real. I do believe that this must be one of the most beautiful
gardens in the world.”
“I’m looking forward myself more to the tea-garden this after-
noon,” Steven remarked. “It ought to be tremendously interesting
to see just how tea is made, and I don’t mean the one-spoon-for-each-
person-and-another-for-the-pot way! ”
They had motored out from Kandy to see the Botanical Gardens
and the tea-factory, which was quite near. The tea-gardens stretched
away up a hillside, rows and rows of low bushes with dark-green
leaves and small white flowers, and amongst them rows and rows of
brown women in red or orange petticoats and white cotton jackets,
picking—picking —picking, until the flat baskets which they carried
were full of green tea-leaves.


‘ ! ping, aiiu
} feeling very wise concerning
Then these leaves were carried to the factory and dried on metal
trays in the ovens, until gradually they shrivelled and curled up
into tiny black or dark-brown tea-leaves which everyone knows.
Even then, all the sorts of tea-leaves were not alike, Steven
and Sallie learnt. The tiny tips of leaf-buds made one kind, the half-
grown leaves another, and so on, each with a different name and taste.
They were given some of the very finest tea to taste, made in shallow
china cups with covers, pale straw-coloured liquid, which smelt
even better than it tasted, in SaUie’s opinion. She privately wished
that she dared ask for milk and sugar, but Steven told her this would
be considered too ignorant for words.
"Positively vulgar," he said severely. "Tea-tasters never have
anything in it."
They saw the tea lying in great sieves to finish drying, they
V / saw it packed ready for ship-


A few days later they went up to Newera Ellia—which they dis-
covered was inconsiderately pronounced Neuralia —a station up in
the hills where it is quite cool and even cold at nights. And it was
from there that Steven and Sallie visited the buried City of Anurad-
hapoora, which Sallie tried to pronounce at least a hundred times
and then gave up in despair.
“But it’s absolutely wonderful, isn’t it?” she sighed. “Just
like the Temple in the 'Jungle Book’ that was swallowed up by the
forest. That’s what has happened here.”
“Only how?” Steven wondered. “It’s such a huge place for the
jungle to swallow; the people must all have left it for some reason,
but I should like to know why.”
Many other people have wondered, like Steven, what happened
to Anuradhapoora, hundreds and hundreds of years ago. But there
it is now, buried deep in the jungle, the ruins of temples and palaces,
of bathing-pools and terraces and towers, and marvellously carved
gateways, watched over by great statues of gods and elephants.
Only the jungle people live there, instead of Kings and priests and
warriors: there are monkeys everywhere, bears and leopards often
prowl over the worn stone pavements, pythons and other snakes
hide in comers, there are birds’-nests and bees’-nests in crevices
of the carvings.
Some of these inhabitants of the dead city Sallie discovered for
herself, when she crept along a narrow passage, doing a little explora-
tion on her own account. The passage sloped a little downwards,
and as Sallie moved on, flashing her pocket-torch from side to
side, she hoped that she might find something exciting: statues
or carvings or perhaps paintings which she could boast about to
Steven.
“It doesn’t look as though anybody had ever been here before,”
she thought, scrambling over a pile of stones and rubbish. “I


wonder what that queer rumbling noise is, almost like thunder very
far away. It might be an underground stream.”
The low roar grew louder, and although she was more than half-
afraid, Sallie’s curiosity drew her on towards it. Then, stooping,
she came out from the low arched passage into a stone-walled room,
where the noise echoed and boomed as though she were inside a
huge seashell.
There were carvings certainly, but Sallie scarcely saw them;
she only had eyes for something else, something which sent her
scurrying and stumbling away along the passage, knocking her knees
and elbows against the walls, but paying no attention to grazes
and bruises in her hurry to escape.


Pale, panting, perspiring, she came running to Steven, where
he sprawled peacefully in the shade of an apricot-tree, watching a
green lizard sunning itself on an ancient wall.
“Oh, do you see them, are they following me?” Sallie flung her-
self down beside her brother and glanced back over her shoulder.
“Who? What? I don’t see anybody! ’’ Steven sat up and stared.
“I thought they were' —I heard them ... I went along a
passage and I came to a sort of room and they were all over the walls,
hanging in great black lumps and crawling in and out . . . and
roaring . . . thousands and millions of them . . . ugh!’’ Sallie
explained incoherently.
“What were?’’ Steven demanded impatiently.
“Why, hornets, enormous ones! And I saw them looking at me
—and I ran.’’
“Yes, you did; I saw that part of it,’’ Steven agreed. “Well,
there’s not a sign of a hornet here, so you might leave me alone to
be comfortable.”
“Of all the heartless brutes /” Sallie exploded. “I don’t believe
you’d have cared a bit if I’d been stung to death in there, so long as
you were comfortable.”
“Well, you’re not dead,” Steven murmured provokingly. “So
we shall never know for certain. Now sit still and calm yourself
and don’t keep glaring and flapping at imaginary hornets.”
And now the time in Ceylon was coming nearly to an end; one
more expedition, one more adventure, and not an easily forgotten
adventure either, before they must steam away from the beautiful
island.
The two were to ride on pony-back to some famous tanks in a
mountain valley with Mr. Ascot, the friend at whose bungalow the
whole family had been staying in Newera Ellia. The way lay along
steep tracks through the hills, with the most lovely views at every


twist and turn, and birds, flowers and butterflies all more highly
coloured than each other glowing in the tropical sunshine on each
side of the path.
But it was very, very hot, and when they reached a place where
two roads divided, one dipping and winding down into the valley where
the tanks or baby lakes gleamed like turquoises, Mr. Ascot drew up.
“My pony’s gone dead lame,” he said. “I’ll get of and lead him
along this upper track to the rest-house, where we’ll have tiffin
You two ride down and look at the tanks and then join me; you can’t
mistake the way.”
“I know what 7’m going to do,” confided Steven to Sallie, as
their ponies picked their way slowly down the rough path to the valley.
“And that is—bathe! I’ve never been so grilled, boiled and roasted
in my life.”
“Do you think you’d better?” Sallie looked doubtful. “How
about crocodiles and things?”
“There definitely aren’t any; I asked!” Steven declared trium-
phantly. “So I brought my swimming suit on purpose, and yours
too. There’s thoughtfulness for you!”
But Sallie still looked and felt uncertain, even when a few minutes
later they reached the tanks, lying cool and lovely in the shade of
the flowering trees which edged their banks. The water was most
tempting to hot sticky bodies, there seemed no reason against bathing,
and yet. . . .
“I don’t think I will, Steve,” Sallie said, still mounted, whilst
Steven flung himself out of the saddle, and began to unroll the
bathing suits.
“Well, I call that downright silly and ungrateful!” Steve stared.
“D’you mean to say you’re afraid, after I told you I asked about
crocs? ”
“N-no, I just don’t feel like it.”


“Then you’d better ride on and say I’m following. There’s no
sense in your staying here just to watch, if you won’t be sociable,”
Steven said crossly.
“Oh, well, if you don’t want me I’ll go!’’ Sallie said, with almost
equal bad temper, and rode away, up the steep path, which seemed
to be twisted and more winding than any other part of their journey.
However, it was really no great distance, and she reached the rest-
house in about a quarter of an hour, to find tiffin and their host
both ready, the latter stretched in a long cane chair.
“Steve won’t be long,” Sallie said. “He just waited behind to
have a bathe in the tank.”
“A bathe!” Mr. Ascot was on his feet in a moment. “ I say, he
mustn’t— it’s most dangerous —no one bathes there!”
“But there aren’t any crocodiles —Steve asked about them,
Sallie said.
“Crocodiles, no! But these tanks simply swarm with water-
snakes, and they’re deadly poisonous. Steve must be warned; he ought
to know by this time that you can’t behave in these countries as
though you were in England. Who on earth can I send?
“I’m going!” Sallie said, and pulling round her pony’s head
without waiting to say or hear anything more, she was off down the
steep path once again, riding recklessly fast in her haste to reach
and warn Steven.
Too recklessly. For one side of the narrow path fell steeply,
unprotected, in a rocky slope, covered here and there with bushes,
the path itself, too, was broken away in places. As Sallie pushed
the pony on, the little beast stumbled, swerved and lost its footing.
Over the edge it went, plunging and struggling in a cloud of dust
and a shower of flying stones and clods of earth.
Before Sallie really realised what was happening, they were
both going down the steep descent at a headlong pace, the pony


slithering on its haunches and snorting wildly with fear. Then a
clump of bushes broke the slide and brought them up short, and the
plucky little beast struggled out and regained its footing in a really
wonderful way. Once having done so, it set off again like a goat,
until suddenly they were on level ground again, and Sallie saw that
they had reached a lower stretch of the path, cutting off an immense
loop by that unplanned and unexpected movement, for they were now
almost on a level with the tank.
“That was taking a short cut!” Sallie thought, as she urged on
the pony. “We must have saved minutes and minutes, just by
that accident, though I did think we were done for when we went
clattering down the precipice. Oh, there’s Steven —in the water!”
Steven lay lazily in a clear pool, where the sunlight was making
patterns on the water as it shone through the leaves, patterns of
gold on the dark patches of shade. The boy seemed to be almost
asleep: his eyes were shut, and he took no notice as Sallie trotted
quickly up and slipped from the pony’s back.
“Ste ” she was just beginning, when she broke off with a
little gasp of horror. For there, just behind her brother, looking
itself like a streak of golden sunlight and deep shadow as it glided
swiftly through the water towards him, was a slim yellow and black
snake.
Its head was reared up above the surface, moving from side
to side; Sallie caught the glitter of its evil black eye. She dared not
call out or startle Steven, as he lay there with his back to her, for the
creature was so close to him that if he made a hasty movement of
surprise, he might touch it and cause it to strike at him.
But something must be done: and without waiting to think,
Sallie did it. Running quickly down into the water up to her knees,
she slashed at the snake again and again with her riding-switch. It
turned, writhing, and began to wriggle towards her, hissing fiercely,


whilst Steven, thoroughly roused now, scrambled, splashing, to his
feet.
“Hullo, Sallie, what on earth . . he began, and then caught
sight of the water-snake, very close now to Sallie’s ankles, as she
plunged back towards the bank. A stone lay near by and Steven
snatched it up; next instant the snake was dead, its head crushed,
and Sallie had collapsed on the bank in a heap.
“It’s p-p-poisonous .. . frightfully p-poisonous . . she
sobbed. “They . . . they all are . . . Mr. Ascot t-t-told me.
. And, oh, Steve, I did think it would b-bite you!”
“It would have, if it hadn’t been for you,” Steve said.
“It would have —if it hadn’t been for the pony and me sliding
down the cliff for a short cut,” Sallie declared. “We couldn’t have
been in time if we’d stuck to the path.”
But Steven, when this was explained, did not seem to see the


Chapter Ten
THE LAST OF ASIA
IT'S terrible to think this is our last ship,” Sallie said regretfully,
mounting the gangway from the launch which had brought
them off from Colombo to the big white cruising liner.
“Well, anyhow, we’ll have two or three weeks of it,” answered
Steven, attempting to be cheerful.
In cloudlessly hot weather they crossed the Indian Ocean
and steamed up the Red Sea, with the rose-pink peaks of the
Mount Sinai range in full view for a whole day, rising from
the desert.
“Come to think of it, all round the world we haven’t actually
seen a real sandy desert,” Steven said. “So it’s rather lucky to
come in for one at the finish.”
“You’ll do more than that, you’ll go right through it,” Sir
John promised. “Remember the Canal begins at Suez.”
At Suez itself the only event was the conjurors who came on
board, producing live chickens and eggs from nowhere and every-
where. But as they moved slowly on through the Canal, Steven
and Sallie realised that this was not the least interesting part of
their travels.
That straight, water-filled ditch cut through the desert, con-
necting two continents, yet hardly wide enough for the huge ships
using it, was fascinating; so were the sights on each bank. There
were strings of camels with wild-looking Bedaween drivers, blue-
shirted fellaheen working in their sugar-cane or maize patches,
and always the grinding creeking noise of sakkiyas, the water-
wheels by which those fields are irrigated.


Stretching beyond in all directions, just sand, with the mirage
shimmering on the horizon, under a sky that seemed immensely
bigger than anywhere else.
At Ismailia, the oasis where the Canal widens out for some
distance into the Bitter Lakes, there was time for a short
run ashore, to see the desert close at hand. There were trees
and gardens at
Ismailia, and in
the lakes flamingo
and clumsily-
flying pelican.
And, scrambling over the sand-mounds, Sallie found a comical
tiny creature with big eyes and bigger ears and long kangarooish legs.
“It’s like a mouse on stilts!” she said. “Whatever can it be?”
“That’s a young jerboa,” her father told her. “They make
nice pets if you can manage to rear them.”
Sallie decided at once to make the attempt, and the jerboa
took up its abode in a wool-lined Egyptian basket, to make it feel
at home. It throve on the condensed milk with which Sallie fed it


every few hours, and survived the voyage, to become a pet and
mascot, the rival of Spots and Stripes.
“And if Td left it I’m sure a hawk or a fox would have got
the poor darling; it was much too young to look after itself,” Sallie
always declared.
Port Said was reached only too quickly, ushered in by the
sounds of coaling ship, the chant of the coolies as they ran up and
down the bending planks from lighter to launch with baskets of
coal upon their heads. Everything was soon thick with black dust,
and all who could took refuge on shore.
“It’s our last Eastern place, so we’ve got to make the most of
it,” Sallie said, as they walked along the quays and visited Simon
Artz’ shop, where, it seems, anything in the world can be bought.
“Port Said has altered a lot in my time,” Sir John said. “When
I first came East as a boy it was almost the last place on earth,
sordid, dirty and unhealthy. Now it’s a fine town, much more
suited to be the gateway of the East.”
It was time to go aboard. The crows, which are almost as
common and mischievous in Egypt as English sparrows, were flying
about the harbour, perching on buoys or on the ship’s hawsers.
There was something else on most of those hawsers, big discs of
metal through which the ropes ran, and which puzzled Sallie.
But Steven, to his own satisfaction, was able to tell her their
purpose.
“They’re to prevent rats from crawling along the hawsers
and getting on board the ship,” he informed her. “They bring
plague and all sorts of diseases, you know, but they can’t climb
over those metal circles.”
The sun was just setting as the great liner got under way, and
the sky flaming with red and gold. It seemed, somehow, the right
moment to say good-bye to Egypt, to the East, and to Asia.


Part V: EUROPE
Chapter One
SHOATS AND SHIPS
THERE are only little bits and pieces of the Empire left
to see now, in Europe,” Sallie complained. “Just two
more stopping places before England.”
“But both quite interesting, as you’ll find,” her mother told
her.
Sallie remembered those words next morning as they entered
Malta’s Grand Harbour, which so well deserves its name; a two
miles’ stretch, where battleships and liners lay at anchor within
the shelter of the long breakwater quay, and brilliantly-painted
native boats, scarlet, blue and yellow, shuttled and scuttled back-
wards and forwards with passengers or goods.
And there was Valetta, spreading round inlets and bays, very
clean and white against the blue sky and water, looking quite “a
city built by gentlemen for gentlemen,” as it has been called.
Battlements rise from the water’s edge, with bastions and
queer old stone sentry-boxes put there long ago to keep a look-out
for enemy ships, and each with an Ear and an Eye on them, show-
ing their purpose. For those walls go back to Malta’s fighting
days, when the island was owned by the warlike Knights of
St. John.
In the streets of Valetta people from all parts of the world,
east and west, seemed gathered together, speaking in almost as
many languages as if it had been the Tower of Babel. Most of the
Maltese women wore their distinctive dress, the “Faldetta,” a kind


of cloak and stiffened-out hood all in one, made always of black
material and covering them from top to toe.
“It does make them look queer,” Sallie said. “Rather like
badly rolled umbrellas; but I s’pose they wear nice things under-
neath. I do like the shops, with the silver filagree and such lovely
lace.”
“Always with tiny Maltese crosses worked into the pattern,”
Lady Wylde pointed out. “The Maltese women have made lace
like that for centuries.”
“Lace and Crosses,” Sallie said. “I wonder what other especially
Maltese things there are? Things that aren’t made anywhere
else.”
“Maltese oranges,” Steven suggested. “Don’t you remember
the big cases of lovely juicy ones that used to come from Uncle Guy
when his ship was here? ”
“And Maltese dogs,” their mother said. “White fluffy little
beasts, like fleecy toys. I always think they ought to have green
stands and wheels.”
“Not to mention Maltese cats,” Sir John laughed. “Rough-
haired cats who are not particularly pretty, but very intelligent
and affectionate. Maltese cats have always been a breed to them-
selves, and there is a story of one who saved Valetta, and perhaps
the whole island, from Malta’s enemies.”
“Tell us!” Sallie said urgently, clinging to her father’s arm.
“I love stories about cats.”
“ Mind you, I don’t say that it’s true, any more than Whittington’s
cat or Puss-in-Boots,” Sir John said. “But it is a legend that has
been told in Malta for a long time, possibly ever since it happened,
if it really did, in the days of the Knights of St. John. You’ll know
more about them soon, when you’ve seen their wonderful Palace
and Church.”


“Let’s have the cat first!” Sallie begged.
“Well, it belonged to a Maltese soldier, one of those who watched
from the walls of Valetta. He had saved the cat from drowning in
the harbour when it was a tiny kitten, and it loved him, and often
used to follow him like a dog to his post.”
“One of those Ear and Eye Sentry-boxes, I suppose,” said Steven.
“I expect so. Well, one night the cat’s master was very tired,
and he committed the terrible crime for a soldier and a sentry of
falling asleep at his post. This might not have mattered much
sometimes, but on this particular night, as soon as the moon set
and darkness fell, the ships of the enemy stole into the Harbour,
meaning to take Valetta by surprise. And they would have done
so if the little cat had not been wakeful. Somehow the clever beast
felt that all was not well, as she crept into the sentry-box where
her master was sleeping: perhaps she heard or saw or smelt some-
thing strange . . . anyway, she climbed on to the soldier’s shoulder
and mewed and pawed and rubbed herself against him until he
woke—and saw the shadowy ships of the enemy creeping into
the Harbour. He gave the alarm at once, and the whole city sprang
to arms and defended the walls and sent their foes flying helter-
skelter back to the open sea. But it was the Maltese cat who had
really saved Malta.”
“Good old Puss!” Steven said. “I shall have more respect for
cats in future. She ought to have had a statue on the walls, or
on top of one of the sentry-boxes.”
“Couldn’t we buy a Maltese kitten?” Sallie said, “and train
it to be a watch-cat? It might eat my jerboa, though. So perhaps
we’d better not.”
They visited the ancient Palace of the Knights and their beautiful
Church of St. John, with its paintings and mosaics and magnificent
silver gates.


“It’s too hot for much sight-seeing,” Sir John decided. “We’ll
go for a drive round the island this afternoon.”
Bare and rocky, yet full of interest, Malta seemed in the brilliant
sunshine. Stones were everywhere —making the walls to divide
those small, bright-coloured fields which looked so like crazy patch-
work, and built into ancient houses, still hidden on the hillsides,
the homes of people who lived more than six thousand years ago,
but with the chisel-marks still showing on the great blocks which
formed doorways.
From there they drove to a blue bay, dotted with rocky islets,
which has an especial history of its own. For here, in the year 58,
St. Paul’s ship was wrecked on the island then called Melita.
“At Notabile there’s the Cathedral which he is said to have
dedicated himself on the very spot where the sailors made a fire —
and where the islanders saw the Saint’s first miracle,” Sir John
said.
“I know,” Steven nodded. “When the poisonous snake crawled
out of the wood he collected, and bit him without doing any harm.”
They planned to bathe in that blue bay, but when they climbed
down to the beach, the clear water was filled with floating crystal
balls, pale-blue, pink and mauve.
“Very pretty,” Sir John said after one glance. “But it means
that our bathe is off—unless you care to dive into something like
a bed of stinging-nettles. That’s what it would feel like, wherever
those jelly-fish touched you; I’ve tried it myself in Malta once,
so I know! They aren’t so innocent and harmless as they look.”
During the drive back to Valetta, Steven’s face took on a deeply
puzzled expression, as he gazed at a flock of animals feeding upon
a stone-strewed hillside.
“I’m wondering,” he said, “whether those beasts are sheep
or goats.”


“Other people have wondered the same, old man!” Sir John
laughed. “They’re supposed to be half-and-half; that’s why they
are always called ‘Shoats.’”
The queer-looking, lop-eared, brown-and-white creatures stared
and bleated, as Steven surveyed them gravely.
“I suppose they were responsible for the milk that made the
cheese we had for dinner,” he said. “Well, I shan’t forget it —or
the Shoats either; they look like that cheese tasted and smelt!”
Chapter Two
ROCK SCORPIONS
SAL, wake up! We’re ashore —I mean we’ve anchored. It’s
Gibraltar!” Steven’s voice outside her cabin roused Sallie,
and she yawned and stretched.
“It’s a noisy place,” she said sleepily. “What’s all that mewing
and screeching? ”
“Seagulls, thousands of them. Do hurry up and come on deck.
It looks exactly how Gibraltar ought to, the Rock I mean.”
SaUie’s toilet was soon completed, and she joined Steven on
deck.
Standing up from the flatter country all round, the Rock of
Gibraltar looked unexpectedly big, rather like an enormous Trafalgar
Square lion, as someone described it, with the town, a huddle of
pink, white and yellow houses, seeming as though it had slipped
down in trying to climb the steep side. The enclosed harbour was
full of shipping, and across the Straits was seen a flattish, yellowish
strip of country, with the ridge of Atlas Mountains in the distance,
which was North Africa.


After they had been rowed ashore and passport affairs settled
at the Port Gate, they walked up Main Street, where the shops
were full of Spanish shawls and big combs, bright-coloured beads,
and paper fans covered with bull-fighting scenes.
“It seems funny to be walking in Europe again,” Sallie said.
“In England , you mean,” Steven corrected her. “Gibraltar’s
a bit of England in Spain.”
“Well, it doesn’t look English,” Sallie retorted. “There seem
to be people from everywhere here—and who are the natives of
Gibraltar, anyway? ”
“Spaniards, with a bit of Moor in them, perhaps,” Sir John
said. “The nickname for them is Rock Scorpions.”
“Anyhow, I shall say that I’ve been to Spain,” Sallie persisted.
“So it’s no good arguing, Steven.”
The steep, narrow streets were crowded; there were Spaniards
with broad black sombreros, hook-nosed Moors, Turks, Greeks
and negroes, elbowing British soldiers and sailors who seemed,
certainly, as much at home as anybody else.
“But the Moors took the Rock first, and held it for nearly eight
centuries,” Sir John said. “It’s called after their leader, Gebel-el-
Tarik, Mountain of Tarik. Look, this is the graveyard where the


men killed at Trafalgar are buried; a week after the battle the
Victory sailed into Gibraltar Bay, with Nelson dead on board, and
every flag on the Rock and in the harbour flying at half-mast.
Passing the Grand Parade, they reached the beautiful Alameda
Gardens, with wide views down over the harbour and up to the old
Moorish castle on the highest part of the Rock.
"We’ve been talking about Moors and Spaniards and ourselves,"
Sir John said. "But when we’ve had some lunch, I’ll take you to
see the oldest and earliest inhabitants of Gib, who were here before
any of us.”
The call on these aborigines was paid after a motor-drive
along the eastern side of the Rock, where steep cliffs fell down
to the sea, and green, flower-covered slopes rose towards the
craggy crest, for Gibraltar in summer-time is by no means bare
of vegetation.
Soon they reached the ancient wall called after the Emperor
Charles V., who built it four hundred years ago. And on the sunny
side of that wall shapes were moving or sitting.
"Meet the earliest natives of the Rock!” Sir John waved his
hand towards them.
"Why, they’re monkeys\’ } Sallie cried. "Look at the baby ones
running up and down the wall!’’.
"Of course, I’ve heard about the monkeys on Gibraltar," said
Steven.
"Apes, to be exact, my boy—Barbary apes. ‘Magots’ they
call them here, and they’re most carefully looked after, with a mili-
tary officer in charge of them. For these are very special apes,
the only creatures of the monkey-kind wild in Europe; they are
supposed to have come through a passage under the Straits from
Africa."
"/s there such a passage?" Steven asked incredulously.


“No one knows for certain. There’s a cave in the cliffs near
here, in the monkeys’ Alameda, or Promenade, and there the passage
was believed to end. It’s said, too, that the apes are carried there
by their companions when they die, and that’s why no skeletons
or skins are ever found on the Rock itself.”
“I’d like to explore that cave,” Steven said.
“I’m afraid that’s not allowed, and we’ll have to hurry to get
a glimpse of the Galleries, blasted by the British from the solid
rock —two miles of them—during the four-years’ siege by the
Spaniards that began in 1779.”
Through the portholes cut for guns in those stone tunnels they
could see the white houses of Spanish Algeciras beyond the neutral
ground, that flat stretch at the neck of the Gibraltar Peninsula,
through which runs the road to Spain. As they came out by the
Racecourse and North Parade, Sallie’s eye was caught by a group
of steeds all harnessed and ready.
“Oh, do let’s have a donkey-ride!” she cried.
“Really, Sallie, I didn’t think you were such a baby!” Steven
said disgustedly.
“I’m not. Just see what beauties they are, as big as horses,
and with those lovely red-and-yellow fly-nets. Do come, Steven.”
But Steven was dignified and obstinate; finally Sallie departed
alone for a ride round the Racecourse and into the neutral ground
on a tall white donkey, accompanied by a diminutive Spanish
donkey-boy.
All went well at first, but on the flat sandy level Sallie longed
for a gallop, and gave her mount a word and a nudge. The donkey
responded more quickly than she expected; not only did it break
into a gallop, but, taking the bit between its teeth, and pursued
by the yelling boy, it bolted across the neutral ground, hoofs
thudding, sand flying—across the Frontier and into Spain!


As she sped along Sallie was vaguely aware of soldiers and
shouting, of people running forward with arms stretched out to
stop the donkey. The beast swerved, snorted, and began to kick so
violently that Sallie found herself flying through space, descending
with a thud, fortunately on sandy ground, where she sat dazed and
shaken, but not seriously hurt.
Sallie never quite knew how she came to be in a taxi, driving
back to Gibraltar. But there she was —and there was her family
coming anxiously to meet her.
“I told you I was going to tell people I’d been to Spain,” she
said defiantly to Steven. “And I can now —because I have!”
As they stood in the dusk on the steamer’s deck that evening,
a gun crashed out from the Rock and bugles began to blow.
“That’s the eight o’clock signal to close the Fortress,” Sir
John said. “Afterwards the key is carried to the Governor —the
key of the Mediterranean —that’s what Gibraltar is sometimes
called, you know.”
“I like the gun and the bugle,” Sallie said softly, looking at
the lights on the Rock. “ It’s like having the key turned safely in the
lock for the night.”
Chapter Three
AT HOME
SALLIE and Steven stood on the quay at Southampton and
looked up at the high white side of the liner they had just
left.
“It’s so much like the same steamer that it might be the day
we were starting—only it isn’t,” Sallie said.
“No —worse luck!” Steven sighed.


“Wonder if I’ll ever in my life be on that steamer again,”
Steven said, and his voice sounded as though he was quite ship-
sick already.
“You might.” Sallie was gazing from side to side of the Docks,
enjoying the sight of the liners getting ready to go to sea. “Oh,
look, that one must be an American: she’s flying the Stars and
Str ”
“My word!” Steven burst out, giving Sallie no time to finish
what she was saying. And then, before anyone could stop him or
ask what he was doing, he had dashed away, pushing through the
crowd of people on the quay and nearly knocking over a porter loaded
with luggage.
Sallie stared with her mouth and eyes wide open; it really seemed
as though her brother had gone suddenly mad, and for a moment she
felt quite frightened. Then he reappeared, this time on the gang-
way leading to the steamer’s deck, scrambling up it in wild haste
and, when he reached the top, vanishing completely. It was most
mysterious, and Sallie could not understand a bit what it meant.
She had time to think all sorts of wild thoughts, such as wonder-
ing if Steven meant to stow-away on board the liner, before he
appeared once more as unexpectedly as he had disappeared, this
time with a very broad smile on his face, and something in his
hand.
“Got him!” he shouted, and next instant was beside Sallie on
shore.
“It was what you said about the Yankee flag reminded me,” he
explained. “All of a sudden I remembered that I’d left Stripes
in my cabin, and I simply had to go back and fetch him. Fancy
deserting poor old Stripes, who’s been half round the Empire with
us, mascotting all the time as hard as ever he could! No, it just
couldn’t be done. Sorry if I startled you, Sal.”


“Well, we’ve seen a lot and we’ve learnt a lot since the day we
started—more geography and history and heaps of other things than
years of school would have taught us,” Sallie said presently. “And
what fun it’s been, every minute of it!”
“America, Australasia, Africa, Asia and the little bit over
that was Europe,” Steven counted. “Which continent did you like
best? ”
“Couldn’t say. They were all lovely and all different. And
you shouldn’t talk about Europe as a little bit left over, because,
after all, England’s there—and England was the beginning of
everything, for us anyway,” Sallie said wisely. “If she hadn’t
been here we shouldn’t have started or come back —we couldn’t
have travelled round the Empire.”


THE GOLDEN TREASURY LIBRARY
Now comprising eighteen volumes, uniform in size and price. Printed on
beautiful paper. Six full-colour plates and numerous black and white drawings.
Cover in cloth, bevelled boards, gold blocked. Full-colour picture on front.
Crown octavo. Each in artistic wrapper in full colour. 256-288 pages.
WONDROUS DEEDS OF BYGONE DAYS
By HILDA HART and M. D. BELGRAVE
Illustrated by H. G. THEAKER
PERCY F. WESTERMAN and others
TALES OF THE SEA
Illustrated by T. CUNEO
M, GASTER, Ph.D., and others
TALES OF WONDER
Illustrated by C. E. BROCK, R.I.
TALES THAT THRILL
T THRILL By MAJOR CHARLES GILSON and others
Illustrated by C. E. BROCK, R.I.
SHAKESPEARE TALES
FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
Illustrated by
HAROLD COPPING and others
DICKENS’S DREAM CHILDREN
MARY ANGELA DICKENS
AND OTHERS
Illustrated by
From "Tales of
HAROLD COPPING and others
Wonder ”


Golden Treasury Library —continued
From "Heroic Deeds of Great Men”
HEROIC DEEDS OF GREAT MEN
By ALFRED H. MILES and C. SHERIDAN JONES
Illustrated by HOWARD DAVIE and HARRY PAYNE
THE HEROES, OR GREEK FAIRY TALES
CHARLES KINGSLEY
Illustrated by HOWARD DAVIE
ALICE IN WONDERLAND
LEWIS CARROLL
Illustrated by A. L. BOWLEY
KING ARTHUR AND HIS KNIGHTS
DORIS ASHLEY and others
Illustrated by ARTHUR A. DIXON
ROBINSON CRUSOE (Abridged)
DANIEL DEFOE
Illustrated by HOWARD DAVIE
THE WATER BABIES (Abridged)
CHARLES KINGSLEY
Illustrated by MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL
LEGENDS OF ANIMALS FAR AND NEAR
ROSE YEATMAN WOOLF
Illustrated by EDWIN NOBLE


The Golden Treasury Library —continued
G. G. JACKSON
THE ROMANCE OF THE RAILWAY
Illustrated by BARNARD WAY
OLD TIME FAIRY TALES AND NURSERY RHYMES
Illustrated by JENNIE HARBOUR
TALES OF THE ALHAMBRA (Selected Stories) By WASHINGTON IRVING
Illustrated by HARRY G. THEAKER and others
TALES AND LEGENDS FROM INDIA By M. D. BELGRAVE and HILDA HART
Illustrated by HARRY G. THEAKER
TALES OF ADVENTURE By NATALIE JOAN, VIOLET METHLEY and others
Illustrated by T. CUNEO
From "Tales of A dventure "


RAPHAEL HOUSE LIBRARY OF GIFT BOOKS
TWENTY-ONE BEAUTIFUL VOLUMES
Bound in Pictorial Boards, Cloth Back, or in Cloth, Bevelled, Gold Topped, with picture in Gold
on the Back.
Printed on rough art paper. 144 pp. letterpress, crown 4to.
12 or 10 full-page colour plates and numerous black and white drawings.
Each Volume can he supplied in an Attractive Box with same Illustration on Lid as on Cover of Book.
The tales are told by able authors of to-day and celebrated writers of past
years, with lavish and excellent illustrations by popular artists.
HANS ANDERSEN’S STORIES (Selections)
MY BOOK OF MOTHER GOOSE NURSERY RHYMES
ALICE IN WONDERLAND
Illustrated by MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL
Illustrated by
Illustrated by
Illustrated by JENNIE HARBOUR
Illustrated by JENNIE HARBOUR
By LEWIS CARROLL
HANS ANDERSEN’S FAIRY TALES (Selections)
MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL
MOTHER GOOSE
MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL
GOLDEN LOCKS AND
PRETTY FROCKS
Stories by
EDRIC VREDENBURG
AND OTHERS
Illustrated by
AGNES RICHARDSON
From
"Hans Andersen’s
Stories ”


The Raphael House Library— continued
From “ Animal Legends from many Lands ”
TINKER, TAILOR
Stories by Capt. EDRIC VREDENBURG
Illustrated by LOUIS WAIN
THE HEROES (Abridged Edition)
CHARLES KINGSLEY
Illustrated by HOWARD DAVIE
ANIMAL LEGENDS FROM MANY LANDS
ROSE YE ATMAN WOOLF
Illustrated by EDWIN NOBLE
TALES OF THE ALHAMBRA (Selected Stories) By WASHINGTON IRVING
Illustrated by ARTHUR A. DIXON and H. M. BROCK, R.I.
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM ENGLISH HISTORY By E. NESBIT and DORIS ASHLEY
Illustrated by J. H. BACON, A.R.A., HOWARD DAVIE and others
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM OLD BRITISH LEGENDS
By M. DOROTHY BELGRAVE and HILDA HART
Illustrated by HARRY G. THEAKER.
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM THE NORTHERN LEGENDS (Tales of the Norse Heroes)
M. D. BELGRAVE and HILDA HART
Illustrated by H. G. THEAKER


The Raphael House Library —continued
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM INDIAN LEGENDS
M. D. BELGRAVE and HILDA HART
Illustrated by H. G. THEAKER
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM JAPANESE FAIRY TALES AND LEGENDS By N. KATO
Illustrated by H. G. THEAKER
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM ITALIAN FAIRY TALES AND LEGENDS
Illustrated by HOWARD DAVIE By lilia ROMANO
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM RUMANIAN LEGENDS AND FAIRY TALES
By M. GASTER, Ph.D., ( Late President of the English Folklore Society, etc.)
Illustrated by C. E, BROCK, R.I.
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM THE POETS {Tales of Romance and Adventure)
By M. D. BELGRAVE and HILDA HART
Illustrated by FRANK ADAMS
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM TENNYSON By NORA CHESSON
Illustrated by J. H. BACON, A.R.A., ARTHUR DIXON,
HAROLD COPPING, and others
CHILDREN’S STORIES FROM LONGFELLOW By DORIS ASHLEY
Illustrated by A. A. DIXON, HAROLD COPPING, and others
TALES OF KING ARTHUR AND THE KNIGHTS OF THE ROUND TABLE
Illustrated by ARTHUR A. DIXON By DORIS ASHLEY
From "Tales of King
Arthur and the Knights
of the Round Table ”


THE MODERN LIBRARY FOR BOYS AND
A series of ten most attractive volumes of enthralling interest, beautifully
illustrated.
112 pp. letterpress. Frontispiece in full colour. Numerous black and white
pictures. Size 5J x B£. Pictorial boards, front and back in full colour.
LEWIS CARROLL
ALICE IN WONDERLAND
From the ARABIAN NIGHTS
ALI BABA AND OTHER STORIES
FOREST TREASURE
MAJOR CHARLES GILSON
SHERIDAN JONES and ALFRED MILES
FAMOUS HEROES
C
From SIR WALTER SCOTT
IVANHOE AND OTHER STORIES
From "The Speckled Tortoise”
KING ARTHUR’S NOBLE KNIGHTS By DORIS ASHLEY and others
SECRET SERVICE AND OTHER STORIES By C. B. RUTLEY and others
SHAKESPEARE STORIES FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
Illustrated by JOHN H. BACON, A.R.A., and others
TALES OF THE GREEK HEROES (Abridged) By CHARLES KINGSLEY
THE SPECKLED TORTOISE AND OTHER STORIES
MAJOR CHARLES GILSON and others


BAD RHYMES ABOUT
GOOD ANIMALS
{With a few exceptions.)
A BOOK FOR ALL AGES
CECIL G. TREW
With a Foreword by W. P. Pycraft, British
Museum, “Zoology.'*
This attractive book is both a pleasure to read
and a delight to the eye. Its rollicking verses
about the habits and habitat of many well-known
animals and birds are enlivened by numerous
characteristic black-and-white drawings and thumb-
nail silhouettes which combine to make the whole
both instructive and artistic. The quaint vein of humour which runs through the book
will appeal to a wide range of readers of all ages and especially to those who value some-
thing which strikes an entirely new note.
W. P. Pycraft in his Foreword says: "Of books of ‘nonsense-rhymes’ on Animal Life
there axe many; but there is something refreshingly different in the whimsicalities of this
volume. The author is evidently a lover of birds and beasts of all kinds, and has contrived
to ‘hit-off’ their several peculiarities in lines bubbling with humour. ... It is a book for
grown-up, as well as 'growing-up' children, and we shall all be grateful for the charming
fancies it creates for us.”
With about 60 illustrations
and numerous thumb-nail
silhouettes.
Frontispiece in full colour.
120 Pages. Size 5$ xBJ in.
Decorative board cover with
silhouettes of animals; also
Full Cloth Bound, blocked in
colour, each in an attractive
wrapper.
Raphael Tuck and Sons, Ltd., London, Paris, New York.
Publishers by appointment to Their Majesties the King and Queen and to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales.


/Ju^f


*




