

SELECTED
POEMS
by
BARTLETT
ADAMSON




SELECTED POEMS
by
BARTLETT ADAMSON.
"When lay feet no longer can oaroh, i:iy thoughts will still
march to the marching-song of the people."
Published by the Sydney Realist Writers'
Group m aid of the "Bartlett Adamson
Poetry Prise" for the Youth Carnivpl of
Peace & Friendship, l-ferch, 1952.
Pirst Editions December, 1951,
Prices 2/~




FOREWORD.
The writings of Bartlett Adamson derive, if we except his purely
journalistic work, from their creator’s personal experiences :■ and it is
this, together with their literary quality, that gives them their
distinction Adamson was eminently fitted, both by his physical and
mental constitution, to be an interpreter of the realistic, a disciple
in the groat cause of human bettermentj and it can with certainty be
said, that to these qualities we owe the literary and political content
of the pieces here brought together. Assuredly such a man in the days
to come will have a more enduring place in cosmopolitan literature than
that of any formalist, past or present.
For indeed, Adamson was one of the most fearless writers Australia
has yet produced. He sought no tricks, adopted no expediencies, always
his principles remained unbroken and unbreakable.
But ho was not merely fearless and progressive_ he was a man of
classic mind and manner - a writer whose prose and ‘poetry is not only
realistic and unafraid, but is also enriched with a finely moulded
style and a finely chiselled phrasing. He strove always for the right
word, the clear, well-rounded sentence.
Read, for instance, his long-short poem "Bringer of Light", Ably
constructed and conceived, this is a lovely thing, a cameo of beautiful
thought and poesy.
As for his shorter work, if there is in Australian literature a round
doaen sonnets of finer imagery, of so perfect a craftsmanship in this
particular poetic form, than are to be found in Adamson's volume "Twelve
Sonnets", then I do not know of them.




If, later, Adamson, rightly and inevitably, adopted the strictly
historical approach, realised that the process of development in all
its spheres depends on the conditions, time and place, it was only in
line with a mind that was ever perceptive, ever courageous and open to
truth. Thus, though ho has a bouquet as delicate and as full-flowering
as a summer rose, he has also a punch that strikes as heavy as a sledge-
hammer, It was now that ho gave us those two small but striking
volumess "Comrades All" and "Battlcsoug of Change", Here was the
progressive realist at work - Adamson the Fighter.
Adamson belongs, though in time somewhat later, to the Henry
Lav;son, "Tom Collins", Francis Adams school a worthy contemporary
of Katharine Susannah Prichard and Bernard O’Dowd, Like them, he was
an exemplar of the integrity of the mind, an exemplar of the
integrity of the classic forms, both in the act of living and in the
act of writing. Like thorn, too, ho saw things whole and real, and
wrote accordingly.
The minds of succeeding generations (the posterity of the
Socialist State—to-be) will give Bartlett Adamson a higher placo in
the cultural history of this country than the Capitalist State ever
gave him.
ARCHER RUSSELL.




The Rime of a Casual Cove.
Th LHv b ® Sid t thS tent «** down
And glancing down the granite-bouldered wav
A kookaburra, like a cole™ clown, '
wuglisd in the face of day.
The mine^ was calling, calling me to graft-
ait morning beckoned me and lightly laughed.
/ ‘ n Danco°oftl the b ’’ sh 1 saw the Might
ancc of the silver sunlight on the ground.
A thousand birds were welcoming the light.
A never—slumbering sound
from vhero the headlong waterfall
Hung like a veil before the mountain-wall.
And in that ever-rumbling thunder-tone
Of wM+l* tne tuiMlt of a mighty host
Of vhite-manea ocean-chargers booming down
The sandy miles of coast.
It woke the follies in the heart of me
Arid set me longing for the rolling seal




Ab m e a.!' he billy ' s bubble-bubble sona
battered the clanking engine at the mine•
But in my gipsy blood there ran the strong '
Riot of •
And Still the willy-nilly ocean-call
tang through the thunder of the waterfall,
thought went underground,
Along the tunnel that I daily trod- ’
And then they hovered by the seas th.it sound
. T il :’- e of son© great god:
And n a °+ *2 stopOE of darkness down below,
And up to-day - and then I damned the show!
I damned it once, and if the truth must be,
But ft* ”° T® ab ° Ut the raine at all,
nut ~tx ode away to seek the rolling sea
And past the waterfall, ' ’
And down and down the mountain-track I went
Swinging, and singing with a heart content.




Kight and the great grave stars that sauntered by?
Night • and a droning lullaby of billow,
A bed of leaves beneath a tent of sky,
A continent for pillow.
That night the good-night kisses of the breeze
Lulled me to sleep beside the summer seas.
And there for seven days I lived the free
Life of a loafer in a lotus-land |
A seven lazy, hazy days of sea
And sun and clean w arn sand*
A seven days of drowsy dream-delights
Marred by the blasted loneliness o 1 nights.
The hags of solitude they slept by day,
But night by night along that silent shore. , ,
Enough i At sunrise I was on the way
Back to the mine once more •
Ay! back to drives and ctopes, the plunger's noise,
K: I:tl] work, but - back among the boys !




Morning • the plains; the sunlight shimmering;
Noon, and the ranges where the long climb starts;
Sunset,, and gaudy parrots quarrelling
_Like crowds in Asian marts;
Night, and tho light of friendly six-by-eights;
Heyi and tho hearty cheer os of my mates/
Lord I it was jolly to be back once more
And yarning, yarning ho If the night away.
Then like a soldier coming home from war
I went to work next day;
Blithe as the sunlight dancing on the track
I went to work and found I*d got tho sack!
Wellington, N.Z. 1916,
I long to write a poem
But this is rather sad
The loveliest poem will not yield
As much as an ugly ad.




The Toast of Honor.
This great Australia that our fathers won
In proud defiance of a thousand fates I
This ocean--garden sacred to the sun 1
lliis land of homo I This land where men arc mates ]
Drink to your native ranges and your plains,
r-fcn with the sunlight singing in your veins]
About 1917.
Relativity.
So long as one least coolie lies
And in an Asian gutter dies,
There cannot be, beneath the sun,
Security for anyone,
Sydney, 1945.




Exile Song.
I long for the land of gum-trees, and hot summer sun,
And wide golden rivers of wattle that wander away
Whore valleys arc sweeter than valleys of old Lebanon,
Or gardens of Arcady olden or olden Cathay,
I long for the land where a smile is at home in the eyes,
Where warm-hearted men arc, and life loiters careless and free,
I long for warm beaches, I long for the heat of the skies.
The laughter of brown Sunday-surfcrs, the warm-laughing sea.
But most, most of all, I long for the scent of the bush
To set my soul drunken, to riot like wine to my brain,
To sing through my heart, 01 tho reverent magical hush
And warm spicy sroc 11 of the gum-trees adrcnch after rain.
We 11 ington, N, Z. 1917.




Gone West.
"Gone worst/’ they say. "Gone west." But no, ah no I
Lad of the bravo bright eyes and merry mouth 1
You will come homo to where the gum-trees grow
You were Australian through and through, and so
You will bo coming south, lad I coming south,
Wellington, N.Z, 1917.
Election Night.
A street. The tinsel of electric-light,
A polling-board aloft, A coterie
Of people swanking on a balcony.
An angry crowd below. Eyes flashing bright.
Great voices roaring to the roof of night.
A gust of missiles. Intermittently
A thistledown of laughter•floating free,
And over all the stars in flight on flight.
And jerked and jostled by the surging crowd,
A tattered woman, weary-eyed and bowed
By overwork and overweight of woes,
•tables and dreams of brotherhood and love,
While, loaning from the balustrade above,
Tho country’s portly ruler thumbs his noso,
Wellington, N.Z, 1918,




The Tramcar.
Out of the void of night a tramcar comes,
Flashes and blossoms as a blaze of light,
Pauses and. clatters, creaks, and drums and hums
On through the night.
And borne within that quivering husk of noise
People go speeding to their various fates.
And there arc hopes and fears 5 and griefs and joys;
And loves and hates;
And women - one grown tragical and old,
Per sad eyes hungry for untested bliss;
And one who callously will give for gold
More than a kiss.
And girls who gaily hasten to the hall
Where darkness gazes on a shadow-show.
And one who hoars tho voice of sorrow call,
And dares to go.




■Lovers that laugh ary’ snuggle side by side
.Arid bind that jolting ride a cruise of jov.
A -nother 5 glancing dreamy-eyed with pride
On her wee boy.
Cowardice in a tailored suit that well
Matches the pale tint of his perfumed hair.
Couiage, on crutches lately won in hell
With rags to wear,
A man who journeys through the miles of night
Merely to find some favored cigarettes. ’
Some lads who babble of a stadium fight
.And boast of bets.
One who was born to hang. And one far worse,
laued to waddle as a millionaire,
great guts bulging like a bursting purse.
His nose aflare.
A babe. A doddering man who tries to croon
A tune that bubbles through his broken breath
The cube as new to life as he xsill soon
Be new to death.




And all those other ones who seem to be
Everyday people at a casual guess,
Bit' who, at need, stand forth unconsciously
All nobleness.
Eternity flows by, and yet the sum
Of all past ages, all the worlds that are,
And all the worlds and ages yet to come,
Crowds in that car.
Out of the night, out of the voids of space,
Flashing and flowering as a blaze of light,
The world roars by, bearing the human race
On through the night,
Sydney, 1919.
War must cease,
Or all life ceases.
Live in peace,
Or die in pieces.
Sydney, 1951*




Derelicts.
A skirt that sags and sways beneath a torn
Rag of a sealskin coat, A face that leers,
With features furrowed more by hate than years.
Hands clutching at a hat that tilts forlorn,
And toe-nails winking where the shoes are worn
So down a sun-drenched lane she struts and poors,
Pauses, and preens herself, and starts, and veers,
A drunken harlot in a blaze of morn.
Yet wath a flick of chance, a different dole
Of funds or friends, a twist of birth or name,
One turn the mere or loss of life’s roulette,
And she, with that same heart, or rind, or soul,
Might have been some most consequential dame
Lolling behind an insolent lorgnette,
Sydney, 1920.
Labour Renegade.
He claims to be a democrat,
And all of us, his bettors,
Are willing to concede him that
Except the first five letters.
Sydney, 1945-




Girl of the South.
Meet her and greet her, the girl of the south,
A lover ox laughter, with kiss-curved mouth,
With eyes not timid, nor overbold,
Of hazel or green or orange-gold,
A neat, petite, but decisive chin
And roseate glows in her warm-brown skin.
With breasts alert, with mobile hips,
And body warm as her kiss-curved, lips
A body lissom and light of pose,
Fiquantly poised on dancing toes
As dainty a creature as man might meet
In miles of cosmopolitan street.
Girl of tho south ! You find her, whore?
Enthroned, maybe, on an office chair,
Or tripping along in carefree way
With bowls of soup on a restaurant-tray.
Or haloed by windowed rays of the sun
Where spindles multitudinous run
And wools and silks arc woven and spun.




Or maybe this girl of orange-go Id eyes,
Or hazel or green, disports in shorts
On tennis-courts,
With feet a-dance to the ball that flics
Lew or aloft to the singing skies.
Or maybe, with fingers of nerve and verve
Carossivo end calm on a light-poised wheel,
She toys with a two-ton automobile
And dodges death on a cliff-top curve.
Again she may dwell afar from cars,
Intimately with moon and stars,
On floor fourteen of a King's Cross flat
A small one at that.
Or maybe she cantors, with light-touch rein,
Mustering sheep on a wilga plain,
Where hot suns hover and no*bird flies
And lakes are adrift in iniraging skies.




Again, as a sun-god devotee,
As nearly nudo as a girl may bo,
She drowses and browns through lazy days,
Saturate by the living rays
Of skies -ablaze with tropic heat,
Whore gold-toned sands and wide seas meet.
Or maybe she runs and leaps and dives
Where cat or acts of white foam pour,
When a far*-off summer cyclone drives
A tumble of sun-bright breakers ashore.
Or maybe, maybe, where night lights glow,
She sips a double-martini or so,
And, pensive a moment, she dreams, maybe,
Of a baby or two, or even throe.
For where she be, must the song be this:
The girl of the south is a girl to kiss.
The girl of the south, with her lissom limbs,
Is builded for babies rather than hymns.
The song-free girl of the sun-warm south,
With lips of laughter and kiss-curved mouth,
With eyes not timid nor overbold,
Hazel or green or orange-gold,




This girl is moulded for love and life,
Lively as comrade rnd lovely as wife,
Moulded sweetly to bo, indeed,
Mother of men of a lissom breed.
Meet her, greet her, and honor her then,
Mother-to-be of our southern men,
Sydney, 1939.
Commands All.
Thin world will th. n be human, and our ways of life be grand,
Wlion comrade creed end code and deed shall lead in every land,
When comradeship is measure
Of our work and of our pleasure,
And. when success and truthfulness walk freely hand in hand;
When avarice is banished and when brilliance need not brawl;
When peoples of all places,
Of all colours, faiths, and races,
Can live and work together as great-hearted comrades all,
Comrades all I
But, what may be our hope to see mankind as comrades all?




The comrade crood and code and dood arc primitive in man,
For men and women, ever since the human tale began,
Have died for one another
As a brother for a brother,
And brotherhood for common good prompts every social plan.
At final need few men indeed deny the comrade call:
The strong shall aid. the weaker,
And the wise shall guide the seeker,
For human need has long decreed that men bo comrades all,
Comrades all I
Yet, what may be our hope to see mankind as comrades all?
Our fighting men and women faro by skyway, land, and sea,
And side by side and day by day face death in sour: degreej
While black and barefoot bearers
March as equal danger-darore,
And black and white as comrades meet and fight for worlds to bo;
When merchant seamen sag on rafts where flying terrors fall,
Or drift with hope at aero,
While some lone and unknown hero
Dives off to save a thirst-mad. mate those people know the call:
Comrades all I
For those who fare or fight together soon grow comrades all.




When men outback ride out to track some traveller astray,
And search through mulga heat and haze unresting night and day;
When football players, raring
In and out, and ever placing
The team-fane first, their own fame last, from first to last of play;
When workers of the shops or mines or farms fight, back to wall;
When neighbour stands by neighbour
In the cause of union labour,
In firm defence of union rights all these obey the call?
Comrades all!
And those who fight for union might are comrades first of all.
The surfers of our be or he;: who, for hobby, more or less,
Go lunging through the breakers in a cool foolhardiness,
Go strongly plunging under
Toppling walls of death and thunder.
To save a friend or stranger they are comrades, as you guess.
When bushfires roar and ravage, and men race to meet the call,
And face, in breathless manners.
Face and fight the mad flame-banners,
To save the homes of strangers, or of friends these men are all
Comrades all I
And man will be true human then when men are comrades all.




Where Soviet men ,j..i women own the products of their hands,
And own machines and finance, own the State, and own the lands,
Where Soviet life embraces
Man 7 colors, faiths, and races,
They work, or fight, as brothers might wehn comrade-need demands.
When women of our alleys, owning half a tattered shawl,
Through slum-••■'.■/ays of the city
Go to share their rags, and pity.
With someone trapped in wo:., se distress they, too, have heard the calls
Comrades ail t
And women, then, are women most when comrades, comrades all.
When those who manned Eureka met, .and their great vow was made;
When wharf ies at the Calf ram” struck against the murder-trade;
When grim guerilla forces
Mister jamtin-bomb resources,
And fight an armed invader for a people half-betrayed;
When miners crouch, entombed where rotten timbers creak and fall,
And mates defy the rumble
Of the roof that yet may crumble,
And dig tlirough doom and darkness they are comrades most of all,
Comrades all 1
yor deeds like these are comrade-deeds exalted most of all.




This world will bo true human then, our days of life be grand,
When comrade creed and code and deed shall lead in every land %
When men meet one another
As a brother moots a brotherj
And when success and truth and trust walk freely hand in hand s
When craftiness has perished and ambition need not brawl;
When peoples of all places,
Of all colors, faiths, and races,
Can live and work together as great-hearted comrades all,
Comrades all I
But, what may be our homo to see men live as comrades all?
With freedom on the march once more a mighty future gloams•
The dawn glows rod* The now day may bo nearer than it seems.
For comradeship, so common
To the heart of man and woman,
Now colors all the pattern of our thoughts and deeds and dreams.
And history has laboured, and the grain of time is tall.
The hope s that long lay sleeping
Grow rime-ready fvr the reaping,
And peoples all the world around are rising bo the calls
Comrades all i
Why should, not wo yot live to see mankind as comrades alii
Sydney, 1945.




We, the Workers of Austuralia.
We, the workers, men and women, workers all, of hand or brain,
Wo have masters yet to master, we have freedom still to gain.
We, the workers, proud of purpose, firm in union layalty^
Side by side with follow-workors, fighting for the cays to bo I
We the workers of Australia, with the flag of ho-po unfurled,
i:lurching, marching, marching forward, with the workers of
the world.
Sing the deeds of Dorset martyrs, hail Eureka days tnd deed,
Praise the strikers of the Nineties, greet the men of "Dalfram" breed,
Cheer our anti-fascist fighters deeds that live and deeds that
thrill,
Deeds that lead us over forward, forward over, fighting still.
Wo the workers of Australia, with the flag of truth unfurled,
Parching, fighting, surging forward- with the workers of the
wor Id,
Storm che stubborn heights of struggle in the mood of pioneers,
Crest tho range and strong in union, gain the summit of the years,
Ga.se on vistas vast with promise, free from class and greed and strife.
Forward, to tho sunbright landscapes of the Socialistic life I
Wo the workers of Australia, with the worker-flag unfurled,
marching to the World-for-Workers, with the workers of the
world.
Sydney, 1945.




Pathological Prayer.
Written after the ruthor had fallen down and concussed
i?.is cranium, an event which held induced in him an over-
whelming fear that the fall might portend a paralytic
stroke, which in turn had induced a still more over-
whelming dread that he might have to live on with his
Olympian beauty somewhat marred.
Dear Lord I If it should be your joke
To paralyse me with a stroke,
Then be at least, a decent bloke.
Don’t will that I should, wander by
Year after year an ugly guy.
With neck askew and face awry.
But lot the stroke be good and strong.
And sudden, like a dinner gong
That- sounds but once, end not for long.
Then when the starry stair I’ve trod,
I’ll greet you with a cordial nod
And say: "Thanks greatly, Comrade God I"
Sydney, 1945.




Workers of the World.
Workers of the world awake I
All the world is yours to take I
March in vast unconcuered might I
Wake, arise, unite, and. fight.
Workers of the world arise I
New hope flames along the skies I
Wake the world ! New days begin I
Rise, unite, and fight, and win,
Workers of the world, unite i
Freedom calls you to the fight 1
Wake the world with battle din i
Rise, unite, and fight, and win.
Workers of the world beware I
Traitors poison all the air I
(Unfinished, Sydney.)






