

SELECT PLANTS
(exclusive of Timber Trees)
readily eligible for
VICTORIAN INDSTRIAL CULTURE,
with indications of their native
countries and some of their uses.
Baron F erd. von Muller.




SELECT PLANTS
(EXCLUSIVE OF TIMBER TREES)
READILT ELIGIBLE FOR
VICTORIAN INDUSTRIAL CULTURE,
with indications of their native countries and some of their uses.
AN ENUMERATION OFFERED BY
BAEON FEED. YON MUELLEE,
C.M.Q., M.D., Ph.D., F.R.S., F.L.S., F.R.G.S., C.M.Z.S., F.R.8.5.,
Commander of the Order of St. Jago„ and of the Order of Isabella Cath.,
Vice-President of the Acclimatisation Society of Victoria.
When offering an Appendix to the Acclimatisation Society’s
Eeport of last year, in the enumeration of timber trees desirable
for a country of our clime, my willingness was expressed to
extend the notes, then offered, also to other plants of prominent
utilitarian value So considerate was the reception, which the
former Appendix experienced, that I am induced already to
redeem my promise of extending these data; and Ido this with
all the more readiness, as the rapid progress of
throughout our Colonial dominion is causing more and more a
desire for the general and particular indication of such plants,
which a colder clime excludes from the northern countries, where
most of us spent our youth. Within the pages, allotted to this
communication, the notes offered could only be indicative.
Hence this list is merely intended to facilitate the choice of
selection. More extensive information must be sought in special
works, to which, through the English language, access is given
by the literature of Britain and North America. Thus the


colonist, who wishes to pursue an altered path of husbandry, by
adopting some new foreign plants for his culture, can follow up
easily enough the enquiry, to which he may be led by the indica-
tions now submitted.
The writer found himself surrounded by some difficulty of
drawing the line of demarcation between the plants admissible
into this list and those which should be excluded, because the
final importance of any particular species, for a particular want,
locality or treatment, cannot be fully foretold. Moreover, the
field is so ample from which our plants for novel culture may be
gathered, that only the first instalment of a suggestive and
abridged index could be presented on this occasion ; but it may
be supplemented, as well as the former notes on timber trees,
should friendly consideration recognize the spirit, in which these
suggestions are offered. As an instance of the difficulty to
adduce what is most desirable for an enumeration, such as the
present, it may be mentioned, that many species of the thousands
of foreign grasses would be highly eligible here, either for natu-
ralization or for cultural purposes. A few, however, could only
be singled out for the present purpose, and this with no other
view than leading the occupants of our soil onward in some new
direction for their pastoral or agrarian pursuits.
The plants, which appear to be of primary importance for oitr
rural wants, have been designated in this list with an asterisk.
Of these, indeed, many are long since secured by the efforts
of numerous colonists and their friends abroad, who strove to
enrich our cultural resources ; and in these efforts the writer, so
far as his public or private means did permit, has ever endea-
voured to share. But although such plants are introduced, they
are not in all instances as yet widely diffused, nor in many locali-
tios tested. Also, for the sake of completeness, ordinary culture
plants appear in this index, as the opportunity seemed an apt
one, to offer a few passing remarks on their value. The claims
of this contribution on originality must necessarily be very
limited. What for ages has engaged the reflection of thousands
cannot present absolutely or largely a new field of research. So


it is especially with the means and objects of ordinary culture of
fields. To gather, therefore, from a widely-scattered literature
that, which might be here instructive or suggestive, was mainly
my task, though those gatherings may prove insignificant.
Likely also such enumerations, in a very condensed form, will
promote our communications for rural interchanges, both cis.
and trans-equatorial, though mainly with the countries of the
Northern Hemisphere, which predominantly, if not almost
exclusively, provided all the vegetable substances, which enter
into the main requisites of our daily life. Lists like the present
may aid also in naming the plants and their products with
scientific correctness in establishments of economic horticulture,
or in technologic or other educational collections. In grouping,
at the close of this tract, the genera of the plants enumerated,
according to the products which they yield, facility is afforded
for tracing out any particular series of plants, about which special
economic information may be sought, or which may prominently
engage at any time the attention of the cultivator, the manufac-
turer, or the artisan.
Melbourne Botanic Garden, April, 1872.
Acacia Farnesiana, Willd.
Dioscorides’s small Acacia. Indigenous to South Asia j
found westward as far as Japan; a native also of the warmer
parts of Australia, as far south as the Darling River ; found
spontaneously in tropical and sub-tropical America, but
apparently not in tropical Africa. Professor Fraas has
recognised in this Acacia the ancient plant. The scented
flowers are much sought after for perfumery. This bush
may also be utilized as a hedge plant, and a kind of Gum
Arabic may be obtained from it.
Achillea Millefolium, L.
Yarrow or Millfoil. Europe, Northern Asia and North
America. A perennial medicinal herb of considerable
astringency, pervaded with essential oil, containing also a


bitter principle (Achillein) and a peculiar acid, which takes
its name from the generic appellation of the plant.
Aconitum Napellus, E.
The Monk’s Hood. In the colder, especially mountainous
parts of Europe and Northern Asia. A powerful medicinal
plant of perennial growth, but sometimes only of biennial
duration, variable in its forms. It was first introduced into
Australia, together with a number of other Aconits, by the
writer of this communication. All the species possess more
or less modified medicinal qualities, as well in their herb as
in their root; but so dangerously powerful are they, that
the plants can only be administered by the exercise of legiti-
mate medical practice. Napellus root, according to Professor
Wittstein, contains three alkaloids : Aconitin, Napellin and
Narcotin. The foliage contains also a highly acrid, volatile
principle, perhaps chemically not unlike that of many other
Eanunculacese. Aconitin, one of the most potent of any
of the medicinal substances in existence, can likewise be
obtained from the Nepalese Aconitum ferox,’and probably
from several other species of the genus.
Acorns Calamus, L.
The Sweet Flag. Europe, Middle and North Asia, North
America. A perennial pond or lake plant. The somewhat
aromatic root is used as a stomachic, and also in the pre-
paration of confectionery, in the distillation of gin, and in
the brewing of some kinds of beer. The flavor of the
root depends mainly on a peculiar volatile oil,
Actaea spicata, E.
The Baneberry, On forest mountains, mainly in limestone
soil of Europe, North Asia and North America, A peren-
nial medicinal herb. Its virtue depends on peculiar acrid
and bitter, as well as tonic principles. In North America,
this species, and likewise A. alba, are also praised as effica-
cious antidotes against ophidian poisons.
Adesmia balsamica, Bertero.
The Jarilla of Chili. A small shrub, remarkable for exuding
a fragrant balsam of some technic value.


ASschynomene aspera, L.
The Solah of tropical Asia. A large perennial erect or
floating swamp plant, probably hardy in the warmer tracts
of our Colony. Introduced from the Botanic Garden of
Melbourne into the tropical parts of Australia. The pith-
hats are made from the young stems of this plant. The
Solah is of less importance for cultivation than for naturalisa-
tion.
Agave Americana, L.
The gigantic Aloe of Central America. It comes here
into flower in about ten years. The pithy stem can be
utilized for some of the purposes, for which cork is usually
employed, for instance, to form the bottom of insect-cases.
The honey-sucking birds and the bees are very fond of the
flowers of this prodigious plant. The leaves of this and
some other Agaves, such as A. Mexicana, furnish the strong
Pita-fibre, which is adapted for ropes, and even for beautiful
textile fabrics. The sap can be converted into alcohol.
Where space and circumstances admit of it, impenetrable
hedges may be raised in the course of some years from
Agaves.
Agrostis alba, L.
The Piorin or White Bent-Grass. Europe, North and
Middle Asia, North Africa, North America. Perennial,
showing a predilection for moisture. It is valuable as an
admixture to many other grasses, as it becomes available at
the season, when some of them fail. Sinclair regards it as a
pasture grass inferior to Eestuca pratensis and Dactylis
glomerata, but superior to Alopecurus pratensis. The
variety with long suckers is best adapted for sandy pastures,
and helps to bind shifting sand on the sea coast, or broken
soil on river banks.
Aletris farinosa, L.
The Colic root of the woodlands of North America. This
pretty herb is of extreme bitterness, and can be medicinally
administered as a tonic.


Alkanna tinctoria, Tausch.
On sandy places around the Mediterranean Sea. It yields
the Alkanna root, used for dyeing oleaginous and other sub-
stances. It might be naturalized.
Allium Schoenoprasum, L.
The Chives.' Europe, Northern Asia and North America.
Available for salads and condiments. This species of Allium
seems not yet so generally adopted in our culinary cultiva-
tion as Allium Ascalonicum (the Shallot), A. Gepa (the
ordinary Onion), A. fistulosum (the Welsh Onion), A.
Porrum (the Leek), or A. sativum (the Glarlick). A. Scoro-
doprasum, or the Sand Leek of Europe and North Africa,
resembles both Grarlick and Shallot.
Aloe ferox, Mill.
South Africa. This species yields the best Cape Aloe, as
observed by Dr. Pappe, The simply inspissated juice of the
, leaves of the various species of this genus constitutes the
Aloe drug. It is best obtained by using neither heat nor
pressure for extracting the sap. By re-dissolving the
aqueous part in cold water, and reducing the liquid through
boiling to dryness, the Extract of Aloes is prepared. All
species are highly valuable in our Colony, where they are
hardy, and can be used, irrespective of their medicinal
importance, to beautify any rocky or otherwise arid spot.
Aloe linguiformis, Miller.
South Africa. According to Thunberg, from this species
the purest gum-resin is obtained.
Aloe plicatilis, Mill.
South Africa. The drug of this species acts milder than
that of A. ferox.
Aloe purpurascens, Haworth.
South Africa. Again one of the plants, which furnishes the
Cape Aloe of commerce.
Aloe socotrina, L,.
Hills of the Island of Socotra. Also cultivated in Barbadoes
and elsewhere, thus yielding the Socotrin Aloe.


Aloe spicata, Thunberg.
South Africa. This aloe provides Cape Aloe. It is an
exceedingly handsome plant.
Aloe vulgaris, Lamarck.
The Yellow-flowered Aloe. Countries around the Mediter-
ranean Sea, also Canary Islands, on the sandy or rocky sea
coast. Such places could also here readily be utilized for
this and allied plants. Dr. Sibthorp identified this species
with the ’AXoSj of Dioscorides; hence it is not probable, that
A. vulgaris is simultaneously also of American origin,
although it is cultivated in the Antilles, and furnishes from
thence the main supply of the Barbadoes Aloe. In East
India this species is also seemingly only existing in a culti-
vated state. Haworth found the leaves of this and of A.
striata softer and more succulent than those of any other
aloe. It is said to be the only species with yellow flowers
among those early known. It is also this species only, which
Professor Willkomm and Professor Parlatore record as truly
wild in Spain and Italy.
Aloe Zeyheri, Harvey.
South Africa. A magnificent, very tall species, doubtless
valuable like the rest.
Alopecurus pratensis, L.
Meadow Eoxtail G-rass. Europe, North Africa, North and
Middle Asia. One of the best of perennial pasture grasses.
Though so extensively cultivated for years in our Colony,
it is mentioned, for completeness’ sake, in this list. It attains
to its full perfection only after a few years of growth, as
noticed by Sinclair. For this reason, it is not equal to
Dactylis glomerata for the purpose of changing crops.
Otherwise it is more nutritious than the latter, although the
annual return in Britain proved less. Sheep thrive well on
it. Sinclair and others found that this grass, when exclu-
sively combined with white clover, will support from the
second season five ewes and five lambs on an acre of sandy
loam. But this grass, to thrive well, needs land not
altogether dry. In all permanent artificial pastures, this


Alopecurus should form one of the principal ingredients,
because it is so lasting and nutritive. In our Alpine regions
it would also prove prolific, and might convert many places
there gradually into summer-runs. It is early flowering,
and likes the presence of lime in the soil.
Alstonia constricta, E. v. M.
Warmer parts of East Australia, particularly in the dry
inland districts. The bark of this small tree is aromatic-
bitter, and regarded as valuable in ague, also as a general
tonic.
Alstrcemeria pallida, Graham.
Chili. Palatable starch can be obtained from the root of
this plant, which, for its loveliness alone, deserves a place in
any garden. The tubers of others of the numerous Alstroe-
merias can doubtless be utilized in a similar technic manner.
Althaea officinalis, E.
The Real Marsh-Mallow. Europe, North Africa, North and
Middle Asia. A tall perennial herb, with handsome flowers.
The mucilaginous root and also the foliage are used for
medicinal purposes. The plant succeeds best on damp,
somewhat saline soil.
Amelanchier Botryapium, Candolle.
The Grape-Pear of North America. This fruit tree attains
a height of 30 feet. The purplish fruits are small, but of
pleasant taste, and ripen early in the season. This bush or
tree will live in sandsoil; but it is one of those hardy kinds
particularly eligible for our Alps.
Amygdalus communis, E.
The Almond Tree. Countries around the Mediterranean
Sea and Orient. Both the sweet and bitter Almond are
derived from this species. Their uses, and the value of the
highly palatable oil, obtained by pressure from them, are well
known. This oil can well be chosen as a means of providing
a pleasant substitute for milk during sea voyages, &c., by
mixing, when required, with it half its weight of powdered
gum arabic, and adding then successively, while quickly
agitating in a stone mortar, about double the quantity of


water. Thus a palatable and wholesome sort of cream for
tea or coffee is obtained at any moment. There exist hard
and soft shelled varieties of both the sweet and bitter
Almond. In time, they should form an important article of
our exports. Almonds can even be grown on sea shores.
The crystalline Amygdalin can best be prepared from bitter
Almonds, through removing the oil by pressure, then sub-
jecting them to distillation with alcohol, and finally precipi-
tating with iEther. The volatile bitter Almond oil —a very
dangerous substance —is obtained by aqueous distillation.
Dissolved in alocohol, it forms the Essence of Almonds.
This can also be prepared from peach kernels.
Anacyclus Pyrethrum, Candolle.
Countries near the Mediterranean Sea, The root is used
medicinally.
Andropogon avenaceus, Michaux.
{Sorghum avenaceum, Chapman.)
North and Central America. This tall perennial grass
lives in dry, sandy soil, and should here be tried for growth
of fodder.
Andropogon bicolor, Roxburgh.
Warmer parts of Asia. One of the annual tall Sorghums’
It ripens its seeds in three or four months from the time of
sowing, the produce in good soil being often upwards of one
hundredfold. It is a wholesome gram.
Andropogon Calamus, Royle.
Central India. The Sweet Calamus of the Ancients. From
this species the Gmgergrass-oil of Nemaur is distilled, an
article much used in perfumery.
Andropogon cernuus, Roxb. (Sorghum cernuvm , Willd.)
One of the Guinea Corns. India, where it is much culti-
vated, and so also in other tropical countries. It is peren-
nial, and forms the “ staff of life of the mountaineers ”
beyond Bengal. It reaches a height of 15 feet, with leaves
over 3 feet long. The thick stems are rooting at the lower
joints, and cattle are very fond of them. The grain is white.
The specific limits of the various Sorghums are not well
ascertained.


Andropogon citratus, Candolle.
The Lemon Grass of India. It yields an essential oil for
perfumery; besides it is occasionally used for tea. This
applies as well to Andropogon Nardus, L., and some allied
grasses.
Andropogon Haleppensis, Sib thorp.
South Europe, Orient. A rich perennial grass, cultivated
often under the name of Cuba Grass.
Andropogon Ivarancusa, Roxb.
One of the fragrant grasses of North India, much used like
A. Shoenanthus.
Andropogon Martini, Roxb. ( A. fiexuosus , Nees.)
On the mountains of India. The fragrant Citronella Oil is
distilled in Ceylon and elsewhere from the leaves of this
species. General Martin observed, that cattle are vora-
ciously fond of this grass; but it imparts its fragrance to
meat and milk.
Andropogon mnricatus, Retz.
India. A Swamp-grass, with delightfully fragrant roots.
Andropogon nutans, L. {Sorghum nutans , Gray.)
North America. A tall, nutritious, perennial grass, content
with dry and barren soil.
Andropogon saccharatus, Roxb. {Sorghum saccharatum, Pers.)
Tropical Asia. The Broom-Corn. A tall annual species,
splendid as a fodder grass. Erom the saccharine juice
sugar is obtainable. A sample of such, prepared from plants
of the Melbourne • Botanic Garden, was shown at the
Exhibition of 1862. This Sorghum furnishes also material
for a well-known kind of brooms. A variety or a closely
allied species yields the Caffir Corn {A. Cafrorum, Kunth).
The plant can be advantageously utilized for preparing
treacle. Eor this purpose, the sap is expressed at the time
of flowering, and simply evaporated ; the yield is about
100 gallons from the acre. In 1860, nearly seven millions
of gallons of sorghum treacle were produced in the United
States.


Andropogon Shoenanthus, L.
Deserts of Arabia, A scented grass, allied to the Indian
oil-yielding Andropogons. A similar species occurs in arid
places of the interior of North Australia.
Andl’Opog'On Sorghum, Brotero. (-Sorghum vulgare, Persoon.)
The large Indian Millet or Guinea Corn, or the Durra.
Warmer parts of Asia. A tall annual plant. The grains
can be converted into bread, porridge and other prepara-
tions of food. It is a very prolific corn and to us particularly
valuable for green fodder. Many others of the numerous
species of Andropogon, from both hemispheres, deserve our
attention.
Anemone Pulsatilla, L.
Europe and Northern Asia. On limestone soil. This pretty
perennial herb is of some medicinal importance.
Anona Cherimolia, Miller.
Tropical and sub-tropical South America. This shrub or
tree might be tried in the frostless lower valleys of East
Gripps Land, where humidity and rich soil will also prove
favourable to its growth. It yields the Cherimoyer fruit.
The flowers are very fragrant.
Anthemis nobilis, L.
The true Camomile. Middle and South Europe, North
Africa. A well-known medicinal plant, here frequently
used as edgings for garden plots. Flowers in their normal
state are preferable for medicinal use to those, in which the
ray-flowers are produced in increased numbers. They con-
tain a peculiar volatile oil and two acids similar to Angelica
and Valeriana acid.
Anthemis tinctoria, L.
Middle and South Europe, Orient. An annual herb. The
flowers contain a yellow dye.
Anthistina ciliata, L. fil. (Anthistivict Austvalis, E. Brown.)
The well-known Kangaroo Grass, not confined to Australia,
but stretching through Southern Asia also, and through the
whole of Africa. It is mentioned here, because its growth


should be encouraged by every means. There are several
species of Anthistiria deserving introduction and naturalisa-
tion in our Colony.
Anthoxanthum odoratum, L.
The Scented Yernal Grass. Europe, North and Middle
Asia, North Africa. A perennial, not of great value as a
fattening grass, yet always desired for the flavor, which it
imparts to hay. Perhaps for this purpose the scented
Andropogons might serve here also. On deep and moist
soils it attains its greatest perfection. It is much used for
mixing among permanent grasses on pastures, where it will
continue long in season. It would live well in our Alps.
The lamellar-crystalline Cumarin is the principle, on which
the odor of Anthoxanthemum depends.
Apios tuberosa, Moench.
North America. A climber, with somewhat milky juice.
The mealy tubers are edible,
Apium graveolens, L.
The Celery. Europe, North Africa, North and Middle
Asia. It is here merely inserted with a view of pointing
out, that it might be readily naturalized on our sea shores.
Apium prostratum, La Billardiere.
The Australian Celery. Extra-tropical Australia, New Zea-
land, extra-tropical South America, This also can be
utilized as a culinary vegetable.
Apocynum cannabinum, L.
On river banks in North America. This is recorded among
plants yielding a textile fibre.
Aracbis hypogaea, L.
The Earth-nut, Pea-nut or Ground-nut. Brazil. The
seeds of this annual herb are consumed in a roasted state,
or used for pressing from them a palatable oil. The plant
is a very productive one, and yields a very quick return. It
ranks also as a valuable fodder herb. A light somewhat
calcareous soil is best fitted for its growth. On such soil,
50 bushels may be obtained from the acre,


Archangelica officinalis, Hoffmann.
Arctic zone and mountain regions of Europe. The stalks
are used for confectionery; the roots are of medicinal
use. Only in our Alps would this herb fully establish its
value. The root is biennial and used in the distillation
of some cordials.
Arctostaphylos uva nrsi, Sprengel.
Alpine and Arctic Europe, North Asia and North America.
A medicinal small shrub, which here could best be reared in
the heath-moors of our Alpine regions.
Argania Sideroxylon, Roem. and Schult.
The Argan-tree. Western Barbary, on dry hills. Its
growth is here found to be slow ; but it is a tree of
longevity. Though comparatively low iu stature, its foliage
occasionally spreads to a circumference of 220 feet. It
sends out suckers from the root. The fruits s.erve as food
for cattle in Morocco ; but here the kc rnels would be more
likely to be utilized by pressing the oil from them.
Aristolocliia Serpentaria, L.
The Snake-root of North America. The root of this trailing
herb is valuable in medicine; it contains a peculiar volatile
oil. Several other Aristolochige deserve culture for medi-
cinal purposes, for instance, —Aristolochia ovalifolia (G-uaco),
and A. anguicida, from the mountains of Central America,
should they prove hardy.
Arnica montana, E.
Colder parts of Europe. This pretty herb is perennial, and
of medicinal value. It is eligible for our sub-alpine
regions. The active principles are: —Arnicin, volatile oil,
cupron and capryl acid.
Arracacha xanthorrhiza, Bancroft.
Mountain regions of Central America. An umbelliferous
herb. The roots are nutritious and palatable. There are
yellow, purple and pale varieties.
Artemisia Absinthium, E.
The Wormwood. Europe, North and Middle Asia, and
North Africa. A perennial herb, valuable as a tonic and


anthelminthic. Several other species of Artemisia deserve
cultivation for medicinal purposes. Active principles :
Ahsinthin, an oily substance, indurating to a crystalline
mass ; a volatile oil peculiar to the species.
Artemisia Dracunculus, L.
The Tarragon or Estragon. North Asia. A perennial
herb, used as a condiment. Its flavour rests on two volatile
oils, one of them peculiar to the plant.
Arundinaria falcata, Nees.
Nepaul. One of the hardiest kinds of the Bamboo tribe. It
rises to the height of 20 feet, the canes attaining a diameter
of 4 inches.
Arundinaria macrosperma, Michaux.
Southern States of North America, —particularly on the
Missisippi. This Bamboo-like reed forms there the cane-
brakes. It requires to be replanted after flowering in the
course of years. Height 20 feet.
Arundo Donax, L.
The tall evergreen lasting Bamboo-reed of South Europe
and North Africa. It is one of the most important plants
of its class for quickly producing a peculiar scenic effect in
picturesque plantations, also for intercepting at once the
view to unsightly objects, and for giving early shelter. The
canes can be used for fishing-rods.
Arundo Pliniana, Turr.
On the Mediterranean and Adriatic Seas. A smaller plant
than A. Donax, with more slender stems and narrower
leaves, but similarly evergreen, and resembling the Donax
reed also in its roots,
Arundo saccharoides, P. v. M.
(Gynerium saccharoides, Humboldt.)
Northern parts of South xlmerica. This species is here not
yet introduced; but it is likely to prove hardy. Like the
following, it is conspicuously magnificent.


Arund.o Sellowiana, Schultes. (Arundo dioica, Spreng. non
Louriero. Oynerium argenteum, Nees.)
The Pampas Grass of Uruguay, Paraguay and the La Plata
State. A grand autumnal flowering reed, with gorgeous
feathery panicles. As an industrial plant it deserves here a
place, because paper can be prepared from its leaves.
Asparagus officinalis, L.
Europe, North Africa, North Asia. The well-known As-
paragus plant, which, if naturalized on our coast, would aid
in binding the sand. The foliage contains Inosit-Sugar ; the
shoots contain Asparagin.
Astragalus Cephalonicus, Eischer. (A. aristafus, Sib thorp.)
Cephalonia. A small shrub, yielding a good tragacanth;
and so probably, also, the true A. aristatus of I’Heritier is
producing it.
Artragalus Creticus, La March.
Candia and Greece. A small bush, exuding the ordinary
vermicular Tragacanth. The pale is preferable to the brown
sort.
Astragalus gummifer, La Billard.
Syria and Persia. This shrub also yields a good kind of
Tragacanth.
Astragalus strabiliferus, Eoyle.
Asiatic Turkey. The brown Tragacanth is collected from
this species.
Astragalus verus, Olivier.
Asiatic Turkey and Persia. This shrub furnishes the
Takalor or Smyrna Tragacanth, or it is derived from an
allied species.
Atriplex hortensis, L.
North and Middle Asia. The Arroche. An annual Spinage
plant.
Atropa Belladonna, L.
The Deadly Nightshade. South and Middle Europe and
Western Asia. A most important perennial medicinal herb.


The highly powerful Atropin is derived from it, besides
another alkaloid, the Belladonnin.
A vena fatua, L.
Wild Oat. Europe, North Africa, North and Middle Asia,
eastward as far as Japan. The experiments of Professor
Buckman indicate, that our ordinary Culture-Oat (Avena
sativa, L.) is descended from this plant.
Avena flavescens, E- (Trisetum jiavescens , Beauv.)
Yellowish Oat Grass. Europe, North Africa, Middle and
North Asia, eastward as far as Japan. One of the best of
perennial meadow-grasses, living on dry soil; fitted also for
our Alps.
Avena pratensis, L.
Meadow Oat Grass. Europe, North Asia. It thrives well
on dry, clayey soil; it produces a sweet fodder, but not in
so great proportion as several other less nutritious grasses.
It is perennial, and well adapted for our snowy mountains,
where it would readily establish itself, even on heathy
moors.
Avena pubescens, L.
Downy Oat-Grass. Europe, North and Middle Asia. A
sweet perennial grass, requiring dry but good soil, contain-
ing lime. It is nutritious and prolific. Several good Oat-
grasses are peculiar to North America and other parts of
the globe. Their relative value as fodder-grasses is in many
cases not exactly known, nor does the limit assigned to this
little treatise allow of their being enumerated on this occa-
sion.
Bactris Gasipses, Humboldt. (Guilielma speciosa, Mart.)
The Peach Palm of the Amazon Eiver, ascending to the
warm-temperate regions of the Andes. Stems clustered,
attaining a height of 90 feet. Dr, Spruce describes the
large bunches of fruits as possessing a thick, firm and mealy
pericarp, which, when cooked, has a flavor between Potato
and Chesnut, but superior to either. To us, however, this
palm would be mainly an object of grandeur. It is likely
to endure our clime in the fern-tree gullies.


Bambusa arundinacea, Roxb.
The Thorny Bamboo of India. It requires rich, moist soil,
and delights on river banks. It is of less height than Bam-
busa vulgaris; it also sends up from the root numerous
stems, but with bending branches, thorny at the joints.
The seeds of this and some other Bamboos are useful as
food for fowls.
Bambusa attenuata, Thwaites.
The Hardy Bamboo of Ceylon, there growing on the moun-
tains at elevations between 4000 to 6000 feet. It attains a
height of 25 feet.
Bambusa elegantissima, Hasskarl.
Java, on mountains about 4000 feet high. Very tall and
exceedingly slender; the upper branches pendulous. A
hardy species.
Bambusa monadelpha. (Dendrocalamus monadelphus, Thwaites.)
Ceylon, on mountains from 4000 to 6000 feet high. A dwarf
but handsome Bamboo, reaching only a height of ] 2 feet.
Bambusa spinosa, Roxb.
Bengal. A Bamboo of considerable height. The central
cavity of the canes is of less width than in most other species,
thus the strength for many technic purposes is increased.
Bambusa stricta, Roxb. (■Dendrocalamus strictus, Nees.)
India, particularly Bengal. Grows on drier ground than
B. arundinacea. It is also smaller, and quite straight. Its
strength and solidity renders it fit for many select technic
purposes.
Bambusa verticillata, Blume.
The Whorled Bamboo of Java.
Bambusa vulgaris, Wendland.
The large unarmed Bamboo of Bengal. It attains a height
of 70 feet, and stems may attain even a length of 40 feet in
one season, though the growth is slower in our clime. It
has proved to be capable of resisting the occasional night
frost of the lowlands of Victoria. It is the best for building
Bamboo-Houses. Immersion in water for some time ren-


ders the cane still firmer. To the series of large thornless
Bamboos belong also Bambusa Tulda and Bambusa Balcooa
of India, and Bambusa Thouarsii from Madagascar and
Bourbon. These Bamboos are much used for various kinds
of furniture, mats, implements and other articles. There
are many other kinds of Bamboo eligible among the species
from China, Japan, India, tropical America, and perhaps
tropical Africa. One occurs in Arnhem’s Land.
Barosma serratifolia, Willd.
South Africa. This shrub supplies the medicinal Bucco-
leaves, B. crenulata, Hook. (Diosma crenulata, L.), is only
a variety of this species. Active principles—A peculiar
volatile oil, a peculiar resin, and a crystalline substance
called Diosmin.
Beta vulgaris, L.*
The Beet or Mangold Root. Middle and South Europe,
Middle Asia, North Africa. This well-known perennial or
biennial herb ought to engage the general and extensive
attention of our farming population. The herb is most
valuable as a palatable and nutritious spinage; the root is
of importance not only as a culinary vegetable, but, as
well known, also for its content of sugar, fit to be crystallised.
That of Beet, indeed, is now almost exclusively consumed
in Russia, Germany, Austria, France, Sweden and Belgium ;
and these countries not only produce the Beet Sugar, but
also export it largely to the neighbouring States. The
white Sicilian Beet is mainly used for salads, spinage and
soups. The thick-ribbed variety serves like Asparagus or
Seakale, dressed like Rhubarb. Cereal soil, particularly
such as is fit for Barley, is generally adapted also for the
culture of Beet. The rearing of the root, and the manufac-
ture of the sugar, can be studied from manifold works ; one
has been compiled by Mr. N. Levy, of this city. A deeply
stirred, drained soil, rich in lime, brings the saccharine
variety of Beet to the greatest perfection. The Imperial
Beet yields from 12 to 20 per cent, sugar. The Castelnau-
derry, the Magdeburg, the Siberian Whiterib and the
ilmorin Beet are other varieties rich in sugar. About


5 lbs. of seeds are required for an acre. In rotation of
crops, the Beet takes its place best between Barley and
Oats. In Middle Europe tbe yield averages 14 tons of
Sugar Beet to the acre, and as many hundred weight of raw
sugar. The mercantile value of the root, at our distilleries,
ranged from 20s. to 80s. per ton. In our clime, the Beet
harvest can be extended over a far longer time of the year
than in Middle Europe. The extraction of the sap is
effected generally by hydraulic pressure. The juice is
purified with lime and animal coal. Excess of lime is
removed by carbonic acid, and the purified and decolorized
juice is evaporated in vacuum pans, with a view to prevent-
ing the extensive conversion of the crystallisable sugar into
treacle. The production of Beet sugar needs far less labor
than that of cane sugar, and the harvest is obtained in so
short a time as eight months. Beet has shown itself
subject neither to alarming diseases nor to extensive attacks
of insects. Beet is grown in extra-tropical zones like ours,
while the sugar-cane is a plant confined to tropical and sub-
tropical latitudes. Beet culture, by directly or indirectly
restoring the refuge, ameliorates the soil to such an extent,
that in some parts of Germany land, so utilized, has risen
to fourfold its former value. Beet, furthermore, affords one
of the most fattening stable fodders ; and thus again an
ample supply of manure. In Middle Europe now about
one-sixth of all the arable land is devoted to Beet, yet the
produce of cereals has not become reduced, while the rearing
of fattened cattle has increased. Notwithstanding a heavy
tax on the Beet-sugar factories in Europe, the industry has
proved prosperous, and assumes greater and greater dimen-
sions. In 1865, the sugar consumption of Europe amounted
to 31,676,497 cwt., one-third of which had been locally sup-
plied by the Beet, from over one thousand beet-sugar
factories. Treacle obtained from beet is distilled for
alcohol. For establishing remunerative factories on a
large and paying scale, it has been suggested that farmers’
companies might be formed. For ascertaining the per-
centage of sugar in Beet, saccharometers are used. In
Germany, some scientific periodicals are exclusively devoted
to fhc fostering of this industry.


Boehmeria nivea, Q-audichaud.*
The Eamee or Eheea. Southern Asia, as far east as Japan.
This bush furnishes the strong and beautiful fibre woven
into the fabric, which inappropriately is called grass-cloth.
The bark is softened by hot water or steam, and then separa-
ble into its tender fibres. The best is obtained from the
young shoots ; it is glossy, tough and lasting, combining to
some extent the appearance of silk with the strength of flax.
The ordinary market value of the fibre is about £4O per
ton ; but Dr. Eoyle mentions that it has realized, at times,
£l2O. The seeds are sown on manured or otherwise rich
and friable soil. In the third year, or under very favorable
circumstances even earlier, it yields its crops, as many as
three annually. The produce of an acre has been estimated
at 2 tons of fibre. This latter, since Kaempfer’s time, has
been known to be extensively used for ropes and cordage in
Japan, Our rich and warmest forest valleys seem best
adapted for the Eamee, as occasional irrigation can be also
there applied. In the open grormds of Victoria it suffers
from the night frosts, although this does not materially
injure the plant, which sends up fresh shoots, fit for fibre,
during the hot season. The plant has been cultivated and
distributed since 1854, in the Botanic Garden of Melbourne,
where it is readily propagated from cuttings, the seeds
ripening rarely there. Cordage of this Boehmeria is three
times as strong as that of hemp. Other species require to
be tested, among them the one which was recently dis-
covered in Lord Home’s Island, namely Boehmeria calo-
phleba.
Boronia megastigma, Nees.
In West Australia on margins of swamps. This remarkable
bush is recorded here as an emblem of mourning, its ex-
ternal blackish flow ers rendering it especially eligible for
graves. Industrially it interests us on account of its power-
fully fragrant blossoms, for the sake of which this bush will
deserve to be cultivated. The scent might be extracted by
Mr. Bosisto’s process.


Borrago officinalis, L.
South Europe, Orient. An annual herb, occasionally used
for medicinal purposes or as an admixture to salad.
Brabejum stellatifolium, L.
South Africa. The nuts of this shrub are edible, resembling
those of our Macadamia ternifolia, to which also in foliage
and flowers Brabejum is closely allied. The nuts are also
similar to those of the Chilian Gluevina Avellana.
Brassica alba, Visiani. (S inapis alba , L.)
White Mustard. Europe, North Africa, North and Middle
Asia. An annual. The seeds are less pungent than those
of the Black Mustard, but used in a similar manner. The
young leaves of both are useful as a culinary and anti-
scorbutic salad. Dr. Masters enumerates Brassica Chinensis,
B. dichotoma, B. Pekinensis, B. ramosa and B. glauca
among the Mustards, which undergo cultivation in various
parts of Asia, either for the fixed oil of their seeds or for
their herbage. Erom 15 lbs. to 20 lbs. of seeds of the
White Mustard are required for an acre. In the climate of
California, similar to ours, 1400 lbs. of seeds have been
gathered from an acre.
Brassica nigra, Koch. (Sinapis nigra , L.)
The Black Mustard. Europe, North Africa, Middle Asia.
An annual. The seeds, simply crushed and then sifted, con-
stitute the Mustard of commerce. For medicinal purposes
the seeds of this species are preferable for sinapism and
other purposes. In rich soil this plant is very prolific ; and
in our forest-valleys it is likely to remain free from the
attack of aphis. Chemical constituents : A peculiar fixed
oil, crystalline sinapin, the fatty sinapisin, Myron-acid and
Myrosin.
Brassica oleracea, E.
An annual or biennial coast plant, indigenous to various
parts of Europe. It is mentioned here with a view of show-
ing, that it might be naturalized on our rocky and sandy sea
shores. From the wild plant of the coast originated various
kinds of Cabbages, Broccoli, Cauliflower, Brussel Sprouts,


Kail, Kohlrabi, &c. Other races of this species are collec-
tively represented by Brassica Rapa, L. (B. campestris, L.),
the Wild Navew, yielding most of the varieties of Turnips,
some with other cultivated forms transferred to us from
ancient times. Again other varieties are comprehended
within Brassica Napus, L., such as the Swedish and Teltower
Turnips, while the Rape seed, so important for its oil
(Colza), is also derived from a form of B. Napus. The
Rape should be produced here as an agrarian produce,
giving a rapid return, wherever it should remain free of
aphis. The hardier turnips could be produced on our
highest Alps, as they are grown still within the Arctic circle,
and, according to Dr. J. Hooker, at a height of 15,000 feet
in the Himalaya mountains.
Butomus umbellatus, L.
The Flowering Rush. Europe, North and Middle Asia.
This elegant perennial water-plant is mentioned here more
for its value in embellishing our lakes and watercourses than
for the sake of its roots. The latter, when roasted, are
edible. The plant would live in our subalpine rivulets.
Bromus unioloides, Humboldt.* (B. Schraderi, Kunth.)
Here called the Prairie Grass. From Central America it
has spread over many parts of the globe. The writer saw it
disseminated in the mountains of St. Vincent’s Gulf as
early as 1817. It is one of the richest of all grasses, grows
continously and spreads readily from seeds, particularly on
fertile and somewhat humid soil, and has proved as a lasting
and nutritious fodder-grass or pasture-grass one of our best
acquisitions.
Broussonetia papyrifera, Yentenat.
The Paper Mulberry. Islands of the Pacific Ocean, China,
Japan, perhaps only truly indigenous in the last-named
country. The bast of this tree or shrub can be converted
into very strong paper. It can also be used as a textile
fabric ; furthermore the fabrics made from it can be dressed
with linseed oil for waterproof coverings. In cultivation
the plant is kept like an osier. The leaves cannot be used


for silkworms. European fabrics have largely super-
seded the clothing made of this plajpt in the South Sea
Islands.
Caesalpinia Gilliesii, Wallich. (Poinciana Oilliesii, Hooker.)
La Plata States. This beautiful hardy bush can be utilized
for hedges.
Cajanus Indicus, Candolle.
The Catjang; in Assam, called Grelooa-mah. A shrubby
plant of India, probably available for profitable culture and
naturalization in the warmer parts of our Colony. It sus-
tains itself on dry ground, and yields the pulse known as
Dhal, Urhur and Congo-pea. The plant lasts for about
three years. Several species of Cajanus of the Atylosia
section, indigenous to the warmer parts of Australia, might
be tested here for the sake of the economic value of their
seeds. The insect, active in the formation of lac, lives
extensively on the Cajanus, according to Mr. T. D. Brewster
of Assam. Silkworms live also on it.
Calamus montanus, T. Anderson.
Himalaya, up to 6000 feet. A hardy climbing palm. The
aged canes are naked. “ The light but strong suspension-
bridges, by which the large rivers of Sikkim are crossed, are
constructed of this palm. It supplies material for the
strongest ropes for dragging logs of wood from the forests.
The most durable baskets and the cane-work of chairs are
manufactured from the slit stems. Walking-sticks and
riding-canes made of this species are exported from Sikkim
in considerable quantity.” Many other Calami serve similar
purposes, but probably few or perhaps none are equally
hardy.
Camelina sativa, Crantz.
Middle and South Europe, temperate Asia. An annual
herb, cultivated for the sake of its fibre and the oil of its
seeds. It is readily grown after corn crops, yields richly
even on poor soil and is not attacked by aphis. Mr. W.
Taylor obtained 32 bushels of seeds from an acre, and from
these 510 lbs. of oil. The return is within a few months.


Ganna Achiras, Gillies.
Mendoza. One of the few extra-tropic Gannas, eligible for
Arrow-root culture.
Ganna coccinea, Eoscoe.
West Lodi a. Yields with some other Gannas the particular
Arrow-root, called “ Tons les mois.’’
Ganna edulis, Edwards.
The Adeira of Peru. One of the hardiest of Arrow-root
plants, and thus well adapted for our clime. Seeds, even if
many years old, will germinate. This species has yielded
excellent starch at Melbourne. Western Port, Lake Welling-
ton, Ballarat and other localities, from plants supplied at
the Botanic Garden. The Eev. Mr. Hagenauer, of the
Gipps Land Aboriginal Mission station, obtained 220 lbs. of
Arrow-root from one-eighth of an acre of this Ganna. The
gathering of the roots is effected about April. The plants
can be set out in ordinary ploughed land. Captain James
Hall, of Hastings, prepared also largely the starch from this
root. Starch grains remarkably large.
Ganna flaccida, Eoscoe.
Carolina. Probably also available for Arrow-root, though in
first instance like many congeners chosen only for orna-
mental culture.
Ganna giauca, Linne.
One of the West Indian Arrow-root Gannas.
Cannabis sativa, L.*
The Hemp-plant; indigenous to various parts of Asia, as far
west as Turkey and as far east as Japan. Cultivated for
its fibre since ancient times. Particularly in hot climes it
exudes the “ Churras,” a resinous substance of narcotic
intoxicating property. The foliage contains also a volatile
oil, which the seeds yield by pressure —the well-known fixed
Hemp-oil. The staminiferous plant is pulled for obtaining
the fibre in its best state immediately after flowering ; the
seeding plant is gathered for fibre at a later stage of growth.
Good soil, well drained, never absolutely dry, is needed for


successful Hemp culture. Hemp is one of the plants yield-
ing a full and quick return within the season. The summer
temperatures of St. Petersburg (67° F.) and of Moscow
(62° F.) admit yet of the cultivation of this plant.
Capparis spines a, L.
South Europe and North Africa. A somewhat shrubby
and trailing plant, deserving even for the sake of its hand-
some flowers a place in any garden. It sustains its life in
the most arid deserts. The frosts of our lowlands do not
destroy this plant. The flower-buds and young berries
preserved in vinegar with some salt form the Capers of
commerce. Samples of Capers, prepared from plants of the
Botanic Garden, are placed in our Industrial Museum,
together with many other industrial products emanating
from the writer’s laboratory. A closely allied and probably
equally useful plant, Capparis nummularia, is indigenous to
Northern Australia. The Caper-plant is propagated either
from seeds or suckers; it is well able to withstand either
heat or drought. The buds after their first immersion into
slightly salted vinegar are strained and afterwards preserved
in bottles with fresh vinegar. Chemical principle: Glycosid.
Capsicum annuum, L.
Central America. An annual herb, which yields the Chillies
and thus also the material for Cayenne Pepper. Chemical
principle: Capsicin, an acrid soft-resinous substance.
Capsicum baccatum, L.
The Cherry-Capsicum. A perennial plant. From Brazil
brought to tropical Africa and Asia, where now other
Pepper-Capsicums are likewise naturalized.
Capsicum frutescens, L.
Tropical America. The berries of this shrubby species are
likewise converted into Cayenne Pepper.
Capsicum longum, Candolle.
Some of the hottest parts of America An annual herb,
also yielding Cayenne Pepper. Our summers admit of the
successful growth of at least the annual species of Capsicum
in all the lowlands.


Carthamus tinctorius, L.
From Egypt to India. The Safflower. A tall annual rather
handsome herb. The florets produce yellow, rosy, ponceau
and other red shades of dye, according to various admix-
tures. Pigment principles: Carthamin and Carthamus -
yellow. For domestic purposes it yields a dye ready at
hand from any garden. In India the Carthamus is also
cultivated for the sake of the oil, which can be pressed from
the seeds.
Carum Ajowan, Bentham. {PtycTwtis Ajowan , Candolle.)
India. The fruits of this annual herb form an excellent
culinary condiment with the flavor of thyme. Its peculiar
oil is accompanied by Cymol and Thymol.
Carum Carui, L
The Caraway-plant. Perennial. Europe, North and Middle
Asia. It might be naturalized in our Alps and also along
our sea shores. The Caraway-oil is accompanied by two
chemical principles : Oarven and Carvol.
Carum ferulifolium, Koch. (Bunium ferulifolium, Desfont.)
A perennial herb of the Mediterranean regions. The small
tubers are edible,
Carum Petroselinum, Bentham. {Apium Petroselinum, L.)
The Parsley. The biennial well-known herb, indigenous to
South Europe and the Orient. Essential oil peculiar with
Stearopten.
Caryota urens, L.
India. One of the hardier Palms, ascending according to
Dr. Thomas Anderson the Himalayas to an altitude of 5000
feet, yet even there attaining a considerable height, though
the temperature sinks in the cooler season to 40° Fahren-
heit. The trunk furnishes a sago-like starch. This Palm
flowers only at an advanced age, and after having produced a
succession of flowers dies away. From the sap of the
flowers Toddy and palm-sugar are prepared, like from the
Cocos and Borassus Palm, occasionally as much as 12 gallons
of Toddy being obtained from one tree in a day. The fibre


of the leaf-stalks can be manfactured into very strong ropes,
also into baskets, brushes and brooms. The outer wood of
the stem serves for turnery.
Cassia acutifolia, Delile.
Indigenous or now spontaneous in Northern and tropical
Africa and South-west Asia. Perennial. The merely dried
leaflets constitute part of the Alexandrian and also Tinne-
velly Senna. In Victoria it will be only in the warmest
northern and eastern regions, where Senna can perhaps be
cultivated to advantage.
Cassia ang’ustifolia, Vahl.
Northern Africa and South-western Asia, indigenous or cul-
tivated. Perennial. Yields Mecca-Senna.
Cassia Marylandica, L.
An indigenous Senna plant of the United States of North
America. Perennial.
Cassia obovata, Colladon.
South-west Asia ; widely dispersed through Africa as a
native or disseminated plant. Perennial. Part of the
Alexandrian and also Aleppo Senna is derived from this
species. Several of the Australian desert Cassias of the
group of C. artemisioides may also possess purgative pro-
perties. The odor of their foliage is almost that of Senna.
Catha edulis, Porskoel.
Arabia and Eastern Africa. The leaves of this shrub under
the designation Kafta or Cat are used for a tea of a very
stimulating effect, to some extent to be compared to that of
Erythroxylon Coca. To us here the plant would be mainly
valuable for medicinal purposes.
Cedronella cordata, Bentham.
United States of North America. A perennial herb, fragrant
like the foregoing.
Cedronella triphylla, Moench.
Madeira and Canary Islands. A shrubby plant with highly
scented foliage. The volatile oil obtainable from it resem-
bles that of Melissa, but is somewhat camphoric.


Cephaelis Ipecacuanha, Richard.
Brazil in woods of mountains, consociated with Palms and
Fern-trees. It is not unlikely, that this herb, which is
perennial and yields the important medicinal Ipecacuanha
root, would live in our warmer forest regions, such as those
of East G-ipps Land, Active principles: Emetin and Ipeca-
cuanha-acid.
Ceroxylon andicola, Humboldt.
The Wax-palm of Hew Granada, ascending the Andes to
11,000 feet. One of the most majestic and at the same
time one of the most hardy of all palms, attaining occa-
sionally a height of 180 feet. The trunk exudes a kind of
resinous wax, about 25 lbs. being obtainable at a time from
each stem; this by admixture to tallow is used for candles.
There are several other andine palms, which could be reared
in our forests or in sheltered positions at our dwellings, but
some of them are not even yet phytographically circum-
scribed.
Cervantesia tomentosa, Ruiz and Pavon.
Forest-mountains of Peru. This tree yields edible seeds.
It is likely to prove hardy in our lower forest regions.
Chaerophyllum bulbosum, Linne.
Middle Europe and Western Asia. The Parsnip-Chervil.
A biennial herb. The root a good culinary esculent.
Chaerophyllum sativum, Lamarck.
(Anthriscus Cerefolium, Hoffm.)
The Chervil. Middle and South Europe, Western Asia.
An annual herb, available for salads and condiments, but the
root deleterious.
Chamaerops excelsa, Thunberg.
South China. This fan-palm is highly desirable, although
not tall as the name would indicate.
Chamaerops Fortune!, Hooker.
North China. The Chusan-palm. It attains a height of
about 12 feet and endures like the following species con-
siderable frost. The leaves can be employed for plaiting


palm-hats. Other hardy palms might be naturalized and used
forvarious purposes, irrespective of their ornamental features.
Chamaerops humilis, Linne.
The dwarf Tan-Palm of South Europe and North Africa.
It is very decorative for garden plantations, particularly also
eligible for scenic effect.
Chamaerops Hystrix, Eraser.
The Blue Palmetto of Florida and Carolina. Another
dwarf Fan-Palm.
Chamaerops Martiana, Wallich.
Ascends the mountains of Nepaul to 5000 feet. Attains a
height of 50 feet and is altogether a noble object.
Chamaerops Richieana, Giriffith.
Arid mountains of Affghanistan. Has also proved hardy
even in England.
Chelidonium majus, L.
Europe and Western Asia. The Celandine. A perennial
herb of medicinal value. Chemical principles : Chelerythrin
and Chelidonin ; also a yellow pigment: Chelidoxanthin.
Chenopodium ambrosioides, L.
Tropical America. An annual medicinal herb. Chenopo-
dium anthelminticum is a perennial variety of this species.
Chenopodium auricomum, Bindley.
From the Barling Eiver to Carpentaria and Arnhem’s
Land. A tall perennial herb, furnishing a nutritious and
palatable spinage. It will live in arid desert regions.
Chenopodium Quinoa, Willdenow.
From New Granada to Chili. A large-leaved quick-growing
annual species, cultivated for the sake of its amylaceous
seeds, but perhaps of more value as a culinary vegetable.
Cicer arietinum, L.
South Europe and Orient. The Gram. An annual herb,
valuable as a pulse for pasture animals. The seeds can also
be converted into peameal or be used otherwise for culinary
purposes.


Cichorium Endivia, L.
South Europe, Orient, Middle Asia. A biennial plant, used
since ancient times as a culinary vegetable.
Cichorium Intybus, L.
Chicory. A well-known perennial plant, indigenous to
Europe, North Africa and North and West Asia. The roots
can be used as a substitute for Coffee. This plant requires
a rich deep loamy soil, but fresh manure is detrimental to
the value of the root. It is also a good fodder-plant espe-
cially for sheep. The root can also be dressed and boiled
for culinary purposes. The leaves useful for salad.
Cimicifuga racemosa, Elliot.
The Black Snake-root of North America. A perennial herb
of medicinal value, the root possessing emetic properties.
Cinchona Calisaya, Ruiz.*
Yellow Perubark-tree. Andes of Peru and Bolivia, 5-6000
feet above the ocean. This tree attains a height of 40 feet.
It yields the yellow bark, and also part of the crownbark.
It is one of the richest' yielder of quinin, and produces
besides Cinchonidin.
Cinchona micrantha, Ruiz and Pavon.
Cordillieres of Bolivia and Peru. This tree attains a height
of 60 feet, and from it part of the drey and Huanuco Bark
as well as Lima Bark are obtained. It is comparatively rich
in Cinchoniu and Quinidin, contains however also Quinin.
Cinchona nitida, Ruiz and Pavon.
Andes of Peru and and Ecuador. This tree rises to 80 feet
under favorable circumstances. It also yields drey Bark
and Huanuco Bark, besides Loxa Bark. It will probably
prove one of the hardiest species. It contains predominantly
Cinchonin and Quinidin.
Cinchona officinalis, L. (partly.)*
(■Cinchona Condaminea, Humboldt)
Andes of New Grenada and Peru, at a height of 6000 to
10,000 feet. Yields Crown or Brown Peru Bark, besides
part of Loxa Bark. Comparatively rich in Quinin and


Cinchonidin. The temperature of the middle regions of
the Andes, where this tree grows, is almost the same as that
of the Canary Islands. Superabundance of moisture is par-
ticularly to this species pernicious. The Crispilla variety
endures a temperature occasionally as low as 27° E.
Cinchona clancifolia Mutis is considered by Weddell a
variety of C. officinalis. This grows on places, where the
mean annual temperature is that of Eome, with however
less extremes of heat and cold. It yields part of the Pitaya-
Bark.
Cinchona Pitayensis must also be referred to C. officinalis
as a variety. This attains a height of 60 feet and fur-
nishes also a portion of the Pitaya Bark. It is this partic-
ular Cinchona, which in Upper India yielded in some
instances the unprecedented quantity of 11 per cent, alkaloids,
nearly 6 per cent. Quinin, the rest Quinidin and Cinchonin.
In Java some of the best results were obtained with Cin-
chona Hasskarliana Miq., a species seemingly as yet not
critically identified.
Cinchona succirubra, Pavon. #
Middle andine regions of Peru and Ecuador. A tree,
attaining a height of 40 feet, yielding the red Pern-Bark,
rich in Quinin and Cinchonidin. It is this species, which is
predominantly cultivated on the mountains of Bengal. All
these Chinchonas promise to become of importance for cul-
ture in the warmest regions of our forest-land, on places not
readily accessible or eligible for cereal culture. The Peru-
vian proverb that Cinchona trees like to be “ within sight of
snow” gives some clue of the conditions, under which they
thrive best. They delight in the shelter of forests, where
there is an equable temperature, no frost, some humidity at
all times both in air and soil, where the ground is deep and
largely consists of the remnants of decayed vegetable sub-
stances and where the subsoil is open. Drippage from
shelter-trees too near will be hurtful to the plants. Closed
valleys and deep gorges, into which cold air will sink, are
also not well adapted for cinchona-culture. In our Colony
we ought to consociate the Perubark-plants with naturally


growing fern-trees but only in our warmest valleys of richest
soil. The best temperature for Cinchonas is from 53° to
66° E.; but they mostly will endure in open places a mini-
mum of 32° E.; in the brush shades of the Botanic Garden
of Melbourne, where years ago already Cinchonas were
raised by the thousands, they have even resisted uninjured
a temperature of a few degrees less, wherever the wind had
no access, while under such very slight cover the Cinchonas
withstood also a heat of a few degrees over 100° E. The
plants are most easily raised from seeds, best under some
cover such as mats and they are seeding copiously already
several years after planting. The contents of alkaloids in
the bark can be much increased by artificial treatment, if
the bark is only removed on one side of the stem and the
denuded part covered with moss, under which in one year
as much bark is formed as otherwise requires three years’
growth, such forced bark moreover containing the astound-
ing quantity of as much as 25 alkaloids, because no loss
of these precious substances takes place by gradual disin-
tegration through age. The Cinchona-plants are set out at
distances of about 6 feet. The harvest of bark begins in
the fourth or fifth year. The price varies in Europe from
2s. to 9s. per lb. according to quality. The limits assigned
to this small literary compilation do not admit of entering
further into details on this occasion, but I may yet add, that
in the Darjeeling district over three millions of Cinchona
plants were in cultivation in 1869, raised in Government
plantations.
Citrus Aurantium, L.*
The Orange (in the widest sense of the word). A native of
South Asia. A tree of longevity, known to have attained
an age of 600 years and more. Any specific differences, to
distinguish C. Aurantium from C. medica, if they once
existed, are obliterated now through hybridisation at least
in the cultivated forms. As prominent varieties of C.
Aurantium may be distinguished :
Citrus Big amelia, Duhamel. The Bitter Orange. This fur-
nishes from its flowers the Neroli Oil so delicious and costly


as a scent. It is stated, that Orange-flowers to the value of
£5O might he gathered from the plants of an acre within a
year. The rind of the fruit is used for candied orange-peel.
Bitter principle : Hesperidin in the rind, Limonin in the
seed.
Citrus dulcis, Yolkamer, The Sweet Orange, of which many
kinds occur. The St. Michael Orange has been known to
bear in the Azores on sheltered places 20,000 fruits on one
tree in a year. Neroli Oil is obtained from the flowers of
this and allied varieties.
Citrus Bergamium , Bis so. From the fruit-rind of this variety
Bergamotte Oil is obtained, but also oil from the flowers.
The Mellaroea variety furnishes a superior oil and exquisite
confitures.
Citrus decumana, Linne. The Shaddock or Pompelmos. The
fruit will exceptionally attain a weight of 20 lbs. The pulp
and thick rind can both be used for preserves.
Citrus nohilis, Loureiro. The Mandarin-Orange. The thin
peel separates most readily from the deliciously flavored
sweet pulp. There are large and small fruited Mandarin
Oranges ; the Tangerine variety is one of them.
Citrus medica, Linne.*
The Citron (in the widest sense of the word). Indigenous
to Southern Asia. For convenience’s sake it is placed here
as distinct from the preceding species. As prominent
varieties of the Citrus medica may be distinguished;—
Citrus Cedra , Gallesio. The real Citron. From the acid
tubercular fruit essential oil and citric acid can be obtained,
irrespective of the ordinary culinary use of the fruit. A
large variety with thick rind furnishes candied the Citrionate
or Succade. The Cedra oil comes from a particular variety.
Citrus Limonium , Eisso. The real Lemon. From the fruit
of this is largely pressed the Lemon juice, while the thin
smooth aromatic peel serves for the production of volatile
oil or for condiments. The juice of this fruit is particularly
rich in citric acid. A large variety is the Bosaline Lemon.


Citrus Lumia, Eisso. The sweet Lemon, including the Pear-
Lemon with large pear-shaped fruit. Eind thick and pale ;
pulp not acid. This variety serves for particular condi-
ments.
Citrus Limetta, Eisso. The real Lime. The best lime-juice is
obtained from this variety, of which the Perette constitute
a form.
Citrus Australasica, E. von Mueller.
Coast forests of extra-tropic East Australia. A shrubby
species with oblong or almost cylindrical fruits of lemon-like
taste, measuring 2 to 4 inches in length. They are thus
very much larger than those of Atalantia glauca of the coast
and the desert-interior of tropic Australia, which are also of
similar taste, These plants are entered together with the
following on this list, merely to draw attention to them, as
likely capable of improvement of their fruit through cul-
ture.
Citrus Planchoni, E. von Mueller.
(C. Australis , Planchon, partly.)
Eorests near the coast of sub-tropic East Australia. A
noble tree, fully 40 feet high with globular fruits about the
size of a walnut, called Native Oranges. The species has
first appeared under the above name in the “ Eeport on the
Vegetable Products of the Intercolonial Exhibition of 1867.”
Citrus Japonica, Thunberg.
The Kumquat of Japan. A shrubby Citrus with fruits of
the size of a Gooseberry, from which on account of their
sweet peel and acid pulp an excellent preserve can be pre-
pared.
Cochlearia Armoracia, L.
The Horseradish. Middle Europe and Western Asia.
Perennial. The volatile oil of the root allied to that of
Mustard.
Cochlearia officinalis, L.
Shores of Middle and North Europe, North Asia and North
America. A biennial herb, like the allied C. Anglica and


C. Danica valuable as an antiscorbutic; hence deserving
naturalization. It contains a peculiar volatile oil.
Coffea Arabica, L.
Mountains of South-west Abyssinia. The Coffee-plant.
This shrub or small tree has been admitted into this list
not without great hesitation, merely not to be passed. The
cultivation within Victorian boundary can only with any
prospect of success be tried in the warmest and simul-
taneously moistest regions, such as East Gipps Land, frost
being detrimental to the Coffee-plant. In Ceylon the Coffee
regions are between 1000 and 5000 feet above the ocean,
but Dr. Thwaites observes that the plant succeeds best at
an elevation from 3000 to 4500 feet, in places where there
is a rainfall of about 100 inches a year. The temperature
there rises hardly ever above 80° E., and almost never sinks
below 45° E. Coffee requires moist weather whilst it
ripens its fruit, and a season of drier weather to form its
wood. Eor further particulars see the papers of the Planters’
Association of Kandy. Chemical principles: Coffein, a
peculiar tannic acid and Quiua acid.
Colchicum auctumnale, L.
Middle and South Europe, West Asia. The Meadow Safron.
The seeds and roots of this pretty bulbous-tuberous herb
are important for medicinal use. The plant has been intro-
duced by the writer with a view of being cultivated on moist
meadows in our ranges. Active principle : Colchicin.
Colocasia antiquorum, Schott.
Erom Egypt through South Asia to the South Sea Islands,
apparently also indigenous in the warmer parts of East
Australia. The Taro. The stem-like tuberous starchy roots
lose their acridity by the process of boiling, roasting or
baking. The plant proved hardy in the Botanic Garden of
Melbourne. The tops of the tubers are replanted for a new
crop. Taro requires a rich moist soil and would grow well
on banks of rivers. Eor scenic culture it is a very
decorative plant. Colocasia esculenta is a variety of this
species.


Colocasia Indica, Kunth. (Alooasia Indioa, Schott.)
South Asia, South Sea Islands and East Australia. Culti-
vated for its stem and tubers on swamps or rivulets. This
stately plant will rise in favorable localities to a height of
12 feet, the edible trunk attaining a considerable thickness,
the leaves sometimes measuring 3 feet in length. In using
the stem and root for food great care is needed to expel by
the heating process all acridity. Colocasia odora and C.
macrorrhiza seem varieties of this species. Several other
Aroid plants deserve attention for test-culture on account
of their edible roots, among them Cyrtosperma edulis,
Seemann, from the Eeegee Islands.
Conium maculatum, E.
The Hemlock. Europe, North Africa, North and West
Asia. A biennial herb, important for medicinal purposes.
It should however not be allowed to stray from its planta-
tions, as it is apt to be confounded with culinary species of
Anthriscus, Chaerophyllum and Myrrhis, and may thus
cause as a most dangerous plant disastrous mistakes. Active
principles: Ooniin, in the fruit also Conhydrin.
Conopodium denudation, Koch.
Western Europe. The small tuberous roots of this herb,
when boiled or roasted, are available for food and known as
Earth Chesnuts. The plant is allied to Carum Bulbocasta-
num.
Convolvulus floridus, E. fil.
Canary Island. A shrubby not climbing or winding species.
With the following it yields the Atlantic Eosewood from
stem and root.
Convolvulus scoparius, E. fil.
Teneriffe. One of the Eosewood plants.
Convolvulus Scammonia, E.
Mediterranean regions and Asia Minor. A perennial
herb. From the root is obtained the purgative resin Scam-
monia.


Corchorus capsularis, L.*
From India to Japan. One of tlie principal Jute plants.
An annual, attaining a height of about a dozen feet, when
closely grown, with almost branchless stem. A nearly
allied but lower plant, Corchorus Gunninghami , F. y. Mueller,
occurs in tropical and subtropical East Australia. Jute can
be grown where cotton and rice ripen, be it even in localities
comparatively cold in the winter, if the summer’s warmth is
long and continuous. The fibre is separated by steeping
the full grown plant in water from five to eight days, and it
is largely used for rice and cotton bags, carpets and other
similar textile fabrics, and also for ropes. About 60,000
tons are annually exported from India to England, and a
large quantity also to the United States. Jute is sown on
good land, well ploughed and drained, but requires no irri -
gation, although it likes humidity. The crop is obtained in
the course of four or five months, and is ripe when the
flowers turn into fruit capsules. Grood paper is made from
the refuse of the fibre.
Corchorus olitorius, L.*
South Asia and North Australia. Furnishes, with the fore-
going species, the principal supply of Jute fibre. As it also
is an annual, it can be brought to perfection in our
summers. The foliage can be used for spinage. The fibre
is not so strong as hemp, but very easily prepared. It
will not endure exposure to water. The allied Corchorus
trilocularis, L., of Indian origin, is likewise a native of
eastern tropical and subtropical Australia.
Cordyline Banksii, J- Hooker.
New Zealand. This lax and long leaved palm-lily attains
a height of 10 feet; its stem is usually undivided. This
and the following species have been admitted into this list
for a double reason, because not only are they by far the
hardiest, quickest growing and largest of the genus, and
thus most sought in horticultural trade for scenic planting ;
but also because they furnish from the leaves a superior
fibre for ropes and other purposes. The small seeds are
produced in great abundance, and germinate with extreme


readiness. These Palm-lilies ought to he naturalized in our
ranges by mere dissemination.
Cordyline Forsteri, F. v. Mueller.
{C. Australis , J. Hooker, not Endlicher.)
New Zealand. The stem of this noble thin-leaved plant
attains a height of 40 feet, and is branched.
Cordyline indivisa, Kunth.
New Zealand. The stem of this thick and rigid-leaved
palm-like species rises to a height of 20 feet, and remains
undivided. Leaves finally 5 inches broad; yield the Toi-
fibre.
Cordyline Baueri, J. Hooker.
(G. Australis , Endlicher, not J. Hooker.)
Norfolk Island. The stem of this stately species attains a
height of 40 feet, and becomes in age ramified. It is
very intimately allied to the New Zealand Cordyline
Forsteri.
Coriandrnm sativum, L.
Orient and Middle Asia. An annual or biennial herb, much
in use for condiments. The essential oil peculiar.
Corynosicyos edulis. (Gladosicyos edulis, J. Hooker.)
Guinea. A new cucumber-like plant, with edible fruits
about 1 foot long, and 3 inches in diameter.
Crambo maritima, L.
Sea Kale. Sand coasts of Europe and North Africa. A
perennial herb ; the young shoots used as a wholesome and
agreeable vegetable.
Crambo Tataria, Wulfen.
From Southern Europe to the Orient. Perennial. Like-
wise used for culinary purposes.
Crataegus aestivalis, Torrey and Gray.
The Apple Haw. Southern States of North America. The
small juicy fruit of an agreeable acid taste.
Crataegus apiifolia, Michaux.
North America. Highly serviceable for hedges.


Crataegus coccinea, L.
North American Whitethorn. A valuable hedge plant; also
very handsome. Spines strong.
Crataegus cordata, Aiton.
Southern States of North America. Also much employed
for hedges.
Crataegus Crus-Galli, L.
North America. The Cockspur Thorn. Regarded as one
of the best species for hedges. Spines long and stout.
Crataegus Oxyacantha, L,
Europe, North Africa, North and West Asia. The ordinary
Hawthorn or Whitethorn. Recorded here as one of the
most eligible among deciduous hedge plants.
Crataegus parvifolia, Alton.
North America. For dwarf hedges. Spines long, slender,
sharp and numerous.
Crataegus pyracantlia, Persoon.
The Firethorn. South Europe. This species is evergreen.
It is likewise adapted for hedges, hut slower in growth
than Hawthorn, but hot difficult to rear.
Crataegus tomentosa, E.
North America. Fruit edible. By the species mentioned
the list of American Hedgethorns is, probably, not yet
exhausted.
Crithmum maritimum, L.
The real Samphir. Sea shores of Middle and South Europe,
North Africa and the Orient. A perennial herb. Settlers on
the coast might readily disseminate and naturalize it. It
is held to be one of the best plants for pickles, the young
leaves being selected for that purpose.
Crocus sativus, L.
The Dye-Safron. South Europe and Orient. The Stigmata
of this particular autumnal flowering Crocus constitute
the costly dye substance. The best is collected from the
flowers, just as they daily open in succession. At our stage


of colonisation it would not "be remunerative to grow Safron
commercially ; but as the plant is well adapted for our
clime, it might be planted out into various unoccupied moun-
tain localities, with a final view to naturalize it, and to
render it thus available at a later period from native
sources.
Crotalaria juncea, L.
The Sunn Hemp. Indigenous to South Asia, and also
widely dispersed through tropical Australia. An annual
herb, rising under favourable circumstances to a height of 10
feet. In our colony Sunn can only be cultivated in the
warmest and moistest localities. It comes in four or five
months to maturity. The plant can also be grown as a
fodder-herb for cattle. It requires rich friable soil. If a
superior soft fibre is desired, then the plant is pulled Avhile
in flower ; if strength is the object, then the plant is left
standing until it has almost ripened its seeds. The steeping
process occupies about three days. For the purpose of
obtaining branchless stems it is sown closely.
Crotalaria retusa, L.
Asia, America and Australia within the tropics. A peren-
nial herb. Its fibre resembles that of C. juncea, and is
chiefly used for ropes and canvas. Others of the multitu-
dinous species of Crotalaria deserve to be tested for their
fibres.
Crozopliora tinctoria, Necker.
South Europe, North Africa and Orient. An annual herb.
The turnsole-dye is prepared by exposure of the juice to
the air, or by treating it with Ammonia.
Cucumis cicatrisatus, Stocks.
Scinde, where it is called “ Wungee.” The edible ovate
fruit is about 6 inches long.
Cucumis Citrullus, Seringe.
(Oitrullus vulgaris, Schrader.)
Mediterranean regions. The Water-Melon. It is simply
mentioned here, to indicate the desirability of naturalizing
it in the interior-deserts, where no Cucurbita and only a


single kind of edible Cucumis (O’, acidus, Jacquin), with
fruits not larger than a pigeon’s egg, is indigenous. In
South African deserts it has become spontaneously esta-
blished, and retained the characters of the cultivated fruit.
Cucumis Colocynthis, L.
(Gitrullus Colocynthis , Schrader.)
From the Mediterranean regions to India. An annual herb.
The medicinal extract of Colocyuth is prepared from the
small gourd of this species. Active principle : Colo-
cynthin.
Cucumis Conomon, Thunberg.
Japan. An annual. The large fruit is used for pre-
serves.
Cucumis Melo, L.
The Melon. Originally from the country about the Caspian
Sea. The best varieties might also be naturalized in our
sand-deserts, particularly on places where some moisture
collects. Some of the Bokhara varieties are remarkably
luscious and large. Apparently remunerative results have
been gained in Belgium from experiments to cultivate
Melons for sugar and treacle. The seeds, thus obtained in
quantity, become available for oil-pressing. The root con-
tains Melonemetin.
Cucumis Momordica, Roxburgh.
Cultivated in India. It produces Cucumbers 2 feet long,
bursting slowly when ripe into several divisions. Young
the fruit is used like Cucumbers, aged like Melons.
Cucumis sativus, L.
The Cucumber. Egypt. Indicated here merely for com-
pleteness’ sake, also because Gherkin pickling ought to
become a more extended local industry.
Cucumis utilissimus, Roxburgh.
Mountains of Bengal. An annual like the other species.
Eruit of the size and shape of an ostrich’s egg with the
flavor of Melons. These fruits will keep for several
months.


Cucurbita maxima, Duchesne.
Large Gourd. Turkey. Instances are on record of fruits
having weighed over 2 cwt. Also this species is eligible for
naturalization in the interior. Amongst other purposes it
serves for calabashes.
Cucurbita Melopepo, L.
The Squash. May be regarded as a variety of C. Pepo. It
will endure storage for mouths.
Cucurbita moscbata, Duchesne.
The Musky Gourd. Doubtless also from the Orient.
Cucurbita Pepo, L.
The Pumpkin and Yegetable Marrow. Countries on the
Caspian Sea. Its naturalization in the desert would be a
boon. The seeds on pressure yield a fixed oil; they are also
anthelmintic. O. melanosperma, A. Braun, is not edible.
Cuminum Cyminum, L.
North Africa. The fruits of this annual herb are known as
Cumin and used for certain condiments, as also in medicine.
Cuminum Ilispanicum , Merat, is similar. Essential oil
peculiar.
Cycas revoluta, Thunberg.
The Japan Eern-palm. The trunk attains in age a height of
about 6 feet, and is rich in sago-like starch. The slow
growth of this plant renders it to us valuable for no other
purpose than scenic decorative culture. Cycas angulata,
R. Br., may also prove hardy, and would prove a noble
horticultural acquisition, as it is the most gigantic of all
Cycadese, attaining a height of 70 feet in tropical East Aus-
tralia. Possibly like the Zamia stems also the trunks of
Cycas admit of translocation even at an advanced age.
Cynara Cardunculus, L.
The Cardoon. Mediterranean regions. A perennial herb.
The bleached leaf-stalks serve as esculents.
Cynara Scolymus, L.
The Artichoke. South Europe and North Africa. The
receptacles and the base ol the flower scales well known as


a vegetable. The plant is perennial and here merely men-
tioned as entitled to extended culture in grouping this with
other stately plants. Several other species are worthy of
cultivation.
Cynosurus cristatus, E.
The Crested Dogstail-Grass. Europe, North Africa, West
Asia. A perennial grass, particularly valuable as with-
standing drought, the roots penetrating to considerable
depth. The stems can also be used for bonnet plaiting.
Though inferior in value for hay this grass is well adapted
for permanent pasture, as it forms a dense turf without
suffocating other grasses or fodder-herbs.
Cyperus corymbosus, Eottboell.
India. This stately perennial species may be chosen to
fringe our lakes and ponds. It is extensively used for mats
in India.
Cyperus Papyrus, L.
The Nile Papyrus. Though no longer strictly an utilitarian
plant, as in ancient times, it could scarcely be passed on this
occasion, as it ought to become valuable in horticultural
trade. Its grand aspect recommends it as very decorative
for aquatic plantations.
Cyperus Syriacus, Parlatore.
The Syrian or Sicilian Papyrus. This is the Papyrus-plant
usual in garden cultivation. The plants in our Botanic
Garden attain a height of 8 feet, but suffer somewhat from
frost. Other tall Cyperi deserve introduction, for instance
C. giganteus, Eottboell, from West India and Guiana, these
kinds of plants being hardier than others from the tropics.
I have not ventured to recommend the introduction of
Cyperus esculentus, L., a Mediterranean species, remarkable
for its sweet tubers, known as Earth Almonds. It is stolo-
niferous like the allied Cyperus rotundus, L., which has
invaded the culture ground of many countries as an obnoxious
irrepressible weed. The tubers of Cyperus esculentus con-
tain about 1G per cent. oil.


Cyperus vaginatus, B. Brown.
Widely dispersed over the Australian continent, but not yet
noticed in Tasmania and New Zealand. It is restricted to
swampy localities, and thus is not likely to stray into
ordinary fields. It is our best indigenous fibre-plant, and
it is likewise valuable as being with ease converted into
pulp for good writing paper, as shown by me some years
ago. Its perennial growth allows of regular annual cutting.
Within Victorian territory this Graliugale-rush is particu-
larly common on the Murray-flats.
CytisUS SCOparillS, Link. {Spartium scoparium, L.)
The Broom-bush. Europe, North Asia. Of less significance
as a broom plant than as one of medicinal value. It can
also be used for tanning purposes. An alkaloid (Spartein)
and a yellow dye (Scoparin) are obtainable from this Broom-
bush.
Dactylis caespitosa, Eorster. {Poa Forsteri, Steudel.)
Euegia, Ealklands Island, South Patagonia. The Tussock-
grass. Thrives in cold countries near the sea in pure
sand, at the edge of peat-bogs. It would likely prosper in
our alpine moors. It is perennial, and reaches to a height
of 7 feet. It is very nutritious, and much sought by herds.
The base of the stem is nutty and edible.
Dactylis glomerata, L.*
Europe, North Africa, North and Middle Asia. The
Cocksfoot-grass. Perennial. One of the best of tall pas-
ture grasses, adapted as well for dry as moist soil, thus even
available for wet clays. It will live also under the shade of
trees in forests. Its yield of fodder is rich and continuous,
but its stems are hard. It is already largely cultivated, and
has become naturalized.
Daucus Carota L.
Europe, North Africa, extra-tropic Asia east to Japan. The
Carrot. Admits of naturalization along our shores. Beyond
the ordinary culinary utilization it serves for the distillation
of a peculiar oil. The chemical substances Carotin and
Hydrocarotin are derived from it.


Digitalis purpurea, L.
Greater part of Europe. The Fox-glove. A biennial and
exceedingly beautiful herb of great medicinal value, easily
raised. Chemical principles: Digitalin, Digitaletin and
three peculiar acids.
Dioscorea aculeata, L.*
The Kaawi-Yam. India, Cochin-China, South Sea
Islands. Stem prickly, as the name implies, not angular.
Leaves alternate, undivided. It ripens later than the
following species, and requires no reeds for staking. It is
propagated from small tubers. This Yam is of a sweetish
taste, and the late Dr. Seemann regarded it as one of the
finest esculent roots of the globe. A variety of a blueisb
hue, cultivated in Central America (for instance at Caracas),
is of very delicious taste. In the warmest parts of our
colony this and the following species are likely to come to
perfection.
Dioscorea alata, L.*
The Uvi-Yam. India and South Sea Islands. The stems
are four-angled and not prickly. The tubers, of which
there are many varieties, will attain under favorable circum-
stances a length of 8 feet, and the prodigious weight of one
hundred pounds ! This species, and the preceding one, are
the two principal kinds cultivated in tropical countries,
D. alata is in culture supported by reeds. It is propagated
from pieces of the old root, and comes in warm climes to
perfection in about seven months. The tubers may be baked
or boiled. It is this species, which has been successfully cul-
tivated in New Zealand, and also in the Southern States of
North America.
Dioscorea globosa, Eoxburgh.
India. Eoxburgh states this to be the most esteemed Yam
in Bengal.
Dioscorea hastifolia, Nees.
Extra-tropic Western Australia, at least as far south as 32°.
It is evidently one of the hardiest of the Yams, and on that


account deserves particularly to be drawn into culture.
The tubers are largely consumed by the aborigines for
food; it is the only plant on which they bestow any kind of
cultivation, crude as it is.
Dioscorea Japonica, Thunberg.* (_D. Batatas, Decaisne.)
The hardy Chinese and Japan Tam. This species, which is
not prickly, has been cultivated some years in our Botanic
Q-arden. The material here for comparison is not complete,
but seems to indicate, that _D. transversa, R. Br. and 2).
punctata, R. Br., are both referable to D. Japonica. If
this assumption should prove correct, then we have this Tam
along the coast tracts of North and East Australia as far
south as latitude 33°. In Australia we find the wild root of
good taste.
Dioscorea nummularia, Lamarck.
The Tivoli Tam, Continental and Insular India, also South
Sea Islands. A high climbing prickly species, with opposite
leaves. Roots cylindrical as thick as an arm ; their taste
exceedingly good.
Dioscorea oppositifolia, L.
India and China. Not prickly. One of the edible Tams.
Dioscorea pentaphylla, L.
Continental and Insular India, also South Sea Islands. Like-
wise a good Tam. A prickly species, with alternate divided
leaves.
Dioscorea purpurea, Roxb.
India. In Bengal considered next best to D. alata.
Dioscorea sativa, L.
South Asia, east as far as Japan, also in the South Sea
Islands, and North and tropical East Australia, likewise
recorded from tropical Africa. Stem cylindrical, not prickly.
The acrid root requires soaking before boiling. It has proved
hardy in the Southern States of North America.
Dioscorea spicata, Roth.
India. Root used like those of other species.


Dioscorea tomentosa, Koenig.
Ooyala Yam. India. The nomenclature of some of the
Asiatic species requires further revision.
Dioscorea triMa, L. fii.
Central America. One of the Yams there cultivated.
Various other tuberous Dioscorese occur in tropical
countries ; but their respective degree of hardiness, taste
and yield are not recorded or ascertained. The length of
the Victorian warm season is probably sufficient for ripen-
ing all these Yams.
Diospyros Kaki, L. fil.
The Date-plum of China and Japan. A slow growing not
very productive tree, here recorded for completeness. The
fruit is yellow or pink or dark purple, variable in size,
but never larger than an ordinary apple. It has ripened at
Sydney. D. Virginiana , L., has been recorded among the
timber-trees.
Dipsacus fullonum, L.
Fuller’s Teazel. Middle and South Europe and Middle
Asia. A tall biennial herb. The thorny fruit-heads in use
for fulling in cloth factories. The import during one of the
last years into England was valued at £5OOO. The plant is
most easily raised. The use of these Teazels has not yet
been superseded by any adequate machinery.
Dolichos Lablab, L.
Warmer parts of Africa; probably thence spread widely
through the tropics. An annual herb, sometimes lasting
through several years. The young pods as well as the ripe
seeds available for culinary use, but not of all varieties. It
delights in rich soil, and ripens in hot countries within
three months ; its yield is about fortyfold according to
Roxburgh. The whole plant forms excellent stable-feed for
cattle.
Dracocephalum Moldavica, L.
North and Middle Asia. An annual showy scent-
herb.


Ecballion Elaterium, Richard.
Mediterranean regions and Orient. The Squirting Cucumber.
An annual. The powerful purgative Elaterium is prepared
from the pulp of the fruit. Chemical principles: Elaterid,
Elaterin, Hydroelaterin.
Ehrharta Diplax, E. v. Mueller.
(Microlaena avenacea, J. Hooker.)
New Zealand. This tall perennial grass is fond of wood"
lands and deserves introduction. It is likely to prove a rich
pasture-grass. A few other Australian species, particularly
of the section Tetrarrhena, are readily accessible to us, and
so indeed also the South African Ehrhartas, all adapted
for our clime, the majority perennial and several of
superior value. Ehrharta caudata, Munro, is indigenous in
Japan.
Ehrharta stipoides, Labillardiere.
Extra-tropic Australia, also New Zealand. A perennial
grass, which keeps beautifully green all through the year.
Eor this reason its growth for pasturage should be
encouraged, particularly as it will live on poor soil. Mr.
W. H. Bacchus, of Bacchus-Marsh, considers it nearly as
valuable as Kangaroo-Grrass, and in the cool season more
so. He finds it to bear over-stocking better than any other
native grass, and to maintain a close turf. It is however
not always copiously seeding.
Eleusine Coracana, Haertner.
Southern Asia, east to Japan. Though annual, this grass is
worthy of cultivation on account of its height and nutri-
tiveness. The large grains can be used like Millet.
Eleusine stricta, Roxburgh.
India. The increase of grain of this annual grass in rich
soil is at times five hundredfold. E. Tocusso, Eresenius, is
a valuable kind from Abyssinia, seemingly allied to E.
stricta. The Arabian and Himalaian E. flagellifera, Nees,
is perennial. Other species of Eleusine are deserving of
trial.


Elymus arenarius, L.*
The Sea Lyme-Grass. Europe and North Asia, on sand-
coasts. One of the most important and vigorous of grasses
for binding drift-sand on the sea shores. The North
American JE. mollis, Trinius, is allied to this species,
Elymus condensatus, Presl.
The Bunch-Grass of British Columbia and California.
This is favorably known as adapted for sandland.
Ervum Lens, L. (Lens esculenta , Moench.)
Mediterranean regions, Orient. The Lentil. Annual,
affording in its seeds a palatable and nutritious food.
Euclea myrtina, Burchell.
South Africa. Berry small, black, but edible. To us this
plant would hardly be more than an ornamental bush.
Euclea undulata, Thunberg.
South Africa. Berry small, red, edible. Other shrubby
species from the same portion of the globe yield also
esculent fruits, which under superior culture may vastly
improve.
Erythroxylon Coca, Lamarck.*
Peru. This shrub is famed for the extaraordinarily stimu-
lating property of its leaves, which pass under the names of
Spadic and Coca. They contain two alkaloids, Cocain and
Hygrin, also a peculiar tannic acid. Whether any of the
many other species of Erythroxylon possess similar pro-
perties seems never yet to have been ascertained.
Eupatorium triplinerve, Yahl. (A/. Ayapana , Yentenat.)
Central America. A perennial somewhat shrubby herb,
possibly hardy in the warmer parts of our Colony. It is
used as a medicinal plant, also as an alexipharmic. It con-
tains Eupatorin and much essential oil, peculiar to the
plant.
Fagopyrum cymosum, Meissner.
The perennial Buck-Wheat or rather Beech-Wheat of the
Indian and Chinese Highlands.


Fagopyrum emarginatum, Babington.
Chinese and Himalaian Mountains, where it is cultivated
for its seeds. Annual.
Fagopyrum esculentum, Moench.
Central Asia. The ordinary Buck-Wheat. This annual
herb succeeds on the poorest soil. The crushed amylaceous
seeds can be converted by boiling or baking into a palatable
and wholesome food. As an agrarian plant it can with
advantage be raised as a first crop on sandy heath-land,
newly broken up, for green manure. The period, required
for the cyclus of its vegetation, is extremely short. Thus it
can be reared on our higher Alps.
Fagopyrum Tataricum, Moench.
Middle and North Asia. Yields for the higher mountain
regions a still safer crop than the foregoing, otherwise the
remarks offered in reference to F, esculentum apply also to
T. Tataricum.
Fagopyrum triangulare, Meissner.
In the Himalaian Mountains, ascending naturally to regions
11,500 feet high. An annual. F. rotundatum, Babington,
seems a variety of this species. It is cultivated for food
like the rest.
Festuca elatior, L.*
The Meadow Fescue. Europe, North Africa, North and
Middle Asia. A perennial grass, attaining a height of
several feet. There are several varieties of this species.
The tallest follows rivers readily as far down as the tides
reach. The ordinary form is well adapted for permanent
pastures, has tender leaves, produces excellent hay and is
early out in the season. It can be mixed advantageously
with F. ovina. It is superior to ryegrass in produce
and improves with age. F. arundinacea, Schreb., F.
pratensis, Huds. and F. loliacea, Huds. are varieties of this
species.
Festuca Hookeriana, F. v. Mueller.
Alps of Australia and Tasmania. A tall perennial grass,
evidently nutritious, required to be tried for pastoral cul-


ture, and perhaps destined to become a meadow grass of
colder countries.
Festuca ovina, L.
Sheep-Fescue. Europe, North and Middle Asia, North
America, found also in South America and the Alps of
Australia and New Zealand. This species like F. elatior is
obtainable with facility. F. duriuscula, L. and F. rubra, L.
are varieties. A perennial grass, thriving on widely different
soil, even moory and sandy ground. It yields a good pro-
duce, maintains its virtue, resists drought, and is also well
adapted for lawns and the swards of parks.
The space does not admit of entering here into further
details of the respective value of many species of Festuca,
which might advantageously be introduced from various
parts of the globe for rural purposes.
Ficus Carica, L*
Orient. The ordinary Figtree. It attains an age of several
hundred years. In our latitudes and clime a prolific tree.
The most useful and at the same time the most hardy of
about a thousand recorded species of Ficus. The extreme
facility with which it can be propagated from cuttings, the
resistance to heat, the comparatively early yield and easy
culture recommend the Figtree to be chosen, where it is an
object to raise masses of tree-vegetation in widely treeless
landscapes of the warmer zones. Hence the extensive
plantations of this tree made in formerly woodless parts of
Egypt; hence the likelihood of choosing the Fig as one of
the trees for extensive planting through favorable portions
of our desert-wastes, where moreover the fruit could be
dried with particular ease. Caprification is unnecessary,
even in some instances injurious and objectionable. Two
main-varieties may be distinguished, that which produces
two crops a year and that which yields but one. The former
includes the grey or purple Fig, which is the best, the white
Fig and the golden Fig, the latter being the finest in appear-
ance but not in quality. The main-variety, which bears
only one crop a year, supplies the greatest quantity of Figs
for drying, among which the Marseillaise and Bellonne are


considered the best. The Barnisote and the Auhique pro-
duce delicious large fruits, but they must be dried with
fire-heat, and are usually consumed fresh. The ordinary
drying is effected in the sun. For remarks on this and
other points, concerning the Fig, the valuable tract, recently
published by the Eev, Dr. Bleasdale, should be consulted.
The first crop of figs grows on wood of the preceding year,
the last crop however on wood of the current year. Varieties
of particular excellence are known from Genua, Savoy,
Malaga, Andalusia.
Flemingia tuberosa, Dalzell.
Western India. The tubers of this herb are said to be
edible. Another species, F. vestita, it on record as culti-
vated in North-western India for its small esculent tubers.
Foeniculum officinale, Allioni.
The Fennel. Mediterranean regions, particularly on lime-
stone soil. A perennial or biennial herb, of which two
primary varieties occur —the so-called sweet variety having
fruits almost twice as large as the other. The herb and
fruits are in use as condiments and the latter also for
medicine. The fruits are rich in essential oil, containing
much Anethol.
Fourcroya Cubensis, Haworth.
West India and continental tropical America. A smaller
species than the following, but equally utilized for fibre and
impenetrable hedges. F.flavo-viridis, Hooker, from Mexico,
is still smaller.
Fourcroya gigantea, Ventenat.
Central America. With species of Yucca, Agave, Dracaena,
Cordyline, Phormium, Doryanthes and this and a few other
Furcroyas, we have gigantic liliaceous plants available
industrially for fibre. Frost injures the leaves of this
species. Scape up to 30 feet high.
Fourcroya longaeva, Karw. and Zucc.
High mountains of Guatemala and Mexico, at an elevation
of about 10,000 feet. One of the most gigantic and mag-
nificent of all liliaceous or amaryllideous plants, in volumen


only surpassed by Dracaena Draco, the Dragon-tree of the
Canary Islands. This is the only known high-stemmed
species, the trunk attaining a height of 50 feet and the huge
panicle of flowers 40 feet more. It dies, like many allied
plants, after flowering. The species is recorded here as a
fibre plant, but with us would mainly or solely be kept for
its ornamental grandeur.
Fragaria Chiloensis, Alton.
In various of the colder parts both of North and South
America. Chili-Strawberry.
Fragaria collina, Ehrhart.
In various parts of Europe. Hill-Strawberry.
Fragaria grandiflora, Ehrhart. (A. Ananas , Miller.)
Various colder parts of America. Closely allied to E.
Chiloensis. Ananas Strawberry.
Fragaria Illinoensis, Prince.
North America. Hovey’s Seedling and the Boston kind
from this plant.
Fragaria pratensis, Duchesne. (Fragaria elatior, Ehrhart.)
In mountain-forests of Europe. Cinnamon-Strawberry.
Hautbois.
Fragaria vesca, D.
Naturally very widely dispersed over the temperate and
colder parts of the Northern Hemisphere. Wild Wood
Strawberry. From this typical form probably some of the
other Strawberries arose. Middle forms and numerous
varieties now in culture were produced by hybridisation.
These plants, though abounding already in our gardens, are
mentioned here, because even the tenderest varieties could
be naturalized in our ranges. Any settler living near some
brook or rivulet might readily set out some plants, which
with others, similarly adapted, would gradually spread with
the current.
Fragaria Virginiana, Miller.
North America. Scarlet Strawberry.


Gaultieria Shallon, Pursh.
North-western America. This handsome spreading bush
would yield its pleasant edible berries in abundance, if
planted on our snowy mountains, where it would likely
become naturalized.
Gaylussacia frondosa, Torrey and Gray.
The Blue Tangleberry of North America. A bush with
deciduous foliage. Berry sweet.
Gaylussacia resinosa, Torrey and Gray.
The Black Huckleberry of North America. A dwarf shrub
with deciduous leaves. It likes swampy woodlands, and
thus would find ample space in our forest-ranges. Berry of
pleasant taste. Perhaps some of the South American species
produce also edible fruits.
Geitonoplesium cymosum, All. Cunningham.
Through the whole East Australian forests. It is mentioned
here to draw attention to the fact, that special culture may
convert this into an Asparagus plant, as Mr. P. O’Shanesy
has found, that the young shoots offer a fair substitute for
Asparagus
Genista monosperma, Lamarck.
Mediterranean regions. One of the best of broom-bushes
for arresting sand-drift. G. sphaerocarpa, Lam., is of like
use, and comes also from the Mediterranean Sea.
Gentiana lutea, L.
Sub-Alpine tracts of Middle and South Europe. A peren-
nial most beautiful herb, yielding the medicinal Gentian-
root. It could be easily raised in our higher mountains.
Chemical principles : Gentian-bitter and Gentianin.
Gladiolus edulis, Burchell.
Interior of South Africa. The bulb-like roots are edible,
and taste like chesnuts, when roasted.
Glycine hispida, Bentham. {Soja hispida, Moench.)
An annual herb of India, China and Japan. The beans are
one of the main ingredients of the condiment known as
Soja. Glycine Soja, Siebold and Zuccarini, is said to be a
distinct plant, but probably serving the same purpose.


Glycyrrhiza echinata, L.
South Europe and Orient. Erom the root of this herb at
least a portion of the Italian Liquorice is prepared. The
root is thicker than that of the following. The Russian
Liquorice root is derived from this species. It is less
sweet.
Glycyrrhiza glabra, L.
South Europe. The extract of the root of this herb consti-
tutes the ordinary Liquorice. The plant grows here most
vigorously. The liquorice is of some utility in medicine,
but also used in Porter Breweries. Chemical principle :
Glycyrrhizin.
Gossypium arboreum, L.*
The Tree-Cotton. India, Arabia, A tall perennial species,
but not forming a real tree, yielding cotton in the first
season already. Leaves long-lobed. Bracts with few teeth.
Petals yellow or in age pink or purple. Seeds brown, dis-
connected, after the removal of the cotton-fibre greenish-
velvety. The cotton of long staple, but a variety occurs
with short staple. The New Orleans Cotton (6r. sanguineum ,
Hassk.,) belong to this species. Dr. Seemann connects also
the ordinary G. herhaceum, L., as a variety with G. arhoreum.
The cotton-fibre is crisp, white, opaque, and not easily
separable.
Gossypium Barbadense, L. #
West India. Sea Island Cotton. Leaves long-lobed.
Petals yellow. Seeds disconnected, black, after the removal
of the cotton-fibre naked. The cotton of this species is very
long, easily separable and of a silky lustre. This species
requires low-lying coast tracts for attaining to perfection.
Perennial, and yielding like the rest a crop in the first
season. Cultivated largely in the Southern States of North
America, also in South Europe, North Africa, Queensland
and various other countries.
Gossypium herbaceum, L. #
Scinde, Cabul and other parts of tropical and sub-tropical
Asia, much cultivated in the Mediterranean countries.


Perennial. Leaves short-lobed. Petals yellow. Seeds dis-
connected, after removal of the cotton-fibre grey-velvety.
Distinguished and illustrated by Parlatore as a species,
regarded by Seemann as a variety of G. arhoreum. Staple
longer than in the latter kind, white, opaque, not easily
seceding. Even this species, though supposed to be herba-
ceous, will attain a height of 12 feet. A variety with
tawny fibre furnishes the Nankin Cotton.
Gossypium hirsutum, LA
Upland or Short-staple Cotton. Tropical America, culti-
vated most extensively in the United States, Southern
European and many other countries. Perennial. Seeds
brownish-green, disconnected, after the removal of the
cotton-fibre greenish-velvety. Staple long, white, almost of
a silky lustre, not easily separable. A portion of the
Queensland Cotton is obtained from this species. It neither
requires the coast tracts nor the highly attentive culture of
G. Barbadense.
Gossypium religiosum, LA (G. Peruvianum, Cavan.)
Tropical South America. Kidney Cotton, Peruvian or
Brazilian Cotton. Leaves long-lobed. Petals yellow.
Seeds black, connected. The cotton is of a very long
staple, white, somewhat silky and easily seceding from the
seeds. A tawny variety occurs. This is the tallest of all
cotton-bushes, and it is probably this species, which occurs
in the valleys of the Andes as a small tree, bearing its cotton
while frosts whiten the ground around.
Gossypium Taitense, Parlatore.
( G. religiosum, Banks and Solander.)
In several islands of the Pacific Ocean. A shrub. Petals
white. Seeds disconnected, glabrous after the removal of
the fulvous cotton-fibre, which secedes not with readiness.
Gossypium tomentosum, NuttallA
(G. Sandvicense, Parlat. G. religiosum, A. Gray.)
Hawaia. Perennial. Petals yellow. Seeds disconnected,
after the removal of the tawny cotton-fibre fulvous-velvety,
not easily parting with their cotton.


For limitation of species and varieties Parlatore’s specie
dei cotoni (Florence, 1866,) and Todaro’s asservazioni su
cotone may be consulted; information on culture may be
sought in Porter’s “ Tropical Agriculturist ” and in Mallet’s
work on “ Cotton” (London, 1862).
There are many parts of our Colony, in which all these
species of Gossypium could be cultivated, and where a fair
or even prolific cotton crop may be obtained. Good cotton
for instance has been produced on the Goulbourn Fiver,
the Loddon, the Avoca and the Murray Fivers, particularly
in places where water could be applied. All cultivated
kinds of Cotton-plants are either naturally perennials or
become such in favorable climes, although they may be
treated strictly as annuals. Some of them will indeed in
particular instances grow to the height of 20 feet. The
geographic parallels, between which cotton-culture is usually
placed, are stretching in various girdles between the 36°
N.L. and 36° S.L. The primary advantages of this important
culture are : A return in a few months, comparatively easy
field operations, simple and not laborious process of collect-
ing the crop, and requirement of but little care in the
use of the gin-machine in finally preparing the raw material
for the market, the woolly covering of the seeds constituting
the cotton of commerce. The oil obtained by pressure from
the seeds is useful for various technic purposes, and the
oil-cake can be used like most substances of similar kind
for very fattening stable-feed. Sea Island Cotton was
raised in splendid perfection in the northern parts of Vic-
toria fully 15 years ago from seeds, extensively distributed
by the writer; but the want of cheap labor has hitherto
militated against the extensive cultivation of the Cotton,
and so also against the culture of Tea and many other indus-
trial plants. Cotton having been raised far away from the
influence of the sea-air, it would be worthy of attempts, to
naturalize various kinds of Cotton in the oases of our
deserts, irrespective of regular culture. Our native Gossy-
pium of the interior produces no fibre, worth collecting.
Cotton-plants have a predilection for gently undulating or
sloping ground, with light soil and a moderate supply of


moisture. In the most favorable climes, sucb as that of
Eeegee, Cotton produces flowers and fruits throughout the
year, but the principal ripening falls in the dry season.
From 200 to 300 plants or more can be placed on an acre.
As many as 700 pods have been gathered from a single
plant at one time, 12 to 20 capsules yielding an ounce of
mercantile cotton. Weeding is rendered less onerous by
the vigorous growth of the plants. Cotton comes well in
for rotation of crops. Major Clarke has ascertained that
crossing cannot be effected between the Oriental and Occi-
dental kinds of cotton. A high summer temperature is
needed for a prolific cotton harvest. Intense heat, under
which even maize will suffer, does not injuriously affect
cotton, provided the atmosphere is not dry in the extreme.
The soil should not be wet, but of a kind that naturally
absorbs and retains humidity, without over saturation. In
arid regions it is necessary to irrigate the cotton-plant.
Heavy rains at the ripening period are injurious if not
destructive to the Cotton crop. Dry years produce the
best returns, yet aqueous vapour in the air is necessary for
the best yield. In colder localities the balls or capsules
continue to ripen after the frosts prevent the formation of
new ones. Porous soils resting on limestones and meta-
morphic rocks are eminently adapted for cotton culture.
The canebrake soil of the North American cotton regions
absorbs ammonia to a prodigous extent.
Guadua angustifolia, Kunth.
(Bambusa Guadua , Humboldt and Bonpland.)
New Granada, Ecuador and probably others of the Central
American States. This Bamboo attains a height of 40 feet,
and might prove hardy in sheltered places of our lowlands.
Guadua latifolia, Kunth.
(Bambusa latifolia, Humb. and Bonpl.)
One of the tall Bamboos of Central America, from whence
several other lofty Bamboos may be obtained, among them
the almost climbing Chusqueas. This Gadua is stouter
than any Indian Bamboo. In tropical America native
Bamboos are planted for hedges.


Guizotia oleifera, Candolle.
India and probably also Abyssinia. The Hamtil oil is
pressed from the seeds of this annual herb, which
yields its crop in three months. The oil is much used
like Sesamum oil, as well for culinary as technic pur-
poses.
Hedeoma pulegioides, Persoou.
The Pennyroyal of North America. An annual herb of
aromatic taste, employed in medicine.
Hedysarum coronarium, L. #
The Soola Clover. South Europe. One of the best of
perennial fodder-herbs. It carries with it also the recom-
mendation of being extremely handsome.
Helianthus annuus, L.*
The Sunflower. Peru. This tall showy and large-flowered
annual is not without industrial importance. As much as
50 bushels of seeds or rather seed-like nutlets have been
obtained from an acre under very favorable circumstances,
and as much as 50 gallons of oil can be pressed from such a
crop. The latter can be used not only for machinery, but
even as one of the best for the table. Otherwise the seeds
afford an excellent fodder for fowl. The stalks furnish a
good textile fibre and the blossoms yield a brilliant lasting
yellow dye. About G lbs. of seeds are required for an acre.
The plant likes calcareous soil. Several allied North
American species deserve perhaps rural culture. The
return from a Sunflower field is attained within a few
months.
Helianthus tuberosus, L.
Brazil. Sunflower Artichoke. Inappropriately passing
under the name Jerusalem Artichoke. The tubers are
saccharine and serve culinary purposes. The stem is rich
in textile fibre. The percentage of crystalline sugar is
largest during the cold season, namely 5-6/100. During
the summer the starch-like Inulin prevails. This plant
can only be brought to full perfection in a soil rich in
potash.


Heliotropium Peruvianum, L.
Andes of South America. A perennial somewhat shrubby
plant. Among various species of Heliotrop this one can
best be utilized for the distillation of the scented oil.
Helleborus niger, L.
Forest mountains of Middle and South Europe. The
Christmas Rose of British gardens. A perennial handsome
herb. The roots are used in medicine.
Hibiscus cannabinus, L. (11. radiatus, Cavanill.)
Tropical Asia, Africa and Australia. An annual showy
herb. The stem yields a hemp-like fibre ; the leaves serve
as sorrel-spinage. Several other Hibisci can be utilized in
the same manner.
Hibiscus esculentus, L.
West India and Central America. A tall herb. The muci-
laginous seed-capsules are known as Ochro, Bandakai or
Grobbo, and used as culinary vegetables. Our summers
bring them to maturity. The leaves of this and allied
species can be used as pot-herbs.
Hierochloa reddens, B. Br.
South-eastern Australia, almost confined to the Alps; in
Tasmania and New Zealand also found in the lowlands,
occurring likewise in the Antarctic islands and the southern
extremity of America. A tall perennial nutritious grass,
with the odor of Anthoxanthum. It is worthy of dissemi-
nation on moist pasture land. 11. borealis of the colder
regions of the Northern Hemisphere accompanies here in
the south H. redolens, but is a smaller grass.
Hordeum deficiens, Steudel.
The Red Sea Barley. One of the two-rowed Barleys, culti-
vated in Arabia and Abyssinia. Allied to this is H.
macrolepis, A. Br., a native of Abyssinia.
Hordeum distichon, L.
Central Asia. The ordinary two-rowed Barley. To this
species belong: the ordinary English Barley, the Chevalier,
the Annat, the Dunlop, the long-eared, the black, the


Italian and the Gulden Barley along with other kinds. A
variety with grains free from the sepals constitutes the
Siberian and the Haliday Barley, which however is less
adapted for malt. Dry Barley-flour, heated at the tempera-
ture of boiling water during several hours, constitutes
Hufeland’s meal for invalids. Barley-culture might be
carried on in many parts of our Alps.
Hordeum hexastichan, B.
Orient. The regularly six-rowed Barley. This includes
among other varieties the Scotch, the Square and the Bear
Barley. Seeds less uniform in size than those of H. dis-
tichon. The so-called skinless variety is that, in which the
grain separates from the calyx.
Hordeum secalinum, Schreber.
( [H . pratense, Hudson.)
Europe, North and Middle Asia, North America. Peren-
nial. Earned as the best fattening grass of many of the
somewhat brackish marsh pastures on the North Sea. It
never fruits when kept down by cattle, and surpresses finally
nearly all other grasses and weeds.
Hordeum vulgare, B.
Orient. The four-rowed Barley, though rather six-rowed
with two prominent rows. Several varieties occur, among
them: the Spring, Winter and Black Barley, the Russian,
the French, the Naked and the Wheat Barley. Chemical
principles of malt: Asparagin; a protein substance : Dias-
tase ; an acid and Cholesterin-fat.
Hordeum zeocriton, B.
Central Asia. Also a two-rowed Barley. To this species
belong the Sprat, the Battledore, the Fulham and the Putney
Barley.
Hovenia dulcis, Thunberg.
Himalaia, China, Japan. The pulpy fruit-stalks of this tree
are edible. 11. inaequalis, D. C., and H. acerba, LindL,
are mere varieties of this species.


Humulus Lupulus, L.*
The Hop-plant. Temperate zone of Europe, Asia and North
America. This twining perennial unisexual plant has proved
to yield enormously on river banks in rich soil or on fertile
slopes, where irrigation could be effected, particularly so
within our territory along the river valleys of Gipps Land
and in other similar localities. A pervious especially alluvial
soil, fertile through manure or otherwise, appliances for
irrigation natural or artificial, and also shelter against storms
are some of the conditions for success in hop-growth, and
under such conditions the rearing of hops will prove thus
far profitable in countries and localities of very different
mean temperature. A dry summer-season is favorable to
the ripening and gathering of hops. On the Mitchell Eiver,
in Gipps Land, 1500 lbs. have been obtained from an acre.
In Tasmania large crops have been realized for very many
years. The plant might be readily naturalized on river
banks and in forest valleys. The scaly fruit cones form the
commercial hops, whose value largely depends on the minute
glandular granules of Lupuline. Hops impart their flavor
to beer, and principally by their tannic acid prevent acetous
fermentation and precipitate albuminous substances from
the malt. Hop-pillows are recommended to overcome w r ant
of sleep. Many of the substitutes of hops are objectionable
or deleterious. The refuse hops of breweries possess double
the value of stable manure. Active principles of hop
leaves and fruits: A peculiar volatile and a bitter acid
substance. The fibre of the stem can be made into cords
and paper.
Hydrastis Canadensis, L.
North America. The Yellow Poccoon. A perennial herb,
utilized in medicine. The root contains two alkaloids:
Berberin and Hydrastin.
Hyascyamus niger, L.
The Henbane. Europe, North Africa, extra-tropic Asia.
An important medicinal herb of one or two years’ duration.
It contains a peculiar alkaloid: Hyoscyamiu.


Hyphaene Argun, Martins.
Nubia. Probably hardy in the warmer parts of our
Colony.
Hyphaene coriacea, G-aertner.
Equatorial Eastern Africa. The dichotomous Palm of the
seacoast-regions. It attains a height of 80 feet.
Hyphaene crinita, G-aertner. (. H. Thebaica, Martins.)
Abyssinia, Nubia, Arabia and Egypt as far as 31° N., and
southward to the Zambesi, Nyassa and Sofala. The Ginger-
bread-palm or Doum-palm, It is much branched and
attains a height of about 30 feet. The mealy husk of the
fruit is edible. Grows away from the sea.
Hyphaene ventricosa, Kirk.
Zambesi. Loftier than the other species. Stem turgid
towards the middle. Eruit large.
Hypochceris apargioides, Hook aud Am.
Chili. A perennial herb. The root is used for culinary
purposes like that of the Scorzonera Hispanica.
Hyphochoeris Scorzonerae, F. v. M.
(AcTiyrophorus Scorzonerae , Cand.)
Chili. Of the same use as H. apargioides. Allied
species of probably similar utility exist in Western South
America.
Ilex Paraguensis, St. Hilaire.
Uruguay, Paraguay and Southern Brazil. The Mate.
This Holly-bush is inserted into this list rather as a stimu-
lating medicinal plant, than as a substitute for the ordinary
Tea-plant. Chemical principles ; Coffein, Quina-acid and
a peculiar tannic acid, which latter can be converted into
Yiridin-acid.
Illicium anisatum, K
China and Japan. The Star-Anis. An evergreen shrub or
small tree. The starry fruits used in medicine and as a
condiment. Their flavour rests on a peculiar volatile oil
with Anethol. This species and a few others deserve culture
also as ornamental bushes.


Indigofera Anil, B.
Eecorded as indigenous to West India, and as extending
naturally through Continental America from Carolina to
Brazil. A shrub several feet high. Pods sickle-shaped, short?
compressed. One of the principal Indigo plants under culti-
vation both in the eastern and western hemispheres. Only
in the warmest parts of our Colony can we hope to produce
Indigo with remunerative success. But many of the hardier
species seem never yet tested for pigment. Already 114
are recorded alone from extra-tropical Southern Africa. An
Indigofera of Oeorgia, said to be wild, perhaps I. Anil,
yields an excellent product. The pigment in all instances
is obtained by maceration of the foliage, aeration of the
liquid and inspissation of the sediment.
Indigofera argentea, B. (/. coerulea, Roxb.)
Tropical and extra-tropical Northern Africa, Arabia, India.
A shrub several feet high, closely allied to I. Anil, and like-
wise a good Indigo-plant.
Indigofera tinctoria. B.
Warmest part of Asia, as far east as Japan, recorded also
from tropical Africa and even Natal. A shrubby plant,
attaining a height of 6 feet. Pods straight, cylindrical,
many-seeded. Extensively cultivated in warm zones for
Indigo, and probably hardy in our northern and eastern
lowland regions.
Inula Helenium, B.
The Elecampane. Middle and South Europe, Middle Asia
eastward to Japan. A perennial herb. The bitter and
somewhat aromatic root, for the sake of its stimulating and
tonic properties, is used in medicine. It contains also the
amylaceous Inulin and the crystalline Helenin.
Ipomoea Batatas, Poiret.* (Batatas edulis, Choisy).
The Sweet Potato. Tropical South America. First
brought to Europe from Brazil. It proved well adapted
also for our part of Australia and for New Zealand. The
tubers afford a patatable food, more nutritious than ordinary
potatoes. Varieties with red, white and yellow roots occur.


Each tuber weighs generally from 3 lbs. to 5 lbs., but may
occasionally attain to 56 lbs. The yield is from 200 to 300
bushels from an acre.
Ipomcea paniculata, R- Brown.
Almost a cosmopolitan plant on tropical coasts ; thus indi-
genous to North Australia and the warmer parts of East
Australia, The tubers also of this species are edible. If
hardy, the plant would deserve cultivation.
Ipomcea purga, Wenderoth.
Mountains of Mexico. The true Jalap. This species
yields the medicinal Jalap root. It has recently been cul-
tivated with apparent success even at New York. Thus it
is entitled to a trial in our warm woodlands. Active prin-
ciple : the resinous Convolvulin.
Ipomcea simulaus, Hanbury.
Mexico. Erom this species the Tampico Jalap, or rather
the Sierra G-orda Jalap, is derived. I. operculata, Mart.,
yields the Brazilian Jalap.
Isatis indigotica, Fortune.
North China. Perennial, almost shrubby. The use is
similar to that of the following plant.
Isatis tinctoria, B.
Dyer’s Woad. From the Mediterranean regions through
part of the Orient, apparently extending as far as Japan.
A tall herb of two years’ duration. The blue dye is obtained
from the fermented leaves. Many other species of Isatis,
mostly Asiatic, may produce perhaps dye with equal advan-
tage. Boissier enumerates merely as Oriental 28 kinds.
Jasminum grandiflorum, B.
From India to Japan. Flowers white. Extensively
cultivated in South Europe. The delicate scent is with-
drawn either by fixed oils or alcoholic distillation. The
pecuniary yield obtainable from Jasmin cultivation seems
vastly over-rated, even if inexpensive labour should be
obtainable.


Jasminum odoratissimum, L.
Madeira. Shrubby like the rest. Mowers yellow. Used
like the foregoing and following for scent. This may be
prepared by spreading upon wool or cotton, slightly saturated
with olive oil or other fixed oil, the flowers, and covering
them with other layers so prepared. The flowers are
renewed from time to time until the oil is thoroughly per-
vaded by the scent, when the latter is withdrawn by
Alcohol. Other modes of extracting the oil exist.
J asminum officinale, H.
From the Caucasus to China. Flowers white. This is
the principal species cultivated in South Europe for its
scent.
Jasminum Sambac, Aiton.
From India to Japan. It would probably endure our cool
season in the northern and eastern regions. It has the
richest perfume of all. The bush attains a height of 20
feet, and is almost climbing. The flowers are white, and
must be collected in the evening before expansion. The
relative value of many other species of Jasmin, nearly all
from the warmest parts of Asia, seems in no instance to
have been ascertained, as far as their oils or scents are
concerned. Our Australian species are also deliciously
fragrant, amongst which J. lineare, Br., occurs in our Vic-
torian deserts, while also J. didymvm, Forst.; J. racemosvm ,
F. v. M. ; J. simplicifoUnm, Forst.; J. calcaremi, F. v. M.,
and J. suavissimim, landl., reach extra-tropic latitudes.
Jubsea spectabilis, Humboldt.
The tall and stout Coquito-Palm of Chili. Well adapted
for our extra-tropic latitudes. A kind of treacle is obtained
from the sap of this Palm. The small kernels are edible.
Justicia Adhatoda, H.
India; enduring the climate of the lowlands of Victoria.
This bush possesses anti-spasmodic and febrifugal properties.
It can be utilized also as a hedge-plant.
Eentia Baueri, Seemann.
The Norfolk Island Palm. Height 40 feet.


Kentia Belmoriana, M. and M.
The Curly Palm of Lord Howe’s Island. About 40 feet
high. With its congeners, evidently destined to grace our
gardens, and to become also important for horticultural traffic
abroad.
Kentia Canterburyana, M. and M.
Umbrella Palm of Lord Howe’s Island. Likewise a tall
and hardy palm.
Kentia Mooreana, F. v. M.
Dwarf Palm of Lord Howe’s Island, where it occurs only
on the summits of the mountains.
Kentia sapida, Blume.
The Nika Palm of New Zealand and the Chatham Islands.
It also attains a height of 40 feet and is one of the hardiest
of all palms. The unexpanded flower-spikes can be con-
verted as palm-cabbage into food.
Lactuca virosa, L.
Middle and South Europe, North Africa, Middle Asia. A
biennial. The inspissated juice of this Lettuce forms the
sedative Lactucarium.
Lathyrus pratensis, L.
Europe, North and Middle Asia. The Meadow Pea. A
good perennial pasture-herb.
Lathyrus sativus, L.
Middle and South Europe. The Jarosse. An annual
forage-herb; the pods also available for culinary purposes.
Probably other species of Lathyrus could advantageously
be introduced.
Lavandula angustifolia, Ehrhart. (L. vera, Candolle.)
Countries around and near the Mediterranean Sea. The
Lavender-plant of somewhat shrubby growth, from which
by distillation the best oil of Lavender is prepared. It lives
on dry soil, but is less hardy than the following.
Lavandula latifolia, Villars. (L. spica, Candolle.)
South Europe, North Africa. Also from this species much
Lavender oil is obtained.


Lavandula Stoechas, B.
South Europe, North Africa. This shrub can also be
utilized for oil distillation and other purposes, for which the
two other Lavenders are used. The quality of the oil of
these species seems to differ according to their locality of
growth.
Lawsonia alba, Lamarck.
North and Middle Africa, Persia, Arabia, India and North-
western Australia. The Henne or Henna-Bush. It may
become of use as a dye-plant in parts of our Colony free of
frost. The orange pigment is obtained from the grinded
foliage.
Lavatera arborea, B.
Tree-Mallow of Middle Europe and the countries at the
Mediterranean Sea. A tall biennial plant of rapid growth.
The ribbon-like bast is produced in greater abundance than
in most other malvaceous plants. The Tree-Mallow might
easily be naturalized on our shores. Perhaps it might serve
with allied plants for green manure,
Leersia oryzoides, Swartz.
Middle and South Europe, various parts of Asia, Africa and
America. A perennial nutritious swamp-grass. Other
Leersias from both hemispheres are deserving of introduction,
Lepidium sativum, B.
The Cress. Orient. Annual. Irrespective of its culinary
value Cress is of use as one of the remedies in cases of
scurvy. Active principle: A volatile oil and the bitter
Lepidin.
Lepidosperma gladiatum, Ba Billard.
The Sword-Sedge of the sea coasts of extra-tropic Australia.
One of the most important plants for binding sea-sand, also
yielding a paper material as good as Sparta.
Leptospermum laevigatum, F. v. M.
(Fabricia laevigata , Graertner.)
The “ Sandstay.” Sea-shores and sand-deserts of extra-
tropic Australia, but not extending to Western Australia.


This shrub or small tree is the most effectual of all for
arresting the progress of drift-sand in a clime like ours. It is
most easily raised by simply scattering in autumn the seeds
on the sand and covering them loosely with boughs.
Ligustrum Japonicum, Thunberg.
The Japan Privet. A shrub, evergreen or nearly so,,
promising to become a valuable hedge-plant. It grows like
the ordinary European Privet readily from cuttings.
Linum usitatissimum, L. #
The Elax-plant. Orient. A well-known annual, which
yields the fibre for linen and the linseed oil. Elax-culture
is doubtless destined to become an important industry
among us. Eew plants find a wider congeniality of soil
and climate, and few give a quicker return. Glood and deep
soil well drained is requisite for successful flax-culture.
Change of seed-grain is desirable. Thick sowing extends
the length of the fibre. To obtain the best fibre, the plant
must be pulled when the seeds commence to ripen. If the
seeds are allowed in part to mature, then both fibre and
seed may be turned to account. If the seed is left to ripen
completely, then the fibre is generally discarded. The seed
yields by pressure about 22 per cent, of oil. The residue
can either be prepared as Linseed Meal or be utilized as
admixture to stable-fodder. The demand for both fibre and
oil is enormous. The value of our import of raw fibre in
1871 was already £15,634, while the import of oil was
£22,469. Two principal varieties are under culture: a
tall sort, with smaller flowers, closed capsules and dark
seeds; a dwarf sort, more branched (even if closely sown)
with larger flowers and capsules, the seed-vessels opening
spontaneously and with elasticity, while the seeds are of a
a pale color. None of the perennial species of Linum are
so manageable in culture as the ordinary annual flax,
Lippia citriodora, Kunth.
Peru, Chili, La Plata States, Brazil. An evergreen shrub,
yielding scented oil.


Lithospernmm hirtum, Lehmann.
North American Alkanna. A showy perennial herb ; the
root yields a red dye.
Lithospermum canescens, Lehmann.
North American Alkannet. This, as the vernacular name
indicates, offers also a dye root.
Lithospermum longiflomm, Sprengel.
North America. A red pigment can also be extracted from
the root of this species.
Livistona Australis, Martins.
East Australia. Our own and only Palm-tree in Victoria,
occurring in East Gripps Land (in the latitude of Melbourne),
and there attaining a height of 80 feet. The young leaves
can be plaited as a material for cabbage-tree hats.
Livistona Chinensis, E. Brown.
South China and Japan. A very decorative fan-palm, hardy
in our lowlands.
Lolium perenne, L.*
Europe, North Africa, Western Asia. The perennial Eye-
Grass, mentioned here for completeness’ sake. L. Italicum,
Al. Br., the Italian Eye-Grass, seems to be only a variety.
One of the most important of all pasture-grasses, also almost
universally chosen for lawn-culture. It produces an abund-
ance of seeds, which are readily collected and easily vegetate.
It arrives early to perfection. Nevertheless the produce
and nutritive powers are considerably less than those of
Dactylis glomerata, Alopecurus pratensis and Eestuca
elatior; but it pushes forward earlier than the last mentioned
grass, while the ripening of seeds is less defective than in
Alopecurus. Eye-grass though naturally living but a few
years, maintains its ground well by the ease, with which it
disseminates itself spontaneously. Several sorts, which
scarcely can be called varieties, are under cultivation.
Eye -grass stands the dry heat of our summers well. It is
likely to spread gradually over the whole of the Australian
continent, and may play an important part in our pastoral


affairs and also in ameliorating the clime of the desert
districts.
Lupinus albus, L.
The White Lupine. Countries at the Mediterranean
Sea, also in the Orient. An annual quick-growing
herb, valuable for fodder and for green manure. The
lentil-like seeds, after the bitter principle (Lupinin)
has become removed through boiling, become edible.
It would lead too far, to enumerate here many others
of the numerous species of Lupines, of which unques-
tionably very many are eligible for agrarian purposes,
while all are acceptable as hardy, elegant and easily grown
garden plants. One ( L. perennis , L.) extends in America
to the Northern States of the Union and Canada ; fourteen
are recorded from South Europe, seventeen from Brazil,
and numerous species from other parts of America, where
the limits of the genus are about Moute Video south-
ward and about Nootka Sound northward. The majority of
the species is perennial. The Egyptian L. Termis, Eorsk.,
is closely allied to L. albus, and of equal use.
Lupinus luteus, L.
The Scented Yellow Lupine. Countries in the vicinity of
the Mediterranean Sea. This likewise annual species is
predominently in use through Middle Europe, to improve
sandy soil. It can also be employed like some other
Lupines as a fodder herb. About 90 lbs. of seeds are
required for an acre.
Lupinus varius, L.
The Blue Lupine. Also a Mediterranean annual, used like
the above congeners; but a few others are under cultivation
as Blue Lupines. Some of the American, particularly Cali-
fornian species, are regarded for agrian purposes superior
to the Mediterranean kinds.
Madura aurantiaca, Nuttall.
The Osage Orange, or North American Bow-wood, or
Yellow-wood. Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana. This thorny
deciduous shrub or tree can be well trained into hedges.


It is unisexual, and will in favourable localities on rich
river banks attain a height of 60 feet, with a stem 2 to 3
feet thick, thus becoming available as a timber-tree. Here
it is recorded as a hedge plant; as such our own thorny
Madura Calcar Galli (Morus Calcar Galli, A. Cunningh.)
of extra-tropical East Australia, which moreover possesses
small edible fruits, deserves attention for live fences. Neither
of the two is readily subject to blight or attacks of insects.
The latter produces suckers and from the root a yellow dye.
Maharanga Emodi, A. de Candolle.
Nepaul. The root produces like that of Alkanna tinctoria a
red dye,
Mallotus Philippinensis, J. M,
{Bottlera tinctoria, Eoxburgh.)
South Asia and East Australia, in jungle-country, extending
into New South "Wales. Though not of great importance
this bush should not be passed on this occasion, inasmuch
as the powdery substance, investing the seed-capsules, con-
stitutes the Kamala, which can be employed not only as
an orange dye, but also as an anthelminthic remedy. The
Hindoo silk-dyers use it for an orange colour, obtained by
boiling the Kamala with carbonate of soda.
Manihot Aipi, Pohl.
The Sweet Cassava. Tropical South America, but traced as
far south as the Parana Eiver. The root is reddish and
harmless; it can therefore be used, unlike those of the fol-
lowing species, without any further preparations than boiling,
as a culinary esculent, irrespective of its starch being also
available for tapioca. Both are somewhat woody plants,
several feet high, and they are too important to be left
altogether unnoticed on this occasion, although we have no
evidence, that they will prove productive even in those parts
of Victoria, which are free of frost. The Aipi has ligneous
tough fibres, stretching along the axis of the tubers, while
generally the roots of the following species are free of this
central woody substance.


Manihot utilissima, Pohl.
The Bitter Cassava or Tapioca-plant. Tropical South
America. Closely allied to the former, producing varieties
with roots of poisonous acridity, and with tubers perfectly
harmless. The tubers attain a length of 3 feet; they can
be converted into bread or cakes, the volatile poison of
the milky sap being destroyed through pressing of the
grated root in first instance, and the remaining acridity is ex-
pelled by the heating process. The starch, heated in a moist
state, furnishes the Tapioca. Manihot is abundantly culti-
vated at Caracas, where the singularly uniform temperature
throughout the year is only 60° to 70° F. It is a very
exhausting crop, and stands thus in need of rich soil and
manuring. The propagation is effected by cuttings from
the ligneous part of the stem. The soil, destined for Cassava,
must not be wet. In warm countries the tubers are avail-
able in about 8 months, though they still continue to grow
afterwards. The growth of the plant upwards is checked
by breaking off the buds. The Bitter Cassava is the more
productive of the two. The yellowish tubers attain some-
times a weight of 30 lbs. They do not become soft by boil-
ing like Aipi.
Maoutia Puya, Weddell.
India, on mountains up to 4000 feet. It is taller than
Boehmeria nivea, and furnishes a similar fibre. This shrub
belongs to a tribe of the nettle order, not possessing
burning acridity. None of the true nettles, such as the
Girardinias, nor allied stinging plants have been recom-
mended in this index, although from some an exquisite
fibre is derived, as the writer wishes to guard against the
introduction of any burning species, which possibly might
disseminate itself in a mischievous manner in our ranges,
and then probably could not again be suppressed.
Maranta arimdinacea, B.
The true Arrow-root plant. West India, The plant is intro-
duced into this list not without hesitation, as it seems to require
a warmer clime than ours to attain perfection. It furnishes
most of the genuine West Indian Arrowroot, although other


species, such as M. nohilis, M. Allouya, M. ramosissima, are
also cultivated for a similar starch of their tubers.
Matricaria Chamomilla, L.
The annual Chamomile. Europe, North and Middle Asia. A
highly useful herb in medicine. In many parts of the Euro-
pean continent it is much more extensively used than the
ordinary perennial Chamomile. The infusion of the flowers
has rather a pleasant taste without strong bitterness. The
flowers serve as a tonic and especially as a sudorific, and
possess a peculiar volatile oil. ISlarrubium vulgare, L., is
not prominently mentioned, as it is already rather copiously
naturalized.
Medicago sativa, L.*
Orient; now spread through Middle and South Europe and
Middle Asia. The purple Medick, Alfalfa or Lucerne. A
perennial fodder-herb of great importance, and already
largely utilized in our colony, perhaps descended from the
English Medicago falcata, which also deserves naturalization.
Lucerne keeps here green and fresh in the hottest season
of the year, even in dry and comparatively barren ground,
but developes itself for field-culture with the greatest vigour
on river banks, particularly in soil rich in lime. Its deeply
penetrating roots render the plant particularly fit for fixing
fenced embankments or hindering the washing away of soil
subject to occasional inundations.
Melilotus alba, Desrouss.
The Cabul or Bockhara Clover. Middle and Southern
Europe, North Africa, Middle Asia. A biennial herb. On
account of its fragrance it is of value for admixture to hay.
It is also a good bee-plant. Elowers white. Odorous
principle: Cumarin.
Melilotus officinalis, Desrouss.
Europe and Middle Asia. Also biennial, or lasting through
several years if prevented from flowering. Contains also
Cumarin. An allied species is M. macrorrhiza, Pers. Both
serve purposes similar to those for which M. alba is
employed.


Melissa officinalis, L.
The Balm-herb. South Europe and Middle Asia. A peren-
nial herb, valuable for its scent, which depends on a peculiar
volatile oil. It is also valuable as a bee-plant.
Melocanna bambusoides, Trinius. (Beesha Bheedei , Kunth.)
The berry-bearing Bamboo, from Chittagong and other
mountainous parts of India. It is a thornless Bamboo,
growing on dry slopes of hills. Height up to 70 feet; cir-
cumference towards base 1 foot; growth beautifully erect.
Melocanna humilis, Eoeper.
India. More slender than the preceding species, and
attaining only a height of 20 feet.
Melocanna Travancorica. (Beesha Travancorica, Beddome.)
A new Bamboo from Travancore, worthy of introduction.
Mentha piperita, L.*
The Peppermint. Middle Europe. This well-known peren-
nial herb is important for its peculiar essential oil, which
here by culture is produced in good quality. This distilled
oil is in considerable demand, and would be best obtained
from plants cultivated in the mountain regions or natural-
ized along the forest rivulets. Eminent authorities refer
the Peppermint as a variety to Mentha aquatica, L., the Water-
mint of Europe, North Africa, West and North Asia, from
which the true Crisp Mint {M. crista, L.) is again derived,
as well as the Bergamot-mint (If. citrata, Ehrh.)
Mentha Pulegium, L.
The true Penny-royal. Europe, Western Asia, North
Africa. A perennial scent herb, yielding a peculiar ethereal
oil. It likes moist soil.
Mentha rotundifolia, L.
Middle and South Europe, North Africa, Western Asia.
Eond of wet places, which by the culture of this and other
mints may be profitably utilized. In odor this mint
approaches to Melissa. The French and Italian Crisp Mint
is partly derived from this species. Closely allied to the
following, and often regarded as a variety of M. viridis, L.


Mentha silvestris, L.
The Horse Mint. Europe, North Africa, temperate Asia.
Perennial. One of the Crisp Mints is derived from this
species.
Mentha viridis, L.
The Spear Mint. Middle and South Europe. Perennial.
A particular sort of Crisp Mint (Ji. crispata , Schrad.)
belongs to this species.
Our native Mints, M. Australis, M. gracilis and M. sature-
joides, E. Br., yield also oil of good flavor. M. Australis is
far the largest and most abundant of these plants.
Menyanthes trifoliata, L.
Inappropriately called the Bog-bean. Europe, North and
Middle Asia, North America. In springy and spongy bogs.
A perennial herb of great beauty, which could be naturalized
with facility in our Alps. The root is starchy. The whole
plant is pervaded with a bitter principle, largely derived
from Menyanthin, The plant is used medicinally as a tonic
and febrifuge.
Microseris Forsteri, J. Hooker.
The Native Scorzonera of extra-tropical Australia and New
Zealand. A perennial herb deserving attention, as likely
its roots would enlarge and improve through culture. On
the summits of our snowy mountains the plant developes
itself most luxuriantly. The aborigines use the root for
food. The plant would prove hardy in Middle Europe.
Moms alba, L. #
The White Mulberry-tree. China. This tree in several
varieties provides the food for the ordinary Chinese Silk-
insect (Bombyx Mori). Silk was produced in Italy already
600 years ago, and there this branch of industry has
florished ever since. In China, Silk was reeled since 4500
years. This may demonstrate the permanency of an indus-
try, which we wish to establish here extensively under a
similar sky. “ One pound of silk is worth its weight in
silver, and this pound may be produced (so far as the food
of the Bombyx is concerned) from 30 lbs. of Mulberry leaves


or from a single tree, which thus may he brought to yield
annually the material for 16 yards of Glros de Naples.”
The White Mulberry-tree is of extremely easy growth from
cuttings, also readily raised from well-matured seeds. It is
usually unisexual, and attains finally a very large size. It
can he grown in climes, where no longer Olives will thrive.
Spots for Mulberry-culture must not be over-moist, when
the leaves are to be utilized for the Bombyx. In 1870,
according to the British Trade Journal , the produce of
cocoons amounted in Europe to £16,588,000; in Asia to
£28,112,000; in Africa to £14,000; in the South Sea
Islands to £24,000; in America to £20,000 ; —thus giving
a general total of £44,788,000. Superior varieties of Mul-
berry can be grafted with ease on ordinary stock. M. Indica
L. M. macrophylla Morett., M. multicaulis Perott., M.
Morettiana Jacq., M. Chinensis Bertol., M. latifolia Poir,,
M. Italica Poir,, M. Japonica Nois., M. JByzantina Sieb.,
M. nervosa Deb, M. pumila Nois., M. tortuosa Audib., as
well as the Constantinople Mulberry, are merely forms of
M. alba, to which probably also M. Tatarica, L. and M.
pabularia, Jacquem., belong. The variety known, as M.
Indica produces black fruits. The planting of Mulberry-
trees has recently assumed enormous dimensions in Cali-
fornia, where in 1870 between seven and eight millions were
planted. The process of rearing the silk-insect is simple
and involves no laborious exertions. The cocoons, after
they have been properly steamed, dried and pressed, find
readily purchasers in Europe, the price ranging according
to quality from 3s. to 6s. per lb. The eggs of the Silkworm
sell at a price from 16s. to £2 per ounce, and in 1870 Japan
had to provide two millions of ounces of Silk-ova for Europe,
where the worms had extensively fallen victims to disease.
Instances have been recorded in California, where 8 tons of
leaves were gathered in the first year from the Mulberry-
trees of 1 acre, and 30 tons in the next year. As an example
of the profit thus to be realized, a Californian fact may be
cited, according to which £7OO were the clear gain from
3i acres, the working expenses having been £93. The
Commissioner of Agriculture of the United States has


estimated, that under ordinary circumstances an acre should
support from 700 to 1000 Mulberry-trees, producing
5000 lbs. of leaves fit for food, when four years old. On
this quantity of leaves can be reared 140,000 worms, from
which ova at a nett profit ranging from £BO to £240 per
acre will be obtained by the work of one person. Mr. C.
Brady, of Sydney, thinks the likely proceeds of silk-culture
to be from £6O to £l5O for the acre. The discrepancies
in calculations of this kind are explained by differences in
clime, soil, attention and treatment.
The White Mulberry-tree has been very copiously distributed
from the Melbourne Botanic (Harden since many years. A
very palatable fruit is obtained from a variety cultivated in
Beloochistan and Affghanistan. Morus Tatarica, L.,
resembles M. alba. Its juicy fruit is insipid and small.
The leaves are not generally used for Silkworms.
The results of Mr. Brady’s experience on the varieties of the
Morus alba are as follows :—ln the normal form the fruits
are white with a purplish tinge more or less deep, the bark
is pale, the leaf is also of a pale hue, not very early nor
very tender, nor very abundant. It may be grown on moist
ground as long as such is drained, or it will live even on
poor loose gravelly soil bordering on running water. The
Cevennes variety is a free grower, affords a large quantity of
leaves though of rather thick consistence ; all varieties of
the Morus Bombyx like these leaves at all stages of their
age. It is also called the rose-leaved variety. The silk
which it yields is substantial in quantity and also good in
quality. It does best on rich dry slopes. The bushy
Indian variety has a fine leaf of beautiful green, which
though light in weight is abundantly produced. It can be
cut back to the stem three or four times a year ; the leaves
are flat, long and pointed, possess a fine aroma, and are
relished by every variety of the ordinary Silk-insect, though
not all thrive equally well on it. The silk derived from this
variety is excellent, but not always so heavy in quantity as
that produced from the rosy variety. It prefers rich low-
lying bottoms, is a greedy feeder, but may thus be made to


cover an extraordinary breadth of alluvial or manured land
in a marvellous short space of time. At Sydney, Mr. Brady
can provide leaves from this Indian variety all through the
year by the removal of cuttings, which will strike their root
almost at any season. It ripens also seeds readily, and
should be kept at bush size. It requires naturally less space
than the other kinds. A fourth variety comes from North
China ; it has heart-shaped flat thickish leaves, which form
very good food for the Silkworm. Mr. Brady, as well as
Mr. Martelli, recommend very particularly the variety,
passing under the name Morus multicaulis for the worms in
their earliest stages. The former recommends the Cape
variety also ; the latter wishes also the variety, called Morus
Morettiana, to be used on account of its succulent nutri-
tious foliage, so well adapted for the insect while yet very
young, and also on account of producing the largest amount
of food within the shortest time. The Manilla variety,
known as Morus multicaulis, comes several weeks earlier
into bearing than most other sorts, and should therefore be
at hand for early hatched worms.
Moms nigra, L *
The Black Mulberry-tree. South Bussia and Persia.
Highly valuable for its pleasant refreshing fruits. It is a
tree of longevity, instances being on record of its having
lived through several centuries. It is also very hardy. The
leaves also of this species afford food for the ordinary silk-
moth. The tree occurs usually unisexual. M. atropurpurea,
Eoxb., from Cochin-China, is an allied tree. The cylin-
drical fruit-spike attains a length of two inches.
Morus rubra has been recorded already in the Appendix to
our Acclimatisation Society’s Eeport for 1870-1871, among
the timber-trees.
Musa Cavendishii, Lambert.
(AT. regia , Humph.; M. Chinensis , Sweet.)
The Chinese Banana. A comparatively dwarf species, the
stem attaining only a height of about 5 or G feet. Its
robust and dwarf habit render it particularly fit for exposed


localities, and this is one of the reasons, why it is so exten-
sively cultivated in the South Sea Islands. The yield of
fruit is profuse (as much as 200 to 300 fruits in a spike),
and the flavor excellent. This as well as M. sapientmn and
M. paradisiaca ripen still their fruits in Madeira and
Florida.
Musa Ensete, G-melin.
Bruce’s Banana. From Sofala to Abyssinia, in mountain
regions. This magnificent plant attains a height of 30 feet,
the leaves occasionally reaching to the length of 20 feet,
with a width of 3 feet, being perhaps the largest in the whole
empire of plants, exceeding those of Strelitzia and Eavenala,
and surpassing even in quadrat-measurement those of the
grand water-plant Victoria Eegia, while excelling in com-
parative circumference also the largest compound frond of
Angiopteris evecta, or divided leaf of Glodwinia Gigas,
though the compound leaves of some palms are still larger.
The inner part of the stem, and the young spike of the
Ensete can be boiled to serve as a table esculent, but the
fruit is pulpless. This plant produces no suckers, and
requires several years to come into flower and seed, when
it dies off like the Sago plant, the Caryota palm and others,
which flower but once without reproduction from the root.
Musa Livingstoniana, Kirk.
Mountains of Sofala, Mozambique and the Mger regions.
Similar to M. Ensete ; seeds much smaller. Possibly re-
quiring no protection here in favorable places.
Musa paradisiaca, L.
The ordinary Plantain or Pisang. India. Among the most
prolific of plants, requiring the least care in climes adapted
for its growth. Stem not spotted. Bracts purple inside.
In this as well as the foregoing and the following new shoots
are produced from the root, to replace annually the fruit-
bearing stem. The fruit of this is chiefly prepared by some
cooking process. Only a few varieties are distinguished,
and they seem to have sprung from the wild state of M.
sapientum. The writer did not wish to pass this and the


allied plants unnoticed, as they will endure our clime in the
warmest localities of the colony, where under more careful
attention they are likely to mature with regularity their
fruit. They require rich and humid soil. Plantain meal is
prepared by simply reducing the dried pulp to powder. It
is palatable, digestible and nourishing.
Musa sapientum, L.
The ordinary Banana or Sweet Plantain. India. One of
the most important plants yielding nutritious delicious
fruits. The stem is spotted. Bracts green inside. The
leaves and particularly the stalks and the stems of this and
other species of Musa can be utilized for producing a fibre
similar to Manilla Hemp. The fruit of this is used chiefly
unprepared ; it is generally of a yellow color. Numerous
varieties are distinguished. As much as a hundredweight
of fruit is obtained from a plant annually in tropical climes.
At Caracas, where the temperature is seldom much above or
below 60° F., the Plantain and Banana plants are very pro-
ductive, being loaded with fruits 12 to 15 inches long, on
mountains about 5000 feet high. In our dry Murray re-
gions the winter temperature seems too low for the suc-
cessful development of these plants, except on sheltered
spots.
Musa troglodytarum, L. (AT. uranoscopos, Humph J
India, and apparently indigenous also in the Feegee and
other islands of the Pacific Ocean. The fruit-stalk of this
species stands upright ; the edible fruits are small, reddish
or orange-colored. The Chinese M. coccinea, Ait., a dwarf
ornamental species, has also the fruit-spike straight.
Myrica Faya, Aiton.
Madeira, Azores and Canary Islands. A small tree. The
drupaceous fruits are used for preserves. M. sapida,
"VVallich., an Indian mountainous species, has also edible
fruits.
Myrtus Ugni, A. Gray.
The Chilian Gruava. A hardy shrub, freely bearing its small
but pleasantly aromatic berries.


Nar dost achy s Jatamansi, Cand.
Mountains of Bengal and Nepaul. A perennial herb,
famous already at ancient times as a medicinal plant. The
root contains an ethereal oil and bitter principle. This drug
is often also obtained from JV. grandiflora , Cand.
Nelumbo lutea, Caspary.* {Nelumbium luteum, Willd.)
In North America, north to 41° ; also in Jamaica. This
magnificent perennial water-plant carries with it the type of
Nelumbo nucifera, but seems more hardy and thus better
adapted for our latitudes, the By thagorean Beau not descend-
ing in Australia naturally beyond the 23°, although also this
species may perhaps live in the warmer parts of our Colony.
The tuberous roots of both species resemble the Sweet
Potato and are starchy: the seeds are of particularly
pleasant taste. To us the plants would be of great value
as ornamental aquatics. The leaves of N. lutea are from
1 foot to 2 feet in diameter. The flowers measure one-half
to one foot across. The capsular fruit contains from 20 to
40 nut-like seeds. The plant in congenial spots dis-
places nearly all other water vegetation by the vigor of its
growth.
Nelumbo nucifera, Glaertner.* (Nelumbium speciosum, Willd.)
The Pythagorean Bean. Egypt; at the Caspian and Aral
Seas (46° N.) ; Persia; through India, where in Cashmere it
occurs at an elevation of 5000 feet; China ; Japan; Amur
(46° N.); tropical Australia as far south as 23°. The occur-
rence of this grand plant at the Ima, at Pekin and at
Astrachan proves sufficiently, that we can naturalize it in
Victoria. The Nelumbo requires deep water with a muddy
bottom. The large white or rosy flowers are very fragrant.
The seeds retain their vitality for several years. According
to the ancient Egyptian method they are placed in balls of
muddy clay and chaff and then sunk into the water.
Nephelium Litchi, Oambess.
South China, Cochin-China and Philippine Islands. An
evergreen tree, producing the Litchi-fruit. The pulpy
arillus is of extremely pleasant taste, though not large.


Nephelium Longanum, Cambesa.
India and Southern China. The Longan-fmit is obtained
from this tree; it is smaller than that of the Litchi-tree.
Nicotiana multivalvis, Lindley.
The Native Tobacco of the Columbia River. An annual.
This with the following species can be utilized for certain
kinds of Tobacco.
Nicotiana Persica, Lindley.
The Shiraz Tobacco. Persia. Annual. This can be brought
to perfection only in cool mountain regions. The mode of
culture is somewhat different to that of the ordinary Tobacco.
Moderate irrigation is favorable. The plants when ripe are
cut off and stuck into the ground again until they become
yellow. They are then heaped together for a few days in
the drying-house. They are then packed into thin strata
and placed into bags, for pressure and daily turning.
Nicotiana quadrivalvis, Pursh.
The Native Tobacco of the Missouri. An annual.
Nicotiana repanda, Willd.
Cuba, Mexico, Texas. Annual. It is utilized for some of
the Havannah Tobaccoes.
Nicotiana rustica, L.
Tropical America. Annual. Some sorts of Eastern India
Tobacco, of Manilla Tobacco and of Turkey (for instance
Latakia) Tobacco are derived from this particular species.
Nicotiana Tabacum, LA
The ordinary Tobacco-plant of Central America. Annual.
Various districts with various soils produce very different
sorts of Tobacco, particularly as far as flavor is concerned,
and again various climatic conditions will affect vastly the
Tobacco-plant in this respect. We can thus not hope to
produce for instance Manilla or Havannah Tobacco in our
latitudes, but we can anticipate to produce good sorts of
our own, more or less peculiar, or we may aspire to pro-
ducing in our rich and frostless forest valleys a Tobacco


similar to that of Kentucky, Maryland, Connecticut and
Virginia, parts of Victoria resembling in climate very much
these countries. Frost is detrimental to the Tobacco-plant;
not only particularly when young must it be guarded against
it, but frost will also injure the ripe crop. Mr. Politz con-
siders the scarcity of dew in some of our districts to militate
against the production of the best kinds, otherwise the yield
as a rule is large, and the soil in many places well adapted
for this culture. Leaves of large size are frequently
obtained. The moister and warmer northern and eastern
regions of our Colony are likely to produce the best
Tobacco, if the final preparation of the leaf for the manu-
facturer is effected by experienced skill. The cruder kinds
are obtained with ease, and so leaves for covering cigars.
Virgin soil with rich loam is the best for Tobacco-culture,
and such soil should also contain a fair proportion of lime
and potash, or should be enriched with a calcareous manure
and ashes, or with well decomposed stable manure. The seed-
lings, two months or less old, are transplanted. When the
plants are coming into flower the leading top-shoots are
nipped off, and the young shoots must also be broken off.
A few weeks afterwards the leaves will turn to a greenish
yellow, which is a sign that the plants are fit to be cut, or
that the ripe leaves can gradually be pulled. In the former
case the stems are split; the drying is then effected in barns
by suspension from sticks across beams. The drying pro-
cess occupies four or five weeks and may need to be assisted
by artificial heat. Stripped of the stalks the leaf-blades are
then tied into bundles to undergo sweating or a kind of
slight fermentation. It does not answer to continue
tobacco-culture beyond two years on the same soil uninter-
ruptedly. A prominent variety is Nicotiana latissima,
Miller, or A. macrophylla , Lehm., yielding largely the
Chinese, the Orinoco and the Maryland Tobacco. The
dangerously powerful Nicotin, a volatile acrid alkaline oily
liquid, and Nicotianin, a bitter aromatic lamellar substance,
are both derived from Tobacco in all its parts and are thera-
peutic agents.


Niemeyera prunifolia, F. v. Mueller.
The Australian Cainito. An evergreen tree, sparingly dis-
persed from the North of New South Wales through the
coast forests of Queensland. The fruit is of plum-like
appearance and edible. Culture is likely to improve its
quality.
Ocimum Basilicmn, E.
The Basil. Warmer parts of Asia and Africa. An annual
herb, valuable for condiments and perfumery. Several
varieties exist, differing considerably in their scent. A
crystalline substance is also obtained from this and similar
species. 0. canum , Sims, is closely allied.
Ocimum gratissimum, E.
Recorded from India, the South Sea Islands and Brazil, as
indigenous. Somewhat shrubby. This is also a scent-plant
like the following, and is one of the best of the genus.
0. viride, Willd., from tropical Africa seems a variety.
Ocimum suave, Willd.
East Africa. A shrubby species.
Ocimum sanctum, E.
Arabia, India, tropical Australia. A perennial herb. The
odor of the variety occurring in North Australia reminds
of Anis ; the smell of the variety growing in East Australia
resembles cloves. 0. tenuijiorum, L., seems to be another
variety. Probably other species, as well cis- as trans-
Atlantic, can be used like Basil.
Olea Europsea, E. #
The Olive-tree. From South-western Asia; naturalized
in the countries around the Mediterranean Sea. A tree not
of great height, but of many centuries’ duration and of
unabating fecundity. The well-known Olive Oil is obtained
from the fruit. Certain varieties of the fruit, preserved in
vinegar or salt liquid before perfectly ripe, are also much
used for the table. For this purpose the fruit is generally
macerated previously in water containing potash and lime.
The gum-resin of the Olive-tree contains the crystalline
Olivil. The oil of the drupaceous fruit is a most important


product of countries with climates similar to that of
Victoria. Its chemical constituents are : —3O per cent,
crystalline Palmitin; 70 per cent. Olein, through which
Olive-oil belongs to those kinds, Avhich are not drying. The
wild variety of the Olive-tree has usually short blunt leaves
and thorny branches. Long continued droughts, so detri-
mental to most plants, will affect the Olive but slightly. It
thrives best on a free loamy calcareous soil, even should it
be strong and sandy, but it dislikes stiff clay. Proximity to
the sea is favorable to it, and hill-sides are more eligible for
its culture than plains. The ground must be deeply
trenched. Manuring with well decayed substances is re-
quisite annually, or every second or third year according
to circumstances. Irrigation will add to the productiveness
of the plant. Mons. Eiondet distinguishes three main
varieties, of which he recommends two : I, the Cayon, a
small-sized tree, which comes into bearing already after
three or four years, but it bears fully only every second
year ; its oil is fine with some aroma. 2, the Peudulier, a
larger tree, with long drooping branches, yielding an oil of
first-rate quality. Mons. Eeynaud “ Culture de I’Olivier,”
separates 12 varieties, as cultivated in Prance, and recom-
mends among them: —l, the Courniau or Courniale, also
called Plante de Salon, bearing most prolificly a small fruit
and producing an excellent oil. 2, the Picholine, which by
pruning its top branches is led to spread over eight square
yards or more. It is of weeping habit, yields a good oil in
fair quantity and resists well the attack of insects. 3, the
Mouraou or Mourette, a large tree furnishing also oil of a
very fine quality. Olive-trees require judicious pruning
immediately after the fruit is gathered, when the sap is
comparatively at rest. They may be multiplied from seeds,
cuttings, layers, suckers, truncheons or estacas and old
stumps, the latter to be split. The germination of the seeds
is promoted by soaking the nutlets in a solution of lime and
woodash. The seedlings can be budded or grafted after a
few years. Truncheons or estacas may be from one to many
feet long and from one inch to many inches thick; they are
placed horizontally into the ground. Olive plantations at


Grasse are worth from £2OO to £250 per acre. For many
details the tract on the “ Culture of Olive and its Utiliza-
tion,” here recently issued by the Fev. Dr. Bleasdale
should be consulted, as it rests largely on its author’s
observations during a long stay in Portugal. The olive
oil imported last year into Victoria was valued at
£15,538.
The following notes are derived from the important “ Tratado
del Cultivo del Olivo en Espana,” by the Chev. Capt. Jose
de Hidalgo-Tablada (second edit., Madrid 1870), The
Olive-tree will resist for a short time considerable frost
( 15° C.) provided the thawing takes place under fogs or
mild rain (or perhaps under a dense smoke). It requires
for ripening its fruit about one-third more annual warmth
than the Vine. The Olive zones of South Europe and North
Africa are between the 18° and 44° N.L. An elevation of
about 550 feet corresponds in Spain, as far as this culture is
concerned, to one degree further north. Olives do not grow
well on granitic soil. The fruit produced on limestone
formations is of the best quality. Gypsum promotes the
growth of the tree (which thus may perhaps prosper in
parts of the Murray-desert, underlaid with Gypsum). An
equable temperature serves best; thus exposure to prevail-
ing strong winds is to be avoided. The winter temperature
should not fall below —7° C. The content of oil in the
fruit varies from 10 to 20 per cent.; sometimes it even
exceeds the latter proportion. In the Provence at an
average 24 lbs. of Olive Oil are consumed by each individual
of the population ; in Southern Germany nearly 60 lbs., in
Andalusia about 30 lbs. For obtaining the largest quantity
of oil the fruit must be completely ripe. Hand-picked
Olives give the purest oil. Knocking the fruits from the
branches with sticks injures the tree and lessens its produc-
tiveness in the next year. About 30 Olive-trees can be
planted conveniently on an acre for permanence ; each tree
under ordinary circumstances will produce fruits for 4 lbs.
to 5 lbs. of oil annually. Spain alone produces about
250,000,000 lbs. of Olive Oil a year.


SPANISH VARIETIES.
A. — Varieties of early maturation, for colder localities :
1. Var. pomiformis, Clem.
Manzanillo. (French: Ampoulleau.) Fruit above an inch
in diameter, spherical, shining black. Putamen broad and
truncate.
2. Yar. regalis , Clem.
Sevillano. (French: Pruneau de Catignac.) Fruit about an
inch in diameter, ovate-spherical, blunt, bluish-black.
8. Var. Bellotudo or Yillotuda.
Fruit about an inch long, egg-shaped; pericarp outside dark-
red, inside violet.
4. Var. Bedondillo.
Fruit ovate-spherical, nearly an inch long. Pericarp outside
bluish-black, inside whitish. A rich yielder.
5. Var. ovalis, Clem.
Lechin, Picholin, Acquillo. (French: Saurine.) Fruit
broad-oval, two-thirds of an inch long. A copious
yielder.
G. Var. argentata, Clem.
Nevadillo bianco ; Doncel; Zorzalena; Moradillo; Oji-
blanco ; Olivo lucio. Fruit broad-ovate, an inch long, very
blunt, not oblique. Quality and quantity of oil excellent.
7. Var. Varal bianco.
(French : Blanquette.) Fruit ovate, globular, three-fourths
of an inch long, neither pointed, nor oblique, outside blackish-
red. >
8. Var. JEmpeltre.
Fruit ovate, an inch long, equable. Rich in oil of excellent
quality, also one of the best for pickles. Pericarp outside
violet, inside white.
9. Var. Racimal.
(French: Bouteillan, Boutiniene, Eibien, Rapugette.) Fruit
violet-colored, globose-ovate, about an inch long; neither
pointed nor oblique. Bears regularly also on less fertile
soil, and is one of the earliest to ripen.


10. Yar. Varal negro.
Alaraeno. (French.: Cayon, Nasies.) Fruit violet-black,
spotted, globose-ovate, nearly an inch long, somewhat
pointed. Bears richly.
11. Yar. Colchonudo.
Fruit spheric, outside red, inside white, one inch in diameter,
slightly pointed. Produces a large quantity of good oil.
12. Yar. Ojillo de. Liehre.
Ojo de Liehre. Fruit nearly spheric, outside violet-black ;
about one inch long, somewhat oblique. One of the less
early varieties.
13. Yar. Garrasquena.
(French; Bedouan de Cotignat.) Fruit black-red, almost
spherical, slightly oblique, about an inch long. Valuable
both for oil and preserves, but liable to be attacked by
various insects.
14. Yar. Hispalensis, Clem.
Giordal •, Ocal; Olivo real. Fruit black-grey, oblique,
spherical, measuring fully an inch. Bather a large and quick-
growing tree. Fruit used in the green state for preserves,
not used for table-oil.
15. Yar. Verdejo.
Yerdial. (French: Yerdal, Yerdan.) Fruit black-violet,
oblique-spheric, pointed, about one inch long. Furnishes
good oil and resists best of all the cold.
jj Varieties of late maturation, for warmer localities :
16. Yar. maxima, Clem.
Madrileno ; Oivo morcal. Fruit over an inch long, cordate-
globose, strongly pointed. Less valuable for oil than for
preserves.
17. Yar. rostrata, Clem.
Cornicabra. (French: Command, Coruiaud, Courgnale, PI.
de Solon, PI. de la Fane ; Cayon, Bapunier, G-rasse.) Strong
and tall, less tender. Fruit black-reddish, over an inch
long, oval, much pointed. G-ood for oil.
18. Yar. ceratocarpa, Clem.
Cornezuelo. (French: Odorant, Luquoise, Luques.) Fruit
fully an inch long, oval, pointed.


19. Yar. Javaluno.
Fruit black-grey, over an inch long, egg-shaped, some-
what oblique, gradually pointed. Rich in good oil;
can also be chosen for preserves ; much subject to attacks
of insects.
20. Yar. Picudo.
Fetudilla. Fruit fully an inch long, egg-shaped, blunt at
the base, pointed at the apex, with black-grey pulp. Peri-
carp easily separable. Employed both for oil and pre-
serves.
21. Yar. Nevadillo negro.
Fruit egg-shaped, fully an inch long, with turned pointed
apex. One of the richest of all varieties in yield. Endures
considerable cold and ripens not quite late.
All these Spanish varieties show rather long lanceolate leaves
of more or less width.
FRENCH VARIETIES.
(Some verging into the Spanish kinds.)
22. Yar. angulosa, Grouan.
Galliningue, Laurine. For preserves.
23. Yar. Bougef.
Marvailletto. Produces a fine oil.
24. Yar. atrorubens, Grouan.
Salierne, Say erne. Fruit dusted white. Furnishes one of
the best of oils.
25. Yar. variegata, Grouan.
Marbee, Pigale, Pigau. Purple fruit with white spots.
20. Yar. Le Palma.
Oil very sweet, but not largely produced.
27. Yar. atrovirens , Ros,
Pointue, Punchuda. Fruit large with good oil.
28. Yar. ruhicans, Ros.
Rougette. Putamen small. Yield annual and large.
o o
29. Yar. alha , Ros.
Olive blanche, Blancane, Yierge. This with many others
omitted on this occasion is an inferior variety.


30. Yar. Caillet Rouge.
Figanier. Small tree. Fruit large, red. Oil good and
produced in quantity.
31. Yar. Caillet Blanche.
1 ruit almost white, produced annually and copiously, yield-
ing a rather superior oil.
32. Yar. Raymet.
Fruit large, reddish. Oil copious and fine. This variety
prefers flat country.
33. Yar. Cotignac.
Pardigniere. Fruit middle-sized, blunt. Oil obtained in
quantity and of excellent quality. This wants much pruning.
34. Yar. Bermillaon.
"V ermillon. Yields also table-oil and resists cold well.
Many other apparently desirable varieties occur, among which
the Italian Oliva d’ogni mese may be mentioned, which
ripens fruits several times in the year, and furnishes a
pleasant oil and also berries for preserves.
Onobrychis sativa, La March.*
The Sanfoin or Cocks-head Plant. South and Middle
Europe, Middle Asia. A deep-rooting perennial fodder-
herb, fond of marly soil, and living in dry localities. It is
thus well adapted also for the limestone formation of the
lower Murray Fiver.
Ophelia Chirata, G-risebach. (Agathotes Chirata, D. Don.)
Widely dispersed over the higher mountain regions of India.
A perennial herb, considered as one of the best of tonics ;
it possesses also febrifugal and antarthritic properties. Its
administration in the form of an infusion, prepared with
cold water, is the best. Besides 0. elegans, Wight., some of
the other Upper Indian, Chinese and species
deserve probaly equal attention.
Opuntia coccinellifera, Miller.
Mexico and West India. The Cochineal Cactus. On this
and O. Tuna, 0. Hernandezii and perhaps a few others
subsists the Coccus, which offers the costly Cochineal dye.
Three gatherings can be effected in the year. About 1200


tons used to be imported annually into Britain alone, and a
good deal also to other countries, valued at about £4OO for
the ton. The precious Carmin-pigment is prepared from
Cochineal.
Opuntia elatior, Miller.
Central America, A hedge plant with formidable thorns.
Opuntia Ficus Indica, Miller.
Central America, north as far as Florida. Serves for hedges.
Pulp of fruit edible.
Opuntia Hernandezii, Candolle.
Mexico. Affords also food for the Coccus Cacti.
Opuntia spinosissima, Miller.
Mexico and West India. Stem columnar with pendant
branches. Also a good hedge-plant.
Opuntia Tuna, Miller.
West India, Ecuador, New Granada, Mexico. Irrespective
of its value as the principal Cochineal plant, this Cactus is
also of use for hedges. It will attain a height of 20 feet.
The pulp of the fruit is edible. With the other species
hardy at least in our lowdands.
Opuntia vulgaris, Miller.
Central America, northward to Georgia, southward to Peru.
Adapted for hedges and like the rest inflammable, thus par-
ticularly valuable along Railway-lines. The fruit almost
smooth, also eatable. A dye can also be prepared from its
pulp and that of allied species. Numerous other species
are here industrially eligible for hedging purposes.
Origanum Dictamnus, L.
Candia. Like the following a seent-plant of somewhat
shrubby growth.
Origanum Major ana, L.
North Africa, Middle Asia, Arabia. A perennial herb, used
for condiment, also for the distillation of its essential oil.
Origanum Maru, L,
Palestine. Perennial and very odorous.


Origanum Onites, L.
Countries at the Mediterranean Sea. Somewhat shrubby
and strongly scented.
Origanum vulgare, L.
The ordinary Marjoram. All Europe, North Africa, North
and Middle Asia. A scented herb of perennial growth,
containing a peculiar volatile oil. It prefers limestone soil.
O. Tiirtum, Link., O. virens Hoffmannsegg and O. normalc
D. Don, are closely allied plants of similar use. Several
other Majorams, chiefly Mediterranean, are of value.
Ornithopus sativus, Brotero.
South Europe and North Africa. An annual herb, larger
than the ordinary Birdsfoot-clover. It is valuable as a
fodder-plant on sterile soil.
Oryza sativa, LA
The Eice-plant. South Asia and North Australia. Annual
like most cereals. The many rivulets in our ranges afford
ample opportunities for irrigating rice-fields : hut these can
be formed with full advantage only in the warmer parts of
the colony, where rice will ripen as well as in Italy, China,
or the Southern States of the American Union. Among
the numerous varieties of Indian Eice may be noted as
prominent sorts: The Early Eice, which ripens in four
months and is not injured by saline inundations. The
hardier Mountain Eice, which can he raised on compara-
tively dry ground, and which actually perishes under
lengthened inundation, hut which is less productive. The
Glutinous Eice, which succeeds as well in wet as almost dry
places, and produces black or reddish grains. In the rich
plains of Lombardy, irrigated from the Alps, the average
crop is estimated at 48 bushels for the acre annually. The
spirit distilled from Eice and molasses is known as Arrack,
Oryza latifolia, Humh. and Bonpl.
Central America. This species is said to be perennial and
to attain a height of 18 feet. It deserves here trial-
culture, and may prove a good fodder-grass on wet land in
warm localities.- O. perennis, Moench., seems closely allied.


Oxalis crassicaulis, Zuccar.
Peru. This seems one of the best of those Wbodsorrels,
which yield a tuberous edible root. Amongst others O.
tuberosa , Mol. and O. succulenta , Barn, from Chili, as well as
O. carnosa Mol. and O. conorrJiiza Jacq. from Paraguay,
might be tried for their tubers.
Pachyrrhizus ang'ulatus, Rich.
Prom Central America rendered spontaneous in many
tropical countries. A climber, the horizontal starchy roots
of which attain a length of 8 feet and a thickness of many
inches. It requires rich soil. The root is edible, though
inferior to Yam. Prom the stems a tough fibre is obtained.
The plant proved hardy at Sydney,
Paliurus ramosissimus, Poir. (P. Aulletia, Schult.)
China and Japan. A thorny tree, which could be utilized
for hedging.
o o
Paliurus Spina Cliristi, Mill. (P. aculeatus , Lam.)
The Christ Thorn. Prom the Mediterranean Sea to Nepaul.
A deciduous bush or finally tree, which can be trimmed into
hedges.
Panicum amarum, Elliot.
North America. A perennial species, fit to be grown on
drifting coast-sand.
Panicum barbinode, Trinius.
Brazil. Valuable as a fodder-grass.
Panicum ciliare, Retzius.
Prom South Europe and Southern Asia spread through all
countries with a warm climate, but apparently also indi-
genous in East Australia. It readily disseminates itself on
barren ground, and is likely to add to the value of our
desert-pastures, although it is annual. Stock relish this
grass. P. sajiguinale, L. and P. glabrum, Gaudin, are allied
species.
Panicum Crus-Galli, L.
The Barn-yard Grass. Occurring now in all warm countries,
but probably of Oriental origin, as it seems not recorded in


ancient classic literature. A ricli but annual grass of ready
spontaneous dispersion. P. colonum , L. and P. Grus-Corvi
L. are varieties of it. Regarded by R. Brown as indigenous
to Eastern and Northern Australia, where many other
excellent fodder-species occur, some perennial. It will
succeed also on somewhat saline soil, particularly on brackish
water-courses.
Pailicum decomposition, R- Brown. (P. laevinode, Lindl.)
The Australian Millet. One of the most spacious of native
nutritious grasses. The aborigines convert the small millet-
like grains into cakes. This grass will thrive on poor soil.
Panicum frumentaceum, Roxb.
The Shamalo or Deccan Grass. Probably introduced from
tropical Africa into South Asia. It serves as a fodder-grass
and produces also a kind of millet.
To this species is allied P. sarmenfosum, Roxb. from Sumatra,
which is now likewise much cultivated in tropical countries.
It is perennial.
Panicum Italicum, L.
This grass notwithstanding its specific name is of Indian
origin, but appears to be likewise a native of Aorth Aus-
tralia. It is annual and worthy to be cultivated as a tender
green-fodder, attaining a height of 5 feet. The giain is
not only one of the best for poultry, but that of some
varieties can also be utilized as millet. P. Germanicum,
Roth, is a form of this species.
Panicum Koenigii, Spreng. (P. Relopus , Trin.)
India. A good fodder-grass.
Panicum maximum, Jacq* (P. jumentonm, , Pers.)
The Guinea-Grass. Tropical Africa ; elsewhere not indi-
genous. This perennial grass attains a height of 8 feet in
tropical countries. It is highly nutritious and quite adapted
for the warmer parts of our colonial territory.
Panicum miliaceum, L. # (P. miliare, Lam.)
The true Millet. South Asia and North Australia, but
cultivated in Southern Europe already at Hippocrates s


and Theophrastos’ time. Annual, attaining a height of
4 feet. Several varieties occur, one with black grains.
They all need a rich hut friable soil. It is one of the best
of all grains for poultry, but furnishes also a palatable and
nutritious table-food. It ripens still in Middle Europe.
Panicum pilosum, Swartz.
Tropical America. A perennial fodder-grass.
Panicum repens, L.
At the Mediterranean Sea, also in South Asia and North
Australia. Regarded by the Cinghalese as a good fodder-
grass. It is perennial and well suited for naturalization on
moist soil or river-banks or swamps.
Panicum prostratum, Lam. (P. setigerum, Retz.)
Egypt, South Asia, North Australia, perhaps also indigenous
to tropical America. Perennial. Recommendable for pas-
tures.
Panicum spectabile, Nees.*
The Coapim of Angola. From West Africa transferred to
many other tropical countries. A rather succulent very
fattening grass, attaining a height of about 4 feet. It
may be assumed, that hitherto about 300 well-defined
species of Panicum are known, chiefly tropical and sub-
tropical, thus very few extending naturally to Europe, or
the United States of North America, or Japan, or the
southern part of Australia. Though mostly from the hot
zones these grasses endure in many instances our clime,
and some of them would prove great acquisitions, particu-
larly the perennial species. Numerous good kinds occur in
Queensland and North Australia spontaneously. Panicum
is the genus richest in species among grasses.
Papaver somniferum, LA
The Opium-Poppy. Orient. The capsules of this tall annual,
so showy for its flowers, are used for medicinal purposes ;
from the minute but exceedingly numerous seeds, oil of a
harmless and most palatable kind can be pressed remuner-
atively ; but a still more important use of the plant is that
for the preparation of Opium, of which a quantity valued in


the Custom’s returns at £94,455 was imported during 1871
into Victoria, and this does not provide for a large por-
tion of Morphia used in medicine. Both the black and pale
seeded varieties can be used for the production of Opium.
The return of Poppy-culture, whether for opium or for oil,
is within a few months. Our milder and somewhat humid
open forest tracts proved most productive for obtaining
opium from this plant; but it can be reared also in colder
localities, good Opium, rich in Morphia, having even been
obtained in Middle Europe and the northern United States,
the summers there being sufficiently long to ripen the Poppy
with a well elaborated sap. The Morphia contents in
Opium from Gripps Land was at an average somewhat over
10 per cent. Opium was prepared in our Botanic G-arden
for the Exhibition of 1866 ; but palticularly Mr. J. Bosisto
and Mr. J. Hood have given to this branch of rural industry
here commercial dimensions. The Smyrna variety is partic-
ularly desirable for Opium ; it enables the cultivator to get
from 40 lbs. to 75 lbs. of Opium from an acre, generally worth
30s. to 355. per pound. The ground for poppy-culture must
be naturally rich, or otherwise be well manured ; dressing
with ashes increases the fecundity of the plant. The seed,
about 9 lbs. to an acre, is generally sown broadcast, mixed
with sand. In the most favorable places as many as three
crops are obtained during a season. The collecting of the
Opium, which consists merely of the indurating sap of the
seed-vessels, is commenced a few days after the lapse of the
petals. Superficial, horizontal or diagonal incisions are
made into the capsules as they successively advance to
maturity. This operation is best performed in the after-
noons and evenings, and requires no laborious toil. The
milky opium-sap thus directed outward, is scraped oft next
morning into a shallow cup, and allowed to dry on a place
away from sunlight; it may also placed on Poppy-leaves.
Erom one to six successive incisions are made to exhaust
the sap, according to season, weather, locality or the knife-
like instrument employed. In the Department of Somme
(France) alone Opium to the value of £70,030 annually is
produced, and poppy-seed to the value of £170,000. Our


seasons here, as a rule, are favorable for collecting Opintn }
and thus this culture is here rendered less precarious than
in many other countries. Our Opium has proved as good
as the best Smyrna kinds. The petals are dried for packing
the Opium, The main value of Opium depends on its con-
tents of Morphia, for which the genus Papaver, as far as
hitherto known, remains the sole source. But not less than
eleven Alkaloids have been revealed in Opium by the pro-
gressive strides of organic chemistry : Codein, Metamorphin,
Morphia or Morphin, Narcein, Narcotiu, Opianiu, Papaverin,
Porphyroxin, Pseudo-morphin and Thebain. It contains
besides an indiiferent bitter principle: Meconin and
Meconic Acid (Vide “ Wittstein’s Chemische Analyse von
Pflauzentheilen.”) Yarious species of Papaver produce
more or less Opium and Morphia.
Parinarium Nonda, P- v. Mueller.
The Nonda-tree of North-east Australia. It may prove
hardy in East Gripps Laud, and may live perhaps in the dry
and hot air of our deserts, where it deserves trial-culture
for the sake of its edible mealy plum-like fruit. A few
other species with esculent drupes occur in different tropical
countries.
Parkinsonia aculeata, L.
From California to Monte Video. A thorny shrub, clearly
adapted for the warmer parts of Victoria, where it might be
utilized with the following plant for evergreen hedges. The
flowers are handsome.
Parkinsonia Africana, Sonder.
South Africa. A tall bush. A third species, P. microphyUa,
Torr., occurs on the Colorado.
Paspalum disticlmm, Bunn.
From India to South-eastern Australia. A creeping swamp-
grass, forming extensive cushions. It keeps beautifully
green throughout the year, affords a sufficiently tender
blade for feed, and is exqusitely adapted to cover silt or
bare slopes on banks of ponds or rivers.


Paspalum scrobiculatum, L.
Through the tropics of the Eastern Hemisphere widely
dispersed, extending to South-east Australia. A valuable
pasture-grass. A superior variety is cultivated in India for
a grain crop. This grass furnishes a good ingredient to
hay. The stem sometimes attains a height of 8 feet.
Passiflora alata, Aiton.
Pern and Brazil. This Passion-flower and all the
following (and probably other species) furnish Grranadilla
fruits.
Passiflora coccinea, Auhlet.
Prom Giuiana to Brazil.
Passiflora coerulea, L.
South Brazil and Uruguay. One of the hardiest of all
Passion-flowers, and with many others well adapted for
covering bowers, rookeries and similar structures. Many
of the Equatorial species come from mountainous regions
and may thus endure our lowland clime.
Passiflora edulis, Sims.
Southern Brazil.
Passiflora filamentosa, Willd.
Southern Brazil.
Passiflora incarnata, L.
North America from Virginia and Kentucky southward.
The fruits are called Maypops.
Passiflora laurifolia, L (P. tinifolia, Jussieu.)
The "Water-Lemon. Erom West India to Brazil.
Passiflora ligularis. Juss.
Erom Mexico to Bolivia.
Passiflora lutea, L.
North America from Pennsylvania and Illinois southward.
Berries small.
Passiflora maliformis, L.
Erom AVest India to Brazil.


Passiflora quadrangularis, L.
Brazil. One of the most commonly cultivated Grana-
dillas.
Passiflora serrata, L.
From West India to Brazil.
Passiflora suberosa, L. (P. pallida , L.)
From Florida to Brazil. A careful investigator, Dr. Marw.
Masters, has recently defined about 200 species of Passion-
flowers.
Peireskia aculeata, Miller.
West India. The Barbadoes Gooseberry. A tall shrub,
adapted for hedges in localities free of frost. The Cochineal
Insect can be reared also on this plant. The berries are
edible. Several other species exist in tropical America,
among which P. Bleo, Humb., is particularly handsome, but
they may not all be sufficiently hardy for utilitarian purposes
in our clime. Otherwise the Bleo is used for salad.
Peireskia portnlacifolia, Haw.
West India. This attains the size of a fair tree.
Pennisetum thyphoideum, Rich.*
(Fenicillaria spicata, Willd. Panicvm coeruleum, Miller.)
Tropical Asia, .Nubia and Egypt. The Bajree. An annual,
ripening its millet crop in about three months in warm
countries. The stems are thick and reach a height of 6 feet.
This grass requires a rich and loose soil, and on such it will
yield upwards of a hundred fold. It furnishes also a good
hay, and is also valuable as green-fodder. Sone of the
many other species of Pennisetum are doubtless of pastoral
value. A plant allied to P. thyphoideum occurs in China:
nameiy P. cereale, Trin. This affords also millets or corn
for cakes.
Pentzia virgata, Lessing,
South Africa. A small bush, recommended to be established
in our deserts for sheep -fodder. Several other species occur
in South Africa.


Perilla arguta, Benth.
Japan. An annual herb. An infusion of this plant is used
to impart to table vegetables and other substances a deep red
color. P. ocimoides, L., of Upper India, serves probably
similar purposes.
Persea gratissima, Q-aertner.
Prom Mexico to Peru and Brazil in forest-tracts near the
coast. The Avocado Pear. Suggestively mentioned here as
likely available for East Gripps Land, French Island and
other mild localities of our country,' inasmuch as it has
become naturalized in Madeira, the Azores and Canary
Islands. A noble evergreen spreading tree. The pulp of
the large pear-shaped fruit is of delicious taste and flavor.
Persea Teneriffae (P. Indica, Spreng.), indigenous to Madeira,
the Canary Islands and Azores, is a tree with hard and
remarkably beautiful wood.
Peucedanum graveolens, Benth. ( Anethum graveolens , L.)
The Dill. South Europe, North Africa, Orient. Annual.
The well-known aromatic fruitlets used as a condiment.
P. Sowa, Benth. ( Anethum Sowa, Boxb.) is a closely allied
Indian annual herb.
Peucedanum officinale, L.
The Sulphur Boot. Middle and South Europe, North Africa >
Middle Asia. Perennial. The root used in veterinary
medicine. It contains like that of the following species the
crystalline Peucedanin.
Peucedanum Ostruthium, Koch. ( Imperatoria Ostruthium, L.)
Mountains of Middle Europe. A perennial herb, which
could be grown in our Alps. The acrid aromatic root is
used in medicine, particularly in veterinary practice. It is
required for the preparation of some kinds of Swiss Cheese.
P. Cervaria, Cuss, and P. Oreoselinum , Moench., are also
occasionally drawn into medicinal use.
Peucedanum sativum, Benth. (Fastinaca sativa, L.)
The Parsnip. Europe, North and Middle Asia. Biennial.
The root palatable and nutritious.


Phalaris Canariensis, L.
The Canary Grass. * An annual grass from the Canary
Islands, now widely dispersed as a spontaneous plant over
the warmer zones of the globe. Thus it has also become
naturalized in Australia. It is grown for its seeds, which
form one of the best kinds of fodder for many sorts of small
cage-birds. The flour is utilized in certain processes of
cotton manufacture, and liked for some kinds of cakes. The
soil for the culture of the Canary-grass must be friable and
not too poor. It is an exhaustive crop. As allied annual
species of similar use, but mostly of less yield, may be enu-
merated : P. brachystachys Link., from Italy; P. minor
Betz, and P. truncata Guss., from various countries at the
Mediterranean Sea. Other species, including some from
Asia, are deserving of trial; but the perennial British
P, arwndinacea y L., is too harsh to serve for wholesome
fodder, nor does it furnish Canary seed.
Phaseolus adenanthus, Q-. Meyer.
(P Truxillensis, Humb. P. rostratus, Wallich).
Almost cosmopolitan within the tropics, where irrespective
of navigation and other traffic it becomes dispersed by
migrating birds; truly spontaneous also in tropical Aus-
tralia. A perennial herb with large flowers, resembling
those of Vigna vexillata, Benth. Cultivated for its seeds,
which are rather small ,but copiously produced.
Phaseolus coccineus, Kniphof.* (P. multiflorus , Willd).
The Turkish Bean or Scarlet-Runner. A native of the
Orient, if Sprengel’s identification is correct, according to
which this plant was known in Arabia and Persia at
Avicenna’s time; but according to other opinions it is a
native of Mexico. A twining showy perennial, as useful as
the ordinary French Bean. Its seeds usually larger than
those of the latter plant, purple with black dots, but some-
times also pure blue and again quite white. The flowers
occur sometimes white. The root contains a narcotic
poison.


Phaseolus lunatus, L.
Considered as a native of tropical America, but also recorded
as wild from many parts of tropical Africa and Asia. Biem
nial according to Roxburgh. Much cultivated in the warn?
zone for its edible beans, which are purple or white. A
yellow-flowered variety or closely allied species is known as
the Madagascar Bean and proved hardy and productive
here;. P.perennis, Walt., from the United States of Nortl
America, is another allied plant.
Phaseolus Mungo, L. (P. Max, L.)
The G-reen G-ram. South Asia and tropical Australia. An
annual very hairy plant, not much climbing. Frequently
reared in India, when rice fails or where that crop cannot be
produced. The seeds are but small, and the herb is not
available for fodder. This plant requires no irrigation, and
ripens in two and a-half to three months. The grain tastes
well and is esteemed wholesome. The harvest is abouf
thirtyfold.
Phaseolus vulgaris, LA
The ordinary Kidney Bean or French Bean or Haricot.
India, from whence it came to Europe through the conquest
of Alexander the Great; but apparently it is also wild ip,
North-western Australia. Though this common and im-
portant culinary annual is so well known, it has been deemed
desirable, to refer to it here with a view of reminding, that
the Kidney-bean is nearly twice as nutritive than wheat.
The meal from Beans might also find far augmented use.
As constituents of the Beans should be mentioned a largf
proportion of starch (nearly half), then much Legumin, als&
some Phaseolin (which like Amygdalin can be converted intc
an essential oil) and Inosit-Sugar. Lentils contain more
Legumin but less starch, while Peas and Beans are in respect
to the proportion of these two nourishing substances almost
alike. Phaseolus nanus, L.,the Dwarf-bean, and P. tumidus T
Savi, the Sugar-bean or Sword-bean or Egg-bean, are
varieties of P. vulgaris. Several other species of Phaseolus
seem worthy of culinary culture.


Phleum pratense, L.*
The Catstail or Timothy (Trass. Europe, North Africa,
North and Middle Asia. One of the most valuable of all
perennial fodder-grasses. Its production of early spring-
herbage is superior to that of the Cocksfoot-grass. It should
enter largely into any mixture of grasses for permanent
pasturage. It will live also on moist and cold clay-ground.
This grass and perhaps more yet the allied Fhleim alpinum ,
L., are deserving of an extensive transfer to our moory Alps.
Eor hay it requires mowing in a young stage. The seed is
copiously yielded and well retained.
Phoenix dactylifera, L.*
The Date-Palm. North Africa, also inland ; Arabia, Persia.
This noble palm attains finally a height of 80 feet. It is
unisexual and of longevity:—-“Trees of from 100 to 200
years old continue to produce their annual crop of dates.”
Though from the sap sugar or palm wine can be obtained,
and from the leaves hats, mats and similar articles can be
manufactured, we here would utilize this palm beyond scenic
garden ornamentation only for its fruits. It is in the oases
of our desert-tracts, swept by burning winds, where the
Date-palm would afford in time to come a real boon, although
it might be grown also in the valleys of our mountains and
in any part of our lowlands. Several bunches of flowers are
formed in a season, each producing often as many as 200
dates. Many varieties of dates exist, differing in shape,
size and color of the fruit; those of Gomera are large and
contain no seed. The unexpanded flower-bunches can be
used for palm-cabbage; the fibre of the leaf-stalks for cor-
dage. The town Elche in Spain is surrounded by planted
forest of about 80,000 Date-palms, and the sale of leaves for
decorative purposes produces irrespective of the value of
the date-fruits a considerable income to the town, and so it
is at Alicante. As far north as the Gulf of Genoa exists
also a date-forest. The ease, with which this palm grows
from seeds, affords facility in adapted climes to imitate these
examples, and we certainly ought to follow them in all parts
of Australia.


Phoenix palndosa, Roxb.
India. A stout species, not very tall. Of value at least for
decorative culture.
Phoenix pnsilla, Graertner.
India and South China. A dwarf species, likely also to he
hardy here. P. farinifera, Roxb., appears to he identical.
It is adapted for sandy and otherwise dry and barren land,
but prefers the vicinity of the sea. Berry shining black,
with a sweet mealy pulp.
Phoenix reclinata, Jacquin.
South Africa in the eastern districts. A hardy species, but
not tall, often reclining. It is adapted for ornamentation.
The seeds are frequently drawn into local use as a substi-
tute for colfee.
Phoenix silvestris, Roxb.
India, almost on any soil or in any situation. It has proved
at Melbourne a very hardy species. Its greatest height is
40 feet. Berries yellowish or reddish, larger than in P.
pusilla. Where this palm abounds much sugar is obtained
from it by evaporation of the sap, which flows from incisions
into the upper part of the trunk, a process not sacrificing
the plant, as for 20 years the sap can thus be withdrawn.
A kind of Arack is obtained by fermentation and distillation
of this sap. Each plant furnishes the juice for about 8 lbs.
of Date-sugar annually, but in some instances much more.
About 50,000 tons of sugar are produced a year in Bengal
alone from this and some other palms.
Phoenix spinosa, Thonning.
Tropical Africa, ascending mountain regions, thus perhaps
hardy here with us. Dr. Kirk found the green bunches, if
immersed in water for half a day, suddenly to assume a
scarlet hue, and then the astringent pulp to become edible
and sweet.
Phorminm tenax, J. R. and GJ-. Eorster.*
The Elax-lily of New Zealand, where it occurs as far south
as 46° 30', occurring also in the Chatham Islands and
Norfolk Island, though not on Lord Howe> x *Wd. It


seems important, that this valuable plant should here he
brought universally under culture, particularly on any
inferior spare ground or on the sea-beaches or any rocky
declivity, where it may be left unprotected to itself, as no
pastoral animal will touch it. It is evident, that the natural
upgrowth will soon be inadequate to the demand for the
plant. Merely torn into shreds the leaves serve at once in
gardens and vineyards as cordage, and for this purpose,
irrespective of its showy aspect, the Phormium has been
distributed from our Botanic Garden since the last 14 years.
From the divided roots any plantation can gradually be
increased, or this can be done more extensively still by
sowing the seeds. In all likelihood the plant would thrive
and become naturalized in the Auckland’s and Campbell’s
Group, in Kerguelen’s Land, the Falkland Islands, the
Shetland Islands and many continental places of both
hemispheres. Among the varieties three are better charac-
terized than the rest: The Tehore, the Swamp and the
Hill variety. The first and the last mentioned produce a
fibre fine and soft, yet strong, and the plants attain a height
of only about 5 feet, whereas the Swamp-variety grows to
double that height, producing a larger yield of a coarser
fibre, which is chiefly used for rope or paper making. As
might be expected, the richer the soil the more vigorous the
growth of the plant; it likes moreover now and then to be
overflown by fresh or brackish water, but it will not live if
permanently sunk into wet. In swampy ground trenches
should be dug to divert the surplus of humidity. Fibre free
from gum-resin properly dressed withstands moisture as well
as the best Manilla rope. Carefully prepared the fibre can also
be spun into various textile durable fabrics, either by itself or
mixed with cotton, wool or flax. In October last, the sale
of Phormium fi . e in on was 11,500 bales, ranging in
price from £l9 to £3l. The tow can also be converted into
paper, distinguished for its strength and whiteness. The
London price of Phormium fibre for this purpose is from
£lO to £2O per ton.
For further details on the utilization of this plant the elaborate
reports of the Hew Zealand Commission for Phormium


should be consulted. One of the dwarf varieties is Phor •
mium Colensoi, J. Hook.
Physalis Alkekengi, L.
The Strawberry-Tomato or Winter-Cherry. Middle and
South Europe, North Africa, Middle Asia, extending to
Japan, said to have come originally from Persia. A peren-
nial herb. The berry, which is red and of a not unpleasant
taste, has some medicinal value. The leaves contain a
bitter principle: Physalin.
Physalis angulata, L.
In many tropical countries, extending as a native plant to
the northern parts of the United States and to Japan. An
annual herb. Yellowish ; the berries edible. P. minima L.
(P. parvijlora, E. Br.) appears to be a variety and extends
also into tropical Australia.
Physalis Peruviana, U.
Temperate and tropical America, widely naturalized in many
countries of the warmer zones. With double inaptness
called the Cape Gooseberry. A perennial herb; but for
producing its fruit well, it requires early renovation. The
acidulous berries can be used as well as a table-fruit as for
preserves. Doubtless several other kinds of Physalis can
be utilized in the same manner. In colder countries the
P. Peruviana becomes annual.
Pimpinella Anisum, L.
The Anise Plant. Greece, Egypt, Persia. An annual.
The seed-like fruits enter into various medicines and condi-
ments, and are also required for the distillation of oil, rich
in Anethol.
Pimpinella Saxifraga, L.
Europe, North and Middle Asia. A perennial herb; its
root used in medicine ; a peculiar volatile oil can be distilled
from the root. P. magna , L., is a closely allied species, and
P. nigra, W., is a variety. The root of the last is particu-
larly powerful.


Pimpinella Sisarum, Benth. (Slum Sisarum, L.)
East Asia. A perennial herb. The bunches of small tubers
afford an excellent culinary vegetable.
Pipturus propinquus, Weddell.
Insular India, South Sea Islands and warmer parts of East
Australia. This bush is higher and rather more hardy than
Boehmeria nivea; but in fibre it is similar to that plant.
P. velutinus, Wedd., is closely allied. The few other species
serve probably as well for fibre.
Pistacia Lentiscus, L.
The Mastix Tree. Mediterranean regions. A tall ever-
green bush, exuding the Mastix Resin mostly through
incisions into its bark. In Morocco it is extensively used
for hedges.
Pistacia Terebinthus, L.
Countries around the Mediterranean Sea. A tall bush or
* small tree with deciduous foliage. The fragrant Cyprian or
Chio Turpentine exudes from the stem of this species.
P. vera, L., is inserted already among the timber trees.
Pisum sativum, L.*
The Common Pea. Mediterranean countries and Western
Asia. This annual of daily use could hardly be left disregarded
on this occasion. Suffice it to say, that the herbage as a
nutritious fodder deserves more attention than it receives.
The green fruit contains Inosit-sugar and Cholesterin-fat.
A second species, P. Aucheri, Jaub. and Spach., which is
perennial, occurs in alpine elevations on the Taurus.
Plectocomia Himalaiana, Griffith.
Sikkim, up to 7000 feet. This Rattan-Palm requires moist
forest-land. Its canes are not durable, but this palm is an
object worthy of horticulture and would prove the hardiest
among its congeners.
Poa angustifolia, E- (P- serotina, Ehrh. P , fertilis, Host.)
Europe, North Asia, North America. A perennial pasture-
grass, allied to P. nemoralis. An excellent grass for moist
meadows and river-banks.


Poa aquatica, L. (Glyceria aquatica, Sm.)
Europe, North and Middle Asia, North America. This
conspicuous water-grass attains a height of 6 feet. It is
perennial, and deserves naturalization in our swamps.
Poa Brownii, Kunth, (.Erayrostis Brownii, Nees.)
Tropical and Eastern extra-tropical Australia, extending
rather widely through our Colony. It is here mentioned as
a valuable perennial species, keeping beautifully green in
our driest summers, even on poor soil. The section
Eragrostis of the genus Poa contains numerous species in
the hotter parts of the globe. Of these many would doubt-
less be hardy here and prove of pastoral value.
Poa cynosuroides, Betz.
North-eastern Africa, South Asia. A harsh perennial grass,
not serviceable for fodder, hut mentioned by Boyle as a
fibre-plant of North-western India, where it is valued as a
material for ropes. In this respect it may not surpass the
rough tufty variety of our own Poa Australis, B. Br., so
common on our river-bankss, from the leaves of which
excellent nets are made by the natives.
Poa distans, L.
Europe, North Africa, Middle and Northern Asia, North
America. Perennial. It is one of the limited number of
tender grasses, suited for moist saline soil, and thus affords
pasturage on coast marshes.
Poa fluitans, Scopoli. {Glycerin fluitans, B. Brown.)
Europe, North Africa, Middle and North Asia, North
America, The Manna-Grass. Perennial. Excellent for
stagnant water and slow-flowing streams. The foliage is
tender. The seeds are sweet and palatable, and are in
many countries used for porridge.
Poa maritima, Hudson.
Europe, North Africa, North Asia, North America, Its
long creeping roots help to bind the coast-sand. This grass
can also be depastured,


Poa nemoralis, L.
Europe, North and Middle Asia, North America. This
perennial grass can be grown on shady forest-land, as the
name implies, but it accommodates itself also to open places,
and will grow even among rocks. It endures alpine
winters.
Poa pratensis, L.
The ordinary English Meadow-Grass. A perennial species,
fit for any meadows, thriving early, and able to live also in
alpine localities. Better adapted for pasture than hay, but
by no means one of the very best grasses, though it resists
drought. It forms excellent sward, and with advantage
can be used for intermixing it with other pasture-grasses.
Poa trivialis, L.*
Europe, North Africa, Middle and Northern Asia. Also a
good perennial grass for mixture on pasture-land. One of
the best grasses for sowing on ground recently laid dry.
Sinclair regarded the produce of this Poa as superior over
many other kinds, and noticed the marked partiality, which
horses, oxen and sheep evince towards it. To thrive well it
wants rather moist and rich soil and sheltered places.
These few species of Poa have been singled out as recom-
mendable, because they are well tested. Euture experiments
beyond Europe will add others to lists of recommendations
like this.
Podophyllum peltatum, L.
North America. A perennial forest-herb, not without im-
portance for medicinal purposes. The root contains the
bitter alkaloidßerberin. Podophyllum Fmodi^d all., occurring
in the Indian mountains at a height from GOOO to 14,000
feet, can probably be used like the American species. The
berries of both are edible, though the root and leaves are
poisonous.
Pogostemon Patchouli, Pellet.
Mountains of India. A perennial herb, famed for its
powerful scent arising from a volatile oil, F. parviflorus,
Benth. and F, Ileyneanus, Benth. belong to this species.


Polygala Senega, L.
North America. A perennial herb. The root is of medicinal
value; its acrid principle is Saponin.
Prangos pabularia, Lindley.
Plateaus of Mongolia and Tibet. A perennial fodder-herb,
much relished by sheep, eligible for cold and arid localities,
and deserving naturalization on our alpine pasture-ground.
Other perennial species exist near the Mediterranean Sea ;
on the Atlas, the Caucasus and the Indian Highlands. P.
pabularia is regarded by some as the Silphium of Arrianus.
Pringlea antiscorbutica, W. Anderson and E. Br.*
The Cabbage or Horse-Eadish of Kerguelen’s Island. The
perennial long roots taste somewhat like Horse-Eadish. The
leaves in never-ceasing growth are crowded cabbage-like
into heads, beneath which the annual flower-stalks arise. The
plant ascends mountains in its native island to the height of
1400 feet, but luxuriates most on the sea-border. To Arctic
and other Antarctic countries it would be a boon. Probably it
would live not only on our shores, but also on our Alps.
Whalers might bring us the roots and seeds of this remark-
able plant, which seems to have never entered into culture
yet. Not even its flowers in a perfect state are known.
The plant was used by the celebrated Captain Cook and all
subsequent navigators, touching at yonder remote spot,
as Cabbage, and it proved to possess powerful properties
against scurvey. Dr. Hooker observes, that Pringlea can
sectionally be referred to Cochlearia. The whole plant is
rich in a pungent volatile oil. Through culture important
new culinary varieties may likely be raised from this plant.
The taste of this vegetable in its natural growth is like
Mustard and Cress, and the Kerguelen’s Land Cabbage,
when boiled, proved a wholesome and agreeable substitute
for the ordinary Cabbage.
Prosopis dulcis, Kunth.
Prom Mexico to the southern parts of the La Plata States.
A thorny shrub, growing finally to a tree, adapted for live-
fences. This is one of the species, yielding the sweetish


Algaroba-pods for cattle-fodder, and utilized even in some
instances for human food. As allied plants, besides the
following, may be mentioned: P. horrida , Humb., occurring
from the base of the Andes to the sand-shores of Peru;
-P. juliflora, Cand., growing from Mexico and West India to
Ecuador; P. Siliquastrum, Cand., extending from the
Chilian Andes apparently into the Argentine Province
Catamarka. A short communication on the American
Algaroba-trees was presented to our Parliament by the
writer in 1871.
Prosopis gdandulosa, Torrey.
Colorado, Arkansas, Texas. The pods of this thorny ever
green shrub or tree are also succulent. It exudes a gum,
not unlike Gum Arabic, and this is obtained so copiously,
that children could earn from 2 dollars to 3 dollars a day in
Texas while gathering it, latterly about 40,000 lbs. being
bought by druggists there. The tree attains a height of
30 feet, and its wood is excessively hard. The pods of
several species are rich in tannin.
Prosopis pubescens, Bentham.
Texas, California, New Mexico. Likely available for hedges,
with other species of other countries.
Prosopis spicifera, L.
India. A thorny tree, also with edible pods, possibly hardy
here.
Prosopis Stephaniana, Kunth.
Syria and Persia. A shrubby species for hedge-growth.
Primus Americana, Marshall. (P. nigra , Aiton.)
Canada, Eastern United States of America. A thorny tree,
furnishing the Yellow and Eed Plum of North America.
The fruit is roundish and rather small, but of pleasant taste.
Prunus Chisasa, Michaux.
North America, west of the Missisippi. On the prairies it
is only 3to 4 feet high. Fruit spherical, red, rather small,
with a tender usually agreeable pulp. Other species with
edible fruit occur in North America, such as P. purnila, L.>


P. Pennsylvania, L., P. Virginiana, L., P, serotina, Ehrh.,
but tbeir fruits are too small to render these plants of
importance for orchard culture, though they may also become
enlarged by artificial treatment.
Primus maritima, Wangenheim.
The Beach Plum of North America. A shrubby species, of
service not only for covering coast-sands, but also for its
fruit, which is crimson or purple, globular and measuring
trom a-half to one inch. It is not necessary to enter here
any notes on the generally known species of Prunus, which
have engaged already for years the keen attention of many
orchard-cultivators also in this Colony. Thus we possess in
this country numerous though not all the best varieties of
the Cherry (P. avinm, L. and P. Cerasus, L.J, of the Plum
(P. domestica, L.), of the Apricot (P. Armeniaca, L.) and of the
Cherry-Plum (P. myrobalana, L.), the latter Canadian, the
others European and Oriental. Information on these and
other varieties, to which we have added independently also
here, may be sought in “ Hogg’s Eruit Manual.” The
Almond (Amygdalus communis , L.) and the Peach (Amyg-
dalus Persica, L.) belong also generically to Prunus, as
indicated in 1813 by E. Gr. Hayne (“ Arznei Grewaechse,”
iv., 38) and finally settled by J. D. Hooker (Benth. and
Hook., gen. pi. i. ; 610), for which therefore now the names
P. Amygdalus and P. Persica should be adopted.
Prunus spinosa, L.
The Sloe or Blackthorn. Wild in many parts of Europe.
With its flowers it is one of the earliest plants to announce
the spring. Its tendency to throw out suckers renders the
bush less adapted for hedges of gardens than of fields, but
these suckers furnish material for walking-sticks. The
small fruits can be made into preserves. P. insititia, L., the
Bullace, with larger and sometimes yellow fruits, extends to
North Africa and Middle Asia. Dr. Hooker and other
phytographers consider P. domestica not specifically distinct
from P. spinosa. Of medicinal value are P. Lauro-Cerasus,
L., the evergreen Cherry-Laurel from the Orient, and
P. Fadus, L., the deciduous Birds Cherry, wh"** l " extends


from Europe to North Africa and West Asia. These and
most other species contain in their foliage and in some other
parts Amygdalin. Perhaps some of the species from
Eastern Asia, California and tropical America are eligible
for improving their fruit through horticultural skill. The
Sloe and others might with advantage be naturalized on
our forest streams.
Psamma arenaria, Poem, and Schult.
(-P. littoralis, Beauv. Galamagrostis arenaria , Roth.)
The Moram or Marrem or Bent Grass. Sand-coasts of
Europe, North Africa s nd Middle North America. One of the
most important of reeu / grasses, with long creeping roots,
for binding the moving drift sands on the sea shore, for the
consolidation of which in Europe chiefly this tall grass and
Elymus arenarius are employed Psamma Baltica, R.
and S., from the Baltic and North Sea, serves the same pur-
pose. Both can also be used in the manner of Sparta for
paper material.
Psidium Araca, Raddi.
From West India and Guyana to Peru and Southern Brazil,
where it is found in dry high-lying places. This is one of
the edible Guavas, recorded already by Piso and Marcgrav.
The greenish-yellow berry is of exquisite taste.
Psidium arboreum, Vellozo.
Brazil; province Rio de Janeiro. This Guava-fruit mea-
sures about one inch, and is of excellent flavor.
Psidium Cattleyanum, Sabine.*
The Purple Guava. Brazil and Uruguay. One of the
hardiest of the Guava-bushes, attaining finally a height of
20 feet. The purple berries are seldom above an inch long,
but of delicious flavor and taste, resembling thus far
strawberries. P. huxifolium , Nutt., of Florida, seems nearly
related to this species.
Psidium cinereum, Martins.
Brazil ; provinces Minas Geraes and Sao Paulo. Also
yielding an edible fruit.


Psidium cordatum, Sims.
The Spice Guava. West India. This one attains the
height of a tree. Its frnit edible.
Psidium cuneatum, Cambess.
Brazil; province Minas Geraes. Bruit greenish, of the
size of a Mirabelle Plum.
Psidium grandifolium, Martius.
Brazil; provinces Rio Grande do Sul, Parana, Sao Paulo,
Minas Greraes, where the climate is similar to Southern
Queensland. A. shrub of rather dwarf growth. The berries
edible, size of a walnut.
Psidium Guayava, Raddi.*
(P. pomiferum, L. P. pyriferum, L.)
The large Yellow Guava. Prom West India and Mexico
to South Brazil. Por this handsome evergreen and useful
bush universal attention should be secured anywhere in our
warm lowlands, for the sake of its aromatic wholesome
berries, which will attain the size of a hen’s egg and can be
converted into a delicious jelly. The pulp is generally
cream-colored or reddish, but varies in the many varieties,
which have arisen in culture, some of them bearing all the
year round. Propagation is easy from suckers, cuttings or
seeds. Many other berry-bearing Myrtaceae (of the genera
Psidium, Myrtus, Myrcia, Marliera, Calyptranthes, Eugenia)
furnish edible fruits in Brazil and other tropical countries,
but we are not aware of their degrees of hardinesss. Berg
enumerates as esculent more than half a hundred for Brazil
alone, of which the species of Campomanesia may safely be
transferred to Psidium.
Psidium incanescens, Martius.
Brazil; from Minas Geraes to Rio Grande do Sul. This
Guava-bush attains a height of 8 feet. Berry edible.
Psidium polycarpon, Al. Anderson.*
Prom Guiana to Brazil, also in Trinidad. A comparatively
small shrub, bearing prolifically and almost continuously its
yellow berries, which are of the size of a large cherry and of
exquisite taste.


Psidium rufum, Martins.
Brazil, in the province Minas Geraes, on sub-alpine heights.
This Guava-hush gains finally a height of 10 feet, and is
likely the hardiest of all the species, producing palatable
fruit.
Ptychosperma Alexandrae, P. v. Mueller.
The Alexandra Palm. Queensland, as well in tropical as
extra-tropical latitudes. The tallest of Australian Palms,
and one of the noblest form in the whole empire of vegeta-
tion. It exceeds 100 feet in height, and is likely destined
to grace any shady moist grove free from frost in this and
other countries, as it seems less tender than most palms.
The demand for seeds has already been enormous.
Ptychosperma Cunninghami, Wendland.
East Australia, as far south as Illawarra; thus one of the
most southern of all palms. This also is a very high species,
destined to take here a prominent position in decorative
plantations. Several species occur in Peegee and other
islands of the Pacific Ocean, and again others might be
obtained from India, but they are probably not so hardy as
ours. Though strictly speaking of no industrial value these
palms are important for horticultural trade, and are objects
eminently fitted for experiments in acclimation.
Ptychosperma elegans, Blume.
(P. Seaforthia, Miq. Seaforthia elegans, R, Br.)
Litoral forests of tropical Australia. Also a lofty magnifi-
cent Feather-Palm. Its leaflets are erose. It may prove
hardy.
Pycnanthemum incanum, Michaux.
North America. A perennial herb, in odor resembling both
Pennyroyal and Spearmint. It likes to grow on rocky
woodland, and on such it might be easily naturalized.
Pycnanthemum montanum, Michaux.
The Mountain-Mint of North America. A perennial herb
of pleasant aromatic mint-like taste. These two particular
species have been chosen from several North American


kinds to demonstrate, that we may add by their introduction
to the variety of our odorous garden herbs. They may also
be subjected with advantage to distillation.
Pyralaria edulis, Meissner.
Nepaul, Khasia, Sikkim. A large umbrageous tree. The
drupaceous fruit is used by the inhabitants for food. A few
other species occur in Upper India, one on the high moun-
tains of Ceylon and one in North America. The latter,
P. pubera, Mich., can be utilized for the oil of its nuts.
Pyrus coronaria, L.
The Crab-Apple of North America. This showy species is
mentioned Imre as worthy of trial-culture, since it is likely,
that it would serve well as stock for grafting. It seems
unnecessary to refer here to any of the forms of Fyrus
communis , L., P. Malus , L., P. Cydonia , L., and P. Oer-
manica, J. Hook. ( Mespilus Germanica, L.), but it may pas-
singly be observed, that curious fruits have been produced
latterly in North America by the hybridisation of the Apple
with the Pear. A bitter Grlycosid, namely Phlorrhizin, is
obtainable from the bark of Apple and Pear Trees, particu-
larly from that of the root, while a volatile Alkaloid, namely
Trimethylamin, can be prepared from the flowers.
Quercus Mongolica, Fischer.*
Mandschuria. One of the two species, on which mainly (if
not solely) the silk insect peculiar to Oak trees is reared,
as shown by Dr. Hance. Q. senata, Thuub. ( Q. obovata,
Bunge), the second of the principal Oaks for the production
of silk, has been mentioned previously in the Accli-
matisation Society’s list of trees yielding timber, and has
through the exertions of the writer found its way already to
Australia.
Rafiiia amplexicaulis, Thunberg.
South Africa. The root of this bush is sweet like Liquorice,
and is administered in medicine. Bafnia perfoliata,
E. Meyer, also from South Africa, fqyrdshes likewise a
medicinal root.


Reseda Euteola, E.
The Weld. Middle and South Europe, Middle Asia, North
Africa. A herb of one or two years’ duration. A yellow
dye (Luteolin) pervades the whole plant.
Reseda odorata, E.
The true Mignonette. North Africa and Syria. A herb of
one or very few years’ duration. The delicate scent can
best be concentrated and removed by enfleurage.
Rhamnus catharticus, E.
The Buckthorn. Middle and South Europe, North Africa,
Middle Asia. It can be utilized as a hedge-plant. The
berries are of medicinal value, as indicated by the specific
name. The foliage and bark can be employed for the pre-
paration of a green dye.
Rhamnus chlorophorus, Lindl.
China. Erom the bark a superior green pigment is pre-
pared. R. util is, from the same country, serves for the like
purpose. This kind of dye is particularly used for silk, and
known as Lokao.
Rhamnus infectorius, E.
On the Mediterranean Sea, and in the countries near to it.
The berry-like fruits of this shrub are known in commerce
as Graines d’Avignon and Graines de Perse, and produce a
valuable green dye. Other species seem to supply a similar
dye material, for instance JR. saxatilis, L., R. omygdalinus ,
Desf., R. oleoides, L.
Rhapis flahelliformis, E- fib
China and Japan. This exceedingly slender palm attains
only a height of a few feet. The stems can be used for various
small implements. It is one of the best plants for table
decoration.
Rhaponticum acaule, Cand.
On the Mediterranean Sea. A perennial herb. The root
is edible.


Rheum australe, Don.*
(-Z2, Emodi, Wall, JR. Weblianum , Eoyle.)
Himalaian regions up to 16,000 feet. From this species at
least a portion of the medicinal Ehubarb is obtained, most
likely several species furnish Ehubarb-root, and its quality
depends probaby much on the climatic region and the geo-
logic formation, in which the plant grows. Should we wish
to cultivate any species here for superior medicinal roots,
then clearly localities in our higher and drier alpine tracts
should be chosen for the purpose. Hayne regards the pre-
sence of much yellowish pigment in the seed-shell as indi-
cating a good medicinal Khubarb-plant. As much as 5 lbs.
of the dried drug are obtained from a single plant, several
years old. An important orange-red crystalline substance,
Emodin, allied to Crysophanic acid, occurs in genuine
Ehubarb.
Rheum Rhaponticum, L.
Erom the Volga to Central Asia. This species together
with B. Tataricum, L. fil, B. undulatum, L., and a few others,
all Asiatic (one extending to Japan) provide their acidulous
leaf-stalks and unexpanded flower-mass for culinary pur-
poses. Ehubarb leaves can also be used in the manner of
Spinage. B. palmatum, L., often considered to yield the
best Ehubarb root, is an insular plant of North-eastern Asia,
but may in the alpine deserts far inland become a source of
the genuine root, so long ascribed to it. That is the only
one with deeply jagged leaves.
Rhus copallina, L.
North America, extending to Canada. A comparatively
dwarf species. This can also be used for tanning. A resin
for varnishes is also obtained from this shrub.
Rhus Coriaria, L. #
The Tanner’s Sumach. Countries around the Mediterranean
Sea. The foliage of this shrub or small tree, reduced to
powder, forms the Sumach of commerce. Many localities
in our colony are particulary well adapted for the growth
of this bush. It is remarkably rich in Tannic acid, yielding


as much as 30 per cent., and extensively used for the pro-
duction of a superior Corduan- or Maraquin-leather. The
cultivation presents no difficulty. Sumach can also be used
for ink and various particularly black dyes. Under favor-
able circumstances as much as a ton of Sumach is obtained
from an acre.
Rhus Cot inns, L.
The Scotino, Countries at the Mediterranean Sea. The
wood of this bush furnishes a yellow pigment. The Sotino,
so valuable as a material for yellow and black dye, and as a
superior tanning substance, consists of the grinded foliage
of this plant.
Rhus glabra, L.
North America, extending to 54° N.L. This Sumach shrub
will grow on rocky and sterile soil. It produces a kind of
gall, and can also be used as a good substitute for the
ordinary Sumach. This species can easily be multiplied
from suckers. It will live on poor soil, American sumachs
contain generally from 15 to 20 per cent. Tannin.
Rhus lucida, L.
South Africa. This shrub proved here of particular adapta-
bility for forming hedges. About half a hundred South
African species are known, of which probably some could be
utilized like ordinary Sumach, but hitherto we have remained
unacquainted with the nature and degree of any of their
tanning and coloring principles.
Rhus semialata, Murray.
China and Japan. This shrub produces a kind of nut-
galls.
Rhus typhina, L.
The Staghorn Sumach. North America, extending to
Canada. This species will grow to a tree of 30 feet high.
Its wood is of an orange tinge. Through incisions into the
bark a kind of Copal is obtained. The leaves can be used
like ordinary Sumach. This bush can be reared on inferior
land.


Ribes aureum, Pursh.
Arkansas, Missouri, Oregon. This favorite bush of our
shrubberies would likely on our forest-streams produce its
pleasant berries, which turn from yellow to brown or black.
Allied to this is B. tenuiflorum , Lindl., of California and the
nearest States, with fruits of the size of red currants, of
agreeable flavor, and either dark purple or yellow color.
Ribes divarication, Douglas.
California and Oregon. One of the Gooseberries of those
countries. Berries smooth, black, about one-third of an
inch in diameter, pleasant to the taste. Culture might
improve this and many of the other species. R. Nuttalli
{B. villosum, Nutt., not of Gay, nor of Wallich) is an allied
plant also from California.
Ribes Floridum, I’Herit.
The Black Currant of North America. The berries resemble
in odor and taste those of R. nigrum. Allied to this is
B. Hudsonianum, Rich., from the colder parts of North
America.
Ribes Griffithi, j. Hook, and T. Thoms.
Himalaia, at a height of 10,000 to 13,000 feet. Allied to
R. rubrum, bearing similar but larger berries of somewhat
austere taste. The naturalization of this Currant-bush on
our highest alps may prove of advantage. B. laciniatum,
H. and T., is likewise a Himalaian species with red berries,
and so B. glaciate, Wall. Furthermore B. villosum, Wall.
(. B. leptostachyum, Decaisne) comes from the Indian high-
lands and seems worthy of introduction.
Ribes Grossularia, L.
The ordinary Gooseberry. Europe, North Africa, Western
Asia, on the Himalaian Mountains up to a height ol
12,000 feet. This bush, familiar to every one, is mentioned
here merely to indicate the desirability of naturalizing it in
our alpine regions, whore no fruits equal to it in value exist.
Ribes hirtellum, Michaux.
The commonest smooth Gooseberry of North America. It
likes moist ground.


Ribes nigrum, L.
The Black Currant. Middle and Northern Asia, Europe,
North America, ascending the Himalaian and Tibet moun-
tains to a height of 12,000 feet. Commonly cultivated
already in the cooler parts of Victoria, but also particularly
fit to be dispersed through our forests and over our alps.
Ribes niveum, Lindl.
One of the Oregon Gooseberry-bushes. Berries small,
black, of a somewhat acid taste and rich vinous flavor.
Ribes rotundifolium, Michaux.
North America. Yields part of the smooth Gooseberries of
the United States. The fruit is small, but of delicious taste.
Ribes rubrum, L.
The ordinary Bed Currant. Europe, North America, North
and Middle Asia, in the Himalaian Mountains ceasing
where E. Griffithi commences to appear. One of the best
fruit-plants for jellies and preserves that could be chosen
for the colder mountain altitudes of our Colony. The root-
bark contains Phlorrhizin. Perhaps other species, than
those recorded here, among them some from the Andes,
may yet deserve introduction, irrespective of their showiness,
for their fruits.
Ricinus communis, L.*
The Castoroil-plant. Indigenous to the tropical and sub-
tropical zones of Asia and Africa. A shrubby very decora-
tive plant, attaining the size of a small tree. It was well
known to the Egyptians 4000 years ago, and is also men-
tioned already in the writings of Herodotos, Hippocrates,
Dioscorides, Theophrastos, Plinius and other ancient physi-
cians, philosophers and naturalists. The easy and rapid
growth, the copious seeding and the early return of produce,
render this important plant of high value in a clime like
ours, more particularly as it will thrive on almost any soil,
and can thus be raised even on arid places, without being
scorched by hot winds. It may thus become an important
plant also for culture in our desert-tracts, and is evidently
destined to be one of our most eligible oil-plants for tech-


nical uses, irrespective of the value of its oil for medicinal
purposes. The seeds contain about 50 per cent. oil. To
obtain the best medicinal oil, hydraulic pressure should be
employed, and the seeds not be subjected to heat; the seed-
coat should also be removed prior to the extracting process
being proceeded with. A screw-press suffices however for
ordinary supply to obtain the oil. By decantation and some
process of filtration it is purified. Bor obtaining oil to be
used for lubrication of machinery or other technologic pur-
poses, the seeds may be pressed and prepared by various
methods under application of heat and access of water.
Castoroil is usually bleached simply by exposure to solar
light, but this procedure lessens to some extent the laxative
properties of the oil. It dissolves completely in waterless
alcohol and in ether, and will become dissolved also in spirit
of high strength, to the extent of three-fifths of the weight
of the latter. Solutions of this kind may become valuable
for various technic purposes, and afford some tests for the
pureness of the oil. If pressed under heat it will depose
margaritin. Heated in a retort about one-third of the oil
will distil over, and a substance resembling india-rubber
remains, which saponizes with alkalies. Other educts are
at the same time obtained, which will likely become of indus-
trial value. These facts are briefly mentioned here merely
to explain, that the value of this easily produced oil is far
more varied than is generally supposed, and this remark
applies with equal force to many other chemical compounds
from vegetable sources, briefly alluded to in this present
euumerative treatise. The seeds contain also a peculiar
alkaloid : Eicinin. The solid chemic compound of Castor-
oil is the crystalline Isocetin-Acid (a Glycerid). The oil
contains also a non-crystalline acid peculiar to it (Eicin-acid).
Bor the production of a particular kind of silk the Eicinus-
plant is also important, inasmuch as the hardy Bombyx
Cynthia requires for food the leaves of this bush. The
value of Castoroil imported last year into Victoria was
according to the Custom-returns not less than £23,755.
Even a few of the seeds if swallowed, will produce poisonous
effect.


Rosa contifolia, L.
The Cabbage Hose. Indigenous on the Caucasus and seem-
ingly also in other parts of the Orient. Much grown in
South Europe and South Asia for the distillation of Eose-
water and Oil or Attar of Eoses. From 12,000 to 16,000
roses, or from 250 lbs. to 300 lbs. of rose-petals are required
according to some calculations, for producing a single ounce
of Attar through ordinary distillation. The flowers require
to be cut just before expansion ; the calyx is separated and
rejected; the remaining portions of the flowers are then
subjected to aqueous distillation, and the saturated rose-
water, so obtained, is repeatedly used for renewed distilla-
tion, when from the overcharged water the oil separates on
a cold place and floats on the surface. But some other
methods exist for producing the oil, for instance it may be
got by distilling the rosebuds without water at the heat of
a saltwater bath. The odor may also he withdrawn by
alcoholic distillation from the Eoses, or be extracted by the
“ enfluerage ” process. The latter is effected by placing the
flowers, collected while the weather is warm, into shallow
frames covered with a glass-plate, on the inner side of which
a pure fatty substance has been thinly spread. The odor of
the flowers is absorbed by the adipose or oleous substance,
though the blossoms do not come with it in direct contact;
fresh flowers are supplied daily for weeks. The scent is
fiuallv withdrawn from its matrix by maceration with pure
alcohol. Mr. Jos. Bosisto’s method for obtaining the most
delicate and precious volatile oils will likely be applicable
also to the Eose, and prove more advantageous both in labor
and gain than any other process. Purified Eucalyptus-oil
can be used for diluting Eose-oil, when it is required for the
preparation of scented Soap.
Rosa Damascena, Miller.
Orient. Allied to the preceding species, and also largely
used for the production of essential Oil of Eoses.
Rosa Gallica, L.
The French or Dutch Eose. Middle and South Europe,
Orient, The intensely colored buds of this species are par


ticularly chosen for drying. These however may be got
also from other kinds of Eoses.
Rosa Indica, L.
Noisette Eose. From Upper India to China and Japan.
Some Eoses of the sweetest scent are derived from this
species.
Rosa laevigata, Michaux (E. Sinica, Aiton.)
The Cherokee Eose. China and Japan. Considered one
of the best Hedge-roses, and for that purpose much employed
in North America. It serves also well for bowers. Allied
to the foregoing species.
Rosa moschata, Miller.
North Africa and South Asia as far east as Japan. From
the flowers of this extremely tall climbing species also
essential oil is obtained. The Attar thus derived from Eoses
of not only different varieties hut even distinct species
must necessarily be of various quality.
Rosa sempervirens, L.
From South Europe through Southern Asia to Japan. One
of the best Eose-bushes for covering walls, fences and similar
structures. Also the flowers of this species can be utilized
for Eose-oil.
Rosa setigera, Michaux.
North America, where it is the only climbing Eose-bush.
It deserves introduction on account of its extremely rapid
growth, 10 feet to 20 feet in a season. Its flowers however
are nearly inodorous.
Other original species of Eoses deserve our attention, Dr. J.
Hooker admitting about 30, all from the Northern Hemis-
phere. But on the snow-clad unascended mountains of
Borneo, Sumatra, New G-uinea and Africa south of the
Equator yet perhaps new Eoses may be discovered, as they
have been traced south to Abyssinia already.
Rosmarinus officinalis, L.
The Eosmary. Countries around the Mediterranean Sea.
This well-known bush is mentioned here as a medicinal


plant, from which a distilled oil is rather copiously obtain-
able. One of our best plants for large garden edgings.
The oil enters into certain compositions of perfumery.
Rubia cordifolia, L. {B. Mungista, Eoxb.)
From the Indian Highlands through China and Siberia to
Japan ; also occurring in various parts of Africa, as far
south as Caffraria and Natal. This perennial plant produces
also a kind of Madder. Probably other species yield like-
wise .Dye-roots. The genus is represented widely over the
globe, but as far as known not in Australia.
Rubia tinctorum, L.
The Madder. Countries around the Mediterranean Sea.
A perennial herb of extremely easy culture. The roots
merely dried and pounded form the dye. The chemical
contents are numerous ; in the herb: Eubichloric and
Eubitannic acid ; in the root: Alizarin, Purpurin, Eubiacin,
Eubian, Euberythrin acid, and three distinct resins ; also
Chlorogenin, Xanthin and Eubichloric acid. On the five
first depend the pigments produced from the root. Madder
is one of the requisites for Alizarin Ink.
Rubus Canadensis, L.*
The Dewberry of North America. A shrub of trailing
habit. Pruit black, of excellent taste, ripening earlier than
that of R. villosus, Ait., which constitutes the High Black-
berry of the United States, with large fruits.
Rubus Chamaemorus, L.
The Cloud-Berry. North Europe, North Asia, North
A merica, particularly in the frigid zone. A perennial but
herbaceous plant; a pigmy amongst its congeners. Never-
theless it is recommended for introduction to our spongy
mossy alpine moors, on account of its grateful amber-colored
or red fruit. All the species can readily be raised from
seeds. B. Arcticus, L., also with edible fruit, is in the high
north usually its companion. Near to us we have a similar
little herb, living for a great part of the year in snow, namely
Bwbus O-imnianus, Hook. It occurs on the alpine heights
of Tasmania, from whence it might be easily transferred to


our snowy mountains and those of New Zealand. The
fruit of R. Q-unnianus is red and juicy, hut not always well
developed.
Rubus cuneifolius, Pursh.
The Sand Blackberry. North America. A dwarf shrub.
The fruit is of agreeable taste.
Rubus deliciosus, Torrey.
On the sources of the Missouri. An erect shrub. Fruit
Easpberry-like, large and grateful.
Riibus fruticosus, L.*
The ordinary Blackberry or Bramble. All Europe, North
Africa, Middle and Northern Asia. This shrub bears well
in our clime. In some countries it is a favorite plant for
hedges. It likes above all calcareous soil, though it is con-
tent with almost any, and deserves to be naturalized on the
rivulets of our ranges. R. corylifolius, Sm., R. suberectus,
Andr. and R. leucostachys, Sm., are varieties like many other
named kinds of European Blackberries, or perhaps belong to
the closely allied R. caesius, L., the English Dewberry ; or
in some instances hybrid forms may have arisen from the
two, although the generality of these various Blackberry -
bushes bear their fruits freely enough.
Rubus Idaeus, L.*
The ordinary Easpberry. Europe, Northern and West
Asia. It is mentioned here, to point out the desirability of
naturalizing the plant in our mountains and on river-banks.
It would live also on our highest alps, where the native
Easpberry ( R. parvifolius, L.) produces much finer fruits
than in our lowlands. The fruits contain Stereopten.
Rubus macropetalus, Douglas*
California and Oregon. An unisexual shrub. Fruit black,
oval-cylindric, particularly sweet.
Rubus Occident alis, L.*
The Black Easpberry or Thimbleberry. North America.
A species with woody stems and nice fruits, with a glaucous
bloom, well flavored and large. It ripens early.


Rubus odoratus, L *
North America. A kind of Easpberry. A handsome
species on account of its large purple flowers. Berry
edible. Culture would doubtless enhance the value of the
fruits of many of these Eubi. Hybridising might be tried.
Rubus strigosus, Michaux,
North America. Closely allied to the European Easpberry.
Its fruits large, also of excellent taste. It would lead too
far to enumerate other kinds of Eubus, although about a
hundred genuine species occur, which render the genus one
of very wide dispersion over the globe.
Rubus trivialis, Michaux.*
Southern States of North America. Another shrubby
species with good edible fruits, which are large and black.
The plant will thrive in dry sandy soil.
Rumex Acetosa, L.
The Kitchen Sorrel. Europe, Middle and North Asia to
Japan, also in the frigid zone of North America. A peren-
nial herb. The tender varieties, particularly the Spanish
one, serve as pleasant aciduous vegetables, but must
be used in moderation, as their acidity like that of the speeies
of Oxalis (Wood-sorrel) depends on Binoxylate of potash.
Rumex scutatus, E.
The Erench Sorrel. Middle and South Europe, North
Africa, Orient. Also perennial, and superior to the fore-
going as a culinary plant. Both and the following are of
use against scurvy and most easily reared.
Rumex vesicarius, L.
South Europe, Middle Asia, North Africa. An annual berb
of similar utility as the two former ones.
Ruta graveolens, E.
The Eue. Mediterranean countries and the Orient. The
foliage of this acrid and odorous shrub, simply dried, con-
stitutes the Eue-herb of medicine. The allied B. silvestris,
Mill., is still more powerful in its effect. These plants and
others of the genus contain a peculiar volatile oil and a
Grlycosid (Eutin).


Sabal Adansoni, Guernsey.
Dwarf Palmetto. South Carolina, Georgia and Florida.
A stemless Fan-Palm, with the two following and
Chamaerops Hystrix attaining the most northerly positions
of any American palms.
Sabal Palmetto, Poem, and Bchult.*
Extends from Florida to North Carolina. The stem attains
a height of 40 feet. This noble Palm ought to grow on
our sandy coast-tracts, as in such it delights to live.
Sabal serrulata, P. and S.
South Carolina, Georgia and Florida. The stem grows to
8 feet high. The leaves can be used for cabbage-tree hats
and other purposes, for which palm-leaves are sought.
Saccharum officinarum, E.
The Sugar-Cane. India, China, South Sea Islands, not
indigenons in any part of America or Australia. Sugar-
cane having been cultivated in Spain and other countries
on the Mediterranean Sea, it will be worthy of further trial,
whether in the warmest parts of our Colony under similar
climatic conditions sugar from cane can be produced to
advantage. Though the plant will live unprotected in the
vicinity of Melbourne, it thrives there not sufficiently for
remunerative culture. But it may be otherwise in East
Gipps Land or along the Murray Piver and its lower
tributaries. In the United States the profitable culture of
cane ceases at 32° N.L., in China it extends only to the 30°
N.L. In the last-mentioned country the culture of Sugar-
cane dates from the remotest antiquity ; moreover we have
from thence a particular kind ( S. Sinense, Poxb.), which is
hardier and bears drought better than the ordinary cane;
this kind needs renewal only every second or third year, and
ripens in seven months if planted early in spring, but if
planted in autumn and left standing for fully a year the
return of sugar is larger. Moderate vicinity to the sea is
favorable for the growth of canes.
The multiplication of all sorts of Sugar-cane is usually effected
from top cuttings, but this cannot be carried on from the


same original stock for an indefinite period without deteriora-
tion ; and as seeds hardly ever ripen on the canes, new
plants must from time to time be brought from the distance.
Thus New Caledonia has latterly supplied its wild-growing
splendid varieties for replanting many sugar-fields in
Mauritius. The Bourbon variety is praised as one of the
richest for sugar: the Batavian variety ($. violaceum,
Tussac) is content with less fertile soil. Many other
varieties are known. Excessive rains produce a rank luxu-
riance of the canes on expense of the saccharine principle.
Bich manuring is necessary to attain good crops, unless in
the best of virgin soil. The lower leaves of the stem must
successively be removed, also superabundant suckers, to
promote the growth upwards, and to provide ventilation and
light. Out of the remnants of Sugar-cane Molasses, Rum
and Taffia can be prepared. The average yield of Sugar
varies from 1 ton 6 cwt. to 3 tons for the acre. Eor fuller
information the valuable local work of Mr. A. McKay,
“ The Sugar-cane in Australia,’’ should be consulted. The
stately S. spontaneum, L., which extends from India to
Egypt, is available for scenic culture. It attains a height
of 15 feet. Other tall kinds of Saccharum occur in South
Asia.
Sagittaria lancifolia, L.
Erom Virginia to the Antilles. This very handsome aquatic
plant can douhless be utilized like the following species. It
attains a height of 5 feet.
Sagittaria obtusa, Muehlenberg. (S. latifolia, Willd.)
North America, where it replaces the closely allied S. sagit-
tifolia. A few other conspicuous species are worthy of
introduction.
Sagittaria sagittifolia, E-
Europe, North and Middle Asia, east to Japan. One of the
most showy of all hardy water-plants ; still not alone on that
account deserving naturalization, hut also because its root is
edible. If once established this plant maintains its ground
well, and might occupy spots neither arable nor otherwise
utilized.


Salix nigra, Marshall. (A Purshiana , Sprengel.)
The Black Willow of North America. It attains a height
ot 25 feet. This species was not included in the list of trees,
published by the Acclimatisation Society in its last year’s
report. The Black Willow is one used for basket-work,
although it is surpassed in excellence by some other species,
and is more important as a timber-willow. IMr. W. Scaling,
of Basford, includes it among the sorts, which he recom-
mends in his valuable publication “ The Willow ” (London,
1871). 1 rom his treatise, resting on unrivalled experience,
it will be observed, that he anew urges the adoption of the
Bitter Willow (also called the Rose-Willow or the Whipcord-
Willow), S. purpurea, L., for game-proof hedges, this species
scarcely ever being touched by cattle, rabbits and other
herbivorous animals. Not only for this reason, but also for
its very rapid growth and remunerative yield of the very
best of Basket material he recommends it for field hedges.
Cuttings are planted only half-a-foot apart, and must be
entirely pushed into the ground. The annual produce from
such a hedge is worth 4s. to ss. for the chain. For addi-
tional strength the shoots can be interwoven. In rich
bottoms they will grow from 7 feet to 13 feet in a year.
The supply of basket material from this species has fallen
very far short of the demand in England. The plant grows
vigorously on light soil or warp land, but not on clay.
8. rubra , Huds., is also admirably adapted for hedges. The
real Osier, S. viminalis, L., is distinguished by basketmakers
as the soft-wooded Willow, and is the best for rods requiring
two years’ age, and also the most eligible for hoops, but
inferior to several other species for basket manufacture.
8. triandra, L., is a prominent representative of the hard-
wooded Basket Willows, and comprises some of the finest
varieties in use of the manufacturers. A crop in the third
year after planting from an acre weighs about 12 tons,
worth £3 for the ton. A fragilis , L., and 8. alba, L., are
more important as timber-willows, and for growing hoop-
shoots. Their rapidity of growth recommends them also for
shelter plantations, to which advantage may be added their
inflammability and their easy propagation; the latter


quality they share with most Willows. Mr. Scaling’s
renewed advocacy for the formation of Willow-plantations
comes with so much force, that his advice is here given
though condensed in a few words. Osier-plantations come
into full bearing already in the third year; they bear for
ten years and then slowly decline. The raw-produce from
an acre in a year averages 6 tons to tons, ranging in
price from £2 10s. to £3 10s. for the ton (unpeeled).
Although 7000 acres are devoted in Britain to the culture
of Basket Willows (exclusive of spinneys and plantations
for the farmers’ own use), yet in 1866 there had to be
imported from the Continent 4400 tons of Willow-branches,
at a value of £44,000, while besides the value of the made
baskets imported in that year was equal to the above sum.
Laud comparatively valueless for root or grain crop can be
used very remuneratively for Osier-plantations. The soft-
wooded Willows like to grow in damper ground, than the
hard-wooded species. The best peeled Willow-branches
fetch as much as £25 for the ton. Peeling is best effected
by steam, by which means the material is also increased in
durability. No Basket Willow will thrive in stagnant water.
Osier-plantations in humid places should therefore be
drained. The cuttings are best taken from branches one
or two years old, and are to be planted as close as 1 foot by
H foot. No part of the cutting must remain uncovered, in
order that only straight shoots may be obtained ; manuring
and ploughing between the rows is thus also facilitated,
after the crop has been gathered, and this, according to the
approved Belgian method, must be done by cutting the
shoots close to the ground after the fall of the leaves.
Salvia officinalis, L.
The Garden Sage. Countries at the Mediterranean Sea. A
somewhat shrubby plant of medicinal value, pervaded by
essential oil. Among nearly half a thousand species of this
genus some are gorgeously ornamental.
Sambucns nigra, L.
The ordinary Elder. Europe, North Africa, Middle Asia.
The flowers are of medicinal value, and an essential oil can


be obtained from them. The wood can be utilized for shoe-
pegs and other purposes of artisans. The berries are used
for coloring of port wine and for other purposes of dye.
Santalum cyguorum, Miquel.
South-western Australia, where this tree yields scented
Sandal-wood.
Santalum Preissianum, Miq. (S. acuminatum , A. de Cand.)
The Quandang. Desert-country of extra-tropical Australia.
The fruits of this small tree are called Native Peaches. As
both the succulent outer part and kernel are edible, it is
advisable to raise the plant in desert-tracts, where the
species does not occur, since moreover it becomes gradually
sacrificed on many native places by pasture operations.
Santalum Yasi, Seemann,
The Sandal-tree of the Peegee Islands, where it grows on
dry and rocky hills. It is likely to prove hardy here, and
deserves with a few other species from the South Sea Islands,
yielding scented wood, test-culture in the warmest parts of
our Colony.
Saponaria officinalis, L.
The Soapwort or Puller’s Herb. Europe, North and Middle
Asia. A perennial herb of some technologic interest, as the
root can be employed with advantage in some final processes
of washing silk and wool, to which it imparts a peculiar
gloss and dazzling whiteness, without injuring in the least
the most sensitive colors. Experiments, instituted in the
laboratory of the Botanic G-arden of Melbourne, render it
highly probable, that Saponin, which produces the froth from
the soapwort, is also present in the bark of Acacia ( Albizzia )
lophantha , W. At all events a substance, closely resembling
Saponin, was unexpectedly detected (in the course of other
investigations entrusted to Mr. Pummel) in the bark of this
Acacia, and this substance occurred in so large a proportion
as to constitute 10 per cent, of the dry bark.
Satureja hortensis, L.
The Summer Savory. Countries around the Mediterranean
Sea. An annual scent herb, from which an essential aromatic


oil can be distilled. The culture of this and allied plants is
easy in the extreme.
Satureja montan a, L.
The Winter Savory. On arid hilly places at and near the
Mediterranean Sea, A perennial somewhat shrubby herb,
frequently used as a culinary condiment along with or in
place of the foregoing species, although it is scarcely equal
to it in fragrance.
Satureja Thymbra, L.
Countries at or near the Mediterranean Sea. A small ever-
green bush, with the flavor almost of Thyme. The likewise
odorous 8. Graeca, L., and 8. Juliana , L., have been trans-
ferred by Bentham to the closely cognate genus Micromeria;
they are in use since Hioscorides’ time, though not repre-
senting, as long supposed, the Hyssop of that ancient physi-
cian.
Saussurea Lappa, Bentham. {llaplotaxis Lappa, He Caisne.)
Cashmere. The aromatic root of this perennial species is
of medicinal value, and by some considered to be the Costus
of the ancients.
Schizostachyum Blumei, Nees.
Java. A lofty Bamboo. A few other species, less elevated,
occur in China, the South Sea and Philippine Islands and
Madagascar. The genus might well be united with Melo-
canna. The Bamboos being brought once more thus before
us, it may be deemed advisable, to place together into one
brief list all those kinds, which are recorded either as very
tall or as particularly hardy. Accordingly, from Major-
G-eneral Munro’s admirable monography (“ Linnean
Transact.,” 1858,) the succeeding enumeration is compiled,
and from that masterly essay, resting on very many years’
close study ot the richest collections, a few prefatory remarks
are likewise offered, to vindicate the wish of the writer of
seeing these noble and graceful forms of vegetation largely
transferred to every part of Australia, where they would
impress a grand tropical feature on the landscapes. Even
in our far southern latitudes Bamboos from the Indian


lowlands have proved to resist our occasional night frosts
of the low country. But in colder places the many sub-alpine
species could he reared. Be it remembered that Chusque
aristata advances to an elevation of 15,000 feet on the
Andes of Quito, indeed to near the zone of perpetual ice.
Arundinaria falcata, A. racemosa and A. spathiflora live on
the Indian highlands, at a zone between 10,000 feet and
11,000 feet, where they are annually beaten down by snow.
We may further recognize the great importance of these
plants, when we reflect on their manifest industrial uses, or
when we consider their grandeur for picturesque scenery,
or when we observe their resistance to storms of heat, or
when we watch the marvellous rapidity, in which many
develope themselves. Their seeds, though generally only in
long intervals produced, are valued in many instances higher
than rice. The ordinary great Bamboo of India is known
to grow 40 feet in 40 days, when bathed in the moist heat of
the jungles. The Bourbon Bamboo forms an impenetrable
sub-alpine belt of extraordinary magnificence in yonder
island. One of the Tesserim Bambusas rises to 150 feet,
with a diameter of the mast-like cane sometimes, measuring
fully 1 foot. The great West Indian Arthrostylidium is
sometimes nearly as high and quite as columnar in its form,
while the Dendrocalamus at Pulo Geum is equally colossal.
The Platonia Bamboo of the highest wooded mountains of
Parama sends forth leaves 15 feet in length and 1 foot in
width. Arundinaria macrosperma as far north as Phila-
delphia rises still in favorable spots to a height of nearly
40 feet. Through perforating with artistic care the huge
canes of various Bamboos musical sounds can be melodiously
produced, when the air wafts through the groves, and this
singular fact may possibly be turned to practice for checking
the devastations from birds on many a cultured spot.
Altogether 20 genera with 170 well-marked species are
circumscribed by General Munro’s consummate care; but
how may these treasures yet be enriched, when once the
snowy mountains of New Guinea through Bamboo jungles
become ascended, or when the alps on the sources of the
Nile, which Ptolemseus and Julius Ceesar already longed to


ascend, have become the territory also of phytologic
researches, not to speak of many other tropical regions as
yet left unexplored. Europe possesses no Bamboo; Aus-
tralia as far as hitherto ascertained only one (in the interior
of Arnhem’s Land). Almost all Bamboos are local, and
there seems really no exception to the fact, that none are
indigenous to both hemispheres, all true Bambusas being
Oriental.
The introduction of these exquisite plants is one of the easiest
imaginable, either from seeds or the living roots. The
Consuls at distant ports, the missionaries, the mercantile
and navigating gentlemen abroad and so particularly also
any travellers could all easily aid in transferring the various
Bamboos from one country to the other —from hemisphere
to hemisphere. Most plants of this kind here with us, once
well established in strength under glass, can be trusted out
to permanent locations with perfect and lasting safety, at
the commencement of the warm season. Indeed Bamboos
are hardier than most intra-tropical plants, and the majority
of them are not the denizens of the hottest tropical low-
lands, but delight in the cooler air of mountain regions. In
selecting the following array from General Munro’s mono-
graphy it must be noted, that it comprises only a limited
number, and that among those, which are already to some
extent known, but as yet cannot be defined with precision
in their generic and specific relation, evidently some occur,
which in elegance, grace and utility surpass even many of
of those now specially mentioned: —
Arundinaria Japonica, S. and Z. Japan. Height to 12 feet-
Arundinaria macrosperma, Mich, North America. Height
to 35 feet.
Arundinaria verticillata, Nees. Brazil. Height to 15 feet.
Arundinaria debilis, Thwaites. Ceylon ; ascends to 8000 feet.
A tall species.
Arundinaria acuminata , Munro. Mexico. Height to 20 feet.
Arundinaria falcata, Nees. Himalaia; ascends to 10000
feet. Height to 20 feet.


Arundinaria tesselata, Munro. South Africa; ascends to
6500 feet. Height to 20 feet.
Arundinaria callosa , Munro. Himalaia j ascends to 6000
feet. Height to 12 feet.
Arundinaria iLhasiana f Munro. Himalaia; ascends to
6000 feet. Height to 12 feet.
Arundinaria Rookeriana, Munro. Sikkim ; ascends to 7000
feet. Height to 15 feet.
Arundinaria suberecta, Munro. Himalaia; ascends to
4500 feet. Height to 15 feet.
Thamnocalamus Falconeri, J. Hook. Himalaia; ascends to
8000 feet. Tall.
Thamno calamus spathiflorus, Munro. Himalaia; ascends to
10000 feet. Tall.
Phyllostachys bambusoides , S. and Z. Himalaia, China,
Japan. Height to 12 feet.
Phyllostachys nigra, Munro. China, Japan. Height to 25 feet.
Arthrostylidium longijiorum, Munro. Venezuela; ascends
to 6000 feet.
Arthrostylidium Schomburgkii, Munro. Guiana ; ascends
to 6000 feet. Height to 60 feet.
Arthrostylidium excelsum , Giriseh. West India. Height to
80 feet; diameter 1 foot.
Arthrostylidium racemijlorum, Steudel. Mexico ; ascends to
7500 feet. Height to 30 feet.
Aulonemia Quexo, Goudot. New Granada, Venezuela, in
cool regions. Tall, climbing.
Merostachys ternata, Nees. South Brazil. Height to 20 feet.
Merostachys Clausseni, Munro. South Brazil. Height to
80 feet.
Merostachys Kunthii , Euprecht. South Brazil. Height to
30 feet.
Ghusquea simpliciflora, Munro. Panama. Height to
80 feet. Scandent.
Ghusquea abietifolia, Grisehach. West India. Tall, scandent.
Ghusquea Culcou, E. Desv. Chili. Height to 20 feet.
Straight.
Ghusquea unijlora, Steudel. Central America. Height to
20 feet.


Ghusquea Galleottiana, Euprecht. Mexico; ascends to
8000 feet.
Ghusquea montana, Philippi. Chili Andes. Height to 10 feet.
Ghusquea Dombeyana , Kunth. Peru ; ascends to 6000 feet.
Height to 10 feet.
Ghusquea Fendleri, Munro. Central America ; ascends to
12000 feet.
Ghusquea scandens, Kunth. Colder Central America.
Climbing, tall.
Ghusquea Quila, Kunth. Chili. Tall,
Ghusquea tenuiflora, Philippi. Chili. Height to 12 feet.
Ghusquea Gaudichaudiana, Kunth. South Brazil. Very tall.
Ghusquea capitulijiora , Trinius. South Brazil. Yery tall.
Blatonia nobilis, Munro. New Granada, colder region.
A astus Borbonicus, Grmel. Bourbon, Sumatra ; ascends to
4000 feet. Height to 50 feet.
Guadua Tagoara , Kunth. South Brazil; ascends to 2000
feet. Height to 30 feet.
Guadua latifolia, Kunth, Central America. Height to
24 feet.
Guadua macrostachya, Eupr. Guiana to Brazil. Height to
30 feet.
Guadua capitata , Munro. South Brazil. Height to 20 feet.
Guadua angustifolia, Kunth. Andes of South America.
Height to 40 feet.
Guadua virgata, Eupr. South Brazil. Height to 25 feet.
Guadua refracta , Munro. Brazil. Height to 30 feet.
Guadua paniculata, Munro. Brazil. Height to 30 feet.
Bambusa Tulda, Boxh. Bengal to Burmah. Height to 70 feet.
Bambusa nutans , Wall. Himalaia ; ascends to 7000 feet.
Bambusa tuldoides, Munro. China, Hong Kong, Formosa.
Bambusa pallida , Munro. Bengal to Khasia; ascends to
3500 feet. Height to 50 feet.
Bambusapolymorpha, Munro. Burmah, in the Teak region.
Height to 80 feet.
Bambusa Balcooa, Eoxb. Bengal to Assam. Height to
70 feet.
Bambusa Jiexuosa, Munro. China. Height to 12 feet.
Bambusa Blimeana , Schultes. Java. Tall.


Bambusa arundinacea, Roxb. Southern India. Height to
50 feet.
Bambusa spinosa, Roxb. Bengal to Burmah, Height to
100 feet.
Bambusa vulgaris, Wendl. (JB. Thouarsi, K.) Ceylon and
other parts of India. Height to 50 feet.
Bambusa Beecheyana, Munro. China. Height to 20 feet.
Bambusa marginata, Munro. Tenasserim • ascends to 5000
feet. Tall, scandent.
bambusa regia, Th. Thomson. Tenasserim. Height to 40 feet.
Bambusa Brandisii, Munro. Tenasserim ; ascends to 4000
feet. Height to 120 feet, circumference 2 feet.
Gigantoehloa maxima, Kurz. ( Bambusa verticillata, Willd.)
Java. Height to 100 feet
Gigantoehloa atter, Kurz. Java. Height to 40 feet.
Gigantoehloa heterostachya, Munro. Malacca. Height to
30 feet.
Oxytenanthera Abyssinica, Munro. Abyssinia to Angola ;
ascends to 4000 feet. Height to 50 feet.
Oxytenanthera nigro-ciliata, Munro. Continental and insular
India. Height to 40 feet.
Oxytenanthera albo-ciliata, Munro. Begu, Moulmein. Tall,
scandent.
Oxytenanthera Thivaitesii f Munro. {Bendro calamus mona-
delphus, Thwait.) Ceylon ■ ascends to 5000 feet.
Height to 12 feet.
Melocanna bamhusoides, Trin. Chittagong, Sylhet. Height
to 70 feet.
Schizostachyum Blumei, ISTees. Java. Very tall.
Cephalostachyum capitatum, Munro. Himalaia; ascends to
6000 feet. Height to 30 feet.
Cephalostachyum pallidum, Munro. Himalaia; ascends to
5000 feet. Tall.
Cephalostachyum pergracile, Munro. Burmah. Height to
40 feet.
Bseudostachyum polymorphum, Munro. Himalaia ; ascends
to 6000 feet. Yery tall.
Teinostachyum attenuatum, Munro. ( Bambusa attenuate,
Thw.) Ceylon ; ascends to 6000 feet. Height to 25 feet.


Teinostachyum Griffithi, Munro. Burmah. Tall and slender.
Beesha Travancorica, Beddome. Madras. Tall.
Beesha Bheedei, Kunth. Southern India, Cochin-China.
Height to 20 feet.
Beesha stridula, Munro. Ceylon.
Beesha capitata, Munro. Madagascar. Height to 50 feet.
Bendrocalamus strictus, Nees. India to Japan. Height to
100 feet.
Bendrocalamus serieeus, Munro. Behar; ascends to 4000
feet. Tall.
Bendrocalamus Jiagellifer, Munro. Malacca. Yery tall.
Bendrocalamus giganteus , Munro. Burmah, Penang. Ex-
ceedingly tall. Circumference 2 feet.
Bendrocalamus Hooheri, Munro. Himalaia ; ascends to 6000
feet. Height to 50 feet.
Bendrocalamus Samiltoni, Nees. Himalaia; ascends to
6000 feet. Height to 60 feet.
Binochloa Tjanhorreh, Buehse. Java, Philippines; ascends
to 4000 feet. Climbing.
Scilla esculenta, Ker. ( Camassia esculenta, Lindl.)
The Quamash. In the Western extra-tropic parts of North
America, on moist prairies. The onion-like bulbs in a
roasted state form a considerable portion of the vegetable
food, on which the aboriginal tribes of that part of the globe
are living. It is a pretty plant, and might be naturalized
here on our moist meadows.
Schoenocaulon officinale, A. Gray.
{Asa-Graya officinalis, Lindl.)
{Sabadilla officinalis , Brandt and Dierbach.)
Mountains of Mexico. A bulbous-rooted herb with leafless
stem, thus far specially distinct from any Yeratrum. It
furnishes the Sabadilla-seeds and yields two alkaloids : Yera-
trin and Sabadillin; a resinous substance : Helonin; also
Sabadillic and Yeratric acid. The generic names adopted
for this plant by Lindley and by Dierbach are coetaneous.
Scorzonera deliciosa, Gusson.*
Sicily. One of the purple-flowered species, equal if not
superior in its culinary use to the allied Salsify.


Scorzonera Hispanica, L •
Middle and South Europe, Orient. The perennial root of
this yellow-flowered herb furnishes not only a wholesome
and palatable food, hut also serves as a therapeutic remedy
much like Dandelion. Long boiling destroys its medicinal
value. Some other kinds of Scorzonera may perhaps he
drawn into similar use, there being many Asiatic species.
Scorzonera tuberosa, Pallas.
At the Wolga and in Syria. Also this species yields an
edible root, and so perhaps the Chinese S. alhicaulis, Bunge?
the Persian Sc. Scowifzii, Cand., the North African Sc.
undwlata, Vahl., the Greek Sc. ramosa, Sibth., the Russian
Sc. AstracJianica, Cand., the Turkish Sc. semicana, Cand., the
Iberian Sc. lanata , Bieberst. At all events careful culture
may render them valuable esculents.
Sebsea ovata, R. Brown.
Extra-tropic Australia and New Zealand. This neat little
annual herb can be utilized for its bitter tonic principle
(Gentian-bitter). S. albidijiora, E. v. M., is an allied species
from somewhat saline. ground. These plants disseminate
themselves most readily.
Secale cereale, L *
The Rye. Orient, but perhaps wild only in the country
between the Caspian and Black Seas. Mentioned here as
the hardiest of all grain-plants for our highest alpine regions.
There are annual and biennial varieties, while a few allied
species, hitherto not generally used for fodder or cereal
culture, are perennial. The Rye, though not so nutritious
as wheat, furnishes a most wholesome well-flavored bread,
which keeps for many days, and is most extensively used in
Middle and North Europe and Asia. This grain moreover
can be reared in poor soil and cold climates, where Wheat
will no longer thrive. In produce of grain Rye is not inferior
to Wheat in colder countries, while the y ield of straw is
larger, and the culture less exhaustive. It is a hardy cereal,
not readily subject to disease, and can be grown on some
kinds of peaty or sandy or moory ground. The sowing


must not be effected at a period of much wetness. Wide
sand tracts would be uninhabitable, if it was not for the
facility to provide human sustenance from this grateful corn.
It dislikes moist ground. Sandy soil gives the best grain.
It is a very remarkable fact, that since ages in some tracts
of Europe Eye has been prolifically cultivated from year to
year without interruption. In this respect Eye stands
favorably alone among alimentary plants. It furnishes in
cold countries also the earliest green-fodder, and the return
is large. When the Eye-grain becomes attacked by Cordy-
ceps purpurea , Fr., or very similar species of fungi, then it
becomes dangerously unwholesome, but then also a very
important medicinal substance, namely Ergot, is obtained.
The biennial Wallachian variety of Eye can be mown
or depastured prior to the season of its forming
grain. In alpine regions Wallachian Eye is sown with
Pine-seeds, for shelter of the Pine seedlings in the first
year.
Sechium edu.le, Swartz.
West India. The Chocho or Chayota. The large root of this
climber can be consumed as a culinary vegetable, while the
good-sized fruits are also edible. The plant comes in climates
like ours to perfection.
Selinum anesorrhizum, F. v. M.
(.Anesorrhiza Capensis, Ch. and Schl.)
South Africa. The root of this biennial herb is edible. A.
monfana, Eckl. and Zeyh., a closely allied plant, yields like-
wise an edible root, and so it is with a few other species of
the section Anesorrhiza.
Sesamum Indicum, L.
The Qingili. Southern Asia, extending eastwards to Japan.
This annual herb is cultivated as far as 42° N.L. The oil,
fresh expressed from the seeds, is available for table use.
One of the advantages of the culture of this plant consists
in its quick return of produce. The soot of the oil is used
for China-ink.


Sesbania aculeata, Persoon.
The Danchi. Intra-tropical and sub-tropical Asia, Africa
and Australia. This tall annual plant has proved adapted
for our desert-regions. It yields a tough fibre for ropes,
nets and cordage, valued at from £3O to £4O for the ton
Several congeneric plants can be equally well utilized.
Shepherdia argentea, Nuttall.
The Buffalo Berry. Prom the Missouri to Hudson’s Bay.
This bush bears red acidulous edible berries.
Sison Amomum, L.
Middle and South Europe. A herb of one or two years’
duration. It grows best on soil rich in lime. The seeds
can be used for condiment.
Smilax officinalis, Humboldt.
Hew Granada and other parts of Central America. This
climbing shrub produces at least a portion of the Columbian
Sarsaparilla.
Smilax medica, Cham, and Schl.
Mexico. This plant produces mainly the Sarsaparilla root of
that country.
Smilax papyracea, Duhamel.
Guyana to Brazil. The origin of the principal supply of
Brazilian Sarsaparilla is ascribed to this species, although
several others of this genus, largely represented in Brazil,
may yield the medicinal root also. In our fern-tree gullies
these plants would likely succeed in establishing themselves.
Smilax australis, E. Br., extends from the tropical coast-
parts of Australia to East Gipps Land. Neither this, nor
the East Australian S. glycyphylla, Smith, nor the Hew
Zealand Hipogonum scandens, Porst., have ever been sub-
jected to accurate therapeutic tests, and the same may be
said of numerous other Smilaces, scattered through the
warmer countries of the globe. The Italian Sarsaparilla,
which is derived from the Mediterranean S. asp era, L., has
been introduced into medicine,


Smyrnium Olusatrum, L.
The Alisander. Middle and South Europe, North Africa,
Western Asia. A biennial herb, which raw or boiled can
be utilized in the manner of Celery. The roots and the
fruitlets serve medicinal purposes.
Solaimm Aethiopicum, L.
Tropical Africa. Cultivated there and elsewhere on account
of its edible berries, which are large, red, globular and
uneven. The plant is annual.
Solatium Dulcamara, L.
Middle and South Europe, North Africa, Middle Asia. A
trailing half-shrub, with deciduous leaves. The stems are
used in medicine, and contain two alkaloids: Dulcamarin
and Solanin.
Solatium edule, Schum. and Thonn.
Guinea. The berry is of the size of an apple, yellow and
edible.
Solatium indigoferum, St. Hilaire.
Southern Brazil. A dye-shrub, deserving here trial-culture.
Solatium Gilo, Eaddi.
Tropical America; much cultivated there for the sake of its
large spherical orange-colored berries, which are eatable.
Solatium Lycopersicum, L (Lycopersicum esculentum, Mill.)
The Tomato. South America. Annual. Several varieties
exist, differing in shape and color of the berries. It is one
of the most eligible plants with esculent fruits for naturaliza-
tion in our desert-country. As well known the Tomato is
adapted for various culinary purposes.
Solatium Melongetia, E.
( S. ovigerum , Dunal. S. esculentum , Dunal.)
The Egg-plant. India and some other parts of tropical
Asia. A perennial plant, usually renewed in cultivation
like an annual. The egg-shaped large berries are known
under the name of Aubergines or Bringals or Begoous as
culinary esculents. Allied plants are: S. insanum, L., S,


S. longum, Roxb., 8. serpentinum, Desf, 8. undatum, Lam.,
8. ferox, L., 8. pseudo-saponaceum, Blume, 8. album , Lour.,
which bear all large berries, considered harmless, but may
not all represent well-marked species. Absolute ripeness
of all such kinds of fruits is an unavoidable requisite, as
otherwise even wholesome sorts may prove acrid or even
poisonous. Probably many other of the exceedingly
numerous species of the genus Solanum may be available
for good-sized edible berries.
Solanum macrocarpum, L.
Mauritius and Madagascar. A perennial herb. The berries
are of the size of an apple, globular and yellow. 8. Than-
ningi, E. Jacq., from Gruinea, is a nearly related plant. 8.
calycinum, Moc. et Sess., from Mexico, is also allied.
Solanum muricatum, I’Herit.
The Pepino of Peru. A shrubby species with egg-shaped
edible berries, which are white with purple spots, and attain
a length of 6 inches.
Solanum Quitoense, La Marck,
Ecuador, Peru. A shrubby plant. The berries resemble
in size, color and taste small oranges, and are of a peculiar
fragrance. To this the 8. Plumierii, Dun., from the West
Indian Islands is also cognate and the 8. Topiro, Kunth, from
the Orinoco.
Solanum tuberosum, L. #
The Potato. Andes of South America, particularly of
Chili, but not absolutely trans-equatorial, as it extends into
Columbia. It is also wild in the Argentine territory. As
a starch plant, the Potato interests us on this occasion par-
ticularly. Considering its prolific yield in our richer soil, we
possess as yet too few factories for Potato-starch. The
latter by being heated with mineral acids or malt can be
converted into Dextrin and Dextro-Glucose for many pur-
poses of the arts. Dextrin, as a substitute for gum, is also
obtainable by subjecting Potato-starch in a dry state to a
heat of 400° E. Alcohol may be largely produced from the
tubers. The berries and shoots contain Solanin.


Solarium torvum, Swartz.
-From "West India to Pern. A shrubby species with yellow
spherical berries of good size, which seem also wholesome.
Other species from tropical America have shown themselves
sufficiently hardy for inducing us to recommend the test-
culture of such kinds of plants. Many of them are highly
curious and ornamental.
Solarium Uporo, Dunal.
In many of the islands of the Pacific Ocean. The large
red spherical berries of this shrub can be used like Tomato.
Solarium vescum, P. v. Mueller.
The Gunyang. South-east Australia. A shrub yielding
edible berries, which need however to be fully ripe for
securing absence of deleterious properties.
Solarium xanthocarpum, Schrad. and Wendl.
North Africa and South Asia. A perennial herb. The
berries are of the size of a cherry, and either yellow or
scarlet.
Sophora Japonica, L.
China and Japan. A deciduous tree. The flowers produce
a yellow or with admixtures a green dye, used for silk.
Spartina juncea, Willd.
Salt marshes of North America. A grass with creeping
roots ; it can be utilized to bind moist sand on the coast.
A tough fibre can readily be obtained from the leaves. S.
polystachya, W. and S. cynosuroides, W. are stately grasses,
the former also adapted for saline soil, the latter for fresh-
water swamps.
Spartium junceum. L.
Countries around the Mediterranean Sea. The flowers of
this bush provide a yellow dye. A textile fibre can be
separated from the branches.
Spigelia Marylandica, L.
North America, north to Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. A
perennial handsome herb, requiring as a vermifuge cautious


administration S. anthelmia, L. is an annual plant of
tropical America and possesses similar medicinal properties,
in which probably other species likewise share.
Spilanthes oleracea, N. Jacq.
The Para Cress. South America. An annual herb of con-
siderable pungency, used as a medicinal salad.
Spinacia oleracea, L.
Sibiria. The ordinary Spinage. An agreeable culinary
annual of rapid growth. It is of a mild aperient property.
Spinacia tetrandra, Stey.
Caucasus. Also annual and unisexual like the preceding
plant, with which it has equal value, though it is less known.
Stenetaphrum giabrum, Trim*
South Asia, Africa, warmer countries of America, not known
from any part of Europe or Australia. Here called the
Buffalo-Grass, It is perennial, creeping and admirably
adapted for binding sea-sand and river-banks, also for form-
ing garden edges, and for establishing a grass-sward on
lawns much subjected to traffic ; it is besides of some pas-
toral value.
Stilbocarpa polaris, He Caisne and Planchon.
Auckland’s and Campbell’s Islands, and seemingly also in
the southern extremity of Hew Zealand. A herbaceous
plant with long roots, which are saccharine and served some
wrecked people for a lengthened period as sustenance. The
plant is recommended here for further attention, as it may
prove through culture a valuable addition to the stock of
culinary vegetables of cold countries.
Stipa tenacissima, L. # (Macrochloa tenacisima, Kunth.)
The Esparto or Atocha. Spain, Portugal, Greece, North
Africa, ascending the Sierra Nevada to 4000 feet. This
grass has become celebrated siuce some years, having
afforded already a vast quantity of material for British
paper-mills. It is tall and perennial, amd may prove here a
valuable acquisition, inasmuch as it lives on any kind of poor
soil, occurring naturally on sand and gravel as well as on


clayey or calcareous or gypseous soil, and even on the very
brink of the coast. But possibly the value of grasses of
our own, allied to the Atocha, may in a like manner become
commercially established, and mainly with this view paper
samples of several grass-kinds were prepared by the writer
(vide “Report, Industrial Exhibition, Melbourne, 1867”).
Even in the scorching heat and the arid sands of the Sahara
the Atocha maintains itself, and it may thus yet be destined
to play an important part in the introduced vegetation of
any arid places of our desert-tracts, particularly where lime
and gypsum exist. The very tenacious fibre resists decay,
and is much employed for the manufacture of ropes.
During 1870 the import of Esparto ropes into England was
18,500 tons, while the raw material to the extent of about
130,000 tons was imported. Extensive culture of this grass
has commenced in the south of France. It is pulled once
a year, in the earlier part of the summer. The propagation
can be effected from seeds, but is done usually by division
of the root. Ten tons of dry Esparto, worth from £4 to £5
each, can under favorable circumstances be obtained from
an acre. The supply has fallen short of the demand. Good
writing paper is made from Esparto without admixture ; the
process is similar to that for rags, but cleaner. The price of
Esparto-paper ranges from £4O to £5O for the ton. Stipa
arenaria, Brot., is a closely allied and still taller species,
confined to Spain and Portugal. Consul W. P. Mark
deserves great praise for having brought the Atocha into
commercial and manufactural recognition.
Styrax officinale, L.
Countries on the Mediterranean Sea. A tall bush or small
tree'. The fragrant solid Storax-resin exudes from this
plant, or is particularly obtained by pressure of the bark,
Symphytum officinale, E.
The Comfrey. Europe, Western Asia. A perennial herb.
The root is utilized in veterinary practice. S. asperrimum,
Sims, from the Caucasus, is recommended by some as a pro-
lific plant for green-fodder.


Tacca pinnatifida, Gr. Forster.
Sand-shores of the South Sea Islands. From the tubers of
this hero the main supply of the Feegee Arrowroot is pre-
pared. It is not unlikely, that this plant will endure our
coast clime. The Tacca-starch is much valued in medicine,
and particularly used in cases of dysentery and diarrhoea.
Its characteristics are readily recognized under the micro-
scope. Several other kinds of Tacca are distinguished, but
their specific limits are not yet well ascertained. Dr.
Seemann admits two (T. maculata and T Brownii ) for tropical
Australia, one of these extending as a hill-plant to Feegee.
From the leaves and flower-stalks light kinds of bonnets are
plaited. A Tacca, occurring in the Sandwich Islands, yields
a large quantity of the so-called Arrowroot exported from
thence. Other species (including those of Ataccia) occur
in India, Madagascar, Gruinea and Gruiana, all deserving
tests in reference to their value as starch-plants.
Tamarindus Indica, L.
Tropical Asia and Africa. This magnificent large expansive
tree extends northwards to Egypt, and was found by the
writer of this list in North-western Australia. It is indi-
cated here not without hesitation, to suggest new trials of
its acclimation on the lower Murray Eiver and in East Gripps
Land. The acid pulp of the pods forms the medicinal
Tamarind, rich in formic and butyric acid, irrespective of its
other contents.
Tanacetum vulgare, L.
The Tansy. North and Middle Europe, North Asia, North-
western America. A perennial herb of well-known medi-
cinal value, which mainly depends on its volatile oil.
Telfairia pedata, Hooker.
Mozambique. A cucurbitaceous climber with perennial
stems, attaining a length of 100 feet, with fringed lilac
flowers of extraordinary beauty and with fruits attaining a
weight of GO lbs., and containing at times as many as 500
large seeds. The latter in a boiled state are eatable, or a
large quantity of oil can be pressed from them. The root
is fleshy. Our summers in the Murray-country are likely


to bring this plant regularly into bearing. A second huge
species of similar use, T. occidentalism J. Hook., occurs in
Guinea.
Terfezia Leonis, Tulasne.
South Europe, North America. This edible truffle, together
with other species of this and other genera, is deserving of
naturalization in Australia.
Tetragonia implexicoma, J. Hook.
Extra-tropic Australia, New Zealand, Chatham’s Island. A
frutescent widely expanding plant, forming often large
natural festoons, or trailing and climbing over rocks and
sand, never away from the coast. As a Spinage-plant it is
as valuable as the succeeding species. It is well adapted
for the formation of bowers in arid places. T. trigyna , Banks
and Soland., seems identical.
Tetragonia expansa, Murray.
The New Zealand Spinage, occurring also on many places oi
the coast and in the desert-interior of Australia. Known
also from New Caledonia, China, Japan and "Valdivia. An
annual herb, useful as a culinary vegetable, also for binding
drift-sand.
Teucrium larum, E.
Countries at the Mediterranean Sea. A small somewhat
shrubby plant, in use for the sake of its scent, containing a
peculiar Stearopten. T. Scordium, L. from Europe and
Middle Asia, T. Chamaedrys, L., T. Folium, L. and T.
Creticum, L. from South Europe, are occasionally drawn
into medical use. All these together with many other
species from various countries are pleasantly odorous.
Thea Chinensis, Sims*
The Tea-shrub of South-eastern Asia. This evergreen and
ornamental bush has proved quite hardy in our lowland
clime, where in exposed positions it endures without any
attention as well our night frosts as also the free access of
scorching summer winds. But it is in our humid valleys
with rich alluvial soil and access to springs for irrigation,
where only the most productive tea-fields can be formed.


The plant comes into plentiful bearing of its product as
early as the Vine and earlier than the Olive. Its culture
is surrounded with no difficulties, and it is singularly exempt
from diseases if planted in proper localities. Pruning is
effected in the cool season, in order to obtain a large
quantity of small tender leaves from young branches.
Both the Chinese and Assam tea are produced by varieties
of one single species, the Tea-shrub being indigenous in the
forest-country of Assam. Declivities are best adapted and
usually chosen for tea-culture, particularly for Congo, Pekoe
and Souchong, while Bohea is often grown in flat countries.
Por many full details Portune’s work, “ The Tea-Districts
of China,” might be consulted.
The tea of commerce consists of the young leaves, heated,
curled and sweated. The process of preparing the leaves
can be effected by steam machinery ; one of particular con-
struction has been suggested recently by Mr. Joachimi
according to requirements explained by the writer. In
1866 three machines for dressing tea have been patented in
England, one by Messrs. Campbell and Burgess, one by
Mr. Thomson and one by Mr. Tayser. To give an idea of
the quantity of Tea, which is consumed at the present
time, it may be stated, that from June to September, 1871,
11,000,000 lbs. of tea were shipped from China alone to
Australia, and that the produce of tea in India from January
to June of this year has been 18,500,000 lbs. Seeds of the
Tea-bush are now in many parts of this colony locally to be
gathered from plants distributed by the writer, and for
years to come the cultivation of the Tea-bush, merely to
secure local supplies of fresh seeds, ready to germinate, will
in all likelihood prove highly lucrative. Tea contains an
alkaloid: Coffein, a peculiar essential oil and Bohea-acid
along with other substances.
Thrinax parviflora, Swartz.
West India, and also on the continent of Central America.
The stem of this Pan-palm attains a height of 25 feet. It
belongs to the sand-tracts of the coast and may endure our
clime. The fibre of this Palm forms material for ropes.


T. argentea , Lodd., is a closely allied palm. The few other
species of the genus deserve also trial-culture here.
Thymelaea tinctoria, Endl. ( Passerina tinctoria, Pourr.)
Portugal, Spain, South Prance. A small shrub. It yields
a yellow dye. Cursorily it may be noted here, that some of
our Pimelese contain a blue pigment, which has not yet been
fully tested. Their bark produces more or less of Daphnin
and of the volatile acrid principle, for which the Bark of
Daphne Mezereum, L. is used. These are remarkably
developed in the Yictorian Pimelea stricta, Meissn. The
bark of many is also pervaded by a tough fibre, that of the
tall Pimelea clavata, Labill., a West Australian bush, being
particularly tenacious.
Thymus capitatus, Hoffm. and Link. (Satureja capifata, L.)
Around the whole Mediterranean Sea. Since the times of
Hippocrates, Theophrastos and Gralenus this small scented
shrub has been employed in medicine.
Thymus Mastichina, L.
Spain, Portugal, Morocco. A half-shrub of agreeable scent,
used also occasionally in medicine.
Thymus Ssrpillum, L.
Europe, Western Asia. A perennial herb of some medicinal
value. It would live on our highest alps. An essential oil can
be obtained from it. One particular variety is lemon-scented.
Thymus vulgaris, L.
The Grarden-Thyme. South Europe. This small shrubby
plant is available for scent and for condiments. It is also
well adapted for forming garden-edges. The essential oil
of this plant can be separated into the crystalline Thymol
and the liquid Thymen and Cymol. T. aestivus, Eeut., and
T. hiemalis , Lange, are closely cognate plants, Several other
species with aromatic scent occur at the Mediterranean Sea.
Tragopogon porrifolius, L.
The Salsify. Middle and Southern Europe, Middle Asia.
The root of this herb is well known as a useful culinary
vegetable,


Trapa bicornis, L. fil.*
The Leng or Ling or Links of China. The nuts of this
water-plant are extensively brought to market in that
country. The horns of the fruit are blunt. The kernel,
like that of the two following species, is of excellent taste.
The plant is regularly cultivated in lakes and ponds of
China.
Trapa bispinosa, Roxb.*
Middle and South Asia, extending to Ceylon and Japan;
found also in Africa as far south as the Zambesi. Here in
our culture it lasts through several years. In some countries,
for instance in Cashmere, the nuts form an important staple
cf food to the population. To this species probably
belong T. Cochin-chinensis, Lour, and T. incisa, Sieb. and
Zucc.
Trapa natans, L.*
The ordinary Waternut. Middle and South Europe, Middle
Asia, North and Central Africa. Recorded as an annual.
T. quadrispinosa , Roxb., from Sylhet, is an allied plant.
Trifolium agrarium, L.
The perennial Yellow Clover or Hop-Clover. All Europe,
Western Asia. Of considerable value in sandy soil as a
fodder-herb. It is easily naturalized.
Trifolium Alexandrinum, L.*
The Bersin-Clover. North-eastern Africa, South-western
Asia, South Europe. Much grown for forage in Egypt.
Recorded as annual.
Trifolium fragiferum, L.
The Strawberry-Clover. Europe, North Africa, Middle and
North Asia, A perennial species, well adapted for clay
soils.
Trifolium bybridum, L*
The Alsike-Clover. Europe, North Africa, Western Asia.
A valuable perennial pasture-herb, particularly for swampy
localities.


Trifolinm incarnation, L.
The Carnation-Clover. Middle and South Europe. Though
annual only, it is valued in some of the systems of rotation
of crops. It forms particularly a good fodder for sheep. A
white flowering variety exists.
Trifolinm medium, L.*
The Eed Zigzag Clover. Europe, North and Middle Asia.
A deep-rooting perennial herb, much better adapted for dry
sandy places than T. pratense. It would also endure the
inclemency of the clime of our higher alpine regions if
disseminated there. T. Quartinianum, A. Eieh., is an allied
plant from Abyssinia, where several endemic species exist.
Trifolinm pratense, L.*
The ordinary Eed Clover. All Europe, North Africa, North
and Middle Asia, extending to Japan. A biennial or under
special circumstances also perennial herb, of great import-
ance for stable-fodder. It prefers rich soil and particularly
such, which is not devoid of lime. Also this species would
live in our alps, where it would much enrich the pastures.
Trifolinm repens, L •
The ordinary White Clover. Europe, North Africa, North
and Midele Asia, sub-Arctic America. Perennial. Most
valuable as a fodder-plant on pastoral land. It has a predi-
lection for moist soil, but springs again from dry spots after
rain. It has naturally spread over many of our humid
valleys, and its growth should be encouraged in such
localities.
Trifolinm snbrotundnm, Hochstett.
The May ad-Clover. North and Middle Africa, ascending to
9000 feet. A perennial species, in its native countries with
advantage utilized for Clover-culture. This by no means
closes the list of the Clovers, desirable for introduction,
inasmuch as about 150 well-marked species are recognized )
many doubtless of pastoral value. But the notes of rural
observers on any of these kinds are so sparingly extant,
that much uncertainty about the yield and nutritive value
of the various kinds continues to prevail. Most Clovers


come from the temperate zone of Europe and Asia; only
two are indigenous to the eastern of the United States of
North America, none occurs in Australia, few are found in
South Africa, several in California and the adjoining
countries, several also in Chili; no species is peculiar to
Japan.
Trig'onella Fosnrnn Graecum, L.
Countries on the Mediterranean Sea. The seeds of this
annual herb find their use in veterinary medicine.
Trig'onella suavissima, Lindley.
Interior of Australia, from the Murray Elver and its tribu-
taries to the vicinity of Shark’s Bay. This perennial,
fragrant, clover-like plant proved a good pasture-herb. A
lithogram, illustrating this plant, occurs in the work on the
“ Plants Indigenous to Victoria.” Some of the many Euro-
pean, Asian and African plants of this genus deserve our
local tests.
Tripsacum dactyloides, L.
Central and North America. A reedy perennial grass, more
ornamental than utilitarian. It is the original Buffalo-
Grass, and attains a height of 7 feet, assuming the aspect of
Maize. It is of inferior value for fodder.
Triticum vulgare, Villars.*
The Wheat. Apparently arisen through culture from
Aegilops ovata , L., and then a South European, North
African and Oriental plant. This is not the place, to enter
into details about a plant universally known. It may there-
fore suffice merely to mention, that three primary varieties
must be distinguished between the very numerous sorts of
cultivated Wheat: 1. Var. muticum (T. Jiyhernum, L.), the
Winter Wheat or Unbearded Wheat ; 2. Var. aristatum
(T. aestivum, L.), the Summer AVheat or Bearded Wheat;
3. Var. adhaerens ( T Spelta, L.), Wheat with fragile axis
and adherent grain. Metzger enumerates as distinct kinds
of cultivated Wheat: —
T. vulgare , Vill,, which includes among other varieties the
ordinary Spring Wheat, the Eox Wheat and the Kentish


Wheat. It comprises also the best Italian sorts for plaiting
straw-bonnets and straw-hats, for which only the upper part
of the stem is used, collected before the ripening of the
grain and bleached through exposure to the sun while kept
moistened.
T. turgidum , L., comprising some varieties of White and Eed
Wheat, also the Clock Wheat and the Eevet Wheat.
T. durum , Desfont., which contains some sorts of the Bearded
Wheat.
T. Polonicum, L., the Polish Wheat, some kind of which is
well adapted for Peeled Wheat.
T. Spelta , L., the Spelt Corn or Dink el Wheat, a kind not
readily subject to disease, succeeding on soil of very limited
fertility, not easily attacked by birds, furnishing a flour of
excellence for cakes, also yielding a superior grain for Peeled
Wheat. Por preparing the latter it is necessary to collect
the spikes while yet somewhat green and to dry them in
baking-houses.
T. diccocum, Schrank. (T. amgleum, Ser.) The Eramer
Wheat. Its varieties are content and prolific on poor soil,
produce excellent starch, are mostly hardy in frost and not
subject to diseases. To this belongs the Arras Wheat of
Abyssinia, where a few other peculiar sorts of Wheat are to
be found.
T, monococcum, L. St, Peter’s Corn, which is hardier than
most other Wheats; exists in the poorest soils, but produces
grains less adapted for flour than Peeled Wheat.
Tropaeolum majus, L.
Peru. This showy perennial climber passes with impro-
priety under the name of Nasturtium. The herbage and
flowers serve as Cress and also are considered antiscorbutic.
A smaller species, T. minus> L., also from Peru, can likewise
be chosen for a Cress-salad; both besides furnish in their
flower-buds and young fruits a substitute for Capers. A
volatile oil of burning taste can be distilled from the foliage
of both; and this is more acrid even than the distilled oil


of Mustard-seeds. In colder countries these plants are
only of one year s duration. Numerous other species, all
highly ornamental, occur in South America and a few also
in Mexico.
Trophis Americana, L.
West Indian A rchipelagus. The foliage of this milky tree
has been recommended as food for the silk-insect. In Cuba
and Jamaica it is used as provender for cattle and sheep.
Tuber aestivum, Yittad.
The Truffle mostly in the markets of England. The white
British Truffle, Ghairomyces meandriformis , Yitt., though
large is valued less. In the Department Yaucluse (France)
alone about 60,000 lbs. of Truffles are collected annually at
a value of about £4OOO. Many other kinds of Truffles are
in use. Our own native Truffle, Mylitta australis , Berk.,
attains sometimes the size of a Cocos nut, and is also a fair
esculent. It seems also quite feasible to naturalize the best
of edible fungi of other genera, although such may not be
amenable to regular culture.
Tuber cibarium, Sibthorp.
Middle and South Europe. The Black Truffle. Like all
others growing under ground, and generally found in forest-
soil of limestone formations. It attains a weight over 1 lb.
Experiments for naturalization may be effected with every
prospect of success by conveying the Truffle in its native
soil to us, and locating it in calcareous places of our forest-
regions. As condiment or merely in a roasted state it
affords an aromatic food. T. melanosporum , Yitt., from
France, Giermany and Italy, is of a still more exquisite
taste than T. cibarium , indeed of Strawberry flavor. Again
T. magnatum , Pico, from Italy, is of delicious fragrance.
Ullucus tuberOSUS, Lozano. ( Melloca tuberosa, Lindl.)
Andes of New Grranada and Peru, up to an elevation of
9000 feet. A perennial herb, the tubers of which are edible.
Urginia Scilla, Steinheil. ( Scilla maritima, L.)
South Europe, North Africa. The medicinal Squill. The
plant needs not regular cultivation, but settlers living near


the coast might encourage its dissemination, and thus obtain
the bulbs as drug from natural localities. Its peculiar bitter
principle is called Scillitin.
Uvularia sessilifolia, L.
North America, in forests. This pretty herb is mentioned
as yielding a good substitute for Asparagus.
Vaccinium alatum, Domhey. ( Thibaudia data, Dunal.)
Frigid regions of the Andes of Peru. A tall evergreen
shrub, with pink berries of the size of a cherry. This
highly ornamental plant could be grown in our sub-alpine
regions.
Vaccinium bicolor, F. V. M. ( Thibaudia hicolor, R. and P.)
Cold zone of the Peruvian Andes. A high evergreen bush,
with red berries of the size of a Hazel nut. All Thibaudias
seem best to form a section in the genus Vaccinium, some
species of the latter, for instance Vaccinium Imrayi, Hook.,
from Dominica, mediating the transit. The species of the
section Thibaudia are, as a rule, producing red berries of
acidulous grateful taste. Many others may deserve there-
fore culture in our forest ravines or on our alpine heights.
They occur from Peru to Mexico, also in West India. One
species, Vaccinium melliflorum ( Thibaudia mellijiora , R. and
P.), has its flowers rich in honey-nectar.
Vaccinium caespitosum, Mich.
Canada and Northern States of North America. A
deciduous-’eaved small bush, with blueish edible berries.
V. ovalifolium , Sm., is an allied species.
Vaccinium corymbosum, L.*
The Swamp-Blueberry or blue Huckle-berry. Canada and
United States of North America. A good-sized shrub with
deciduous foliage. Berries blueish-black of sweetish taste,
ripening late in the season.
Vaccinium erythrocarpum, Michaux.
{Oxycoccus ereetus Pursh.)
Carolina and Virginia, on high mountains. An upright
bush of a few feet in height, with deciduous leaves, The


transparent scarlet berries, according to Pursh, are of
excellent taste.
Vaccinium grandiflorum, Dombey.
( Ceratostemma grandiflorum , E. and P.)
Andes of Peru. A tall evergreen shrub. The berries of a
pleasant acidulous taste.
Vaccinium humifusum, Graham.
North-western America, on the Eocky Mountains. Berries
of this bush well flavored.
Vaccinium Lesclienaultii, Wight. (.Agapetes arhorea, Dunal.)
India, Neilgherries and Ceylon. This evergreen species
attains the size of a tree, flowering and fruiting throughout
the year. The fruits resemble cranberries,
Vaccinium leucanthum, Cham.
Mountains of Mexico. An arborescent species. The blackish
berries are edible.
Vaccinium macrocarpon, Alton *
(Oxycoccus macrocarpus , Pers.)
The large Cranberry. Prom Canada to Virginia and Caro-
lina, particularly in sandy and peaty bogs, and in cold mossy
swamps. A trailing evergreen bush, with stems attaining a
length of 3 feet. It is this species, which has become so
extensively cultivated in the eastern parts of the United
States, where on moory land, often not otherwise to be
utilized, enormous quantities of this fruit have been pro-
duced by regular culture at a highly profitable scale. The
berries are of the acid taste, pleasant aroma and scarlet
brightness of the British Cranberry, but considerably
larger.
Vaccinium meridionale, Swartz.
Jamaica, from the summits of the highest ranges down to
the Coffee-regions. It attains a height of 30 feet and is
evergreen. The small berries are of the taste and color of
those of V. Yitis Indsea.


Vaccinium Mortinia, Bentham.
Mountains of Columbia. A sbrub several feet bigb. The
fruits resemble those of Y. Myrtillus, but are more acid.
They come under the name Mortina to the Quito market.
Vaccinium Myrtillus, LA
The British Whortleberry or Bilberry. Throughout
Europe, North and Middle Asia, remotest North America,
in heathy and turfy forest-land. A shrub, few feet high or
less, deciduous, erect, of great value for its copious supply
of berries. They are, as well known, black with a blueish-
grey hue and of exceedingly grateful taste. The naturaliza-
tion of this plant on our alpine ranges and in our cooler
woodlands, particularly in our forests of Eagus Cunning-
hami, would prove a boon. The berries can be utilized for
their dye. The whole bush contains Quina acid.
Vaccinium myrtilloides, Michaux.
Michigan, Canada, Newfoundland, Labrador. The large
edible berries are called Bluets. This little bush is adapted
for our higher alpine country.
Vaccinium Oxycoccus, LA (Oxycoccus palustris, Pers.)
The British Cranberry. Through Europe, North and Middle
Asia, North America, on turf-moss in moory heaths. A
creeping evergreen shrub of particular neatness. The
berries give a most agreeable preserve and are of anti-
scorbutic value. This species is particularly eligible for
the spongy mossy bogs of our snowy mountains.
Vaccinium parvifolium, Smith.
North-western America. A tall shrub. The berries are
excellent for preserves.
Vaccinium Pennsylvanicum, LamarckA
(V. angustifolium, Aiton.)
The early Blue-berry or Blue Huckleberry. North America,
on dry woody hills. A dwarf-bush with deciduous foliage,
producing fruit in abundance. The berries are large,
blueish-black and of sweet taste. V. Canadense, Kalm,
according to Dr. Asa Gray, is closely allied.


Vaccinium uliginosum, L.
British Bog Bilberry. Europe, North and Middle Asia ?
North America. A deciduous hush, with blackish berries,
similar to those of Y. Myrtillus, but hardly of equal excel-
lence.
Vaccinium vacillans, Solander.
North America, in sandy forest-lands. A deciduous small
bush, coining with its blue berries later into season than
Y. Pennsylvanicum.
Vaccinium Vitis Ida®, L.
Europe, North and Middle Asia, North America. A dwarf-
shrub with evergreen leaves. The purplish-red berries are
sought for jellies and other preserves.
It is as yet impossible to say, how many other species of
Vaccinium are producing good-sized and well-flavored fruits.
But the genus ranges in many species from Continental
Asia to the Indian Archipelagus, and has a wide extension
also in South America, occupying in hot countries higher
mountain regions. But few reliable notes on the tropical
species are extant, as far as the fruits are concerned.
Valeriana Celtica, E.
Alps of Europe. The root of this perennial herb is particu-
larly aromatic.
Valeriana edulis, Nuttall.
North-western America, from Oregon to the Bocky Moun-
tains. The thick spindle-shaped root of this herb affords
food to the natives of that part of the globe. When baked
the root proves agreeable and wholesome. When we con-
sider the wild states of the plants, from which many of our
important root-crops arose, then this Valeriana and several
other plants, suggestively mentioned in these pages, may
well be admitted for trial-culture.
Valeriana officinalis, L.
Europe, North and Middle Asia, in swampy grass-land, with
a predilection for forests and river-banks. This perennial
herb would do particularly well on our alps. It is the only


one among numerous congeners of Europe, Asia and America,
which is drawn to a considerable extent into medicinal use.
The root and herb contain Yalerianic acid and a peculiar
tannic acid ; the root furnishes an esential oil, which again
resolves itself into Yalerol (70 per cent.), Yalereen, Earned
and Yalerianic acid. The order of Yalerianese is not repre-
sented by any native plant in Australia.
Valerianella olitoria, Moench.
Lamb’s Lettuce. Europe, North Africa, North and Middle
Asia. A fair and early Salad-plant. It is an annual plant,
and has several congeners in Europe and Asia.
Veratmm album, L.
Europe, North and Middle Asia, extending eastwards to
Japan. It delights particularly in sub-alpine locali-
ties. The root furnishes Yeratrin, Jervin and Sabadillic
acid.
Veratrum viride, Aiton.
Canada and United States of North America. A near
relative of the former plant. Its root has come recently
into medicinal use.
Vicia Ervilia, Willdenow. (Ervum Ervilia, L.)
South Europe, North Africa, South-western Asia. An
annual herb, praised as a valuable fodder-plant on dry cal-
careous soil.
Vicia Faba, L.*
The Straight Bean. Orient, particularly on the Caspian
Sea. This productive annual herb affords not only its seeds
for table use, but provides also a particularly fattening
stable food. The seeds contain about 33 per cent,
starch.
Vicia sativa, L. # (V. angmtifolia, Eoth.)
The ordinary Yetch or Tare. Europe, North Africa, North
and Middle Asia. One of the best of fodder-plants, but
only of one or two years’ duration. Many of the other
European and Asiatic species of Yicia are deserving our
attention.


Vigna Sinensis, "Hindi.* (Dotichos Sinensis, L.)
Tropical Asia and Africa. The cultivation of this twining
O
annual pulse-herb extends to Southern Europe and many
other countries with a clime like ours. The pods are
remarkable for their great length, and used like Erench
Beans. Vigna Gafjang, A. Rich, and Vigna sesquipedalis are
varieties of this species. In fair soil the produce is fortyfold.
Viola odorata, L.
The Violet. Middle and South Europe, North Africa,
Middle Asia. Passingly alluded to here, as this modest
though lovely plant should be extensively naturalized in
our forest-glens, to furnish its delicate scent for various
compositions of perfumery.
Vitis acetosa, E. V. Mueller.
Carpentaria and Arnhem’s Land. Stems rather herbaceous
than shrubby, erect. The whole plant is pervaded with
acidity, and proved valuable in cases of scurvy. The berries
are edible. This species, if planted here, would likely spring
annually afresh from the root.
Vitis aestivalis, Michaux.*
The Summer Grape of the United States of North America.
Elowers fragrant. The berries are deep blue, of pleasant
taste, and ripen late in the season.
Vitis Baildiniana, E. y. Mueller. (Gissus Antarctica, Vent.)
East Australia. With V. hypoglauca the most southern of
all Grapes, none extending to New Zealand. It is ever-
green, and here a vigorous plant for bowers, but suffers even
from slight frosts. The berries are freely produced and
edible, though not large.
Vitis COrdifolia, Michaux.* (Vitis riparia, Mich.)
The Winter Grape or Erost Grape. Erom Canada to
Elorida. A deciduous vine. The scent of the flowers
reminds of Reseda. The berries are small, either blackish
or amber-colored, and very acid. They can be used for
preserves, and are only fully matured when touched by
frosts. A succession of seedlings may give us a superior
and simultaneously a very hardy vine.


Vitis hypoglauca, F. V. Mueller.
East Australia, as far south as Gipps Land. An evergreen
climber of enormous length, forming a very stout stem in
age. The black berries attain the size of small cherries.
Also this species may perhaps be vastly changed in its fruit
by continued culture.
Vitis Indica, L.
On the mountains of various parts of India, ascending an
altitude of 3000 feet in Ceylon. The small berries are
edible. The plant should be subjected to horticultural
experiments. This is an apt opportunity to draw attention
to the various Indian species of Vitis with large edible
berries ; for instance : V. laegivata , BL, F. thyrssijlora, Miq.,
V. mutahilis, BL, V. Bhcmeana, Steud,, all from the moun-
tains of Java, and all producing berries as large as cherries,
those of V. Blumeana being particularly sweet. Further
may here be inserted V. imperialis, Miquel, from Borneo,
V. auriculata, Wall, and V. elongata, Wallich, both the last
from the mountainous mainland of Coromandel, and all
producing very large juicy berries even in the jungle wilder-
ness. V. (guadrangularis, L., stretches from Arabia to India
and Central Africa, and has also edible fruits. Many such
plants may be far more eligible for Grape-culture in hot wet
climes than the ordinary vine. About 250 species of Vitis
are already known, mostly from intra-tropical latitudes, and
mostly evergreen ; but in regard to their elevation above the
ocean, and to the nature of their fruits, we are almost
utterly without data.
Vitis Labrnsca, L.*
The Isabella Grape. North America, from Canada to Texas
and Florida, also in Japan. The Schuylkill Grape is derived
from this species. A pale-fruited variety furnishes the
Bland’s Grape. Another yields the American Alexander-
Grape. The berries are large among American kinds and
are of pleasant taste. Flowers fragrant. This and the
other hardy North American vines seem never to be attacked
by the Oidium disease.


Vitis Schimperiana, Hochstetter.
From Abyssinia to Guinea. This vine may become
valuable with many other Central African kinds for
tropical culture, and may show itself hardy here. Barter
compares the edible berries to clusters of Frontignac
Grape.
Vitis vinifera, L. #
The Grape Vine. Turkey, Persia, Tartary, This is not
the place to discuss at length the great industrial questions,
concerning this highly important plant, even had these not
en o a S e( i already since many years the attention of a large
number of our colonists. The whole territory of Victoria
stretches essentially through the vine-zone, and thus most
kinds of vine can be produced here, either on the lowlands
or the less elevated mountains in various climatic regions
and in different geologic formations.
The Corinthian variety, producing the “ Currants ” of com-
merce, thrives also well in some districts, where with Raisons
it promises to become a staple article of our exports beyond
home consumption. Dr. W. Hamm, of Vienna, has recently
issued a Vine-map of Europe, indicating the distribution of
the different varieties and the principal sources of the
various sorts of Wine. The writer would now merely add,
that the preservation of the Grapes in a fresh state, accord-
ing to M. Charmeux’s method, and the sundry modes of
effecting the transit of ripe Grapes to long distances, ought
to be turned to industrial advantage. The pigment of the
dark wine-berries is known as Oenolic acid. The juice
contains along with Tartaric acid also Grape acid. All
these chemically defined substances have uses of their own
in art and science.
Vitis vulpina, L. # (Vitis rotundifolia , Mich.)
The Muscadine or Fox-Grape. South-eastern States of
North America. This species includes as varieties also
the Bullace, the Mustang, the Bullet-Grape, both kinds
of the Scupperuaugs and the Cotowba Grape. The


berries are of a pleasant taste, but in some instances
of a strong flavor; they are the largest among American
Grapes.
Voandzeia subterranea, Thouars.
Madagascar and various parts of Africa, as far south as
Natal. This Earth-Pea is annual, and pushes its pods
under ground in the manner of Arachis hypogaea for matu-
ration. The pods are edible, and much consumed in tropical
countries.
Wallichia oblongifolia, Griffith.
Himalaia, as far as 27° North. There one of the
hardiest of all Palms. It is not a tall one, yet a graceful
and useful object for cultural industries. Several species
exist.
Wettinia aug'usta, Poeppig.
Peru, on mountains several thousand feet high. This Palm
is therefore likely to endure our. clime.
Wettinia Maynensis, Spruce.
Cordilleras of Peru. Like the foregoing it attains a height
of 40 feet, and advances to elevations of 3000 feet or
4000 feet. Before finally parting from the American Palms,
it may be appropriate to allude briefly to some of the hardier
kinds, which were left unnoticed in the course of this com-
pilation. From Dr. Spruce’s important essay on the Palms
of the Amazon Eiver may be learnt, that besides other
species, as yet imperfectly known from the sources of this
great river, the following kinds are comparatively hardy;
thus they might find places for cultivation or even naturaliza-
tion within the limits of our Colony: — Geonema undata ,
Klotzsch ; Iriartea deltdidea, 11. and P. ; Iriartea ventricosa ,
Mart., which latter rises in its magnificence to fully 100 feet;
Iriartea exorrhiza , Mart. ; this with the two other Iriarteas
ascends the Andes to 5000 feet. — Oenocarpus multicaulis,
Spruce; ascends to 4000 feet; from 6to 10 stems are
developed from the same root, each from 15 feet to 30 feet


high.— Euterpe ; of this two species occur in a zone between
8000 feet and 6000 feet.— PhytelepJias microcarpa, E. and
P.; eastern slope of the Peru Andes, ascending to 3000
feet. — PhytelepJias macro carp a, E. and P.; also on the eastern
side of the Andes, up to 4000 feet; it is this superb species
which yields by its seeds part of the vegetable ivory.—
Phytelephas aequatorialis, Spruce ; on the west slope of the
Peruvian Andes, up to 5000 feet; this Palm is one of the
grandest objects in the whole vegetable creation, its leaves
attaining a length of 30 feet! The stem rises to 20 feet.
Palm-ivory is also largely secured from this plant. Though
aequinoctiai it lives only in the milder regions of the moun-
tains ; therefore in the equable temperature of East Gripps
Land it would likely prosper without protective cover.—
Carludovica pahnata, E. and P., on the east side of the Andes
of Peru and Ecuador, up to 4000 feet; the fan-shaped
leaves from cultivated specimens furnish the main material
for the best Panama-hats. The illustrious Count de Castelnau
saw many Palms on the borders of Paraguay during his
great Brazilian Expedition. Most of these together with
the Palms of Uruguay and the wide Argentine territory
would likely prove adapted for acclimation in our latitudes ;
but hitherto the limited access to those countries has left
us largely unacquainted with its vegetable treasures also in
this direction. Yon Martius demonstrated, already in 1850,
the occurrence of the following Palms in extra-tropic South
America : — Ceroxylon australe , Mart., on high mountains in
Juan Eernandez at 30° S.L.; Jubwa spectabilis, Humb., in
Chili at 40° S.L.; Trithrinax Brasiliana, Mart., at 31° S.L.;
Copernicia cerifera, Mart., at 29° S.L. ; Acrocomia Total ,
Mart., at 28° S.L. ; Cocos australis , Mart., at 34° S.L.;
Cocos Tatai, Mart., at 32° S.L.; Cocos Bomanzojiana,
Cham., at 28° S.L.; Biplothemium littorale , Mart., at
30° S.L. Al[ the last mentioned Palms occur in
Brazil, the Acrocomia and Trithrinax extending to Para-
guay, and Cocos australis to Uruguay and the La Plata
State.


While some Palms, as indicated, descend to cooler latitudes,
others ascend to temperate and even cold mountain regions.
Among the American species are prominent in this respect:
Euterpe andicola, Brogn., E. Haenkeana , Brogn., E. longi-
vaginata, Mart., Eiplothemium Porallyi, Mart, and Ceroxylon
pithy rophy Hum, Mart., all occurring on the Bolivian Andes
at an elevation of about 8000 feet. — Ceroxylon andicola,
Humb., Kunthia montana, Humb., Oreodoxa frigida, Humb.,
and Geonoma densa, Linden, reach also on the Andes of
New Granada a height of at least 8000 feet.— Ceroxylon
Klopstockia, Mart., advances on the Andes of Yenezeula to
a zone 7500 feet altitude, where Karsten saw stems 200 feet
high with leaves 24 feet long! There also occur ttyagrus
Sancona, Karst, and Elatenia Chiragua, Karst, at elevations
of 5000 feet, both very lofty Palms. Prom the temperate
mountain regions of sub-tropical Mexico are known among
others: Chamaedora concolor, Mart., Gopernicia Pumos,
Humb., C. nana, Kunth, and Brahea dulcis, Mart., at eleva-
tions from 7000 feet to 8000 feet.
Xantliorrhiza apiifolia, PHerit.
North America. A perennial almost shrubby plant of
medicinal value. The root produces a yellow pigment,
similar to that of Hydrastis Canadensis, L. Both contain
also Berberin.
Ximenia Americana, L.
Tropical Asia, Africa and America, passing however the
tropics in Queensland, and gaining also an indigenous
position in Florida. This bush may therefore accom-
modate itself to our clime in localities free of frost.
The fruits are edible, resembling yellow plums in ap-
pearance ; their taste is agreeable. The wood is scented.
Yucca filamentosa, B.
The Adam’s Needle. Prom Carolina and Florida to Texas
and Mexico. An almost stemless species. It would hardly
be right, to omit hete the plants of this genus altogether, as


they furnish a fibre of great strength, similar to that of the
Agaves. Moreover all these plants are decorative, and live
in the poorest soil, even in drifting coast-sand. They are
also not hurt, as is the case with the Pourcroyas, by the
frosts of our lowlands. Among the species with stems of
several feet in height may be recorded Y. gloriosa, L. and
Y. aloifolia, L., both from the sandy south coast of North
America.
Zalacca secunda, Griffith.
Assam, as far north as 28°. A stemless Palm with large
feathery leaves, exquisitely adapted for decorative purposes.
Before we finally quit the Asiatic Palms we may yet learn
from Yon Martins’s great work, how many extra-tropic
members of this princely order were known in 1850 already,
when that masterly work was concluded. Martins enume-
rates as belonging to the boreal extra-tropic zone in Asia;
Prom Silhet at 24° N.L.: Calamus erectus, Eoxb.; C.
extensus, Eoxb.; C. quinquenervius, Eoxb.from Garo at
26° N.L.: Wallichia caryotoides, Eoxb. ; Ftychosperma
gracilis, Miq.; Caryota urens, L. ; Calamus leptospadix,
Q-rifp . from Khasya in 26° N.L.: Calamus acanthospathus ,
Griff. ; G. macrospathus, Griff. ; Plectocomia Xhasyana,
Griff.from Assam about 27° N.L.: Areca Nagensis,
Griff. ; A. triandra, Eoxb.; Livistona JenJcinsii, Griff.;
Xaemonorops nutantiflorus, Grift.; T>. JenJcinsii, Griff. ; D.
Guruba, Mart. ; Plectocomia Assamica, Griff.; Calamus
tenuis, Eoxb. ; G. Flagellum, Griff. ; G. Jleliotropium,
Hamilt.; G. Jiorihundus, Griff.; Phcenix Ouseloyana, Griff. ;
from Upper Assam between 28° and 29° N.L. : Caryota
ohtusa, Griff. ; Zalacca secunda , Griff. ; Calamus Mislimelensis,
Q r iff,'. from Darjiling at 27° N.L.: Wallichia ohtusifolia,
Griff.; Licuala peltata, Eoxb.; Plectocomia Rimalaiana,
Griff. ; Calamus schizospathus, Griff.; —from Nepaul between
28° and 29° N.L.: Chamaerops Martiana, Wall.; from
Guhrval in 30° N.L. : Calamus Boyleanus, Griff.from
Saharampoor in 30° N.L.: Borassus jiabelliformis, L.
from Duab in 31° N.L. : Pkcenix silvestris, Eoxb.from


Kheree in 30° N.L. : Phoenix humilis, Hoyle; from
Dekan: Benlinchia Goddapanna, Berry, at an elevation of
4000 feet.
Miquel mentions as Palms of Japan (entirely extra-tropical) :
BhapisJlahelliformis, Alton ; li. humilis, Blume ; Chamaerops
excelsa, Thunb. ; Livistona Chinensis, Br. and Arenga
saccharifera, La Bill, or a species closely allied to that
Palm.
Zea Mays, L.*
The Maize or Indian-Corn. Indigenous to the warmer parts
of South America. St. Hilaire mentions as its native
country Paraguay. Pound in Central America already
by Columbus. This conspicuous though annual cereal
grass interests us on this occasion as being applicable here
to far more uses than those, for which it has hitherto been
employed. In North America, for instance, Maize is con-
verted into a variety of dishes for the daily table, being thus
boiled in an immature state as “green corn.” Mixed with
other flour it furnishes good bread. For some kind of cakes
it is solely used, also for Maizena, Maccaroni and Polenta.
Several varieties exist; the Inca-maize of Peru being re-
markable for its gigantic size and large grams. Maize is
not readily subject to the ordinary corn diseases; but to
prosper it requires fair access to potash and lime. Good
writing and printing papers can be prepared from Maize-
straw. Meyen calculated, that the return from Maize under
most favorable circumstances in tropical countries would
be 800-fold, and under almost any circumstance it is the
largest yielder among cereals in warm countries. As a fat-
tening saccharine green-fodder Maize is justly appreciated.
Any Ergot from it is used, like that of Eye, lor medicinal
purposes. Maize-Corn contains about 7o per cent, of
starch. Dierbach recommends Mellago or Treacle from
Maize, instead of that prepared from the roots os Triticum
repens , L., and the molasses, so obtained, serve also culinary
uses.


Zingiber officinale, Roscoe.
The Ganger. India and China. Possiby this plant may be
productive in the hottest parts of our colony, and give satis-
factory results. The multiplication is effected by division
of the root. Tor candied ginger only the young succulent
roots are used, which are peeled and scalded prior to the
immersion into the saccharine liquid.
Zizania aquatica, L.* (Rydropyrum esculentum , Link.)
The Canada Rice. In shallow streams and around ponds
and lakes from Canada to Florida. This tall grass might
be readily naturalized. Although its grain can be utilized
for bread-corn, we would wish to possess the plant chiefly
to obtain additional food of a superior kind for water-
birds.
Zizania latifolia, Hance.*
(Rydropyrum latifolium, Grrisebach.)
The Kau-sun of China. In lakes of Amur, Manschuria,
China and Japan. Nearly related to the preceding species.
From Dr. Hance we know, that the solid base of the stem
forms a very choice vegetable, largely used in China, where
this tall water-grass undergoes regular cultivation like the
Trapa.
Zizania miliacea, Michaux.
Southern part of North America, West India. Likewise
tall and perennial, but more restricted to the tide-water
meadows and ditches, according to Pursh ; but according to
Chapman’s note generally distributed like Z. aquatina, with
which it has similar use. In South Brazil occurs a similar
grass, namely Z. microstachya, Nees.
Zizyphus Jujnba, La Marck.
From India to China. This shrub or tree can only be ex-
pected to bear its pleasant fruits in the warmest parts of our
colony. The fruit is red or yellow, and of the size of a large
cherry.


Zizyphus rugosa, La Marck.
Nepaul and other mountainous parts of India. A small
tree, hardier than the last. The drupe of this is also edible,
and the same may be said of a few other Indian species.
Zizyphus vulgaris, La March.
Orient, particularly Syria. A small tree, well-adapted for
our clime. Fruits scarlet, about an inch long, with edible
pulp ; they are known as South European Jujubs.




