

1923
(Second Session.)
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
A SELECTION OF PAPERS PRINTED
BY THE
LEAGUE OE NATIONS
RELATING TO
THE MANDATORY SYSTEM
(ESPECIALLY THOSE RELATING TO C MANDATES)
1920-1922.
(ENGLISH TEXTS ONLY.)
COMPILED IN THE PRIME MINISTER’S DEPARTMENT
Presented by Command; ordered to be printed, 25 th August, 1923, a.m.
[Cost of Paper: —Preparation, not given , 820 copies; approximate cost of printing and Publishing,£lo2.]
%
No. 41. — F.10729.—Price, 2s. 3d.




CONTENTS.
Page.
No. 1. Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations.. 5
No. 2. Allocation of Mandates .. .. 5
•
No. 3. The Responsibility of the League of Nations arising
out of Article XXII. of the Covenant (Mandates).
Memorandum laid by the Secretary-General before
the Council on 30th July, 1920 .. .. 5
No. 4. Report presented by the Belgian Representative,
Monsieur Hymans, and adopted by the Council
of the League of Nations, meeting at San
Sebastian on sth August, 1920 .. .. 7
No. 5. Proposed Constitution of the Permanent Commission
to be established under Article 22 of the Covenant.
Memorandum by the Secretary-General to the
Council on 12th October, 1920 .. .. 11
No. 6. Constitution of Permanent Mandates Commission,
approved by the Council on Ist December, 1920.. 11
No, 7. [Extract.] Report by the Council to the Assembly
on the Responsibilities of the League arising out
of Article 22 (Mandates), 6th December, 1920 .. 12
No. 8. Texts of the “C ” Mandates, and Declaration by the
Japanese Government relating to “C ” Mandates 13
No. 9. [Extract.] Permanent Mandates Commission. Min-
utes of the First Session, held in Geneva, 4th to
Bth October, 1921 .: .. .. .. 15
No. 10. B Mandates. Questionnaire intended to facilitate
the preparation of the annual reports from the
Mandatory Powers .. .. .. .. 25
No. 11. C Mandates. Questionnaire intended to facilitate
the preparation of the annual reports from the
Mandatory Powers .. .. .. .. 26
No. 12. Report submitted to the Council of the League of
Nations on 10th October, 1921, on behalf of the
Permanent Mandates Commission by its Chairman,
M. Theodoli .. .. .. .. .. 27
Page
No. 13. Rules of Procedure of the Permanent Mandates
Commission, approved by the Counoil at its
Sixteenth Session, January, 1922 .. 29
No. 14. [Extracts.] Permanent Mandates Commission.
Minutes of the Second Session, held in Geneva,
Ist to 11th August, 1922, under the chairmanship
of the Marquis Theodoli .. .. .. 30
No. 15. Report on the Second Session of the Permanent
Mandates Commission, submitted to the Council
of the League of Nations on behalf of the Com-
mission by the Chairman, the Marquis Theodoli,
23rd August, 1922 .. .. .. ..71
No. 16. Permanent Mandates Commission. Observations of
the Commission on the Reports relating to the
Territories under C Mandates. 23rd August, 1922 75
No. 17. Comments by the accredited representatives of the
Mandatory for the island of Nauru on the observa-
tions of the Permanent Mandates Commission
concerning the reports relating to the adminis-
tration of the island of Nauru, under the Mandate
of His Britannic Majesty, discussed during the
session in August, 1922. 23rd August, 1922 .. 80
No. 18. Report concerning the Second Session of the Per-
manent Mandates Commission. Report by the
Marquis Imperiali and resolutions adopted by the
Council on 4th September, 1922 .. .. 83
No. 19. Extracts from proceedings of the Council and the
Assembly regarding Mandates, September, 1922.. 84
No. 20. The National Status of the Inhabitants of Territories
under B and C Mandates. Report of the Per-
manent Mandates Commission. 19th August-, 1322; 89
Index *.. .. .. .r ’ .. 91




No. 1.
ARTICLE 22 OF THE COVENANT OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS.
To those colonies and territories which as a conse-
quence of the late war have ceased to be under the sove-
reignty of the States which formerly governed them
and which are inhabited by people not yet able to stand
by themselves under the strenuous conditions of the
rnodern world, there should be applied the principle
that the well-being and development of such peoples
form a sacred trust of civilisation, and that securities
fpr the performance of this trust should be embodied
m this Covenant.
The best method of giving practical effect to this
principle is that the tutelage of such peoples should be
entrusted to advanced nations who, by reason of their
resources, their experience or their geographical posi-
tion, can best undertake this responsibility, and who
are willing to accept it, and that this tutelage should
he exercised by them as Mandatories on behalf of the
League.
The character of the Mandate must differ according
to’ the stage of the development of the people, the
geographical situation of the territory, its economic
conditions and other similar circumstances.
Certain communities formerly belonging to the
Turkish Empire have reached a stago of development
where their existence as independent nations can be
provisionally recognised, subject to the rendering of
administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory
until such time as they are able to stand alone. The
wishes of these communities must be a principal con-
sideration in the selection of the Mandatory.
Other peoples, especially those of Central Africa, are
at such a stage that the Mandatory must be responsible
for the administration of the territory under conditions
which will guarantee freedom of conscience or religion,
subjoct only to the maintenance of public order and
morals, the prohibition of abuses such as the slave
trade, the arms traffic and the liquor traffic, and the
prevention of the establishment of fortifications or
military and naval bases and of military training of
the natives for other than police purposes and the
defence of territory, and will also secure equal oppor-
tunities for the trade and commerce of other Members
of the League.
There are territories, such as South-West Africa
and certain of the South Pacific Islands, which,
owing to the sparseness of their population,
or their small size, or their remoteness from
the centres of civilisation, or their geographical con-
tiguity to the territory of the Mandatory, and other
circumstances, can be best administered under the laws
of the Mandatory as integral portions of its territory,
subject to the safeguards above mentioned in the
interests of the indigenous population.
In every case of Mandate, the Mandatory shall
render to the Council an annual report in reference to
the territory committed to its charge.
The degree of authority, control, or administration
to be exercised by the Mandatory shall, if not pre-
viously agreed upon by the Members of the League,
be explicitly defined in each case by the Council.
A permanent Commission shall be constituted to
receive and examine the annual reports of the Man-
datories and to advise the Council on all matters relat-
ing to the observance of the Mandates.
No. 2.
ALLOCATION OF MANDATES.*
Extracts from the Notes of a Meeting held in the Conference Room of the Supreme War Council, at the Grand
Hotel Trianon, Versailles, on Wednesday, 7th May, 1919, at 4.15 pan.
The folloiving decisions were reached:
1. Togoland and Cameroons: France and Great
Britain shall make a joint recommendation to the
League of Nations as to their future.
German East Africa: The Mandate shall be held
by Great Britain.
German South-West Africa: The Mandate shall be
held by the Union of South Africa.
The German Samoan Islands: The Mandate shall
be held by New Zealand.
* League of Nations, 20/48/161, Annex 2.
The other German Pacific Possessions south of the
Equator (excluding the German Samoan Islands and
Nauru) : The Mandate shall be held by Australia. *
Nauru: The Mandate shall be given to the British
Empire.
German Islands north of the Equator: The Man-
date shall be held by Japan.
2. That an Inter-Allied Committee consisting of one
Representative each of the British Empire, Prance
and Italy, should be formed to consider the application
of Article i 3 of the Treaty of London, dated 26th
April, 1915.
3. That the above decisions should be published.
No. 3.
THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS ARISING OUT OF ARTICLE XXII. OF THE
COVENANT (MANDATES).
Memorandum laid by the Secretary-General before the Council on 30th July, 1920.*
1. By Article XXII. of the 'Covenant it is provided
that “ Those colonies and territories which, ns a conse-
quence of the late war, have ceased to he under the
sovereignty of the States which formerly governed them
and which are inhabited by peoples not yet able to
stand by themselves under the strenuous conditions of
* League of Nations, 20/48/161, Annex 3.
the modern world ” shall be administered by Mandatory
Powers acting “ on behalf of the League,” and assuming
as “ a sacred trust of civilisation” the responsibility
for their well-being and development. By the Peace
Treaty of Versailles, which came into force on 10th
January, 1920, all the late German colonies and over-


seas possessions “ ceased to be under the sovereignty
of the State which formerly governed them,” and
therefore came within the operation of Article XXII.
Article XXII further pledges the signatories °f
the Treaty of Versailles to apply a similar system
to the countries formerly part of the Turkish Empire
when a settlement with Turkey has been arrived at.
2. To carry out the undertakings contained in Article
XXII. and to establish a system of Mandates as a
working institution under the League, the following
measures are necessary:
(a) Suitable Mandatory Powers must be chosen
to administer on behalf of the League the
given territories which come within the
operation of Article XXII.
(b) The frontiers of the territories entrusted to
the different Mandatory Powers must be
delimited.
( c ) The necessary rights of authority and adminis-
tration must be conferred upon the selected
Mandatory Powers by a legally binding act.
(d) The terms of the Mandates in accordance with
which the Mandatory Powers are to govern
must be specifically defined in separate
charters applicable to each Mandated Area.
The definition of these terms involves the
application in detailed provisions of the
general principles laid down in paragraphs
4,5, and 6of Article XXII. These provi-
sions will necessarily vary according to the
nature of the territory or people to which
the Mandate is to apply.
( e ) The establishment of the machinery provided
for by Article XXII. for securing the
observance of the terms of the Mandates.
8. For the carrying out of the steps and for the
bringing into effective operation of the Mandatory
System, action is required both by the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers and by the League of Nations.
The rights of the Principal Allied and Associated
Powers in connexion with this matter arise from
Article 119 of the Treaty of Versailles, which is as
follows:
“ Germany renounces in favour of the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers all her rights and
titles over her overseas possessions.”
• It follows from this Article that since 10th January,
1920, the title to the territories which are to be placed
under Mandate has been invested in the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers. It is generally agreed
that as a result it is the right and duty of the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers to select the Mandatory
Powers who shall exercise authority on behalf of the
League and to define the frontiers of the areas for
which each of these Powers shall be responsible.
4. The rights and duties of the League of Nations
in connexion with Mandates arise, as has been said,
from Article XXII. The principal points of Article
XXII. are as follows:
(cr).By paragraph 2 it is provided that the Man-
datory Powers shall exercise their authority
specifically “on behalf of the League.”
(b) Paragraph 4 deals with the application of
Mandates to the territories of the late
Turkish Empire. Paragraph 5 lays down
principles to be applied to the Mandated
areas of Central Africa. Paragraph 6 lays
down the principles to be applied to South-
West Africa and the Pacific Islands.
(c) Paragraph 7 provides that the Mandatory
Powers shall render to the Council of the
League an annual report in reference to
the territory committed to its charge.
(d) Paragraph 8 provides as follows: —
“ The degree of authority, control or
administration to he exercised by the Man-
datory shall, if not previously agreed upon
by the Members of the League, be explicitly
defined in each case by the Council.”
(e) Paragraph 9 provides that a permanent Com-
mission he established to examine the annual
reports made hv the Mandatory Powers and
to advise the Council on all matters relating
to the observance of the Mandates.
5. So far as concerns the late German overseas
possessions—that is to say, those territories in regard
to which the provisions of Article XXII. have, since
10th January, 1920, been of binding force —the follow-
ing steps have already been taken to carry out the
requirements indicated under number 2 above.
(a) By a published decision of 7th May, 1919,*
the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
selected the Mandatory Powers to whom
they wished to entrust the government of
the Mandated areas. This decision was
modified by a subsequent decision of August,
1919, but agreement as to the allocation of
these Mandates is now complete among the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
Their agreement has not, however, been
embodied in any legally binding form,
although the territories in question are
actually being administered by the prospec-
tive Mandatory Powers.
( b ) The frontiers of the territories conferred on
the different Mandatory Powers have been
agreed to in draft treaties negotiated
between the Allied Powers principally con-
cerned, but not yet published.
(c) In July and August, 1919, a Commission
appointed by the Principal Allied and Asso-
ciated Powers discussed the terms of the
Mandates which they thought might suit-
ably be applied to those territories referred
to in paragraphs 5 and 6 of Article XXII.-
in other words, to all the territories in
respect of which Article XXII. is now of
binding force. This Commission reached
general agreement as to the terms of the
Mandates to be applied to these territories,
which they divided into two classes, respec-
tively known as “ B ” (paragraph 5 of
Article XXII.) and “O” (paragraph 6 of
Article XXII.).
( d ) Two reservations were, however, made to the
draft Mandates as agreed to. First, the
French Government made a reservation on
the subject of the raising of native troops
in Mandated areas. Second, the Japanese
Government made a reservation as to the
interpretation of paragraph 6 of Article 22
(“C” Mandates).
6. Before the Mandatory system can come into effec-
tive operation, however, the following steps still remain
to be taken.
( a ) A legal title to the necessary rights of
authority and administration must be con-
ferred on the respective Mandatory Powers
by the Principal Allied and Associated
Powers in whom the title to these terri-
tories is at present vested.
( b ) The terms of the various Mandates (both of
Class “ B ” and Class “ C ”) must be laid
down in specific charters applicable to
each of the territories concerned. In con-
nection with this requirement, the Council
* No. 2, page above.


of the League appears to have duties it
might fulfil either by accepting and con-
firming, on behalf of the League, draft
Mandates laid before it by some- of its
Members—for example, such Mandates as
"were agreed to by the Commission of the
(Principal Allied and Associated Pow r ers
last year—or alternatively, it could on its
own initiative draw up the Mandates itself
and inform the Principal Allied and Asso-
ciated Powers as to the terms upon "which
the Mandatory Powers selected shall have
to govern.
If none of its Members lays before it
draft Mandates for its consideration, the
Council of the League must itself take action
and drau T up the Mandates. It is already
six months since the provisions of Article 22
came into force, and the matter cannot be
indefinitely deferred.
(c) If the Council followed the course of drawing
up Mandates on its own initiative, it would
no doubt be faced iby the difficulties arising
from the French and Japanese reservations
referred to above. It would also be obliged,
when it had drafted its Mandates, to request
the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
to draw up the necessary acts conferring
definitive rights of authority and adminis-
1 ration upon the Mandatory Powers whom
they have selected.
( d ) It "would then remain for the Council to
establish the permanent Commission re-
ferred to in paragraph 9 of Article 22, to
receive the reports of the Mandatory Powers
and to assist the Oouueil in securing the
observance of the Mandates.
7. With regard to Mandates for the territories of the
late Turkish Empire, it is clear that nothing can be
done by the League until the Turkish Treaty is finally
signed. In view, however, of the very grave responsi-
bilities which will be laid upon the League as the
result of these Mandates, the Council of the League
might ask the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
for information as to the steps which they intend to
take for giving effect to the provisions of Article XXII.
( i.e for nominating the different Mandatory Powers,
etc.), and as to any proposals which they intend to
make for the drawing up of the Mandates.
8. Whatever course the Council may think it wise
to follow 7, it is clear that the matter is not one which
permits of delay. It is six months since the Covenant
came into force and the late German overseas posses-
sions are being governed by their prospective Man-
datory Powers as. if the powers conferred on the League
under the Covenant -were not existent. If the Man-
datory' System is to he established before the meeting
of the Assembly, the measures indicated above must
be taken as soon as possible.
No. 4.
REPORT PRESENTED BY THE BELGIAN REPRESENTATIVE, MONSIEUR HYMANS,
And Adopted by the Council of the League of Nations, meeting at San Sebastian on sth August, 1920.^
I. The fate and the government of the territories
which belonged to Germany outside of Europe are
regulated by Articles 118 and 119 of the Treaty of
Versailles, and by Article 22 of the Covenant of the
League of Nations.
By Articles 118 and 119 of the Treaty, Germany
renounced in favour of the Principal Allied and Asso-
ciated Powers all her rights over overseas possessions,
and undertook to recognise and to accept the measures
taken by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers,
in agreement where necessary with Third Powers, in
order to carry the consequences of her renunciation into
effect.
Article 22 of the Covenant lays down in its first
two paragraphs two essential principles which apply
to all peoples not yet able to stand by themselves who
have ceased to he under the sovereignty of the States
Avhich formerly governed them. It is a sacred trust of
civilisation to assure the well-being and development of
these peoples. To ensure the performance of this trust,
the Covenant stipulates certain guarantees: the tutelage
of such peoples will he entrusted to the nations which
are best fitted to undertake this responsibility. They
w'ill exercise this tutelage as Mandatories and on behalf
of the League.
Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 differentiate three categories
of peoples, national communities or territories:
1. Certain communities formerly belonging to the
Turkish Empire, whose existence as inde-
pendent nations can be provisionally recog-
nised on condition that they are guided by
the advice of a Mandatory.
2. Other peoples, especially those of Central
Africa, in respect of whom the administra-
tion should he assumed by the Mandatory
Power under conditions which will prohibit
abuses, give certain guarantees to the in-
* League of Nations, 20/48/161, Annex 4.
digenous populations, and secure equal op-
portunities for the trade and commerce of
all Members of the League.
3. Finally, there are territories, such as South-
West Africa and certain of the South
Pacific Islands, which can be best adminis-
tered under the laws of the Mandatory as
integral portions of its territory, subject
to the safeguards above-mentioned in the
interests of the indigenous population.
To these three categories of communities or terri-
tories three types of Mandate, styled respectively “ A ”
Mandate, “ B ” Mandate, “ C ” Mandate, should corre-
spond.
Paragraph 8 of Article 22 stipulates that if the
degree of authority, control or administration to be
exercised by the Mandatory shall not have been pre-
viously agreed upon by the Members of the League, it
shall be explicitly defined in each case by the Council.
Finally, Paragraphs 7 and 8 regulate the control to
which the administration of the Mandatory Powers
will be subject: they shall render to the Council an
annual report; a Permanent Commission shall examine
the annual reports, and advise the Council on all
matters relating to the observance of the Mandates.
11. What are the measures to be taken to ensure the
observance of Article 22 and to apply the Mandatory
system: —-
(a) The Mandatory Powers entrusted with the
administration in the name of the League,
of the territories ceded, which come within
the application of Article 22, must be very
carefully chosen.
(b) The frontiers of the territories entrusted to the
various Mandatory Powers must be de-
limited. '


(c) The Mandatory Powers chosen must be in-
vested with the authority and the necessary
powers for administering territories by
means of an instrument 'which will legally
bind them.
(d) The terms of the Mandates according to
which the Mandatory Powers should exer-
cise their government must be especially
defined in distinct charters applicable to
each Mandatory area. The definition of
these terms involves the application, in de-
tailed clauses, of the principles laid down
in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of Article 22.
These clauses will necessarily vary accord-
ing to the nature of the people who are to
come under the Mandates.
(e) The Body provided for by Article 22, in order
to ensure the observation of the Mandates,
must be created.
111. What are the measures which the Principal
All : ed and Associated Powers have so far taken?
(a) By a decision published on May 5, 1919, the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers
have chosen the Mandatory Powers to
whom they wish to entrust the government
of the territories placed under their Man-
date. This decision was modified by a sub-
sequent decision in August, 1919, that the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers are
now in complete agreement as to the alloca-
tion of the Mandates. This agreement has
not been expressed in a form implying a
legal obligation, although the territories in
question are actually being administered by
the Mandatory Powers to whom it was
intended to entrust them.
( b ) In draft Treaties negotiated between the
Allied Powers principally concerned, the
Mandatory Powers came to an understand-
ing as to the delimitation of the frontiers
of the territories which are entrusted to
them; but these drafts have not been pub-
lished.
(c) In July and August 1919, the Commission
appointed by the Principal Allied and Asso-
ciated Powers discussed the clauses of the
Mandates which in its opinion would best
apply to the territories referred to in para-
graphs 5 and 6 of Article 22 —in other
words, to all the territories to which Article
22 henceforward compulsorily applies. The
Members of this Commission agreed
unanimously as to the terms of the Mandates
to which these terr’tories will be submitted;
they too were divided into two categories—
■Categorv “B ” (paragraph 5 of Article
22) and Category "C" (paragraph fi of
Article 22).
(d) Two reservations, however, have been made
in connection with these draft Mandates,
wh’ch have resulted from this agreement.
The first, formulated by the French Go-
vernment, refers to the recruitment of
native troops in the Mandated areas. The
second, formulated by the Japanese Govern-
ment, refers to the interpretation of para-
graph sof Article 22. (“ C ” Mandates.)
We must now consider the measures which the Coun-
cil should take, and how it can hasten the bringing into
force of the mandatory system.
Three points are to be considered:
1. Allocation of the mandates and legal title of
the mandatories.
2. The definition of the terms of the mandate and
the extent of the powers of the League of
Nations.
3. Organisation of the Commission.
I. ALLOCATION OF THE MANDATES AND
LEGAL TITLE OF THE MANDATORIES.
There is one point on which there seems to be no
divergence of opinion, namely, that the right to allocate
the mandates, that is to say, to appoint the mandatory
powers and to determine the territories over which they
shall exercise authority, belongs to the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers. Article XXII. of the Cove-
nant makes no provision regarding the authority which
shall appoint the mandatories; but Article 119 of tbe
Treaty of Versailles transfers tbe sovereignty over the
former German overseas possessions to the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers, and Article 118 expressly
stipulates that measures shall be taken by the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers, in agreement, where
necessary, with Third Powers, in -order to carry into
effect the full consequences of the provision iby which
Germany renounces her rights outside Europe. These
two Articles of the Treaty of Versailles can obviously
serve as guides in the interpretation of the Covenant,
since they are strictly contemporary, have been drawn
up by the same authors, and since the Covenant forms
part of the Treaty of Versailles. The Allied Powers
have adopted the same interpretation of Article XXII.
of the Covenant by inserting Articles in the Treaty of
Peace of Saint-Germain dated September 10, 1919, with
Austria, and in the draft Treaty with Turkey, which
stipulate expressly that the right to appoint Mandatory
Powers shall belong to the Principal Allied Powers.
There can be no question, moreover, as to the inten-
tions of the authors of the Covenant with regard to
this question.
It is not enough, however, that the Mandatory
Powers should be appointed; it is important that they
should also possess a legal title —a mere matter of form
perhaps, but one which should be settled, and the con-
sideration of which will help towards a clear under-
standing of the conception of mandates.
It must not be forgotten that, although the Man-
datory Power is appointed by the Principal Powers, it
will govern as a mandatory and in the name of the
League of Nations.
It logically follows that the legal title held by the
Mandatory must he a double one: one conferred
by the Principal P’owers and the other conferred by the
League of Nations. The procedure should, in fact, be
the following:
t. The Principal Allied and Associated Powers
confer a Mandate on one of their number on
a third Power;
2. The Principal Powers officially notify the
Council of the League of Nations that a cer-
tain Power has been appointed Mandatory
for such a certain defined territory.
3. The Council of the League of Nations takes
official cognisance of the appointment of
the Mandatory Power and informs the
latter that it (the Council) considers it as
invested with the Mandate, and at the same
time notifies it of the terms of the Mandate,
after ascertaining whether they are in ac-
cordance with the provisions of the Cove-
nant.
TT. DETERMINATION OF THE TERMS OF
THE MANDATES.
By whom shall the terms of the mandates bo deter-
mined f


1. Du TILS LAID ON THE MANDATORIES OF THE
Covenant.
It has not been sufficiently noted that the question is
only partially solved by paragraph 8 of Article XXII.,
according to which the degree of authority, control
or administration to be exercised by the mandatory,
if not defined by a previous convention,- shall be ex-
plicitly defined by the Council.
Most of the Mandates will eontain many provisions
other than those relating to the degree of authority.
These provisions are, so far as J 3 and C mandates
are concerned, summed up in paragraphs 5 and 6.
It is not within the power either of the Council or
of the Principal Powers to alter these. Amendments
4 can only be made if the Covenant is revised. The
pr'nciples laid down in paragraphs 5 and 6 of Article
XXII may possibly need amplifying and defining in
the mandates and the Council will gratefully accept any
suggestions with regard ta this matter which may be
suggested to it by any of the Powers concerned. On
the other hand, it is undoubtedly the duty of the
Council to see to the observance of the rules laid down
** in Article XXII., and it could not allow these to be
omitted. 1
Every B and C Mandate must certainly therefore be
submitted for the approval of the Council, and if the
latter appears reluctant to take the matter up, it might
incur the censure of the Assembly.
The degree of authority, control or administration is,
so far as B or C Mandates are concerned, a question of
only secondary importance.
In the former case, as in the latter, the Mandatory
Power will enjoy in my judgment a full exercise of
sovereignty, in so far as such exercise is consistent
with the carrying out of the obligations imposed by
paragraphs 5 and 6. In paragraph 6, which deals with
C Mandates, the scope of these obligations is perhaps
narrower than in paragraph 5, thus allowing the Man-
datory Power more nearly to assimilate the Mandated
territory to its own. I, therefore, conclude that it is
not indispensable that B and C should contain any
stipulation whatever regarding the degree of authority
or administration.
On the other hand, so far as A Mandates are con-
cerned this question becomes more important than any
other. The Covenant lays down for us future
guarantees for the benefit of the inhabitants of terri-
tory formerly a part of the Turkish Empire, save what
is involved in the provisional independence provided
for by paragraph 4, and nevertheless it is clear that this
is a notion capable of an infinite series of differences
in interpretation, and that it would be right to adopt
administrative regimes which will vary according to
the degree of civilisation of the people concerned, and
oven according to the principles and systems of govern-
ment of the respective Mandatory Powers. This, there-
fore, is the po : nt at which the question of the right
interpretation of paragraph 8 assumes its full import-
ance.
2. Degree of Authority, Control or
Administration.
A. Paragraph 8 of Article 22 lays upon the Council
the duty of drawing up explicit definitions on this point,
unless a previous convention has been concluded
between the Members of the League. It cannot be dis-
puted that if this last expression were taken in its
literal sense, it would mean that it would normally be
the Assembly which would be called upon to deter-
1 For mandates of the same category these prescriptions should he identical
that is to say, that for B and C mandates I approve the drawing up of a
s'and a d Mandate for each Ca'tqnry. I think that it would highly desirable, in
order to avoid fiVure disputes, that the provisions in favour 6f the lnd'gnnous
inhabitants, which figure in the two categories of mandates, should be formulated
In identical terms: which Is not the case in the work of the London Com-
mission.
mine the conditions of the mandate, since the Assembly
alone brings all the Members of the League together .
This interpretation was supported by Lord Robert Cecil
in a letter to the Times of the Ist July. It seems im-
probable that it represents the of those who
drew up the Article, and this for the following reasons:
(a) In the first place, it seems certain that if
they had intended to indicate the Assembly
they would have mentioned it by name,
rather than used an obscure periphrasis.
(b) Further, it should be noted that a few months
after Article 22 was drafted and before the
Treaty of Versailles was ratified, there was-
a Meeting in London of the Colonial ex-
perts of the Principal Allied and Asso-
ciated Powers to draw up drafts of the
“ different categories of Mandates.”
( c ) Finally it seems inconceivable that a body
such as the Assembly, whose Members are
so numerous, and in which the conduct of
business must be so difficult would have been
entrusted with the difficult task of working
out the details of the three kinds of Man-
date.
B. It seems to me that the real explanation of para-
graph 8 of Article 22 is as follows: When this Article
was drafted in January, 1919, its authors supposed that
the conventions dealing wfith the Mandates could cer-
tainly be included in the Treaty itself, or form annexes
to it. It was also thought at that time that only the
Allied and Associated Powers could be considered as
Original Members of the League of Nations. In other
words, that on the day of its foundation they would be
its only Members. It was, therefore, intended in using
the words “ the Members of the League ” to refer to
all the signatories exfcept Germany of the Treaty of
Versailles.
It therefore seems to me that the right reading of
paragraph 8 is as follows:
The degree of authority, control or administration
to be exercised by the Mandatory shall, if not previously
agreed upon by these signatories of the Treaty of Ver-
sailles who are Members of the League of Nations, be
explicitly defined by the Council.
C. How is paragraph 8 to be applied to the present
moment? It is in practice almost impossible to apply
literally the procedure which we have just defined.
How could the assent of all those signatories of the
Treaty of Versailles who are Members of the League
be obtained?
Has not the Council now the right to take cognisance
of the absence of any Convention such as is referred to
by the Covenant and itself to regulate the degree of
authority or administration of the Mandatory Power?
This right appears theoretically incontestable, but
one wh : ch it would not be opportune to exercise. We
must bear in mind, indeed, that in the A Mandates the
degree of authority must vary according to the popu-
lation of the mandated territories and according to who
is the Mandatory Power. In these circumstances, and
as far as these Mandates are concerned, the Council
should in any case wait unt'l the Powers have arrived
at a decision with resrard to the appointment of the
Mandatory Power and the delimitation of the terri-
tories.
Moreover, the examination of the degree of authority
to be conferred presupposes somewhat speciahsed know-
ledge; with regard to B and C Mandates, the Council
would probably consider that it could not make a pro-
nouncement until it should have taken the opinion of
experts, appointed by it. Would it not be more reason-
able to take advantage of the work which has already
been accomplished by the experts of the Principal


Powers. I propose, therefore, to ask these Powers at
the same time as they acquaint us with their decision
as to the Mandatory Power, to inform us of their pro-
posals with regard to the terms of the Mandate to be
exercised.
Moreover, if I have not misunderstood Lord Curzou’s
speech on Mesopotamia in the House of Lords, it is
thus that the British Government understands the ap-
plication of Article 22.
111. THE EXTENT OF THE LEAGUE’S RIGHT
OF CONTROL.
1 shall not enter into a controversy —though this
would certainly be very interesting—as to where the
sovereignty actually resides. We are face to face with a
new institution. Legal erudition will decide as to what
extent it can apply to this institution the older juridical
notions. In the same wav, whether the League of
Nations is responsible in respect of the Mandatory
Powers, appears to be a moral rather than a legal
question. For there is no legal responsibiilty except
in respect of another person. Now, the responsibility
of the League of Nations could only occur in respect of
the populations who are under mandatory rule. But
it is difficult to see in what way this responsibility would
be organised, or ivhat measures could enforce it. Quis
custodset custodes? The responsibility of the League
before the public opinion of the civilised world will in
point of fact be a moral one.
The practical and positive question appears to me to
be the following :
What will be the responsibility of the Mandatory
Powers before the League of Nations, or in other words,
in what direction will the League’s right of control be
exercised ? Is the Council to content itself with ascer-
taining that the Mandatory Power has remained within
the limits of the power which were conferred upon it, or
is it to ascertain also whether the Mandatory Power has
made a good use of these powers, and whether its ad-
ministration has conformed to the interests of the native
population ?
It appears to me that the wider interpretation should
be adopted. Paragraphs 1 and 2of Article 22 have
indicated the spirit which should inspire those who are
entrusted with administering peoples not yet capable of
governing themselves, and have determined that this
tutelage should be exercised by the States in question, as
Mandatories and in the name of the League. The
Annual Report stipulated for in Article 7 should cer-
tainly include a statement as to the .whole moral and
material situation of the peoples under the Mandate.
It is clear, therefore, that the Council also should
examine the question of the whole administration. In
this matter the Council will obviously have to display
extreme prudence so that the exercise of its right of
control should not provoke any unjustifiable complaints,
and thus increase the difficulties of the task undertaken
by the Mandatory Power.
IV. ORGANISATION OF THE COMMISSION
PROVIDED FOR IN PARAGRAPH 9 OF
ARTICLE 22.
It is not, of course, essential that the Commission
should be set up at once, since it need not enter upon
its duties until the first Reports dealing wdth the
mandates have been rendered.
There is, moreover, an obvious difficulty in appointing
the members of this Commission before it is known
which are the various Mandatory Countries.
Here, however, are a few considerations on which
agreement could be reached now, and which would much
simplify the future composition of the Commission.
1. It is desirable, in order that the Commission should
have proper information, that it should include amongst
its members a delegate from each Mandatory Power.
2. The objection has been raised that under these
circumstances these Powers would be both judges and
parties; the answer to this objection is that the Com-
mission will not judge, and is called upon to make recom-
mendations; moreover, it would be easy to lay down
that no member of the Commission should take part in a
vote upon a report from the State or Empire which he
represents.
S. As it is, however, essential, in order to ensure the
impartiality of the recommendations made by the Com-
mission, not to give to the Mandatory Powers the right
of expressing a judgment on the fashion in which each
of them has carried out its Mandate, the Commission
will be completed by asking other members superior in
numbers to those nominated by the Mandatory Powers.
How should these other Members be chosen ? I propose
that they should be appointed by the Council. The
Council would appoint a certain number of private
individuals, who would be instructed to sit upon the
Commission as Members, and to examine either some
or all of the Mandates. These persons should not belong
to any States already represented as Mandatory Powers.
Recourse would naturally in the first instance be had
to the experience of Nationals of colonial Powers which
are not Mandatories. In such a fashion the Council
would be able in a large measure to give satisfaction to
the desire expressed by the Dutch Government and con-
veyed to us by the Secretary-General.
CONCLUSIONS.
I have the honour to propose to the Council the fol-
lowing Resolutions*:—
I. The Council decides to request the Principal
Powers to be so good as to: (a) name the Powers to
whonv they have decided to allocate the Mandates pro-
vided for in Article 22; (b) to inform it as to the
frontiers of the territories to come under these Man-
dates; ( c ) to communicate to it the terms and the
conditions of the Mandates that they propose should be
adopted by the Council from following the prescriptions
of Article 22.
11. The Council will take cognisance of the Manda-
tory Powers appointed and will examine the draft Man-
dates communicated to it, in order to ascertain that
they conform to the prescriptions of Article 22 of the
Covenant.
111. the Council will notify to each Power appointed
that it is invested with the Mandate, and will, at the
same time, communicate to it the terms and conditions.
IV. The Council instructs the Secretary-General, fol-
lowing the recommendations set forth in this report, to
prepare a draft scheme for the organisation of the
Commission of control provided for by Article 22,
paragraph 9.
* These Resolutions were adopted by the Council at Its meeting at San
Sebaetian, on 6th August, 1920.


No. 5.
PROPOSED CONSTITUTION OF THE PERMANENT COMMISSION TO BE ESTABLISHED UNDER
ARTICLE 22 OF THE COVENANT.
Memorandum by the Secretary-Generai to the Council on 12th October, 1920. *
1. By the Resolution of the Council passed at San
Sebastian, the Secretary-General was instructed to
elaborate a draft scheme for the organisation of the
Commission of Control by Article 22, paragraph 9, of
the Covenant.
In preparing the plans for the constitution of the
Permanent Mandatory Commission, he was to follow
the recommendations set forth in the report of the
Representative of Belgium.
2. The recommendations contained in this report
were to the following effect. First, that in order to
have proper information is was necessary to include
amongst the members of the Commission a delegate from
each Mandatory Power. As far as it can be foreseen,
the following Countries, Members of the League, are
likely to have Mandates conferred upon them:
1. Australia.
2. Belgium.
3. France.
4. Great Britain.
5. Japan.
6. New Zealand.
7. South Africa.
The Secretary-General would, therefore, propose that
the Governments of each of these countries should be
asked to nominate forthwith a representative to sit on
the Mandatory Commission.
3. Secondly, the Report of the Representative of
Belgium contained the recommendation that there
should be on the Commission a superiority of Members
chosen from non-Mandatory Powers. The Secretary-
General therefore proposes that eight additional Mem-
bers should be chosen, making a total of fifteen. As
regards the choice of these eight, it is suggested that
the Governments of the Members of the League other
than the Mandatory Powers should be invited to nomi-
nate candidates should they desire to do so. From
among these Candidates the Council or the Assembly
should select the eight persons whom it deems to be the
most suitable. These members of the Commission would
not be representatives of their Governments. They
* League of Nations, 20/48/161, Annex 8.
would he appointed by the Council or the Assembly on
the nomination of the Governments, which would,
therefore, only he responsible for certifying that the
members were competent to undertake the duties which
they would be called upon to prforrn.
4. There remains the question as to whether the selec-
tion of these eight members should be made by the
Council or by the Assembly.
The Secretary-General believes that the wisest course
would be that this selection should be made by the
Assembly.
If these proposals meet with the approval of the
Council, the question of the selection of the eight
members of the Commission will be placed on the
Agenda of the approaching Meeting of the Assembly,
and the Members of the League will be invited to nomi-
nate candidates forthwith.
5. In making the above proposals, however, the Sec-
retary-General ventures to suggest that it would per-
haps be a mistake to determine at the present time the
final constitution of the Permanent Mandatory Com-
mission .
He feels that the Mandates Commission cannot fail
to be one of the most important organs of the League
and one in which the co-operation of the different Go-
vernments is absolutely essential to its good working:
that therefore it is desirable to know before its organisa-
tion is finally settled more of the views of the Govern-
ments and to secure the advice of colonial experts of
international reputation.
To secure this result, the Secretary-General invites
the Council to consider whether the Mandates Commis-
sion should not be provisionally constituted as above
proposed and be invited by the Council to make recom-
mendations at an early date, as to the plan to be
adopted for its own final constitution and organisation.
Any such recommendations, in accordance with the
general principle adopted by the Council, would be
submitted by the Council to the Assembly at its second
meeting, and meanwhile the provisional Commission
would continue to act as the organisation required under
Article 22.
No. 6.
CONSTITUTION OF PERMANENT MANDATES COMMISSION.
Approved by the Council on the Ist December, 1920. *
The Council of the League of Nations in accordance
with paragraphs 7 and 9 of Article 22 of the
namely:
“In every case of Mandate, the Mandatory shall
render to the Council an Annual Report in reference
to the territory committed to its charge.”
“ A Permanent Commission shall be constituted to
receive and examine the Annual Reports of the Manda-
tories, and to advise the Council on all matters relating
to the observance of the Mandates,”
has decided as follows:
(a) The Permanent Mandates Commission pro-
vided for in paragraph 9 of Article 22 of
the Covenant, shall consist of nine Members.
The majority of the Commission shall be
nationals of non-Mandatory Powers.
* Leagur of Nations. 20/48/161, Annex 14.
All the Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Council and selected for
their personal merits and competence. They
shall not hold any office which puts them
in a position of direct dependence on their
Governments while Members of the Com-
mission.
The International Labour Organisation shall
have the privilege of appointing to the Per-
manent Commission an expert chosen by
itself. This expert shall have the right of
attending in an advisory capacity all meet-
ings of the Permanent Commission at which
questions relating to labour are discussed.
(b) The Mandatory Powers should send their
annual report provided for in paragraph 7


of Article 22 of the Covenant of the Com-
mission through duly authorised representa-
tives who would be prepared to offer any
supplementary explanations or supplemen-
tary information which the Commission
may request.
(c) The Commission shall examine each in-
dividual report in the presence of the duly
authorised representative of the Mandatory
Power from which it comes. This repre-
sentative . shall participate with absolute
freedom in the discussion of this report.
(d) After this discussion has ended and the repre-
sentative of the Mandatory Power has with-
drawn the Commission shall decide on the
wording of the observations which are to be
submitted to the Council of the League.
( e ) The observations made by the Commission upon
each report shall be communicated to the
duly authorized representative of the Man-
datory Power from which the report come 3.
This representative shall be entitled to ac-
company it with any comments which he
desires to make.
(/) The Commission shall forward the reports of
Mandatory Powers to the Council. It shall
annex to each report its own observations as
well as the observations of the duly autho-
rised representative of the Power which
issued the report, if the representative so
desires.
(tf) When the Council publishes the reports of the
Mandatory Powers and the observations of
the P ermanent Commission, it shall also pub-
lish the observations of the duly authorised
representatives of those Mandatory Powers
which have expressed a desire.
(h) The Commission, acting in concert with all the
duly authorised representatives of the Man-
datory Powers, shall hold a Plenary Meeting
to consider all the reports as a whole and any
general conclusions to be drawn from them.
The Commission may also utilise such a
meeting of the representatives of the Man-
datory Powers to lay before them any other
matters connected with Mandates which in
their opinion should be submitted by the
Council to the Mandatory Powers and to the
other States Members of the League. This
Plenary Meeting shall take place either
before or after the presentation of the
annual reports as the Commission may think
fit.
(*) The Commission shall regulate its own pro-
cedure subject to the approval of the Coun-
cil.
(;) The Commission shall sit at Geneva. It may
summon technical experts to act in an ad-
visory capacity for all questions relating to
the application of the system of Mandates.
(A;) The Members of the Commission shall receive
an alloAvance of 100 gold francs per day dur-
ing their meetings. Their travelling ex-
penses shall be paid. Expenses of the Com-
mission shall be borne by the League of
Nations.
No. 7.
[EXTRACT.]
Report by the Council to the Assembly on the Responsibilities of the League arising out of Article 22
(Mandates). 1
The Council, in presenting its report to the Assembly
on the subject of the responsibilities of the League
arising out of Article 22 of the Covenant, has thought
it well to attach, as Annexes, 2 the principal documents
on the subject which it has had under its consideration
during the past year. These include a general expose
of the matter by the 'Secretary-General 3 and the Reports
and .Resolutions adopted by the Council at its meetings
at San Sebastian, 4 Brussels, 5 and Geneva. 5 As the
numerous points connected with the League’s responsi-
bilities under Article 22 are discussed fully in these
documents, the Council think it may be sufficient to
deal very shortly with the principal decisions wdiich.
they have taken and to refer Members of the Assembly
to the fuller exposition given in the Annexes of the
reasons for these decisions.
1. The first point which the Council had to consider
concerned the selection of the Mandatory Powers who
are to exercise authority over the Mandated Territories,
on behalf and in the name of the League. It was agreed
that the Mandatory Powers must, in accordance with
tbe. Treaty of Versailles, be selected by the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers and that'“the legal title
held by a Mandatory Power must therefore be a double
one, one conferred by the Principal Powers, and the
other by the League of Nations.” The grounds for
this decision will be found in the Report of the Belgian
Representative adopted in San Sebastian and given on
p. 14 6 of the Annex.
2.. With regard to the terms of the Mandates the
Council decided that the principles laid down in para-
graphs 1,5, and 6 of Article 22 would perhaps need
amplifying and defining in the Mandates, and that it
was therefore prepared to “ accept any suggestions with
regard to the matter which might be made to it by
any of the Powers concerned.” The Council further
decided that it was undoubtedly its duty to secure the
observance of the rules laid down in Article 22. A
full discussion of this matter is found in the Report
of the Belgian Representative at San Sebastian (p. 15 7
of the Annex).
3. The Council decided that it was in the last resort
itself responsible for approving, and if necessary for
drawing up, the terms for the Mandates. While it was
prepared to receive the proposals of any of its Members
with regard to the terms of the Mandates, at the same
time it could not, without dereliction of its duty, wait
indefinitely for such proposals to be made. If such
proposals were not made within a reasonable time it
would be obliged to act on its own responsibility. This
it conceived to be the right interpretation of paragraph
S of Article 22.
A full discussion of this point will be found in the
Reports of the Belgian Representative made at San
Sebastian and at Brussels (pages 16 8 and 29 9 of the
Annex).
4. With regard to the responsibility of the League
for securing the observance of the terms of the Man-
dates, the Council interprets its duties in this connec-
tion in the widest manner.
Nevertheless the League will obviously have to
display extreme prudence, so that the exercise of its
rights of control should not in any way increase the
(*) Dated 6th December, 1620, of Nations, 20/48/161. (>) Annexes
1-4.8, 14. are rr'nted as Nos. 1-6 of this paper. (•) No. 3, pp. S-7 above
U \ pp - 7 '/!x° I ? b ? vp -- A Not Panted. (•) P, 8 above. (») P. 0 above,
(*) P. 9 above. (*) Not printed.


difficulties of the task undertaken by the Mandatory
Powers.
(A full discussion will be found on p. 17 9 of the
Annex).
5. With regard to the constitution of the Mandates
Commission, provided for under Article 22 to “ receive
and examine the annual reports of the Mandatories,
to advise the Council on all matters relating to the
observance of the Mandates,” the Council after very
full consideration (see pages 17 9 , 24, 29 10 of the Annex)
decided that the Commission should be composed in
the manner set forth in the Report adopted at its
meeting at Geneva on December Ist, 1920 (see page
34 11 ).
6. * * * * * * * * l2
(•) P. 10 above. ( l 0) Not Printed. (“) Pp. 11-12. (“) Not printed.
No. 8.
TEXTS OF THE “C” MANDATES, AND DECLARATION BY THE JAPANESE GOVERNMENT RELATING
TO THESE MANDATES.
Geneva, 17th February, 1921.
Sir, —
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith certi-
fied copies of the following Mandates—
Mandate for Nauru, conferred upon His Britannic
Majesty;
for German Samoa, conferred upon
His Britannic Majesty to be exercised on his
behalf by -the Government of the Dominion
of New Zealand;
Mandate for the German Possessions in the Pacific
Ocean situated south of the equator, other
than German Samoa and Nauru, conferred
upon His Britannic Majesty to be exercised
on his behalf by the Government of the Com-
monwealth of Australia;
’"Mandate for German South-West Africa,
ferred up His Britannic Majesty to be exer-
cised on his behalf by the Government of the
Union of South Africa;
’"Mandate for the German Possessions in the
Pacific Ocean lying north of the Equator,
conferred upon His Majesty the Emperor of
J apan,
as defined by the Council of the League of Nations at
its meeting on 17th December, 1920.
In execution of the final provisions of the said Man-
dates, such certified copies are being forwarded to all
Powers Signatories of the Treaty of Peace with
Germany.
At the meeting of the Council at which the terms of
these Mandates were defined, it was understood that
the English text only was to be considered authentic.
I have, &e.,
(Sgd.) ERIC DRUMMOND,
-Secretary-General.
The Prime Minister of Australia.
♦Not printed.
MANDATE FOR THE GERMAN POSSESSIONS IN THE PACIFIC OCEAN SITUATED SOUTH OF THE
EQUATOR OTHER THAN GERMAN SAMOA AND NAURU.
The Council of the League of Nations:
Whereas by article 119 of the Treaty of Peace with
Germany signed at Versailles on the 28th June, 1919,
Germany renounced in favour of the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers all her rights over her overseas
possessions, including therein German New Guinea
and the groups of islands in the Pacific Ocean lying
south of the equator other than German Samoa and
Nauru; and
(Whereas the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
agreed that, in accordance with article 22, part I.
(Covenant of the League of Nations), of the said
treaty, a mandate should be conferred upon His
Britannic Majesty, to be exercised on his behalf by
the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia,
to administer New Guinea and the said islands, and
have proposed that the mandate should be formulated
in the following terms; and
Whereas His Britannic Majesty, for and on behalf
of the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia,
has agreed to accept the mandate in respect of the said
territory and has undertaken to exercise it on behalf of
the League of Nations in accordance with the follow-
ing provisions; and
Whereas, by the aforementioned article 22, para-
graph 8, it is provided that the degree of authority,
control or administration to be exercised by the man-
datory, not having been previously agreed upon by
the members of the League, shall be explicitly defined
by the Council of the League of Nations:
Confirming the said mandate, defines its terms as
follows:
Article 1.
The territory over which a mandate is conferred
upon His Britannic Majesty for and on behalf of the
Government of the Commonwealth of Australia (here-
inafter called the mandatory) comprises the former
German colony of New Guinea and the former German
islands situated in the Pacific Ocean and lying south
of the equator, other than the islands of the Samoan
group and the island of Nauru.
Article 2.
The mandatory shall have full power of administra-
tion and legislation over the territory subject to the
present mandate as an integral portion of the Com-
monwealth of Australia, and may apply the laws of the
Commonwealth of Australia to the territory, subject
to such local modifications as circumstances may
require.
The mandatory shall promote to the utmost the
material and moral well-being and the social progress
of the inhabitants of the territory subject to the present
mandate.
Article 3.
The mandatory shall see that the slave trade is pro-
hibited, and that no forced labour is permitted, except
for essential public works and services, and then only
for adequate remuneration.
The mandatory shall also see that the traffic in arms
and ammunition is controlled in accordance with prin-
ciples analogous to those laid down in the convention
relating to the control of the arms traffic, signed on
the 10th September, 1919, or in any convention amend-
ing the same.
The supply of intoxicating spirits and beverages to
the natives shall be prohibited.


Article 4.
The military training of the natives, otherwise than
for purposes of internal police and the local defence of
the territory, shall be prohibited Furthermore, no
military or naval bases shall be established or fortifica-
tions erected in the territory.
Article 5.
Subject to the provisions of any local law for the
maintenance of public order and public morals, the
mandatory shall ensure in the territory freedom of
conscience and the free exercise of all forms of wor-
ship, and shall allow all missionaries, nationals of any
State member of the League of Nations, to enter into,
travel and reside in the territory for the purpose of
prosecuting their calling.
Article 6.
The mandatory shall make to the Council of the
League of Nations an annual report to the satisfaction
of the Council, containing full information with regard
to the territory, and indicating the measures taken to
carry out the obligations assumed under articles 2,3,
4 and 5.
The Council of the League of Nations:
Whereas by Article 119 of the Treaty of Peace with
Germany signed at Versailles on the 28th June, 1919,
Germany renounced in favour of the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers all her rights over her overseas
possessions, including, therein Nauru; and
Whereas the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
agreed that, in accordance with Article 22, Part I.
(Covenant of the League of Nations), of the said
treaty, a mandate should be conferred upon his
Britannic Majesty to administer Nauru, and have
proposed that the mandate should be formulated in the
following terms; and
Whereas His Britannic Majesty has agreed to accept
a mandate in respect of Nauru and has undertaken
to exercise it on behalf of the League of Nations in
accordance with the folloiving provisions; and
Whereas, by the aforementioned Article 22, para-
graph 8, it is provided that the degree of authority,
control or administration to be exercised by the man-
datory, not having been previously agreed upon by
the members of the League, shall be explicitly defined
by the Council of the League of Nations:
Confirming the said mandate, defines its terms as
follows :
Article 1.
The territory over which a mandate is conferred
upon His Britannic Majesty (hereinafter called the
mandatory) is the former German island of Nauru
(Pleasant Island, situated in about 167° longitude east
and 0° 25' latitude south).
Article 2.
. The mandatory shall have full power of administra-
tion and legislation over the territory subject to the
present mandate as an integral portion of his territory.
The mandatory shall promote to the utmost the
material and moral well-being and the social progress
of the inhabitants of the territory subject to the present
mandate.
Article 3.
The mandatory shall see that the slave trade is pro-
hibited, and that no forced labour is permitted, except
MANDATE FOR NAURU
Article- 7.
The consent of the Council of the League of Nations
is required for any modification of the terms of the
present mandate.
The mandatory agrees that, if any dispute whatever
should arise between the mandatory and another mem-
ber of the League of Nations relating to the interpre-
tation or the application of the provisions of the
mandate, such dispute, if it cannot be settled by nego-
tiation, shall be submitted to the Permanent Court
of International Justice provided for by article 14 of
the Covenant of the League of Nations.
The present declaration shall be deposited in the
archives of the League of Nations. Certified copies
shall be forwarded by the 'Secretary-General of the
League of Nations to all Powers signatories of the
Treaty of Peace with Germany.
Made at Geneva the 17th day of December, 1920.
Certified true copy.
Frio Drummond,
Secretary-General .
for essential public works and services, and then only
for adequate remuneration.
The mandatory shall also see that the traffic in arms
and ammunition is controlled in accordance with
principles analogous to those laid down in the con-
vention relating to the control of the arms traffic, signed
on the 10th September, 1919, or in any convention
amending the same.
The supply of intoxicating spirits and beverages to
the natives shall be prohibited.
Articlr 4.
The military training of the natives, otherwise than
for purposes of internal police and the local defence of
the territory, shall be prohibited. Furthermore, no
military or naval bases shall be established or fortifica-
tions erected in the territory.
Article 5.
Subject to the provisions of any local law for the
maintenance of public order and public morals, the
mandatory shall ensure in the territory freedom of
conscience and the free exercise of all form of worship,
and shall allow all missionaries, nationals of any State
member of the League of .Nations, to enter into, travel
and reside in the territory for the purposes of prosecut-
ing their calling.
Article 6.
The mandatory shall make to the Council of the
League of Nations an annual report to the satisfaction
of the Council, containing full information with regard
to the territory, and indicating the measures taken to
carry out the obligations assumed under Articles 2,3, 4
and 5.
Article 7.
The consent of the Council of the League of Nations
is required for any modification of the terms of the
present mandate.
The mandatory agrees that, if any dispute whatever
should arise between the mandatory and another mem-
ber of the League of Nations relating to the interpre-


tation or the application of the provisions of the man-
date, such dispute, if it cannot be settled by negotia-
tion, shall be submitted to the Permanent Court of
International Justice provided for by Article 14 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations.
The present declaration shall be deposited in the
archives of the League of Nations. Certified copies
17th December, 1920.
From the fundamental spirit of the League of
Nations and as the question of interpretation of the
Covenant, His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Govern-
ment have a firm conviction in the justice of tho claim
they have hitherto made for the inclusion of a clause
concerning the assurance of equal opportunities for
trade and commerce in “ C ” mandates. But from the
spirit of conciliation and co-operation, and their reluc-
tance to see the question unsettled any longer, they
* League of Nations, 20/31/96.
DECLARATION BY THE JAPANESE GOVERNMENT RELATING TO “C” MANDATES.
shall be forwarded by the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations to all Powers signatories of the
Treaty of Peace with Germany.
Made at Geneva the 17th day of December, 1920.
Certified true copy.
Eric Drummond,
Secretary-General.
have decided to agree to the issue of the mandate in its
present form. That decision, however, should not be
considered as an acquiescence on the part of His
Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government in the sub-
mission of Japanese subjects to a discriminatory and
disadvantageous treatment in the mandated territories;
nor have they thereby discarded their claim that the
rights and interests enjoyed by Japanese subjects in
these territories in the past should be fully respected.
No. 9.
[EXTRACT.]
PERMANENT MANDATES COMMISSION.
Minutes of the First Session, held in Geneva, 4th to Bth October, 1921.
FIRST MEETING HELD AT GENEVA ON
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 4th, 1921, at 10 a.m.
Mr. Wellington Koo, President of the Council of the
League of Nations, in the Chair.
The following were present: —
M. Pierre Orts (Belgium).
Mr. Ormsby-Gore (British Empire).
M. Ramon Pina (Spain).
M. Beau (France).
The Marquis Theodoli (Italy).
M. Yanagida (Japan).
M. van Rees (Netherlands).
M. Freire d’Andrade (Portugal).
Mme. Bugge-Wicksell (Sweden).
3. —Statement by the Director ok the Mandates
Section (M. Rappard).
M. Rappard, apologising for having to be the first
speaker, said that his statement might be useful to those
members of the Commission who had not had an oppor-
tunity to study the Mandates question from its beginning
up to its present stage. He would therefore give a
brief account, in the first place, of the origwi and history
of the Mandatory system. Further, he would next con-
sider Article 22 of the Covenant, which was the con-
stituent charter of the Commission.
During the war the Colonial problem presented itself
very clearly. The enemy States, former sovereigns of
the territories which were to be subsequently placed
under Mandates, had been accused of mal-administra-
tion and abuses of every kind. A hope of freedom
had been kindled in the populations of these territories.
It was impossible, therefore, once the peace was signed,
to return to the status quo ante. Such a solution could
not have been adopted, for practical reasons, while
annexation pure and simple would have been in contra-
diction with the principles which secured the victory to
the Allies. The Mandatory system formed a kind of
compromise between the proposition advanced by the
advocates of annexation, and the proposition, put for-
ward by those -who wished to entrust the Colonial terri-
tories to an international administration.
From these facts certain general principles might
already be deduced.
The Mandatory Powers had assumed a responsibility
similar to that of a guardian with respect to his ward.
The interests of the natives were therefore of primary
importance, and the rights of all the Members of the
League must always be respected. It was in order to
complete the League of Nations by a work of pacifica-
tion that these Colonies were entrusted to certain
Powers, subject to their securing equal opportunities
for the trade and commence of all the Members of the
League, and subject, also, to their being responsible to
the League. Great moderation was exercised in this
respect; the Mandatory Powers were only obliged to
submit to the Council a single annual report on their
administration.
M. Rappard then proceeded to analyse Article 22, and
noted that the fourth paragraph dealt with former
Turkish territories, the fifth with the former German
territories in Central Africa, and the sixth with South-
West Africa, and certain Pacific Islands. The treat-
ment to be applied to the populations of these terri-
tories varied according to the degree of their civilisa-
tion. The Arab populations had been considered to
have reached a sufficiently high degree of civilisation to
be recognised as independent nations, provided that
their administration was guided by a Mandatory until
they were able to govern themselves. The populations
of Central Africa were placed under a system of
guardianship which was intended to protect them from
well-known abuses; in territories of this class, all the
Members of the League of Nations enjoyed the same
economic rights. In this matter alone did they differ
from the territories under Class “ C,” which were ad-
ministered as an integral part of the territory of the
Mandatory Power.
What then had been done since the Covenant had
entered into force? A question of principle had been
settled regarding the competence of the Supreme Coun-
cil and of the Council of the League, respectively. The
former German possessions had not been handed over—
in virtue of the Treaties—to the League of Nations,
but to the Principal Allied and Associated Powers. As
to the former Turkish possessions, the Treaty of Sevres,
which had not yet been ratified, laid down that these
should be ceded to the Principal Allied Powers. It was
the Supreme Council, therefore, which had disposed of


these territories and which had divided them between
the so-called Mandatory Powers. This took place at
Versailles .and at San Remo. The British Empire,
which had received 9 Mandates out of 14, was entrusted
with part of Togoland and the Cameroons, with the
greater part of East Africa and the Island of Nauru in
the Pacific, the administration of which it shared with
Australia and New Zealand. To the British Empire
were also allotted Mesopotamia and Palestine. The
South-West Africa Union was entrusted to South Africa.
As regards the Pacific, Australia received New Guinea,
New Zealand received Samoa; and the Islands North of
the Equator, including the Island of Yap, were allotted
to Japan. Prance -was entrusted with Syria and the
greater part of the Cameroons and Togoland; Belgium
received a part of German East Africa bordering on the
Belgian Congo.
M. Rappard pointed out that all the British Mandates
had been entrusted to His Britannic Majesty, and cer-
tain of the Mandates were to be exercised on his behalf
by one of the Dominions. This being the case, one
might ask whom the Council should deal with, if any
question arose concerning a territory entrusted to a
Dominion.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore replied that in such cases the Go-
vernment of the Dominion should be directly ap-
proached. Por instance, if a question should arise with
regard to South-West Africa, the view would have to be
adopted that the British Crown was represented solely
by His Britannic Majesty’s Government at the Cape.
The British Parliament would in any case refuse to
consider such questions if they were submitted to it,
since they would be within the jurisdiction of the
South African Parliament. The case of Nauru was,
however, peculiar: whatever the arrangements might be
which had been arrived at between the British Govern-
ment, Australia and New Zealand, it -was the British
Government which, should the occasion arise, would
have to be consulted with regard to this island. The
British member pointed out that this agreement might
be of some interest to the Commission. The agreement
was concluded by virtue of an Act of the British Par-
liament and was confirmed subject to the clauses of
Article 22 of the Covenant. The Commission would
therefore have to decide whether it was not called upon
to examine this agreement.
The Chairman asked his British colleague for some
information on the relations between the Commission
and the Dominions: could direct relations be established
or would they have to communicate through the Colo-
nial Office?
Mr. Ormsby-Gore replied that, in any case, it would
be the Foreign Office which -would be concerned, not the
Colonial Office, and he enquired what procedure the
League had, up to the present, adopted in similar
• cases.
M. Rappard said that the League approached the
Prime Ministers of all the countries directly. He
stated that when there were important communications
to be made it was the duty of the Council, which
assumed the responsibility, to make them, and not of
the Commission, whose role was only an advisory one.
M. Rappard, resuming his statement, pointed out
that the allocation of the territories was an accomplished
fact which did not concern the League of Nations, nor
consequently the Commission. The allocation of the
Mandated territories had been made by the Supreme
Council, and it was for the Council of the League of
Nations to determine the manner in which Article 22
was to be applied. The penultimate paragraph said
‘‘that the degree of authority, control, or administra-
tion to be exercised by the Mandatory shall, if not pre-
viously agreed upon by the Members of the League, be
explicitly defined in each case by the Council.”
Last year, at the first session of the Assembly, when
the Mandates were not yet confirmed, discussion arose
with regard to the meaning of this paragraph. Some
Members were of opinion that it referred to all the
Members of the League and that it was for the Assembly,
therefore, to define the terms of the Mandates. The
Council, on the other hand, considered that the para-
graph referred only to the Principal Allied Powers
representing all the States Members of the League which
had signed the Treaties of Peace. However this might
be, all the Mandatory Powers had agreed on the draft
Mandates, and the Council would be freed from any
responsibility when, after having considered these drafts,
it had indicated the points on which, if the occasion
arose, modifications should be made in order to bring
them into harmony with the letter and the spirit of the
Covenant. This had been done towards the end of 1920
in respect of the territories referred to in paragraph 6
(Class C).
The position of the territories of Class A had not yet
been settled. In February last the Council announced
its intention of defining the Mandates of this class,
when two obstacles arose simultaneously. The repre-
sentative of the British Empire announced that the Bri-
tish Colonial Secretary had proceeded to Asia Minor to
study various questions, and he requested that any
decision should be postponed until the latter’s return.
At the same time a Note was received from the United
States declaring that it could not recognise as definitely
settled a question on which it had not been consulted.
This took place during the last days of President Wil-
son’s administration. The Council believed that it was
correctly interpreting the intervention of the United
States, by informing the American Government that it
would be happy to receive a Representative from the
United States at its next meeting. Since no
reply had been received from the United States
in June, the President of the Council in-
formed the Principal Allied Powers of the state of
affairs: since the American Government had not replied
to the Council’s request, the President of the Council
begged the Principal Allied Powers to enter into direct
negotiations with the United States on questions relating
to Mandates. These Powers communicated with the
United States. It became known quite recently that an
American reply had been received, but this was neither
published nor communicated to the Council. The
latter evidently preferred to await the result of this
exchange of views before defining the terms of the
Mandates.
The present Assembly had shown a certain restiveness
with regard to this matter. Some Delegates had ex-
pressed regret that the Principal Allied Powers had not
communicated the American reply to the Council, which
would have been guided by it in establishing the bases
for the definition of the Mandates; other Delegates
were of a different opinion. The Assembly and the
Council finally agreed upon a compromise in the fol-
lowing circumstances: a Resolution by Lord Robert
Cecil, which was referred by the Assembly to the Sixth
Committee, was the object of a Report, which was again
submitted to the Assembly. The latter adopted a re-
commendation which might be summed up as follows :
The Council had been asked to write to the Mandatory
Powers requesting them, pending a definite solution, to
act as if the Mandates had been confirmed; the recom-
mendations which had been submitted to the Council
could not be considered unfriendly to the United States.
The latter was not confronted with an accomplished
fact, but it was not desirable that the Mandatory Powers
should be deprived any longer of the advantage of a
definite position, nor that the native populations should
be deprived of the guarantees which had been promised
them by the Covenant.
M. Rappard communicated the agreement reached by
the Sixth Committee, an agreement due to an incident
which might be of interest to the Mandates Commission.
Lord Robert Cecil, who held the more extreme view,


asked his British colleague, Mr. Fisher, whether he
believed that, although the Mandates were not defined
and therefore the Mandatory Powers were not bound
to submit their report to the Permanent Commission,
the Governments of the Mandatory Powers would never-
theless authorise the Permanent Commission to examine
the reports on their provisional administration which
they had already prepared and communicated to the
League of Nations for its information. Mr. Fisher
for Great Britain, M. Reynald for France, and M.
-Poullet for Belgium having replied in the affirmative.
Lord Bobert Cecil did not press the point.
This statement showed that, in virtue of a tacit agree-
ment, the Commission would be enabled to consider the
Administration of the Mandatory Powers; but that, on
the other hand, there would be no legal obligation for the
latter to accept tbe observations of the Council, nor to
submit their reports officially before the end of the first
year of their administration. As regards 0 mandates,
this first year had not yet elapsed.
The Reports, the communication of which the Perma-
nent Mandates Commission owed to the courtesy of the
"’Mandatory Powers, were as follows
The French Reports on the Cameroons and Togoland;
the British Reports on Tanganyika, Palestine and Meso-
potamia or Irak; the South African Report on South-
West Africa; and, finally, a report received the preced-
ing night from Belgium, communicated in a single copy,
which would be submitted to the Members of tbe Com-
mission immediately.
The Commission was thus already in possession of
material for a very important task.
In conclusion, M. Rappard said that he thought it
was impossible to overestimate the importance of the
duties of the present Commission. Mandates implied
relations between a Mandatory and the authority which
conferred the Mandate. The Powers exercised their
Mandates on behalf of the League of Nations, and the
only official link between the Mandatories and the
League, in whose name they exercised their powers, was
the Mandatory’s annual Report. Now, the Covenant
laid down that it was the Permanent Mandates Com-
mission which should examine this Report. Therefore,
if there were no Permanent Commission, it might be
said that the Mandates would exist only on paper and
this would, in a measure, justify the opinion of the
sceptics who saw in the Mandates nothing but a veiled
annexation.
The Secretariat would be entirely at the disposal of
the Permanent Commission, which would act as a Tri-
bunal with the most complete independence. The Coun-
cil had wished, indeed, when constituting the Commis-
sion, that, the majority should consist of nationals of
non-Mandatory Powers, a measure of the greater signi-
ficance in that the Covenant did not oblige it to take
any such step. It had wished, moreover, that each
member of the Commission should be freed from any
obligation to its own Government, so that he could sit,
not as a representative of any particular Government,
but as an entirely impartial judge. Undoubtedly, this
first Session of the Mandates Commission marked the
beginning of an epoch in Colonial history and in the
history of the League of Nations.
* * * * # *
SECOND MEETING HELD ON sr« OCTOBER,
1921, AT 9.30 A.M.
Chairman: The Marquis Theodoli.
* * * * * * \
7.—Limitation of the Powers of the Permanent
Commission with Regard to the Consideration of
Questions relating to the Observance" of the
Mandates.
M. van Rees, before beg'nning the examination of
the French Report on the Cameroons. desired to draw
F. 10729. — 2
the attention of his colleagues to the necessity for lay-
ing down the principles which should guide the Com-
mission in its extremely delicate task, hirst, there was
one most important point: Should the Commission deal
with the terms of the Mandates, had it authority to
lay before the Council proposals with a view to the
eventual modification of these terms? The last para-
graph of Article 22 very clearly defined the double duty
entrusted to the Mandates Commission —the examina-
tion of the Annual Report of the Mandatories, and the
task of advising the Council on questions relating to
the observance of the Mandates. This paragraph was
in no way concerned with the terms of the Mandates.
The duties of the Permanent Commission, as laid down
in the Covenant, did not extend beyond the limits fixed
by the paragraph in question.
A different theory ..might, however, be maintained.
Paragraph (h) of the Constitution of the Permanent
Commission said that the Commission “ may also utilise
such a meeting of the representatives of the Mandatory
Powers to lay before them any other matters connected
with Mandates which, in their opinion, should be sub-
’mitted by the Council to the Mandatory Powers and to
the other States Members of the League.” This text
therefore involved no limitation of the competence of
the Permanent Commission. Was not this working too
general ?
What interpretation would the Commission adopt?
The Dutch Member of the Commission would per-
sonally desire to abide by the letter of the Covenant,
which, in his opinion, appeared conclusive. But the
other interpretation might correspond with the inten-
tions of the Council—though M. van Rees did not think
so—-for it appeared to him that the Council could not
in any way alter the spirit of the Covenant.
To sum up, the question raised by the Dutch Mem-
ber of the Commission amounted to this: Were the
terms of the Mandates to be dealt with exclusively by
the Council or also by the Permanent Commission?
Mr. Ormsuy-Goee explained his point of view:
What the Commission had to consider was not the
Annual Reports, but the preliminary reports relating
to the mandated territories of which the charters had
not as yet been defined. At the Assembly, the repre-
sentatives of the Mandatory Powers had said that they
had no objection to the examination, in the light of
the draft Mandates, by the Permanent Commission of
such reports as might he submitted to it for informa-
tion. The members of the Commission should, there-
fore, 'bear these drafts in mind and should take it for
granted that the final Mandates would be in conformity
with them. If, in the course of this consideration, it
appeared to them that any of the provisions was not in
conformity with Article 22, they would have to point
this out to the Council. The Council alone would have
the right to go further. The Council had taken the
view that its task was limited to satisfying itself that
the draft Mandates were in conformity with the spirit
of the Covenant.
The Chairman pointed out that this did not exactly
reply to the question raised by the Dutch member.
M van Rees, to make the matter clear, asked if the
Commission would have the right, for instance, to
examine the terms of the C Mandates which had been
approved by the Council.
M. Orts considered that M. van Rees had raised a
question of principle which was of a permanent nature,
while Mr. Ormsby-Gore’s remarks, on the other hand,
only affected a provisional state of things. Neverthe-
less, the answer contained in latter member’s declara-
tion might apply to the case which the Dutch member
had in mind; for should the Commission consider that
it could not propose modifications with regard to pro-
visional Mandates, there was all the more reason to
conclude that it was unable to propose modifications to


the final Mandates. Furthermore, the Commission
could not propose amendments, as the terms of the
Mandates decided upon could only be altered by the
Governments, and the members of the Commission did
uot possess the status of representatives of their re-
spective Governments.
The Chairman was of the opinion that the Council
might be glad to know the-opinion of the Commission
on the terms of the draft Mandates; that is to say, the
opinion of the organ which would be entrusted with
the supervision of the observance of the Mandates.
M. Rappard explained the legal point of view. Borne
had proposed that draft Mandates should be submitted
to the Permanent Commission. The Council did not
appear to view such a scheme with favour, as the Com-
mission had only to consider the observance of the Man-
dates and not the way in which they were drawn up.
But it was evident that if, during the process of examin-
ing the reports, certain clauses in the Mandates should
appear liable to interpretations differing from, or con-
trary to, Article 22, the Council could not take excep-
tion to questions or opinions with regard to this matter
presented by the 'Commission in a purely advisory capa-
c;ty, for the Council would doubtless desire that, the
Commission should be its watchful counsellor.
M. van Rees held by his view. He was of opinion
that it would be outside the competence of the Commis-
sion to examine the terms of the Mandates, all the more
so as the terms of these Mandates raised political ques-
tions as, for instance, that of recruiting of natives.
Thus, the first paragraph of Article 3 of the draft
French Mandate for the Cameroons appeared to him in
agreement with Article 22 of the Covenant. But the
second paragraph of the Article referred to provided
that the native troops thus recruited could, in certain
cases, be used outside the mandated territory. Did not
this go further than the provisions of the Covenant?
After an exchange of opinions between the members
of the Commission on this particular point, M. Orts,
returning to the question which had been originally
raised by M. van Rees, was also of opinion that the
Covenant was the final authority so far as the Com-
mission was concerned, for the latter had only been
constituted in order to carry out the provisions con-
tained in the Covenant. Now, it was clear that the
Covenant had limited the competence of the Commis-
sion and that this competence did not extend to the
right of giving an opinion on the nature of draft Man-
dates.
The Chairman considered, that this was correct from
a legal point of view. In practice, should the Com-
mission perceive a contradiction between the observ-
ance of the Mandates and the drafts that had been
communicated to it, it might consider itself bound
to notify the Council of the fact.
After a further exchange of views, the members of
the Commission agreed that it would be advisable,
before commencing the examination of the reports
which had been communicated to them, to make a
formal declaration that they could not express any
opinion with regard to the draft Mandates that had
been made public.
_ M. van Rees then asked which text of the Mandates
should be regarded by the Commission as authentic—
the English text or the French text.
The Commission were agreed that the French text
should be so regarded in the case of the French and
Belgian Mandates and the English text in the case of
the English Mandates.
M. van Rees raised a third question directly con-
cerning the Mandates Commission: Should the Com-
mission confine itself to verifying the reports 6j com-
paring them with the draft Mandates and avoid deal-
ing with points not mentioned in the Draft? The
Dutch member of the Commission was of opinion that
that Avould be too narrow a conception and one which
would not be in .conformity with the spirit which iri
spired the institution of the Permanent Commission.
M. van Rees based his arguments on a passage of the
Report presented by M. Hymans to the Council of the
League on August sth, 1920 (see Assembly Document
161, page 17, chapter 3, 2nd and 3rd paragraphs).
M. Hymans, in this report, took a very liberal view
of the nature of the consideration which the Council
would give to the annual report of the Mandatory
Powers. This consideration, for which the enquiries of
the Permanent Mandates Commission would provide a
basis, could not be in accordance with the interpreta-
tion suggested by M. Hymans, unless the Permanent
Commission itself gave this interpretation practical
effect.
M. Orts supported his colleague from the Nether-
lands, and said that the examination by the Permanent
Commission should extend to the whole of the report.
Tire Chairman was also of this opinion. If it was
the task of the Permanent Commission to follow the
letter of the instructions which had been given it, it
was also its moral duty to facilitate the interpretation
of the Covenant. It was doubtless with a view to guid-
ing the Permanent Commission in this path that M.
Hymans had published his interpretation in his Report.
M. Orts added that the fact that the Mandatory
Powers had explained the whole of their administration
in their preliminary reports showed that they agreed
with this interpretation.
* * t- * * *
FOURTH MEETING HELD ON Gth OCTOBER,
1921, at 9.30 a.m.
Chairman: The Marquis Theodoli.
21. Resolution of the Permanent Mandates
Commission as to the extent of its Powers.
The Chairman read the following text, embodying
the resolution which had been arrived at by the Com-
mission at its second meeting:—
“ The Permanent Mandates Commission holds
that it is not its duty to express any opinion con-
cerning the terms of the Mandates, and that its
attributes are limited by the last paragraph of
Article 22 of the Covenant, which provides that
that Commission shall receive and examine the
annual reports of the Mandatories, and shall
advise the Council on all matters relating to the
observance of the Mandates.”
M. van Rees said that this text completely met his
views.
Mr. Ormsby-Goke stated that the English translation
was correct.
M. d’Andrade asked what construction was to be
placed upon the phrase “ provides that the Commission
. . . . shall advise the Council on all matters,
&e ” Was that to be taken as meaning that
the Commission would only advise the Council on such
points as the latter should specifically bring before it?
The Chairman asked for the views of the Commis-
sion, and the latter decided that it was entitled either to
advise on definite matters to which its attention should
be directed by the Council, or to express its views on its
own initiative


EIFTH MEETING HELD ON 6th OCTOBER,
1921, AT 3.30 p.m.
Chairman: The Marquis Theodoli
sjc * * * * *
31. — 'Consideration of Preliminary Draft
Questionnaire, B Mandates.*
M. Rappard, in laying before the Commission the
preliminary draft questionaire which he had drawn up
for the purpose of discussion, explained that he had
adopted the following method as regards the order
questions:—
1. Special clauses with regard to the guarantees
laid down by the Covenant or by the draft
i mandates.
2. General clauses in accordance with the spirit of
the Covenant.
Slavery. —The Covenant provided only for the pro-
hibition of the slave traffic (the English text said
“ slave trade ”), but all the draft mandates went con-
siderably further. They provided for the abolition of
slavery at a date not fixed and laid down regulations
f<sr forced labour.
After an exchange of views, the Commission, on the
proposal of M. van Rees, decided to draft the questions
relating to slavery as follows:
A. 1. What measures are being taken with a view
to ensuring the suppression of the slave
trade ?
2. What results have been obtained?
B. 1. Is slavery recognised legally?
2. Does domestic or other slavery still exist?
(Give statistics.)
3. What are the principal causes of slavery?
(Gambling, drink, &c.).
4. Under what conditions can a slave be
liberated ?
5. What steps have been or are being
taken to secure the emancipation of all
slaves and the suppression of all slavery,
whether domestic or otherwise?
6. Is any period fixed for the emancipation of
slaves? If so, what period?
7. Is the pledging of a person in bondage recog-
nised by law?
Labour. —The Chairman informed the Commission
that he had sent a telephone message to the Director
of the Labour Office, as this chapter of the question-
naire was of interest to him. He therefore suggested
that they should turn to the next chapter.
Arms and Munitions. —M. Rappard read the text of
Article 22 of the Covenant and of the draft mandates
on this subject and pointed out that between the prohi-
bition of abuses and the exercise of a strict control
there was a difference which had become evident to
many associations, which had written to the Council
on this subject.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore and M. Oiits pointed out that cer-
tain fire-arms (sporting guns, &c.), were used to pro-
tect natives against wild animals, and that it would be
desirous to have detailed statistics as to the different
categories of arms and munitions. ,
The Chairman considered that it was not necessary
to state definitely in the questionnaire what arms were
referred to, and reminded the Commission of the end-
less discussion which arose on this subject at the draft-
ing of the Convention of iSaint-Germain. The follow-
ing text w T as adopted:—
“ What measures are being adopted to control the
traffic in arms and munitions?
liberated ?
* The discussion on the Questionnaire, B Mandates (see No. 10 below), is
included in this paper as this questionnaire formed the basis of the Questionnaire
adopted for C Mandates (No. 11 below).
“ What are the statistics relating to imports of
arms and munitions of different categories?’'
Spirits. —M. Rappard pointed out that the draft B
Mandates had substituted “ strict control ” for the pro-
hibition of abuses ” provided for by the Covenant.
The C Mandates imposed absolute prohibition of the
sale of spirits to natives.
M. d Andrade said that it was essential to know how
much alcohol was produced in the territory.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that the only efficient
method would be to go to the source of the evil, that
was to say, to obtain information as to the points from
which spirits were exported to the territory. More-
over, spirits above a certain strength should be pro-
hibited—l 2 degrees, for instance.
M. Beau pointed out that this figure would not per-
mit the Customs authorities to give complete statistics.
He proposed 14 degrees.
The Commission decided that it would be 'better not
to enter into too great detail and to make a distinction
between fermented and non-fermented products. With-
out referring to their strength, it decided to discrimi-
nate only between spirituous liquors and wines or beers.
Upon a remark by M. Orts, Mr. Ormsby-Gore
reminded the Commission that the text of the Covenant
provided for absolute prohibition; there was no ques-
tion of the abuse of the traffic in spirits; the traffic
itself was regarded as an abuse. Moreover, this text
was drafted in English, and the English expression
“ liquor traffic ” there used so clearly referred to an
abuse that it served as a catch-word in anti-liquor
campaigns. The word “ trade ” was intentionally
avoided.
M. Orts thought that there must be some misunder-
standing. It had not been possible to prohibit the
use of alcohol by Europeans.
M. Rappard thought that on this chapter of the
questionnaire, which was quite clear, the Commission
would certainly be supplied with all legislation against
alcohol adopted by the Mandatory Powers. There was
therefore no objection to saying simply “ prohibition
of abuses of the liquor traffic.”
On the proposal of M. van Bees, the Commission
added to this chapter a question on the prohibition of
poisonous substances, such as hemp, &c. The follow-
ing text was adopted:—
A. What steps are being taken to assure the pro-
hibition of abuses of the liquor traffic?
B. How is the campaign against alcoholism
organised ?
C. What are the effects of these measures?
(Statistics relative to the import and to the
local manufacture of alcoholic liquors, &c.)
1). State place and origin of alcoholic liquors, other
than Vine and beer, imported into the ter-
ritory.
E. What steps have been taken to secure the pro-
hibition of the cultivation and consumption
of other noxious substances (hemp and
others).
Freedom of Conscience. —Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired
whether it was necessary to ask what were the effects
of measures limiting religious instruction.
M. Rappard answered that the information supplied
might be incomplete, for instance, as regards
missionaries.
The following text was adopted:—
A. What measures are being taken to guarantee
liberty of conscience and religion?
B. What restrictions have been laid down for the
maintenance of public order and morality ?
C. Is there free exercise of religious worship and
instruction ?


D. If not, what restrictions are there to limit such
exercises ?
E. What are the results of such restrictions?
Military Clauses. —On a remark made by M. Beau,
M. Rappard said that it was desirable to draft the
question with regard to fortifications and military or
naval bases in a manner that would be inoffensive to
the Mandatory Power. It. would be for the Council
to consider the replies.
On the proposal of M. Beau, it was decided to make
a distinction between police forces and defence forces,
and between expenditure for these two purposes.
The Commission drew up the following questions:—
A. Has the Mandatory Power established or main-
tained fortresses Or military or naval bases
in the mandated territory?
B. What are the forms of native military organi-
zation and instruction?
C. Are there any police forces independent of the
military charged with the defence of the
territory? What is the respective impor-
tance of the two forces and the amount
spent on each?
D. In what respect is the military organization of
the mandated territory different from that
in force in the neighbouring possessions cf
the Mandatory Power ?
Economic Equality. — M. Rappard read the text of
Article 22 and of the draft mandates on this subject.
The draft mandates always began by expressing
general conformity to the stipulations of Article 22, but
immediately afterwards they made certain reservations
with regard to which it was indispensable to have some
information.
M. Beau proposed to substitute for the words
" equality for all ” the "words “ equality for all
of States Members, &c.” as in the draft mandates.
M. Rappard explained that this objection was raised
by the United States; the matter was clear as regard
nationals but not as regards the States. The question
of monopolies might arise. In that case there would
be a violation of the spirit of the Covenant, hence it
was desirable to employ simply the word <l ali.”
Mr. Ormsby-Gore and M. Orts agreed that a special
question should be inserted on the subject of mining
regulations, referring in particular to prospecting.
M. Beau agreed. Prospecting was one of the sources
of wrongs inflicted on the natives; it should be severely
restricted. Attention should be drawn to this point.
The following text was adopted
A. What steps have been taken to secure economic
equality for all as regards:—
• 1. Concessions ?
2. Land tenure?
3. Mining rights (in particular prospect-
ing) ?
4. Fiscal regime (direct and indirect
taxation) ?
5. Customs regulations (imports, exports,
transit) ?
B. What are the exceptions, if any, in each
category ?
Mme. Bugge-Wicksell, on the commencement of the
discussion of the general clauses, remarked that the
question of education was of such vital importance for
the moral and material welfare of the natives that it
would appear insufficient to mention this subject only
in the course of an enumeration placed in a parenthesis.
The Swedish Member of the Commission thought that
this subject should be treated in greater detail in a
special paragraph.
As this proposal met with no objection, Mr. Ormsby-
Gore undertook to draw up immediately a draft con-
taining four questions on the subject of education.
This draft was handed to the Secretariat for transla-
tion.
The Meeting ended at 6.45 p.m.
SIXTH MEETING HELD ON 7th OCTOBER, 1921,
AT 10 a.m.
Chairman: The Marquis Theodoli.
******
83. Consideration of the Preliminary Draft
Questionnaire.
The Chairman reminded his colleagues that they had
provisionally adjourned consideration of the chapter
on native labour conditions, in order to enable them
to examine it with the Director of the International
Labour Office; the latter had informed them that he
would be happy to be present at this part of the dis-
cussion. The Commission had reached the considera-
tion of the general clauses. The Chairman requested
Mr. Ormsby-Gore to read the questionnaire with re-
gard to Education which he had prepared.
Education. —Mr. Ormsby-Gore read the English text
of his questionnaire on the conditions obtaining with
regard to Education in the mandated territories.
M. Rappard pointed out that there was some uncer-
tainty with regard to an appropriate translation of
the English words “ higher education.”
M. d' Andrade pointed out that the words “ instruc-
tion superieure des indigenes ” appeared an unsuitable
rendering.
M. Beau proposed a wording which was approved.
M. van Rees was of opinion that the questionnaire
should also deal with the conditions of free education
for natives.
The following text was adopted on this subject:—
(A) What steps are being taken for the
elementary education of the natives of the
territory (organisation and .statistics) ? Is
this education free to all natives, and if not,
in what cases is it free ?
(B) What steps are being taken in the territory
to provide for higher education of the
natives such as medical, veterinary and
technical ?
(C) In what languages is instruction given in the
different categories of schools?
(D) Are Mission schools compelled to submit to
certain conditions? If so, what?
Public Health. —Mme. Bugge-Wicesell suggested
the addition of a paragraph on prostitution to the draft
questionnaire.
M. Beau said that it was advisable to make an
enquiry as to the efforts made by the Mandatory Powers
to improve sanitary conditions in the country and to
protect the population against endemic diseases.
M. Rappard suggested a special paragraph on the
veteflfcnary regime, in considerat’on of the importance
of the question of live-stock in native territories.
The Chairman and M. d j Andrade agreed that it was
inadvisable to go into many details; if they did so
they would risk making incomplete statements and, con-
sequently, perhaps obtaining less information than if
they expressed themselves in more general terms.
The following text was adopted:—
(A) What steps are being taken in the territory
to provide for public health, sanitation, and
to combat endemic and epidemic diseases ?
(B) What provisions are made for medical as-
s;stance?
(C) What is the actual situation as regards pros-
titution, and what steps are being taken in
this matter ?
Land Tenure.— Mr. Ormsby-Gore emphasised the
importance of inserting detailed questions on the


system of land tenure. He had had occasion to point out
that in regions like East Africa a complete disorganisa-
tion of the system of land tenure had resulted from the
war.
The British member of the Commission and M. van
Rees were of opinion that a paragraph should be added
on the system of grants of State lands.
With regard to land where the natives had rights of
ownership or usufruct, the Chairman and M. Beau
stated that land registration presented great difficulties,
and that it was desirable that the form of question
should be in very general terms.
M. van Rees suggested some draft questions with re-
gard to the conditions of the alienation of land.
M. d’Andrade emphasised the advisability of em-
ptying only general terms; would it not, on the other
be desirable to insert a question regarding the
general principles on which the territory .was adminis-
tered ? • I
M. Rappard pointed out that the Reports of the Man-
datory Powers would always give this information, and
that the Permanent Commission would run the risk of
antagonising the administrators by inserting this ques-
tion.
The following text, approved by the Portuguese mem-
ber of the Commission, was adopted:
(A) What systems of land tenure and forest law
exist? How are they legally recognised?
What lands are considered as belonging to
the State and what are regarded as com-
munally owned?
(B) What measures are being adopted for the re-
gistration of landed property?
(C) What are the regulations for the alienation
of land in which natives or native com-
munities exercise rights by virtue of here-
dity or use?
(D) What steps have been taken to protect natives
from usury and forced sales of land?
Moral , Social and Material Welfare of the Natives. —
M. van Rees and M. Orts proposed a draft of this
paragraph.
The Commission adopted the following text: —
“ What are, generally speaking, the measures
adopted to ensure the material and moral welfare
of the natives (measures to maintain the interests,
rights and customs of the natives, their participa-
tion in public service, native tribunals, &c.)”
Public Finance. —The Chairman recalled the fact
that M. d’Andrade had pointed out that it was desir-
able that the Permanent Commission should collect in-
formation on the Budgets of the mandated territories.
M. d'Andrade proposed the following text: —
“Budget of the territory; indication of the con-
tents of its principal chapters.”
M. Rappard referred to the case of the territories
which, as a result of their union with regions governed
by the same Mandatory Power, might not possess a
Budget of their own.
The following text was adopted:—
“ The general schedule of receipts from and ex-
penditure on the territory, budget system, indica-
tion of the nature and assessment of taxes.”
Demographic Statistics. —The importance of such
statistics was emphasised by M. Yanagida. The. fluc-
tuation of census returns was a very accurate index
of the state of the territory’s development. The
Hawaians, for instance, were very prosperous from a
material point of view, but they were not contented,
and therefore decrease in the population had been noted
amongst them.
M. Rappard reminded the Members of the Commis-
sion that they had considered the question of poly-
gamy, and that it should be referred to in the ques-
tionnaire. The expression “maritalitS (polygamy)”
might be employed. The word “ maritalite ” was not in
the dictionary, hut it was employed in statistical works.
The Commission adopted the following text: —
“Births, marriages (polygamy), deaths, emigra-
tion and immigration.”
34. — Consideration of Appeals or Protests
CONCERNING THE MANDATES.
The question as to the method of procedure adopted
by the Mandatory Power for deal ng with appeals or
protests presented by the inhabitants with regard to
the carrying out of the Mandates having been raised,
M. d'Andrade thought that the matter would probably
be settled by the law of the territory. It would perhaps
be inadvisable for the Permanent Commission to ad-
vocate the opening by the administration of special
bureaux to receive appeals, which would be submitted
in considerable numbers.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that a paragraph on
the subject would have met the question raised by M.
Rappard, with regard to complaints addressed to the
Secretariat.
The majority of the Commission thought that this
point should not be insisted upon. It decided, more-
over, that the questionnaire which it had just drawn
up should be revised when the meeting was over, in
order to make it sufficiently homogeneous to give as few
loopholes as possible for criticism.
35. —Draft Questionnaire for C Mandates.
M. Rappard reminded the Commission that the essen-
tial difference between B and C Mandates consisted in
the fact that Article 22 of the Covenant made no men-
tion, in connection with C Mandates, of the economic
equality of the Members of the League and took the
view that these territories “ would be best administered
under the laws of the Mandatory as integral portions of
its territory. . . .” It should, moreover, be re-
marked that the C Mandates contain far fewer provi-
sions regarding the Labour system than the B draft
Mandates. It might therefore be .considered that the
responsibility of the League of Nations was less in the
case of the C Mandates.
The Commission began the consideration of the pre-
liminary draft of the questionnaire. The c^a Pf er . on
native labour conditions was postponed until the arrival
of the Director of the International Labour Office.
The Commission thought that in a general way. the
text of the questionnaire adopted for B Mandates might
be applied to C Mandates.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that in the chapter on
land tenure, account should be taken of the special con-
ditions of South-West Africa, a vast territory sparsely
populated and with a limited water supply.
M. Yanagida said that his Government must make
some reservations with regard to equality of economic
treatment so far as these Mandates were concerned.
It was to be presumed, moreover, that experience would
give the Permanent Commission a more accurate view
of the scope of its duties in the examination of C
Mandates. .
A more detailed consideration of the preliminary
draft of the questionnaire was postponed to a later
date.
36, —Native Labour Conditions.
M. Albert Thomas (Director of the International
Labour Office) joined the meeting at 11.45 a.m.
The Chairman welcomed him and said, that the
Commission counted on his valued assistance in drawing
up a questionnaire on the conditions of native labour
in mandated territories with a view to obtaining as
circumstantial replies as possible,


M. Albert Thomas thanked the Chairman of the
Commission for having been so good as to summon him.
Although taken unawares, he considered that this
was a problem which concerned the International
Labour Organisation. He was of opinion that the
questionnaire could be based upon the terms of Article
421 of the Peace Treaty, which refers to Colonies and
Protectorates.
As regards territories under A Mandates, which are
of a temporary nature, the Director of the International
Labour Office thought that either the Mandatory State
should be the qualified representative of the new State
in the International Labour Organisation, or the new
State itself should be immediately included in the
Organisation. In any case it would be possible to put
the measures in question in force at once.
Moreover, it was Article 421 that made it possible for
the just and humane labour conditions indicated in the
preamble of Part XIII. to be established. Article 421
imposed on the Members of the Organisation the obli-
gation to apply the Conventions to such of their Colo-
nies or Protectorates as were not self-governing. Fur-
ther, the Treaty recognised that certain Conventions
might be inapplicable owing to local conditions; any
necessary modifications as well as the measures taken
for carrying out the Conventions should be communi-
cated to the International Labour Organisation.
The Director of the International Labour Office con-
sidered that the essential part of the questionnaire
from his point of view was that concerned with forced
labour. It would be advisable to make more detailed
provisions for labour conditions, hours of labour, pro-
tection of women and children, etc.
M. Rappard asked if this applied only to compulsory
labour.
“ In all cases,” was the reply of the Director of the
International Labour Office. He confined his comments
within the limits of the questionnaire which he had
before him, but if the Commission desired to extend
the questionnaire and to take general labour conditions
into consideration, in the spirit of the Washington Con-
ference, he would personally be much gratified.
M. d'Andrade pointed out that native labour was an
essential necessity to the development of the territories.
Certain tribes considered labour unworthy of man, re-
garding it as a thing which should be left to women
alone. This idea was beginning to change, but the
ehange •would not be encouraged by allowing natives
freedom to abstain from labour. In this respect, the
wording of the questionnaire should be carefully con-
sidered. He pointed out that the words “ forced ”or
• u compulsory labour ” must be interpreted. Were they
to be regarded as synonymous in this text? That was
his view, and he was also of opinion that the draft
had been made without consulting Colonial and other
experts.
If “ forced labour ” meant the practice of going to
the native villages to take natives and to bring them,
under escort, to the locality Avhere they were to work,
he agreed that this practice should be absolutely pro-
hibited.
But if, by these words, was intended the consecration
of the right to idleness and laziness, very r prevalent
in some native tribes, where the men are provided with
food and drink by a real forced labour on the part of
their wives, then he could no longer agree.
It was in the African regions which were still im-
perfectly developed that these habits of sloth were the
most prevalent, and it was precisely there that native
labour was the most necessary in order to promote
civilisation and progress among the natives themselves.
Therefore, labour in those localities should be compul-
sory in this sense, that, the native should not be entitled
to refuse to work, though he should have the right to
choose freely the nature and place of his work.
At the present time, when in civilised societies the
right of refusal to work was not accorded to any one
who could not show other means of subsistence, and
when it was already foreseen that the obligation to work
would be a general rule for all mankind in the future,
the right of the native not to work could not be ad-
mitted.
He knew very well that the Covenant said that forced
or obligatory labour should be prohibited. But, while
fully respecting this principle, it might be asked whether
it meant that, in territories under “ B ” Mandates, the
obligation to work, which was recognised in all civilised
countries, without which no progress was possible,
should be prohibited.
How, moreover, was female and child labour to be
protected if idleness was permitted on the part of the
men and was rendered possible only by the women and
children being compelled to work for them?
M. Rappard, in reply to the Portuguese member of
the Commission, stated that they were bound by the
provisions of the draft Mandates, which included this
prohibition. It should not appear that they desired to
provide exceptions which were not provided for in
these drafts. It went without saying that the mainten-
ance of forced labour was implied. Perhaps the Com-
mission might suggest that the Council should consider
the draft Mandates from the point of view indicated by
M. d’Andrade. M. Rappard pointed out to the Direc-
tor of the International Labour Office that the draft
Mandates stipulated for “ a careful supervision of the
labour contracts and of the recruiting of labour.” That
is what was contemplated in the final part of the ques-
tionnaire concerning free labour.
M. d'Andrade asked why the questionnaire did not
recognise “ forced labour,” which was a fact, whereas
it recognised “ slavery,” which was also a fact.
Because, replied M. Rappard, the Covenant did not
abolish slavery, while prohibiting the slave trade,
whereas the draft Mandates prohibited forced labour,
except for essential public works and services.
M. d'Andrade asked if it was not, to a certain extent,
the duty of the Commission to interpret the Covenant.
M. Albert Thomas proposed a formula to conciliate
the different points of view. With regard to this
matter, he cited the provisions of the Bulgarian law on
this subject. It should be noted that, in virtue of this
law, the citizens were forced to take part in public
work for two years.
Mr. Ormsby-Gobe said that this point raised the ques-
tion of forced labour for enterprises which were not of
a public nature —for instance, in the cotton plantations.
M. o’ Andrade explained his point of view as to
forced labour. No one had the right to force a native
to work if he had already worked regularly, but it
should not be admitted that he had the right to do no
work. That would be to encourage laziness and idleness
and to render impossible the development and progress
of tropical regions, as well as that of the natives them-
selves. He thought that the problem should be faced,
and no declarations should be made which did not
agree with the facts. It should be taken into con-
sideration that scarcely anywhere, was freedom of
labour recognised; this fact should not be forgotten,
and no provisions should be made to guarantee such
freedom.
M. van Rees, basing his argument on the terms of
the Mandates, proposed certain paragraphs deferring
the nature of the public services for which forced labour
should be exacted.
M. Rappard asked if it was advisable to introduce so
many details in the questionnaire. The Commission
appeared to be concerning itself with the ideal state of
affairs, whereas it had only to consider the actual
facts.


M. Albert Thomas was of opinion that they
should get to grips with the facts. Many things had
struck him in this discussion. M. d’Andrade’s state-
ments, for instance, might be in conflict with the idea
of absolute prohibition of forced labour, but they took
existing facts into account.
M. Rappard again read the draft Mandate. Either
labour was free, or it was not, Now it could only be
obligatory for essential public works and services. The
questionnaire should obtain information for the Com-
mission with regard to the application of this provi-
sion. It was advisable to keep within the terms of
the Mandate, reserving the right to add recommenda-
tions. It went without saying that M. Rappard was
far from being opposed to the ideas championed by the
of the International Labour Office.
*■ M. Orts agreed with M. Rappard. If the Commis-
sion considered the wording of the Covenant imperfect,
they would not remedy it by putting subtle questions.
The problem should be boldly faced. But the neces-
sity of drawing up a questionnaire which would be
above criticism, and in conformity with the task as-
signed to the Commission, should not be lost sight of.
this respect, the wording proposed by his Dutch
colleague seemed to him well chosen.
M. Albert Thomas said that forced labour might
exist on particular farms, and that it would be interest-
ing to know if measures had been adopted with regard
to it.
M. Rappard thought that it would be advisable to
put, first of all, the general question and then go on to
deal with exceptions.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore and M. van Rees proposed for-
mulas with regard to plantations and other enterprises.
M. Albert Thomas said that the International
Labour Office placed its statistics at the disposal of the
Commission, as well as its studies on the general re-
cruiting of labour, &c.
M. van Rees proposed a text with regard to the con-
trol exercised by the authorities.
M. Orts and M. i/ Andrade amplified these proposals.
Free Labour. —M. Albert Thomas suggested to the
Commission a certain number of questions concerning
free labour, in response to the desire which it had
expressed to enlarge the questionnaire on this point.
The Commission adopted these questions. The two
chapters “ Forced Labour’" and “Free Labour” read,
therefore, as follows:
Forced Labour.
A. 1. What are the measures intended to ensure
the prohibition of forced labour?
2. Eor what public works and services is forced
native labour required ? How is this
regulated ?
3. Are there any other forms of forced labour,
such as labour in lieu of taxation, main-
tenance of highways, &c., except for
essential public works and services?
4. Are there any other forms of forced labour,
such as work on plantations or commercial
undertakings? If so, how are these regu-
lated ?
5. What are positive results of these measures?
B. 1. What measures have been taken with regard
to the recruiting of labour?
2. Does the administration participate in this
recruiting ?
3. What compulsory measures are authorised
with respect to native labour?
4. What powers has the Administration for
dealing with labour contracts and for pre-
venting abuses in this respect?
Free Labour.
A. 1. What measures have been adopted to ensure
that account is taken of the conventions
or recommendations of the International
La hour Conf erenees ?
2. Are these Conventions or recommendations
being carried into effect ?
3. By what other provisions is free labour pro-
tected ?
M. Outs expressed the hope that the interchange of
opinions which had just taken place in the presence of
the Director of the International Labour Office would
produce results, aud that it would be possible for the
secretariat of the Permanent Commission to remain in
touch with the International Labour Office.
The Chairman and M. Albert Thomas congratu-
lated each other on the collaboration which had just
been established between the Permanent Mandates
Commission and the International Labour Office, with
the noble object of improving the condition of the
labouring classes, whatever their colour might be.
The meeting adjourned at 12.50 p.m.
EIGHTH MEETING, HELD ON OCTOBER Bth,
1921, AT 11 a.m.
Chairman: The Marquis Theodoli.
******
44. Questionnaire for the C Mandates.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said he desired.to add to the ques-
tionnaire an enquiry concerning the case of indentured
Chinese labour, with special reference to Samoa. The
German Government had introduced Chinese labour
into Samoa before the war and the Government of New
Zealand had found it necessary to continue the system.
M. van Bees represented that the enquiries already
included in the questionnaire in regard to the recruit-
ment of labourers sufficiently covered the point which
had been raised.
M. d'Andrade contended that the matter was one for
the Chinese Government to settle with the Government
of New Zealand.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that the introduction
of indentured labour had an effect on the welfare of
the natives, for which the League of Nations is re-
sponsible.
M. Rappard considered that an agreement between
the Governments of China and New Zealand-did not
disengage tho responsibility of the League.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore proposed to add an enquiry asking
whether there was any system of indentured (Chinese
or otherwise) labour in the territory ? If so, what were
the conditions of indenture and what steps were being
taken to provide for the moral and material well-being
of the natives of the territory, vis-a-vis the indentured
labourers ?
The meeting adjourned at 1 p.m.
NINTH MEETING, HELD ON OCTOBER Bth,
1921, AT 3 p.m.
Chairman: .The Marquis Theodoli.
:;c * $ * * *
46. Questionnaire concerning B Mandates.
M. Orts read, with the necessary explanations, the
revised text of the request for information concerning
forced labour, which he had prepared in collaboration
ivith M. Beau, in conformity with the decision taken
at the morning meeting. He drew a distinction between
three kinds of work: (1) Essential public works and
services. (2) Work required by the Government in
lieu of taxes and dues. (3) Work for private enter-
prise.
Eor each of these questions it was necessary to ad-
dress certain requests for information to the Man-
datory Powers. As regards paragraph 2, it was
especially necessary that the Commission .should bo
certain that there was no possibility, of abuse. As


regards paragraph 3, it was also neeessary to know to
what extent the Governments were assisting in the re-
cruiting of private labour, what penal and disciplinary
measures had been taken, and what protection was
granted as regards contracts.
M. Orts presented a draft containing seven ques-
tions referring to the three kinds of work which he had
defined.
***** *
49. Consideration of the Questionnaire
{continued) : Forced Labour.
M. Orts read the portion of the questionnaire which
the Commission had decided to reconsider. The read-
ing of the first six articles resulted only in certain im-
provements of form, particularly in the English text.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that there was no
paragraph dealing with the recruiting of natives in a
territory for work outside the territory.
Discussion followed between the Chairman, the
Portuguese and Belgian members and M. Rappard.
M. Orts stated that, in a general way, the adminis-
tration reserved the right to authorise recruitment. He
proposed this formula, drawn up by his British col-
league :
“ Does the administration allow recruitment in
the Mandated areas of labour for another terri-
tory? If so, under what conditions?
50. Consideration of the Draft Questionnaire for
C Mandates.
M. Rappard said that the question was whether the
text adopted for B Mandates could also be used for C
Mandates. In a general way, he thought that the
questionnaire already adopted could he maintained, hut
in any case it would be advisable to make some altera-
tions in it. For example, the question referring to
economic equality might remain, hut in an amended
form, for the Powers were not obliged to observe this
principle for C Mandates, although, in fact, they did
so to some extent* It would undoubtedly be desirable
that the Commission should have information upon this
subject.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore recalled the reservations made in
this respect by the Japanese Government, arid sug-
gested that the question be reversed so as to read :
“What, derogations are there to the principle of
economic equality, &c.”
The CUairman proposed to re-read, point by point,
questionnaire B. The Commission could deal, in pass
mg, with paragraphs which might he altered for use in
questionnaire G. ",
Chapter 1 (Slavery) was adopted.
As regards Chapter 2, Mr. William Martin drew
the attention of the Commission to one point. Accord-
ing to the drafts of C Mandates the Mandatory Power
applied its legislation to the territory under Mandate.
Now, South Africa alid Japan had adhered to the
Labour Conventions. Ought they not to draft the para-
graphs in question in conformity with these conven-
tions, which appeared to apply automatically, and in
conformity With Article 421.
M. Rappard pointed out that although the Man-
datory. Powers were authorised to extend the provisions
of their national legislation t,o the territories under
Mandate they were not obliged to do so.
The chapter on “ Arms and Traffic ” was approved as
corresponding closely enough to the terms of C Man-
dates, which were stricter on this point than B Man-
dates.
In the chapter on “ Alcohol and Drugs,” an altera-
tion of form proposed by M. d’Andßadj? Was approved.
In this connection M. van Rees pointed out that the
Mandate did not expressly prohibit poisonous drugs
and secured the adoption of the following text: —
“ What measures have been taken to assure pro-
hibition of the importation, production and con-
sumption of poisonous substances or drugs such as
hemp ? ”
The chapter on “ Liberty of Conscience ” was
adopted.
As regards military clauses, M. Rappard reminded
the Commission that C Mandates absolutely prohibited
the maintenance of any military base or fortification,
whereas these were authorised in the draft “ B ”
Mandates for the defence of the territory.
M. Orts suggested the employment of a formula
which should not offend the Powers: —
“ Are there any fortresses or military or naval
bases in the Mandated territories?”
Adopted.
As regards the Chapter on “ Economic Equality,”
M. Rappard reminded the Commission of the text pre-
viously adopted: “ What derogations are there to the
principle of economic equality as regards, &c. ?” Para-
graph B had been deleted, but there arose, in connection
with this matter, a very delicate question, that of im-
migration.
Mr. OrMsby-Gore remarked that this question arose
in the case of all the territories under C Mandates,
whether British or Japanese.
M. Rappard asked if paragraph B could not he re-
placed by the words: “ What derogations are there to
the principle of freedom of immigration?” This men-
tion of the freedom of immigration ought not to offend
any Power.
M. Beau and Mr. Ormscy-Gore remarked that the
Comtniss'on had here to deal with an important poli-
tical question at present being discussed by the Govern-
ments.
M. Rappard stated that the Covenant, according to
its most widely received interpretation, did not stipu-
late freedom of immigration for 0 mandated areas and
it was upon this po ; nt that Japan had made reserva-
tions. In other words, according to the Japanese stand-
point, it was as much in the interest of the natives
as in the interest of the Members of the League that
the Covenant had wished to assure economic equality.
Therefore, it was claimed, C Mandates also involved
an obligation for the Mandatory Powers to respect
economic equality and, consequently* freedom of immi-
gration. It was not for the Permanent Commission to
take sides, but, as an impartial observer, to ask what
the position was, by means of the formula: “ What im-
migration laws are there?”
The French and. Belgian members of the Commis-
sion approved this formula, which was adopted.
Before dealing with the general clauses, Mr.
Ormsby-Gore wished to submit to the Commission a
paragraph in conformity with his declarations at the
preceding meeting. He read this paragraph, which ran
as follows;
“Is there any system of indentured (Chinese or
othef) 1 ahoUf in the territory? If so, what are
the conditions of indenture and what steps are
being taken to provide for the moral and material
Well-being Of the natives of the territory, vis-a-vis
the indentured labourers?”
This paragraph was inserted In the questionnaire in the
Chapter on " Labotir.”
The Chapters upon “ Education ” and “ Public
Health ” were adopted.
M. d'AndradE proposed an alteration in form in the
Chapter on the “ System of Land Tenure/’ The ques-
tionnaire appeared to suggest that there might be sys-
tems of land tenure hot yeCOgnisOd by th© law.


On the suggestion of M. Beau, the following formula
was adopted:—
‘‘ What systems of land tenure and forest law
exist ? ”
At the beginning of the same chapter, M. n’Andrade
observed that the word “ all ” in the phrase “ measures
intended to assure economic equality for all ” appeared
to apply also to black people.
M. Rappard reminded the Commiss : on that he had
had to find a formula wide enough to include both the
Members of the League of Nations and their nationals
and the United States and their nationals. Why should
black people not be included in the word “ all ” ?
M. Orts proposed merely to delete the words “ for
all.”
The Chapter on “ Public Finances ” was adopted.
In the Chapter on “ Statistics/’ the Chairman stated
that he had scruples regarding the retention of the word
“ maritalite.”
On Mr. William Martin's suggestion, this word
was replaced by “ nuptialite.”
No. 10.
B MANDATES.
Questionnaire intended to facilitate the preparation of the Annual Reports from the Mandatory Powers.
I. Slavery.
(a) 1. What measures are being taken with a view
to insuring the suppression of the slave
trade ?
2. What results have been obtained?
'“(b) 1. Is slavery recognised legally?
2. Does domestic or other slavery still exist?
m Give statistics.
3. What are the principal causes of slavery
(gambling, drink, &c.)?
4. Is the pledging of a person recognised legally?
5. Under what conditions can a slave get his
freedom ?
6. What measures have been taken, or are being
taken, to provide for the emancipation of
slaves and to put an end to all slavery,
domestic or otherwise?
7. Is there any time-limit fixed for the emanci-
pation of slaves?
If in the affirmative, how long is the period ?
11. Labour.
(a) 1. Have measures been taken to insure, in accord-
ance with Part XIII. of the Treaty of Ver-
sailles, the taking info consideration of con-
ventions or recommendations of Interna-
tional Labour Conferences?
2. Are these conventions or recommendations
being carried into effect?
3. By what other provisions is free labour
protected ?
(b) 1. What are the measures intended to insure the
prohibition of forced labour for purposes
other than essential public works and ser-
vices and what are the effective results of
these measures?
2. For what public works and services is forced
native labour required? How is this
regulated ?
3. Are there any other forms of forced labour,
such as labour in lieu of taxation, main-
tenance of highways, &c. ? If in the affir-
mative, how afe these regulated?
(e) 1. How is the recruiting' of labour required by
private enterprise organized and regulated?
Does the Administration participate in this
recruiting ?
2. Does the Administration allov r recruiting in
mandated area of labour for another terri-
tory ? tf SO, under what conditions ?
3. What compulsory and disciplinary measures
are authorized with respect to native
labour?
4. Wh&t powers has the Administration for con-
trolling labour contracts in Order to insure
their loyal fulfilment both bn the part of
employer and employed, and what powers
does it possess to prevent any abuses in this
respect ?
111. Arms Traffic.
1. What measures are being adopted to control
the traffic in arms and ammunition?
2. What are the statistics relating to imports of
arms and ammunition of different cate-
gories?
IV. Trade and Manufacture of Alcohol and Drugs.
1. What steps are being taken to assure the pro-
hibition of abuses of the liquor traffic?
2. How is the campaign against alcoholism
organized ?
3. What are the effects of these measures (statis-
tics relative to the import and to the local
manufacture of alcoholic liquors, &c.) ?
4. What are the countries of origin of alcoholic
liquor, other than wine and beer, imported
into the territory?
5. What measures have been taken to assure the
prohibition or regulation of the importa-
tion, production, and consumption of
dangerous drugs?
V. Liberty of Conscience.
1. What measures are being taken to guarantee
liberty of conscience and religion?
2. What restrictions have been laid down for the
maintenance of public order and morality?
3. Is there free exercise of religious worship and
instruction ?
4. If not, what restrictions are there to limit
such exercises?
5. What are the results of such restrictions?
VI. Military Clauses.
1. Has the Mandatory Power established or
maintained fortresses or military or naval
bases in the mandated territory?
2. What are the forms of native military organi-
zation and instruction ?
3. Are there any police forces, independent of the
military charged with the defence of the
territory ?■
What is the respective importance of the two
forces.and the amount spent on each?
4. In wffiat respect is the military organization
of the mandated territory different from
that in force in the neighbouring posses-
sions of the Mandatory Power?
VII. Economic Equality.
1. What provisions are made to secure economic
equality as regards:—
(a) Concessions?


( b ) Land tenure?
(c) Mining rights (in particular, pros-
pecting) ?
( d ) Fiscal regime (direct and indirect
taxation) ?
(e) Customs regulations (imports, tran-
sit) ?
2. What are the exceptions, if any, in each
category ?
VIII. Education.
1. What steps are being taken for the elementary
education of the natives of the territory
(organization and statistics) ?
Is this education free to all natives, and, if
not, in what cases is it free?
2. What steps are being taken to provide for
higher education of the natives, such as
medical, veterinary, and technical?
• 3. In what languages is instruction given in the
different categories of schools?
4. Are Mission schools compelled to submit to
certain conditions, and, if so, what?
IX. Public Health.
1. What steps are being taken in the territory
to provide for public health, sanitation, and
to combat endemic and epidemic diseases?
2. What provisions are made for medical assis-
tance ?
3. What is the actual situation as regards prosti-
tution, and what steps are being taken in
this matter?
X. Land tenure.
1. What systems of land tenure and forest law
exist? How are they legally recognised?
What lands are considered as belonging to the
State, and what are regarded as commun-
ally owned?
2. What measures are being adopted for the regis-
tration of landed property?
3. What are the regulations for the alienation of
land in which natives or native communi-
ties exercise rights by virtue of hereditary,
or use?
4. What other measures are being taken to pro-
tect the rights and interests of natives and
native communities in respect to land
(usury, forced sales, &c.) ?
XI. Moral, Social, and M atonal Welfare.
What are, generally speaking, the measures
adopted to insure the moral, social, and mate-
rial welfare of the natives (measures to main-
tain the interests, rights, and customs of the
natives, their participation in public services,
native tribunals, &c.) ?
XII. Public Finances.
The general schedule of receipts from, and expen-
diture on, the territory, budget system, indica-
tion of the nature and assessment of taxes.
XIII. Demographic Statistics.
Births, marriages (polygamy), deaths, emigration,
immigration.
The Permanent Mandates Commission would be
grateful to the Mandatory Powers if they would be
good enough to add to the annual reports the text of
all the legislative and administrative decisions taken
with regard to each mandated territory in the course of
the past year.
No. 11.
C MANDATES.
Questionnaire intended to facilitate the preparation of the Annual Reports from the Mandatory Powers.
I. Slavery,
(a) 1. What measures are being taken with a view
to insuring the suppression of the slave
trade?
2. What results have been obtained?
( b ) 1. Is slavery recognised legally?
2. Does domestic or other slavery still exist?
Give statistics.
3. What are the principal causes of slavery
(gambling, drink, &c.) ?
4. Is the pledging of a person recognised legally ?
5. Tinder what conditions can a slave get his
freedom ?
6. What measures have been taken, or are being-
taken, to provide for the emancipation of
slaves and to put an end to all slavery,
domestic or otherwise?
7. Is there any time limit fixed for the emancipa-
tion of slaves?
If in the affirmative—how long is the period?
11. Labour.
(a) 1. Have measures been taken to> insure, in accord-
ance with Part XIII. of the Treaty of Ver-
sailles, the taking into consideration of con-
ventions or recommendations of Interna-
tional Labour Conferences?
2. Are these conventions or recommendations be-
ing carried into effect?
3. By what other provisions is free labour pro-
tected? |
(&) 1. What are the measures intended to insure the
prohibition of forced labour for purposes
other than essential public works and ser-
vices and what are the effective results of
these measures?
2. For what public works and services is forced
native labour required? How is this regu-
lated?
3. Are there any other forms of forced labour
such as labour in lieu of taxation, main-
tenance of highways, &c. ? If in the
affirmative, how are these regulated?
(c) 1. How is the recruiting of labour required by
private enterprise organized and regulated?
Does the Administration participate in this
recruiting ?
2. Does the Administration allow recruiting in
the mandated area of labour for another
territory? If so, under what conditions?
3. Is there any system of indentured (Chinese or
other) labour in the territory? If so, what
are the conditions of indenture and what
steps are being taken to provide for the
moral and material well-being of the natives
of the territory, vis-a-vis the indentured
labourers ?
4. What compulsory and disciplinary measures
are authorized with respect to native
labour ?
5. What powers has the Administration for con-
trolling labour contracts in order to insure


their loyal fulfilment both on the part of em-
ployer and employed, and what powers does
it possess to prevent any abuses in this
respect ?
111. Arms Traffic.
1. What measures are being adopted to control
the traffic in arms and ammunition?
What are the statistics relating to imports
of arms and ammunition of different
categories ?
IV. Trade and Manufacture of Alcohol and Drugs.
1. What steps are being taken to assure the pro-
hibition of abuses of the liquor traffic?
2. How is the campaign against alcoholism
organized ?
3. What are the effects of these measures (statis-
tics relative to the import and to the local
manufacture of alcoholic liquors, &.c.) ?
4. What are the countries of origin of alcoholic
liquor, other than vine and beer, imported
into the territory?
5. What measures have been taken to assure the
prohibition or regulation of the importation,
production, and consumption of dangerous
drugs ?
V. Jjiberty of Conscience.
1. What measures are being taken to guarantee
liberty of conscience and religion?
2. What restrictions have been laid down for the
maintenance of public order and morality?
3. Is there free exercise of religious worship and
instruction?
4. If not, what restrictions are there to limit
such exercises?
5. What are the results of such restrictions?
VI. Military Clauses.
1. Are there any fortresses or military or naval
bases ?
2. What are the forms of native military organi-
zation and instruction?
3. Are there any police forces independent of the
military charged with the defence of the
territory ?
What is the respective importance of these two
forces and the amount spent on each?
4. In what respect is the military organization
of the mandated territory different from that
in force in the neighbouring possessions of
the Mandatory Power?
VIJ. Economic Equality.
1. What derogations are there to the principle
of economic equality as regards -
(a) Concessions?
(b) Land tenure?
(c) Mining rights (in particular, pros-
pecting) ?
(d) Fiscal regime (direct and indirect
taxation) ?
(e) Customs regulations (imports, ex-
ports, transit) ?
2. What immigration laws are there?
VIII. Education.
1. What steps are being taken for the elementary
education of the natives of the territory
(organization and statistics) ?
Is this education free to all natives, and, if not,
in what cases is it free?
2. What steps are being taken to provide for
higher education of the natives such as
medical, veterinary, and technical.
3. In what languages is instruction given in the
different categories of schools?
4. Are Mission schools compelled to submit to
certain conditions? If so, what?
IX. Public Health.
1. What steps are being taken in the territory
to provide for public health, sanitation, and
to combat endemic and epidemic diseases ?
2. What provisions are made for medical
assistance ?
3. What is the actual situation as regards prosti-
tution, and what steps are being taken in this
matter ?
X. Land Tenure.
1. What systems of land tenure and forest law
exist? How are they legally recognised?
What lands are considered as belonging to the
State, and what are regarded as communally
owned ?
2. What measures are being adopted for the
registration of landed property?
3. What are the regulations for the alienation of
land in Avhicli natives or native communities
exercise rights, by virtue of heredity or use?
4. What other measures are being taken to pro-
tect the rights and interests of natives and
native communities in respect to land (usury,
forced sale, &c.) ?
XI. Moral, Social, and Material Welfare.
What are, generally speaking, the measures
adopted to insure the moral, social, and ma-
terial welfare of the natives? (Measures to
maintain the interests, rights, and customs of
the natives, their participation in public ser-
vice, native tribunals, &c.).
XII. Public finances.
The general schedule of receipts from, and ex-
penditure on, the territory, budget system,
indication of the nature and assessment of
taxes.
XIII. Demographic statistics.
Births, marriages (polygamy), deaths, emigra-
tion, immigration.
The Permanent, Mandates Commission would be
grateful to the Mandatory Powers if they would be
good enough to add to the annual reports the text of
all the legislative and administrative decisions taken
with regard to each mandated territory in the course
of the past year.
No.. 12.
REPORT SUBMITTED TO THE COUNCIL OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS ON 10th OCTOBER, 1921, ON
BEHALF OF THE PERMANENT MANDATES COMMISSION BY ITS CHAIRMAN, M. THEODOLI. *
Mk. President, Gentlemen,
The Permanent Mandates Commission, mentioned
in the last paragraph 22 of the Covenant, -and set up
by you in conformity with the Constitution, the terms
of which you laid down on December Ist, 1920, has
just finished the work of its first session.
You were kind enough to allow the Chairman to
give you a verbal account of its discussions. I have the
honour to express to you my warmest thanks for so
doing. You thus afford me a welcome opportunity of
assuring you how much my colleagues and myself
* L. of N. e. 405,17.281.1021, vi.


appreciate the confidence you have shown by calling
upon us to collaborate in one of the most interesting,
arid,, we hope, the most fruitful tasks of the League of
Nations. I am also glad of this opportunity for the
Permanent Mandates Commission to come into contact
with the Council by which it was constituted, and which
has called for its help and advice.
The minutes of the discussions at our first meeting,
which I have the honour to submit to you, give an
exact account of our decisions and the motives which
inspired them. It is therefore unnecessary for me to
explain to you at length the subject of our debates at
nine meetings held between October 4th and 9th. I can
therefore confine myself to indicating to you very
briefly the principal results of our work and to sub-
mitting to you the recommendations which these results
seem to suggest as regards the course we ask you to
adopt.
May I, in the first place, define briefly the spirit in
which my colleagues on the Commission and myself
have approached our task?
The Covenant provides that “ the Permanent Com-
mission shall be constituted to receive and examine the
annual Report ’ which the Mandatory Powers are pledged
to send to the Council concerning the territories under
their charge, and “to advise the Council on all matters
relating to the observance of the Mandates.” Such
investigations and such advice can only be of value if
inspired by absolute independence and impartiality of
judgment concerning the data furnished to us. We
know that the Council intended us to act in that spirit,
since it insisted that the Commission should be com-
posed of experts answerable only to the League of Nations
as a body, and further, insisted that that majority of
these members should be nationals of non-Mandatory
States. Allow me, Mr. President and Gentlemen, to
assure. you that this is the manner in which we as a
Commission unanimously interpret the mission en-
trusted to us, a mission of which we hope to prove our-
selves worthy.
In the second place, the study of the Reports which
will bo submitted to us and any proposals they may
suggest will be inspired by the sincere desire to facili-
tate the execution of the task which the Mandatory
Powers have agreed to accomplish in the name of the
League of Nations, , the importance and difficulty of
which we fully realize. Whilst supervising the strict
observance of the principles of tutelage laid down in
Article 22 of the Covenant, in the interest of the native
populations and of all the Members of the League, we
shall endeavour to exercise our authority, less as judges
from whom critical pronouncements are expected, than
as collaborators who are'resolved to devote their
experience and their energies to a joint endeavour.
In the course of our first meeting, we had to devote
our attention to three principal questions:—
(1) We thought it desirable to conform to the request
laid down in paragraph (i) of the Constitution which
you gave us, and to draw up our Rules of Procedure.
Ihese Rules are before you and we ask you to approve
their provisions.
(2) When we gathered at Geneva for our first meet-
ing, we knew that no annual Report could be placed
before us as a year has not yet elapsed since the Council
confirmed the first Mandates. On the other hand, we
a . s ° knew that, in accordance with a recommendation ‘
'?* *L irst tlie League of Nations, adopted
by the Council at its meeting in June, 1921, the Manda-
tory Powers had consented to authorize us to study
Reports on the administration of some of the territories
lhtrusted to their care for administration in accordance
with the. principle of the Mandates. The Reports thus
communicated to us were the following
French Cameroons,
French Togolahd,
British Tanganyika,
Belgian East Africa,
South West Africa,
Mesopotamia,
Palestine.
We nave studied these Reports, with the exception
of the last two. Interesting as the reports on Palestine
and Mesopotamia are, we considered that the state of
uncertainty still existing concerning everything that
affects the Mandates mentioned in paragraph 4 of
Article 22 of the covenant would make such a study of
little use at this moment.
We have read most attentively the other Reports
communicated to us. We read them fully conscious of
the restrictions imposed on us by their nature, for it
was a question, not of annual Reports, but of documents
drawn up for the Parliaments of the Mandatory-
Powers, and communicated voluntarily for the infor-
mation of the League. We will therefore say nothing
of them here, except to express to the Mandatory Powers
our gratitude for the courtesy they have displayed in
allowing us to study them, and our admiration for the
magnificent and generous effort at colonial reorganiza-
tion and reconstruction which they show.
The Commission has also taken note, with profound
gratitude, of the declarations made on behalf of their
Governments by MM. Pisher, Reynald, and Poullet,
at the meeting of the Sixth Assembly Committee on
September 20th. If, during the course of the present
session, we have not considered it necessary to have
recourse to the information which these gentlemen were
kind enough to offer us, we shall no doubt be happy to
avail ourselves of it in the future. The Commission,
feeling that it was authorized by the very friendly
attitude which the Mandatory Powers have adopted
towards it, and inspired by the suggestions to which
the study of the Reports already dealt with gave rise,
has also undertaken a third task.
(3) In order to facilitate the work of the Mandatory
Powers in preparing the annual report for submission
to the. Council, after the first year of their regular
administration, we have considered it advisable to draw
up questionnaires for this purpose. These ques-
xi° n ?i^ re .s aie °* different kinds, corresponding to
ie Mandates “B” and “ C,” mentioned in paragraphs
5 and 6of Article 22 of the Covenant, Both are
lerewith submitted to you. We beg to express the hope
that, the Council will approve this step and transmit
these questionnaires to the Mandatory Powers for whom
they are intended; we also hope that the Council will
request these Powers to take them into account as far
as possible when drafting their first annual report.
W e are fully aware that these questionnaires are open
to criticism, and we reserve to ourselves the right to
complete and improve them according to experience
acquired in studying the reports.
In drawing up these questionnaires, we have had in
j 11 ! 1 . ihe “C ” Mandates, the terms of which were
definitely laid down by the Council nearly a year ago,
and the draft “ B ” Mandates, which still await con-
fii mat.ion. by the Council. We have, however, refrained
iom giving any opinion on these drafts themselves,
since we were unanimous in considering, as shown by
the resolution adopted at our meeting of October stl\,
fiat, subject to instructions to the contrary from the
Council, the . competence of the Permanent Mandates
Commission is, by. the last paragraph of Article 22 of
the Covenant, limited to the examination of questions
relating to the observance of the Mandates.
In order to facilitate the work of the Mandatory
I owers, and to throw light on certain doubtful points,
we would, however, submit to the Council a certain
number of questions and suggestions based on the
study of the reports and draft Mandates which have
come before us. These questions and suggestions are
embodied m an annex to this Report


I will therefore only mention very briefly the ques-
tion of the national status of the inhabitants of the
Mandated Territories, which was brought to the notice
of the Commission when it examined the report on
South West Africa.
In view of the importance of this problem, the Com-
mission considers that it deserves a very detailed exami-
nation and that it calls for the speediest possible solu-
tion.
The Commission is of opinion that, while authorizing
the incorporation of a territory under Mandate “ B ”
in the neighbouring possessions of the Mandatory
Powers for Customs purposes, it is not the Council’s
intention to sanction any infringement of the prin-
' ciples of economic equality laid down at the end of
paragraph 5 of Article 22 of the Covenant.
Nor does the Commission suppose that, while con-
firming the prohibition laid on the Mandatory Powers
of exacting forced or compulsory labour, the Council
wishes to forbid the obligation to work, which is the
foundation of all civilized society.
Finally, the Commission confines itself to drawing
the attention of the Council to certain differences which
appear to exist between the texts of the British draft
“B ” Mandates and the French and Belgian drafts.
It considers that these differences of "wording do not
imply a difference in substance.
Mr. President and Gentlemen, in once more express-
ing our gratitude for the confidence which you have
been good enough to show us, and in assuring you of
the keen interest which all of us take in the great work
you have intrusted to us, I would ask you to be good
enough to take into consideration the recommendations
to which, on behalf of the Permanent Mandates Com-
mission, I have the honour to draw your attention.
No. 13.
RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PERMANENT MANDATES COMMISSION. *
Approved by the Council at its Sixteenth Session* January, 1922.
Whereas, in conformity w’th Article 22 of the Cove-
nant, the Permanent Mandates Commission is
entrusted with the duty of receiving and examining the
annual reports which the mandatory Powers shall
render to the Council in reference to the territories
committed to their charge, and of advising the Council
on all matters relating to the observance of the man-
dates ; ■!
And whereas, by tbe provisions of the Constitution
of the Permanent Mandates Commission, which was ap-
proved by the Council on Ist December, 1920, the Com-
mission is instructed to draw up its own Rules of Pro-
cedure, subject to tbe approval of tbe Council;
Now therefore the Commission adopts the follow-
ing provisions for its Rules of Procedure, subject to
the above-mentioned reservation:
Rule 1.
The Permanent Mandates Commission will assemble
for its ordinary session once a year at the seat of the
League of Nations, as a rule oq the first Tuesday in
August.
It will meet for extra-ordinary sessions at the request
of one of its members, on condit : on that this request,
which should be addressed to the Secretary-General and
submitted by him to the other members of the Commis-
sion, he approved by the majority of these members and
by the President of the Council of the League.
The Mandatory Powers and the President of the
Council shall he informed, at least one month in ad-
vance, of the dates of sessions.
Rule 2.
The Permanent Mandates Commission shall consist
of nine members, as laid down by paragraph (a) of its
Constitution.
The International Labour Organization may detail
an expert, selected by itself, to sit on the Permanent
Commission. This expert shall be entitled to attend,
in an advisory capacity, all the meetings of the Per-
manent Commission at which questions connected with
the labour system are discussed.
Rule 8.
At any meeting five members shall constitute a
quorum.
All decisions of the Commission shall be adopted by
a majority of the votes of the members present at the
meeting. In case of equality of votes, the Chairman
shall have a easting vote. Any statement of v : ews by
* L. Of N., C. 404, M. 205, 1921, vi.
a minority consisting of one or more members of the
Commission shall be transmitted to the Council at the
request of the minority.
Rule 4.
At the beginning of each ord'nary session, the Com-
mission shall elect from among its members, by secret
ballot, a Chairman and a vice-Chairman for a period
of one year. The Mandates Section of the Secretariat
of the League will constitute' the permanent Secretariat
of the Commission.
Rule 5.
The Commission shall be put in possession, at latest
by tbe end of June, of tbe annual reports which, in con-
formity with the provisions of paragraph 9 of Article
22 of the Covenant, it is constituted to receive.
The Mandatory Powers shall be requested to send
twenty copies of these reports to tbe Secretariat of the
League, and one copy each, at the same time, to the
members of the Permanent Mandates Commission,
whose names and addresses shall be communicated, with
this object in view, to the Governments of these Powers.
Rule 6.
The agenda for each session shall be prepared by the
Secretariat, of the League, submitted for the approval
of the Chairman of the Commission, and communicated
to the members, together with the notice convening the
Commission.
The Commission may decide, during the course of a
session, by a two-thirds majority of the members pre-
sent, to add any question to the agenda.
Rule f.
The Chairman shall convene the Comnrrssion through
the agency of the Secretariat; he shall direct the work
at the meetings, ensure that the provisions of the Rules
of Procedure are observed, and announce the results of
ballots.
The Secretariat shall draw up the minutes of each
meeting. These minutes, after being approved by the
Commission, shall be kept in a special file. Copies shall
be communicated to tbe Council and to the Mandatory
Powers.
The Secretariat shall, as a rule, make all the neces-
sary arrangements for meetings of the Commission. It
shall keep the Chairman informed of all questions
which may be brought before the Comnrssion for con-


sideration, and shall supply, in due course, all the
Members of the Commission with the documents re-
quired for the study of the problems on the agenda.
Rule 8.
At the beginning of the ordinary session, the Com-
mission shall undertake a separate examination and
discussion of each of the annual reports submitted by
the Mandatory Powers. The examination and the dis-
cussion shall take place, in each case, in the presence
of the accredited representative of the Mandatory
Power which issued the report.
After this examination, the Commission shall decide
upon the form to be given to the observations to be
transmitted to the Council of the League. If the Corn-
miss on is not unanimous, it may present its observa-
tions in the form of majority and minority reports.
These observations shall be, in every case, communi-
cated to the accredited representative of the Power
which issued the report to which they refer. The re-
presentative concerned may attach his own remarks.
The Commission shall forward the reports of the
Mandatory Powers to the Council. It shall annex to
each report its own observations as well as the observa-
tions of the duly authorized representative of the Power
wh : ch issued the report, if the representative so desires.
The Commission shall hold a plenary meeting in the
presence of all duly authorized representatives of the
Mandatory Powers, when it has adopted the final terms
of its observations on all the reports which it has
examined. This meeting shall be public. If the
majority of its members so desire, the Commission may
take advantage of the presence of the' duly authorized
representatives of the Mandatory Powers, to bring
beore them all matters connected with the Mandates
which, in its opinion, should be submitted by the Coun-
cil to the Mandatory Powers and to the other Members
of the League.
Rule 9.
French and English shall be the official languages of
the Commission.
If a member of the Commission should express the
desire, the Secretariat will cause all written documents
emanating from the Commission, together with the
annual reports of the Mandatory Powers and the re-
marks of the duly authorized representatives of the
latter, to be translated into French when they have been
submitted in English, and vice versa.
Members of the Commission may speak in French
or in English. On the request of a member of the
Commission, speeches in French will be summarized in
English, and vice versa, by an interpreter on the staff
of the Secretariat.
Rule 10.
Subject to the approval of the Council, these Rules
of Procedure may be modified if at least five members
of the Commission so decide.
No. 14.
[EXTRACTS.]
PERMANENT MANDATES COMMISSION.
Minutes of the Second Session, held in Geneva, Ist to 11th August, 1922, under the Chairmanship of the
Marquis Theodoli.
The following members of the Commission were pre-
sent at the second session:—
The Marquis Theodoli, Chairman.
Count de Ballobar.
M. Beau.
Mme. Bugge-Wicksell.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore.
M. Pierre Orts.
M. Van Rees.
M. Kunio Yanagida.
M. Freire if Andrade was absent on account of
ill-health.
Also present: Mr. Grimshaw, representative of the
International Labour Organization.
The following accredited representatives of various
Mandatory Powers attended certain meetings of the
Commission’s second session:—
Sir James Allen, High Commissioner in London
of the Government of New Zealand;
Sir Joseph Cook, High Commissioner in London
of the Commonwealth Government of Aus-
tralia ;
M. M. Matsttda, Minister Plenipotentiary, repre-
senting the Japanese Government.
FIRST MEETING (PUBLIC), HELD AT
GENEVA, TUESDAY, Ist AUGUST, 1922,
AT 11 a.m.
54. Opening Speech of Chairman.
In opening the session, the Chairman made the fol-
lowing remarks: —
I.
The short session held by our Commission last year
on October 4th to 9 th left a heavy heritage of work
to jour Chairman, which I have tried to carry out to
the best of my ability, assured as I am of the support
of all —my colleagues, the Council of the League of
Nations, the Governments of the mandatory Powers
and the Secretariat of the League of Nations. I wish
first of all to give an account of the carrying out of
this task.
On October 10th, 4921, immediately after our first
meetings, I had the honour to submit to the Council a
report of our first session. This report, the terms of
which we had drawn up in collaboration, and to which
were added as annexes the draft Pules of Procedure,
and the Questionnaires relating to B and C mandated
areas, Annexes 2 and 3 were duly circulated to you.
I may therefore confine myself to recalling in brief
the various points which we felt should be brought to
the notice of the Council.
In the first place, I had the honour of submitting for
the approval of the Council the draft Rules of Pro-
cedure which we had drawn up, and which were given
executive force by the Council’s decision taken on
January 10th, 1922.
In the second place, I submitted to the Council the
draft Questionnaires which we had prepared with a
view to assisting the mandatory Powers in drafting
annual reports relating to B and C mandated areas,
the administration of which they had taken over.
At its meeting held on October 10th, 1921, the
Council was good enough to approve the terms of these
Questionnaires and to request the Secretary-General
of the League of Nations to bring them to the notice of
the mandatories for whom they were intended; this was
done during the month of October, 1921. lam glad to
note that, despite the shortness of the periods at the
disposal of the Governments of the mandatory Powers,
several of them—in particular the Japanese Govern-
ment and the Government of the Union of South Africa


—sent us their first annual reports, in which they fol-
lowed the exact order adopted by us, and replied—with
a care for which we are extremely grateful—to the
detailed questions which we had ventured to put to
them.
Thirdly, in our report to the Council, we drew its
attention to several points which had been suggested to
us by a perusal of the draft B mandates and by the
consideration of a report communicated to us in the
previous year by the Union of South Africa.
I note with special pleasure—due to the fact that we
have found in the Governments of the mandatory
Powers the same spirit of trust and co-operation which
-fve ourselves bring to our work —that the questions
''which we ventured to ask have not remained un-
answered. During the recent session of the Council, at
which the terms of the B mandates were finally drawn
up, most of our suggestions were followed. It was
agreed, as we had hoped it would be, that the clauses
authorizing the mandatory Powers to constitute a cus-
toms union between B mandated areas and adjoining
territories should not involve any infringement of the
principle of commercial equality sanctioned by the
Covenant. We also note with pleasure that the words
u travaux publics et services essentiels,” which appeared
in the French and Belgian draft B mandates, and
which were not, in our opinion, exactly equivalent to
the corresponding terms in the British mandates
(“essential public works and services”), were modified
in accordance with our wish. In the final forms of the
mandates, they have been replaced by the words
“ travaux et services publics essentiels,” which appeared
to us more in accordance both with the intentions of
their authors and with their own views.
Finally, at its meeting held on October 10th, 1921.
the Council expressed, through its President, His
Excellency M. Wellington Koo, its great gratitude to
the members of the Permanent Mandates Commission
for the work which they had accomplished, and after
an interesting exchange of views between M. Leon
Bourgeois, M. Paul Hymans and Mr. Balfour, unani-
mously adopted, at the proposal of the President, the
fol 1 owing resolution:
“ The Council of the League of Nations, having
considered Question (1) mentioned in the annex
to the report submitted on behalf of the Permanent
Mandates Commission by its Chairman, the Mars-
quis Alberto Theodoli, on October 10th, 1921.
“Resolves to request the Chairman of the Com-
mission and two of his colleagues to form a Sub-
Committee for the purpose of seeking further in-
formation on the question of the nationality of the
inhabitants of B and C mandated areas. The Sub-
Committee shall present a preliminary report to
the Council at its coming meeting.”
This resolution, which fully met the wishes of the
Commission, nevertheless placed upon us a somewhat
heavy responsibility. In execution of the Council’s
wishes, I requested M. Freire d’Andrade and M. Orts
to meet me and proceed to Paris, London and Brussels,
in order to learn from the lips of the authorized repre-
sentatives of the Governments of the mandatory Powers
themselves their views as to the question of the nation-
ality of the inhabitants of B and C mandated areas.
M. Freire d’Andrade was good enough to accept this
invitation, for which I have pleasure once more in
tendering him my public thanks. M. Orts was unfortu-
nately unable to leave Brussels, but was good enough to
offer us his assistance, in the capital of his country, in
the work which we had to undertake. As M. Beau and
Mr. Ormsby-Gore very kindly agreed to render us the
same service in Paris and in London respectively, I
considered myself justified in accomplishing my mis-
sion -without having- to appeal to the kindness of any
other of our colleagues.
Our task, which lasted for a fortnight, was rendered
very interesting and, I venture to hope, fruitful by the
assistance which the Governments concerned hastened
lo afford us. The results of our inquiry are well known
to you, as they were included in a report which was
communicated to all members of the Permanent Man-
dates Commission.
This report, together with the documents attached
thereto, was placed at the Council’s disposal at its meet-
ing in January, 1922, at which I myself was unable to
be present. For various reasons, the Council decided
to postpone the consideration of the report until its next
session. On May 12th, I returned to Geneva and had
the honour of reading my report. The Council
accorded it a favorable reception and adopted with
regard to it the following resolution:—
“ The Council of the League of Nations, having
taken cognisance with interest and lively satisfac-
tion of the report of the Marquis Theodoli, pre-
sented on behalf of the Sub-Committee appointed
. to collect information on the question of the
nationality of the inhabitants of B and C mandate
areas, requests the Permanent Mandates Commis-
sion to examine this question during its coming
session with a view to submitting to the Council
proposals for a suitable solution of the matter.”
Being thus called upon, first of all, to ascertain the
views of the mandatory Powers with regard to the
nationality of the inhabitants of B and C mandated
areas, we have now been intrusted by the Council with
the task of considering the problem from the point of
view de lege ferenda, and to frame proposals with
regard to the solution which should be applied to it.
With a view to introducing and, I hope, facilitating the
discussion of the subject, I ventured to transmit to
my colleagues a short memorandum (Annex 4), stating
the views which I had adopted as the result of my study
of and reflections upon this difficult subject.
11.
Having thus reviewed the results of our work during
the last year, I wish briefly to indicate the various
points which are to engage our attention this year, and
to submit to you a draft agenda for our deliberations
for this session.
According to our Rules of Procedure, the agenda is
prepared by the Secretariat, is submitted for the
approval of the Chairman of the Commission and is
communicated to the members, together with a notice
summoning them to the session. These documents have
been forwarded to you, and I will, therefore, remind
you of their contents. Allow me to give you a few brief
explanations and certain supplementary information re-
garding various points in the agenda which has been
sent to you. Although mv term of office as Chairman
is nearing its end, I think I must do so, because it is
the retiring Chairman who is responsible for the
approval of the agenda of the session at which he
resigns his office.
I would remind you that, before we enter upon any
further discussion, we must appoint a new bureau for
the Commission.
Under Article 4 of the Rules of Procedure, it is laid
down that, at the opening of each ordinary session, the
Commission will, elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman,
by secret ballot, for the period of one year. I am
therefore of opinion that when the reading of this report
is concluded, and before any discussion takes place on
the agenda, it would be well to select those members of
the Commission to whom my colleague, M. Van Rees,


and myself will be happy to transfer the offices of Vice-
Chairman and Chairman of the Commission.
It appears to me that it would then perhaps be de-
sirable to request the Director of the Mandates Section
to lay before us a brief report on the work of his sec-
tion since last session.
After that, it would in my judgment be well to con-
sider the annual reports of the Powers responsible for
the administration of territories under C mandates.
All annual reports dealing with these territories are
now in our hands, and we shall therefore be able to
fulfil in their entirety the duties imposed upon us under
the last paragraph of Article 22 of the Covenant, which
instructs us to receive and examine the annual reports
of the Mandatories, and to advise the Council on all
matters relating to the observance of the mandates.
As yon are aware, this examination must take place
in the presence, and with the co-operation, of the duly
accredited representatives x>f the mandatory Powers.
We are aware that all these Powers, with the possible
exception of the South African Union, regarding whose
intentions we have not yet been finally informed, were
good enough to send to Geneva distinguished delegates
to represent them —for the Japanese mandate M.
Matsuda, Minister Plenipotentiary; for Australia, Sir
Joseph Cook, High Comm ssioner, who, it is stated,
will arrive in Geneva on August 3rd, and who is to
represent his Government when the report on New
Guinea and the Island of Nauru comes up for considera-
tion; and finally, Sir James Allen, High Commissioner
in London for New Zealand, on whose co-operation we
can rely from Saturday, August sth.
The Commission will decide the order in which it
will enter upon the consideration of these various re-
ports. I shall merely remind my colleagues that our
Rules of Procedure provide, after the separate con-
sideration of each of these reports, for a plenary and
public meeting, in the presence of the accredited repre-
sentatives of the mandatory Powers.
We shall then have to consider various reports re-
lating to the administration of territories under A and
B mandates, which the mandatory Powers were good
enough to communicate to ns, though a year has not yet
elapsed since their mandates were ratified. These re-
ports deal with the following territories —French Togo-
land and Cameroons, British Togoland and Cameroons,
■Syria and the Lebanon.
As is known, moreover, reports with regard to Tan-
ganyika, Belgian East Africa, Palestine and Mesopo-
tamia have been prepared at the instance of the man-
datory Powers, and will perhaps be communicated to
the Permanent Mandates Commission in time for them
to he examined by us during the present session. .
The third task -which devolves upon us consists in
the preparation of a recommendation to the Council
with respect to the question of the nationality of in-
habitants of territor'es under B and C mandates—a
matter to which I alluded above.
Should the majority of the Commission deem it
advisable to enter upon the consideration of this sub-
ject, we shall then have to consider the question of the
land system in territories under the B mandate, which
has been brought to our notice by means of a memo-
randum from the British Anti-Slavery and Aborigines
Protection Society. (Annex 5.) Without prejudice
to the decision of the Commission on this subject, I
would state at the outset that, if we should devote our
attention to the problem of the land system in mandated
territories, which is a matter of such importance for
the well-being of the natives, it appears to me inadvis-
able to confine our attention to the French Cameroons.
with regard to which the question was raised. The
same question, indeed, appears in a no less acute form
in the territories under B and C mandates.
Should the Commission, by a two-thirds vote of the
members present, deem such a course justifiable and
possible, it would then be desirable to consider the
question of the right of the inhabitants of mandated
territories to present petitions, regarding which the
British Government has addressed a memorandum to
the Council. In takiug note of this memorandum, my
colleagues will doubtless appreciate the importance of
the matter with which it deals.
Finally, although this question, like the preceding
question, did not appear on the agenda which was com-
municated to you with the notice convening the meet-
ing, I believe we should be well advised if we drew up,
for the sake of the mandatory Powers intrusted with
the administration of territories under the A mandate,
Questionnaires intended to assist them in preparing the
annual reports which we shall have an opportunity ot
considering next year. The success which we have had
with the Questionnaires regarding the B and C man-
dates ought, in my judgment, to encourage us to com-
plete our work in this direction.
Gentlemen, I would in a word express my deep and
heartfelt gratitude to all those with whom my duties
as Chairman have led me to co-operate. My warmest
thanks are due to you, my colleagues, to whose favour
and indulgence I was indebted for the high honour of
the responsible post of Chairman, which I now relin-
quish into your hands, earnestly hoping that I have
done nothing to forfeit your esteem. To the Council
and Governments of the mandatory Powers, who have
displayed so friendly an interest in the work of our
Commission, and have thus been good enough to give
evidence of their devotion to the entire work of the
League of Nations, I would in all respect once more
express my deepest gratitude. My task would have
been a difficult and even a thankless one but for the
intelligent and devoted service rendered me by the
Director of the Mandates Section, to whom I wish to
express my warmest gratitude, confident as I am that I
am also expressing your sentiments.
While fully conscious of the heavy responsibility
which rests upon us, and of all the difficulties which
beset ns, I would, however, in conclusion affirm my
fullest confidence in the success of the work which we
are invited to pursue in common.
sb. Statement bv the Director of the Mandates
Section.
At the request of the Chairman, M. Katpard made
the following statement:
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
1 venture to submit, in as brief and concise a form
as possible, a statement of the work undertaken by the
Mandates Section during the year just concluded.
As you are aware, the duties of the Seetion over
which I have the honour to preside are of a twofold
nature: on the one hand, it has to aet as a Permanent
Secretariat for your Commission, whose ordinary meet-
ings are held yearly, that is to say on somewhat rare
occasions, but whose duties impose upon its members
constant vigilance'; while, on the other hand, the Sec-
tion forms an integral part cf the Secretariat of the
League of Nations, and N as such, must assume its share
of the common burden and act as an organization for
the preparation and carrying out of the work, for the
Council and the Assembly, with regard to all matters
dealing with the question of mandates.
The report which the Chairman of the Permanent
Mandates Commission has just laid before you, on the
work of the Commission since its last session, absolves
me from the duty of dwelling at length upon the work
performed by our Section as Permanent Secretariat of
your Commission. Our special duties in this respect
were confined to the following points.


1. We have endeavoured to place our services, as far
as appeared useful and desirable, at the disposal of the
Chairman of the Commission and of the Sub-Com-
mittee of Inquiry regarding the national status of in-
habitants of territories under B and C mandates.
2. We have, moreover, striven to keep the members
of the Commission fully informed of the general move-
ment of ideas regarding mandates, especially in man-
datory and mandated countries. We have sought to
discharge this duty by forwarding to members of the
Commission, during the year, ten monthly dossiers con-
taining a selection of newspaper and magazine articles,
extracts from parliamentary papers, reports of inter-
views with representatives of mandatory Powers, in-
habitants of mandated territories, and travellers, to-
gether with other documents and information of various
kinds.
I venture to take this opportunity to dispel any mis-
understanding which might ar.se from this phase of
our work. It is, of course, the case, but it may be
desirable to repeat the statement, that neither the Man-
dates Section, nor the Secretariat of the League of
"Nations as a whole, identifies itself in any way with
the various opinions which we may transmit to the
members of the Commission in the monthly dossiers.
At its last meeting, the Commission expressly in-
structed us to acquaint it with what was said and
written throughout the world on the subject of the insti-
tution for the supervision of which it has assumed re-
sponsibility on behalf of the League of Nations. In our
anxiety to convey to the Commission as faithfully as
possible the views held by the public (views which are
constantly before us through newspapers, magazine
articles, parliamentary debates, appeals, petitions and
manifestoes), but being also solicitous of sparing the
members of the Commission the task of reading
thousands of pages of printed matter, we are naturally
compelled to make a selection from the vast accumula-
• tion of documents which reach us daily. In under-
taking such a selection, we endeavour to be guided by
a single consideration —that of unswerving impar-
tiality. It does not fall within our province to judge of
the tendencies and opinions which we bring to the
notice of members of the Commission, but merely of
the apparent sincerity, the seriousness of purpose and
the competence of their authors. As we are not re-
sponsible for any direct inquiry, and as, moreover, we
have no means of investigation at our disposal for such
a purpose, we cannot in any way vouch for the accuracy
of the information contained in our monthly dossiers.
We resolutely refrain from taking sides in any way in
the clash of opinion which is revealed in our documents.
Nor can these documents ever serve as the sole basis
for any action or intervention by the Commission in
any sphere whatever.
If we have deemed it our duty to make this statement
here, it is certainly not for the sake of the members
of the Commission, with whom we know we are in full
agreement on this matter, but to allay the anxieties
which appear to have been aroused in certain circles,
and to forestall criticisms which m'ght arise.
3. In order to be in a position to discharge, in a
satisfactory manner, the task which falls upon us of
preparing the documents, we must naturally devote a
considerable portion of our time to reading or glancing
through works, pamphlets, reviews, newspapers, reports
of parliamentary debates and publications of all kinds
of very varied origin and nature. Moreover, we have to
receive an ever-increasing number of persons and dele-
gations, who v'sit the Secretariat and bring forward
information, entreaties, suggestions, or recriminations
regarding the mandates question, emanating from the
most, varied circles and countries.
F. 10729.—3
4. Finally, we have transmitted to the Permanent
Mandates Commission all communications from the
Council and the mandatory Powers, and we have
sought to establish the necessary close relations between
the members of the Commission themselves.
In this connexion, I venture to give a complete list
of the reports dealing with the administration of the
mandated territories which we have received during the
past year, with particulars of the date on which they
reached the Secretariat.
Report on the administration of the territories
under Japanese mandate. October, 1914
June, 1921. Received at the Secretariat
December 15 th, 1921.
Report on the administration of Samoa, May, 1920
—March, 1921. Received at the Secretariat
April 25th, 1022.
Report on the administration of Nauru, Sept., 1914
—December, 1920. Received at the Secre-
tariat April 27th, 1922.
Second report on the administration of territories
under Japanese mandate. Received at the
Secretar.at June 22nd, 1922.
• Report on the administration of New Guinea,
September, 1914 —dune, 1921. Received at
the Secretariat June 23rd, 1922.
Report on the administration of the French
Gamer oons for the year 1921. Received at the
Secretariat June 26th, 1922
Report on the administration of French Togoland
for the year 1921. Received at the Secretariat
July Ist, 1922.
Report on the administration of British Togoland
for the year 1920-21. Received at the Secre-
tariat July Ist, 1922.
Report on the administration of the British
Cameroons for the' year 1921. Received at
the Secretariat July 13th, 1922.
Second report on the administration of Nauru,
December, 1920 —December, 1921. Received
at the Secretariat July 17th, 1922.
Report on the administration of Syria and the
Lebanon for period up to July, 1922. Re-
ceived at the Secretariat July 24th, 1922.
Report on the administration of South-West
Africa. —Replies to Questionnaire. —Received
at the Secretariat July 27th, 1922.
Report on the administration of Ruanda-TJrundi.
Received at the Secretariat August Ist, 1922.
Report on the administration of Taganyika for
the year 1921. Received at the Secretariat
August Ist, 1922.
In our second capacity, as an organ of the Secre-
tariat, we have had to prepare and to give effect to the
Council’s decision on A and B mandates, the terms of
which have just been finally fixed in London. We have
had, moreover, to contribute to' the preparation of
various reports, and particularly in the preparation of
the Secretary-General’s report, to be submitted to the
Assembly on behalf of the Council on the work of the
League of Nations during the past year.
In this connection, it might perhaps be well for me
to make a short statement on the history and the
present situation of the various mandates.
As is well known, the C mandates were finally con-
firmed by the Council on December 17th, 1920. The
A and B mandates, meanwhile, the particulars of which
had been communicated to the Secretariat on the same
date, remained in abeyance until the last session of the
Council. Various circumstances, and particularly the
intervention of the United States, decided the Council
not to examine these drafts or to define their terms
until the international negotiations which had been
entered upon had reached a satisfactory conclusion.


This has now been achieved in respect of all man-
dates, save the manuaie which the Principal Allied
powers naa entrusted to His Britannic majesty in
rega.ru to the territory of Mesopotamia.
The B mandates, that is to say, the mandates refer-
ring to Togoiand, the Cameroons and the former
German East Airica, were continued by the Council on
July 20th, 1922. As early as February 1921, the
Council had considered a very complete report on this
subject submitted by Viscount Ishii, representative of
Japan. The Government of the United States then
expressed a desire to consider the draft mandates, and
to propose certain amendments to them. The Council
thereupon postponed its decision, and asked the Prin-
cipal Allied and Associated Powers to enter into nego-
tiations with a view to arriving at an agreement on the
subject of the amendments proposed by the United
States. These amendments were discussed in special
conversations, and in the forms in which they were
incorporated in the final draft mandates they were
recognised as in conformity with the spirit and the
letter of Article 22 of the Covenant.
The Council, at its last session, was therefore able to
approve of the draft mandates, but it entrusted a draft-
ing committee with the task of examining the text, for
the purpose of inserting the modifications proposed by
Viscount Ishii in February 1921, in so far as an agree-
ment could be reached in regard to these modifications.
The happy results of these negotiations and these
preliminary studies have been witnessed with the live-
liest satisfaction by all friends of the mandates system.
At the same meeting at which the terms of these man-
dates were settled, the Council, on the proposal of
Viscount Ishii, adopted the following resolution, the
importance of which will be obvious to every one, and
particularly to the Permanent Commission, which is
thereby entrusted with a special responsibility in the
delicate matter of the protection of the natives against
the ravages of alcoholism:
“ Whereas, under the terms of Article 22 of the
Covenant, the mandatory Power entrusted with the
administration of the mandated territories of
Central Africa must be responsible for the pro-
hibition of the abuse of the liquor traffic,
“ Whereas, on the other hand, under the terms
of B mandates, the mandatory Power will be
required to exercise severe control over the liquor
traffic,
. “ The Council of the League of Nations,
“ Conscious of the gravity of the danger for the
native populations of Central Africa arising from
the scourge of. alcoholism,
“ Recommends that the mandatory Powers
should do everything within their power in order
that their administration shall protect the popula-
tions from the dangers above mentioned, and
requests the Permanent Mandates Commission to
investigate most carefully the measures taken by
the mandatory Powers in this connection, and to
report to the Council on the application of the
provisions in the mandates regarding alcoholism.”
In regard to the mandates for Syria and Palestine,
their terms were also defined by the Council at its last
session, but these mandates will not finally be put into
force until the negotiations between the Governments of
France and Italy regarding Syria have reached a con-
clusion satisfactory to both parties, a conclusion which,
it seems, will shortly be' reached.
In regard to the mandate respecting Mesopotamia, it
is still undetermined, the Council having received no
final proposals from the British Government on this
subject.
The activities of the Mandates Section in all these
matters have clearly been both modest and anonymous.
If one considers, however, the divergent passions and
interests concerned in the promulgation of these
various mandates, particularly in regard to Syria and
Palestine, witn respect to winch tor instance we nave
received, no less tnan 613 memoranda, appeals, letters
ana telegrapn, it will be realised that, however obscure
the work of the Mandates Section may appear, it Has
nevertheless engrossed the attention of the two members
of which it is composed, and their two secretaries.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, I will not trespass
further on the precious and limited time of your dis-
cussions by prolonging my report, but allow me to
assure you that we are always at your entire disposal,
now or at any future date, to reply to any questions
which you may do us the honour of asking us, and to
supply you with supplementary information on tne
activities of our Section. I ask your permission, on
behalf of my colleagues and myself, to express our
sincere gratitude to the Chairman and members of the
Commission for the great confidence and perfect good-
will which they have been good enough to extend dur-
ing the last year to our Section, which has no' other
ambition than that of placing all its energies continu-
ally at the disposal of the Commission and of carrying
out faithfully the instruction which will be given
to it.
The goodwill of the members of the Commission and
the goodwill we have always encountered in our deal-
ings with the representatives of the mandatory Powers
are for us not only the most valuable encouragement,
but constitute the primary and necessary condition for
the success of our efforts.
The Chairman - , on behalf of the Commission, thanked
M. Rappard for his statement.
******
M. Beau urged that the question of land tenure
should be discussed by the Commission as arising out of
the relevant B mandate reports, and not as arising out
of any document which might have been presented to
the Commission from a private source.
The Commission agreed.
M. Rappard, with relerence to Mr. Ormsby-Gore's
proposal that Sir Joseph Cook should be present during
the discussion of the .Japanese C mandate, pointed out
that Sir Joseph Cook's request raised a question of prin-
ciple, which should be settled by the Commission itself.
The Chairman was of opinion that, in any case, the
consent of the Japanese representative was necessary.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore explained that Sir Joseph Cook
had no wish to discuss the Japanese reports unless the
Japanese Government had some question to raise in
connection with the Nauru and New Guinea mandates.
M. Beau thought that the Commission should take
this opportunity of settling the question of principle
involved—whether representatives of other mandatory
Powers should be present when reports on mandated
territories were being made to the Commission,
Mr. Ormsby-Gore suggested that the Commission
should forthwith deal with the Japanese report, and
should then, in the event of the Japanese Government
maintaining the reservation which it had made when
the Council had issued the Nauru and New Guinea
mandates, consider de novo the question whether Sir
Joseph Cook should be invited to attend.
The Chairman thought that the Commission’s point
of view could be expressed by the following formula:
The general principle that the representatives only
of the mandatory Powers concerned should be present
when their mandate is under discussion, is accepted by
the Commission. Nevertheless, the Commission reserves
its right, should occasion arise, to discuss the question
of the admission of extraneous representatives, on the
understanding that such representatives shall only be
admitted with the consent of the mandatory Power
concerned.
The Commission agreed with this point of view.
After discussion, the Commission agreed to discuss,
at its meeting the same afternoon, the report by the
Japanese Government on the islands granted to it under


a C mandate, provided that the Japanese accredited
representative was able to attend. In the event of this
being impossible, it was agreed that the Commission
should discuss in the first instance the subjects referred
SECOND MEETING, HELD ON TUESDAY,
Ist AUGUST, 1922, at 4 p.m.
* * * * * *
63. Second Annual Report on Japan’s Mandated
Territory.
The Chairman invited the views of the Commission
on the procedure to- be followed in discussing the report.
4 Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired whether M. Matsuda, the
accredited representative of the Japanese Government,
desired to add anything to his report as a general
preface to the discussion. He suggested that the report
itself should be taken subject by subject.
M. MatsudA said !;hat the questions relative to the
Japanese mandated islands were of a comparatively
simple character, and the Japanese Government, m
drawing up the report, had endeavoured to- answer as
directly as possible the enquiries contained in the
Questionnaire-. (Annex 3.) This had not been difficult.
There was, for example, no slavery in the islands and
no forced labour.
Slavery.
The Chairman enquired in what way domestic labour
was recruited and regulated in the islands. Were the
labourers who were attached to a family free to go else-
where, and could they be dismissed without notice?
Was such labour paid labour, or was it obligatory?
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that the Commission would
like to have rather more detailed information concerning
the social organization of the natives.
M. Matsuda said that domestic labour was free; that
the men were paid, and might- leave when desired.
This had also been the case under German adminis-
tration.
Labour.
The Chairman inquired whether the Japanese
administration intervened in the recruiting of labour.
M. Matsuda said that the Japanese Government did
not intervene.
Mme. Bugge-Wicksell, referring to Article 2 of the
Regulations concerning contracts with natives, pointed
out that, while it was the general rule that contracts
between the natives and Japanese employers were valid
only if sanctioned and registered by the civil adminis-
tration, there were two exceptions to this rule. Petty
transactions need not be sanctioned, or employment
contracts for a term of not more than one year. She
inquired whether the second of these exceptions might
not be abused by persons desiring to escape supervision
of their contracts. The contract might be made for
less than a year, and renewed repeatedly on its expiry.
M. Matsuda said that the sanction and registration
of contracts was necessary owing to the backward
civilization of the natives. There could not be entire
freedom. Petty transactions were excepted because
they were comparatively unimportant. Contracts
repeatedly renewed would be regarded by the adminis-
tration as longterm contracts.
M. Orts pointed out that there was a misunderstand-
ing with regard to the word “ intervene.” The autho-
rities intervened as regards the sanction and registra-
tion of contracts, but this was really a guarantee for
the protection of the natives.
Mme. Bugge-Wicksell did not object to the rule
but to the exception: she asked whether there was any
special reason for making the exception to which she
had drawn attention.
M. Beau pointed out that the Japanese representa-
tive had already explained that the Japanese authorities
would regard renewed contracts as contracts requiring
sanction and registration.
M. Matsuda said that, so far as he knew, there had
been no abuse of the exception in question.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that, in Appendix 2
of the Japanese report, particulars were given of strict
regulations for immigrant labourers. He asked whether
similar regulations existed for native labourers. He
suggested that the Commission might ask the Japanese
Government to give, in its next report, further infor-
mation concerning the relations of masters and servants
generally, more particularly in regard to contracts of
less than one year’s duration.
M. Orts thought that- the exception in the law in
regard to short-term contracts was reasonable. He
thought there was no need to inquire what action was
taken in the case of fraud or abuse. There was little
doubt that the law in question was much the same as
the generality of laws regulating the application and
execution of contracts.
M. Yanagioa, referring to the exception in regard to
contracts of less than a year’s duration, pointed out that
such a measure was very natural in Japan, where virtu-
ally all contracts were made for one year, and not les9
than one year, subject to change or renewal on their
expiry.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore represented that, in regard to in-
dentured labour recruited from outside, it was desirable
to have statistics for all the territories under C
mandate. It would be well to know, for example, how
many Chinese and how many Japanese indentured
labourers there were in the islands. He drew attention
to a statement in the report that the population of the
islands included 3,097 Japanese males, and only 574
females. Such figures raised the question whether
indentured Japanese labourers were being introduced
with or without their families.
Mr. Grimshaw (representative of the International
Labour Organization) draw attention to a statement in
the report that organized labour in the islands was not
such as to be covered by conventions or recommenda-
tions adopted by the- International Labour Conference.
He inquired how the Japanese Government had reached
this conclusion, and to what authority the conventions
in question had been referred.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore drew attention, in this connexion,
to a statement in the report that the mining revenue for
the year amounted to over a million yen. He inquired
as to the nature of this mine and the kind of labour
employed.
The Chairman said that the Commission would like
to know whether this mining revenue was from State
mines, and whether the miners were State employees.
He drew attention to the great increase in the revenue
of the mines during the last twelve months. He had
no criticism to make on the report of the Japanese
Government, but these were matters oil which he hoped
that the reports of the Mandatories would become more
precise and comprehensive as the system developed.
M. Matsuda explained that the mines in question
were phosphate mines, which had belonged to a German
company before the war. They had been taken over
by the Japanese Admiralty, and they had recently been
intrusted to a special office.
The Chairman pointed out that this amounted to
State control, and indicated the desirability of further
particulars being furnished.
M. Matsuda, replying to the question raised by the
representative of the International Labour Office, said
that all questions relating to labour went to the Japan-
ese Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce. A special
office had recently been instituted at Tokio, however, to
deal with questions relating to the mandated territory.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore suggested that to the third item of
the Questionnaire for C mandates concerning inden-


tured labour there should be added the following
inquiry: ‘ ‘ and for what purposes are indentured
labourers introduced, and on what terms ? ”
M. Matsuda said that indentured labourers were not
usually introduced into the island without their families.
The labourers employed in the phosphate mines were
almost all natives of the island, and there were also
a few labourers from neighbouring islands. There were
450 of these labourers at present, and they were intro-
duced for a limited time only.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore, pointing out that the number cf
indentured labourers in the islands had made it neces-
sary to make special regulations, emphasized the neces-
sity for statistics in the next report..
M. Matsuda said that the Japanese Government
would be perfectly willing to give all particulars as to
the number, nationality, and work of the indentured
labourers.
Arms Traffic.
The Chairman hoped that, in the next report, it
would be possible to give statistics with regard to the
arms traffic.
Trade and Manufacture of Alcohol and Drugs.
The Chairman again emphasized the necessity for
further statistics.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore drew attention to Article 7 of
Appendix 4 to the report, from which it appeared that
a native might receive a special licence for the drinking
of spirits. He inquired whether figures might not be
given as to the number of permits granted, and the
conditions of their issue.
Mme. Bugge-Wicksell drew attention to a passage
in the same appendix, from which it appeared that
'licences for the drinking of liquors were granted not
only for medical purposes but also for religious and
other ceremonies. If that exception meant that the
natives could get liquors practically for every family
festival, the general prohibition clause certainly lost a
good deal of its value, and she would be glad to have
some information about the application of the law.
M. Matsuda said that the law was very carefully
applied, and that it was the desire of the Japanese
authorities to suppress drunkenness.
Liberty of Conscience.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired whether, in order to make
the information under this head rather more specific,
it was not possible to give a list of the religious missions
at work in the islands.
M. Matsuda gave some particulars-in regard to the
American Protestant missions and the Catholic missions
working in the islands.
Economic Equality.
M. Van Rees referred to Appendix 5, Article 1:
Decree on the subject of native-owned land, &c., and
asked whether the provisions of this article applied to
contracts between natives for the sale of land.
M. Matsuda replied in the negative. The natives
were permitted to buy and sell among themselves. The
sole object of this article was to protect the natives.
M. Van Rees inquired whether the “ authorities ”
referred to in Article la of Appendix 5 were the
Japanese authorities or native authorities.
M. Matsuda replied that the Japanese authorities
were referred to.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired whether it was the cus-
tom in the islands for the land to be held communally
or individually.
M. Matsuda replied that both forms of tenure pre-
vailed. Originally the tenure had been entirely com-
munal, but the former German authorities had to a
large extent substituted individual for communal
tenure.
M. Van Rees inquired whether the Japanese Go-
vernment applied the principle that unoccupied land
might be regarded as State land.
M. Matsuda replied in the affirmative.
The Chairman inquired what was the legal title to
landed property in the islands. Had the Japanese
Government taiken over the German system in this
respect ?
M. Matsuda replied that the Japanese Government
had in principle retained the German system, which was
fundamentally the same as the Japanese system.
M. Van Rees inquired if details could be given as
to the second item under the heading “ Revenue,” in
the Budget for 1922. How much of this total was
derived from land?
M. Matsuda replied that he would give details on
this subject later. The revenue in question was chiefly
derived from the postal service, the sale of tobacco,
ground rents, &c.
M. Van Rees inquired whether there were any
German agricultural enterprises, the ownership and
control of which had passed to the Japanese Govern-
ment.
M. Matsuda replied in the negative.
M. Van Rees inquired whether the Japanese Go-
vernment recognised the right of property in land, or
simply tenure by custom.
M. Matsuda replied that, mutatis mutandis, the
Japanese land law was applied in the islands.
M. Beau pointed out that the existing legal position
must of necessity be extremely complicated. The posi-
tion would however, tend to stabilize itself in time.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore held that the question was pri-
marily connected with the question of the judicial
system obtaining in the islands. In what Court, e.g.,
could a native establish his customary right to occupy
or own land ? There was nothing in the report which
made this clear.
M. Matsuda drew attention to the Japanese Go-
vernment’s decree of 30th March, 1922, which estab-
lished a juridical system for the islands. This decree
set up Courts of first and second instance. The judges
in these Courts had to possess qualifications similar to
those required of judges in the Japanese Courts.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore presumed that, according to this
system, a native involved in a dispute concerning the
ownership of land had a power of choice whether he
would take his case to the Court of first instance, by
which was usually meant an administrative official, or
to the higher Court presided over by a jurist.
M. Matsuda replied in the affirmative.
M. Van Rees inquired whether the decree quoted by
M. Matsuda superseded the decree of 11th October,
1915.
M. Matsuda replied in the affirmative.
Education.
M. Ormsby-Gore noted that there were in the islands
seventeen State schools. Reference was also made to
mission schools. He inquired how many mission
schools there were in the islands, and whether religious
instruction, and if so, what religious instruction, was
given in State schools.
Mr. Matsuda replied that State schools were entirely
secular. There were three missionary schools in the
islands, in which religious instruction was given.
Public Health.
The Chairman stated that it would appear from the
report that none of the ordinary tropical diseases were
seriously prevalent in the islands.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired whether the Japanese
Government received any annual report from its Chief
Medical Officer, and hoped that, in future reports, a
list of the various diseases, and statistics in regard to
them, would be appended to the annual report.


M. Matsuda replied that no such report had been
received for the current year. He stated that there
were very few tropical diseases; public health in the
islands was, comparatively speaking, sound.
Moral, Social, and Material Welfare.
M. Van Rees drew attention to the reference to
“ Tribunals,” in Chapter XI of the report., page 21,
and inquired whether Article 10 of the superseded
decree of October 11th, 1915, was reproduced in the
new decree of March 30th, 1922. What was the reason
of the difference, in respect of the right, of appeal, made
between the European and the native ?
M. Matsuda said that he would give a written reply
pn this question.
Public Finances.
The Chairman wished to ask the following questions:
(1) In the budget for 1920, the heading “ Taxes ’
was given as 171,482 yen. In the budget for 1922.
the same heading figured as 61,495 yen. He would
like to ask the reason for this somewhat striking de-
crease. •
(2) In the budget for 1920, under “ Expenditure,”
office expenses were assessed at 67,732 yen. In the
budget for 1922, under “ Expenditure ” (South Seas
Bureau expenses), the same item figured as 2,316,027
yen. It would appear that this increase was accounted
for by a large increase in the number of Japanese
officials. He asked if M. Matsuda could furnish further
information on this point.
(3) In the budget for 1922, an item appeared, under
“ Expenditure,” of 1,235,500 yen, entitled “ Expenses
for encouraging shippings services, industry, &c.” He
would like further details concerning this entry. Was
it inter, ded for the encouragement of local shipping
enterprises, or did it largely consist of subsidies to
Japanese shipping firms encouraging them to trade with
the islands?
(4) What did M. Matsuda understand by the reserve
fund mentioned under “ Expenditure ” in the 1922
budget ?
(5) In the budget for 1920, the item under
“ Revenue ” entitled “ Mining Tax,” was assessed at
10,000 yen. In the budget for 1922, the same item
entitled “ Mining Revenue, ” was assessed at 1,064,000
yen. It would seem that there had been some great
development in the mining industry in the islands. He
would like further details on this point.
M. Matsuda asked leave to reply in writing to the
various points raised (see minute 110).
The Committee agreed to this procedure.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that, in the 1922
budget, the item under “ Revenue ” entitled “ Taxes ”
figured as 61,495 yen. It was stated in the report that
this figure was a product of a poll tax and a business
tax. Considering the total population of the islands,
the figure given in the budget was surely very small.
M. Matsuda pointed out that a large part of the
native population, e.g., children was not liable to the
tax. Further the authorities very seldom exacted the
maximum rate, which was 10 yen.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that no entry was
made in the 1922 budget under the heading “ Cus-
toms,” although in the report reference was made to
impart and export duties as sources of revenue.
M. Matsuda pointed out that this particular source
of revenue was inconsiderable. There was free trade
between Japan and the islands, and foreigners did not
find trade with the islands profitable.
M. Rappard thought that it would be interesting to
know whether the yield from import and expert duties
was included under the heading “ Taxes ” or under the
heading “ Miscellaneous Revenue.”
M. Matsuda stated that it was included under the
heading “ Revenue.”
M. Rappard considered that the second question
asked by the Chairman was answered by the fact that
the civil administration of the islands was of recent
growth, the mandatory territory having only lately been
taken over by the civil authorities from the Japanese
Admiralty.
The Chairman thanked M. Matsuda for the informa-
tion with which he had furnished the Commission.
The Japanese Government had furnished the Commis-
sion with two reports, and, in spite of the distance and
the unusual linguistic difficulties involved, the two
reports in question were received in the Secretariat in
very good time in comparison with other reports
received. Moreover, the second report was most care-
fully based upon the questionnaire, and thus gave proof
of great deference to the League of Nations and to the
Commission.
He thought, therefore, that he would express the
views of his colleagues in tendering to the Japanese
Government his hearty thanks and sincere congratula-
tions.
The Commission agreed with the Chairman's expres-
sion of opinion.
M. Matsuda thanked the Chairman and the Com-
mission for the expression of their gratitude and satis-
faction. It was the first time that his country had been
intrusted with a great mission of this nature. He re-
gretted that his replies had sometimes of necessity been
vague, and assured the Commission that, in spite of
the great difficulties involved, his Government would
do all that lay in its power to facilitate the work of the
Commission, and to insure the well-being and prosperity
of the territory committed to its care.
As regards the various questions, notably those of the
Chairman, addressed to him during the course of the
discussion, he stated that he would give a written reply
to them as soon as they were communicated to him by
means of the minutes of the Commission.
64. Memorandum by the British Government on the
SUBJECT OF THE PROCEDURE FOR TRANSMITTING TO
the League of Nations Petitions originating in
the Inhabitants of Mandated Territories.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore drew attention to a memorandum
by the British Government on this subject. The British
Government was anxious that the Commission should
discuss this memorandum at the earliest possible
moment and make recommendations on it to the
Council.
The Chairman pointed out that the memorandum in
question had not been officially referred to the Commis-
sion by the Council. The document in question was
destined for the Council, and he had decided, in con-
sultation with the Secretariat, that the Commission
could not officially take cognizance of it until it had
been submitted to the Council.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that, now that the
A and B mandates were' definitely issued, the Secre-
tariat would probably receive many petitions, com-
plaints, &c., as to the method of carrying out the
mandates. The British Government was very anxious
that a regular channel should be created for such
petitions and complaints, and wished the Commission
to advise the Council as to the definite procedure to be
adopted.
M. Rappard wished the Commission to be quite clear
that the memorandum in question was now. distributed
by the Secretariat solely because the British member
of the Commission had requested that it should be dis-
tributed. The Secretariat could not otherwise have
taken the responsibility for the distribution of a docu-
ment destined for the Council.
M. Beau observed that the Council had not asked
the Commission to examine this document. The Com-
mission was a Commission of technical expeits, and


could not pronounce upon political issues. If the Com-
mission were to take a decision upon this memorandum
it might embarrass the Council.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that the covering
letter enclosing the memorandum, addressed to him by
the British Cabinet Offices, contained the phrase: “ It
is possible that the Permanent Mandates Commission
may wish to discuss the British memorandum.” The
British Government wished the Commission to examine
the memorandum, because it wished the question
decided as soon as possible.
M. Beau maintained his opinion that only the
Council could properly discuss the memorandum. The
Commission could discuss the matter only at the express
request of the Council.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired whether it would be
possible for the Secretary-General to request the Com-
mission to examine the memorandum.
M. Rappard pointed out that, if the Secretary-
General took action of this nature, he would have to
take responsibility for it before the Council.
The situation was really quite simple. If the Council
had met in the previous week, it would probably have
referred the memorandum in question to the Commis-
sion. As it was, the Council would not meet again
until the end of the month, and if it then referred the
memorandum to the Commission, it was possible that
the Commission would not be able to consider it until
the summer of 1923.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore stated that, if there was the least,
doubt as to the propriety of the memorandum being
considered by the Commission, he would not take it
upon himself to assume the responsibility for requesting
the Commission to discuss it, but that he would tele-
graph to l Mr. Tufton before doing so.
THIRD MEETING HELD ON WEDNESDAY,
2nd AUGUST, 1922, AT 10 a.m.
***** *
66. Correspondence with the Prime Minister of
the Union of South Africa with regakd to South-
West Africa.
M, Rappard explained that he had circulated for the
information of the Commission a letter from General
Smuts (Annex 6*), addressed to him personally, in
order that the Commission, in its discussions on the
national status of the inhabitants of mandated terri-
tories, might be enabled to have before it all the
ncessary facts.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that the problem in
South-West Africa was vitally affected by the possi-
bility of Germany becoming a Member of the League of
Nations. In this event, there might be very great
difficulty in South-West Africa. The Germans were a
majority of the white population. They still regarded
themselves as German. If Germany joined the League,
they might take part in an agitation to return to
German rule.
General Smuts was, .undoubtedly, in a difficult posi-
tion. He gathered, from paragraphs 6,7, 8 and 9 of
the report of the Commission of Inquiry into the future
government of South-West Africa, that the policy to
be followed would be one to give the Germans the
choice of opting for South African nationality (with
the vote, and other privileges appertaining thereto), or
for German nationality without these privileges,
Personally he thought it doubtful whether the
Government of the Union, in naturalizing Germans
en bloc, would be within its rights as a mandatory
Power. The issue, however, was a practical one. The
question was, What other course remained open to the
Government ? It was clear that repatriation was not
proposed. He thought that any proposal made on this
* Pp. 68-70 below.
question by the Commission must be of a practical
nature, and must not be based on purely legal con-
siderations.
He regretted deeply the absence of a representative
of the Government of the Union, and thought that the
Commission, in its report to the Council, should make
it clear to what an extent its work had been pre-
judiced by such absence.
M. Beau thought it very difficult for the Commission
to deal with this particular question. The problem was
one which, with the possible exception of Samoa, did
not occur in any other mandated territory, since in
other territories all the white German inhabitants had
been repatriated. The Government of the Union had
adopted a contrary policy, which it considered expedient
in vieiv of the numbers of the German population. It
had relied on the assistance of the German population
m carrying on the administration of South-West Africa,
but it had been deceived as to the state of German
mentality, of the persistent hostility, of which it was
now aware.
The Chairman thought that the Commission could
only consider the question of national status from the
general point of view, and should not deal with* special
problems, such as the problem of South-West Africa.
He recalled the fact that, three years ago, General
Smuts had explained the absolute necessity of making
use of the German population of South-West Africa,
and that he was inclined to question the possibility of
making this population South African by legislation.
That, however, was a matter for General Smuts.
In any case, he thought that the Commission must
accept the white German population of South-West
Africa as German. As regards the native population,
they were clearly not German.
M. Beau was inclined to agree that the Commission
should only deal with the question of the native popu-
lation.
M. Orts did not agree. In his view the Commission
could not leave the Council in ignorance of the diffi-
culties which had arisen in South-West Africa as
regards the national status of the inhabitants of the
territory who were of German origin,
In this respect, the situation in South-West Africa
was altogether different from that which existed in the
former German colonies in the equatorial zone. In
the latter, there was no domiciled population of Euro-
peans, but only Germans who resided there temporarily,
the length of whose stay was as a rule limited by the
climate to two or three years. It was only natural that
the loss of these latter colonies should not affect the
national status of such temporary residents.
But Germany had pursued, in colonizing South-West
Africa, a policy of re-population. To a certain extent,
she had succeeded. Several thousand German settlers
had established themselves there, had brought up
families, and, despite events, remained there, with no
wish to return to Germany. Consequently, South-West
Africa was a territory with a mixed population, a
majority of blacks, and the rest white.
Germany had lost her sovereignty over South-West
Africa. The bond of allegiance between the local
population and the Reich had been broken. There was
general agreement that, in consequence, the native
inhabitants had ceased to be German subjects. By
what right, therefore, could the white “ inhabitants ”
claim to have preserved their German nationality ?
What justification was there for such a distinction
between the two constituent elements of the population
of this territory?
He could not call to mind any precedent for a popu-
lation removed by treaty from the sovereignty of a
State retaining the nationality of that State.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore questioned the contention that,
under international law, the transfer of territory in-
volved a change in the nationality of the inhabitants,
and gave his opinion that, in the absence of a special


article in the treaty dealing with the nationality of the
inhabitants of the ceded territory, the inhabitants
retained their previous nationality.
M. Orts said that the loss of sovereignty generally
involved a change of nationality for the population of
the ceded territory considered as a whole. The right
to opt for the former nationality was frequently
reserved, under certain conditions, in the treaty of
cession.
The Chairman wondered whether the Commission
would accept the view that C mandates were equivalent
to annexation.
M. Orts said that he had not had this idea in mind,
but had merely wished to point out that the population
of German origin in South-West Africa had lost its
German nationality when the territory ceased to be
under German sovereignty.
The Chairman saw a difficultv in distinguishing " in-
habitant ” Germans from Germans not “ inhabitant.”
The view of the British Government on the
nationality of the inhabitants of mandated territories
was perfectly clearly expressed in its memorandum an-
nexed to the report ot the Sub-Committee appointed by
the Commission to collect information upon the question
of the nationality of the inhabitants of B and C man-
dated areas. It was as follows:
(a) The mandate does not in itself affect the
nationality of the inhabitants of the terri-
tory mandated.
(b) The special conditions relating to administra-
tion as an integral part of the Mandatory’s
territory, where they occur, should not
affect the nationality of European inhabi-
tants of the mandated territory;
(c) The nationality of the native inhabitants also
of such territory remains unaffected by the
special conditions referred to above. In
this connection it may be pointed out that,
under Article 127 of the Treaty of Versailles,
such natives are entitled to diplomatic
protection bv the mandatory Power and
that, under the Foreign Office Consular In-
structions, natives of territories under
British mandates are already being treated
as British-protected persons. The treatment
of these natives as British-protected persons
do©3 not of course confer upon them British
nationality.
In the view of the British Government, therefore,
the question was settled. To take a parallel instance,
he did not think that the French Government would
question the right of Italian “ inhabitants ” in Tunis
to retain Italian nationality.
M. Orts held that the last case was not parallel.
The Italians in Tunis were not Tunis-born ( regnicoles ).
He further pointed out that the British GovernmenVs
memorandum referred to B mandates. Moreover, the
next paragraph, referring to naturalization, contained
the following words:
“ It should be pointed out, however, that these
territories differed, for instance', from the former
territory of South-West Africa, in the fact that
practically all ex-enemy subjects have been removed
from them.”
He wondered whether, in what the Chairman had
just quoted, the British Government had had South-
West Africa in view.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired by what right, if M.
Orts’ view was correct, the Governments of* the Union
of South Africa, Australia and New Zealand had been
given the power to expel Germans subsequent to the
ratification of the Treaty of Versailles, unless they
really were Germans.
Th© Chairman thought that the Treaty of Versailles
clearly made a distinction in Article 122:
“ The Government exercising authority over
such territories may make such provisions as it
thinks fit with reference to the repatriation from
them of German nationals and to the conditions
upon which German subjects of European origin
shall or shall not be allowed to reside, hold pro-
perty, trade, or exercise a profession in them.
M. Orts replied to Mr. Ormsby-Gore by pointing
out that it was open to the mandatory Power to ask
German subjects whether they wished to remain German
or to take another nationality, and in the former case
to expel them. In the case of South-West Africa the
Germans were undeniably part of the assets of the
colony. The Union Government desired to keep them,
and this was the cause of its existing difficulties.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that, according to Article 127
of the Treaty of Versailles, only the native inhabitants
of the former German overseas possessions were entitled
to the diplomatic protection of the Governments exer-
cising authority over those territories.
M. Rappard recalled the fact that Sir Cecil Hurst,
legal adviser to the British Foreign Office, had ex-
pressed the view that the transfer of territory from one
Power to another did not ipso far,to involve a change
in the nationality of the inhabitants.
M. Orts doubted whether any case could be found of
the retention of nationality under these conditions.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore observed that, in the Belgian
section of the Treaty of Versailles, Part 111., Section
1., Articles 34, 36 and 37, the question -of the
nationality of German inhabitants of Eupen and Mal-
medy was specifically dealt with.
M. Orts pointed out that Article 36 contained the
following words. As soon as the transfer of sovereignty
was definitive, “ German nationals habitually resident
in the territories will definitively acquire Belgian
nationality ipso facto, and will lose their German
nationality."
M. Rapparp observed that Sir Cecil Hurst had fur-
ther drawn a distinction between the loss of the old
nationality and the acquisition of the new. Germany
had transferred her colonies to the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers. Accordingly, even if it was
admitted that the nationality of the inhabitants of a
ceded territory automatically followed the fate of the
territory, the utmost that could happen was the loss of
German nationality, since there v/as no joint Allied
nationality which the former German inhabitants could
acquire.
M. Orts observed that the last point was in accord-
ance with his view.
The Chairman inquired whether the Commission
wished to note General Smuts'* letter, and to make
reference to it in its minutes. He pointed out that the
letter was a private letter, and yet was of considerable
importance to the question of national status which the
Commission was considering.
M. Van Rees thought that the Commission should
not onlv note General Smuts’ letter, but should also
express its opinion whether the white German popula-
tion of South-West Africa retained German nationality
or not.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that the Commission
could not express an opinion upon a legal question
which involved interpreting the Treaty of Versailles.
The Commission could make practical suggestions for
the solution of difficulties which might arise in the
working of mandates, but the utmost it could do on
the general question involved was to ask the Per-
manent Court of International Justice to give an
opinion on the question whether or no Section I. of
Part IV. (Articles 11.9 to 127) of the Treaty of Ver-
sailles, dealing with German colonies, involved the loss
of German nationality by the white German subjects in
such colonies.


M. Orts proposed that the Commission should draft
its reply on the following lines :
1. As to' Germans temporarily residing in the former
tropical colonies of Germany, the Commission should
state that they retained their German nationality.
2. As to the German population permanently
domiciled in such colonies, the Commission should state
that it was not competent to’decide its national status,
but should draw the attention of the Council to the
problem, and to its probable consequences.
3. The Commission would then proceed to give its
opinion on the status of the native population.
The Chairman,, referring to the intention expressed
in General Smuts’ letter of making the German inhabi-
tants of South-West Africa Union subjects by Act of
Parliament, with the option of remaining German, said
he was afraid that all the German inhabitants would
elect to remain German.
M. Orts thought that perhaps this would not be
quite the case. As a matter of fact, people hesitated
to reject, by means of a definitely expressed option, a
new nationality imposed upon them by law or by treaty.
In any case, this was not the business of the Commis-
sion. General Smuts would have to find a solution.
The Commission agreed to note General Smuts' letter.
67.—Draft Memorandum on the Question of the
National Status of the Inhabitants of B and C
Mandated Territories.
The Commission considered a draft memorandum* on
the above subject by the Chairman.
In the third sub-paragraph of paragraph A of Section
11, last line, it was agreed that the word “ nationals ”
should be altered to the words “ citizens and subjects.”
The Chairman asked the Commission whether it de-
sired to amend the whole report, and so present a single
report to the Council, or whether it would prefer to
forward his memorandum to the Council, and annex to
it the relevant minutes, in order that the observations
of the members of the Commission might be made
known to the Council.
M. Beau thought that it was the duty of the Com-
mission to simplify the Council’s task as far as possible.
The first method would, therefore, be preferable.
This was agreed.
M. Rappard read the three resolutions at the end
of the memorandum, and pointed out that I and II of
these resolutions referred to B and C mandates, whereas
resolution 111 referred to C mandates only.
The Chairman thought it possible to extend Resolu-
tion 111 to cover B mandates.
M. Orts also thought it desirable to do so.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore presumed that Resolution 111 re-
ferred only to European inhabitants of mandated terri-
tories. As regards native inhabitants, it was not
possible to depart from the terms of Article 127 of the
Treaty of Versailles. He recalled the fact that the
law officers of the Government of New Zealand had
expressed the opinion that the Government could not
grant the application made by certain Samoan natives
to acquire New Zealand nationality.
M. Beau drew a distinction between the full sove-
reignty exercised in non-mandatory colonies and the
limited sovereignty exercised in mandated territories.
The French Government considered that ex-German
subjects in the mandated territories under its control
could not become French subjects. They were to some
extent “ quasi-subjects,” and, to express this new and
somewhat nice distinction, the French Government had
chosen the expression “ administres francais.”
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that in the British Empire
persons were either considered to be British subjects or
* Pp. 65-66 below.
British-protected persons. No other categories were
recognised. Since 1914, Egyptians had been described
on their passports as “ Egyptian subject, British-
protected person.”
The Chairman enquired whether the Commission
would like to amend the three resolutions, or present
them as they stood to the Council, with the opinions of
the members of the Commission in regard to them
appended in the form of minutes.
The Commission took the three resolutions seriatim.
Resolution I.
It is desirable, out of respect for the principles
defined in Article 22 of the Covenant, that the
native inhabitants of the territories of mandates B
and C should receive a national status clearly dis-
tinguished from that of the nationals or subjects of
the mandatory Power.”
The above resolution was adopted.
Resolution 11.
The Commission then discussed how the status of the
native inhabitants should be described in the second
resolution.
Various suggestions were put forward, with a view
to combining in this definition a description of the in-
habitants “ administered ” under the French mandate
(“ administres ”) and of the inhabitants
protected ” under the British mandate.
After discussion, in which M. Orts, Mr. Ormsby-
Gore, M. Beau, and M. Yanagida took part, it was
agreed , on the proposal of the Chairman, to describe
the inhabitants in question as “ administered or pro-
tected persons under mandate ” of a mandatory Power
(“ administres ou proteges sous mandat ” de la
Puissance mandataire).
The second resolution was then adoj)ted in the follow-
ing form:
“ These inhabitants should be ‘ administered or
protected persons under mandate * of the manda-
tory Power.”
Resolution 111.
The Commission then discussed the question whether
the third resolution should describe the nationality of
the persons to whom it applied.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore suggested that the resolution
should apply to non-native inhabitants.
After discussion, in which the Chairman, M. Yana-
gida and M. Beau took part, it was agreed that a
formula, suggested by M Orts, should be adopted,
limiting the application of the resolution to “ persons
foreign to the territories in question, and settled there
on January 10th, 1920.”
The resolution was thereupon adopted in the follow-
in form :
“It i 3 for the Mandatory Powers to whom
the territories are entrusted under the C man-
date to regulate in conformity with their legis-
lation the acquisition, individually and of their
own free will, of the nationality of the Mandatory
by foreigners settled in these territories on or be-
fore January 10th, 1920 ( etrangers d ces territoires
et y etahlis le 10 janvier 1920).’’
M. Orts reserved the right, upon further considera-
tion, to express his opinion in a minority report.
It was agreed that the question which had arisen in
the course'of the discussion in regard to the German
inhabitants of South-West Africa should be again con-
sidered when the report on the mandate for South-West
Africa was before the Commission.


FOURTH MEETING OF THE SECOND SESSION,
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 2nd AUGUST, 1922,
AT 4 p.m.
69. —Further Consideration of Resolutions Adopted
at the Third Meeting (See. Minute 67).
1. M. Rappard proposed that, in Resolution 111.,
the words “ persons foreign to these territories and
settled there, &c., &c.,” should read “ foreigners settled
in these territories.”
This was agreed.
2. M. Rappard inquired whether it was the intention
of the Commission to confine the scope of Resolution
m. to C Mandates, or to extend it to cover both B
and C Mandates.
After discussion, it was agreed that Resolution 111
should refer to C Mandates only.
70. —Report on the Administration of the French
Cameroons.
Chapter V.—Land Tenure.
-M. van Rees wished to draw the attention of the
Commission to an important question which he thought
vitally concerned all B and C Mandated Territories.
The Decree of 11th August, 1920, dealing with the
organization of the domain and of the system of domain
lands in Togo and the Cameroons, mentioned public
and private domains of the State.
To what State did this refer ?
It certainly did not refer to the State of France.
France did not possess the sovereignty since Togo and
the Cameroons were not annexed to France.
These Territories did not form States in the sense
commonly recognised, and the question, therefore, arose
how the provisions should be interpreted of the Decree
above mentioned, or of any measures determining the
conditions of its application, so far as the question cf
the State domains was concerned.
It seemed to him that only one interpretation was
acceptable, namely, one which would interpret the word
“ State ” as applying to the Territories of Togo and
the Cameroons themselves. Clearly these Territories
were not States, but, according to Article 4 of the
Decree of 23rd March, 1921, the Territories of Togo
and the Cameroons enjoyed administrative and financial
autonomy, and had a Budget of their own. This was
sufficient proof that the Territories in question were
considered as “ personalities.” They were civil per-
sons, and if this appeared doubtful, it would be possible
to recognise them legally as such.
In order, however, to avoid all appearance of in-
fringing upon the principle of the mandatory ystem.
it seemed advisable to eliminate the word “ State ”
from the provisions concerning the land and domain
system and to lay down that the land descibed as
public and private domain belonged to Togo and the
Cameroons.
M. Beau said that the question of domain land
seemed to him to be governed by principles analogous
to those which he had set out at the morning’s meeting,
in connexion with national status. Just as the limited
sovereignty of the Mandatory State created a state of
limited “ subjection ” (quasi-subjection) for the in-
habitants of Mandated Territories, so it would appear
that the public domain of Mandated Territories had
become the “ quasi-property ” of the Mandatory State.
Further, it was difficult to see who could be the owner,
if not France, since there was no “ State of the
Cameroons.”
M. van Rees said that the Netherlands Government
no longer defined such land in its own colonies as
forming part of the “ private State domain.” The
“ State ” no longer existed in its legal provisions
defining domain lands in the Dutch East Indies. Was
it not possible for the French Government to take a
similar view 1 The land could not be regarded as
belonging to France.
M. Orts thought that “ public or private State pro-
perty ” was the legal term properly applied to property
which, by reason of its nature or its destination, could
not be appropriated to private uses, or over which no
right of private property in fact existed. It would be
a mistake to oppose the idea of the State to that of
the community. According to the modern idea, the
State was the community, and State property was all
goods the use, enjoyment or free disposal of which was
reserved by the community for itself. In his opinion,
the only point which mattered was whether the re-
venues from such property were received by the Ad-
ministration of the mandated area. If such revenues
were included in the Budget of the French Treasury,
that would clearly be contrary to the intention of the
Mandate.
M. Beau said that such revenues were included under
Revenue ” in the Cameroon and Togoland Budgets.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that the British Government
had been greatly perplexed by the problem, and a
law had been drafted for the Territory of Tanganyika,
in which an endeavour was made to solve it. In this
law, which would be proclaimed by the Governor of
the Territory in September, all land was declared simply
to be public land. The only exceptions admitted to
this rule would be land which had passed from the
ownership of the German State into the ownership
of the new Government, and land to which a definite
title could be shown on the part of private individuals.
The Chairman said that, in any case, the descrip-
tion contained in Chapter V. of the French Report on
the Cameroons (domaine prive de VEtat franrais)
seemed contrary to the Treaty of Versailles. He sug-
gested that the Commission should continue its discus-
sion of Chapter V. of the Report, reserving the right
to take up this question on the other Reports, and come
to a general conclusion on the question as a whole.
M. van Rees drew the attention of the Commission
to a second question of the utmost importance arising
in regard to the lands which it was agreed to call “ the
native reserves.”
The definition of these lands was as follows: “ Lands
situated around the village. The natives cultivate
these lands, gather from them what is necessary for
their livelihood, pasture their flocks on them, &c. But
they have only a customary right to them, not a right
of ownership.”
To whom did these lands belong, and who was the
owner ?
In the case of the Cameroons, the owner was no-
clearly indicated. The Decree of 15th September, 1921,
was silent on the subject, though it implied that it
was intended to consider these lands as forming part
of the private domain of the State.
In the case of Togo, the draft Decree drawn up by
a Special Commission, appointed in February, 1922,
clearly said, in the first Article of the first Chapter,
that the lands around villages, &c., formed part of
the private domain of the State.
Thus, according to legal theory, it was to be presumed
that these lands were put in the same position as lands
vacant and without an owner, in spite of the fact
that the law recognised a permanent right of usage
for the natives who cultivated the soil.
M. Orts observed that the system described in the
Report for French Cameroons and Togoland was prac-
tically identical with that of the draft Decree for
Tanganyika of which Mr. Ormsby-Gore had just in-
formed the Commission.
The Chairman insisted that such land could in no
circumstances be regarded as the private domain of
the Mandatory States.
M. Rappard said that it seemed clear from the Treaty
of Versailles that the rights of the mandatory powers


over immovable property had been ceded to them by
the German Government in their capacity of man-
datory powers only. The First Assembly of the League
of Nations further expressed the wish that the Man-
dated Territories should not be regarded as a source
of profit to the mandatory State. This seemed to
have been also the conception of the authors of the
Treaty of Versailles when they spoke of tutelage in
Article 22 of the Covenant. It seemed further proved
by the fact that no account was taken of the Mandated
Territories in estimating the amount of reparations
due to the Allied countries.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that the ultimate sove-
reignty over the Mandated Territories must either
belong to the principal Allied and Associated Powers or
to the League of Nations.
The Chairman proposed that the Commission should
continue its examination of the Report, reserving the
problem of the domains for further consideration when
the other Reports had been considered.
M, van Rees desired to have the following question
recorded in the minutes:
The Decree of 11th August, 1920, mentions
“ lands forming the property of the natives collec-
tively, or which the native chiefs hold as repre-
sentatives of native communities.”
These definitions raise certain questions.
1. Are these lands to be taken as forming part of the
private domain of the State? as this is not clearly
indicated.
2. What are the lands forming the property of the
natives collectively ? Are these the lands on which the
dwellings of the natives are erected ? since the lands
situated around their villages which they cultivate, &c.,
are comprised in another category.
3. What is the right of property recognised for these
lands? Is it some other right unwritten, but existing
nevertheless in the ideas and sentiments of the local
native population ?
4. Is the right mentioned in the decree already
quoted always and everywhere collectively exercised, so
that there are only lands which are owned collectively.
5. To whom does the land belong which the native
chiefs hold as representatives of native communities?
Is the community to be regarded as having the
quality of a civil person ?
6. The land in question cannot be handed over to
individuals except with the approval of the Commis-
sioner of the Republic. Is it understood that this
applies to European individuals as well as to native
individuals t
FIFTH MEETING HELD ON THURSDAY, 3rd
AUGUST, 1922, AT 11 a.m.
72. —Mandate for Togoeand and the Cameroons:
Question of the Domain Lands.
The Chairman asked M. Orts whether he would like
to make a statement to the Commission on this subject.
M. Orts said he would like to return for a moment
to what had been said at the previous meeting on the
subject of land tenure. M. Van Rees had expressed the
opinion that the use of the expression “ State pro-
perty'” in relation to the system of land tenure
applicable to a Mandated area, should be avoided. If,
however, reference were made to Articles 120 and 257
of the Treaty of Versailles, it would be seen that the
goods and property of the German Empire were to be
transferred to the Mandatory State. Where there had
been (German) State property, there was still State
property (French, British, <fcc.). The expression " State
property ” or even “ French State property ” was there-
fore in no sense misapplied. It was understood, but
need hardly be mentioned, that henceforward the State
owned its property in its capacity as Mandatory.
Everything that was done by the Mandatory Power was
done in that capacity, and the whole Mandate system
was governed by the Peace Treaty.
73.—Report on the Mandate for South-West
Africa.
M. Rappard explained that the Report of the
Administrator of South-West Africa had not yet
reached the Commission. It had been sent to London
and posted on 21st July. Meanwhile, the Commission
had at its disposal the replies to the Questionnaire for
C Mandates, which had been sent by the Government
of South Africa.
Mr. Qrmsby-Gore inquired whether there was any
information at the disposal of the Commission concern-
ing the recent outbreak of disorder in the Mandated
Territory, and the measures taken to deal with it.
M. Rappard said that the Government of South
Africa had prepared a Report, which was not yet
available. He understood that the disorder in question
had arisen among the native Hottentot tribes.
The Chairman proposed to take the replies section by
section.
Slavery.
Mr. Grimshaw (representative of the International
Labour Organization) represented that it was desirable
for the Commission to have a copy of the law relating
to masters and servants, referred to in the first para-
graph of this section.
Labour.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired whether the labour laws
in force in the diamond mines of South-West Africa
were of a similar character to those in force at
Kimberley. He also thought that the Commission
should see a copy of the Proclamation No l . 3 of 1907,
referred to in paragraph 3 of the section on Labour.
Mr. Grimshaw, referring to paragraph 1 of the
section on Labour, thought that the brief reply given
in the negative was hardly adequate. If this reply
were literally interpreted, it would mean that the
question had never been taken into consideration,
whether or no the conventions or recommendations of
international labour conferences should be applied. He
would like, in any case, to know what authority had
decided that the conventions were inapplicable.
Air . Ormsby-Gore thought that the responsibility
rested with the Government of the Union of South
Africa, which should have notified the International
Labour Office of the reasons why the conventions had
not been applied. He submitted that attention should
be drawn to this point in the Commission’s Report.
He further suggested that the Commission should be
informed whether withholding wages from native
employees was regarded as a criminal or a civil offence
on the part of masters who wilfully employed this form
of pressure.
Mme. Bugge-Wicksell considered that the informa-
tion in regard to labour conditions was not sufficiently
full or precise to enable the Commission to make any
useful comments.
The Chairman summed up the opinion of the Com-
mission, which was unanimous that the labour condi-
tions in the Mandated Territory were not sufficiently
fully described.
Arms Traffic.
No observations.
Liquor Traffic.
No observations.
Liberty of Conscience.
The Commission regretted that the Proclamation
referred to in paragraph 2 of this section was not
available for it.


Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought it desirable that a list of
the missionary bodies working in the Territory should
be furnished.
Military Clauses.
No observations.
Economic Equality.
M. Rappard, replying to a question put by M. Beau,
SR.id that for Customs purposes the Mandated Territory
was included in the system of the Union of South
Africa.
The Chairman drew attention to the use of the word
' f protectorate ” in the paragraph of this section dealing
with the immigration regulations.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore reminded the Commission that the
exclusion of Asiatic immigrants had been one of the
questions raised by Mr. Sastri at the last Assembly.
The Commission noted that the education of the
natives was intrusted to the missionaries, whereas the
white population was provided for directly by the State.
It was felt that further information on this subject was
desirable.
P fib lie Health.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore drew attention to a Report,
printed in 1920, concerning the very high percentage of
syphilis among the natives. This was a very serious
menace for the native population. He thought that
the Commission should know what steps were being
taken to deal with it. The disease had been introduced
into the Territory during the last thirty years, and more
information was needed on the subject.
Land Tenure.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore drew attention to the statement
that large areas were being set aside for native reserves.
He thought it desirable for the Commission to have
statistics in regard to these reserves.
Moral, Social, Material Welfare.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore suggested that, in the Report of
the Commission, emphasis should be laid on the passage
in this section describing generally the condition of the
natives, and the effect on their prosperity of contact
with a white population. South-West Africa presented
the most striking example of a destruction of the
organization of a native population by the invasion of
a white civilization.
Public Finances.
After some discussion of the various items in the
Budget appended to this section, the Commission agreed
that it was impossible to form any clear or concise idea
concerning the finances of the Mandated Territory. It
was noted that the Mandated Territory had a public
debt, and that extraordinary expenditure to the amount
of £lOB,OOO was recorded.
Demographic Statistics.
No observations.
General Report.
The Chairman suggested that a general statement on
the character of the replies to the Questionnaire should
be drafted for the approval of the Commission, and
that the Minutes of the above discussion should be
appended to> this statement, in order to indicate in what
respects further information was considered to be desir-
able. In the absence of a representative of the
Mandated Territory, and of the Report of the Adminis-
trator. it was difficult for the Commission to form any
definite opinion, or to make any useful comments on
the document before it. The only statistics given in
this document were the figures contained in the Budget,
and these figures were not even bookkeeping figures in
the true sense of the word.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that the Commission
might express its regret at the absence of a representa-
tive of the South African Government, particularly as,
without further information, and without the actual
text of the laws referred to in the document before the
Commission, it was hardly possible to make any useful
comments.
M. Orts thought that any remarks made by the
Commission in its Report to the Council should be brief
and objective in character. It would be desirable to
abstain from giving any general view, favorable or
unfavorable. Such criticisms as might be made as to
the insufficiency of information or on the administration
of the Mandatory would be formulated on each indivi-
dual point as it arose.
The Chairman agreed with this point of view,
pointing out that the minutes of the discussion would
furnish the Council with any further information which
it might desire.
SIXTH MEETING, HELD ON THURSDAY,
3rd AUGUST, 1922, AT 4 p.m.
Present: The Members of the Commission, except
M. Freiro d’Andrade. Sir Joseph Cook, High Commis-
sioner in London of the Commonwealth Government
of Australia, was also present.
74. —Report on the Administration of the
Territory of New Guinea.*
The Chairman, on behalf of the Commission, ex-
tended a welcome to Sir Joseph Cook, whose co-opera-
tion would, he felt sure, be of the utmost assistance to
the Commission in carrying out its task under Article
22 of the Covenant.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that he warmly appreciated
the Commission’s welcome. He was present in order
to give the Commission any information in his power.
He left the question of procedure entirely to the Com-
mission.
Mr. Ormsby-Gobe suggested that the best method of
procedure would be for the Commission to consider the
Questionnaire concerning C Mandates (Annex 3), and
to see how far the questions raised therein were dealt
with in the Report.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that he had only just seen
the Questionnaire on C Mandates.
M. Rappard explained the origin and the purpose
of the Questionnaires, which were intended to facilitate
the preparation by the Mandatory Powers of their
annual reports.
Sir Joseph Cook suggested that it might be prefer-
able to postpone the discussion until the following day,
when he would have had an opportunity of studying the
Questionnaire.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that, as most of the
material for replies was contained in the Report, it
would be perfectly possible to proceed with the dis-
cussion.
Sir Joseph Cook agreed.
The Chairman suggested that the C Mandates Ques-
tionnaire should be considered, chapter by chapter,
in its relation to the Report.
This was agreed.
I. Slavery.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that there was no slavery
or slave trade in the Territory. This portion of the
Questionnaire was therefore not relevant.
11. Labour.
(a) 1,2, and 3.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that, among the annexes to
the Report, were contained several Native Labour
♦Parliamentary Paper No. 3 of 1922.


Ordinances, including the Native Labour (Consolida-
tion) Ordinance 1920, which came into force on Ist
December, 1920. More material on the same subject
was contained in the Supplementary Report, which he
would make available later on. Further, paragraph 7
of the Report contained an outline of the legislation on
native affairs, including labour, questions.
Mr. Grimshaw (representative of the International
Labour Organization) stated, with particular reference
to Chapter II (a) 1 of the Questionnaire, that there
was no evidence that the Conventions or Recommen-
dations of the International Labour Conferences had
been taken into consideration by the Administration
of the Territory. He explained the working of the
International Labour Organization, and read Article
421 of the Treaty of Versailles:
“ The Members engage to apply conventions
which they have ratified in accordance with the
provisions of this Part of the present Treaty to
their Colonies, Protectorates, and Possessions which
are not fully self-governing;
“ (a) Except where, owing to the local condi-
tions, the convention is inapplicable, or
“ (b) Subject to such modifications as may be
necessary to adapt the convention to
local conditions.
“ And each of the Members shall notify to the
International Labour Office the action taken in
respect of each of its Colonies, Protectorates, and
Possessions which are not fully self-governing.”
He asked through what administrative machinery the
Commonwealth Government or the Administration of
New Guinea would take steps to consider such Conven-
tions and Recommendations.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that such Conventions would
be communicated to the Commonwealth Government in
Melbourne, and by it transmitted to the Administra-
tion of New 7 Guinea. It should be remembered, in this
connexion, that New Guinea was distant some 3,000
miles from Melbourne, and that therefore the Adminis-
trator must necessarily exercise a certain degree of
plenary power. He could not speak officially, but per-
sonally he had no doubt that the Conventions and
Recommendations in question had been forwarded to
the Administrator. It would probably be found that
many of these Conventions were embodied in the Ordi-
nances already promulgated, even although there was
no direct reference to them.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore asked if the Committee might
assume that Sir Joseph Cook would inform his Govern-
ment that this question had been raised by the repre-
sentative of the International Labour Office.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that he would advise his
Government to consider the Questionnaire and, in
future reports, to answer categorically questions of this
nature.
11. Labour (continued).
(b) 1,2, and 3.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that there was no compulsory
labour in the Territory.
(c) 1. Recruiting.
Sir Joseph Cook referred the Commission to sec-
tions 4 and 5 of the Native Labour ( Consolidation)
Ordinance 1920, on page 44 of the Report, and to the
Statements appearing on page 12. In all such matters,
the first consideration of the Commonwealth Govern-
ment was for the natives, even at the cost of perhaps
a smaller return than could be realized by unrestricted
private enterprise.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore quoted from page 6 of the Report
on the administration of Nauru:
“ During the year, a number of New Guinea
natives were also imported, under contract to the
British Phosphate Commission, for work in the
phosphate fields,”
and inquired under what arrangements such importa-
tions were organized.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that the Administration did
not generally allow recruiting in the Mandated area of
labour for another Territory, and that such questions, if
and when they arose, were the subject of reciprocal ar-
rangements between the Administrations concerned.
The regulations governing the exportation or importa-
tion of native labour were contained in the measure pre-
viously referred to, viz., the Native Labour (Consoli-
dation) Ordinance 1920 (Appendix C to the Report).
In point of fact, the only exception in the period
covered by the Report was that, in May and June,
1921, 41 labourers were recruited for service with the
British Phosphate Commission in the neighbouring
island of Nauru. In addition, 69 labourers were re-
cruited later in 1921, for the same purpose. Every care,
both for their health and their welfare, was taken by
the Commission and by the Administration.
(c) 3. Indentured- (Chinese or other) Labour.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore drew attention to the fact that in
1921 there were 1,885 Chinese in the Territory, and
asked whether or no these Chinese were indentured
labourers.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that they were in the Terri-
tory under the German occupation. The Common-
wealth laws prohibited indenturing or the importation
of Chinese labour in any shape or form.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore stated that it was clear, from the
figures for Asiatic population given in Appendix G
to the Report, that there was a gradual though small
increase in the number of Chinese in the Territory.
It would be interesting to know whether this increase
was a natural process, or whether Chinese were slipping
into the Territory.
Sir Joseph Cook thought that the explantaion was
that the Chinese in question had all the time been in
the Territory, but were only now appearing in the
statistics as the method of drawing up statistics was
improved. It should be remembered that a very vast
area had to be covered, and that the Administration
was in its infancy. As the organization expanded, it
was likely that such figures would show a slight increase.
(c) 4. Compulsory and Disciplinary Measures.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that this question was fully
answered in paragraph 7 of the Report.
Mme. Bugge-Wicksell observed that, according to
the Report, corporal punishment of natives was for-
bidden in the Territory. She quoted section 49 (5) of
the Native Labour ( Consolidation ) Ordinance 1920
regarding field punishment No. 1, and inquired whether
this punishment was applied only to natives in military
service.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that it was confined to
military discipline. Even in the case of natives under
military law, the approval of the Administrator to
this form of punishment had first to be obtained in
writing, except in cases where the obtaining of such
consent was not possible without undue delay. In such
cases, the punishment could not be inflicted without
the permission of a commissioned officer of the Aus-
tralian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force.
Further, a full report had to be sent to the Adminis-
trator by the first post.
(c) 5. Control of Labour Contracts.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that as a general rule no
contract could be made with a native without the cog-
nisance of the District Officer, who had the power to
cancel an unexpired contract of service if he considered
that the native was in any way being unfairly treated.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore added that a medical examination
was also required, both before and after the period of
service.
111. Arms Traffic.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that he had cabled to his
Government asking urgently for such statistics as were
available on this question.


It was, of course, difficult to secure reliable statistics,
both owing to the size of the Territory, and owing to
the fact that, in the last stages of the campaign which
terminated German sovereignty m the Territory, the
Germans had been driven inland before capitulation.
What could be done, however, was to see that no
more arms or ammunition came into the Territory, and
this the Administration was doing to the best of its
ability. Aims and ammunition could not be imported
into the Territory except under licence. Natives were
forbidden to have fire-arms or ammunition in their
possession. The Administrator, however, was em-
powered to supply any native with arms or ammuni-
tion, either if he considered that he could do so with
safety in the interests of good order and government,
or if the native was in urgent need of arms and ammu-
nition for the purpose of self-defence. The item “ Guns
and ExplosiveSj” figuring under “ Imports ” in Appen-
dix G to the Report, and amounting to £3,67b Is.,
referred almost exclusively to explosives used for civil
purposes.
• ' ;l : 1 ; !'• 'I ' ' :J • ' : |
IV. Trade and Manufacture of Alcohol and Drugs.
Sir Joseph Cook referred the Commission to para-
graph 15 (c) of the Report. There was total prohibi-
tion for the natives, except for medicinal purposes.
M. Rappard pointed out that the value of the im-
ports, in 1920-1921, of beers, wines, and spirits was
about £40,000.
Sir Joseph Cook reminded the Commission that these
figures referred to a period when there was still a
considerable military force in the Territory. The
figures for the following year would probably show a
decrease.
The Chairman stated that the Commission would be
very grateful if, in the next Report, full and detailed
information could be given as to the whole question
of the manufacture, import, &c., of wines, beer, and
spirits in the Territory.
Sir Joseph Cook fully appreciated the Commission’s
solicitude on this point, and although he could say
that, up to the present, no local manufacture of alco-
holic liquors was known to his Government, he would
nevertheless make a special feature of the question in
his Report to his Government. All imports into the
Territory since 1919 had come from Australia. But
information as to the country of origin or manufacture
had not yet been collected.
Opium and its derivatives were not allowed to be
supplied to the natives (see page 21 of the Report).
t
I
V. Liberty of Conscience.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that the fundamental prin-
ciple of the administration of the Territory was that
there was no interference with religious freedom.
A certain number of German missionaries had been
allowed, for the time being, to remain in the Territory.
The Chairman asked Sir Joseph Cook to be so good
as to request his Government to give, in future reports,
fuller details as to the method by which liberty of
conscience and religion was secured, under due restric-
tion for the maintenance of public order and morality.
Sir Joseph Cook said that he would do this.
VI. Military Clauses.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that there were no fortresses
or military or naval bases and no military or naval
forces of any description within the Territory. The
only armaments in the Territory during the military
occupation consisted of two 6-in. guns. Before the
establishment of civil government, these were dis-
mounted, as was pointed out on page 19 of the Report.
Information about the Native Police Force was given
in paragraph 17 of the Report.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore asked whether the native police
were armed with rifles.
Sir Joseph Cook thought that they were not generally
so armed.
The Chairman inquired of details concerning the
cost of the Native Police Force could be incorporated
in subsequent reports.
Sir Joseph Cook replied in the affirmative.
VII. Economic Equality.
1. Derogations to the Principle of Economic Equality.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that there were not any dero-
gations to the principle of economic equality between
the nationals of the several Powers. The Customs
Tariff in the Territory was the same whatever the coun-
try of origin of the goods, whether the Commonwealth
of Australia, another part of the British Empire, or
a foreign country.
M. (jets inquired whether the Tariff in force in the
Territory was the same as that in force in Australia.
Sir Joseph Cook replied in the negative. Trade
was considerably freer in the Territory than even in
Great Britain, the only imports taxed being tobacco,
spirits, and certain other luxury commodities. The
chief revenue of the Territory was derived, not from
import duties, but from an export duty on copra.
M. van Rees referred to the question of land tenure,
and asked if the Lands Ordinance, referred to in the
fourth paragraph of Chapter 11. of the Report, was
still in force. This Ordinance would appear to contain
a derogation to the principle of economic equality.
Sii Joseph Cook replied that the Lands Ordinance
1919 had been superseded by the Lands Ordinance
1922, the text of which he proposed to lay before the
Commission. This later Ordinance regulated (inter
alia) the sale and lease of Crown lands.
2. Immigration Laws.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that the immigration laws in
force in the Territory was the Immigration Act 1901-
1920, of the Commonwealth of Australia.
The Chairman asked if Sir Joseph Cook could fur-
nish the Commission with the text of this Act.
Sir Joseph Cook said that he would do this.
VIII. Education.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that an Ordinance promul-
in 1922, the text of which he would lay before
the Commission, contained an elaborate set of regula-
tions for the education of the natives, comprising a
system of education both elementary and technical.
the leport for next year there would be more
information on the subject. The aim of the scheme
was to give to the native all the education which he
could properly digest and apply. To provide for the
cost of the scheme, it was proposed to levy on all
taxable natives an education tax not exceeding Ten
shillings per head per annum. Employers of natives
would be contributors, the amount of their contri-
bution being determined by the number of natives
they employed. The revenue from this tax would be
handed over to a Native Education Trust Fund and
utilized solely for the education of the natives. This
education tax was one of the few taxes imposed on
the native population.
The Chairman asked Sir Joseph Cook to be good
enough to request his Government to furnish in next
year’s report full details concerning primary education,
and notably as to the language in which primary educa-
tion was carried on.
Sir Joseph Cook said that he would do this.
IX. Public Health.
1. Steps Taken to Provide for Public Health and
Sanitation and to Combat Diseases.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that paragraph 17 of the
Report gave a very full account of the work being
carried on in this connexion by the Department of the
Chief Medical Officer to the Administrator. At the


moment, one of the experts of the Rockefeller Founda-
tion, Dr. S. H. Lambert, was working out, in collabo-
ration with Col. Honman, the Chief Medical Officer,
a complete scheme of health organization for the Terri-
tory.
M. Beau thought that it would be extremely valu-
able, not only for the Commission, but for the other
Mandatory Powers, to have a full, account of the excel-
lent work being done in this connexion by the Austra-
lian authorities. Aliy information which could be
circulated among the Mandatory Powers would be
most acceptable.
Sir Joseph Cook said that he would make a note of
this point.
2. Provision for Medical Assistance.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that full details were given
in paragraph 17 of the Report.
M. Orts inquired whether the hospitals in the Terri-
tory were supported wholly by the State, or in part or
wholly by philanthropic or religious institutions.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that they were supported
wholly by the State. There were no hospitals in the
Territory other than State hospitals.
X. Land Tenure.
Sir Joseph Cook drew the attention of the Commis-.
sion to the relevant articles of the Laws Repeal and
Adopting Ordinance 1921 (Appendix F to the Report).
At the time of the issue of the Report, this Ordinance
was under revision so far as land tenure was concerned.
The revision was now complete, and was to be found
in a Land Ordinance of 1922, a text of which he would
lay before the Commission.
The new Ordinance repealed only such portions of
the Old Ordinance as were in conflict with it.
M. van Rees noted that, in the Land Ordinance
1922, all the right, title, estate, or other interest or
control of the formei German Government in lands in
the Territory were now vested in the Commonwealth
Government, and inquired whether there were any other
Crown lands in the Territory.
Sir Joseph Cook replied in the negative.
M. van Rees stated that, in that case, he did not
quite understand Article 6 of the Laws Repeal and
Adopting Ordinance.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that this was simply a classi-
fication of various kinds of Crown lands.
M. Orts asked for an explanation of paragraph 8
of Article 6 of the Laws Repeal and Adopting Ordi-
nance :
“ Native lands which have been ceded to the
Crown by the natives or have been purchased or
otherwise acquired from the natives on behalf of
the Crown, or have become vested in the Crown
by right of prerogative or in any other manner
whatsoever. . .
Sir Joseph Cook replied that this paragraph referred
only to the inherent right of a Government to acquire,
by one means or another, the possession of land, and
did not in any way affect the title or interest, vested,
possessory or contingent, of any native or tribe of
natives to lands within the Territory.
Since the date of the Report, the Forestry Ordinance
1922 has been enacted to regulate the management of
the forests.
He was advised by his Government that an Ordinance
for the Registration of Landed Property was in prepa-
ration.
Provisions which had for their object the proper
protection of native interests were to be found in several
different measures; for example, in Part 111. of the
Lands Ordinance 1922; in sections 8 and 9 of the Laws
Repeal and Adopting Ordinance 1921 ; in section 5 of
the Forestry Ordinance 1922; and in section 156 of
the Mining Ordinance 1922. These Ordinances would
be found in the supplementary appendix to the Report
which he proposed to put at the disposal of the Com-
mission.
XI. Moral Social , and Material Welfare.
Sir Joseph Cook stated that most of the information
under this head had been given under other heads of
the Report. The policy of the Commonwealth Govern-
ment was to preserve native customs, interests, and
rights wherever such customs, interests, and rights
could usefully be retained. Among the new Ordinances
there was an Ordinance for the special purpose of pro-
tecting native customs.
The natives were not sufficiently advanced to be able
to sit on tribunals; but there was a Native Police
Force, there were native overseers, and natives were
used in connexion with the health organization.
lie drew attention to the last sentence in paragraph 7
of the Report.
On the whole, taking account of all the circum-
stances of the occupation, the Commonwealth Govern-
ment considers that it can justly claim that the change
from German to Australian control has meant for the
natives of New Guinea a fuller protection of personal
liberty and of tribal and communal property, and a
keener solicitude and higher regard on the part of the
Government for the sanctity of human life. The natives
have also been brought into closer and more confident
relations with the Administration, and have been en-
couraged to continue such of their local customs as tend
to develop their social organization along lines of
advancement consistent with the highest principles of
the government of a subject race.”
XII. Public Finances.
The Chairman drew attention to the fact that, for
the financial year 1920-1921, the revenue of the
Territory was £193,197 and its expenditure £215,315,
whereas in 1914 the difference between the revenue and
the expenditure had necessitated a subsidy from the
Imperial German Government of £85,350. He inquired
whether this deficit was real, or whether the German
Administration spent more than the existing Adminis-
tration.
Sir Joseph Cook hoped that further details would be
given in the Report for next year. The expenditure
for the financial year 1921-22 was £237,650, which was
also the amount of the estimated revenue. This was
over £40,000 more than the Germans spent in 1914.
For the first half-year of the period, the expenditure
was £96,655 and the revenue £104,878. These ap-
parent divergencies were explained by the fact that the
price of copra was the dominating factor.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore suggested that it would be much
easier to judge the question if the Commission knew
how much of the expenditure of the German Govern-
ment referred to was ordinary expenditure and how
much was extraordinary, capital, or military expendi-
ture. It would be desirable to include details of this
nature in future Reports.
Sir Joseph Cook said that, in making a comparison
of expenditure, it was necessary also to make a com-
parison of the functions which determined expenditure.
Future Reports would certainly contain a detailed con-
spectus of the budgetary position.
XIII. Demographic Statistics.
No observations.
75. — National Status.
The Chairman wished, on behalf of the Commission,
to ask Sir Joseph Cook’s opinion on the question
referred to it by the Council of the League as to the
national status of the inhabitants of B and C Mandated
areas.


Sir Joseph Cook gave it as his personal opinion that
perhaps the principle of “ sell-determination ” by the
Mandatory could usefully be appiied. Conditions were
so different in the various areas that it would be prefer-
able to allow the authorities of each Mandated Territory
to settle the question for themselves.
The Chairman thanked Sir Joseph Cook for the great
assistance which he had rendered to. the Commission.
The Commission was happy to think that it had been
able to obtain so complete a view of conditions in the
Territory of New Guinea.
SEVENTH MEETING HELD ON FRIDAY, 4th
4 AUGUST, 1922, AT 3.30 P.M.
Present: The members of the Commission, except
M. Freire d’Andrade. Sir Joseph Cook, High Com-
missioner in London of the Commonwealth Government
of Australia, was also present.
78.—Memorandum by the British Government on the
SujBJECT OF THE PROCEDURE FOR TRANSMITTING TO
the League of Nations Petitions Originating
from the Inhabitants of Mandated Territories.
The Chairman stated, with reference to the previous
discussion on this subject (see Minute 64), that Lord
Balfour had written a letter to M. Quinones de Leon,
President of the Council of the League of Nations,
asking him to authorize the consideration of the British
Government’s memorandum by the Commission.
79.—Reports on the Administration of Nauru.
The Chairman pointed out that there were two
Reports on this subject:
1. A Report covering the military occupation until
17th December, 1920 ;( x )
2. A Report on the administration of Nauru, 17th
December, 1920, to 31st December, 1921.( 2 )
After discussion, it was agreed that the Commission
should first consider the Report for the period ending
31st December, 1921, in connexion with the C Mandates
Questionnaire, making such references to the former
Report as might seem desirable for purposes of com-
parison.
Administrator.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired whether the Adminis-
trators mentioned on page 1 were appointed by the
Australian Government.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that Mr. G. B. Smith-Rewse
was appointed by the British Phosphate Commission.
Mr. T. Griffiths was appointed on 10th June, 1921, by
the Commonwealth Government, to succeed Mr. Smith-
Rewse.
The Mandate for Nauru had been conferred on the
British Empire as a whole. The present Administrator
was an Australian civil servant, but, under an agree-
ment between the parties concerned, he would be
succeeded, on the expiration of his term of office, by an
Administrator appointed by New Zealand or by .the
British Government.
Finances of the Administration and Position of the
British Phosphate Commission.
The Chairman pointed out that in 1920 the excess of
revenue over expenditure had been nearly £6,000,
whereas in 1921 the excess of expenditure over revenue
was some £2,500. He wished to knew: (1) what was
the explanation of this difference; (2) how the deficit
was met; and (3) who benefited from an excess, if any,
of revenue over expenditure?
Sir Joseph Cook thought that the deficit for 1921
might be explained by the fact that it required some
(*) Parliamentary Paper No. sof 1922. (*) Parliamentary Paper No. 4of 1922.
time to get a new organization into working order.
Many dimctaties had been encountered in re-startmg
the mines, there Oad been an increase m the cost of
goods and materials, and administrative expenses had
also increased, e.y., the Administrator’s .Department
was a new expense. Moreover, as in New Guinea, there
had been a general depression of export prices since
the time the Mandate was taken over. This situation
was now righting itself.
Besides tne Administrator’s Department, there were
other items of new or non-recurring expenditure, e.y.,
extraordinary public works, and expenditure on tne
epidemic of pneumonic influenza.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought the answer probably was
that the deficit was covered out of the assets reierred
to at the bottom of page 1 of the Report.
Sir Joseph Cook agreed, but said that perhaps, more
accurately, it was covered by the credit balances brought
forward at the beginning of the year.
M. Gets inquired whether the British Phosphate
Commission had received the exclusive right of working
the phosphate mines.
Sir Joseph Cook replied in the affirmative. It
should, however, be iemembered that the Commission
was not a private and independent concern. The Com-
missioners were only the managers of the works, which
were owned by the Mandatory Powers, viz,: Great
Britain, New Zealand, and Australia.
M. Orts considered this to be a derogation from the
principle of economic equality.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that the Pacific
Phosphate Company had been nationalized, having been
bought out by the British, Australian, and New Zea-
land Governments.
The Chairman inquired what was the meaning of the
entry, under revenue, for 1921, entitled “ British
Phosphate Commission : £5,036 75.”
Sir Joseph Cook replied that this was a royalty paid
to the Administration by the Commission.
Replying to the other two questions previously put
by the Chairman, he stated that Article 2 of the iNauru
Island Agreement Act would make the position clear:
“All the expenses of the Administration
(including the remuneration of the Administrator
and of the Commissioners;, so far as they are not
met by other revenue, shall be defrayed out of the
proceeds of the sales of phosphates.”
He agreed that the financial position was not suffi-
ciently fully explained in the Report, and he would
endeavour to clear up the position before Monday, 7th
August.
M. Orts was anxious for a slightly more detailed
explanation of the position. The Territory was under
the Mandate of the British Empire. The British
Empire was apparently a shareholder in the British
Phosphate Commission, having combined with the
Governments of Australia and New Zealand to buy out
the Pacific Phosphate Company. At the present
moment, the Australian Government, and, in general,
one of the three Governments in turn nominated the
Administrator. It would be desirable that, in the next
Report, definite information should be given on the
method by which the Mandatory Government exercised
a control over the British Phosphate Commission.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that the British Empire was
not a shareholder in the British Phosphate Commission.
It was the sole owner of the works, which had been
purchased by the British, Australian, and New Zealand
Governments from the old company at a cost of
£3,500,000. There. was an Administrator, nominated
at present by the Australian Government, and subse-
quently to be nominated by one of the three Govern-
ments concerned. On the other hand, the British
Phosphate Commission was administered by three Com-
missioners, subject, as to duration of office, to the will


of the Mandatory. The relations between the Adminis-
trator and the Commissioners were as follows: The
Commissioners were not subject to the control of the
Administrator, except in so far as they were bound to
observe the terms of the Nauru Island Agreement Act
1920, and to comply with the various Ordinances pro-
mulgated by the Administrator for the government of
the island. The Administrator had all the powers of
Government—administrative, legislative, and judicial—
in the island, e.g., police, education, justice, &c.
On the other hand, the British Phosphate Commission
exercised control over deposits which were contem-
poraneous with the island itself. In this connexion, it
should be remembered that nothing in the island was
of much economic importance excepting the phosphate
deposits. The original “Jaluit Gesellschaft ” had
virtually administered the island as a concession, under
the nominal oversight of the Imperial German Govern-
ment. The rights transferred from the “ Jaluit
Gesellschaft” to the Pacific Phosphate Company were
purchased in 1919 by the Governments of Great
Britain, Australia, and New Zealand, and these
Governments had in their turn vested the control of
the works in the present British Phosphate Commission.
The duty of the three Phosphate Commissioners was,
therefore, to work the deposits and to administer the
liability incurred as a result of the purchase before-
mentioned.
The Chairman’s third question might be answered by
saying that the excess, if any, of revenue over expendi-
ture would be carried over by the Administration to
meet the obligations of succeeding years. As Article 2
of the Nauru Island Agreement Act showed, if the
revenues of the Administration were insufficient to
meet the expenditure, the deficit was defrayed out of
the proceeds of the sales of the phosphates. This latter
statement would also answer the Chairman’s second
question.
It should be clearly understood that there was an
annual Government Budget totally distinct from the
balance-sheet of the Commission. The figures given on
page 1 of the Report could not refer to the Commission,
since the Commission’s balance-sheet dealt with very
much larger sums. It was to him quite clear that the
assets mentioned were the credit balances of the Con-
solidated Revenue Fund at the end of the financial
year.
The Chairman pointed out that the above statement
was a description of the actual position, but could not
be taken as a justification of the system adopted.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that, if the position was not
in conformity with the Covenant, it became ipso facto
invalid by virtue of clause I (1) of the Nauru Island
Agreement Act of 4th August, 1920.
M. Orts pointed out that the Territory in question,
being under a C Mandate, might be administered as an
integral portion of the territory of the Mandatory
Power. He inquired whether a similar position existed
in other territories of the Mandatory.
Sir Joseph Cook replied in the negative.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that the fundamental question
at issue would more properly arise when the Commission
came to consider the subject of economic equality.
On the proposal of the Chairman, the Commission
took the Questionnaire for C Mandates as the basis of
further inquiry.
Labour.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that there was no
information in the Administrator’s Report on labour
conditions in Nauru.
In reply to Mr. Grimshaw (representative of the
International Labour Organization), Sir Joseph Cook
said that any questions as to the applicability of the
conventions of the Labour Conference would, no doubt,
be forwarded by the Government to the Administrator.
Mr. Grimshaw noted that there was no reference to
free labour in the Report, and asked whether labour in
the island was protected.
Sir Joseph Cook .said that there was no special
Ordinance for the protection of labour, but on page 7
of the Report it was pointed out that all labour in the
island was free and voluntary, and the whole of the
Ordinances could truthfully be said to be for the pro-
tection of labour on the island.
Mme. Blgge-Wicksell pointed out that in other
mandated territories there were special regulations
under which contracts must be sanctioned by the
authorities.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that, in such matters, the
Administrator had entire discretion. He was the
ultimate protector of labour on the island.
The Chairman inquired whether each Phosphate
Commissioner was held responsible to the Mandatory
Power or to the Government which had appointed him.
Sir Joseph Cook replied that he was responsible to
the Government which had appointed him. The Ad-
ministrator, on the other hand, was directly responsible
to the Australian Government, which in turn was
responsible to the League.
I\l. Rappard said tnac the League of Nations, in this
case, could only recognise the British Empire as the
true Mandatory in international law.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that in Paris the principal
allied and associated Powers had constituted the British
Empire as Mandatory for Nauru. The British Empire
Delegation as a whole had subsequently decided that
the Mandate for Nauru should be exercised by Great
Britain, New Zealand, and Australia, acting on its
behalf.
Reverting to labour conditions in Nauru, he urged
that it was desirable for the Commission to have next
year some details of conditions in the mines and the
regulations in force.
Sir Joseph Cook said that there was no need to wait
until next year. A request now would bring all the
information desired. The course of the discussion so
far had shown the necessity for closer contact between
the representative of the Mandatory Powers and the
members of the Mandates Commission. He would
recommend his Government to appoint its representa-
tive as early as possible in future, in order that he
might keep in touch "with the Commission.
The Chairman said that the Mandates Commission
was new to the duties which it had to fulfil, but that
no intention should be imputed to it of criticising the
way in which the Administrator had presented his
report.
M. Orts said that the Commission would like to have
particulars next year of the number of workers in the
phosphate mines, and of their nationality. He inquired
whether the workers were free to come to the island,
and to leave it when they desired.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore drew attention to the fact that
there was, printed as an appendix to the report, an
Ordinance regulating the movements of natives.
M. Van Rees drew attention to certain restrictions
on the movements of natives imposed by Article 3 of
this Ordinance, and wished to know what was their
object.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore drew attention to the fact that
the Chinese were apparently required to live in com-
pounds.
Sir Joseph Cook said that the Ordinance was no
doubt necessary for the maintenance of good order on
the island.
The Chairman noted that, in applying this Ordi-
nance, the Administrator enjoyed absolute discretion.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore desired to know whether the con-
ditions of labour in the island were equally subject to
the discretion of the Phosphate Commission.
Sir Joseph Cook said that the Administrator could,
if he desired, report to his Government on the con-


ditions of labour in the administration of the Phos-
phate Commission, and that it was his duty to watch
over the interests of the natives in a general way in
this as in other respects.
M. Van Rees inquired what was the restricted form
of self-government mentioned in the report (page 6)
as enjoyed by the natives.
Sir Joseph Cook said that this self-government re-
ferred to the relations between the tribes and the chiefs,
who were allowed to make arrangements generally for
the welfare of the villages and communes.
Land Tenure.
M. Rees put the following question:
“ According to page 4 of the report, the natives
are regarded *as proprietors of the soil.
“ Nevertheless, the British Phosphate Commis-
sion holds a monopoly for the exploitation of all
land containing phosphate deposits, since Ordi-
nance No. 12, appended to the report, provides
that only the Commission can be granted a lease
of these lands, on condition that it pays a fixed
legal rent. The trees and shrubs on the land in
question become the property of the lessee.
“ Subject to the consent of the Administrator,
other land not containing phosphates can be let;
but in this case, also, the Government has fixed,
not a minimum rent, but the rent itself.
“ It is clearly in the interests of the natives that
they should be forbidden to sell their lands to no
matter whom, and that they should only be allowed
liberty to let them; but the stipulations above de-
scribed tend to show that it is not the native owner
who i 3 really considered as proprietor, but the
Government. Is this actually the principle
adopted ? If so, all the land should be declared
private State domain, a declaration which, how-
ever, would not be admissible.
" But in what other way can the above restric -
tions be explained ?”
Sir Joseph Cook said that, in any case, the land
remained the property of the natives. If the land con-
tained phosphates, and it was deemed necessary to ex-
ploit them, the owner was paid £2O per acre for the
lease of the land, and 3d. per ton royalty on the phos-
phates extracted. Under German rule, the natives
received only per ton. The lessee received the right
to cut down trees, and otherwise to clear the land in
order to mine the phosphates. The annual rental of
lands not containing phosphates was naturally less. In
this case there was no necessity to remove the trees and
edible fruits, and the lessor retained the right to enter
on the land and to gather the fruits.
The Chairman thanked Sir Joseph Cook for the in-
formation which he had given to the Commission, and
proposed that the discussion should not, for the moment,
be continued. He hoped that next year the Commis-
sion might have more complete and detailed informa-
tion at its disposal.
Sir Joseph Cook then withdrew.
80.— Commission’s Report on the Administration of
Territories under Japanese Mandate.
M. Rappard read a draft of the Commission’s
observations on the reports of the Administration of
the territories under a Japanese mandate, discussed at
previous meetings. He pointed out that the observa-
tions were as brief and as objective as possible. Their
aim was to elicit further information in regard to-the
mandated territories, which the Commission desired to
have at its disposal. He hoped that the Commission
would look closely to the form of these observations,
as they would naturally serve as a model for the ob-
servations to be drafted on the other reports.
F. 10729.—4
Mr. Ormsby-Gore proposed the following text in sub-
stitution of Observation 3:— '
“ The Commission notes in the reports that the
population of the islands contains over 3,000 non-
natives, of whom only one-sixth are of the feminine
sex. It further notes that, while the recniitment
of labour from outside is regulated by the Adminis-
tration in the case of groups exceeding ten in
number, no such supervision is imposed for groups
of less than ten. It would be glad of further in-
formation regarding the conditions of recruitment
and employment of all imported labour, together
with statistics in this regard.”
With this substitution, and subject to a number of
textual emendations, for the purpose of making the
observations more explicit, the draft submitted by M.
Uappard was adopted by the Commission.
EIGHTH MEETING, HELD ON SATURDAY, sth
AUGUST, 1922, AT 10.30 a.m.
Present: The Members of the Commission, except
M. Freire d’Andrade. Sir James Allen, High Com-
missioner in London of the Dominion of New Zealand,
was also present.
82.— Report of the Government of New Zealand on
Western Samoa.
On the proposal of the Chairman, it was agreed that
the “ C ” mandates Questionnaire should be followed in
the inquiries addressed to Sir James Allen, the High
Commissioner in London for New Zealand.
Slavery..
Sir James Allen stated that there was no slavery in
Samoa, and that slavery had never existed.
Labour.
Mr. Grimshaw (representative of the International
Labour Organization) inquired whether the New Zea-
land Government had considered the application of the
Washington Conventions in the island of Samoa, and
asked what authority had been consulted in the matter.
Sir James Allen replied that he did not know
whether the Conventions had been approved by the
New Zealand Government, or whether they had been
sent to Samoa.
On the proposal of the Chairman, a French transla*
tion of the section of the report of the New Zealand
Government dealing with labour conditions in the island
was read to the Commission.
Sir James Allen, in reply to a question by M. Van
Rees, said that there was no forced labour in the island.
He produced a copy of the contracts which were made
for the regulation of Chinese indentured labour im-
ported into Samoa. The first of these contracts had
been signed at Hong Kong, on behalf of the Adminis-
trator of Samoa, by a special officer sent there for the
purpose, and by a representative of the Chinese Go-
vernment.
The second contract was signed by the labourer him-
self on his arrival in Samoa. These contracts contained
the only special regulations for the control of the
labourers. The general purport of the contracts was
that the labourer must satisfactorily do the work for
which he was required, subject to regular wages and
regular conditions laid down in his interest. The
labourers were entitled to holidays, and at such times
were not under any restrictions. No labourer could be
re-indentured without his consent.
The labourers might bring their wives to Samoa at
the expense of the Administration. No labourer had,
however, t%ken advantage of this provision. There
were two reasons for this. First, the agent at Hong
Kong could not guarantee that the women who desired
to accompany the Chinese were in reality their wives,
and in the second place, the women insisted that they
should be allowed to work under the same conditions


and for the same wage as the men. There had been
some trouble under the German occupation, arising out
of the association of the Chinese with the native women.
There would, however, be very little trouble in future.
The Chinese labourers were only indentured for three
years, and they were not able in that time to learn the
languages, or to associate at all intimately with the
natives.
The administration of the contracts for the regulation
of Chinese labour was under the control of the Adminis-
trator appointed by the New Zealand Government. The
Chinese labourers were, however, protected by a special
Chinese Commissioner and by the Chinese Consul.
They also had recourse to the ordinary law in the event
of any breach of contract on the part of their employer.
The only disciplinary measures in force were a reduc-
tion of wages for neglect of work, and a small fine
which was imposed under the law. The agreements
contained specific clauses prohibiting any form of cor-
poral punishment.
Experience had shown that special disciplinary mea-
sures for inducing a native population to work were
impracticable. An endeavour had been made in the
Cook Islands to induce the natives, in their own in-
terests, to work on the roads, but it had been found
quite impossible to carry out the programme. In
Samoa, the authorities were unable to persuade the
natives to do the work necessary to maintain the island
in its present state of cultivation.
M. Orts inquired how the labour was regulated
which was required for the exploitation of the Crown
lands.
Sir James Allen replied that the Crown lands were
under the control of a manager, who was responsible to
the Administrator.
The Chairman asked whether the Administrator
might not find a difficulty in reconciling his position
as protector of the labourers with his position as an
official of the New Zealand Government, who were
naturally anxious to make the Crown lands as produc-
tive as possible.
Sir James Allen said that' the sole concern of the
Administrator was to insure that a reasonable day’s
work was done in return for a fair wage. In any event,
the labourer had an immediate remedy against possible
injustice, by the terms of his contract and under the
ordinary law.
A mis Traffic.
Sir James Allen said that the traffic in arms was
absolutely prohibited. The import of arms was for-
bidden, and Europeans carrying arms were obliged to
have a licence. They might not dispose of their arms,
and might be called apon to produce them at any
moment before a justice. The penalty for possessing a
weapon without a licence was £25.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore asked whether it would be possible
to have figures showing the import of arms and ammu-
nition, and the number of licences granted.
Sir James Allen; referring to Customs statistics,
pointed out that the amounts in question were incon-
siderable. The highest figure shown was £362, which
represented the value of arms and explosives imported
from the United States. The figures for Australia and
New Zealand were £l7 and £lO respectively
(Annex 7).*
Alcohol and Drugs.
Sir James Allen said that there was absolute pro-
hibition of the liquor traffic in Samoa for Europeans
and natives alike. In Samoa, as in the Cook Islands,
there was no discrimination as between thfe white and
the native population. Experience in the Cook Islands
had shown that any such discrimination was regarded
as a grievence by the native population, and that the
"P. 70 below.
only way to abolish the abuse of liquor among the
natives was to make the prohibition absolute for all
races.
The Chain man enquired whether there had also been
prohibition under the German occupation, and it not,
for what reason the New Zealand Government had felt
obliged to introduce it.
Sir James Alien replied that the New Zealand
Government had felt bound by the terms of the mandate
to abolish the liquor trade among the native population,
and had for this reason made the prohibition absolute
without any exception.
Count de Ballobar asked what was the penalty for
illicit trading in alcoholic drinks.
Sir James Allen replied that the penalty for illicit
trading in alcohol was £25 for the .first offence, £SO
for the second, and imprisonment for the third.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that, according to the
report of the New Zealand Government, an offender
had been fined £IOO on being discovered in possession
of illicit stills.
The Chairman said that this afforded a proof that
the New Zealand Government was in earnest in apply-
ing the law.
Liberty of Conscience.
Sir James Allen, replying to Mr. Ormsby-Gore, said
that the Administrator would be glad to furnish any
particulars which might be useful in regard to the
number, denomination, and nationality of the mis-
sionaries who worked on the islands.
Military Clauses.
Sir James Allen said that there were no military
forces or fortifications on the island. There were no
military police, and native police were now in training
for civil purposes.
Economic Equality.
The Chairman drew attention to the fact that the
Customs statistics of the island indicated that a prefer-
ence was extended to British goods over foreign goons.
The ad valorem duty was 15 per cent, for British
goods, and 22 per cent for foreign goods.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that, in his view, the
Customs laws and regulations, including preference, of
the' mandatory Power were legitimately applicable in
all territories under the C mandate. The question of
discrimination did not arise, unless the preference in
force for the mandated territory exceeded the prefer-
ence in force for the mandatory Power’s own territory.
This was implied by the wording of the Covenant,
which provided that the territory under the C mandate
should be administered as an integral part of the terri-
tory of the Mandatory.
Sir James Allen, in support of this interpretation,
said that it was clear to him that the wording of the
C mandates had been deliberately made to differ from
the wording of the B mandates in order that such
preferences might be valid for- the C mandated terri-
tories. The Prime Minister of New Zealand had
informed him that this question had been carefully
considered and discussed when Article 22 of the
Covenant was drafted by the Peace Conference, and
that President Wilson had explicitly stated at the time
that the interpretation of Mr. Ormsby-Gore was correct.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired whether there were any
special Ordinances affecting immigration into Samoa,
Sir James Allen replied that the regulations in force
were practically the same as for New Zealand.
Education.
Sir James Allen said that there had been further
developments since the report of the New Zealand Go-
vernment had been drafted. The Government had


done its utmost to improve the education of the natives.
There were financial difficulties, as the island itself was
unable to support the charge of these improvements.
The New Zealand Government had already been obliged
to lend Samoa £IOO,OOO for public works, and another
£16,000 would be required in the present year.
Mine. Bugge-Wicksell asked whether, in the next
report, more detailed information could be given re-
garding the missionary schools. She noticed a state-
ment in the report that practically all natives could
read or write in the vernacular.
Sir James Allen said that the work of the mis-
sionary schools was highly valuable, but that they were
to continue their work without assistance.
Schools of the first standard were still exclusively man-
aged by the missionaries, subject: to Government inspec-
tion. Schools of the second standard were managed by
native teachers trained by the missionaries, with the
assistance of the Government. There was a third and
higher class of schools which were exclusively managed
by the Government, and in which the teachers were
English.
NINTH MEETING HELD ON SATURDAY,
stii AUGUST, 1922, AT 3.30. p.m
Present: the Members of the Commission, except M.
Freire d’Andrade. Sir James Allen, High Commis-
sioner in London of the Dominion of New Zealand, was
also present.
' 83. — Report on the Administration of Western
Samoa (con tinued) .
Public Health.
The Chairman noted that the subject of prostitution
was mentioned in an annex to. the report of the New
Zealand Government. He inquired what measures
had been taken to deal with the question.
Sir James Allen said there was little or no prostitu-
tion on the island, and that the Administrator had not
found it necessary to use the powers which had been
conferred upon him.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore noted that there was an allusion
in the report to a dwelling of approved tropical type.
Was it to be understood from this allusion that malaria
was prevalent in the island ?
Sir James Allen said that there was little malaria
in Samoa, but mosquito bites were frequent. The hous-
ing accommodation had been inadequate before New
Zealand had entered upon her administration. The
Samoans, under native conditions, were sufficiently well
housed, but when they formed European habits they
tended to suffer from inadequate accommodation. The
Chinese on the island were not at present as well
housed as they should be. They had been provided
with mosquito nets, and plans for better houses were
under consideration.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore inquired whether measures were
being taken to combat tropical diseases.
Sir James Allen said that the .New Zealand Govern-
ment was extremely anxious to undertake an effective
campaign, and was securing the services of a specialist
from the Tropical Research Society. Meanwhile, pre-
ventive measures were being taken, and it was hoped
that, when funds permitted, a regular campaign might
be started. Further particulars on the subject could
be given next year.
Land Tenure.
Sir James Allen, in reply to the Chairman, said that
the Crown lands in Samoa had been taken over from
the German State, which had possessed the freehold.
The Crown lands also included small freehold estates
inherited from German private owners. The natives
were protected in the tenure of their land, which they
were not permitted to alienate. The New Zealand
Government was anxious, if possible, to dispose of the
smaller Crown estates, because they were difficult to
manage.
M. Beau inquired as to the land which was vacant
and without an owner.
Sir James Allen explained that there was no such
land in Samoa. All land not privately owned was com-
munal, and could not be alienated by the' natives
except with the consent of the Crown.
The Chairman asked whether the Government of New
Zealand or the Administration of Samoa was the owner
of the Crown lands, and inquired as to the disposal of
any revenue accruing from them.
Sir James Allen said that, in the last report, the
ownership of the Crown lands was vested in the King.
Tha profits accruing from the Crown lands were in-
vested in New Zealand, and put to the credit of the
Samoan Crown estates. These profits did not appear in
the budget for Samoa, but went into a separate account,
of which particulars could in future be given, if desired.
The Crown lands were managed as a business concern
by the Office of the Crown Estates. Any profits accru-
ing would be used for public works in Samoa, but
hitherto the revenue had been entirely absorbed by
expenses incurred in the management of the estates.
Moral, Social and Material Welfare.
The Chairman, alluding to a passage in the report',
from which it appeared that the natives enjoyed a
measure of self-government, inquired whether the
Legislative Council mentioned in the report was nomi-
nated by the Governor, or whether it was elected.
Sir James Allen said that full particulars of this
Council were given in the Government of Western
Samoa Act, 1921. The Council consisted of not less
than four official members, and of unofficial members
not more in number than the official members, ap-
pointed by the Governor-General to hold office during
his pleasure. Natural-born British subjects, or
Samoans, or persons born in Samoa were qualified for
appointment. The assent of the Administrator was
necessary for the approval of any ordinance recom-
mended by the Council, and the Governor-General of
New Zealand might disallow any ordinance within one
} r ear after the assent of the Administrator.
Public Finances.
Sir James Allen explained that the deficit in the
finances was due to a lack of labour on the island.
The position had been partially remedied by the im-
portation of Chinese labour, but pre-war conditions
were not' yet restored.
He explained that the note issue of £45,000, men-
tioned in the budget, was entirely covered by the New
Zealand Government.
The Chairman noted with satisfaction that the New
Zealand Government had expended large sums on
public works and improvements on the island, and that
the natives were investing with confidence in the post-
office savings bank.
1) e m ograph ic Statistics.
No observations.
Public Plenary Session.
The Chairman stated that, to meet Sir James Allen’s
convenience, the public plenary session of the Commis-
sion, in conjunction with the High Commissioners con-
cerned, had been fixed for Monday, 7th August. He
suggested that, in order to give the Secretariat all pos-
sible time for the preparation of the necessary docu-
ments, the meeting should be fixed for 5 p.m. on the
date mentioned.
Sir James Allen agreed.
The Chairman conveyed to Sir Janies Allen the
thanks of the Commission for the assistance which he


had rendered in the elucidation of the report under
discussion.
Sir James Allen thanked the Commission for its ex-
pressions of gratitude. The Government of New
Zealand was ready at all times to furnish the Com-
mission with all the information which it was in its
power to give.
Sir James Allen then withdrew from the Com-
mission.
of the Commission on Reports
on the Administration of Nauru.
A draft memorandum on this subject was read to the
Commission and discussed in detail.
Preamble.
The Preamble was adopted, subject to certain verbal
modifications.
General Observations.
First 'paragraph. No observations.
Adopted.
Second, third and fourth paragraphs.
M. Orts stated that the paragraphs in question
raised a preliminary point. The mandate for Nauru
had been conferred upon “ His Britannic Majesty.”
The authorization of the League of Nations was neces-
sary to modify the terms of a mandate. Now it would
seem that the mandate in question had been ceded by
His Britannic Majesty to the three Governments con-
cerned, or to one of them, which would exercise it on its
sole responsibility.
He inquired whether the two conventions referred to
in the draft report, viz. :
1. The convention between the constituent Govern-
ments of the British Empire, Paris 1919, and
2. The agreement between the Governments of Great
Britain, Australia and New Zealand, 1920,
had been officially communicated to the Council of the
League of Nations.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that the first of the two
conventions had not been communicated to the League
of Nations.
M. Rappard stated that the second of the two con-
ventions was known to the Secretariat, but had not
been officially communicated.
M. Orts thought that the Commission should draw
the attention of the Council to this fact, without
commenting upon it. It was not for the Commission
to decide what Government was actually the mandatory
Power for Nauru. It could only recognise as such the
Power designated in the mandate—namely, His
Britannic Majesty, otherwise the British Empire.
He drew attention to the fact that, in all the other
mandates conferred upon any of the constituent parts
of the British Empire, the mandate had been conferred
upon His Britannic Majesty, acting, according to
circumstances, “ for and on behalf of ” the Union of
South Africa, the Commonwealth of Australia or New
Zealand, which were explicitly designated as “ the
Mandatory.” This procedure was regular in all cases
of C mandates conferred upon His Britannic Majesty.
M. Rappard did not believe that even the Council
of the League of Nations had the power to modify the
attribution of a mandate. This power as far as B and
C mandates are concerned, appeared to be solely vested
in the Supreme Council of the Allied and Associated
Powers, including the United States.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that, on the evidence
before it, the Commission must, for all practical
purposes, accept the Commonwealth Government as the
mandatory Power in the case of Nauru.
M. Orts stated that he could agree to this if all
the other mandates accorded to the British Empire
did not specifically state the particular Government
forming part of the British Empire to which the
particular mandate had been assigned. As regards
Nauru, the Commission would be going outside its
powers if it took it upon itself to recognise as the
mandatory Power a Government which was not so
designated in the mandate.
He had a further observation to malie, concerning
which he proposed that a paragraph should be inserted
in the report.
According to Article 22 of the Covenant, there were
certain territories which:
“ Owing to the sparseness of their population, or
their small size, or their remoteness from the
centres of civilization, or their geographical con-
tiguity to the territory of the Mandatory and other
circumstances, can best be administered under the
laws of the Mandatory as integral portions of its
territory.”
These were the territories under a C mandate.
It would appear that the authors of the Covenant
wished to secure an advantage for such territories
when they intimated that they could not be better
administered than under the laws of the Mandatory.
The above seemed to be merely a recommendation.
It was worthy of note, however, that Nauru, a territory
under a C mandate, was subjected to an exceptional
regime to which the British Empire afforded no parallel.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore agreed, but pointed out that
Samoa, for instance, was not governed under the laws
of New Zealand, the mandatory Power.
It was clear that, in the case of Nauru, the Govern-
ment of the Commonwealth regarded itself as the
mandatory Power.
He pointed out that there was no Government of
“The British Empire.” In this case, it was presumably
for the British Empire to choose one of its constituent
Governments to administer the mandate.
M. Van Rees pointed out that Australia was part
of the British Empire.
M. Orts agreed that His Britannic Majesty was the
sovereign of Australia, but maintained that, in all the
other mandates conferred on the British Empire, the
mandatory Dominion was expressly designated, and it
was on behalf of such Dominion that the Empire acted.
The Chairman drew attention to the extra complica-
tion introduced into the question of Nauru by the
system of rotation of administration as between the
three Governments concerned.
M. Van Rees thought that the Commission could
only place on record the fact that neither the Council
of the League nor itself had been officially advised of
the arrangement arrived at in respect of Nauru.
The Chairman agreed. The Commission should ask
His Britannic Majesty to inform it officially to what
Government he had delegated the mandate for Nauru,
and in what order, as between the three Governments
concerned.
M. Orts thought that in any case an addition should
be made to the report embodying the first point raised
by him. He did not insist as regards the second point,
which only aimed at elucidating the spirit of Article
22 of the Covenant.
M. Rappard expressed the opinion that, as a matter
of fact, on this point, Article 22 of the Covenant did
not constitute an obligation, and that if it did, the
obligation was in this case impossible of fulfilment
in practice, as the mandatory Power was the British
Empire, which, as such, had no general system of laws
applicable to all its parts.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that the primary function
of the Commission was to examine the actual admini-
stration of the island.
Mr. Rappard agreed. He ventured to submit that
the Commission might be ill-advised to enter upon theo-
retical and constitutional discussions in its report to
the Council, and thus to some extent abandon its pro-


per function of supervising, in the interests of the
native population, the actual details of administration
in mandated territores.
M. Orts maintained his position. There was a real
practical advantage, likely to result in benefit to the
native population, to be obtained if the Commission
raised this point with the Council, in view of the
somewhat anomalous regime to which Nauru was sub-
jected. His point was that the existing regime was not
only without parallel in the British Empire, but con-
trary to the spirit of Article 22 of the Covenant.
It was agreed that M. Orts, in collaboration with
Mr. Ormsby-Gore and M. Rappard, should draft a
passage amplifying paragraphs 2,3, and 4 of the report
in the" sense of the questions raised by M. Orts during
the discussion.
Fifth paragraph.
Adopted.
Sixth paragraph.
It was agreed that the words “ by purchase ” should
be eliminated from the report.
Seventh paragraph.
Adopted.
Eighth paragraph.
M. Orts drew attention to the fact that, contrary
to the accepted principles of government, the Admini-
strator, who was described by the High Commissioner
as controlling the Phosphate Commissioners, was ap-
pointed for five years only, whereas the Phosphate
Commissioners held office during the pleasure of the
Governments concerned.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that the High Commis-
sioner had not quite accurately described the Admini-
strator as exercising control over the Commissioners
in respect of labour matters.
It would appear that, in regard to the recruitment
and conditions of imported labour, the Phosphate Com-
missioners, who were not responsible to the Australi in
Government alone, were independent of the Admini-
strator.
M. Orts said that, in that case, the draft was
acceptable as it, stood.
This was agreed.
Ninth paragraph.
Adopted. - ,
Tenth paragraph
It was agreed that this paragraph should be placed
under the heading “ Particular Questions.”
Eleventh paragraph.
Adopted.
Further General Observations.
Mme. Bugge-Wicksell suggested that the Commis-
sion should add to the General Observations in the
report a paragraph asking the mandatory Power to in-
form it for how many years the phosphate deposits of
Nauru would probably last, and whether it had any
plans for the native population when the deposits were
finally exhausted.
M. Rappard agreed that this was a most important
question, but pointed out that the question had not
been put to the High Commissioner. It. might, there-
fore, be delicate for the Commission to. refer to it
in its report.
The Chairman saw no harm in asking this question,
as an expression of the Commission’s solicitude in the
matter of the expropriation of phosphate-bearing
lands.
This was agreed.
Particular Questions.
Arms and Alcohol.
A dopted.
Liberty of Conscience.
A dopted.
Police.
Adopted.
Public Health.
Adopted, with the deletion of the word “ principle ”
in the first line' and of the reference at the end of the
paragraph to the problem of prostitution.
Land Tenure.
The last three lines of the paragraph were struck out,
and replaced by the following words:
“ The Commission notes that under Ordinance
Number 12 of 1922 all lands in the island are
under the control and at the disposal of the Ad-
ministrator, who has power to acquire them or
to authorize their acquisition at prices fixed by
him. The Commission would be glad to receive
fuller particulars of the application of these powers
by the Administration.”
TENTH MEETING HELD ON MONDAY, AUGUST
7th, 1922, AT 9.30 a.m.
Present: the Members of the Commission, except M.
Freire d’Andrade.
85.—Procedure for Public Plenary Meeting.
M. Rappard read the fourth paragraph of Article 8
of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure:
The Commission shall hold a plenary meeting
in the presence of all duly authorized representa-
tives of the Mandatory Powers, when it had
adopted the final terms of its observations on all
the reports which it has examined. This meeting
shall be public. If the majority of its members
so desire, the Commission may take advantage of
the presence of the duly authorized representatives
of the Mandatory Powers, to bring before them
all matters connected with the Mandates which,
in its opinion, should be submitted by the Council
to' the Mandatory Powers and to the other Mem-
bers of the League.”
The Chairman stated that his address, which would
be circulated at the meeting in both official languages,
would bo divided into two parts, the first part explain-
ing, for the benefit of the public, the nature of the
Commission’s work, and the second part giving a brief
summary of the actual results of the first year’s work
of the Commission in respect of C mandates. This
second part would make a special reference to two of
the most important questions arising out of the reports
submitted, namely, the problem of indentured labour,
and the special question of the island of Nauru. The
speech would be delivered on the responsibility of the
Chairman.
M. Orts pointed out that every member of the
Commission must either share in the responsibility for
an utterance from the Chair, or must put in a minority
report.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that the question could
be settled if the Chairman, at the conclusion of his
address, were to allow the members of the Commission
an opportunity of commenting upon his speech.
It was agreed that this procudere should be fol-
lowed, and it was understood that the address in ques-
tion would be delivered by the Chairman on behalf of
the Permanent Mandates Commission.
The Chairman’s speech was then read to the Com-
mission, and, after sundry minor emendations, was
adopted (see Minute 90).
86.—Proposed Addition to the Commission’s
Observations on the Report Relative to South-
West Africa.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore proposed an addition to the sixth
paragraph (under the heading “ Particular observa-
tions ”) of the memorandum containing the Commis-
sion’s observations on the report relative to South
West Africa.


The additional paragraph in question was adopted
in the following form:
The Commission has been much struck by the
information supplied by the Government of the
Union of South Africa as to the state of affairs
discovered by its Administration among the vari-
ous native tribes. It would appear that the pros-
perity and well-being of the aboriginal population
is in inverse ratio to its contact with the coloni-
zation of its former masters. The Commission
expresses the hope that the primitive organisation
in tribes may be maintained unaltered wherever
it still exists.”
87.—Observations of the Commission on the Report
Relative to the Island of Nauru (continued).
The re-drafted observations of the Commission were
read.
M. Beau thought that the reference to the. exact
sum paid by the three Governments concerned for the
acquisition of the rights of the Pacific Phosphate Com-
pany should be deleted.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that the public should
know the immense sum disbursed by the Governments
concerned, and should be able to compare it with the
size of the island.
It was agreed that the reference should be main-
tained.
Particular observations.
Labour.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore proposed that a sentence should
be added indicating the desire of the Commission to
know what action the Phosphate Commissioners were
taking in the matter of the recruitment, etc., of labour.
It was agreed- that the paragraph in question should
be altered in this sense.
Public finances.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore proposed that a new paragraph
should be inserted, between Nos. 6 and 7, with the
title ” Public Finances ”. In this paragraph the Com-
mission should ask for the balance-sheet of the; Phos-
phates Commission, which was responsible for making
up any deficit in the Government’s budget.
This was agreed, and the following draft was
adopted
7. Public Finances.
The Commission notes that it is ‘ not at the
moment in possession of information as to the
finances of Phosphate Commission. In view of
the fact that the chief source of revenue of the
island is the. exploitation of phosphate deposits,
the Commission would be glad to receive, in the
next report, a full statement of the budget of the
Phosphate Commission.”
Demographic Statistics.
The Chairman proposed that this paragraph should
be suppressed.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore did not agree. It was important
to. show that there were still Nauru natives in the
island, and how many.
After discussion, the paragraph was amended to
read as follows:
The demographic statistics for Nauru show
there are in the island 1,084 Nauruans. There
are also 597 Chinese, of whom 592 are men, 2
women, and 3 children.”
With these and sundry other minor emendations, the
redrafted, observations were adopted.
88.—Observations of the Commission on the
Report Relative to Western Samoa.
The draft observations of the Commission were read.
Labour.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that a sentence should be
added to this paragraph, expressing the satisfaction of
the Commission with the arrangements made with the
Chinese Government, through the British authorities
in Hong Kong, in respect of the importation of Chinese
labour, and with the protection afforded to the Chinese
indentured labourers by the presence in Western Samoa
of a Chinese Consul and a special official.
After discussion, the following text was adopted, for
addition to the paragraph concerning labour:
“ Sir James Allen explained that, in order to
maintain the productivity of the plantations in
Samoa, and for the execution of necessary public
works and services, recourse was had to indenture
of Chinese labour. The Commission notes that the
Government of New Zealand has, through the in-
termediary of the British Authorities at Hong
Kong, entered into a Convention with the Chinese
Government regarding the importation and con-
ditions of work of Chinese indentured labour in
Western Samoa. The terms of this convention
were submitted to the Commission by Sir James
Allen, and among other provisions the Commission
observes that the interests of the Chinese in Samoa
are protected by a special officer and by the pre-
sence of a Chinese Consul.”
Education.
Madame Bugge-Wick sell wished to add to this
paragraph a definite enquiry as to the number of the
missionary schools and their curricula.
After discussion, Madame Bugge-Wicksell’s point was
met by the alteration of the last sentence of the para-
graph in question to read as follows:
The Commission would welcome. further informa-
tion concerning the means by which these interesting
results have been obtained by these; schools.”
With these, and sundry other minor emendations,
the draft observations mere adopted.
89. —Observations of the Commission on the Report
RELATIVE TO NEW GUINEA.
M. Rappard read the report to. the Commission.
The report, with a few slight verbal amendments,
was adopted.
ELEVENTH MEETING ,(PUBLIC) HELD ON
MONDAY, 7th AUGUST, 1922, AT 5 p.m.
Present: The Members of the Commission, except
M. Freire d’Andrade. Sir James Allen, Sir Joseph
Cook, and M. Mats c da, representatives of New Zea-
land, Australia, and Japan, were also present.
90. --General Report of the Mandates Commission
on C Mandates.
The Chairman read to the Commission the final
paragraph of Article 8 of the Rules of Procedure:
The; Commission shall hold a plenary meeting
in the presence of all duly authorized representa-
tives of the mandatory Powers, when it has
adopted the final terms of its observations on all
the reports which it has examined. This meeting
shall be public. If the majority of its members so
desire, the Commission may take advantage of the
presence of the duly authorized representatives of
the mandatory Powers, to bring before them all
matters connected with the Mandates which, in its
opinion, should be submitted by the Council to the
mandatory Powers and to the other Members of
the League.”


The present meeting was being held in accordance
with this rule, primarily in order to consider the gene-
ral report of the Commission on C mandates, in the
presence of the High Commissioners for Australia and
New Zealand, and the accredited representative of
.1 apan.
The following general report was read to the
Commission •
The Permanent Mandates Commission, during the
week which has just passed, has examined the report
regarding the administration of the territories under
C mandates, and # has decided upon the observations
which it desires to make upon these reports. These
observations have been communicated to the accredited
representatives of the mandatory Powers, and they will
be transmitted, with any comments which the latter
may see fit to make, to the Council of the League of
Nations.
The Commission will gladly avail itself of the oppor-
tunity afforded by the first, session at which the
accredited representatives of the mandatory Powers
have been present to exchange opinions with these
representatives in regard to the organization of the
Commission's collaboration with them in the future.
1 also wish to take this opportunity of making a short
statement with regard to the general results of our
examination of the reports on the administration of the
territories placed under C mandates, and of pointing
out a few of the more important questions which arise
in this connexion.
I Organization of Collaboration with the Mandatory
Rowers.
The rules of procedure of the Mandates Commission,
approved by the Council of the League of Nations,
provide in Article 1 that the Permanent Commission
shall meet in ordinary session, once a year at the seat
of the League of Nations, as a general rule on the first
Tuesday in August. It further provides, in Article 5,
that the Commission shall be informed, at the end of
June at latest, of the annual reports, which, according
to the terms of paragraph 9 of Article 22 of the
Covenant, it is its duty to receive.
It is, moreover, provided in the same article that
the mandatory Powers shall be asked to send to* the
Secretariat 20 copies of their reports, and also a copy
to* each of the members of the Permanent Mandates
Commission, whose names and addresses will be com-
municated for this purpose to the Governments of these
Powers.
The motives which inspired these clauses are the
following:
The Commission proposed the* first Tuesday in August
as the date for its annual session, because it considered
that this was a date which would make it possible for
it to receive, examine, and communicate to the Council,
before the Assembly, the annual reports in regard to
the last administrative year which it. believed coincided,
in the case of the majority of the mandatory Powers,
with the calendar year. It considered, moreover, that
in order to be able* to consider with the necessary care
the annual reports, which according to the Covenant,
it. was its duty to receive and examine, it was necessary
that it. should receive these reports at least one month
before its ordinary session.
The experience of this first year has led the Com-
mission to doubt the wisdom of its decision in fixing the
first Tuesday in August for the opening of its ordinary
session, since the advantages of this date are, in fact,
neutralized by two disadvantages. As will be seen in
the following table, the administrative year in the
majority of the mandated territories in no wise
corresponds with the calendar year.
End of the administrative year in the mandated territories .
(We have no precise information in regard to Iraq and the British
Cameroons.)
31st
March.
30th
April.
31st
May.
30th
June.
Slat
December.
Samoa
S.W. Africa
B. E. Africa
Palestine
British
Togoland
French
Togoland
New Guinea
Nauru
German
North
Equatorial
Possessions
Belgian East
Africa
Syria
As a result, the reports sent to the Commission have
in most cases arrived too: late for it to he possible
for the members to examine them with the necessary
care before' the opening of the session. Furthermore,
in several cases the reports received related to a,
period too far removed from the time of their ex-
amination.
The following table shows both the period to which
the statements sent, by the mandatory Powers refer,
and the dates upon which, they were received by the
Secretariat:
Report on the administration of the territories
under Japanese mandate. Oct. 1914-June 1921.
Received by the Secretariat December 15th,
1921.
Report on the administration of Samoa. May
1920-March 1921.
Received by the Secretariat. April 25th, 1922.
Report on the administration of Nauru. Sept.
1914-Dec. 1920.
Received by the Secretariat April 27th, 1922.
Second report on the administration of the terri-
tories under Japanese mandate.
Received by the Secretariat June 22nd, 1922.
Report on the administration of New Guinea.
Sept. 1914-June 1921.
Received by the Secretariat June 23rd, 1922.
Report on the administration of the French Came-
roons, for 1921.,
Received by the Secretariat. June 26th, 1922.
Report on the administration of French Togo-
land for 1920-21.
Received by the Secretariat July Ist, 1922.
Report on the administration of British Togo-
land for 1920-21.
Received by the Secretariat July Ist, 1922.
Report on the administration of the British Carne-
roons for 1921.
Received by the Secretariat July 13th, 1922.
Second report on the administration of Nauru.
Dec. 1920-Dec. 1921.
Received by the Secretariat July 17th, 1922.
Report, on the administration of Syria and of
Lebanon for the period 1918 to 1922.
Received by the Secretariat July 24th, 1922.
Report on the administration of South-West
Africa. Replies to the questionnaire.
Received by the Secretariat July 27th, 1922.
Report on the administration of Ruanda-Urundi.
Received by the Secretariat August Ist, 1922.
Report on the administration of Tanganyika for
the year 1921.
Received by the Secretariat August Ist, 1922.
The second disadvantage of selecting the first Tues-
day in August arises from the fact that it seems diffi-
cult to reconcile this date with the convenience of the
representatives of the mandatory Powers, and of the
members of the Commission itself. The beginning of
August is, in fact, for the majority of the members,


a holiday time which they would gladly pass elsewhere
and otherwise than in discussing together in Geneva
the reports of the mandatory Powers. Moreover, it
appears that several of the representatives of the man-
datory Powers and two of the members of the Com-
mission have had in the past, and may have again in
the future, to represent their countries at the As-
sembly of the League of Nations which meets in Geneva
a month later.
I therefore propose to you to consider the problem
of the date of our annual session, with a view to de-
ciding if possible upon a more satisfactory solution.
In this connection, I beg to point out that, if we decide
to change the date of our annual meeting, this would
involve a modification in Articles 1 and 5 of our rules
of procedure. Consequently this change would have
to be proposed by at least 5 of the members of the
Commission, and the new proposals would have to be
submitted for the approval of the Council of the
League of Nations.
M hatever decision may be taken in this connexion,
I have the honour most respectfully to draw the atten-
tion of the mandatory Powers and of the Council, who
will receive the Minutes of our meetings, to the fact
that it is essential that we should receive the reports
which we are called upon to examine together one
month at least before the date of our meeting. It may
also be found necessary to increase the number of
copies of these reports which we are obliged to ask
the Governments of the mandatory Powers to com-
municate to us. If indeed we wish to avoid the un-
necessary expense involved in the reprinting of these
reports, the League of Nations should receive 25 copies
for the members of the Council, and 100 other copies
to be d’stributed to the Members of the League. Since
according to the terms of the Covenant, the'tutelage
of the Mandatories is exercised on behalf of the League
as a whole, it would seem that the reports of the man-
datory Powers should properly be communicated to all
Members of the Leavue in the same way as the Minutes
of the Council’s deliberations with all annexes, includ-
ing the Minutes of our own meetings, are regularly
communicated to all Members,
I am taking the liberty of raising all these questions
at the plenary meeting, reserving the faculty of pro-
posing resolutions to my colleagues of the Permanent
Mandates Commission, after hearing the opinions of the
representatives of the mandatory Powers.
The Commission desires to make a public expression
of its appreciation of the valuable assistance in its dis-
cussions which it has received from the representatives
. of the Australian, Japanese, and New Zealand Go-
vernments. The experience of this first year has
demonstrated the wisdom of the decision of the Council,
which, 'when approving the constitution of the Perman-
ent Mandates Commission Qn December Ist, 1920, ex-
pressly stipulated that the Commission should consider
each report in the presence of the accredited representa-
tive of the Mandatory Power from which it emanated.
As a result of the additional information supplied by
Sir James Allen, Sir Joseph Cook, and M. Matsuda,
numerous obscure points and misunderstandings have
been cleared up in connexion with the administration
of Samoa, New Guinea, the Island of Nauru, and the
former German possessions situated north of the
equator.
The success of the collaboration between the repre-
sentatives of these three mandatory Powers and the
Commission still further deepens our regret at the
absence of a representative of the South African Union,
upon whose assistance, however, we hope we shall be
able to count next year.
11. General Observations on Territories Administered
under C Mandates.
During its deliberations, the Commission noted with
tli© liveliest satisfaction the statements contained in the
reports and confirmed by the accredited representatives
that, in all the territories in question, certain provisions
in the Covenant and the Mandates have been scrupu-
lously observed in every particular. Thus it is happy
to note the disappearance of all forms of slavery and
the prohibition and effective suppression of the slave
trade.
Furthermore, it has noted that no forced labour has
in any way been imposed upon the natives, even in the
case of those essential public works and services where
such a course would have been consistent with the terms
of the Mandate. In the case of New Guinea and the
Island of Nauru, the mandatory Power informed the
Commission that, not only did forced labour not exist,
but that it was even expressly forbidden.
The Commission also noted that the clauses in the
Covenant and the Mandates forbidding the establish-
ment of military and naval bases or fortifications within
the territory have been everywhere rigorously enforced,
and that the sole form of military training given to the
natives is intended to enable them to carry out local
police duties. Thus, in this matter also, going beyond
the strict letter of the Covenant and the mandates, the
Powers responsible for the administration of the terri-
tories under the C mandates would in all cases appear
to have abandoned the idea of creating native forces for
the local defence of the territory.
The reports submitted to the Commission show clearly
that freedom of conscience is everywhere fully guaran-
teed. The Commission has made inquiries into the
nature and extent of the work of the various mis-
sionaries who are settled in the territories, and it hopes
to receive fuller information on this matter next year.
As regards the prohibition of the supply of spirits
and alcoholic liquors to the natives, measures to this
effect are incorporated in the laws or administrative
decrees of all territories under C mandates, and are
effectively enforced by the mandatory Powers.
The Commissioners have noted that the New Zealand
Government has absolutely forbidden the importation
and consumption of all spirituous liquors in Western
Samoa. According to the statement of the Represen-
tative of the New Zealand Government, experience had
shown Ins Government that the one and only method of
completely suppressing the consumption of all spiritu-
ous liquors among the native populations, was to compel
the nationals of the mandatory Power, and all other
foreigners in the territory, to set an example of total
abstinence.
It noted further that complete prohibition was en-
forced in the case of the natives of New Guinea and
South-West Africa, while in the islands placed under
Japanese Mandate, certain exceptions might be allowed
by special permission of the administration. The Com-
mission has askpd for further information regarding
the nature and extent of these exceptions.
All these matters are highly encouraging, and the
Commission is happy to be able to pay a tribute to the
efforts which the mandatory Powers have made to
insure in this way the moral and material well-being
of the natives.
It further expresses its satisfaction with all the steps
taken to safeguard the health of the inhabitants of the
territories in question, and to protect them from the
ravages—often of a very terrible character—of the
tropical diseases to which they are exposed. It hopes
that it will be able to note year by -year, from informa-
tion supplied by the mandatory Powers, the progress
achieved in dealing with these dreaded scourges.
Apart from all these grounds for satisfaction, the
Commission regrets that it must call attention to two


matters of grave concern which have engaged its atten-
tion.
In all the mandated territories in the Pacific, tropical
conditions prevail, which, by reducing the needs of the
natives to a minimum, and by favouring the growth of
plants whose abundant fruits are sufficient for the wants
of the native population, render them inapt and disin-
clined for any physical exertion, and in this way lead
to a serious shortage of labour. But mankind cannot
be indefinitely deprived in this way of the invaluable
resources which it might secure by the wise exploitation
of these* territories. Fully alive to this self-evident
truth, ffiit thwarted by the innate indolence of the in-
habitants, in their desire to improve the territories
whose administration they have assumed, the mandatory
Powers have very naturally been induced to have re-
course to foreign labour. They would appear to have
experienced no difficulty in finding such labour, es-
pecially in China.
The recruiting of these labourers at places thousands
of miles from the islands where their labour is required,
raises very serious problems.
On tlje one hand, the mandatory Powers are forced
to conclude contracts for very long periods, as a rule
for three years, with the labourers so recruited; on the
other hand, it leads to immigration into the mandated
territories, of an exclusively male population, a circum-
stance which is not unattended with danger for the im-
migrants and for the native population with which it is
in contact.
This year, the Commission merely noted the facts of
the situation.' It hopes that the mandatory Powers
will be good enough to enable it to consider the question
more closely in their future reports, and thus effectively
to. exercise its beneficent and watchful supervision in
this very delicate and difficult matter.
Finally, the Commission noted the following points
in connexion with the Island of Nauru.
This tiny island, which is hidden in the vast extent
of the Pacific, has. only about 2,000 inhabitants. Its
sole wealth—and it is considerable—consists in vast
and rich deposits of phosphates. The Mandate for this
island was conferred by the Principal Allied and As-
sociated Powers upon the British Empire, which dele-
gated the. working of this mineral wealth to Australia,
Great Britain, and New Zealand. These three Go-
vernments have devolved upon Australia the respon-
sibility Jor the administration of a first period of five
years. From information supplied by the mandatory
Power, the Commission finds ground for fear that the
fundamental principle of the institution of Mandates
may, as regards its application to this island, be pre-
judiced in two ways.
It fears on the one hand that the disproportion be-
tween the material wealth of this island and the small
number of its inhabitants may induce the mandatory
Power to subordinate the interests of the people to the
exploitation of the wealth. It is, therefore, not without
deep concern that it considers the question whether the
well-being and development of the inhabitants of this
island, which, in the words of the Covenant "form a
sacred . trust of civilization, 1 ” the accomplishment of
which it is the Commission’s duty to safeguard, are not
in danger of being compromised.
It is moreover concerned with the consideration of
the question whether the mandatory Power, by reserv-
ing the ownership and exclusive exploitation of the re-
sources of this territory to itself, has brought its policy
into true harmony with the requirements of the
Mandate which, in accordance w r ith the Covenant, it
should exercise on behalf of the whole League of
Nations.
The Commission decided, however, merely to request
the Mandatory Power to be good enough to furnish
- fuller information in regard to its administration, and
to inform the Council of the League of Nations of the
apprehensions and scruples aroused by the facts to
which I have just drawn attention.
The Chairman asked whether any members of the
Commission desired to put any questions to the High
Commissioners.
Mr. Ormsby-Gorb asked what time would be most
convenient for the High Commissioners to attend the
Commission next year, and when their reports were
likely to be received. The Commission found that, in
some respects, it was not desirable to have the meeting
of the Commission in August.
M. Matsuda (Representative of Japan) said that
the Japanese Government would have no objection to
changing the date. If a new date were fixed for the
meeting, the Japanese Government would deliver its
report a month before the meeting.
Sir Joseph Cook (High Commissioner for Aus-
tralia) said that the Australian Government was
anxious to' facilitate the work of the Commission. The
most convenient date for the Australian High Commis-
sioner would be towards the end of August, so that the
meeting of the Commission might coincide with the
meeting of the Assembly. The Australian financial
year ended on June 30th. If the Commission were to
meet earlier than August, the Australian reports would
necessarily be obliged either to anticipate events, or to
deal with events of the previous year.
Sir James Allen (High Commissioner for New Zea-
land) said that the financial year for Samoa and New
Zealand ended on March 31st. The report on Samoa
could not be in New Zealand until the end of April. It
might be available for the Commission within one
month of a meeting held on August Ist. He would be
.grateful if the meeting could be arranged to coincide as
nearly as possible with the Assembly.
M. Rappard pointed out that a date on the eve of the
Assembly presented inconveniences, as the Commission
w ould not in this case meet early enough to prepare its
reports in time to be considered by the Council and for-
warded to the Assembly. It would, moreover, be very
difficult for the Secretariat to deal satisfactorily with
the work of the Commission during the last days of
August. The Council invariably met just at this time,
and the Secretariat was also busy preparing for the
Assembly.
It was agreed that the question of a date for the meet-
ing of the Commission should be discussed and settled
at a private meeting.
The Chairman took this opportunity to thank the
Mandates Section of the Secretariat for the way in
which it had prepared and co-operated in the work of
the Commission.
Sir Joseph Cook asked leave to speak on a passage in
the general report which had been read to the Com-
mission, which, in his opinion, was unfortunate and
unjustified. A fear was expressed in the report that
the welfare of the natives in Nauru might be subordin-
ated to the exploitation of the wealth of the island.
There was no exploitation of the natives in Nauru.
Their position had, on the contrary, been greatly im-
proved. Under the German administration, the native
had received a royalty of only -|d. per ton on the phos-
phate extracted from the island. He now received 3d.
per ton, and if his land were wanted for mining, he
received compensation at the rate of £2O per acre. The
natives at present enjoyed affluence and prosperity be-
yond their fondest hopes. He would have expected to
find in the report rather an acknowledgment of the


generosity .of the mandatory Power than the unfor-
tunate expressions to which he had drawn attention.
Sir James Allen wished to associate himself with
Sir Joseph Cook in the remarks which he had made.
Neither Great Britain, Australia, or New Zealand, who
were all concerned in the welfare of Nauru, would
permit any exploitation of the natives. Public opinion
in those countries was as much opposed to such a course
as the Mandates Commission itself. He would point
out that the mandatory Powers, far from making any
profit from their position, were actually administering
their mandated territories at a loss. New Zealand liad
lent £lOO,OOO to Samoa for public works' and £16.000
Had been given to the island in the present year.
Sir Joseph Cook said that* the last thing he did as
Treasurer, before leaving for his present appointment,
was to authorize an increase in the overdraft at the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia from £350,000 to
£500,000, on account of the mandated territories.
The Chairman said that there was no desire on the
part of the Mandates Commission to criticise the ad-
ministration of the mandatory Powers. The Commis-
sion had merely wished to inquire into the system in
force in Nauru in order to determine whether it was
likely to conduce to the wemire of the natives. He
alluded in particular to the phosphate monopoly in
Nauru.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that lie had studied the report
of the administrator of Nauru with great admiration,
but there were certain circumstances on which he
thought further information was necessary.
Allusion has been made to financial losses incurred
in respect of Samoa and New Guinea. He would point
out that the mandatory Power was not responsible for
any loss incurred in connexion with the Nauru man-
date. Such loss was met out of the sale of the phos-
phates mined on the island, and the mining of the phos-
phates Avas controlled by a Commission of three, on
which the mandatory Power had only one representa-
tive.
The curious constitution of the Phosphate Commission
had given rise to a feeling in the Mandates Commission
that the conditions of working of the phosphate deposits
by the independent Commissioners should be carefully
watched, and the Mandates Commission would ask next
year for particulars as to conditions of work, wages,
hours, &c. It was not clear whether the Administrator
or the Phosphate Commissioners recruited external
labour.
Sir Joseph Cook said that the Phosphate Commis-
sioners were responsible to the Administrator of the
island, and were bound by the ordinary laws and regu-
lations protecting the natives. The Phosphate Com-
mission had been made independent only as a business
concern. This had been done so that the Mandatory
might be free from the necessity of managing a purely
commercial enterprise.
The Chairman drew attention to Article 13 of the
Nauru Agreement, of 1920, in which it was laid down
1 Hat, there should be no interference by the Mandatory
with the Phosphate Commission in the direction,
management or control of the business ot working, ship-
ping, or selling the phosphates.
Sir Joseph Cook said that the working and control
of the phosphate; deposits has been intrusted to ex-
perienced business men, in the belief that they would
work the deposits more efficiently than could the
Government. This did not release the Phosphate Com-
missioners from the ordinary obligations of citizenship,
or from the observance of any of the Ordinances and
laws for the protection of the natives. The Adminis-
trator might at any time, if necessary, interfere to
protect the natives, and care had been taken to safe-
guard native interests by express provisions. It was
necessary in this connexion to remember that the island
of Nauru was 2,000 miles from Australia, and that a
large delegation of powers to the Administrator was
essential.
The Chairman asked where the three Commissioners
resided.
Sir Joseph Cook said he believed that one of them
resided in London, one in New Zealand, and the other
in Australia. There were, however, expert managers
on the spot who aeted for them. In this connexion, the
same procedure was adopted as in the case of any other
well-conducted enterprise.
The Chairman inquired how the Administrator would
intervene in the event of the Phosphate Commission
requiring excessive hours of labour from their em-
ployees. Could he interfere, in the face of Article 13
of the Nauru Agreement ‘I
Sir Joseph Cook, replied that it was the duty of the
Administrator to report to the Australian Government
anything to which he took exception. -The Phosphate
Commission might not contravene) the general laws and
Ordinances governing labour or other conditions on the
island.
The Chairman noted with satisfaction the declaration
of the High Commissioner that Article 13 of the Nauru
Agreement did not prevent the Administrator from
procuring respect for the laws and regulations of the
island.
M. Orts said that the questions inserted in the
general report relative to the future of the Nauru
mandate had been put with the general agreement of
all the members of the Mandates Commission. There
were also considerations to which value was attached
by certain of the members of the Commission
individually.
He desired to emphasize the importance of the land
question. It was generally recognised that peaceful
and undisturbed possession of the land was essential to
the preservation and development of primitive com-
munities.
In Nauru, it would appear that the Administrator
had the right to lease native lands and to expropriate
them when they contained phosphates. It was true
that the natives obtained compensation, even generous
compensation. But in Nauru, as elsewhere, the native
was probably improvident. What would become of him
when he had spent his compensation money, and had
no more land and no money left ?
Sir Joseph Cook said that the natives did not
live actually upon the phosphate lands, but on the
fringe of them. It was not normally necessary to
exploit the lands which the natives occupied. The
decree for compulsory leasing had been framed as a
provisional measure to be applied contingently, e.g., in
the case of a right of way, in the event of it being
necessary for the Phosphate Commission, in working
the mines, to make use of certain land in the possession
of the natives. The terms of the decree as to compen-
sation, &c., showed how careful the Government had
been to protect the interests of the natives in every
possible way.
The Chairman said that the Mandates Commission
and the public would be grateful to the High Commis-
sioners for having given these facts and assurances.
The discussion which'had taken place afforded a proof
of the desirability of the mandatory powers making
their reports as full and detailed •as possible. There
had been no wish on the part of the Mandates Commis-
sion to criticise the work of the mandatory Powers, but
only a desire to obtain a full knowledge of the actual
conditions and of the system prevailing.


TWELFTH MEETING, HELD ON TUESDAY,
Bth AUGUST, 1922, AT 10.80 a.m.
93.— Proposals by M. Beau and M. Van Rees
Relative to the Commission’s Procedure.
The Chairman thought that, before proceeding to
consider the text of the proposals put forward, the
Commission should come to. some decision as to the
date which it intended to adopt in the future for its
sessions. This question turned mainly on the date
of the Assembly. It was important that the Assembly,
as well as the Council, should be in a positon to. discuss
the Commission’s observations on the various annual
reports. **•
M. Orts pointed out the difficulty of fixing the
session of the Commission for any date later than
August. Ist, and thought the only solution was that
the Commission should meet about July 20th. It
would be undesirable for - the Commission to choose
an earlier date because of the difficulty which the
mandatory Powers experienced in issuing their reports
in time.
M. Van Rees pointed out that the next session of
the Commission would be much longer than the pre-
sent one, and doubted whether, if the session were to
last, as it well might, to the end of August, it would
be practically possible to submit the Commission's re-
ports to the Council before the Assembly. In these
circumstances, it might perhaps be preferable, to. con-
sider the possibility of fixing the annual session of the
Commission for October Ist. It was time that, in
this case, the Assembly could not consider the Com-
mission’s reports, but the Council could do so at its
next session after the Assembly.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore felt inclined to suggest that the
Commission should have two- sessions every year, one
in April and one in November.
M. Yanagida pointed out. that the Japanese fiscal
year ended March 31st. All statistics, however, given
in the reports on Japanese mandated territory were
based on the calendar year.
M. Beau was inclined to agree with M. Van Rees.
He inquired whether it would be possible for the Com-
mission to meet in September.
M. Rappard pointed out the great difficulty in-
herent in this date, in view of the fact that the As-
sembly would be sitting at the same time.
The Chairman was inclined to agree with Mr.
Ormsby-Gore’s suggestion. He inquired whether the
Japanese member would be able to make the arrange-
ments necessary to enable him to attend two meet-
ings of the Commission, one in April, and one, per-
haps, in October.
M. Yanagida could not give a definite answer on
this question, but suggested that either himself or a
substitute would be able to attend the later meeting.
He pointed out that, if the Commission was going to
sit twice in the year, its Rules of Procedure would
have to be altered.
The Chairman pointed out that there was no pro-
vision or authority for the replacement, by a sub-
stitute of a member of the Commission.
M. Van Rees was opposed to* any alteration in
the Rules of Procedure. He suggested that for next
year the Commission should experiment with the date
of July 20th.
The Chairman pointed out that there were three
proposals before the Commission.
1. M. Orts’ proposal—on or about July 20th.
2. Mr. Ormsby-Gore’s proposal—two sessions in the
year.
3. M. Van Rees’ original proposal —on or about
October Ist.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out. that July 20th was,
for him, a difficult date, in view, of the great press
of work about that time in the British Parliament. He
was prepared, however, to agree to July 20th, on the
understanding that, if the Commission had not before
it-all the reports necessary to complete its work, it
should meet again in the same year immediately after
the Assembly.
This was agrees/, and it was understood that the
Commission would meet next year on or about July
20th, under the condition proposed by Mr. Ormsby-
Gore.
M. Rappard pointed out the difficulty which might
arise if the representatives of the mandatory Powers
were to attend meetings of the Commission early in
the session, and were then to be kept waiting for the
public plenary session.
The Commission agreed that this difficulty was in-
evitable.
M. Beau and M. Van Rees suggest to their col-
leagues the following proposals, with the object of in-
suring, as far as possible, the effective and rapid de-
spatch of the. work of the Commission :
I. That a. recommendation should be made to the
mandatory Powers with regard to the following points:
(a) To forward their annual reports to the mem-
bers of the Commission as soon as possible, and,
at the latest, towatos the end of June.
(b) To follow as closWv as possible in drawing up
these reports the. order of the Questionnaire;
(c) To annex to the reports the texts of the de-
crees and other legal ordinances mentioned, un-
less such texts have already been communicated ;
(d) To annex to each report a small map sum-
marily indicating frontiers, administrative di-
visions, the. principal centres, ports of import
and railways;
(e) To make special mention of the administra-
tive organisation in its broad outline, and of the
share taken by the natives in public duties and
the administration of matters of general con-
cern.
11. That either the Mandates Section or such mem-
bers of the Commission as might be willing to under-
take the duty should draw up a comparative state-
ment, based on existing Reports and Minutes, relat-
ing to:
(a) The administrative organisation in its broad
outline, and the share taken by the natives in
public duties and the administration of matters
of general concern;
(b) The organisation of native justice;
(c) Slavery:
(d) Labour;
(e) The trade in, and manufacture of, alcohol and
drugs;
(/) Native education;
(g) Public health;
(/<) Government lands and land tenure.
All these statements would be translated and circu-
lated to members of the Commission.
111. That the Commission should divide among its
members the responsibility of considering new reports,
as far as the essential questions mentioned in para-
graph 11. above are concerned.
The obervations made on these questions would be
sent to. thel Mandates Section for translation and
communication to the members of the Commission.
Those members of the Commission who. might have
addtional observations to make should, as far as pos-
sible, forward them directly to the Rapporteur.
IV. That members of the Commission should be good
enough to. note in writing their observations on all
other questions Avhich they might propose to* submit at
the next session.
V. That all the observations mentioned in para-
graphs 111. and IV. should form the subject of dis-
cussion at a preliminary meeting, with the object of


defining the attitude of the Commission towards the
representatives of the mandatory Powers.
VI. That the observations which the Commission
might propose to. submit to the representatives of the
mandatory Powers should be communicated to them
through the Secretariat at least twenty-four hours
before the meeting to which they are to bo sum-
moned.
Section I.
I. a. It was agreed that the last words of this
paragraph should be amended to read as follows:
“As soon as possible, and at latest about June
20tih.”
I. h. Agreed.
I. c. Agreed.
I. d. Agreed.
I. e. M. Van Rees explained that this pro-
vision had been inserted because there was not
in the Questionnaire a special question devoted
to this particular subject.
Agreed.
Section 11.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore queried the necessity of includ-
ing slavery as a special subject for comparative study
by a member of the Commission. Slavery existed
only in Tanganyika Territory, and was there being
put down.
It was agreed that slavery should be included under
Labour.
Section 11. was agreed, and the following members
of the Commission were appointed to make the com-
parative studies referred to:
(a) Administrative Organization and Participation
in Public Functions: M. Van Rees.
(b) Organization of Native Justice: M. Van
Rees.
(el) Labour (including Slavery): Mr. Grimshaw
representative of the International Labour Or-
ganisation) .
(e) Trade and Manufacture of Alcohol and Drugs:
Mr. Ormsby-Gore.
(/) Native Education: Mme. Bugge-Wicksell.
(g) Public Health: Count de Ballobar.
(//) Land Tenure: M. Van Rees.
Section 111.
This section was agreed.
It was further agreed that, in addition to the
special comparative studies referred to above, the fol-
lowing members of the Commission should be re-
quested, in accordance with the proposals before the
Commission, to make observations on the various
chapters of the Questionnaire:
Chapters I. and 11. Slavery and Labour : Mr.
Grimshaw, representative of the International
Labour Organisation.
Chapter 111. Arms Traffic: Mr. Ormsby-Gore.
Chapter IV. Trade and Manufacture of Alco-
hol and Drugs: Mr. Ormsby-Gore.
Chapter V. Liberty of Conscience: Count de
Ballobar.
Chapter VI. Military Clauses: M. Beau.
Chapter VII. Economic Equality: M. Orts.
Chapter VIII. Education: Mme. Bugge-Wick-
sell.
Chapter IX. Public Health: Count de Ballo-
bar.
Chapter X. Land Tenure: M. Van. Rees.
Chapter XI. Moral, Social, and Material Wel-
fare : M. Yanagida.
Chapter XII. Public Finances: The Chairman.
Chapter XIII. Demographic Statistics: M. Yana-
gida.
Section IV.
Agreed.
Section V.
M. Rappard pointed out that Section V. involved
a change in the Rules of Procedure of the Commission,
which laid down the following provisions:
“At the beginning of the ordinary session, the
Commission shall undertake a separate examina-
tion and discussion of each of the annual reports
submitted by the mandatory Powers.
The examination and the discussion shall take
place, in each case, in the presence of the ac-
credited representative of the mandatory Power
which issued the report.
“After this examination, the Commission shall
decide upon the form to be given to the ob-
servations to be transmitted to the Council of
the League. If the Commission is not unanimous,
it may present its observations in the form of
majority and minority reports. These observa-
tions shall be, in every case, communicated to the
accredited representative of the Power which
issued the report to which they refer. The re-
presentative concerned may attach his own re-
marks.”
M. Van Rees thought that there was nothing in
the Rules of Procedure to prevent the Commission
holding preliminary private meetings for the purpose
of preparing its observations on the reports.
Mr. Beau agreed. It might be well to suppress
Section V., but the Commission could not be pre-
vented from examining in common the questions which
it wished to put to the High Commissioners.
It was agreed that Section Y. should be suppressed.
Section VI.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore suggested that Section YI. should
be suppressed.
M. Orts thought that the High Commissioners
should be given every possible opportunity of study-
ing beforehand the observations of the Commission
on their reports. They must be given time to submit
sunnlementary observations if they wished to do so.
The Commission agreed with M. Orts, but con-
sidered that the result desired could be obtained with-
out; specification in the memorandum.
It was , therefore, agreed that Section VI. should be
suppressed.
THIRTEENTH MEETING, HELD ON
TUESDAY, Bth AUGUST, 1922, AT 3.30 p.m.
94. —Proposals for Additions to the
Questionnaire Relating to B Mandates.
Mr. Ormsby-Gorf. introduced a number of pro-
posals involving additions to certain chapters of the
Questionnaire relating to B mandates, particularly as
regards tropical diseases and the trade in and manu-
facture of alcohol. He pointed out that the Ques-
tionnaire, under the section dealing with .public
health, contained three questions of a somewhat gene-
ral nature, whereas the Commission required statis-
tics concerning certain definite tropical diseases.
At this point, Dr. Rajchman, Director of the Health
Section of the League of Nations, came to attend
the Commission.
After some discussion, Mr. Ormsby-Gore withdrew
his proposals, and submitted to the Commission the
following resolution in substitution jof his original
proposal on tropical diseases :
“That in order to study, in co-operation with
the Health Committee of the League, the inci-
dence of tropical diseases and their treatment
in mandated territories B and C, the Perma-
nent Mandates Commission represents to the
Council of the League of Nations that mandatory


Powers should be requested to. furnish in their
annual reports full particulars and statistics re-
garding the incidence and treatment of the fol-
lowing tropical diseases: sleeping sickness, tuber-
culosis, ankylostomiasis, malaria, plague, leprosy,
filariasis, small-pox, and syphilis.”
Dr. Rajchman suggested that the mandatory Powers
should also be asked to give particulars of the mea-
sures taken to exterminate the diseases in question,
and that the Health Committee should be asked to
complete the list of diseases. He asked whether
the Mandates Commission would like to invite the
Health Committee, which would be meeting during
the following week, to give an opinion on the health
section of the Questionnaire.
It was agreed that M. Rappard should consult the
Health Committee in regard to the amendments or
additions to be made to the Questionnaire, it being
understood that any alterations thus introduced must
accord with the general scheme of the Questionnaire,
and that M. Rappard, if he had any doubts on the
matter, should consult the Chairman of the Mandates
Commission.
Dr. Rajchman, on being invited to inform the
Mandates Commission what measures were being taken
by the Health Committee to deal with tropical diseases,
said that information was being collected by a small
committee of experts.
M. Orts pointed out that, according to Article 22
of the Covenant, the Mandates Commission alone was
entitled to ask the mandatory Powers for informa-
tion concerning the mandated territories, which in-
formation the mandatory Powers included in annual
general reports. The Commission could not ask for
special reports on particular subjects. It could only
ask the mandatory Powers to deal more fully in their
general reports with certain subjects on which further
information was desired. If the example of the
Health Committee were followed, and if other techni-
cal committees, such as the Disarmament Committee
or the Opium Committee, were also to address special
requests for information to the mandatory Powers,
there would be a danger of overlapping, and the
mandatory Powers would perhaps cease to recognise
that they were responsible solely to the Mandates Com-
mission.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought it desirable for the man-
datory Powers to form the habit of reporting regu-
larly to the Mandates Commission in their general
reports anything which concerned the administration
of mandated territories. He suggested that M. Rap-
pard might re-draft the resolution which he had pre-
sented, which could then go straight to the Coun-
cil.
Dr. Rajchman said the Health Committee would
be willing to assist in re-drafting the reso-
lution. The Committee would be meeting next
week, and there would be no delay in sending the
resolution to the Council. The Health Committee
had addressed itself for information to the mandatory
Pow r ers, not as Mandatories administering mandated
territories, but as great colonial Powders with tropical
possessions.
M. Rappard pointed out that the Health Com-
mittee, in asking for such information, acted under
Article 23 of the Covenant, which gave the League
the right to conduct any general enquiry into the
health of nations. The Mandates Commission, on the
other hand, acted under Article 22 of the Covenant,
and w T as concerned exclusively with mandated areas.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said it was desirable on the one
hand to avoid overlapping, and on the other hand,
to avoid restricting in any way the' sphere of action
of the Health Committee in conducting its general
enquiries. Clearly, in the matter of health in the
mandated territories, it would be desirable for the
Mandates Commission to have the assistance of a
member of the Health Committee or of Dr. Rajch-
man.
On the proposal of the Chairman, it was agreed :
1. That the resolution presented by Mr. Ormsby-
Gore should be amended by the Health Com-
mittee, and forwarded to the Council on be-
half of the Mandates Commission.
2. That, in the mariner above described, the
Health Committee should amend the section of
the Questionnaire dealing with public health.
3. That a representative of the Health Section
should in future be invited to attend the Man-
dates Commission when health questions were
under discussion.
Dr. Rajchman then withdrew from the Commis-
sion.
96. —National. Status of Inhabitants of B and C
Mandated Territories.
A draft communication to the Council of the
League, containing three resolutions on this subject,
was read to the Commission. The draft resolutions
as submitted were as follows:
“I. It is important, in order that the principle
laid down in Article 22 of the Covenant may
be respected, that the native inhabitants of B
and C mandated territories should be granted
a national status distinct from that of the
national or subjects of the mandatory Power.”
“11. These inhabitants will be designated admin-
istered or protected persons under mandate of
the mandatory Power.”
“111. It is the business of the mandatory Powers
to which B and C mandatory territories have
been entrusted to make arrangements, in con-
formity with their own laws, for the individual
and purely voluntary acquisition of their na-
tionality by foreigners established in these terri-
tories as from January 10th, 1920.”
Resolution 1.
It was agreed that the words “or subjects” should
be suppressed.
Resolution 11.
M. Van Bees was not satisfied by the term “ad-
ministered or protected persons under mandate.” He
maintained that the phrase “administered person”
did not clearly and directly connote a national
status, but merely indicated a certain administrative
relation. He wondered whether it was really im-
possible to find a shorter and more striking term than
the expression “administered or protected person
under mandate,” a term which would at once make
the national status clear. The term suggested did
not succeed in doing this, and could not, so long as
there was no legal understanding that the term “ad-
ministered person” or “protected person” implied a
special national status.
But if it was permissible to introduce into exist-
ing public law a new term which recognised a new
national status, it was equally permissible to intro-
duce, not a new term, but a new sense for a term
in common use. It that case, it would appear pre-
ferable to designate the native inhabitants in ques-
tion “subjects” of mandated territories, e.g., “French
Togoland subject,” applying to this term the legal
definition of “native inhabitant of a B or C man-
dated territory.”
M. Orts thought that the Council had not in
effect asked the Commission to state what was the
national status of such-and-such a population in man-
dated territory, but only to study the general ques-
tion of national status. The solution proposed in


Resolution 11. was not quite satisfactory, as it merely
gave a photographic picture of the de facto situa-
tion.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore suggested that the Commission
should not attempt to make use of any phraseology
implying that such nationals were “called” adminis-
tered or protected persons, but that the resolution
should merely state that such persons had a right
to the diplomatic protection of the mandatory Power.
The Chairman pointed: out that this would not
solve the problem before the Commission.
M. Beau pointed out that certain mandated areas
could not be regarded as single States in any na-
tional sense, e.g., the French Cameroons could
not connote a nationality, since the phrase was only a
geographical expression.
M. Van Rees agreed, but wished the resolution to
contain some such phrase as “French Cameroon sub-
ject.” The important point was that the new national
status should, by means of a special law, be given a
special sense.
M. Beau pointed out that the word “subject” was
inadmissible since the English language used the
phrase “British subject” for the inhabitants of its
colonial possessions.
The Chairman suggested that M. Van Rees’ point
might be met by the inserton of an explanatory sen-
tence in the portion of the memorandum which' gave
the reasons advanced by the Commission in support
of its resolutions.
He enquired whether the Commission was prepared
to agree to Resolution 11. as it stood.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore stated that he could not accept
without qualification the term “administered persons”
or “protected persons under mandate.”
M. Van Rees pointed out that the mandated areas
were perfectly well-defined territories under the con-
trol of a well-organised and highly developed govern-
ment. The mandatory Powers should, therefore, make
laws laying it down that the inhabitants had such-
and-such a status. If a particular mandatory Power
wished to enact that) the inhabitants of the man-
dated area in its control had the status of “adminis-
tered persons and persons protected under mandate,”
it was perfectly at liberty to do so, provided that it
established a legal basis, the effect of which would be
to make the term in question correspond to a defi-
nite legalized status.
M. Rappard pointed- out that, if the Council of
the League adopted a reply on these lines from the
Commission, it would then probably forward the reply
to the various mandatory Powers with the request
that they would consider the possibility of the neces-
sary legislation.
M. Beau agreed. In effect, the Commission would
note the fact- that there was at present no defined
national status for the inhabitants of mandated areas.
The Commission would therefore ask the Council of
the League to request the mandatory Powers to con-
sider the possibility of enacting such legislation as
would confer such a status.
M. Orts feared that this procedure might result in
an infinite variety of status.
M. Beau agreed that this might be so. But he
did not think that the Commission should seek to
promote uniformity of status; its chief object should
be to ensure that the inhabitants of each mandated
territory should have at least some national status.
In using the words “administered persons or persons
protected under mandate,” the Commission was
merely recommending what appeared to be the most
useful among the various formulae from which the
mandatory Powers might choose.
M. Van Rees was prepared to agree, if the point
which he had made was referred to. He was merely
a.nations- that the Commission should not confine itself
to the term used in Resolution 11. The Commission
might say that perhaps another and shorter term
might conceivably be found, always on condition that
the status which such a term implied was embodied
in the legal definition.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore thought that the Commission
could hardly suggest a formula for the mandatory
Powers, which should be left to find their own
formulae'. The New Zealand Government, c.g., wished
to regard Samoans under mandate as legally
Samoans/’
The Commission then proceeded to discuss the draft
summary of the reasons to be adduced by it in sup-
port of Resolutions I. and IT
The summary in respect of Resolution 1. was
adopted.
The summary in respect of Resolution 11. was to
he re-drafted in accordance with the ultimate form
adopted for Resolutions I. and IT.
The Commission then proceeded to consider Resolu-
tion 111.
On M. Orts’ proposal, the words “it is the busi-
ness of the mandatory Powers ” (il appartient aux
Puissances mandataires ) were altered to read “it is
open to> the mandatory Powers” (il est Joisible aux
Puissances ■mandataires).
On M. Orts’ proposal, the words “by foreigners
established in these territories” were altered to read
“by the inhabitants of these territories,” and
It teas agreed that Resolution 111. should be ex-
tended to apply to B and C mandated territories.
It was further agreed that the reference to date
in the resolutions should be suppressed.
M. Van Rees pointed out that, the effect of Re-
solution 111. was that, in the opinion of the Com-
mission, the native inhabitants of C mandated terri-
tories could in no circumstances, even individually,
or as a purely voluntary act, obtain the status of
citizens of the mandatory Power. Further, the
naturalisation of native and non-native inhabitants
of B mandated territories was considered as prohibited.
It would seem that these points of view were unten-
able.
This was agreed.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore pointed out that, in Resolution
1., the Commission had laid it down that the natives
were to have a distinct national status apart from
the national status of the subjects of the mandatory
Power. In this connection, he read a letter dated
April 28th, 1922, addressed to the Under-Secretary of
State of the British Colonial Office by the New Zea-
land Government Offices in London. The letter stated
that Sir James Allen, High Commissioner for New
Zealand, had communicated with his Government in
regard to the nationality of the native inhabitants
of Western Samoa. The reply from the New Zealand
Government enclosed a copy of an opinion furnished
on May 11th, 1920, by Sir John Salmond, then
Solicitor-General to the New Zealand Government.
This opinion was couched in the following terms:
“The natives of Samoa are not British subjects,
inasmuch as Samoa, has jnolt beten annexed as
part of the British Empire. Its connection with
the Crown cannot be put higher than that of
a British protectorate. The natives of a protec-
torate are not British subjects; they occupy an
anomalous position under the title of British pro-
tected persons, and, although they are not en-
titled to the full rights of a British subject, they
are entitled to British diplomatic protection when
in foreign countries. This right is expressly re-
cognised by the Treaty of Peace in respect of the
territories under mandate. The natives of the
Cook Islands, on the other hand, are British sub-
jects. There is some practical advantage in re-
taining this distinction, since it affords the
Samoans an additional motive for exercising the


right conferred upon them by the Peace Treaty
to become incorporated within the British Em-
pire if they so desii’e. Then and not until then
will they acquire the full status of British citizen-
ship.
“I suggest accordingly that, in proper cases, ap-
plications for naturalization by Samoans perma-
nently resident in New Zealand should be ac-
ceded tpY
As regards the question of naturalisation, the New
Zealand Government did not at the time think it ad-
visable for t lie New Zealand Parliament to pass
special legislation on the question. If such legislation
were in the future contemplated, no discrimination
would be made between Europeau and native inhabi-
tants. On this question. Sir John Salmond had given
the following opinion on September 30th, 1919:
"The inhabitants of Samoa cannot be natural-
ised as British subjects by the New Zealand Go-
vernment under the Aliens Act, 1908. The au-
thority given by that Act to naturalize aliens is
limited to aliens who’ are resident in New Zea-
land, yjid who declare their intention of remain-
ing resident there.
“ The New Zealand Parliament has no autho-
rity to amend the Aliens Act by extending its
operation to Samoa. The authority of a Colonial
Parliament to legislate with respect to naturalisa-
tion is a limited delegated authority conferred by
Section 26 of the British Nationality and Status
of Aliens Act, 1914. This section authorises the
Legislature of a British Possession to impart to
any person any of the privileges of naturalisation,
to be enjoyed by him within the limits of that
Possession, and provides that any Act so passed
shall within those limits have the authority of
law. Even, therefore, if the New Zealand Par-
liament provided for the naturalisation in New
Zealand of the inhabitants of Samoa, such
naturalisation would operate only in Ne>v Zealand
itself, and the persons so naturalised would
still remain aliens in Samoa, just as persons
naturalised in New Zealand would remain aliens
in Australia or in the United Kingdom.”
The Commission placed it on record that it did not
understand the reference in Sir John Salmond's
opinion, dated May 1 \th, 1920, to the right conferred
upon the Samoans by the Peace Treaty to become in-
corporated within the British Empire.
M. Rappard saw nothing in the communication
from the New Zealand Government which was in
contradiction with the principle- of voluntary natura-
lisation.
M. Van Rees agreed. The Commission’s sole objec-
tion was to naturalisation cn bloc. This point should
be made clear in the draft.
After further discussion, the following definite text
was adopted for the Resolutions:
“ I. It is important, in order that the prin-
ciples laid down in Article 22 of the Covenant
may be respected and subject to the- provision in
paragraph 111 below, that the native inhabitants
of B and C mandated territories should be granted
a national status wholly distinct from that of the
nationals of the mandatory Power.”
11. A special law of the mandatory Power
should determine the status of these native in-
habitants, who might be given a designation such
as ‘ administered persons under mandate ’ or
‘ protected persons under mandate ’ of the man-
datory Power.”
“ 111. It is open to mandatorv Powers*- to
which B and C mandated territories have been
entrusted to make arrangements, in conformity
with their own laws, for the individual and
purely voluntary acquisition of their nationality
by inhabitants of these territories.”
The Commission then proceeded to consider the
summary of the reasons which it would adduce in
support of Resolution 111.
After discussion, and after M. Orts had read a
summary of his views on the question, which he pro-
posed should be incorporated in the memorandum, it
was ay reed that, before the next meeting of the Com-
mission, M. Beau, Mr. Ormsby-Gore, Mr Orts and
M. Rappard should re-draft Bart 111 of the memo-
randum, with a view to reconciling, as far as possible,
the various opinions expressed.
FIFTEENTH MEETING, HELD ON
WEDNESDAY, 9th AUGUST, 1922, AT 4 p.m.
Present: the members of the Commission, except
jVI. Freire d’Andrade.
100. — Communication op Commission’s Reports, etc.,
to the Council and the Members of the League.
M. Rappard pointed out that the reports of the
mandatory Powers would be forwarded to the Council
of the League of Nations, together with the observa-
tions of the Commission, and the comments of the High
Commissioners on those observations. The question,
therefore, arose whether it was necessary that all the
Members of the League of Nations should receive a
copy of the original reports of the mandatory Powers,
as well as the other relevant documents.
If this question were answered in the affirmative, the
further questions would arise: (a) by what means suffi-
cient copies of these reports were to be' secured (either
from the Governments concerned or by reprinting);
(b) whether the reports were to be distributed in their
original language or in both the official languages of the
League, as the procedure of the League required 1
M. Van Rees inquired what last year’s procedure
had been.
M. Rappard replied that last year’s procedure could
not constitute a precedent, since there were no annual
reports from mandatory Powers, and the only docu-
ments submitted to the Council were the Commission’s
report with the relevant annexes.
M. Beau thought that the Secretariat could hardly
ask the Governments concerned for the 200 copies which
would be necessary if the Members of the League were
to be supplied.
It was agreed: {a) that the reports need not be
translated from English into French, or vice versa; (*)
that, as regards the original reports, the Commission
should confine itelf to forwarding them to the Council
of the League. Should any other States Members of
the League wish to see any of them, they could be
specially communicated by the Secretariat.
M. Rappard stated that the Secretariat would be very
glad if members of the Commission would, before leav-
ing Geneva, return their available copies of the printed
reports from the various mandatory Powers.
101.—Publicity of Reports from Mandatory
Powers.
M. Van Rees inquired to what extent the reports
from the various mandatory Powers were public pro-
perty.
M. Rappard thought that, so far as the Secretariat
at least was concerned, they could not be either wholly
or party published until they had been submitted to
the Council. An applicant for a copy could, of course,
deal with the Governments concerned.
102. —Re-drafted Observations of the Commission
Supporting the Three Resolutions on the
Subject of National Status.
M. Rappard recalled the fact that at its thirteenth
meeting the Commission had adopted three resolutions
(see Minute 96) on the subject of the national status
of the inhabitants of B and C mandated territories.
POWERS.


At the same meeting the Commission had intrusted
three of its members with the task of redrafting its
observations in support of these three resolutions. A
re-drafted text of the Commission’s observations was
now submitted for consideration.
The re-drafted observations in respect of Resolution
I* were adopted.
The re-drafted observations in respect of Resolution
II were adopted , with certain verbal modifications.
lie-drafted Observations in respect of Resolution 111.
Paragraph 1 of the re-drafted observations in respect
of Resolution 111 was adopted. Paragraphs 2 and 3
were deleted.
103. — State Domains.
M. Rappard reminded the Commission that it had
decided to consider the question of the state domains
in connexion with all the B and C mandates, (see
Minute 59.)
M. v r an Rees thought it was for the Commission to
express an opinion on the subject.
M. Beau drew attention to Article 9 of the French
Mandate for the Cameroons, which authorized the
Mandatory to apply to the mandated territory the laws
in force in its colonies. The expression to which M.
Van Rees had drawn attention ( domaine prive de I’Etat
frangais) was only a current term in such legislation,
adapted by local decrees to territories under French
mandate.
M. Van Rees said that it was desirable to correct
the impression, which would arise from the use of such
a phrase, that the mandatory Power claimed the right
to take possession of these lands. There was no ques-
tion of criticising the French Administration or of
dealing with the subject without reference to the other
mandatory Powers. The same observations applied to
the use of the expression “ property of the Brit : sh
Crown.”
M. Beau observed that the mandatory Governments
were entitled to regulate the disposal of these lands.
M. Van Rees said that the Governments disposed of
them as Mandatories, and as guardians administering
a trust for the mandated territories, but not as owners
of mandated territories.
The Chairman represented that the Commission was
clearly not in a position to examine the question
thoroughly during the present session. He asked M.
Van Rees whether he would study the subject, and pre-
pare a report for further discussion at the next session
of the Commission.
M. Rappard drew attention to the fact that, accord-
ing to the terms of the “ B ” mandates, the legislation
of the Mandatories might not be applied in the man-
dated territories if it were contrary to the customs and
established rights of the natives.
Mr. Ormsby-Gore said that a thorough study of the
question would appear to necessitate a study of the
customs of the natives concerned.
M. Van Rees said that he could not undertake a
study of this importance. The real question at issue
was whether the Mandatory regarded itself as the pro-
prietor of the lands under discussion.
M. Beau had no objection to the question being
taken up by the Commission, provided the inquiry was
not confined to l a study of the position under the
French mandate.
M. Van Rees said that this was already understood.
He had raised the question in connexion with the
Japanese and British mandates, as well as in connexion
with the French mandate.
M. Orts said that, in his view, the question was
chiefly one of words. He referred to the views on this
subject which lie had expressed at previous meetings,
and notably when the Commission was considering the
reports on the Cameroons and East Africa.
M. Rappard represented that, in view of the polemics
in the press to which the subject had given rise, the
Commission might wish to study it further. It was
being alleged that it was the intention of the man-
datory Powers to appropriate all lands which were not
actually the property of the natives.
On the invitation of the Chairman, M. Van Rees
undertook to study the question further, and to present
a report to the Commission for discussion at the next
session.
* * $ # $ * *
SEVENTEENTH MEETING, HELD ON ERIDAY,
AUGUST 11th, 1922, AT 10 a.m.
110. — Japanese Mandate: Communication from
M. Matsuda.
The Commission noted the supplementary informa-
tion concerning the Japanese mandate, addressed to it
by M. Matsuda, following. (See Minute 63.)
1. The striking decrease in the heading “ taxes ” from
171,482 yen for 1920 to 61,495 yen for 1922 is
owing to the following facts:
(a) The business tax is abolished this year, as it
is mentioned on page 25 in the second
J apanese annual report, and also l the tax on
copra collection is abolished.
(b) The item of licences and fees is transferred
from the heading “ taxes ” to that of
“ miscellaneous revenues ” in the budget of
1922.
(c) Import and export duties, which were formerly
levied also on the trades with J apan as
well as on those with foreign countries, were
abolished recently, and therefore customs
duty is imposed at present only on the im-
ports from foreign countries.
The following table is annexed to complete the above
explanation, showing the details of tax revenues.
1920. 1922.
(Taxes and fees) (Taxes)
Poll tax ... ... 41,243 yen 59,495 yen
Business tax .. 22,450 ~
Import duty ... 58,193 ~ ' 2,000 ~
Export duty .. 48,644 „
Tax on copra collection 239 ~
Licences and fees ... 713 ~
2. Office Expenses.
As it is explained in Chapter XII of the second
Japanese report, the public finances of the Islands
were divided into Extraordinary military expendi-
ture and civil administration expenditure, and a
larger part of personnel expenses were comprised
in the former one, while only the inferior personnel
expenses were comprised in the item of “ office ex-
penses ” of the civil administration expenditure.
But, since April of this year, these expenses are
all included in the item of “ South Seas Bureau
expenses.’ ’ This is why there appears such a great
difference of figures, but there is no great increase
of personnel in reality.
3. Expenses for encouraging Shipping Service,
Industry , etc.
This item largely consists of subsidies to Japanese
shipping firms in order to maintain the communica-
tion and traffic between Japan and the Islands.
But, besides, there are comprised subsidies to
educational works, subsidies to natives’ visits to
Japan, and expenses on encouragement of indus-
tries (sugar industry, cultivation of coco-nut
palms, etc.), etc.
4. In the budget of the Japanese Government, a
fixed sum is reserved as reserve fund, which is
• divided into two sub-divisions, namely, the First
Reserve Fund and the Second Reserve Fund. Ac-
cording to the provision of the Japanese Constitu-
tion, the First Reserve Fund is to meet unavoid-
able insufficiencies of the budget, and the Second
Reserve Fund is appropriated for indispensable


expenses unprovided for in the budget. In the
budget of the Islands, a sum of 100,000 yen is
reserved as Reserve Fund, of which 30,000 yen is,
as First Reserve Fund, provided for, among others,
the allowances afforded in cases of officials’ retire-
ments or deaths. The remainder of the sums
amounting to 70,000 yen, is the Second Reserve
Fund, which is a provision for necessities, unable
to be foreseen.
5. The mining revenue, estimated at 1,064,000
yen for 1922, consists of incomes from the sale of
phosphorite, therefore it is not the same thing as
mining -fax. This mining revenue amounted to
1,244,959.82 yen in 1920 and to 1,302,352.60 yen
in 1921, but was not included in the Civil Ad-
ministration Revenue of the Islands.
lll. —Chairman’s Closing Speech.
The Chairman thanked his colleagues for the con-
siderable work which they had done during the ten
days’ session. He also< thanked M. Rappard and his
staff for the valuable assistance which they had rendered
to the Commission. The co-operation of the whole
Section had been extraordinarily intelligent and valu-
able; but certain of the general services of the Secre-
tariat had, for reasons of which he was unaware, not
always completely fulfilled the expectations of the
mission. The work of the Mandates Section of the
Secretariat had greatly increased since its creation, and
would still further increase on the entry into force of
the A and B mandates. It was essential that the
Section should be strengthened.
M. Rappard, speaking for himself and for his
colleagues of the Mandates Section, thanked the Chair-
man for what he had just said. He felt it necessary
to add that, if the work of the general services had not
always completely fulfilled the expectations of the
Commission, this was in no case due to failure on the
part of any individual member. On the contrary, he
was happy to take the opportunity to pay a tribute to
the devotion of his colleagues of the general services,
who had worked night and day without cessation in
order to allow the discussions of the Commission to go
on without interruption. He undertook to beg the
Secretary-General to put at this disposal of the Com-
mission next year a larger number of officials than had
been at his disposal this year.
Annex 4 to No. 14.
MEMORANDUM BY THE MARQUIS THEODOLI
WITH REGARD TO THE QUESTION OF THE
NATIONAL STATUS OF THE INHABITANTS
OF B AND C MANDATED TERRITORIES.
Translation.
At its meeting on May 12th, 1922, the Council of
the League of Nations adopted the following resolu-
tion :
“ The Council of the League of Nations, having
taken cognisance with interest and lively satisfac-
tion of the report of the Marquis Theodoli, pre-
sented on behalf of the Sub-Committee appointed
to collect information on the question of the
nationality of the inhabitants of B and C man-
dated areas, requests the Permanent Mandates
Commission to examine this question during its
coming session with a view to submitting to the
Council proposals for a suitable solution of the
matter.”
I hope that I may be of service to my colleagues and
possibly anticipate their wishes if I recall, briefly, the
circumstances which led the Council to take the above
decision, and to suggest what further action might be
taken in the matter.
F. 10729. —5
I,
At our first meeting, attention was drawn to the
question of the national status of the inhabitants of
B and C mandated areas, in connection with our con-
sideration of a report regarding the administration of
South-West Africa. It was brought to our notice on
that occasion, that a Commission, appointed by the
Government of the Union of South Africa in order to
put forward proposals with regard to the constitution
which should be given to the territory whose admin-
istration had been entrusted to that Government, had
already considered the question.
The majority of the members appeared to consider
that the inhabitants of South West Africa, by reason
of the cession of that territory by Germany and of its
administration by the Union of South Africa, should
ipso facto be invested with the nationality of the
administrators. One or two members of the Commis-
sion, however, seem to have expressed a contrary
opinion,
The Permanent Mandates Commission, considering
that the question was one which affected a fundamental
principle of the new system of Government, the applica-
tion of which .it was its duty to supervise, brought the
matter to the notice of the Council. The Council, at
its meeting on October 10th, 1921, adopted the follow-
ing resolution:
“ The Council of the League of Nations, having
considered question (1) mentioned in the annex to
the report submitted on behalf of the Permanent
Mandates Commission by its Chairman, the Mar-
quis Alberto Theodoli, on October 10th, 1921.
“ Resolves to request the Chairman of the Com-
mission and two of his colleagues to form a Sub-
Committee for the purpose of seeking further in-
formation on the question of the nationality of the
inhabitants of B and C mandated areas. The Sub-
Committee shall present a preliminary report to
the Council at its coming meeting.”
In pursuance of this resolution, I proceeded to Paris,
London and Brussels and M. Freire d’Andrade, m
order to meet representatives of the mandatory Powers
concerned, and to obtain their views on the matter.
M. Beau in Paris, Mr. Ormsby Gore in London, and
M. Ortg in Brussels were good enough to co-operate in
this enquiry. It was rendered much easier, not only
by the devotion and ability of these colleagues, to whom
I am glad to express once again my sincere gratitude,
but also by the co-operation of the Government, who
showed by the warmth of their welcome the confidence
which they felt in our Commission. The results of that
enquiry are well known. They were set forth, together
with all relevant information, in the Council Document
which, at the time, was communicated to the members
of the Commission. (Doc. No. C. 54 (a) M. 45 1922
YII of January 12th, 1922.)
It was in consequence of the presentation of the report
mentioned at the beginning of this document that the
Council, on May 12th, 1922, adopted the resolution to
which I referred above.
After having obtained, in pursuance of the instruc-
tions of the Council of last October, the views of the
mandatory Powers with regard to the question of the
national status of the inhabitants of B and
C mandated areas, it is now our duty to lay
before the Council the recommendations which appear
to us to offer a suitable solution of the matter.
The proposals which I venture to submit to you
herewith on my own behalf will, doubtless, not astonish
any of our colleagues. They are, indeed, in conformity,
not merely with the views expressed by the representa-
tives of the mandatory Powers as set forth in our report
of January 12th, 1922, but also, in my opinion, with
the spirit of Article 22.
A.—First, I consider that it is desirable to give the
Council most clearly to understand that, in our opinion,


it would be contrary to the spirit of the Covenant and
to the fundamental principles on which the institution
of mandates is based, that the inhabitants of the areas
in question should unconditionally be assimilated to
the citizens or subjects of the' mandatory Power.
In view of the fact that, in the course of history,
annexations have not always resulted in the imposition
on the inhabitants of the annexed territories of the
nationality of the Annexing Power, is it not evident,
a fortiori, that the relations of the Mandatory to a
mandated area cannot entail that consequence?
Further, we must point out that the territories are
to be administered by the States to which they have
been entrusted on behalf of the League of Nations.
Would it not constitute a contradiction if a mandatory
Power were to exercise authority on behalf of a third
party over those whom it had made its own nationals?
Finally, as was very acutely and justly remarked in
the coursei of our enquiry by M. Matsuda, Minister
Plenipotentiary of Japan, the institution of Mandates
is based essentially upon a recognised distinction between
the advanced civilisation of the mandatory Power and
the less highly developed condition of the population
placed under its guardianship. The effect, however, of
assimilating the population of the mandated areas, as
regards nationality, with that of the mandatory State
is, surely, to do away with this essential distinction.
B. —ls it desirable to go further in the recommenda-
tions which it will be our duty to lay before the Council,
and to recommend that the native inhabitants of the
territories in question should be placed under a system,
as regards nationality, which we ourselves should define ?
Ido not think so. It seems to me that it would be not
only useless but undesirable to propose for all mandated
areas a uniform system of legislation which is not
required by Article 22, and which would not be in
harmony with that of the mandatory Powers. Our
duty should, in my opinion, not go beyond that of
insisting that the principles set forth in the Convenant
shall be respected. I think that we shall be acting in
the best interests of the League of Nations and of
the institution of mandates if we do not attempt to
encroach unduly upon the rights of the mandatory
Powers, on whom alone falls the direct responsibility
for the administration of the territories in question.
C. —lf we state that the assimilation of the in-
habitants of the B and C mandated territories to' the
nationals of the mandatory Power would be regarded by
us as contrary to the spirit of the mandates system,
and if we declare, that any national status which
respects this fundamental principle and the rights of
these inhabitants would be regarded by us as admis-
sible', I consider that we shall be fulfilling both the re-
commendation of the Council and the duty entrusted to
us. But, having regard in particular to the situation
in South-West Africa which led to our enquiry, we
must briefly examine the question of the naturalisation
and of the nationalisation of the inhabitants who are
not natives of the territories under C Mandates.
The Government of the Union of South Africa, which
appears to be anxious to give the former German
colonists of South-West Africa as large a share as
possible in the administration of this territory, ap-
parently desires to grant them South African or British
nationality for this purpose. The problem arising from
the facts of the situation in South-West Africa is
politically and legally of so delicate a nature that the
desire has been expressed that it should be settled by
the Permanent Court of International Justice. Without
wishing definitely to reject this procedure, I should
nevertheless be very glad if the Permanent Mandates
Commission could recommend to the Council a solution
which would allow it to dispense with the assistance of
the Court.
Are we to recognise the right of the mandatory
Power to naturalise the inhabitants of the territories
under its mandate?
In so far as naturalisation of this kind is a purely
individual and voluntary action, it does not appear to
me to have sufficient international importance to justify
the intervention of the League of Nations. If the laws
of a mandatory Power, in this case, of the Union of
South Africa, should provide for the voluntary
naturalisation of foreigners living outside its actual
territory, it is evident that there is nothing in the
Covenant of the League of Nations forbidding the offer
of such naturalisation to the inhabitants of the mandated
territories by the mandatory Power and its acceptance
by them.
On the contrary, the Covenant provides that these
territories should be administered under the laws of
the Mandatory as integral portions of its territory
subject to the guarantees provided in the interests of
the indigenous population.
It’, on the other hand, the mandatory Power desired
to assimilate the inhabitants of a mandated territory
as soon as possible, and considered that this aim was
not attained with sufficient speed by means of individual
and voluntary naturalisation and, for this reason, were
to propose having recourse to collective and more or
less compulsory naturalisation, we would consider that
the general principles of a mandate would appear to
be opposed to it. Indeed, I consider that the honour
of the League of Nations is involved in seeing that all
the provisions of the Covenant should be fully and
sincerely carried out, in the spirit as well as in the
letter. But it seems to me that compulsion in any
form in regard to nationality applied to the inhabitants
of a territory administered by mandatory Powers, not
as sovereign masters, but as guardians on behalf of the
League of Nations, would be an infringement of the
principle which it is the function and the duty of the
Permanent Mandates Commission to see respected.
D.—The proposals which I have set forth and ex-
plained briefly above! may be summed up in the follow-
ing text, which I venture to submit to the judgment
of my colleagues:
The Permanent Mandates Commission, in compliance
with the invitation addressed to it by the Council of
the League of Nations on May 12th, 1922, has
examined the question of the national status of the
inhabitants of B and C mandated territories, with a
view to submitting to the Council proposals relative to
the solution which, in its opinion, would appear to be
the most satisfactory.
The Commission, for the reasons set forth in the
annexed report and minutes of its discussions has de-
cided to submit to the Council the following proposals:
1. With a view to the observance of the principles
set forth in Article 22 of the Covenant, it is important
that the native inhabitants of B and C mandated
territories should receive a national status clearly
distinct from that of the nationals or subjects of the
mandatory Power.
2. It would appear to be neither useful nor expedient
for the Council of the League of Nations to define with
greater precision the national status of these inhabitants.
Thq Council is confident that it can rely on the
mandatory Powers to give them a national status which
will respect the legitimate rights and interests of the
population whose administration they have undertaken
as Mandatories of the League of Nations.
3. The mandatory Powers to which C mandated
territories are entrusted, shall provide regulations, in
conformity with their own laws, for the individual and
purely voluntary acquisition of their nationality by the
inhabitants of the territories.


Annex 5 to No. 14.
THE LAND QUESTION IN MANDATED
TERRITORIES IN AFRICA.
Letter from the Anti-Sea very and Aborigines
Protection Society.
London, March 28th, 1922.
Sir,
The Committee of this Society begs leave to approach
the Permanent Mandate Commission, with reference to
the land question in the mandated areas of the African
Continent. Our Committee has found, through a long
period, that the menace to the welfare of native races
has expressed itself in different forms during varying
periods. For many years we were mainly concerned
with labour questions; at the present stage of the history
of the treatment of native races, by far the most
important feature appears to be that of the land.
Hence the desire of our Committee that this question
should be dealt with upon broad and generous lines.
The fact that. these mandated areas are outside the
sovereignty of the mandatory Power places them in a
unique position, and gives scope for the adoption of
advanced principles of moral and material development.
We recognise that in certain mandated territories
there are limited areas suitable for white colonisation, —
that is, suitable for Avhite labour and settlement. In
these areas it seems to us to be a matter of supreme
importance that the system of land tenure Should
provide for the' following:
(a) That areas should be reserved for natives,
and that these reserves should comprise lands
adequate in size and suitable in quality and homo-
logous, namely in large self-contained areas with
uninterrupted right of inter-communication. Of
these lands the natives should be granted absolutely
secure tenure, whether communal or- individual.
( b ) That in the event of any of the reserved land
being required for public purposes, twofold com-
pensation should be provided for any natives
removed from such lands, —first, the provision of
fertile areas elsewhere'; and, secondly, a monetary
grant to cover the cost of expropriation.
(c) Our experience points to the advisability of
vesting the title to these lands in some impartial
and protective organisation; in more than one
ease it has been found insufficient to vest such titles
in the local Government, and we submit for con-
sideration the advantage which would accrue from
the creation by the mandatory Power, of a local
Trustee Board for watching over the titles and
the development of native reserve areas.
Whilst averse to the adoption of any form of legalised
industrial and social segregation of races inhabiting
mandated areas, our Committee recognises the practical
difficulties which occur where white and native farms
adjoin each other. With the advance of native agricul-
tural knowledge, these difficulties will gradually dis-
appear. To meet this situation, Generals Botha, and
Smuts introduced the principle in South Africa of
earmarking certain areas, within the confines of which
natives should have the right to purchase individual
title, and it would seem desirable that this principle,
with possibly some modifications, should be adopted in
those Mandated territories where white colonisation is
practicable. We beg to suggest that the mandatory
Powers might consider the advantage which would
accrue both to the native and to the white population,
if selected areas outside the native reserves were
scheduled for preferential leasing or purchase by
natives.
In making these suggestions, we assume, of course,
that no native tribes or individuals would be dis-
possessed of lands which they hold to-day under a clear
native title.
In definitely tropical territories in West Africa where
white colonisation is impossible, and therefore where
native reservations are unnecessary, another feature
emerges, to which we attach vital importance,—namely,
the generally accepted radical title of the native “ right
to roam ” within tribal areas in search of sylvan
products such as vegetable oils and gums, spices and
other virgin products which, from early Egyptian
history, have formed the basis of West African over-
seas commerce. These products exist in huge quantities
in the vast primeval forests of the mandated areas of
West Africa. The native alone is physically capable
of searching for and gathering these products, and
therefore any successful attempt to alienate these sylvan
products from the natives, and remove them from
commerce, would inevitably involve the institution of
some other incentive than commerce, and experience
has shown that the only real substitute for commerce
as the incentive is force, —and force for this purpose
can only be effectively applied in the form of the whip
and a gun behind every producer.
From this position there is no escape whatever;
commerce or force are at present the exclusive means
whereby these sylvan products can be secured.
Ther e is a good deal of literature available on this
subject 1 , but we. will only burden your Commission
with quotations from one official document, —namely,
the Report of the Northern Nigeria Lands Com-
mittee 3 which is generally regarded as almost a classic
upon West African land questions. In submitting
this Report to Lord Crewe, the Governor, Sir Percy
Girouard, says:
“ In my memorandum of the 2nd November,
1907 (No. 1 in Cd. 5103) I stated that in most of
the Provinces of the Protectorate there would
appear to be practically no land which was not
subject to village or tribal claim and the Com-
mittee in other parts of their report adopt thi»
view on the evidence taken. In other words the
lands were national within each community or
state."
The experience of Sir Percy Girouard in this respect
has been, we believe, that of most Administrators;
the natural landmarks of rivers, streams and hills are
well-known, defined and accepted; even the repair of
remote bridges over streams is frequently undertaken
by two tribes who repair their sections at different
periods. That bond fide vacant lands exist, we do not
for one moment deny, but lands should only be de-
clared vacant and alienable after the most exhaustive
and impartial inquiry. Even when lands have been
declared vacant some “ recognition " should, if not in
equity, then at least from the standpoint of good
policy, be made to native tribes in the region. See
the despatch of Lord Crewe to the Governor of Fiji. 0
The remarks of Sir Percy Girouard upon sylvan
produce so concisely state the West African opinion
upon the subject, and are so appropriate to our sub-
missions, that we beg leave to quote them in extenso :
“ On many of the present unoccupied tracts 1
trees and plants of economic value are to be found,
such as oil palms, shea butter trees, gum acacia,
rubber pines, etc. The traders at present in the
country have had long experience in its develop-
ment, but have wisely never sought to obtain any
rights whatever to these sylvan products, having
preferred to leave their collection to the natives
themselves. The extreme caution which should
be observed by the Government in granting rights
to exploit sylvan produce in a tropical country
partially, bui nor wholly, occupied by natives, has
been brought home to modern statesmen by the
lamentable situation created on the Congo. If I
interpret it correctly the position of antagonism
( l ) An exhaustive work lias just been published, by Sir Frederick Lugard:
The Dual Mandate.
(*) Cd. 5102 (1910).
(») Cd. 205, p. 77 (1908).
(*) “Unoccupied” does not, of course, mean “vacant.”


with the natives in the Congo Free State would
appear to have arisen from the claim by the State
to ‘ vacant lands’, and by the definition that all
lands outside the actually cultivated holdings of
the villages were to be considered as 1 vacant
lauds’. By this claim the Congo Free State also
asserted ownership of the sylvan produce found
upon such lands. Many large concessions for the
development of these * vacant lands ' were granted
to immigrants and the inhabitants actually forced
to gather for the concessionaires sylvan produce
they had always looked upon as the property of
the Community.”
“ I am strongly of opinion that the sylvan pro-
duce' should be declared to be reserved for ex-
ploitation by natives of Northern Nigeria except
in those areas to which occupant rights may be
granted to immigrants, and that the area of such
grants, mainly for agricultural or stockfarming
purposes, should be limited to, say, 640 acres for
any one individual. lam further inclined to
think that the dangers which I have mentioned
in the case of sylvan produce apply, but perhaps
not so prejudicially, to the exploitation of pasture
lands, and am most strongly of opinion that
graziers’ rights granted to settlers other than
natives of Northern Nigeria should be limited to
the area of an occupancy grant of, say, 640
acres.”
Our Committee has been much impressed by its
study of the land decree issued by the French Man-
datory Government of the Came toons. This decree
constitutes, we believe, the most comprehensive system
of land tenure yet issued by a mandatory Power, and
we should appreciate receiving in due course any fur-
ther information which may come into the possession
of your Commission, upon the development of this or
similar decrees. The question of ownership title ap-
pears to be raised in Title 2, Article 4, wherein it is
stated:
“ These lands constitute those that are generally
called the native reservations. The natives ex-
ploiting them only possess on the ground a right
of use, and not of ownership.”
The decree does not make dear to us where the
ownership of these Reserves rests to-day, and presum-
ably, it is the intention of the mandatory Government
which possesses no sovereign rights in the Cameroons,
to vest the title in some public body. In the adjoin-
ing Protectorate of Northern Nigeria, the ownership
title reposes in the State, with a British Governor as
the Trustee Protector, and Statutory limitations for-
bid alienation of ownership, and restrict the power of
leasing. In mandated areas we presume that the
League of Nations will act as the protector of the
Ownership of Native State lands, but nothing in the
elaborate decree appeals to indicate where the ulti-
mate ownership reposes. In this decree the question
of land not alienated in definite title, is divided into
three categories of Public Lands, Vacant Lands, and
what is called Private Domain of the State. We
understand that in French Law Public Lands follow
very much those of British Colonial territories,
namely, roads, bridges, foreshores and riparian tracts.
The question of Vacant Lands is also covered by this
decree, and it would seem that “ Vacant Lands ” are
taken to mean all lands other than (a) ex-enemy pro-
perties, ( b) native reserves and cultivated gardens,
and (c) urban districts.
Article 5, Category 4, states:
“ The vacant lands and those without master
belong to the Private Domain of the State. They
• are divided up in urban and rural grounds. They
may be alienated at the hereafter specified condi-
tions, to any European or native applicant who is
competent to own in the Cameroons.”
In our opinion, native welfare and European com-
merce will be vitalty affected by the interpretation of
the word “ vacant.” This term may be quite legiti-
mately applied to lands without occupants and with-
out superficial values, but it would raise precisely the
danger which we have indicated, if the term “ Vacant
Lands ” were applied to those large areas of tropical
lands upon which are found to-day sylvan products,
normally gathered by the natives and forming the
basis of their physical, social and economic existence.
We cannot believe that this is intended, but we under-
stand that the principle of Private Domain in French
law permits the extinction of indigenous rights in
these areas. Moreover, in the passage above, we
observe that there is the right to “ concede.” If the
right to concede covers bond fide vacant lands only
where sylvan produce has been exhausted, there could
be no reasonable exception taken to the granting of
leases under conditions satisfactory to> the Lessors, but
if the sylvan produce has been so exhausted, we cannot
conceive anyone desiring large concessions of forest
tracts of tropical lands. We hope we may assume,
therefore, that the native position in this matter has
been completely safeguarded, but we should appre-
ciate being informed whether the Mandatory Com-
mission is in possession of any instrument issued by
the mandatory Government, which would remove any
danger of a reversion to the policy of State Ownership
of the raw produoe of the forests.
We have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient, humble Servants,
( Signed) Charles Roberts,
President.
Ilenry Bentinck,
Chairman.
Sydney Olivier,
Vice Chairman.
E. W. Brooks,
T. Fowall-Buxton,
Joint Hon. Treasurers.
Travers Buxton,
Secretary.
John H. Harris,
organisiny Secretary.
The Hon. Sir Eric Drummond,
Secretary-General,
League of Nations,
Geneva.
Annex 6 to No. 14.
LETTER FROM GENERAL SMUTS.
Cape Town, July, 4 th, 1922.
Dear M. Rappard,
It was a pleasure to receive your letter of May
23rd, and I readily respond to the queries which you
put to me. I enclose a newspaper report of what I
said in September, 1920, at Windhuk. . . It will help
you to understand what I said if you bear in mind
that we have quite a peculiar and unexpected problem
in our hands with the German population in South-
West Africa. In other mandated African territories,
the German population was simply expelled or re-
patriated during the war or the Armistice, and the
mandatory Power is therefore rid of that source of
trouble. The Union, however, adopted a much more
merciful attitude, and with some exceptions allowed
the German population to remain in South-West
Africa, in the hope that they would respond to the
benevolence of our action, and co-operate with us in
every reasonable way.
This unfortunately they have not done. They re-
main aloof from us in their outlook and sympathies
and cling to the German Fatherland as if they were
still a German Colony, and they long for the day when
they will again be a German Colony. This unexpected


attitude has made our task in South-West Africa
much more difficult than it should have been. And
I have had to explain to the Germans that the man-
date of the. C type largely ignores them as Germans,
and affords guarantees only in respect of the indigenous
native population. I have explained to them the
futility of looking to> the Fatherland and the necessity
of throwing their lot in with the people of the Union,
where a large and prosperous population of German
extraction lives. I have explained to them that the
Union has full power of legislation and administration
over South-West Africa as an integral portion of the
Union, and that the effect is very much the same as if
they were incorporated into the Union, subject of
course to. the full safeguards in the interests of the
native population. In all this, I have confined my-
self to the strict letter of Article. 22. The Germans,
however, claim that they should have their own legis-
lative institutions, and apparently attach no meaning
to the provision that the Union can administer the
mandated territory under its laws as an integral por-
tion of the Union.
I have no doubt that, with a policy of patience and
forbearance, the Germans in South-West Africa will
in the end recognise that it is in their own interest to
identify themselves with the Union and to cease to
look to Germany. The question is coming up in an
acute form in the matter of nationality. Are they
German subjects under the mandate ? Will they, and
. their children forever remain German subjects,
although born in a country which has nothing to do
with Germany, and although they themselves are not
under German protection, but under the protection
of the Mandatory? You see how anomalous the posi-
tion is and how much more absurd it will become with
the years. I believe the only solution is that they be
made Union subjects by Act of Parliament with the
right of objecting individuals to. register themselves as
German subjects. But it is to. be feared that, as long
as they expect one day to be handed back to Germany,
they will resist, such a step.
I see that the Committee of the League has found
that they are, and continue,- as German subjects.
This ia probably correct. But in that case what is the
nationality of the indigenous population which had
become German by conquest and annexation in years
gone by ? Do the natives also remain German
subjects in perpetuity ? This would be most
absurd, and yet it is difficult to draw any
distinction in principle between born white. Ger-
man subjects and conquered black German sub-
jects. I think in the end the. Union will
simply pass a law to settle the nationality question,
but leave it to individual white Germans to register
themselves as continuing German subjects.
Do not for a moment think that in my ideas or
proposals I depart from the system of mandates,
which I consider one of the most beneficial advances
in international law. We must only recognise the
fact that C mandates are in effect not far removed
from annexation. The case is, of course, quite dif-
ferent with the other two far more important types of
mandates.
I wish you all success in your very responsible work;
and from me you will always have full support. . .
Believe me, etc.,
(Signed) I. J. Smuts.
M. W. E. Kappard.
“ The South-West Mandate.”
(Extract from the “Cape Times,” September 18 th,
1920.)
“ Windhuk. —Speaking in English through an inter-
preter, General Smuts stated that he was delighted
with the receptions he had received throughout the Pro-
tectorate. Ho pointed out that the present time
marked the end of one chapter and the opening of a
new one. . . The Prime Minister commented at length
on the good work done by the German settlers in the
face of great difficulties. They had mostly been resi-
dent in this country about 12 years, half of which had
been taken up with war. All the evidence pointed to
their being good colonists. It was one of the best
ranching countries in the world, and General femuts
emphasised the importance of ranching for many years
to come 1 . The first requirements of success were whites
and capital. General Smuts then proceeded to con-
sider the Constitutional position, and pointed out that
the mandate was a new idea in International Paw, and
therefore it was only right that a full explanation
should be given at this stage. He emphasised that
the League of Nations had nothing to do l with the
giving of mandates, which were already settled as a
fact by the Peace Treaty, quite apart from the League
of Nations.
“ Under the Peace Treaty Germany had renounced
her colonies not to the League of Nations, but to the
Great Powers. Article 119 of the Treaty made that
clear. The Great Powers passed a resolution in Paris
in May, 1919, conferring various mandates and in the
case of South-West Africa the mandate was given to
the Union. This mandate was accepted by the Union
Parliament. The League of Nations was only con-
cerned in one way, namely to define the scope of the
mandate in any particular area. General Smuts then
proceeded to discuss the scope of the mandate. The
memorandum presented stated that South-West Africa
should be< regarded, under the mandate as a self-
governing State, but the Peace Treaty was in direct
conflict with such a theory. The mandate system in-
troduced by the Peace Treaty was framed to protect
the indigenous population of certain countries, and
then made mention of certain countries dealt with,
showing that while some were able to govern them-
selves to some extent, others were not so far advanced
in civilisation, therefore it was necessary to provide
three grades of mandates, South-West Africa coming
under the third class. The Prime Minister then
quoted the relevant portion of the Peace Treaty pro-
viding for the government under the law's of the
Mandatory. Subject to safeguards, the Union Govern-
ment had complete authority over South-West Africa,
not as a separate territory, but as an integral portion
of the Union, as though it were Union territory, with
safeguards for the natives against slavery, traffic in
arms, liquor and military training—the control of ‘
these safeguards lying with the League of Nations.
The Union Government could extend to South-West
Africa its legal, judicial, administrative and financial
systems, its Civil Service, its police, and its Railway
Administration, and it could declare South-West
Africa a Province of the Union and could give Parlia-
mentary representation, the only limit being in legard
to natives.
“ In effect, the relations between the South-West
Protectorate and the Union amount to annexation in
all but name. Without annexation the Union could
under the Peace Treaty, do whatever it could have
done in annexed territory, save the reservation of the
natives. The General then discussed the position
among the German population. To whom could they
look for support ? They Could not look to> Germany
which had renounced them. The country had been
entrusted to the Union, and therefore the Union was
the only country to speak arid act for them. The posi-
tion of Germans in such a mandated territory was, of
necessity, difficult. In other mandated territories the
difficulties were overcome by the repatriation of the
whole German population—for instance in Togoland,
East Africa, and the Cameroons. Here much more
humane lines were adopted. The German population
was allowed to remain, but the position of such a
population was necessarily difficult at first. Though


the Germans could not. look to Germany, they were
not Union citizens, but were in a sort- of middle stage.
Lhe Union Government desired the Germans to con-
sider the question carefully. There was no wish to
hurry them. They must take time and consider their
position thoroughly, but the only possible ultimate
solution seemed that they would become Union
citizens. Their position under the Peace Treaty and
mandate seemed to indicate this clearly.
i They would then have full rights and privileges, and
they must decide for themselves. The policy of the
Government would be to carry out the mandate.
South-West Africa would always be a separate unit
as a large country, but it was impossible to run it as
a province at the present time, though later, no doubt,
it would become one, with a Provincial Council and
members in the House of Assembly, but first other
stages would have to be passed through. The first
would probably be an Advisory Council to be
appointed to advise the Administrator. Not long
after that, the Council would become an elected
Council, and in due course there would be a full Par-
liamentary system. This was given as a rough out-
line, but it was inadvisable to go into closei details as
a Commission was coming next month to consider
details.
“A word of warning should be given that political
lights and citizenship went together. Aliens had no.
political right such as franchise, etc. If political
rights were given to- this country, Germans who were
not Union citizens would have barred themselves, and
could take no part in the political administration. It
was therefore highly important that Germans should
decide whether they intended to become Union sub-
jects. No pressure would be brought to bear. It
must be of their own free will. The Union was
anxious to have Germans as citizens. The German
population could make a. great contribution to the
population of the new South Africa, but they must
have time to think it over.
Passing to. other points of the memorandum,
General Smuts stated that Martial Law would be re-
pealed almost immediately, and therefore subsidiary
points Mould go with it. General Smuts
stated that he had visited the German Schools and had
heard the Committees everywhere, and he was most
hopeful of a satisfactory solution of the question; but
a _ number of practical details must be discussed with
.the new Administrator. The Prime Minister pointed
out that the State should bear the cost of education,
he considered, as it was impossible owing to the sparse
population to expect farmers to pay for education.
He expressed the opinion that- German should be used
as the medium in the lower standards, the upper
standards devoting particular attention to the higher
study of the German language and literature. He
ho|>ed the Union Mould also study German literature,
particularly the works of Schiller and Goethe. He
emphasised the fact that nothing would be done to
suppress language and national self-respect. He
painted out that a German child who had not been
trained in one of the official languages of the Union
would be precluded from entering the qualifying
examinations for the Union and would thus be pre-
vented from following a profession in the Union.
There u r as no scope in Germany as that country was
moie than full. There would be no. scope in the
Protectorate for many years owing to the size of the
population. He also pointed out that they must look
for the absorption of the young people into the Union,
and must inculcate one of the Union languages in the
interests or the children.
' . 0n such a basis settlement M'ould be reached. 1
While not able to contemplate German as a third 1
official language, he said every effort- was being made
to overcome the difficulty in the appointments of
officials. He assured his hearers that private property
would be respected. The question of large concessions
was being considered. Trading with Germany would
be respected z and the Public Trustee in England would
be urged to release the property of Germans in the
Union and the South-West, the fortunes of war having
left large sums in England at the beginning of the
war which were confiscated and were now held by the
Public Trustee. Immigration from Germany would
in future be under the permit system, and such permits
would be issued on the merits of each case by tKe
Administrator. General Smuts said he was impressed
by the need of immigration and the need of a female
population to meet the difficulty arising from a new
country populated on a male basis without family life.
Females would be allowed to come out to be married,
to enter service or to join relatives. Many cases had
been observed of the need of skilled labour, white
hands on farms, missionaries, and the hospital staffs
required relief and reinforcements. All such cases
would be considered by the Administrator. Considera-
tion was also being given to those residents of long
standing who had been repatriated. The labour ques-
tion was then touched on as one of the most difficult
problems to be faced. Evidence of this was to be
found everywhere. The natives of South-West Africa
were of a low standard of civilisation. They had been
in contact with whites for a very short' time, and
much of the contact had been disturbed by the hos-
tilities of recent years. The transfer from the stem
German regime to the new Government had thoroughly
unsettled the natives, who would no doubt begin to
realise the situation, but he assured his hearers that
he had impressed on all deputations the absolute neces-
sity for natives to work, pointing out that work was
the law of the white man, and pointing out to whites
that better work could be obtained from natives if
they were well treated. It was pointed out that the
present law in force was closely akin to the Union law
and if firmly administered, would go far to meet
difficulties. Some improvements might be made which
it was hoped the Administrator would consider, not-
ably compulsory branding and marking. He recom-
mended the farmers to consider the advantages of
fencing, and also of farming with white hands, as
more economical and efficient. Land Bank and Govern-
ment assistance would of course' be needed for fencing,
but with fencing on a large scale, much labour and
trouble could be saved. lie assured the meeting that,
transport difficulties in this country would be carefully
considered, and there was need of an early reconstruc-
tion of tariffs which at present were based on the old
German tariffs, which were considered far too high.
He was glad to see the old population and the
new one respected each other, and there was no sign
of that deep and lasting bitterness which was to be
found in Europe. The whole population was sober
and reasonable and prepared to face the future as they
faced the past, as men. He hoped that, with co-
operation in the next ten or twenty years the country
would take a front place among the South African
States.'’
Annex 7 to No. 14.
LETTER FROM SIR JAMES ALLEN, HIGH
COMMISSIONER IN LONDON, FOR NEW
ZEALAND, dated AUGUST 24th, 1922.
London, August 24 th, 1922.
Dear M. Rappard,
In accordance with my promise, I have obtained
statistics relative to Arms in Samoa, and I now have
the pleasure to quote below a telegram which I have
received from my Government on the subject:
“ Replying to your telegram of August 10th,
Arms in Samoa: Shot Gun: License 1,308, in


Government Store 500. Total 1,808. Rifles:
License 25 includes 8 pea, rifles, 11 Military rifles,
also 75 Military rifles in Government store. Total
rifles 100. Revolvers: License 10, in Government
Store 21. Total Revolvers 31. Automatic Pistols
for European Police 12, of which 4 on issue.
Have also 4 fifteen-pounder field guns and 2
maxim, 2 Lewis guns.”
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) J. Allen.
M. William Rappard.
No. 15.
Report on the Second Session of the Permanent Mandates Commission, submitted to the Council of the
League of Nations on behalf of the Commission by the Chairman, the Marquis Theodoli.*
Geneva, August 23rd, 1922.
The second session of the Permanent Mandates Com-
mission was held at the seat of the League of Nations
from August Ist to August 11th, 1922. During this
session, the Commission held seventeen meetings, two
of which were public. With the exception of His
Excellency General Freire d’Andrade, who, on account
of the state of his health, was unable to leave Portugal,
all the members of the Commission took part in its
work.
In connexion with the examination of the reports
dealing with the administration of the territories under
the Australian, Japanese and New Zealand mandates,
the Commission was assisted in its work by Sir Joseph
Cook, the High Commissioner in London for Australia.
M. Al. Matsuda, Minister Plenipotentiary, of Japan,
and Sir James Allen, High Commissioner for New
Zealand in London, the duly accredited representatives
of these three States. The International Labour
Organization was represented at the meetings by Mr.
Grimshaw, who took part in an advisory capacity in the
discussions connected with the study of questions relating
to labour conditions.
At its first meeting, the Commission re-appointed
the Marquis Theod'oli Chairman, and M. Van Rees
Vi ce- Ch ai r man.
During the session, the Permanent Mandates Com-
mission studied the following subjects:
(1) The national status of the inhabitants of
territories under B and C mandates.
(2) The first annual reports regarding the admin-
istration of territories under C mandates.
(3) The reports submitted by the Belgian, British
and French Governments on the administration of
various territories under A and B mandates.
(4) Preparation of questionnaires intended to assist
the British and French Governments in drawing up
their annual reports relating to the administration of
Palestine and of Syria and the Lebanon.
(5) Various administrative questions regarding the
organization of the work of the Commission.
I.
National Status op the Inhabitants op Territories
under B and C Mandates.
This question, on which the Commission had been
instructed by the Council of the League of Nations to
give its opinion, forms the subject of a special report
to be transmitted to the Council at the same time as
the present document. It is therefore merely mentioned
here.
11.
Examination of the Annual Reports relating to the
Administration of Territories under C Mandates.
The' terms of all mandates of the C type were decided
by the Council on December 17th, 1920. During'this
present session, accordingly, the Commission was called'
upon for the first time to study the annual reports
dealing with the administration of territories under this
* League of Nations, C. 660, M. 382,1922, vi.
system of government. The territories in question are
as follows:
Pacific Islands, under Japanese Mandate.
Nauru.
New Guinea.
Samoa.
South-West Africa.
When the Commission met on August Ist, 1922, all
its members had already received reports on the
administration of these five territories. Moreover, the
Secretariat had been informed by the Australian,
British, Japanese and New Zealand Governments that
duly accredited representatives would be present at the
discussions regarding the territories which they had
undertaken to administer. The Commission gladly
takes this opportunity to inform the Council how
fortunate it has been in the assistance which it has
received in this part of its work from the Australian
and New Zealand High Commissioners and the accred-
ited representative of Japan. The Commission is of
opinion that the active participation in its work of these
representatives of the mandatory Powers has proved in
every respect most successful and profitable. For that
reason it regrets all the more deeply that the Govern-
ment of the South African Union did not see its way
to delegate to the Commission a representative whose
special knowledge would have been extremely useful to
it in throwing light on the particulars given in the
replies to the questionnaire which were forwarded to it
by that Government.
The Commission considered the annual report regard-
ing the territories under C mandates in accordance with
the course laid down in Article 8 of its Rules of
Procedure. It accordingly investigated and discussed
each report in the presence of the accredited repre-
sentative of the Power which had submitted it. It
afterwards settled the terms of the observations which
had been suggested to it by the consideration of each
report. These observations were communicated to the
duly accredited representatives of the Powers concerned.
They are annexed to this report.
Finally, in accordance with the last paragraph of
Article 8 of its Rules of Procedure, the Commission
held a plenary and public meeting at which three
accredited representatives of the mandatory Powers
were present. At this meeting, which was held on
August 7th, 1922, a general report was submitted on
behalf of the Commission, which is reproduced in
extenso in its Minutes. In addition to various con-
siderations relating to the co-operation of the man-
datory Powers with the Commission, this report contains
a statement of the general conclusions arrived at by
the Commission as a result of its investigation of the
reports dealing with the administration of the C
mandates.
As will be seen on referring to the special observa-
tions relating to the administration of territories under
C mandates, to this general report, and to the dis-
cussions of the Commission as they are given in the
annexed Minutes, there are two points in particular
which appear to call for the special attention of the
Council.


The first is connected with the presence, in all the
Pacific Islands administered in accordance with the
mandates principle, of labour imported from various
overseas countries, and more particularly from China.
The introduction of these foreign labourers, a step
dictated by economic needs, is not wholly free from
certain social difficulties which have engaged the atten-
tion of the Commission.
On the one hand, the mere distance which separates
the countries where these labourers are recruited from
the place to which they are taken, and the consequent
heavy expenses incurred in their transport, renders it
necessary that labour contracts should be concluded for
very long periods. It is however, clear that, .in spite
of the guarantees incorporated in the mandate the
position of a Chinese coolie who is bound by a three
years’ contract and who has been conveyed to a foreign
land thousands of miles from his kith and kin, calls
for the greatest care on the part of the administration
of the mandatory Powers. Again, the presence of this
exclusively male labour in the midst of a native popula-
tion is bound to involve a certain element of danger to
the social life of the latter.
The Commission, which is fully alive both to the
gravity of the economic conditions responsible for this
state of affairs and to the social danger which arises
from it, merely desires at present to call the Council’s
attention to the facts and to express a desire that the
mandatory Powers will be good enough, in their future
reports, to supply all relevant information on this
subject. The Commission is specially anxious to be
kept constantly and fully informed of the extent of
these migrations of labourers, of the measures taken
by the mandatory Powers to supervise these movements,
and of their results from a social point of view, and
also of all observations to which the application of these
measures might give rise.
The second question which has engaged the special
attention of the Commission during the examination
of the reports regarding the territories placed under
C mandates is the question raised by the administration
of the island of Nauru.
In accordance with the decision of the Supreme
Council, of May 7th 1919, the Mandatory entrusted
with. the administration of this island is the British
Empire taken as a whole, but it was brought out in the
course of discussion that the British Empire had trans-
ferred the responsibility for the administration of
the island of Nauru to Great Britain, Aus-
tralia, and New Zealand, and that, as a re-
sult of a special agreement entered into by these
three Governments, Australia for the time being has
assumed the duty of governing this territory.
The population of this island numbers only 2,000,
but its mineral wealth is considerable. This wealth
consists in rich deposits of phosphates, for the exploita-
tion of which the Governments of Australia, Great
Britain and New Zealand have reserved to themselves
exclusive rights. In accordance with the agreement
concluded between these Governments, these rights are
exercised by three Phosphate Commissioners, whose
powers appear to be unlimited as regards everything
relating to the undertaking which they manage. It is
not clear what powers and means of control the Aus-
tralian administration possesses with regard to this
organization.
This administration is, indeed, intrusted to an official
appointed by the Australian Government alone, while
the three Phosphate Commissioners hold their powers
under the three Governments concerned and take their
decisions by a majority vote.
The Commission feels it its duty to call the attention
of the Council to the anxiety which it feels as a result
of this situation. It expresses the desire that future
annual reports of the mandatory Power should contain
information which will enlighten it further.
In concluding this portion of its statement, the Com-
mission is happy to note that, taken as a whole, the
reports of the mandatory Powers responsible for the
administration of territories under C mandates give
evidence, one and all, of an earnest desire to secure
for the population concerned the benefits arising out of
the application of the provisions of Article 22 of the
Covenant and of the mandates. From the information
supplied in these reports, it has been able more
particularly to note that slavery, even domestic slavery,
was non-existent in these territories, that forced labour
was either wholly unknown or practised only in the
case of essential public works and services, that freedom
of conscience was everywhere guaranteed, that the traffic
in arms and ammunition was under strict control, that
the prohibition to supply the natives with spirits and
alcoholic liquors was everywhere rigorously enforced,
and that the territories under C mandates were
absolutely demilitarised.
Moreover, the Commission noted that in the territories
of the islands under Japanese mandate, New Guinea,
Samoa, and South-'West Africa, the mandatory Powers
have made very considerable financial sacrifices in order
to discharge the duties which they have assumed.
111.
Examination op Reports presented by the Belgian,
British and French Governments on the
Administration of Certain Territories under
B and A Mandates.
In accordance with the undertaking given by the
Belgian, British and French Delegates on September
20th, 1921, in the sixth Committee of the Assembly of
the League of Nations, the Belgian, British and French
Governments submitted to the Permanent Mandates
Commission reports on the administration of their
mandated territories covering the year 1921, which
had been prepared for their respective Parliaments.
Beports of this nature were received in respect of all
the six mandated territories in Equatorial Africa, i.e.,
(i) Tanganyika (British), (ii) Buanda-Urundi (Belgian),
(iii) French Cameroons, (iv) British Cameroons, (v)
French Togoland, (vi) British Togoland. The only
report received regarding an area under A mandate was
a report from the French Government on the administra-
tion of Syria and the Lebanon.
It_ is clear from the character of these reports that
the information submitted in regard to the Tanganyika
Territory, French Cameroons and French Togoland had
already been drawn up in the light of the questionnaire
prepared by the Permanent Mandates Commission at
its first Session in October 1921. These three reports—
and especially the two French reports— gave full in-
formation on practically all those points to which
special reference has been made in the terms of the
mandates upon which the questionnaire was based. The
two French reports contained, in addition to the
information given under the appropriate headings, the
full text of all the important administrative and
legislative measures enacted for the territories during
the year. It is hoped that next year similar texts will
be available for the Commission in regard to the other
four territories under B mandates, not only for 1922
but also for the preceding period.
The question of most general interest to the Per-
manent Mandates Commission affecting the six territories
is the system of land tenure. In tropical Africa the
land question is perhaps the most important from the
point of view of the progressive well-being of the native
inhabitants and their posterity. * The Permanent Man-
dates Commission would therefore be glad to receive, at
as early a date as possible, the full text of the land
laws, in operation in the territories. The Commission
has tried to define clearly the meaning which, under
the mandatory system, should be given to the phrases
“ domaine de PEtat " and “ Crown lands ” which are


used in certain of the reports of the mandatory Powers
and in the ordinances enacted for mandated areas. The
Commission has instructed one of its members to pre-
pare a comparative iieview of these various laws, in
order that it may undertake a close- study of this im-
portant problem at its next session.
Another question, affecting all the mandated terri-
tories in Equatorial Africa, to which the Commission
has given special attention is the co-ordination of
information regarding the appearance, spread, preven-
tion and treatment of tropical diseases. In consultation
with the Heal Section of the- League.of Nations, the
Commission ha« arranged an addition to its questionnaire
J upon this subject. It requests the Council of the
League of Nations to invite the- mandatory Powers to
include in their annual reports prepared for submission
to the- League- replies to this suggested addition to the-
questionnaire already issued.
In their first report of October 1921, the Permanent
Mandates Commission drew the attention of the Council
to the provision in the mandates whereby the mandatory
Power is permitted to incorporate the mandated territory
into a customs union with its neighbouring possessions.
It expressed the opinion that, in approving this pro-
vision, the Council did not intend to authorise an
exception to the principle of economic equality laid
down at the end of paragraph 5 of Article 22 of the
Covenant. The Commission notes that, in the case o-f
Tanganyika Territory, Ruanda-Urundi and a part of
French Cameroons which lie within the conventional
Basin of the Congo, such a- conflict cannot arise, as
commercial equality is there- assured by the provisions
of the Berlin and Brussels Acts and the- St. Germain
Treaty. It would be glad to know, however, whether
any preferential system obtains in Nigeria, Dahomey
and the- Gold Coast, and, if so-, whether the British
Cameroons and French and British Togoland have been
incorporated into a customs union with those neigh-
bouring possessions of the two mandatory Powers con-
cerned.
There was an exchange- of views between the mem-
bers of the- Commission on the question of ascertaining
whether, in the case of the existence of organized native
communities such as “ sultanates ” or il kingdoms,”
the conclusion of some- convention between the man-
datory Power and the heads of these- native bodies
might not be- considered, in order to define their respec-
tive powers.
The most important individual question bro-ught to
the attention of the Permanent Mandates Commission
concerning the execution of the B mandates arises in
connection with Ruanda (Belgian mandate). Under an
arrangement to which the Belgian Government had
assented, one of the richest and most civilized tracts
of the kingdom was separated from the- territory under
the Belgian mandate. The agreement between the
Belgian and British Governments as to this frontier
had been due to the anxiety of both parties to secure to
the British Government uninterrupted railway com-
munication from the north to the south of Africa. It
would seem now, however, that such communication
could be secured without a partition of the- kingdom.
The- population of the kingdom had strongly protested
against an arrangement which deprived them of essential
pasturage and other resources, and the- present frontier
undoubtedly appears to be hardly justifiable either
from the point of view of the well-being, good order
and political stability of an African community already
in a good state of organization or from the point- of
view of its economic development. The Mandates Com-
mission had no right to deal with the frontier question,
but it might justifiably enquire whether the delimita-
tion of the frontier in this way was not gravely preju-
dicial to the welfare of the natives and likely to impede
the progress of native civilization. The attention of the
Commission had been drawn to the deplorable moral
effect on the population of obliging the King of Ruanda
to accept this arrangement.
After having carefully studied various statements
from disinterested sources on this subject, the Com-
mission was unanimous in its deire to draw the atten-
tion of the Council to the unfortunate consequences of
the actual boundary line drawn between the parts of
former German East Africa allocated under mandate
to Great Britain and Belgium.
From the report presented regarding British Togo-
land, it is not clear to the Commission whether this
territory has a separate budget of its own. The corres-
ponding report for British Cameroons contains an
itemised statement of the- revenue and expenditure of
Cameroons Province,” showing that the colony of
Nigeria contributed in 1921 no less a sum that £78,000
to make up the deficit incurred by the administration of
the- mandated territory. The Commission wishes to
enquire whether British Togoland is regarded as a dis-
tinct territory separate from the Colony of the Gold
Coast or whether it is incorporated for fiscal or any
other purposes in the neighbouring colony.
The attention of the Commission was drawn to a
considerable amount of smuggling' of alcoholic liquors
imported into British Togoland from French Togoland
on the one hand, and from the Gold Coast on the other,
due, no doubt, to the fact that until recently the
customs duty payable on alcoholic spirits imported into
French Togoland was much lower than that imposed in
either of the neighbouring countries. Now that the
duties have been raised in French Togoland, it would
seem that this evil has automatically ceased.
One of the tasks which the Permanent Mandates
Commission intends to undertake is that of making a
comparative study of the different provisions regarding
the- importation and sale of alcoholic liquors in the
different mandated territories.
The- Commission would suggest to the Council that
it request the mandatory Powers to furnish the Com-
mission with the fullest possible information with regard
to their customs legislation on this matter, and with
regard to the importance of the importation of alcoholic
liquors. It wishes to obtain detailed and full statistics
on this subject to enable it to ascertain the tariff placed
on different kinds of liquor (beer, wine, distilled alcohol,
etc.) and the relative importance of the sale of those
beverages. As the Commission has requested the
Director of- the Mandates Section to prepare for its
coming session a comparative study on this matter in
so far as it concerns the territories under B and C
mandates, it would be grateful if the mandatory Powers
could put the- Secretariat in possession of the necessary
statistics not later than the- end of June 1923.
The Belgian report on Ruanda-Urundi reveals the
existence of two organized and comparatively advanced
native kingdoms. The Belgian authorities have con-
sequently adopted a system of indirect administration,
and the Commission notes with satisfaction the good
results which have thus been obtained with a com-'
paratively small number of Belgian officials, whose
duties consist in giving advice and assistance to the
Kings of Ruanda and Urundi and in supervising their
administration.
The report presented by the French Government
regarding Syria and the Lebanon contains full par-
ticulars regarding the steps taken by the French ad-
ministration to establish political organizations in the
three Syrian states of Damascus, Aleppo and the
territory of the Alouites, and in the state of the Great
Lebanon. The report also contains information on the
federation of these- four autonomous territories and gives
full statistics of the numbers of the different com-
munities, of the local budget and of the financial assist-
ance given by France towards the administrative ex-
penses of the States and the reconstruction of the
country. The Commission was struck by the importance


of the measures taken with a view t-o the educational
development of the country.
Before turning from the consideration of the reports
of the mandatory Powers, the Commission has the
honour to call the attention of the Council to. two
difficulties which it has encountered in its examination
of these documents in the past.
According to Rule 5 of its Rules of Procedure, ap
proved by the Council, the Permanent Mandates Com-
mission shall be put in possession, at the latest by
the end of June, of the annual report which it is to
examine. This date was fixed with a view to allowing
the members of the Commission a full month for the
careful study of the documents which it is constituted
to receive and examine annually. This year, of the
fourteen reports which the mandatory Powers commu-
nicated for examination by the Commission, eight were
received in the Secretariat after July Ist, four after
July 20th, and two after July 30th. Moreover, several
of these reports were not communicated to all the mem-
bers of the Commission, nor sent to the Secretariat in
sufficient copies to allow of their distribution to the
members of the Commission.
The Commission believes it to be its duty as well as
its right to inform the Council of these facts. It is
obvious that the usefulness of the Commission dejiends
on the care with which it is enabled to examine these
reports, and that it is impossible for it to carry out its
important work if its examination of the annual re-
ports is rendered hasty and superficial owing to lack of
time.
At the end of the questionnaires which were drafted
during its last session, to facilitate the preparation of
the annual reports of the mandatory Powers, the Com-
mission expressed the wish that the. texts of all the
legislative and administrative measures taken with
regard to each mandated territory in the course of the
year should be added to the annual report. The Man-
dates Commission, while expressing its appreciation to
the Governments of the mandatory Powers which were
good enough to comply with this request, ventures to
repeat it in the hope, that the practice may become
general, as in several cases its examination of the
administration of the mandatory Powers was hampered
by the absence, of documents referred to in the reports.
The Commission notes that the first question men-
tioned in its questionnaire concerning labour seems to
have been misunderstood by several of the mandatory
Powers. The wording of the question is as follows:
“ I. (a) Have measures been taken to ensure, in
accordance with Part XIII of the Treaty of Ver-
sailles, the taking into consideration of conventions
or recommendations of International Labour Con-
ference® ?”
This question was intended to secure information
concerning the procedure according to which the con-
ventions and recommendations of International Labour
Conferences were considered, with a view to their
possible application to mandated areas. The. Com-
mission, attaching great importance to. this matter
ventured to. call attention to it in its special observa-
tions on the administration of the C mandated areas.
IV.
Questionnaires relating to Palestine and to Syria
and the Lebanon.
At its last session, the Commission had prepared for
the mandatory Powers entrusted with the administra-
tion of territories under B and C mandates, question-
naires to serve as a guide in framing the annual reports
which, in accordance with the Covenant, they have
undertaken to submit to the. Council. As was pointed
out above, these Powers have as a. general rule readily
accepted the guidance given in these questionnaires,
with the result that the work of the Commission has
been greatly helped. Encouraged by this experience,
the Commission thought it advisable to draw up two
new questionnaires for the Powers entrusted with the
administration of territories under A mandates. These
questionnaires were prepared in accordance with the
terms of the British mandate for Palestine and the
French mandate for Syria and the Lebanon which the
Council defined at its last session. The Commission will
be very grateful to the Council if it will be good enough
to' transmit these questionnaires to the French and
British Governments.
y.
Various Administrative Questions,
Two main questions were considered under this
heading:
(ft) At the outset the Commission was anxious to
find out whether it was desirable to alter the date of
its annual session. After protracted discussion it decided
to open its next session on duly 20th, 1923. In spite
of the disadvantages attending a meeting held in mid-
summer on the eve of the Assembly, it thought it ought
to* retain this date for another year as being most
suitable for the consideration of the annual reports of
the mandatory Powers. If it assembled at an earlier
date it would run the risk of not being in possession of
the reports on the fiscal year which had just- elapsed,
and its first duty is to examine these reports for the
Council. By meeting at a later date, on the other hand,
it would be impossible for it to transmit to the Council
its observations in time for them to be communicated
to the Assembly.
The Commission thinks it expedient to draw the at-
tention of the Council to the discussions on this question
in order that- the mandatory Powers may be informed,
through the Council, of the reasons which compel the
Commission to maintain, for the time being, a date to
which several of them object.
It must, moreover, be recognised that the next session
of the Commission will last considerably longer than the
present one, since thirteen annual reports will have to
be examined next year in the presence of the duly
accredited representatives of the mandatory Powers.
( b) The Commission has learned with great satisfac-
tion that the Council has had before it a proposal to
determine its procedure with regard to petitions received
from inhabitants of mandated territories. It did not
think it advisable to embark upon the consideration of
the British Government’s proposals on this question,
communicated to it by Mr. Ormsby-Gore, because the
Commission was not expressly invited to do so by the
Council. It desires to assure the Council, however, that
it will welcome the drawing up of a rule which would
obviatei difficulties so far experienced in connection with
this question, which is the more delicate in that it has
not yet been made the. subject of any definite regula-
tions. For the purpose of its own discussions, the Com-
mission thought that each of its members should dis-
tribute to all his colleagues, through the Secretariat,
all petitions and all similar documents which he had
received and which might appear to him likely to
deserve the attention of the Commission. It decided,
moreover, that all petitions of this kind which reached
the Secretariat should be transmitted to the Chairman
of the Commission by the Director of the Mandates
Section and be distributed to all members of the Com-
mission if the Chairman thought it advisable.
The Commission washes to express its warmest thanks
to the mandatory Governments whose co-operation has
so greatly assisted it, in its work and to the Council of
the League of Nations for the confidence which it has
unfailingly reposed in it.
The Commission wishes, in connexion with the report,
to make a special tribute of its admiration for the work
of the Director of the Mandates Section and his staff.
During the present session of the Commission the calls
made upon the staff have been heavy to the point for
excess. The Mandates Section and the Commission


have been assisted by several members of the general
staff of the Secretariat. These, too, have had to work
at high pressure day and night and are deserving of the
fullest recognition by the Commission. As the work
of the Mandates Section has now grown by the issue
of the A and B mandates, and our session next year
is likely to be much longer and more arduous, the
Commission hopes that the Secretary-General may find
it possible to provide a more adequate increase of staff
during the sessions of the Commission.
No. 16.
PERMANENT MANDATES COMMISSION.
Observations of the Commission on the Reports relating to the Territories under C Mandates.*
Geneva, 23 August, 1922.
OBSERVATIONS OF THE PERMANENT MAN-
DATES COMMISSION ON THE REPORT
RELATING TO THE ADMINISTRATION OF
NEW GUINEA UNDER AUSTRALIAN MAN-
DATE, DISCUSSED AT ITS SESSION IN
AUGUST, 1922.
The Mandates Commission, on assembling for its
second session on August Ist, 1922, had before it a
Report to the League of Nations on the Administra-
tion of the Territory of New Guinea from September,
1914, to June 30th, 1921, to which are attached the
orders and resolutions from May 9th, 1921, to June
30th, 1921.”
Ten copies of this report were received by the Secre-
tariat on June 23rd. Further, on June 24th, Mr.
Hughes, the Australian Prime Minister, informed the
Secretariat that the Australian Government had at
the same time, on May 20th, addressed one copy to
each member of the Commission.
The report was presented in English.
In a telegram dated June 21st, 1922, the Australian
Government informed the Secretariat that Sir Joseph
Cook, High Commissioner for Australia in London,
would represent the Commonwealth at the session of
the Commission for the consideration of the report on
New Guinea.
The Commission devoted its afternoon meeting of
August 3rd to the consideration of this report. Sir
Joseph Cook was present at this sitting.
Special Observations.
(1) Labour.
The Commission would be' glad to know what machi-
nery has been set up to ensure the consideration by
the Mandatory Power of the decisions of the Inter-
nationa] Labour Conferences and their application to
the mandated area.
(2) Arms Traffic.
The Commission has noted with the keenest satisfac-
tion the statement of Sir Joseph Cook that he had
telegraphed to his Government for statistics relating
to the traffic in arms.
(3) Trade in and Manufacture of Alcohol and Drugs.
The Commission would attach great value to the in-
sertion in the next report of a complete and detailed
series of documents relating to the manufacture and
import into the territory of various kinds of alcoholic
liquors and drugs.
•
(4) Liberty of Conscience.
The Commission would be glad to receive information
concerning the number, religion and nationality of
missionaries at work in the mandated territory and
additional statistics and particulars ‘regarding" their
schools.
(5) Police.
The Commission would be glad to know what ex-
penditure is entailed by the maintenance of the native
police force.
* League of Nations, C. 551, M. 333, 1022, vi.
(6) Immigration.
The Commission lias noted with satisfaction the
statement which Sir Joseph Cook was good enough to
make, to the effect that lie would communicate to the
Commission at the earliest possible date the text of
the Australian laws relating to immigration which
have been rendered applicable also to New Guinea.
(7) Education.
The Commission would be glad to find in the next
annual report fuller details concerning elementary
education and the language in which it is given.
(8) Public Health.
The Commission has noted with keen satisfaction
the continuous efforts made by the Australian admin-
istration to protect public health in New Guinea. It
is convinced that any supplementary documents on this
subject communicated to it would be of no less interest
to Governments and all the Mandatory Powers than
to its own members.
(9) Land Tenure..
The Commission has noted that a new decree con-
cerning the registration of landed property is in pre-
paration. It hopes to find the text of this decree in
the next annual report.
(10) Public Finances.
The Commission has noted with interest the finan-
cial information contained in Annex G of the report.
Its attention has been drawn to the fact, which can
be seen from the figures given, that the deficit which
the administration is meeting with the aid of the Aus-
I ralian Government appears to be less than the amount
of the subsidies given before the war to the former
German protectorate of New Guinea by the German
Imperial Government. The Commission would be
glad to know whether this difference is to> be explained
by the nature or the objects of those' subsidies or
whether it is due to any other circumstances.
General Observations.
The Commission notes with great satisfaction the
efforts made by the Australian Government to provide
information concerning its administration. While
hoping that that Government will be able in its future
reports to include supplementary information; it
highly appreciates the care and the diligence re-
vealed by the communications contained in the
report which it has examined and by the verbal
statements of Sir Joseph Cook. The Commission was
particularly impressed by the data given on the
administration of public health in the area.
OBSERVATIONS OF THE PERMANENT MAN-
DATES COMMISSION ON THE REPORTS
RELATING TO THE ADMINISTRATION OF
THE ISLAND OF NAURU, UNDER BRITISH
MANDATE, CONSIDERED AT ITS SESSION
IN AUGUST, 1922.
The documents before the Commission were two
reports on the administration of the Island of Nauru,


the mandate for which had been given to His Britannic
Majesty.
The first report, received by the Secretariat on April
27th, 1922, contained a statement relating to the
administration of Nauru during the military occupa-
tion and up to December 17th, 1920, when the terms
of the mandate Avere defined by the Council of the
League of Nations.
The second report, which reached the Secretariat on
July 17th, related to' the period from December 17th,
1920, to December 31st, 1921. It contained, in addi-
tion to general information on the financial, economic
and social condition of the Island of Nauru, the text
of various ordinances relating to its administration.
Both reports Avere presented in English.
The Commission devoted its sitting of the afternoon
of August 4th to the discussion of these two- reports.
In conformity with Article 8 of the Rules of Proce-
dure, the consideration and discussion of these reports
took place in the presence of the accredited representa-
tive of the mandatory Power, Sir Joseph Cook.
General Observations.
The consideration of the report on the administra-
tion of the Island of Nauru raises an initial question
which the Mandates Commission wishes to bring to the
notice of the Council.
It will be remembered that the mandate for Nauru,
a small island in the Pacific, with only some 2,000
inhabitants, was conferred upon His Britannic
Majesty. The other British C mandates Avere also con-
ferred upon His Majesty, but in them it is expressly
stated that, in accepting them, His Majesty acts for
and on behalf of the Governments of the Union of
South Africa, the Commonwealth of Australia and the
Dominion of New Zealand, and each of these Govern-
ments is expressly designated as the Mandatory for
the territory to which each mandate refers.
The Commission was therefore bound to consider the
Island of Nauru as under the mandate of the British
Empire as a whole to the exclusion of any one Govern-
ment within that Empire.
It is true that the Secretariat received, on July
28th last, a telegram from the Australian Prime Min-
ister announcing that the Australian Government,
after consultation Avith the British Government, had
appointed Sir Joseph Cook, its High Commissioner in
London, as representative of the mandatory Power at
the discussion on the reports concerning Nauru. But
the Commission was confirmed in its original opinion
by a second notification, proceeding this time from the
Secretary to the Cabinet in London and dated July
31st, accrediting Sir Joseph Cook to the Commission
as representative l of the British Empire.
However, an examination of the report leaves the
impression that the administration of the island is
exercised <le facto by the Australian Government,
which now assumes responsibility for it. This was
confirmed in the course of the discussion, which re-
vealed the following facts:
While the mandate was conferred upon the British
Empire as a whole, as the result of an Agreement
which was signed at Paris in 1919 between the Go-
vernments representing various portions of the Empire,
the rights and responsibilities conferred upon His
Britannic Majesty as regards the Island of Nauru were
reserved to Great Britain, Australia and New Zealand.
By the terms of a second Agreement concluded by
these three Governments, and ratified by an Act of
the Imperial Parliament on August 4th, 1920 (10 and
11, Geo. V, Nauru Island Agreement Act 1920, Cap
27), it has been laid down that the first Administrator
of the island shall be appointed by and made respon-
sible to the Australian Government. This Adminis-
trator is appointed for five years only, and it is pro-
vided in the Act that thereafter the Administrator
shall be appointed in such manner as the three
Governments may decide.
As far as the Commission is aware, these Agreements
(the effect of which is that the Australian Government,
though not designated as such in the mandate, has
become in practice the Mandatory responsible for the
administration of the Island of Nauru) have not been
made the subject of any notification to the League of
Nations.
The Commission wishes to include in the present
report, for the information of the Council, these facts,
which have led to some uncertainty as to whether the
mandate for the Island of Nauru, Avith the responsi-
bility which it entails, is to be considered by the
League of Nations as having been in effect transferred
to the Australian Government.
Another point of interest which the Commission
wishes to bring to the notice of the Council in connec-
tion with the Nauru mandate and with the above-
mentioned Act, is the relation of the authority respon-
sible for the administration of the island under the
conditions of the mandate to the organisation estab-
lished jointly by the three Governments for the ex-
ploitation of its extensive and valuable phosphate de-
posits. It appears from the discussion that the ex-
clusive rights to the possession and development of
these deposits formerly rested in a German private
company. The rights of this company have now
passed to the three Governments of Great Britain,
Australia, and New Zealand, which have provided
the necessary capital (amounting, approximately,
to £4,000,000), in proportion of 42%>, 42%, and
16% respectively, out of their general public revenues.
The administration of the deposits so required by
the three States has been vested by them in three
Commissioners appointed severally by the Govern-
ments concerned.
Article 2 of the Agreement embodied in the Act
lays down that all the expenses of the administra-
tion of the island (including the remuneration of the
Administrator and the three Phosphate Commis-
sioners), so far as they are not defrayed out of the
ordinary revenues of the island, shall be defrayed
by the proceeds of the sale of the phosphates. From
this it would seem to folloAV that, should the ex-
penditure of the public administration exceed the
revenue from taxation, the Phosphate Commission,
and the mandatory Power for the time being, will
be responsible fcr finding the deficit.
The attention of the Permanent Mandates Com-
mission was drawn more particularly to Article 13 of
the Agreement embodied in the Act, which lays down
that:
“There shall be no interference by any of the
three Governments with the direction, manage-
ment, or control of the business of working, ship-
ping, or selling the phosphates, and each of the
three Governments binds itself not to do or to
permit any act or thing contrary to, or incon-
sistent with, the terms and purposes of this Agree-
ment.”
The question therefore arises as to whether the con-
ditions Of labour employed, whether imported or local,
are under the control of the Administrator, and
through him of the mandatory Power, or are under
the control of the three Phosphate Commissioners, who
would appear to be vested with powers subject to
little, if any, Government control. „ The Commission
would be glad to find in the next annual report, in-
formation which would remove any pre-occupations
which might be inspired by this fact.
It would seem that, as a great part of the island
consists of phosphate deposits, the present conditions
of life and the future well-being of the Nauruan
natives, vis-a*vis the use of their lands by the


Phosphate Commissioners, merit the continuous atten-
tion of the Commission, and it is hoped that the exploi-
tation of the mineral wealth of the island will not
entail any undue restriction of the area open to
native habitation or cultivation. The Commission de-
sires to know the probable duration of the exploita-
tion of known deposits, and also what area propor-
tionate to the whole will have been affected by that
exploitation when the deposits are exhausted.
It is important that the future of the population
should be fully guaranteed, and the Permanent Man-
dates Commission would be particularly glad to find
in a later report an explanation of the measures taken
by the Nauru Administration to ensure not only
the present welfare of the natives, but also 1 , in con-
formity with the provisions of the Covenant, the de-
velopment of the population of the mandated area.
Finally, the Commission desires to know whether the
establishment by the three Governments concerned of
a State organisation enjoying the sole rights of de-
velopment of the only natural resources of the area is
fully in keeping—although no formal provision under
the Regulations for C Mandates forbids it—with the
disinterested spirit which should characterise the mis-
sion of a mandatory State.
Special Observations.
(1) Labour.
According to the report presented for the year 1922,
it would seem that the Administrator has not pro-
mulgated any Ordinance for the regulation of labour,
although, apart from native labour, there are nearly
600 Chinese and a certain nurnbei of other labourers
imported under indenture from the mandated territory
of New Guinea. The exact number of the latter are
not given in this report.
(2) Anns and Liquor Traffic.
Under Ordinance No. 9, no native is permitted to
possess arms or alcoholic liquor, except under permits
of the Administrator. The Commission would be glad
to receive particulars regarding the number of such
permits granted as exceptions to the general prohi-
bition.
(3) Liberty of Conscience.
The Commission would be glad to receive informa-
tion concerning the number, religion, and nationality
of missionaries at work in the mandated territory, and
additional statistics and particulars regarding their
schools.
(4) Police.
The Commission would like to know how many police
are employed in the island, and how they are armed.
(5) Public Health.
The Commission notes that the Medical Officer who
acts for the Administration in respect of the natives
of the Island of Nauru is an officer of the Phosphate
Commission. The Permanent Mandates Commission
would be glad to receive a copy of the annual report,
if any, of this public officer regarding the statistics
and incidence of disease in the island.
(6) Land Tenure.
The Commission notes that, under Ordinance No. 12
of 1922, all lands in the island are under the control
and at the disposal of the Administrator, who has
power to acquire them or to authorize their acquisition
at prices fixed by him. The Commission would be
glad to receive fuller particulars of the application of
these powers by the Administration.
(7) Public Finances.
The Commission notes that it is not at the moment
in possession of information as to the finances of the
Phosphate Commission. In view of the fact that the
chief source of revenue of the island is the exploitation
of phosphate deposits, the Commission would be glad
to receive, in the next report, a full statement of the
budget of the Phosphates Commission.
(8) Demography.
The demographic statistics for Nauru show that there
are in the island 1,084 Nauruans. There are also 697
Chinese, of whom 592 are men, 2 women, and 3 children.
OBSERVATIONS OF THE PERMANENT MAN-
DATES COMMISSION ON THE REPORTS
RELATING TO THE ADMINISTRATION OF
JAPANESE MANDATED TERRITORIES, DIS-
CUSSED AT ITS SESSION IN AUGUST, 1922.
Two reports on the administration of Japanese man-
dated territories were considered by the Commission.
The first report, received by the Secretariat on De-
cember 15th, 1921, contained a statement regarding the
period from the seizure by the Japanese squadron, in
October, 1914, of the former German colonies in the
Pacific Islands north of the Equator, down to the year
1921.
The second report, which reached the Secretariat on
June 22nd, 1922, supplemented the first, and also gave
information as regards a later period. It contained,
besides the replies to the questionnaire drawn up by
the Commission during its first session, the text of the
various decrees relating to the administration of those
territories.
Both reports were presented in English.
On July 28th, 1922, His Excellency Viscount Ishii,
Japanese Ambassador at Paris, informed the Secretariat
that his Government would be represented at the meet-
ing of the Commission by M. M. Matsuda, Minister
Plenipotentiary.
The Commission devoted the afternoon meeting of
August Ist, 1922, to the consideration of these reports.
M. M. Matsuda was present at this meeting.
Special Observations.
During the discussion, the following points engaged
the attention of the Commission, and gave rise to ad-
ditional questions on which the Commission would be
glad to receive fuller information:
(1) Social Organization of Native Life.
The Commission notes M. Matsuda’s statement to the
effect that there is no trace of domestic or other slavery
in the territories in question. The Commission desires
to learn the exact nature of the legal relations between
masters and servants in family life.
(2) Intervention of the Authorities to protect Natives
in carrying out Contracts for Periods of less than
One Year.
It appears from the reports that all labour contracts
for periods of more than one year are subject to the
intervention of the Administration in its tutelary
capacity. The Commission has expressed a desire to
know what measures have been taken to protect natives
concluding labour contracts covering shorter periods
but renewable.
(3) Labourers Imported from Abroad into Mandated
Areas.
The Commission notes that, according to the reports,
the population of the islands includes more than 3,000
foreigners, of whom only one-sixth are females. It
further observes that, whereas the recruiting of labour
from outside is controlled by the Administration when


groups of more that ten labourers are concerned, no
similar control exists in the case of groups of fewer
than ten labourers. The Commission would be glad t<
receive further information regarding the conditions of
labour, recruitment and life of all imported labourers,
together with statistics dealing with these matters.
(4) International It e commendations and Convent ions on
Labour.
the Commission wishes to know by what procedure
the decisions of International Labour Conference are
communicated to the authorities responsible for the
administration of the mandated territories and taken
into consideration by them.
(5) II or king of the .I lines.
The Commission wishes to receive further information
regarding the conditions of labour in the working of
phosphate deposits and mines.
(6) Traffic in Arms and Ammunition.
It is desirable that the next annual report should
contain information relating to the nature and quantity
of arms and munitions imported into mandated areas.
(7) Trade in and Manufacture of, Alcohol and Drugs.
The Commission notes that the administrative regu-
lations provide for the issue to natives of individual
licences as an exception to the general prohibition of
consumption of alcoholic liquors. It would be glad to
receive statistics relating to such permits and to the
importation of alcohol and drugs.
(8) Libert// of Conscience.
The Commission would be glad to receive information
concerning the number, religion and nationality of mis-
sionaries at work in the mandated territory and ad-
ditional statistics and particulars regarding their
schools.
(9) Land Tenure.
The Commission would attach great value to an ex-
planation of the State land system now in force, and
to information setting forth what part of the State
revenue shown in the outline of the budget on pages
22 and 24 of the second report under the heading of
" Revenue from public undertakings and property ” is
derived from this source.
(10) Public Health.
The Commission wishes to have in future complete
information regarding the state of public health. If
the Chief of the Medical Service in the mandated areas
submits a report to the Japanese Government, the
Commission would be greatly obliged if the latter
would be good enough to attach a copy to its next
report.
(11) Moral and Social and Material Welfare.
Fuller information is required on the legal pro-
cedure applicable to natives and to foreigners in the
territory.
(12) Public Finances.
The financial statistics included in the report show
several marked differences between the budgets of 1920
and 1922, and more particularly:
(a) An apparent decrease in the yield of the
taxes.
(b) A considerable increase in administrative ex-
penditure, which has increased from 67,732
yen in 1920 to 2,316,027 yen in 1922;
(c) A new item of expenditure in the 1922 budget
for the encouragement of the shipping ser-
vice, industry, &c.;
(d) The appearance in the 1922 budget of a re-
serve fund under the heading of expendi-
ture ;
(f) The substitution of an item of revenue en-
titled "Mining Receipts” in the 1922
budget for the mine tax in the 1920
budget.
General Observations.
The Commission notes with great satisfaction the
efforts made by the Japanese Government to provide
it with information concerning its administration.
While hoping that the Japanese Government will be
able in its future reports to' give more precise informa-
tion on certain points which have been left vague in
its first reports, the Commission highly appreciates the
care and diligence exercised in their preparation and
communication. Tt is particularly glad to note that
the second of these reports is based upon the ques-
tionnaire which it had the honour to address last year
to the mandatory Powers.
OBSERVATIONS OF THE PERMANENT MAN-
DATES COMMISSION ON THE FIRST
REPORT RELATING TO THE ADMINIS-
TRATION OF THE MANDATED TERRI-
TORY OF WESTERN SAMOA, DISCUSSED
AT ITS SESSION IN AUGUST, 1922.
The document before the Commission was entitled
"First Report of the Government of the Dominion
of New Zealand on the Administration of the Man-
dated Territory of Western Samoa for the period from
May Ist, 1920, to March 31st, 1921.”
Two copies of this report were received by the Sec-
retariat on April 25th, 1922. The report was pre-
sented in English.
On June 22nd, the Secretary-General received a
letter from Sir James Allen, High Commissioner for
New Zealand in London, informing him that he had
been appointed accredited representative of his Go-
vernment for the discussion of this report.
The Commission devoted its morning and afternoon
meetings of August sth to the discussion of this report
in the presence of Sir James Allen.
Special Observations. •
(1) Labour. *
The Commission would be glad to know by what
procedure the decisions of the International Labour
Conferences are communicated to the authorities re-
sponsible for the administration of the mandated ter-
ritories and taken into consideration by them.
Sir James Allen explained that, in order to main-
tain the productivity of the plantations in Samoa and
for the execution of necessary public works and ser-
vices, recourse was had to long-period indenture of
Chinese labour. The Commission notes that the Go-
vernment of New Zealand has, through the interme-
diary of the British Authorities at Hong-Kong,
entered into a Convention with the Chinese Govern-
ment regarding the importation and conditions of work
of Chinese indentured labour in Western Samoa. The
terms of this Convention were submitted to the Com-
mission by Sir James Allen, and, among other pro-
visions, the Commission observes that the interests of
the Chinese in Samoa are protected by a special officer
and by the presence of a Chinese Consul.
12) Traffic in Arms and Ammunition.
The Commission would attach importance to the
communication of detailed statistics concerning the im-
portation of arms and ammunition and the number
of licenses granted for the importation and sale ‘of
arms and ammunition.


(J) Liberty of Conscience.
the Commission would be glad to receive informa-
tion concerning the number, religion and nationality
ot missionaries at work in the mandated territory and
additional statistics and particulars regarding their
schools.
(4) Immigration.
Ihe Commission took note of a declaration of Sir
James Allen, according to which the immigration into
the mandated area was governed by provisions prac-
tically the same as those in force in New Zealand.
I he Commission would be happy to receive precise and
complete information on this subject.
(5) Education.
File Commission noted with interest the fact men-
tioned in the report that, thauks to the activity of the
missionary schools, very few inhabitants of Samoa were
unable to read and write their language. The Com-
mission would welcome further information concern-
ing the means by which these interesting results
have been achieved by these schools.
General Observations.
The Commission noted with satisfaction the efforts
made by the New Zealand Government to provide it
with information concerning its administration. While
hoping that future reports may contain fuller in-
formation on certain points, the Commission highly
appreciates the care and precision exercised in the
preparation and communication of the information
supplied to it during its second session. It would
be grateful to the mandatory Power if future reports
could be based upon the questionnaire which it pre-
pared last year.
OBSERVATIONS OF THE PERMANENT MAN-
DATES COMMISSION ON THE REPORT
DEALING WITH SOUTH-WEST AFRICA
UNDER THE MANDATE OF THE UNION
OF SOUTH AFRICA, DISCUSSED AT TTS
SESSION IN AUGUST, 1922.
The document before the Commission was entitled
“Replies to the Questionnaire drawn up by the Man-
dates Commission of the League of Nations on the
occasion of the Annual Report for the. Mandated Ter-
ritory of South-AVest Africa.”
This document was received at the Secretariat on
July 27th.
The document contained a statement that copies of
all the official gazettes of the South African Union
which had appeared since the abrogation of martial
law on December 31st, 1920, were annexed, and that
they contained the text of all the legislative and ad-
ministrative decisions for which the Commission had
asked. Copies of these gazettes were not annexed to
the replies to the questionnaire. On August 4th, 1922,
however— i.e., immediately after the consideration by
the Mandates Commission of the replies to the ques-
tionnaire^—the- Secretariat received two sets of the
“ Official Gazette of the South A\ 7 est African Protec-
torate,” dated December 31st, 1920, to December 31st
1921. . . !>
Moreover, on July 27th, 1922, a letter, dated Cape
Town, July 6th, 1922, was received by the Secretariat
from the Prime Minister of the South African Union.
In this letter it was stated that the Report by the
Administrator of South-West Africa for the year 1921
would be printed at an early date and forwarded with-
out delay to the Secretariat.
On June 29th, 1922, the Secretariat received from
the office of the High Commissioner of the South
African Union in London, a letter intimating that the
Government of the South African Union did not wish
to be represented at the next session of the Permanent
Mandates Commission. This communication was for-
warded to the Secretariat in reply to a letter, dated
June 15th, 1922, in which the Secretary-General re-
quested Sir Edgar Harris Walton, High Commissioner
of the South African Union in London, to be good
enough to inform him of the name of the duly accredited
representative of the South African Union, who, under
Pule 8 of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure, as ap-
proved by the Council, was to act for this Government
at the August session.
In spite of the steps taken and the telegrams ex-
changed since that date, the Commission was deprived
of the co-operation of the duly accredited representative
of the South African Union at its meeting on August
Jrd, when it considered these replies to the question-
naire.
These replies were in English. Their consideration
gave rise to the following observations:
General Observations.
(1) The Inadequate Documentary Evidence in Posses-
sion of Die Commission.
The Commission was unanimous in regretting the
absence of a representative of the mandatory Power,
whose co-operation was provided for by the constitution
bestowed upon the Commission by the Council of the
League of Nations, and in accordance with the terms
of its Rules of Procedure. In view of the extreme
brevity of the replies to the questionnaire, his help
would have been of very great value, and his absence
was therefore all the more regrettable.
Deprived in this way of the benefit of the comments
of the accredited representative of the mandatory Power
and of the official documents to which the replies to
the questionnaire made reference on several essential
points, the Commission could only express its regret
and its hope that it would be in a more favorable posi-
tion next year to carry out the work with which the
Council had intrusted it under the Covenant.
(2) Nationality of Inhabitants of Mandated Territories.
One of the most important questions in these terri-
tories arises from the presence of considerable German
colonies, which are attached to their nationality and
whose assistance would be very desirable for the ad-
ministration. As the. consideration of this question has
been referred to the Permanent Mandated Commission,
and as it will form the subject of a memorandum and
a special recommendation on the part of the Commis-
sion, it will be sufficient merely to allude to it here.
(3) Official Title of the Territory.
The Commission drew attention to the term “ Pro-
tectorate ” bestowed upon the mandated territory in
some of the official communications of the mandatory
Power. J
Special Observations.
(1) Labour.
The Commission expresses the hope that at its next
session it will be supplied with all the laws and ad-
ministrative decrees regarding the regulation of labour
and all the statistical information asked for in the
questionnaire.
It is especially anxious to be informed of the ma-
chinery which has beeu set up to insure the considera-
tion of the decisions of the International Labour Con-
ferences by the mandatory Power with a view to their
application to. the mandated territory. It also, desires
to find out whether failure on the part of the employers
to discharge their obligations to their employees con-
stitutes under the laws in force, a punishable offence
as in the case of delinquency on the part of employees’
or whether it can be dealt with only by a civil action
oi damages. It is also anxious to know whether the


laws which regulate the exploitation of the Kimberley
Diamond Mines also apply to the exploitation of the
diamond mines in the mandated territory. *
(2) Liberty of Conscience.
The Commission would be glad to receive information
concerning the number, religion and nationality of mis-
sionaries at work in the mandated territory, and addi-
tional statistics and particulars regarding their schools.
(3) Education.
From the document placed at its disposal, the Com-
mission notes that the education of the native is in-
trusted to the missions, while the State has assumed
direct responsibility for the education of the white
population. It is anxious to obtain fuller documentary
evidence on this point.
(4) Public Health.
The Commission has been greatly struck by the.
ravages among the natives of venereal diseases, which
would appear to have been introduced into the terri-
tory during the past thirty years. The Commission is
anxious to know what measures have been taken to
check the havoc wrought by these diseases, and more
particularly by syphilis, and to be put into possession of
the statistics which will allow it to form a clear idea of
the present situation of the territory in this respect.
(5) Land Tenure.
The Commission expresses the desire to be informed
as to the importance and geographical position of the
vast areas which, according to the answers to the ques-
tionnaire, have been set aside for the purpose of form-
ing native reservations. It is also anxious to know the
legal character of the .rights granted to the natives
respecting these reservations.
(6) Moral and Social Well-being.
The Commission hopes that in its next report
the Mandatory Power will be in a position
to supplement the very interesting information
which it was good enough to communicate
to the Commission as regards the effect pro-
duced on the general position of the natives by the
colonization of white races. The Commission desires
to be fully informed regarding the cause, extent and
nature of the disorders and their repression which have
recently occurred in certain parts of the territory.
The Commission has been much struck by the informa-
tion supplied by the Government of the Union of South
Africa as to the state of affairs discovered by its Ad-
ministration among the various native tribes. It would
appear that the prosperity and well-being of the abori-
ginal population is in inverse ratio to its contact with
the colonization of its former masters. The Commis-
sion expresses the hope that the primitive organization
in tribes may be maintained unaltered wherever it still
exists.
(7) Public Finances.
After considering the information supplied with re
gard to public finance, the Commission decided to ad-
journ detailed discussion of the question to its next
session, when it hoped that more complete- information
would be available. For this year it merely takes note
of the fact that the mandated territory would appear
to have a public debt, since a sum of £5,650 is given
in the budget under the heading of public loan, and it
also notes that the extraordinary expenditure amounts
to £B,OOO. On these points, and on the general
budgetary position of the territory, the Commission
hopes that it will be more fully informed by the manda-
tory Power than it has been this year.
No. 17.
Comments by the Accredited Representative of the Mandatory for the Island of Nauru on the Observations
of the Permanent Mandates Commission concerning the Reports relating to the Administration of the
Island of Nauru, under the Mandate of His Britannic Majesty, Discussed during the Session in
August 1922.*
Geneva, 23 August,' 1922.
Re the “ General Observations.”
The Permanent Mandates Commission observes, inter
alia:
“ However, an examination of the report leaves
the impression that the administration of the
island is exercised de facto by the Australian Go-
vernment, which now assumes responsibility for
it.”
A mandate for the administration of the Island of
Nauru—subsequently confirmed on December 17th,
1920, by the Council of the League of Nations—was
conferred by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
upon the British Empire. This mandate was to come
into force coincident with the beginning of a state of
peace with Germany. At a plenary meeting of the
British Empire Delegation held at Paris, it was decided
that, as, from their geographical positions, Australia
and New Zealand were obviously best fitted to admini-
ster this island, the administration should be vested in
the Government of these two Dominions together with
the United Kingdom; these three Governments, there-
fore, were to act on behalf of, and be responsible to,
the British Empire, upon whom the mandate was con-
ferred. Representatives of the Governments of the
United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand accord-
ingly met and drew up arrangements for the admini-
stration, which were incorporated in the Nauru Island
Agreement of July 2nd, 1919, by which the Australian
Government was nominated, as agent for the three
parties, to administer the Island for the first five years.
•League of Nations, C. 552, M, 334, 1922, vi.
But in all matters relating to the major policy, refer-
ence was to be made to all three Governments concerned,
whose concurrence was essential.
“ The impression that the -administration of the
island was exercised dc facto by the Australian Govern-
ment, which now assumes responsibility for it ” is not
justified by the actual facts, which show that in this
administration the Australian Government is acting
merely as agent for the mandatory authority, i.e., the
British Empire.
It' is noted that the' Permanent Mandates Commis-
sion :
“ Wishes to bring to the notice of the Council,
in connexion with the Nauru mandate and with the
above-mentioned Act, the relation of the authority
responsible for the administration of the island
under the conditions of the mandate to the organi-
zation established jointly by the three Govern-
ments for the exploitation of its extensive and valu-
able phos})hate deposits."
The Commission further proceeds to state that:
“ It appears from the discussion that the ex-
clusive rights to the possession and development
of these deposits formerly rested in a German
private company.”
It would perhaps be as well to state briefly the his-
tory of the working of the phosphate deposits. In
1900, the deposits were discovered by A. F. Ellis, of
the Pacific Phosphate Company—the Island of Nauru
at that time being administered by Germany as part


of the Marshall Islands. In 1905, a concession was
granted by the German Government to a German com-
pany, known as the “ Jaluit Gesellschaft ”, to exploit
exclusively all the guano and phosphate deposits in the
Marshall Islands Protectorate. This concession was to
continue for 94 years as from April Ist, 1906, but on
January 22nd, 1906, the Pacific Phosphate Company—
a registered English Company —which already held the
working rights over the phosphate deposits in Ocean
Island (British), had the Nauruan concession trans-
ferred to it by the* “ Jaluit Gesellschaft”, with the con-
sent of the German Government. The monopoly con-
tinued to be held by the Pacific Phosphate Company
until June 25th 1920, on which date it was purchased
by the Governments of the United Kingdom, Australia,
and New Zealand, which paid to the company an
agreed sum of £3,500,000 contributed in the proportions
named by the Commission in its general observations,
viz., 42%, 42%,. .and 16 %. Thus the change that was
made was merely the substitution of a publicly owned
monopoly for one that was privately owned.
The monopoly having been acquired by the three
Governments, measures were necessary which would in-
sure that the deposits should be worked on business
lines, and that such working should not be a cause of
friction between the Governments concerned. To this
end, a Commission consisting of three members was
set up, each of the Governments nominating one mem-
ber, and it was agreed by the three Governments that
thesei Commissioners should not be interfered with in
the exercise of their function of working the deposits.
Any of them, however, might be recalled by the ap-
pointing Government, so that their responsibility to
their individual Government is direct and complete.
The position of the Commissioners is, in fact, strictly
analogous to that of the directorate of a company, who,
whilst, they hold office, must have full power to act
within the terms of their memorandum of agreement,
and are so' far free from interference by their share-
holders, but who' might be replaced by other directors
at the will of the shareholders of the company if their
services were not satisfactory.
The observations, therefore, of the Permanent Man-
dates Commission on Article 13 of the Nauru Island
Agreement were based on an assumption which does
not really arise. The article was introduced into the
said Agreement with the direct purpose of insuring that
the Phosphate' Commissioners should be free to perform
their functions as managers of a business concern; but
it does not mean that they would not be—as indeed they
aref ~in other respects subject to the control of the Ad-
ministrator, or that the conditions of labour, etc.,
should be solely in their hands. The powers of the
Commissioners referred to in Article 13 relate' only to
their 1 unctions as directors of a business corporation.
Freedom of the Commissioners from governmental con-
trol in the business of working, shipping and selling of
the phosphates is not interpreted by the Governments
concerned to include freedom of control in regard to
conditions of labour, etc., and on more than one oc-
casion instructions have been given to the Commis-
sioners through the Administrator on this matter.
There is therefore no reason for any perturbations on
the ground that the Commissioners are free from ad-
ministrative control in their operations.
In its concluding observations on Article 2 of the
Nauru Island Agreement, the Permanent Mandates
Commission states:
“ From this it would seem to follow that, should
the expenditure, of the public administration ex-
ceed the revenue from taxation, the Phosphate
Commission, and not the Mandatory Power for the
time being, will be responsible for finding the
deficit.”
It is quite true that any deficit in revenue would be
defrayed out of the proceeds of the sale of the phos-
phates. As indicated, this, in effect, simply means
F. 10729. —6
that the Administrator representing the three Govern-
ments concerned makes up the deficit from revenues
obtained from the company instead of imposing further
taxation on the natives of the island.
The Permanent Mandates Commission further ob-
serves that:
It would seem that as a great part of the
island consists of phosphate deposits, the present
conditions of life and the future well-being of the
Nauruan natives, vis-d-vis, the use of their lands
by the Phosphate Commissioners, merits the con-
tinuous attention of the Commission, and it is
hoped that the exploitation of the mineral wealth
of the island will not entail any undue restriction
of the area open to native habitation or culti-
vation. The Commission desires to know the pro-
bable duration of the exploitation of known de-
posits, and also what area proportionate to the
whole will have been affected by that exploitation
when the deposits are exhausted.”
The Island of Nauru is some 8 square miles or
5,000 acres in extent, and the present native popula-
tion is, vide report, 1,084. This population is con-
fined to narrow coastal strips, which are more or less
fertile. The phosphate deposits themselves, situated
within these strips, occupy an area that is neither
populated nor food-producing. The extent of these
deposits has been variously estimated as being from
60,000,000 to 400,000,000 tons. Before the war, the
world’s annual consumption of phosphates was ap-
proximately 7,000,000 tons, which were obtained as
follows:
From United States of America 4,000,000 tons.
From Algeria and Tunis ... 2,000,000 ~
From Ocean Island (Paanapa),
Christmas Island and Nauru
Island 1,000,000 ~
The output of Nauru is 212,000 tons per
annum. The area worked in this island during the
past 16 years is about 50 acres, and the annual ex-
tension about 7 acres.
The deposits, at the present rate of production,
would therefore last at least 400 years. There is
therefore no ground for assuming either that the agri-
culture on the island is being interfered with or
that there is any cause whatsoever to fear for the de-
velopment of the native population in the future.
The Permanent Mandates Commission also adds:
“It is important that the future of the popu-
lation should be fully guaranteed, and the Per-
manent Mandates Commission would be particu-
larly glad to find in a later report an explana-
tion of the measures taken by the Nauru Ad-
minstration to ensure not only the present welfare
of the natives but also, in conformity with the
recommendations of the Covenant, the develop-
ment of the population of the mandated area.”
The Administration pays special attention to pub-
lic health, as is shown by the relevant ordinances in
the Appendix to the Administrator’s 'Report to the
League of Nations for the period ending December
31st, 1921.
Finally, the Permanent Mandates Commission ob-
serves that: —
“It desires to know whether the establish-
ment by the three Governments concerned of a
State Organisation enjoying the sole rights of de-
velopment of the only natural resources of the
area is fully in keeping—although no formal pro-
vision under the Regulations for C Mandates for-
bids it—with the disinterested spirit which
should characterise the mission of a Mandatory
State.”


The Governments have done no more than take
over the existing monopoly, which they have in no
way extended. In doing so they have acquired bet-
ter opportunity of looking after the interests of the
natives. Further, although the resources of Nauru
are large, yet the extent of deposit and output is
trifling in comparison with Northern African and
United States fields, of which the former produce
two million tons and the latter over four million tons
annually at competitive prices. During the year
ended June 30th, 1921, seventeen and three-quarters
per cent, of the output went to other countries. More-
over, it should be clearly understood that the Go-
vernments derive no' profit whatever from the working
of the deposits. Selling prices are so fixed as to
provide interest and sinking fund on purchase money
found by the Governments, of which nearly three and
a-half million pounds is still owing, and which will
not, under present arrangements, be completely repaid
until 1970, when provision for these overhead charges
has been made. No profit remains to the Govern-
ments. The principal benefit to Australia and New
Zealand is from assured supplies at prices not liable
to be raised by world monopolies. Any surplus of
Nauru phosphates, after supplying the three coun-
tries, is available to all countries at reasonable prices.
Observations of the Accredited Representative of the Mandatory for the Island of Nauru on the Report
Presented on Behalf of the Permanent Mandates Commission, at its Plenary Meeting on August 7th,
1922, by its President, Marquis Alberto Theodoli.
The Chairman of the Permanent Mandates Com-
mission, in his report, states that:
“It fears, on the one hand, that the dispro-
portion between the material wealth of this island
and the small number of its inhabitants may in-
duce the mandatory Power to subordinate the in-
terests of the people to the exploitation of the
wealth. It is, therefore, not without the deepest
concern that it considers the question whether
the well-being and development of the inhabitants
of this island, which, in the words of the Cove-
nant, 'form a sacred trust of civilisation,’ the ac-
complishment of which, ft is the Commission s
duty to safeguard, are not in danger of being
compromised.”
With the deepest respect, there is not the slightest
justification for this concern. W 7 hatever wealth is con-
tained in the island is used first for the better treat-
ment of the natives, vide Administrator’s report,
pages 4 and 5, and in the next place for the benefit
of the peoples of the world. Since no profit is made,
Comment* of the Accredited Representative of the Japanese Government, on the Observations of the
Permanent Mandates Commission concerning the reports relating to the Administration of
Japanese Mandated Territories, discussed during the Session in August, 1922.
Paris, August 24th, 1922.
(1) M. M. Mat-suda, the accredited representative
of the Japanese Government, notes with pleasure that
the Commission has recognised the care and expedi-
tion with which the Japanese Government has pre-
pared and communicated its reports.
(2) This important task of mandatory adminis-
tration being still in its initial stage and no prece-
dent having yet been established, it is but natural
that some matters in the reports drawn up by the
Japanese Government should not as yet be presented
in an entirely satisfactory manner. The representative
of the Japanese Government notes that the Commis-
sion has been good enough to mention the points in
Re the “Special Observations.”
(1) Labour. '
It is perfectly true that, during the period under
review, the Administrator has not promulgated
any ordinance specifically dealing with labour
conditions such as has been promulgated in,
say, the territory of New Guinea. But it is to be
pointed out that "it always has been the settled policy
of the mandatory Authority to carry out, both in
letter and spirit, the terms of the mandate. The con-
ditions of the natives have been the subject of the
most careful consideration on the part of the Admin-
istrator, who has not, however, so far thought it
necessary to promulgate a special ordinance relating
to this matter.
The Permanent Mandates Commission also refers to
the Chinese on the island. Prior to the war, the
Pacific Phosphate Company employed about 500
Chinese at Nauru. During the war, owing to
diminished output, the number of Chinese was reduced,
but in 1920 between 300 and 400 were introduced
from China.
The further particulars and statistics called lor m
the remaining sections under the heading of Special
Observations” will be incorporated in detail in the
next annual report.
there is no motive to “subordinate the interests of the
people.” The exploitation is solely in the interests
of the people. There is no motive to do otherwise.
The report also states:
“It is, moreover, concerned with the considera-
tion of the question whether the Mandatory
Power, by reserving the ownership and exclusive
exploitation of the resources of this territory to
itself, has brought its policy into true harmony
with the requirements of the mandate which, in
accordance with the Covenant, it should exercise
on behalf of the whole League of Nations.
This has already been fully commented on in the
document headed “Comments by the Accredited Rep-
resentative of the Mandatory for the Island of Nauru
on the Observations of the Permanent Mandates
Commission concerning the Reports relating to. the
Administration of the Island of Nauru, under British
Mandate, discussed during the session in August,
1922.”
regard to which it is desirous of obtaining clearer
and more detailed information.
(3) This information can be supplied in the next
report, as the Japanese) Government has issued, on
March 31st, 1922, several regulations which have been
substituted for the former ones, and which have been
in force since April Ist of this year. M. Matsuda
entertains no doubt that the Commission will be con-
vinced that the Japanese Government will steadfastly
adhere to the line of conduct followed hitherto l , and
will conscientiously administer the territories under
its mandate, with the continuous purpose of conform-
ing to the spirit of the Covenant.


No. 18.
REPORT CONCERNING THE SECOND SESSION OF THE PERMANENT MANDATES COMMISSION.
Report by the Marquis Imperiali and Resolutions Adopted by the Council on September 4th, 1922.
Article 22 of the Covenant lays down that the man-
datory Powers shall render to the Council annual re-
ports in reference to the territories committed to their
charge. It. further lays down that the Permanent Com-
mission shall receive and examine these reports and
shall advise, the Council on all matters relating to the
observance of the Mandates.
The report which we are now considering renders
an account to the Council of the work carried out by
the Permanent Mandates Commission at its second
session, which lasted from August Ist to August 11th,
1922. The Commission takes the opportunity of mak-
ing in this report certain recommendations which it is
anxious that we should adopt and forward to the man-
datory Powers in the name of the Council.
I propose to go through the Report of the Commis-
sion and to mention to. the Council the points which
seem to. deserve its special attention, and which
suggest the resolutions which I shall have the honour
to submit to my colleagues at the conclusion of my
report.
In spite of the importance of its theme, my report
will be quite brief. As my colleagues have seen the
very interesting and complete papers which the Perma-
nent. Mandates Commission has communicated to us,
they will no doubt agree with me that it would be
superfluous to go through all the details of its reports
and its minutes. The documents submitted to. us bear
witness not only to the great zeal and to the con-
scientious manner in which the Commission has accom-
plished its work, but also to the. judgment which its
eminent members have shown. The report affords a
convincing proof -of the sound views of the Commis-
sion, and I think we can readily dispense with a de-
tailed study here of all its contents.
The Commission had in the first place to examine the
first annual reports rendered by the mandatory Powers
regarding the administration of territories under C
mandates. It examined these reports in the presence
of duly accredited representatives of the mandatory
Powers and embodied the result of its researches in the
form of special observations. To these observations
were added commentaries made by Sir Joseph Cook,
High Commissioner for Australia, in regard to the
Island of Nauru, under the Mandate of the British
Empire, and commentaries by M. M. Matsuda, Minister
Plenipotentiary, as regards the islands under the
Japanese Mandate.
My colleagues will have observed in the first place
with satisfaction that the machinery provided by the
Covenant and by the constitution adopted for the Com-
mission by the Council of December Ist, 1920, and by
the rules of procedure for the Commission as approved
by us at our meeting of January 10th, 1922, has on
the whole worked in a very satisfactory manner. The
mandatory Powers have been good enough to render
their annual reports to the Commission. They dele-
gated duly accredited representatives to the Commis-
sion, who were able to play a most useful part in
examining their reports. I consider that we have every
reason to congratulate ourselves on the success of this
first, experience which augurs well for the future of
the institution of Mandates.
In order that the machinery which has been consti-
tuted may work still more smoothly and to still
greater purpose, I propose to my colleagues that the
Council should fully indorse the recommendations made
in this connexion by the Commission. I agree with
the Commission in considering that it is most important
that the annual reports of the mandatory Powers should
reach the members of the Commission at. least
one month before the meeting, and that, in
addition to the replies to the questions asked
by the Commission’s questionnaires, they should
contain all the legislative or administrative de-
crees which would allow the Commission to
interpret correctly the reports of the mandatory
Powers and to base their judgment of the administra-
tion on a full knowledge of the facts. I also agree
with the Commission that the assistance of the duly
accredited representatives of the mandatory Powers has
justified itself, and I hope that next year we shall find
that all the mandatory Powers without exception will
consent to be represented at the Commission as pro-
vided for in its constitution and rules of procedure.
The Council, in taking note of the information pro-
vided by the mandatory Powers with regard to the
presence in the territories under Mandate in the Pacific,
of indentured labour from outside these territories,
no doubt shared the opinion expressed by the Com-
mission on this subject and will wish to concur in its
recommendations, with a view to obtaining still more
complete information on this question in future.
The Council will have been no less interested in the
information concerning the Island of Nauru. It will
certainly wish to receive subsequent information de-
fining the exact status of this island, of which the Man-
date has been conferred on His Britannic Majesty.
The reports and debates to which the situation of
this island has given rise this year have excited general
interest. We desire to associate ourselves with the hope
of the Commission that subsequent information will
clear up points which still seem obscure and will' de-
finitely allay the anxiety which has been shown.
In addition to the annual reports relating to the ad-
ministration of the territories under C mandates, which
were defined by the Council at the end of the year
1920, the Commission was called upon to study the
reports concerning all the territories under B mandates,
as well as Syria and the Lebanon. The mandatory
Powers communicated these reports to the Commission
in accordance with the declarations made by their re-
presentatives on the Sixth Commission of the Assembly
on September 20th, 1921. I wish, on behalf of the
Council, to express to the mandatory Powers our
sincere appreciation for this proof of their regard for
the League of Nations and deference to its wishes.
The first annual reports relating to these territories
cannot be examined by the Commission until next year,
and we hope that this examination will be undertaken
in conjunction with the duly accredited representatives
of the mandatory Powers. This year the Commission
has confined itself to a careful examination of these re-
ports and has prepared the ground for the more ex-
haustive study it intends to undertake next year. In
order to prepare for this work, the Commission has
expressed the desire that the Council should request
the mandatory Powers to provide a certain number of
facts which are still lacking; the Commission has asked
for the texts of all the legislative or administrative
decrees which have been issued by the mandatory
Powers in regard to these territories. It further wishes
to obtain more complete information concerning the
health conditions of the native populations. For this
purpose it has availed itself of the ready co-operation
of the Health Committee for the revision and com-
pletion of its questionnaire on this subject.
The questionnaire which the Health Committee has
drawn up is contained in one of the documents com-
municated to us by the Mandates Commission. The
Council will, no doubt, be anxious to transmit it to


the mandatory Powers, with the request that they will
be guided by it in drawing up their future annual
Commission would also be glad to receive further
light on the Customs situation in the British Cameroons
and in French and British Togoland.
It is not clear, from the last report received, whether
British Togoland enjoys complete fiscal autonomy, and
the Commission has asked for information on this sub-
The Commission, wishing to give full weight to the
Resolution on the subject of the traffic in alcoholic
liquors adopted by the Council at its last session in Lon-
don desires that the Mandates Section, the Director
of which has been asked by the Commission to submit
a special report on this subject at its next session,
should receive, before the end of the month of June,
1923, any documents which the mandatory Powers can
supply dealing with the import and consumption of
alcoholic liquors in the mandated territories.
The Commission has also expressed the same desire
with regard to territories under C mandates.
I have no doubt that on all these points the Council
will give its full support to the recommendations of the
Commission, and will transmit them to the mandatory
Powers. ~ ~
The Commission thought it desirable, on evidence
which it had received, to call the attention of the Coun-
cil to the possible effect on the economic and social well-
being of the native population of the present frontier
between Tanganyika under British Mandate and
Ruanda-Urundi under Belgian Mandate.
The Commission pointed out that the question in
the technical sense was strictly outside their compet-
ence and, while it is also outside the competence of the
Council, I feel sure that my colleagues will agree that
it is desirable that the observations of the Commission
should be handed on to the mandatory Powers con-
cerned, so that they may, as I feel sure they will, g
careful consideration to the social and economic aspects
involved.
The Commission has drawn up questionnaires in-
tended to assist the French and British Governments
in the preparation of their future annual reports on
Syria, the Lebanon and Palestine, when the Mandates
for these territories shall have definitely entered in o
force The Commission has asked us to transmit these
questionnaires to the French and British Governments,
and I have no doubt that the Council will raise no
objection to this being done forthwith.
I venture to put before my colleagues the following
resolutions, summarizing the conclusions of the report
which I have had the honour to submit:
“ The Council of the League of Nations,
“ Having examined the Report on the second
session of the Permanent Mandates Commission,
and the documents annexed thereto:
“ I. Desires to thank the Permanent Mandates
Commission for the great zeal and admirable im-
partiality which it has displayed.
“11. Instructs the President of the Council to
transmit to the mandatory Powers, on its behalf,
the recommendations expressed in the Report and
in the annexed documents, with the request that
they will be good enough to carry out these recom-
mendations ;
“111. Instructs the President of the Council to
transmit for the information of the Belgian and
British Governments the observations of the Com-
mission with reference to the situation on the fron-
tier of Ruanda, under Belgian mandate, and
British Tanganyika.”
No. 19.
Extracts from Proceedings of the Council and the Assembly regarding Mandates, September, 1922.
MEETING OF COUNCIL, 4th SEPTEMBER, 1922.
758. Permanent Mandates Commission. —Report on
the 2nd Session of the Commission.
The Marquis Imperiali read his Report on the
Report of the 2nd Session of the Mandates Commis-
sion (Annex. 411*). T . ...
The conclusions of the Marquis Impenali s report
were as follows:
The Council of the League of Nations, having ex-
amined the Report, of the 2nd Session of the Perma-
nent Mandates Commission and of the documents an-
nexed thereto:
(I.) Desires to thank the Permanent Mandates Com-
mission for the great zeal and admirable impartiality
which it has displayed.
(II.) Instructs the President of the Council to
transmit to the mandatory Powers, on its behalf, the
recommendations expressed in the Report and in the
annexed documents, with the request that they, will
be good enough to carry out these recommendations.
(III.) Instructs the President of the Council to
transmit for the information of the Belgian and
British Governments, the observations of the Com-
mission with reference to. the situation on the frontier
of Ruanda, under Belgian mandate, and British Tan-
ganyika.
In reply to Lord Balfour, the Secretary-General
explained that the Report of the Marquis Imperiali
and that of the Mandates Commission would be cir-
culated to the Members of the League. If at the
Assembly any (Member of the League wished to
raise a question concerning Mandates, he could do
so at the discussion on the report on the work of the
Council.
HPiT 83-84 above.
Lord Balfour said that he understood that the
second part of the resolution was simply an instruc-
tion to the President of the Council to forward to
the mandatory Powers the request for further in-
formation made by the Commission. He did not
wish to be associated with any 'criticism when he
had no opportunity of considering the evidence con-
cerning that criticism.
The Marquis Imperiali said that, the Council, by
adopting the resolution, would show that it associated
itself with the request of the Mandate Commission
for supplementary information on certain points to
be addressed to the mandatory Powers.
Lord Balfour said that this explanation satisfied
him. He thought that the Commission was en-
titled to the information requested.
The conclusions of the Marquis Imperials Report,
were adopted.
MEETING OF SECOND SUB-COMMITTEE OF
SIXTH COMMITTEE, 12th SEPTEMBER, 1922.*
Report of the Permanent Mandates Commission.
The Sub-Committee decided to examine paragraph
by paragraph the Report of the Permanent Mandates
Commission (Document A. 39f).
On the proposal of Lord Robert Cecil (South
Africa) the Sub-Committee decided to. express general
approval of the Report.
Administration of the Island of Nauru. Paragraph
IL
Sir Francis Bell (Australia) explained that the
Island of Nauru was administered on behalf of the
British Empire, which was the mandatory Power, by
Australia, Great Britain, and New Zealand.
* Journal of Third Assembly, 13th September, 1922, pp. 82-83.
t Pp. 71-75 above.


Phosphate Rights in the Island of Nauru.
Discussion took place on the wording of the re-
ference in the Report to the “exclusive rights” of the
Governments of Australia, Great Britain, and New
Zealand over the rich deposits of phosphates in the
island.
The Delegates of Australia and New Zealand ex-
plained that their Governments had in 1920 pur-
chased from the British Phosphate Company the
monopoly of the concession for the sum of three and
a half millions sterling. The Governments, there-,
fore,- held the concession, not as mandatories, but as
purchasers of a concession formerly possessed by a
private company.
During the discussion, it was explained that the
Mandate Commission had based their Report on the
text of the Nauru Island Agreement Act, which did
not clearly distinguish between the rights of the Go-
vernments concerned as mandatories and their rights
as private purchasers.
Mr. Fisher (British Empire) said it was the duty
of the Mandates Commission to seek full informa-
tion on any particular point with regard to a man-
date. He had no- doubt that the Governments of the
mandatory Powers would always be anxious to supply
such information, and thereby to avoid any miscon-
ceptions. The work of the Mandates Commission was
admirable, and must be encouraged.
After further discussion, the Sub-Committee ap-
proved a text drafted in the following terms by Lord
Robert Cecil:
“With reference to the paragraphs dealing with
the Nauru mandate, the Committee, while approv-
ing the general sense of the Commission’s observa-
tions, desire to point out that it is inaccurate
to say that the British Empire had transferred the
responsibility for the administration of the Island
of Nauru to Great Britain, Australia, and New
Zealand. It would be more' correct to say that
the British Empire had provided for the admin-
istration of the island by Great Britain, Australia,
and New Zealand.
Again, the phrase that the Government iof
Australia, Great Britain, and New Zealand have
reserved to themselves exclusive rights over the
phosphates in the island might lead to misappre-
hension. It was explained by the representatives
of the three Governments that these rights had,
in fact, belonged to the British Phosphate Com-
pany, and had been purchased voluntarily from
the company by these Governments.”
MEETING OF SECOND SUB-COMMITTEE OF
SIXTH COMMITTEE, 13th SEPTEMBER, 1922*.
Island of Nauru. (Paragraph 2.)
The Sub-Committee continued the examination of
paragraph 2 of the Report of the Permanent Man-
dates Commission.
Mr. Justice Rich (Australia) pointed out- that the
Administrator of the Island of Nauru was paramount,
and that while the Commissioners had full control over
the phosphates, they were subject to the ordinances
of the Administrator.
Sir Cecil Hurst (British Empire) pointed out that
in the explanation furnished in the observations on
the Report of the Permanent Mandates Commission,
presented by the representatives of Australia and
Japan, the powers of the Phosphates Commissioners
were clearly defined. The point of view of the Go-
vernments administering the mandate was as fol-
lows :
“Freedom of the Commissioners from govern-
mental control in the business of working, ship-
ping, and selling of the phosphates is not in-
* Journal of Third Assembly, 14th September, 1922, p. 101.
F. 10729. —7
terpreted by the Governments concerned to in-
clude freedom of control in regard to conditions
of labour, etc., and on more than one occasion
instructions have been given to the Commissioners
through the Administrator on this matter.”
The Chairman inquired whether the native popula-
tion had the right to refuse to sell land required by
the Concessionaire.
Sir Francis Bell (New Zealand) replied that,
under British law, land required for public service
could always be purchased at any time by the Go-
vernment.
Sir Cecil Hurst (British Empire) pointed out
that the Permanent Mandates Commission had asked
to receive fuller particulars concerning land tenure
in all mandated areas.
The representatives of New Zealand and Aus-
tralia said that the request of the Permanent Man-
dates Commission for fuller information on this sub-
ject had been granted, and that the information
would shortly be in the hands of the Permanent Man-
dates Commission.
The representative of Australia further pointed out
that there had not been any question of appropriating
the fertile parts of the island which lay along the
coast, since there was no deposit of phosphate on
these strips of land.
The Sub-Committee decided to take note of these
observations in its report.
REPORT PRESENTED BY THE SIXTH COM-
MITTEE TO THE ASSEMBLY.*
Geneva, 16th September, 1922.
The Sixth Committee has the honour to> present
to the Assembly the following Report, which has been
unanimously adopted by its members:
The Committee has taken cognisance, in the reports
of the Council and of the Permanent Mandates Com-
mission, of the events which have taken place with
regard to the application of Article 22 of the Cove-
nant since the last Assembly. It wishes to- express
its keen satisfaction that the terms of the mandates
which had not yet been promulgated in 1921 have now
been defined; that reports on the administration of
mandated territories have been presented to the Per-
manent Mandates Commission and examined in the
presence of duly accredited representatives of the man-
datory Powers; and that the mandates system has
thereby been brought fully into force.
The Committee wishes, in particular, to express its
deep gratitude to the Permanent Mandates Commis-
sion for the great care and impartiality which it has
devoted to the accomplishment of its important and
delicate task.
The Committee has noted with great satisfaction the
intention of the Permanent Mandates Commission to
investigate further the questions of indentured
labour in the Pacific Islands, of the laws of land
tenure in mandated territories, of the liquor legisla-
tion and the importation of alcoholic liquors in Africa,
and to draw the attention of the mandatory Powers
to the social, economic, and political effects of the
Ruanda frontier. The Committee is confident that the
Council and the mandatory Powers w T ill do
everything they can to facilitate the task of the Com-
mission in its further labours.
The Committee has also noted with pleasure that
the mandatory Powers have evidenced their desire to
enable due performance of the important duties which
the Covenant of the League imposes upon the Coun-
cil and the Permanent Mandates Commission by add-
ing to the official report required by the Covenant,
full replies to questionnaires framed by the Permanent
Mandates Commission.
* League of Nations, A. 72, 1022, vi.


With regard to the Nauru mandate dealt, with in
Part 11. of the Report of the Permanent Mandates
Commission, the Sixth Committee deems it advisable
to prevent possible misinterpretation by taking note:
First, that the British Empire (the unit respon-
sible for the Nauru mandate) consists of Great Britain
together with a number of territories all owing a com-
mon allegiance, but distinct in their respective powers
of government, and the mandatory authority of the
British Empire can therefore only be exercised by
some one or more of the several Governments of the
territories composing the Empire. If, for the state-
ment in the Report that the British Empire “had
transferred the responsibility for the administration
of the Island of Nauru to Great Britain, Australia,
and New Zealand,” there were substituted a state-
ment that “the British Empire had provided for the
administration of the Island of Nauru by Great
Britain, Australia, and New Zealand” the position
would be defined with greater precision and exacti-
tude ;
Secondly, that the statement in the Report that the
Governments of Great Britain, Australia, and New
Zealand had reserved to themselves the exclusive rights
of the administration of the rich deposits of phos-
phates which constitute the wealth of the island, is
capable of misinterpretation without the explanation
that the three Governments acquired, by direct pur-
chase through voluntary sale on the part of the
owners and not through the mandate, exclusive rights
granted before the war by the German Government
to' a private company.
The Committee has had the advantage of perus-
ing the explanatory document presented by the re-
presentatives of the Commonwealth of Australia and
Japan in the document printed as A. 37. 1922. VI.,
as well as the statement handed in by the Aus-
tralian delegate which is appended to this Report,
and recommends that these documents be read to-
gether with the Report by the Permanent Mandates
Commission.
With regard to the Report on the Bondelzwart Re-
bellion, the Committee has considered and decided
to recommend the adoption of the motion proposed
by M. Dantes Bellegarde, delegate for Haiti,'which
reads as follows:
“The Assembly, highly appreciating the action
taken by the Government of South Africa in com-
municating, in its capacity of mandatory Power
for South-West- Africa, the report of the Bondelz-
wart Rebellion 1922;
Moved by feelings of great anxiety for the
welfare and the relief of the survivors:
Resolves to express—
1. Its profound satisfaction with the official
statement made by Sir Edgar Walton that
a full and impartial inquiry will be made
into all the facts of the Bondelzwart Re-
bellion and its repression;
2. The confident hope' that the Permanent Man-
dates Commission, at its next session will,
consider this question and be able to re-
port that satisfactory conditions have been
established; and that, in the meanwhile,
the mandatory Power will make every effort
to relieve the suffering of the victims, par-
ticularly the women and children, and
that it will insure protection and restitu-
tion of the remaining live stock, and, in
general, the restoration of the economic life
in the Bondelzwart district.”
The Committee, having considered the matter of
the right of petition alluded to in the Report of the
Permanent Mandates Commission, expresses the hope
that this right may be defined in such a manner
that:
(1) All petitions emanating from the inhabitants of
mandated areas should be sent to the Permanent Man-
dates Commission through the intermediary of the
local administration and of the mandatory Power;
(2) All petitions concerning the welfare of the in-
habitants of mandated areas emanating from other
sources should not be considered by the Permanent
Mandates Commission before the mandatory Power
had had full opportunity of expressing its views.
STATEMENT BY MR. JUSTICE RICH.
Australian Delegate.
The statement in the Report (and the context) that
it is not clear what powers and means of control
the Australian administration possesses with regard to
this organization, seems to be capable of misinter-
pretation without the explanation that the political
and economic powers are distinct. The Administrator
is paramount. He is invested with the power (Article
1 of the Act) to make laws for the peace, order, and
good government of the island. The Commissioners'
powers are confined to the control over the business
connected with the phosphates free from Government
interference in such business (Article 13). They, in
common with other citizens, are subject to the laws
made by the Administrator under Article 1. They
hold office during the pleasure of their respective Go-
vernments (Article 4.)
MEETING OF ASSEMBLY 19th SEPTEMBER,
1922.*
Mandates: The report of the Sixth Committee.
Dr. Nansen (Norway) presenting the report of the
Sixth Committee oh Mandates, said the League might
be satisfied that the new machinery for dealing with
the mandates was already working, and apparently
working smoothly. He thanked the mandatory Powers
and the Mandates Commission for the way in which
they had fulfilled their obligations.
He drew attention to the passage in the report in
which the Committee had noted with satisfaction the
intention of the Mandates Commission to investigate
further thei questions of indentured labour in the
Pacific Islands, of the laws of land tenure in mandated
territories, of the liquor legislation and the importation
of alcoholic liquors in Africa, and in which the Com-
mittee had referred to the social,'economic, and politi-
cal effects of the Ruanda frontier.
He commended to the attention of the Assembly the
passage in the report concerning the mandate for the
Nauru Islands.
The Committee had decided to recommend the adop-
tion of the motion proposed by M. Dantes Bellegarde,
delegate for Haiti, in regard to the Bondelzwart Re-
bellion :
“ The Assembly, highly appreciating the action
taken by the Government of South Africa, in com-
municating, in its capacity of mandatory Power
for South-West Africa, the report of the Bondelz-
wart Rebellion, 1922;
Moved by feelings of great anxiety for the
welfare and the relief of the survivors:
‘ ‘ Resolves to> express :
“1. Its profound satisfaction with the official
statement made by Sir Edgar Walton that a full
and impartial inquiry will be made into all the
facts of the Bondelzwart Rebellion and its re-
pression :
2. The confident hope that the Permanent
Mandates Commission, at its next session, will con-
sider this question and be able to report that
satisfactory conditions have l been established; and
that, in the meanwhile, the mandatory Power will
make every effort to relieve' the suffering of the
* Journal of Third Assembly, 20th September, 1922, pp. 167-169.


victims, particularly the women and children, and
that it will insure protection and restitution of the
remaining live-stock, and, in general, the restora-
tion of the economic life in the Bondelzwart
district.”
The Committee had further unanimously agreed on
the following conclusions in regard to petitions coming
from mandated territories:
The C ommittee, having considered the matter
of the right of petition alluded to in the Report of
the Permanent Mandates Commission, expresses
the hope that this right may be defined in such a
manner that:
"1. All petitions emanating from inhabitants of
mandated areas should be> sent to l the Permanent
Mandates Commission through the intermediary of
the local administration and of the mandatory
2* All petitions concerning the welfare of the
inhabitants , of mandated areas emanating from
other sources should not be considered by the Per-
manent Mandates Commission before the manda-
tory 1 ower had had full opportunity of expressing
its views.”
Mme. Anna Bugge-W icksell (Sweden) thanked the
Sixth Committee for having expressed its appreciation
of the Mandates Commission, of which she was a mem-
ber. The Permanent Mandates Commission felt it was
its duty to l safeguard the interests of men and women
who were not capable of defending themselves and had
little knowledge of mondern ways and methods. It had
to_ examine the decrees and ordinances of various ad-
ministrations, and to ascertain that they were well and
justly applied. The Commission was acutely aware
that its task was extremely delicate, and the' mandatory
Powers, when reading the observations of the Commis-
sion, should take into account the difficulties of the
Commission in carrying out duties which were entirely
without precedent.
Sir Francis Bell (New Zealand) presenting a written
statement to the Assembly, said that the Government
of New Zealand felt it had a dual obligation and duty,
first as a Member of the League, and secondly as a
mandatory Power:
New Zealand is under an honorable obligation
to legislate and administer in accordance with the
terms and intent of the Covenant of the League.
She is bound to report annually to the Council.
She is willing and anxious to receive suggestions
and advice from either the Permanent Mandates
Commission or the Council of the League, but she
cannot admit that the Permanent Commission has
power to interpret for her the meaning of the Cove-
nant, or to dictate to her what procedure she should
adopt, in her endeavours to perform her duties to
the League.”
He represented first that the report of the Mandates
Commission should be a report to the Council and not
to the public. New Zealand did not desire opinions
upon her laws or upon her administration from any
persons other than the Council or the Assembly.
Secondly, when the Assembly referred such a report
to one of its Committees, the delegates of the Man-
datory had a right to require that Committee should
inquire into, and report to the Assembly upon, any
objection which the Mandatory offered to the language
or findings of the report. It should be the right of
th® mandatory Power to appeal from adverse comment
and to invite a decision from the delegates in the As-
sembly. The Mandatory could not be asked to alter
its administration or repeal or amend its legislation'
untß its fellow members of the League had decided
that m their opinion, the comment or criticism which
had been made concerning its administration or legis-
lation was justified.
The continuation of the discussion was adjourned to
the next meeting of the Assembly.
MEETING OF ASSEMBLY, 20th SEPTEMBER
1922.*
Debate in Assembly, 20th September, 1922.
Mandates.
Sir P. S. Sivaswamy Aiyer (India) said he supported
the conclusions of the report of the Sixth Committee,
and thanked the Mandates Commission for their solici-
tude on behalf of the native inhabitants of mandated
territories. He emphasized the dangers inherent in
the system of indentured labour. The experience of
the Indian Government had shown the dangers atten-
dant on the immigration of an exclusively male labour-
ing population, and it had always tried to secure a due
proportion between the sexes.
Ihe question of land tenure was also' important.
There was a tendency to assume that native rights which
could not be proved according to the principles of
modern law might be ignored. He was glad that the
Mandates Commission had decided to study the ques-
tion. The French doctrine embodied in the phrase
private domain 'of the State” seemed to him to be
dangerous.
He would have preferred a more emphatic
indorsement of the references of the Mandates
Commission to the partition of Ruanda. He
would have liked to have asked the Council
to express a hope that this boundary would be rectified.
Referring to the speech of Sir Francis Bell delivered
on the previous day, he said that he saw no tendency
on the part of the Mandates Commission to infringe
upon the prerogatives of the Council, or to depart from
its strict constitutional position.
It was unfortunate that the South African Govern-
ment had not afforded the Mandates Commission the
same assistance as the Governments of Australia, New
Zealand, and Japan. He inferred from recent utter*
ances of General Smuts that the responsible statesmen
of South Africa might probably have some miscon-
ception of their obligations. General Smuts had said
that the territories under C Mandates were virtually
annexed to the territory of the Mandatory.
The mandatory Powers had a very serious respon-
sibility. A great experiment was being made for the
first time in history. Hitherto the welfare of native
populations had suffered from contact with white civi-
lizations, which had led in South-West Africa to the
virtual destruction of a native race. It was the duty
of the League of Nations to see that in future the wel-
fare of the natives races should prevail.
M. Dantes Bellegarde (Haiti) paid a tribute to
the loyalty which the Government and delegation of
South Africa had shown in the affair of the Bondelz-
wart rebellion.
He insisted on the importance of the right of peti-
tion, which was the strongest guarantee that the League
of Nations could offer the populations living under a
mandate. The Sixth Committee had expressed the
hope that all petitions would be addressed to the Man-
datory Power. It was necessary to find a more direct
method of dealing with petitions. Governments, in
spite of their good intentions, might be confronted
with a very delicate situation.
The question would be brought before the Council
and account would certainly be taken of the hope ex-
pi essed by the Committee. The best way of avoiding
injustice under the League of Nations, would be to
allow full liberty for the addressing of complaints to the
Permanent Mandates Commission. This would not
prevent those who desired to complain from addressing
1 hemselves in the first instance to the mandatory Power.
Sir James Allen (New Zealand), referring to the
observations of the Indian delegate, said that the New
* Journal of Third Assembly, 21st September. 1922, pp. 180 183.


Zealand Government was extremely solicitous for the
welfare of the natives.
The problem of labour was difficult. The New Zea-
land Government, in order to maintain the Island of
Samoa in cultivation, had been obliged to make arrange-
ments to procure the necessary labour from China. It
had wished the Chinese labourers to bring their wives,
but had been assured that it was impossible to guar-
antee that the women who desired to come were actually
married to the labourers. The authorities were anxious
to avoid any mixture of the races. The labour contracts
were otify for three years, and there was no time for
the labourers to form associations with the Samoan
women. It was absolutely necessary to import such
labour, as the natives themselves would not work.
He would ask the Council of the League to consider
whether it was wise to continue the practice of holding
public meetings of the Mandates Commission before
the Commission sent its report to the Council.
He further emphasized the danger of allowing peti-
tions to come direct to the Mandates Commission with-
out having been seen by the mandatory Powers. The
natives were unfortunately frequently under the in-
fluence of agitators.
Sir Edgar Walton (South Africa) said it was unfor-
tunate that the mandatory system should have become
the subject of debate at that meeting of the Assembly.
The mandatory Powers, in assuming the mandates, had
undertaken a very difficult task, and had incurred much
trouble and expense. They were more entitled to
sympathy than to criticism.
He was surprised at the solicitude of the Indian
delegate in regard to the population of South-West
Africa. He would point out that there were no'
Indians in South-West Africa.
He drew attention to' the very complicated position
with which the South African Government had to
deal, owing to the extremely mixed character of the
population.
It was regrettable that South Africa had not been
represented before the Permanent Mandates Commis-
sion, but the Administrator of South-West Africa
had himself been conducting military operations dur-
ing six months of the year, and no one else had suf-
ficient knowledge or authority to give the Mandates
Commission any useful information.
Reference had been made to the statement of Gene-
ral Smuts, that the C mandates amounted virtually
to annexation. This was true, as far as their adminis-
tration was concerned, as, the natives were put under
the same laws and had the same rights as the rest
of the South African population.
Lord Robert Cecil (South Africa) said he wished
to associate himself with the praise which had been
addressed to' the Mandates Commission.
Referring to the observations of Sir James Allen
in regard to publicity, he represented that on the
whole the advantages of publicity were greater than
the disadvantages.
As regards petitions, he agreed that the greatest care
must be taken not to hamper the mandatory Powers
in the performance of their duties. On the other
hand, there was no better guarantee against oppres-
sion or misgoveminent than publicity. He suggested
that petitions might be sent simultaneously to the
Mandates Commission, and to the mandatory Powers,
on the understanding that the Mandates Commission
would not consider them till it had received the ob-
servations of the mandatory Powers.
The delegate of India had made certain references
to General Smuts. General Smuts was the author of
the Covenant and of the mandatory system, and it
was a fantastic paradox to suggest that he could pos-
sibly misconceive the system of mandates or desire to
do anything hostile to' its success. The absence of a
representative of South Africa from the recent session
of the Mandates Commission was due to administrative
difficulties, and not from any wish to avoid criticism
or investigation. The observations of General Smuts
to which the Indian delegate had alluded, as Sir
Edgar Walton had already shown, needed no defence
if they were understood.
Criticism should not be resented. Criticism and
debate were necessary if the mandatory system were
to become a reality. They were the best sanction for
good administration in the mandated territories. The
present debate showed that the system was not a mere
deception, and that a real step forward had been made
in the progress of humanity.
The Hon. G. E. Rich (Australia) said that the
monopoly of phosphates in the Island of Nauru had
been acquired by voluntary sale from the Pacific
Phosphates Company. The employment of Chinese
labouiers had been continued by the administration,
but in decreasing numbers, and it was hoped that in
the near future it would be possible to dispense with
them altogether.
Sir Joseph Cook (Australia) said that the Mandates
Commission had made preliminary criticisms on the
administration of the Mandatories which were thought
to be rather severe, but these criticisms were made be-
cause the Commission did not know all the facts.
When the facts were supplied to the Commission, it
had not hesitated to accept them. The mandatory
Powers invited the fullest investigations, since criti-
cism came mostly from people who did not understand
the difficulties of the system.
There had been no adverse comments with regard
to the administration of New Guinea. On the con-
trary, the excellent system of medical hygiene intro-
duced into that territory had been warmly praised by
the Commission.
Chinese labour had been introduced into' Nauru be-
cause the natives could not be induced to work in the
mines.
The natives received full compensation for their
land, and were excellently treated under the new
regime.
There was no desire to take from the natives their
right of petition, but it was essential that the real
opinion of the natives should be ascertained, and not
the opinion of agitators who had ulterior purposes of
their own.
Australia was making every effort to administer
these islands in the true spirit of trusteeship, having
regard, always and primarily, to> the interests of the
natives.
The President pointed out that the report of the
Sixth Committee invited the Assembly to note several
recommendations and observations concerning the ad-
ministration of the mandates generally, and concern-
ing particular questions affecting the Pacific Islands
and the African territories.
The Assembly was also invited to l note a declara-
tion of the Honorable G. E. Rich, delegate for Aus-
tralia.
The Assembly duly noted these conclusions.
The President then put to the vote the resolution
of H. Dantes Bellegarde, which had been adopted by
the Sixth Committee:
“The Assembly, highly appreciating the action
taken by the Government of South Africa in com-
municating, in its capacity of mandatory Power
for South-West Africa, the report of the Bondelz-
wart Rebellion, 1922;
“Moved by feelings of great anxiety for the wel-
fare and the relief of the survivors; and
Resolves to express —
“1. Its profound satisfaction with the official
statement made by Sir Edgar Walton, that a
full and impartial inquiry will be made into all
the facts of the Bondelzwart Rebellion and its re-
pression ;


“ 2. The confident hope that the Permanent
Mandates Commission, at its next session, will con-
sider this question and be able to report that satis-
factory conditions have been established; and that,
in the meanwhile, the mandatory Power will make
every effort to relieve the suffering of the victims,
particularly the women and children, and that it
will ensure protection and restitution of the re-
maining live stock, and, in general, the restoration
of the economic life in the Bondelzwart district/'
The resolution was adopted.
The President then put to the vote the conclusions
of the Sixth Committee concerning the right of peti-
tion :
“The Committee, having considered the matter
of the right of petition alluded to in the Report
of the Permanent Mandates Commission, expresses
the hope that this right may be defined in such
manner that:
“1. All petitions emanating from inhabitants
of mandated areas should be sent to the Perma-
nent Mandates Commission through the interme-
diary of the local administration and of the man-
datory Power;
v“2. All petitions concerning the welfare of the
inhabitants of mandated areas emanating from
other sources should not be considered by the Per-
manent Mandates Commission before the manda-
tory Power had had full opportunity of express-
ing its views.”
The conclusions were adopted.
No. 20.
THE NATIONAL STATUS OF THE INHABITANTS OF TERRITORIES UNDER B AND C MANDATES.*
Report of the Permanent Mandates Commission.
The Permanent Mandates Commission, in response
to the request made to it by the Council of the
League of Nations on May 12th, 1922, has considered
the question of the national status of the inhabi-
tants of territories under B and C mandates, with a
view to submitting to the Council proposals for the
solution which it considers most advisable.
The Commission, for the reasons set forth below
and stated at greater length in the minutes of its
meetings of August 2nd, Bth, and 9th, 1922 (C. 548.
M. 330), has decided to' submit to the Council the fol-
lowing proposals :
1. It is important in order that the principles
laid down in Article 22 of the Covenant may be
respected and subject to the provision in para-
graph 111. below that the native inhabitants of
B and C mandated territories should be granted
a national status wholly distinct from that of
the nationals of the mandatory Power.
IT. A special law of the mandatory Power
should determine the status of these native in-
habitants, who might be given a designation such
as “administered persons under mandate” or
“protected persons under mandate” of the man-
datory Power.
111. It is open to mandatory Powers to whom
B and C mandated territories have been en-
trusted, to make arrangements in conformity with
their own laws for the individual and purely
voluntary acquisition of their nationality by in-
habitants of these territories.
SUMMARY OF REASONS IN SUPPORT OF
THESE PROPOSALS.
I.
With regard to the first resolution, the Commission,
in agreement with the views expressed by the re-
presentatives of the mandatory Powers at the pre-
liminary inquiry, the results of which were com-
municated to the Council by Marquis Theodoli on
May 12th, 1922 (C. 54 a.M. 45, 1922), considers it
desirable first of all to point out the necessity of
drawing a distinction between the national status of
native inhabitants of territories under B and C man-
dates on the one hand, and that of nationals of the
mandatory Powers on the other. This distinction,
which is generally recognised and is supported by con-
siderations expressed at length in the abovementioned
Report and Minutes, seems to call for no more detailed
comment here.
* League of Nations, 0. 546, 1922, vi.
Geneva, 19 August, 1922.
The reasons justifying the reservation regarding in-
dividual and purely voluntary naturalization are set
forth below.
11.
In justification of the second proposal, the Commis-
sion wishes to submit to the Council the following con-
siderations :
1. The Commission considers that the national status
of the inhabitants of territories under mandate can
only be constituted by a legislative act of the man-
datory Power. It would seem desirable that the
Council of the League of Nations should ask each
mandatory Power to frame a law designed to con-
stitute such a status, at the same time draw its atten-
tion to the principles laid down and justified in the
present report.
2. The Commission does not consider it necessary
to put forward a precise definition of the status of
such inhabitants; it merely recommends the adoption
of a title such as “administered persons under man-
date” or “protected persons under mandate,” which
would have, in its opinion, the double advantage of
meeting the convenience for the mandatory Powers
and of clearly defining the special quality of the na-
tional status of the inhabitants under mandate.
111.
In justification of the third proposal, the Commis-
sion wishes to submit to the Council the following
consideration:
It seems contrary to the spirit of the Covenant and
to the essence of the institution of mandates to per-
mit the compulsory naturalization, by a single act, of
all the inhabitants of territories under B and C man-
dates. The legal relations which exist between a
mandatory Power and the territory which it adminis-
ters, on behalf the League of Nations, do not appear
to permit of a measure which a State annexing a
territory cannot apply with regard to the inhabitants
annexed except by virue of the provisions expressly
inserted in the Treaty of Cession. The Treaty of
Versailles, by the terms of which the former German
colonies were handed over to the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers to be administered on behalf
of the League of Nations by Powers called manda-
tory, contains no clause imposing the nationality of
the mandatory Power on the inhabitants of those
colonies, f
t At its meeting on 2nd September 1922, the Council decided to defer its final
decision as to the effect to be given to the proposals of the Commission, and
meanwhile to forward to the Members of the League the resolutions and docu-
ments presented by the Commission, drawing the special attention of all the
Mandatory Powers to the subject, and informing them that the proposals would
be discussed by the Council at a later Session.




INDEX.
Page
Commission. See Permanent Mandates Commission.
Council, resolutions adopted by, on Report of Commission.. 84
Covenant of the League, Art. 22
responsibility of League arising from—
memorandum by Secretary-General .. .. .. 5
report by Monsieur Hymans .. .. .. 7-10
report by Council to Assembly .. .. .. 12-13
text .. ... .. .. .. .. 5
Dominions, British, direct correspondence with League .. 16
Japan—
declaration by Government of, relating to “ C ” Mandates 15
Second Annual Report on Mandated Territory—
consideration by Mandates Commission .. 35-37, 49, 64-65
observations of Commission on .. .. .. 77-78
comments of representatives of Japan .. .. 82
Labour-
questionnaire relating to .. .. .. 21-23, 24
indentured labour in Pacific Islands .. .. 57, 71-72
Land Tenure—
State owned lands in “ C ” Mandated Territories 41-42, 64, 72
land question in Mandated Territories in Africa .. .. 67-68
League—
degree of authority, control or administration exerciseable
by .. .. .. .. .. ... 9
responsibility. See Covenant of the League, Art. 22.
Mandates, “ C ”
allocation of .. .. .. .. .. 5, 8
Japanese Government, declaration by, relating to .. 15
observations of Commission on reports relating to .. 75-80
report of Mandates Commission, August, 1922 .. .. 54-58
texts .. .. .. .. .. .. 13-15
Mandates Commission. See Permanent Mandates Commission.
Mandatories—
duties of .. .. .. .. .. 9
legal title of .. .. .. .. .. 8
Mandatory system—origin and history of .. .. 15-17
National status of inhabitants of “ C ” Mandated Territories—
correspondence with Union of South Africa .. 38-40, 68-70
memorandum by Commission on .. 40-41, 61-63, 65-66
report of Permanent Mandates Commission .. .. 89
resolutions submitted by Commission to Council .. 61-63
Sir Jospeh Cook’s opinion as to .. .. .. 46-47
Page
Nauru—
Mandate for .. .. .. .. .. 14-15
reports on, 1920 and 1921, considered by Commission
47-49, 52-53, 54
observations of Commission on 57-58, 72, 75-77
comments of representatives of Mandatory .. 80-82
referred to in debates in Assembly .. 84—86
New Guinea, Territory of—
Mandate for .. ~ .. .. ~ 13-14
report on, 1914-1921, considered by Commission .. 43-46
observations of Commission on .. .. 75
Permanent Mandates Commission—
comparative statements to be prepared from reports of
mandatories .. .. .. .. .. 59-60
constitution of .. .. .. ; .. 11-12
memorandum by Secretary-General on proposed constitu-
tion of .. .. ~ .. .. 11
minutes of First Session, 1921 .. .. .. 15-25
minutes of Second Session, 1922 .. .. .. 30-71
powers of, regarding observance of Mandates .. .. 17-18
public plenary meeting, procedure for .. .. 53
report by Marquis Imperiali on Second Session .. .. 83-84
report to Council, August, 1922, .. ~ 54-58, 71-75
report to Council, 10th October, 1921 .. .. .. 27-29
rules of procedure .. .. .. .. .. 29-30
sessions, consideration of dates of .. .. ~ 59
Petitions from inhabitants of mandated Territories to League
37-38, 47
Questionnaire for “ B ” Mandates—
consideration by Commission .. .. .. 19-24, 60-61
text ~ .. ... .. .. .. 25-26
Questionnaire for “ C ” Mandates—
consideration by Commission .. .. .. 21, 23 25
text .. .. .. .. .. ~ 26-27
Reports, annual—
rules for examination of .. .. 11-12,29-30
circulation to members of League .. .. .. 63
South West Africa—
correspondence with Prime Minister of Union of South
Africa .. .. ~ .. .. 38-40, 68-70
report on, considered by Commission .. .. 42-43, 53
observations of Commission on .. ~ 79-80
State domains.. .. .. .. 41-42, 64, 67-68
Western Samoa—■
report on, 1920-1921, considered by Commission 49-51,70-71
observations of Commission on ~ .. 78-79


