

9?? TH "PPm^
. Uvui L
LAND REFORM LEAGUE.
TRA.CT INTO. 3.
? jV ow, instead of its being a thing which is prima facie for a man, it
may he argued that it is rather prima facie against him, that he is rich; it
is a fact that he has to account for, and often the accovnt he may have to
give is anything but creditable to him.
? If it were universally recognised that there were great objects in human
life, such as social distinctions, over which riches had no influence what-
ever, riches would be less unreasonably, and less immoderately pursued.
Again, 1 object strongly to a man's power of voting , in any capacity, being
augmented by his wealth. Ido not care about your telling me that this is
sheer Radicalism, and' talking to me about stakes in the country; that
betting phrase has no weight with me. The judgment of men who have
devoted themselves to the getting, the saving, or the enjoying of riches, may
be as much warped by those employments as the poor man's judgment may
be by his poverty.
?All I contend for is, do no honour to a rich man merely because he is
rich. If this maxim were adopted, riches would be robbed of half their mis-
chief.
? All merit throughout the world receives an insult and discouragement
when a rich man receives an honour on account of his riches.
? Some of the advantages which Communists aim at might be gained by
central government, which is .bound to undertake that good for individuals
which they cannot possibly compass by individual exertion."?Realm ah, by
Arthur Helps.
?All the old abuses in society, universal and particular, all unjust accu-
mulations of property and power, are avenged in the same manner. Fear
is an instructor of great sagacity, and the herald of all revolutions. One
thing he teaches, that there is rottenness where he appears. He is a carrion
crow, and. though you see not well what he hovers for, there is death some-
where. Our property is timid, our laws are timid, our cultivated classes
are timid. Fear for ages has boded and mowed and gibbered over govern-
ment and property. That obscene bird is not there for nothing. He
indicates great wrongs that must be revised." ? Emerson.
? Laws never would be improved if there were not numerous persons whose
moral sentiments are better than the existing laws." ? J. S. Mill.
?All is gained when the author possesses the prime endowment of reverence
and honour for his work- ?a feeling that he is not as a manufacturer of toys
and trinkets, but follows a mistress for whose sake it is a worthy and privi-
leged thing to make sacrifices, and these inthe light of such a sentiment, are
seen to be no longer sacrifices." ?Luxury and the Scholar.
FOR GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTION.
IJlelkmme;
MASON, FIRTH, & M?CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
Steam Printing Works, Flinders Lane West.
fi
MDCCCLXXI.


The present tract consists of selections from Mr. Mill?s Political Economy.
Those who have studied the argument comprised in the previous tracts will
find in Mr. Mill?s teachings the more scientific grounds on which our main
proposition rests. The extending interest that is perceptible on the subject
of the State being the sole Landlord; the inquiries that are being made as
to articles of detail in the working out of the principle; render it necessary
to anticipate in some particulars the proposed summarisation of the question
at the close of this series of tracts. The subject has been under review from
various aspects of the question in the North American Review, the Fort-
nightly, the London Quarterly, and others. Perhaps, owing to the absence
of personal experience of the facility with which the Government can
assume the functions of Landlord, there is a weakness in most of the notices,
as to the rectification of the existing system. In the colonies, where we have
the double system in full operation, it seems only to require to exhibit the
monstrous injustice of the custom of absolute sale to enable the leasing
arrangement to be extended over the whole of the Crown lands. The com-
plaints against the abuse of patronage and power to which our land sales
system has been subjected, have not been extended in an appreciable
amount to the leasing system. The reason is very evident. In the former
case most of the- influences which actuate mankind in the struggle for
existence are in iniquitous proportions included in the exclusive possession
of land, such as ? potential capital,? and the lust of power. In the latter
case, the simple legitimate use of a natural agent, subject to an equitable
return to the State, is all that is implicated in the bargain. The unjust
nature of our system of the alienation of the land may be inferred from the
entire absence of definition of the elements of the problem ; the same
criticism holds good of all negative propositions. All the excuse the robber
has to offer is, that he wants the property he steals. Hence allusions to
? earth-hunger,? ? the traditional instincts of Englishmen in favour of a
freehold,? &c., form the logic used by advocates of the continuance of our
barbarous system. On the other hand, thanks to the flood of light thrown on
the subject by modern thinkers, the supporters of a State Landlord do define
most emphatically each factor of the problem, and with unmistakeable
clearness indicate the rules which govern this game of our life.
The following notes may prove useful as ?aids to thought.?
1. Society is based, whether realised or not, on the ?social contract.?
2. ? The State is nothing more that the whole population in its corporate
capacity.? * All the members of the community have an equal right to
participate in all the advantages incidental to the working and action of
the Government. The diversity of natural gifts and powers each human
being possesses by birth, will soon enough declare itself ?relegating each to
his own sphere in life?without the State accelerating the dispersion by
iniquitous preference to classes.
3. The State holds in trust, for the benefit of the entire community, all
the natural agents, powers, and advantages, committed to its care, to be
economised and utilised so as to produce ? the greatest happiness to the
greatest number.?
4. The existing generation have only a life-interest in the above mate-
rials, in the midst of which they find themselves placed. They should
hand down to the succeeding generation the general patrimony in as im-
proved condition as possible, and as free from ?entail? as the first occupiers
received it, ?ex done dei .? No generation has a right to dictate to its
successor how it shall exercise its rights in the general inheritance, or dis-
count the advantages belonging to mankind, for the interest of a few, to the
hurt of its successors.
5, There are, in exuberant abundance, natural agents?labour, with skill
and inclination on the part of the labourers?in the world, which, if rightly
directed by those who have a controlling influence over these materials,
would enormously extend the general prosperity, by ? altering the distribu-
tion of (existing) wealth, and the direction of (existing) power.? f
W. H. GRESHAM.
46 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne, 13 th April, 1871.
* Axistralasian, 4th Feb., 1871, p. 144. t Ibid.


SELECTIONS
MILL?S POLITICAL ECONOMY
(PEOPLE?S EDITION, 1867).
1 . In so far as the economical condition of nations turns upon the
state of physical knowledge, it is a subject for the physical sciences,
and the arts founded on them. But in so far as the causes are
moral or psychological, dependent on institutions and social rela-
tions, or on the principles of human nature, their investigation
belongs not to physical, but to moral and social science, and is the
object of what is called Political Economy. (P. 13.)
2. The production of wealth, the extraction of the instruments
of human subsistence and enjoyment from the materials of the
globe, is evidently not an arbitrary thing. It has its necessary
conditions. Of these, some are physical, depending on the proper-
ties of matter, and on the amount of knowledge of those properties
possessed at the particular place and time. These, Political
Economy does not investigate, but assumes; referring for the
grounds to physical science or common experience. Combining
with these facts of outward nature other truths relating to human
nature, it attempts to trace the secondary or derivative laws, by
which the production of wealth is determined; in which must lie
the explanation of the diversities of riches and poverty in the
present and past, and the ground of whatever increase in wealth
is reserved for the future. (P. 13.)
3. Unlike the laws of Production, those of Distribution are
partly of human institution: since the manner in which wealth is
distributed in any given society depends on the statutes or usages
therein obtaining. But though Governments or nations have the
power of deciding what institutions shall exist, they cannot arbi-
trarily determine how these institutions shall work. The conditions
on which the power they possess over the distribution of wealth is
dependent, and the manner in which the distribution is affected by
the various modes of conduct which society may think fit to adopt,
ai'e as much a subject for scientific inquiry as any of the physical
laws of nature. (P. 13.)
4. The requisites of production are two: labour, and appropriate
natural objects. (P. 15.)
5. The reason why the use of land bears a price is simply the
limitation of its quantity, and that if air, heat, electricity, chemical


agencies, and the other powers of nature employed by manufac-
turers, were sparingly supplied, and could, like land, be engrossed
and appropriated, a rent could be exacted for them also. (P. 17).
6. This leads to a distinction which we shall find to be of primary
importance. Of natural powers, some are unlimited, others limited
in quantity. By an unlimited quantity is of course not meant
literally, but practically unlimited; a quantity beyond the use
which can in any, or at least in present circumstances, be made of
it. Land is in some newly-settled countries practically unlimited
in quantity: there is nxox?e than can be used by the existing
population of the country, or by any accession likely to be made to
it for generations to come. But even there, land favourably
situated with regard to markets or means of carriage, is generally
limited in quantity: there is not so much of it as persons would
gladly occupy and cultivate, or otherwise turn to use. In all old
countries, land capable of cultivation, land at least of any tolerable
fertility, must be ranked among agents limited in quantity.
(P. 17.)
7. It will be seen hereafter how much of the economy of society
depends on the limited quantity in which some of the most im-
portant natural agents exist, and more particularly land. For the
present I shall only remark that so long as the quantity of a
natural agent is practically unlimited, it cannot, unless susceptible
of artificial monopoly, bear any value in the market, since no one
will give anything for what can be obtained gratis. But as soon
as a limitation becomes practically operative; as soon as there is
not so much of the thing to be had, as would be appropriated and
used if it could be obtained for asking; the ownership or use of
the natural agent acquires an exchangeable value. When more
water-power is wanted in a particular district than there are falls
of water to supply it, persons will give an equivalent for the use
of a fall of water. When there is more land wanted for cultiva-
tion than a place possesses, or than it possesses of a certain quality
and certain advantages of situation, land of that quality and situa-
tion may be sold for a pi'ice, or let for axx axxnxxal x?exxt. (P. 18.)
8. It would be a great error to x?egret the large proportion of
the anxxual produce which in axi opulent couixtxy goes to supply
unproductive consumption. It would be to lamexxt that the com-
munity has so mixch to spare from its xxecessities for its pleasures
and for all higher uses. This portion of the produce is the fuxxd
from which all the waxxts of the community, other tlxaxx that of mere
living, ai?e provided for; the nxeasux-e of its means of emjoyment,
and of its power of accoxnplishixxg all pui?pose not productive.
That so gx?eat a sux?plus should be available for such pux?poses, and
that it should be applied to theux, can oxxly be a subject of congra-
tulation. The things to be regretted, axxd which are xxot ixicapable
of being x-emedied, are the prodigious ixxeqxxality with which this
surplus is distributed, the little worth of the objects to which the
greater part of it is devoted, axxd the lax?ge shai-e which falls to the
lot of pex'sons who rexxder xxo equivalent service in return. (P. 33.)


9. Everything which is produced is consumed; both what is
saved and what is said to be spent; and the former quite as
rapidly as the latter. All the ordinary forms of language tend to
disguise this. When people talk of the ancient wealth of a
country, of riches inherited from ancestoi's, and similar expressions,
the idea suggested is that the riches so transmitted were produced
long ago, at the time when they are said to have been first ac-
quired, and that no portion of the capital of the country was pro-
duced this year, except as much as may have been this year added
to the total amount. The fact is far otherwise. The greater part,
in value, of the wealth now existingin England has been produced
by human hands within the last twelve months. A very small
proportion indeed of that large aggregate was in existence ten
years ago; of the present productive capital of the country scarcely
any part, except farm-houses and manufactories, and a few ships
and machines; and even these would not in most cases have
survived so long, if fresh labour had not been employed within
that period in putting them into repair. The land subsists, and
the land is almost the only thing that subsists. (P. 46.)
10. This perpetual consumption and reproduction of capital
affords the explanation of what has so often excited wonder, the
great rapidity with which countries recover from a state of devas-
tation; the disappearance, in a short time, of all traces of the mis-
chiefs done by earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, and the x-avages of
war. An enemy lays waste a country by tii?e and sword, and
destroys or carries away neai?ly all the moveable wealth existing
in it: all the inhabitants ai?e ruined, and yet in a few years after
everything is much as it was befoi?e. This vis niedicotrix natures
has been a subject of stei?ile astonishment, or has been cited to
exemplify the wonderful strength of the principle of saving, which
can repair such enormous losses in so brief an interval. Thex - e is
nothing at all wonderful in the matter. What the enemy have
destroyed would have been destroyed in a little time by the in-
habitants themselves: the wealth which they so rapidly reproduce
would have needed to be reproduced, and would have been repro-
duced in any case, and probably in as short a time. Nothing is
changed, except that during the reproduction they have not now
the advantage of consuming what had been produced previously.
The possibility of a rapid repair of their disasters mainly depends
on whether the country has been depopulated. If its effective
population have not been extii?pated at the time, and are xxot
starved afterwards; then, with the same skill and knowledge which
they had before, with their land and its permanent improvements
undestroyed, and the more durable buildings probably unimpaired,
or only pai?tially injured, they have nearly all the requisites for
their former amount of prodxxction. (P. 47.)
11. Land differs from the other elements of production, labour
and capital, in not being susceptible of indefinite increase. Its
extent is limited, and the extent of the more px'oductive kinds of
it more limited still. It is also evident that the quantity of produce
capable of being raised on any given piece of land is not indefinite.


This limited quantity of land, and limited productiveness of it, are
the real limits to the increase of production.
That they are the ultimate limits, must always have been clearly
seen. But since the final barrier has never in any instance been
reached; since there is no country in which all the land, capable
of yielding food, is so highly cultivated that a larger produce could
not (even without supposing any fresh advance in agricultural
knowledge) be obtained from it, and since a large portion of the
earth?s surface still remains entirely uncultivated; it is commonly
thought, and is very natural at first to suppose, that for the present
all limitation of production or population from this source is at an
indefinite distance, and that ages must elapse before any practical
necessity arises for taking the limiting principle into serious
consideration.
I apprehend this to be not only an error , hut the most serious one to
be found in the whole field of political economy. The question is more
important and fundamental than any other; it involves the whole
SUBJECT OF THE CAUSES OF POVERTY IN A RICH AND INDUSTRIOUS
COMMUNITY ; and unless this one matter be thoroughly understood , it
is to no purpose proceeding any further in our inquiry* (P. 108.)
12. After a certain, and not very advanced stage in the progress
of agriculture, it is the law of production from the land, that in
any given state ol agricultural skill and knowledge, by increas-
ing the labour the produce is not increased in an equal degree;
doubling the labour does not double the produce ; or, to express
the same thing in other words, every increase of produce is
obtained by a more than proportional increase in the application
of labour to the land.
This general law of agricultural industry is the most important
proposition in political economy. Were the laiv different, nearly all
the phenomena of the production and distribution of wealth tvould be
other than they are. The most fundamental errors which still pre-
vail on our subject, result from not perceiving this law at work
underneath the more superficial agencies on which attention fixes
itself ; but mistaking those agencies for the ultimate causes of
effects of which they may influence the form and mode, but of
which it alone determines the essence. (P. 109.)
13. All natural agents which are limited in quantity, are not
only limited in their ultimate productive power, but, long before
that power is stretched to the utmost, they yield to any additional
demands on progressively harder terms. (P. 116.)
If. In all countries which have passed beyond a rather early
stage in the progress of agriculture, every increase in the demand
for food, occasioned by increased population, will always, unless
there is a simultaneous improvement in production, diminish the
share which on a fair division would fall to each individual. An
increased production, in default of unoccupied tracts of fertile land,
or of fresh improvements tending to cheapen commodities, can
never be obtained but by increasing the labour in more than the
* The italics where they occur in these selections are mine.?W.H. G.


same proportion. The population must either work harder, or eat
less, or obtain their usual food by sacrificing a part of their other
customary comforts. (P. 118.)
15. The distribution of wealth, therefore, depends on the Jaws
and customs of society. The rules by which it determined are
what the opinions and feelings of the ruling portion of the com-
munity make them, and are very different in different ages and
countries; and might be still more different, if mankind so chose.
16. The opinions and feelings of mankind, doubtless, are not a
matter of chance. They are consequences of the fundamental laws
of human nature, combined with the existing state of knowledge
and experience, and the existing condition of social institutions and
intellectual and moral culture. (P. 124.)
17. Society can subject the distribution of wealth to whatever
rules it thinks best; but what practical results will flow from the
operation of those rules, must be discovered, like any other physical
or mental truths, by observation and reasoning.
We proceed, then, to the consideration of the different modes of
distributing the produce of land and labour, which have been
adopted in practice, or may be conceived in theory. Among these
our attention is first claimed by that primary and fundamental
institution, on which, unless in some exceptional and very limited
cases, the economical arrangements of society have always rested,
though in its secondary features it has varied, and is liable to
vary. I mean, of course, the institution of individual property.
(P. 124.) . ...
18. Private property, as an institution, did not owe its origin to
any of those considerations of utility, which plead for the mainten-
ance of it when established. Enough is known of rude ages, both
from history and from analogous states of society in oui own time,
to show, that tribunals (which always precede laws) were originally
established, not to determine rights, but to repress violence and
terminate quarrels. With this object chiefly in view, they natur
ally enough gave legal effect to first occupancy, by treating as the
aggressor the person who first commenced violence, by or
attempting to turn, another out of possession. _ The preservation
of the peace, which was the original object of civil government, was
thus attained: while by confirming to those who already possessed
it, even what was not the fruit of personal exertion, a guarantee
was incidentally given to them and others that they would be pi o-
tected in what was so. (P. 124.)
19. The social arrangements of modern Europe commenced from
a distribution of property which was the result, not of just parti-
tion, or acquisition by industry, but of conquest and violence: and
notwithstanding what industry has been doing for many centuries
to modify the work of force, the system still retains many and
large traces of its origin. The laws of property have never yet
conformed to the principles on which the justification of private
property rests. They have made property of things which never
ought to be property, and absolute property where only a qualified


property ought to exist. They have not held the balance fairly
between human beings, but have heaped impediments upon some,
to give advantage to others; they have purposely fostered inequal-
ities, and prevented all from starting fair in the race. That all
should indeed start on perfectly equal terms is inconsistent with
any law of private property: but if as much pains as has been
taken to aggravate the inequality of chances arising from the
natural working of the principle had been taken to temper that
inequality by every means not subversive of the principle itself; if
the tendency of legislation had been to favour the diffusion, instead
of the concentration of wealth?to encourage the subdivision of the
large masses, instead of striving to keep them together; the
principle of individual property would have been found to have no
necessary connection with the physical and social evils which
almost all Socialist writers assume to be inseparable from it.
Private property, in every defence made of it, is supposed to
mean, the guarantee to individuals of the fruits of their own labour
and abstinence. The guarantee to them of the fruits of the labour
and abstinence of others, transmitted to them without any merit
or exertion of their own, is not of the essence of the institution,
but a mere incidental consequence, which when it reaches a certain
height, does not promote, but conflicts with the ends which render
private property legitimate. (P. 128.)
20. The essential principle of property being to assure to all
persons what they have produced by their labour and accunndated
by their abstinence, this principle cannot apply to what is not the
produce of labour, the raw material of the earth. If the land
derived its productive power wholly from nature, and not at all
from industry, or if there were any means of discriminating what
is derived from each source, it not only would not be necessary,
but it would be the height of injustice, to let the gift of nature be
engrossed by individuals. The use of the land in agriculture must
indeed, for the time being, be of necessity exclusive; the same
person who has ploughed and sown must be permitted to reap; but
the land might be occupied for one season only, as among the
ancient Germans; or might be periodically redivided as population
increased: or the State might be the universal landlord, and the
cultivators tenants under it, either on lease or at will. (P. 140.)
21. Whenever, in any country, the proprietor, generally speak-
ing, ceases to be the improver, political economy has nothing to
say in defence of landed property, as there established. In no
sound theory of private property was it ever contemplated that the
proprietor of land should be merely a sinecurist quartered on it.
(P. 141.)
22. When the ?sacredness of property? is talked of, it should
always be remembered that any such sacredness does not belong in
the same degree to landed property, No man made the land. It
is the original inheritance of the whole species. Its appropriation
is wholly a question of general expediency. When private pro-
perty in land is not expedient, it is unjust. It is no hardship to


any one to be excluded from what others have produced: they were
not bound to produce it for his use, and he loses nothing by not
sharing in what otherwise would not have existed at all. But it
is some hardship to be born into the world and to find all nature?s
gifts previously engrossed, and no place left for the new-comer.
To reconcile people to this, after they have once admitted into their
minds the idea that any moral rights belong to them as human
beings, it will always be necesssry to convince them that the ex-
clusive appropriation is good for mankind on the whole, them-
selves included. But this is what no sane human being could be
persuaded of, if the relation between the landowner and the culti-
vator were the same everywhere as it has been in Ireland. (P.
142.)
23. Landed property is felt, even by those most tenacious of its
rights, to be a different thing from other property; and where the
bulk of the community have been disinherited of their share of it,
and it has become the exclusive attribute of a small minority, men
have generally tried to reconcile it, at least in theory, to their
sense of justice, by endeavouring to attach duties to it, and erect-
ing it into a sort of magistracy, either moral or legal. But if the
State is at liberty to treat the possessors of land as public function-
aries, it is only going one step further to say that it is at liberty
to discard them. The claim of the landowners to the land is
altogether subordinate to the general policy of the State. The
principle of property gives them no right to the land, but only a
right to compensation for whatever portion of their interest in
the land it may be the policy of the State to deprive them of. To
that, their claim is indefeasible. It is due to landowners, and to
owners of any property whatever, recognised as such by the State,
that they should not be dispossessed of it without receiving its
pecuniary value, or an annual income equal to what they derived
from it. This is due on the general principles on which property
rests. If the land was bought with the produce of the labour and
abstinence of themselves or their ancestors, compensation is due
to them on that ground; even if otherwise, it is still due on the
ground of prescription. Nor can it ever be necessary for accom-
plishing an object by which the community altogether will gain,
that a particular portion of the community should be immolated.
When the property is of a kind to which peculiar affections attach
themselves, the compensation ought to exceed a bare pecuniary
equivalent. But, subject to this proviso, the State is at liberty
to deal with landed property as the general interests of the com-
munity may require, even to the extent, if it so happen, of doing
with the whole what is done with a part, whenever a bill is passed
for a railroad on a new street. The community has too much at
stake in the proper cultivation of the land, and in the conditions
annexed to the occupancy of it, to leave these things to the dis-
cretion of a class of persons called landlords, when they have shown
themselves unfit for the trust. The legislature, which if it pleased
might convert the whole body of landlords into fundholders or


pensioners, might ct fortiori, commute the average receipts of Irish
landowners into a fixed rent charge, and raise the tenants into
proprietors; supposing always that the full market value of the
land was tendered to the landlords in case they preferred that to
accepting the conditions proposed. (P. 142.)
24. To me it seems almost an axiom that property in land
should be interpreted strictly, and that the balance in all cases ot
doubt shall incline against the proprietor. The reverse is the case
with property in moveables, and in all things the product ol
labour: over these, the owner?s power both of use and of exclusion
should be absolute, except where positive evil to others would result
from it; but in the case of land no exclusive right should be per-
mitted in any individual which cannot be shown to be productive
of positive good. (P. 143.)
25. The three requisites of production, as has been so often re-
peated, are labour, capital, and land ?understanding by capital, the
means and appliances which are the accumulated results of pre-
vious labour, and by land, the materials and instruments supplied
by nature, whether contained in the interior of the earth or con-
stituting its surface. Since each of these elements of production
may be separately appropriated, the industrial community may be
considered as divided into landowners, capitalists, and productive
labourers. Each of these classes, as such, obtains a share of the
produce; no other person or class obtains anything, except by
concession from them. The remainder of the community is, in
fact, supported at their expense, giving, if any equivalent, one con-
sisting of unproductive sexwices. These three classes, therefore,
are considered in political economy as making up the whole
community. (P. 145.)
26. So far as rents, profits, wages, prices, are determined by
competition, laws may be assigned for them. Assume competition
to be their exclusive regulator, and principles of broad generality
and scientific precision may be laid down, according to which they
will be regulated. The political economist justly deems this his
proper business. (P. 147.)
27. The idea of property does not, however, necessarily imply
that there should be no rent any more than that there should be
no taxes. It merely implies that the rent should be a fixed charge,
not liable to be raised against the possessor by his own improve-
ments, or by the will of a landlord. A tenant at a quit-rent is, to
all intents and purposes, a proprietor; a copyholder is not less so
than a freeholder. What is wanted is permanent possession on
fixed terms. (P. 171.)
28. The only safeguard against these uncertainties would be the
growth of a custom, insuring a permanence of tenure in the same
occupant, without liability to any other increase of rent than
might happen to be sanctioned by the general sentiments of the
community. (P. 194.)
29. If wealth and population were stationary, rent also would
generally be stationary, and after remaining a long time unaltered,


would probably come to be considered unalterable. But all pro-
gress in wealth and population tends to a rise of rent. (P. 194.)
30. Those who think that the land of a country exists for the
sake of a few thousand landowners, and that as long as rents are
paid, society and government have fulfilled their function, may see
in this consummation a happy end to Irish difficulties.
But this is not a time, nor is the human mind now in a condi-
tion, in which such insolent pretensions can be maintained. The
land of Ireland, the land of every country, belongs to the people
of that country. The individuals called landowners have no right,
in morality and justice, to anything but the rent, or compensa-
tion for its saleable value. With regard to the land itself, the
paramount consideration is, by what mode of appropriation and of
cultivation it can be made most useful to the collective body of its in-
habitants. To the owners of the rent it may be very convenient
that the bulk of the inhabitants, despairing of justice in the
country where they and their ancestors have lived and suffered,
should seek on another continent that property in land which is
denied to them at home. Exit the Legislature of the empire ought
to regard with other eyes the forced expatriation of millions of
people. When the inhabitants of a country quit the country en
masse because its Government will not make it a place fit for them
to live in, the Government is judged and condemned. There is no
necessity for depriving the landlords of one farthing of the pecu-
niary value of their legal rights; but justice requires that the
actual cultivators should be enabled to become in Ireland what
they will become in America?proprietors of the soil which they
cultivate. (P. 200.)
31. Society mainly consists of those who live by bodily labour;
and if society, that is, if the labourers, lend their physical force to
protect individuals in the enjoyment of superfluities, they are entitled,
to do so, and have always done so, ivith the reservation of a power to
tax those superfluities for purposes of public utility; among which
purposes the subsistence of the people is the foremost. Since no one
is responsible for having been born, no pecuniary sacrifice is too
great to be made by those who have more than enough, for the
purpose of securing enough to all. persons already in existence.
(P. 212.)
32. The requisites of production being labour, capital, and
natural agents; the only person, besides the labourer and the
capitalist, whose consent is necessary to production, and who can
claim a share of the produce as the price of that consent, is the
person who, by the arrangements of society, possess exclusive
power over some natural agent. The land is the principal of the
natural agents which are capable of being appropriated, and the
consideration paid for its use is called rent. Landed proprietors
are the only class, of any numbers or importance, who have a
claim to a share in the distribution of the produce, through their
ownership of something which neither they nor any one else have
produced. If there be any other cases of a similar natux-e, they


will be easily understood, when the nature and laws ot rent are
comprehended. It is at once evident, that rent is the effect ot
a monopoly; though the monopoly is a natural one, which may
be regulated, which may even be held as a trust for the com-
munity generally, but which cannot be prevented from existing.
The reason why landowners are able to require rent for their
land, is that it is a commodity which many want, and which no
one can obtain but from them. If all the land oj the country
belonged to one person , he could fix the vent at his pleasure. The
whole people would be dependent on his will for the necessaries of
life , and he might make what conditions he chose. (P. 255.)
33. As society advances in population, wealth, and combination
of labour, land constantly rises in value and price. (P. 261.)
34. It is a case of the error too common in political economy, of
not distinguishing between necessities arising from the nature of
things, and those created by social arrangements. (P. 264.)
35. If the state had retained it (rent), or imposed an equivalent
in the shape of a land-tax, it would then have been a fund applic-
able to general instead of private advantage. (P. 288.)
36. When the demand of an increasing population for more food
cannot be satisfied without extending cultivation to less fertile
land, or incurring additional outlay, with a less proportional return,
on land already in cultivation, it is a necessary condition of this
increase of agricultural produce, that the value and price of that
produce must first rise. But as soon as the price has risen suffi-
ciently to give to the additional outlay of capital the ordinary
profit, the rise will not go on still further for the purpose of
enabling the new land, or the new expenditure on old land, to
yield rent as well as profit. The land or capital last put in requi-
sition, and occupying what Dr. Chalmers calls the margin of
cultivation, will yield, and continue to yield, no rent. But if this
yields no rent, the rent afforded by all other land or agricultural
capital will be exactly so much as it produces more than this. The
price of food will always on the average be such, that the worst
land and the least productive instalment of the capital employed
on the better lands, shall just replace the expenses with the
ordinary profit. If the least favoured land and capital just do
this much, all other land and capital will yield an extra profit ,
equal to the proceeds of the extra produce due to their superior pro-
ductiveness; and this extra profit becomes , by competition , the prize of
the landlords. (P. 417.)
37. When, however, population increases, as it has never yet
failed to do when the increase of industry and of the means of sub-
sistence made room for it, the demand for most of the productions
of the earth, and particularly for food, increases in a corresponding
proportion. And then comes into effect that fundamental law of pro-
duction from the soil, on which we have so frequently had occasion
to expatiate; the law, that increased labour, in any given state of
agricultural skill, is attended with a less than proportional increase
of produce. The cost of production of the fruits of the earth in-


creases, cceteris paribus, with every increase of the demand. (P.
425.)
38. The economical progress of a society constituted of landlords,
capitalists, and labourers, tends to the progressive enrichment of the
landlord class; while the cost of the labourer?s subsistence tends on the
whole to increase, and profits to fall. Agricultural improvements
are a counteracting force to the two last effects; but the first,
though a case is conceivable in which it would be temporarily
checked, is ultimately in a high degree promoted by those improve-
ments; and the increase of population tends to transfer all the benefits
derived from agricultural improvement to the landlords alone. (P.
439.)
39. Most fitting, indeed, is it, that while riches are power, and
to grow as rich as possible the universal object of ambition, the
path to its attainment should be open to all, without favour or
partiality. But the best state for human nature is that in which,
while no one is poor, no one desires to be richer, nor has any
reason to fear being thrust back, by the efforts of others to push
themselves forward.
That the energies of mankind should be kept in employment by
the struggle for riches, as they were formerly by the struggle oi
war, until the better minds succeed in educating the others into
better things, is undoubtedly more desirable than that they should
rust and stagnate. While minds are coarse they require coarse
stimuli, and let them have them. In the meantime , those who do
not accept the present very early stage of human improvement as its
ultimate type, may be excused for being comparatively indifferent to
the kind of economical progress which excites the congratulations oj
ordinary politicians; the mere increase of production and accumula-
tion. For the safety of national independence it is essential that a
country should not fall much behind its neighbours in these things.
But in themselves they are of little importance, so long as either the
increase of population or anything else prevents the mass of the people
from reaping any part of the benefit of them. I know not why it
should be matter of congratulation that persons who are already
richer than any one needs to be, should have doubled their means
of consuming things which give little or no pleasure except as
representative of wealth; or that numbers of individuals should
pass over, eveiy year, from the middle classes into a richer class,
or from the class of the occupied rich to that of the unoccupied.
(P. 453.)
40. We may suppose this better distribution of property
attained, by the joint effect of the prudence and frugality of indi-
viduals, and of a system of legislation'favouring equality of fortunes,
so far as is consistent with the just claim of the individual to the fruits,
whether great or small, of his or her own industry. We may suppose,
for instance, (according to the suggestion thrown out in a former
chapter), a limitation of the sum which any one person may
acquire by gift or inheritance, to the amount sufficient to constitute
a moderate independence. Under this twofold influence, society


would exhibit these leading features: a well-paid and affluent
body of labourers; no enormous fortunes, except what were earned
and accumulated during a single lifetime; but a much larger body
of persons than at present, not only exempt from the coarser toils, hut
with sufficient leisure, both physical and mental, from mechanical
details, to cultivate freely the graces of life, and afford examples of them
to the classes less favourably circumstanced for their growth. This
condition of society, so greatly preferable to the present, is not
only perfectly compatible with the stationary state, but, it would
seem, more naturally allied with that state than with any other.
(P. 454.)
41. It is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary condition
of capital and population implies no stationary state of human
improvement. There would be as much scope as ever for all kinds
of mental culture, and moral and social progress; as much room
for improving the Art of Living, and much more likelihood of its
being improved, when minds ceased to be engrossed by the art of
getting on. Even the industrial arts may be as earnestly and as
successfully cultivated, with this sole difference, that instead of
serving no purpose but the increase of wealth, industrial improvements
would produce their legitimate effect, that of abridging labour.
Hitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made
have lightened the day's toil of any human being. They have enabled
a. greater population to live the same life of drudgery and imprison-
ment, and an increased number of manufacturers and others to make
fortunes. They have increased the comforts of the middle classes.
Tut they have not yet begun to effect those great changes in human
destiny , which it is in their nature and in their futurity to accomplish.
Only when, in addition to just institutions, the increase of mankind
shall be under the deliberate guidance of judicious foresight, can the
conquests made from the. powers of nature by the intellect and energy
of scientific discoverers, become the common property of the species, and
the means of improving and elevating the universal lot. (P. 454.)
42. The observations in the preceding chapter had for their
principle object to deprecate a false ideal of human society. Their
applicability to the practical purposes of present times, consists in
moderating the inordinate importance attached to the mere increase of
production, and fixing attention upon improved distribution, and a
large remuneration of labour, as the tivo desiderata. Whether the
aggregate produce increases absolutely or not, is a thing in which,
after a certain amount has been obtained, neither the legislator
nor the philanthropist need feel any strong interest; but, that it
should increase relatively to the number of those who share in it, is of
the utmost possible importance; and this (whether the wealth of
mankind be stationary, or increasing at the most rapid rate ever
known in an old country) must depend on the opinions and habits
of the most numerous class, the class of manual labourers. (P.
456.)
43. The working classes have taken their interests into their
own hands, and are perpetually showing that they think the


intei'ests of their employers not identical with their own, but
opposite to them. (P. 457.)
44. Suppose that there is a kind of income which constantly
tends to increase, without any exertion or sacrifice on the part of
the owners: those owners constituting a class in the community,
whom the natural course of things progressively enriches, con-
sistently with complete passiveness on their own part. In such
a case it would he no violation of the principles on which private
property is grounded, if the State should appropriate this increase of
wealth, or part of it, as it arises. This would not properly be
taking anything from anybody; it would merely he applying an
accession of wealth, created by circumstances, to the benefit of society,
instead of allowing it to become an unearned appendage to the riches
of a. particular class.
Now this is actually the case with rent. The ordinary progress of
a society which increases in wealth, is at all times tending to augment
the incomes of landlords; to give them both a greater amount and a
greater proportion of the wealth of the community, independently of
any trouble or outlay incurred by themselves. They grow richer, as
it were in their sleep, without ivorking, risking, or economising.
What claim have they, on the general principle of social justice, to
this accession of inches ? In what would they have been wronged if
society had, from the beginning, reserved, the right of taxing the spon-
taneous increase of rent, to the highest amount required by financial
exigencies ? (P. 492.)
45. A certain amount of revenue may, as we have seen, be
obtained without injustice by a peculiar tax on rent. Besides the
present land-tax, and an equivalent for the revenue now derived
from stamp duties on the conveyance of land, ? some further tax-
ation might (I have contended) at some further period be imposed,
to enable the state to participate in the progressive increase of the
incomes of landlords from natural causes.? (P. 523.)
46. Even in the best state which society has yet reached, it is lament-
able to think how great a proportion of all the efforts and talents in
the world are employed in the merely neutralising one another. It
is the proper end of government to reduce this wretched waste to the
smallest possible amount, by taking such measures as shall cause the
energies now spent by mankind in injuring one another, or in protect-
ing themselves against injury, to be turned to the legitimate employ-
ment of the human faculties, that of compelling the powers of nature
to be more and more subservient to physical and moral qood. (P
591.) ' V


TO THE NEWSPAPER EDITORS OF THE
COLONY.
Gentlemen ?As an established institution, the ? fourth estate, from its
peculiar position and power, will always have an immense influence on the
settlement of the political and social problems of the day. A parasitic faith
with the majority of men is more common in politics, as in religion, than is
generally supposed. This condition will inevitably continue until our edu-
cational resources are vastly improved , as well as increased. (His Lordship
the Bishop?s opinion as to the desirability of limiting the education ot the
hewex of wood and the drawer of water, to the contrary, notwithstanding
and nevertheless.) The greater need that the guides of public opinion
should exercise their functions of criticism and leadership when efforts, how-
ever humble, are made to ventilate political inequalities and disabilities ot
such tremendous importance as are implicated in the question of the aliena-
tion of the land of the State. . ~
For the practical prosecution of the agitation now attempted, it is desirable
that opinions, pro and eon., on this subject should be obtained from the Press
of Victoria. Such a ? Plebiscitum,? emanating from the ? fittest audience,
though few,? could not be without its legitimate effect on the settlement ot
the question. It is proposed to make impartial and pertinent extracts from
such criticisms, which are therefore solicited on the broad grounds of public
policy. Copies of the previous Tracts, Nos. 1 and 2, have been posted to all
the newspapers in the colony; it will be taken as a favour if intimation of
their non-receipt, in any case, lie notified to the compiler. _
Supplementary copies will be forwarded to Editors taking an interest in
the question, and willing to distribute the Tracts to appreciative readers and
thinkers in their various localities.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS ON TRACT No. 2.
? It is as complete an exposure of the fallacy of the modern land system as
can be, and clearly points to the only true remedy. There can be little
doubt but that public opinion is rapidly moving in the direction of the reform
indicated, and that the time is not far distant when the great land-holders
must disgorge their vast estates. The ablest minds of modern days clearly
see that the State is the only legitimate landlord, and that monopoly in land
is destructive to the well-being of a people. In this country, too, the time
will arrive for the establishment of the same principle; and when it is, the
foundations of solid prosperity will be laid for the first time. _ Lectures were
delivered some thirteen or fourteen years ago by Dr. Hickson, in this country,
on the same subject, to induce reflection amongst the people as to whether
it was wise in us to alienate our lands. Few then saw the probability ot
such views ever gaining public recognition; now' there is moral certainty
that they will ere long not only be received, but be applied.? Melbourne
Evening Herald, 28rd January, 1871. . A . ~
? The Review article contains a fund of valuable information regarding the
past and present tenure of land in England, with its effects upon the social
condition of the people, and, so far as quoted, strongly supports Mr.
Gresham?s views. These tracts are not unlikely to exercise an important
influence upon our future land legislation, and should be read by all who
take an interest in the prosperity of the colony.?? dunes Guardian, 27th
January, 1871.
The leader in the Sydney Morning Herald of the 9th January, 1871, will
be given in full, and replied to in detail, in the concluding Tract of the
series.
These Tracts may be had Gratis from Me. Wade, Bookseller, Collins
Street, next door to the Clarence Hotel. Four copies posted on receipt of
Twopence in Stamps. '
MASON, FIRTH, AND M?CUTCHEON, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.
