

T> rp^r vr»
UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF
its 6*celUnqi ®6« (iotoox.
ft
>
SELECTIONS FROM
THE COMPOSITIONS
y T»ev. G. W. TORRANCEj Muj, B(?c n
TO BE PERFORMED IN THE
TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE,
On MONDAY EVENING, 28th FEBRUARY, 1881.
For the Benefit, of the Cathedral School of Music.
TO COMMENCE AT A QUARTER BEFORE EIGHT.
JUilbounu:
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, General Printers,
FLINDERS LANE WEST.
PRICE, SIXPENCE.




UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF
its felUttqr jllllllllll «ofr«rn«.
SELECTIONS FROM
THE COMPOSITIONS
Rev. Q e We ftIMUCt, ills, Hoc.,
TO BE PERFORMED IN TUB
TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE,
On MONDAY EVENING, 28th FEBEUAEY, 1881.
For the Benefit of the Cathedral School of Music.
TO COMMENCE AT A QUARTER BEFORE BIGHT.
Melbourne:
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, General Printers,
FUNDERS LANE WEST.


PATRON;
HIS EXCELLENCY THE MAEQUIS OE NORMANBY, G.C.M.G.
VICE-PATRONS:
The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Melbourne, D.D.
His Honour Sir William Foster Stawell, L.L.D.
The Right Worshipful the Mayor of Melbourne.
The Hon. William J. Clarke, M.L.C.
The Hon, Sir Samuel Wilson, M.L.C.
PRINCIPALS:
Mr. Chas. Turner, Tenor.
Mr. B. T. Moroney, Bass.
Mrs. Palmer, Soprano.
Mrs. Cutter, Contralto.
Organist - - - Mr. David Lee.
Leader - - - Me. Edward King.
BAND AND CHORUS,
Comprising Members of the several Choirs and Musical
Societies of Melbourne.
CONDUCTOR:
Rev. G, W. Torrance, Mus. Doc,


First Jewish Prophet -
Tenor.
Second Jewish Prophet
------ Bass.
First Israelitish Woman
- - . - - - Soprano.
First Chaldean Priest
------ Tenor,
Second Chaldean Priest
----- Bass.
First Chaldean Woman -
- .... Soprano.
Second Chaldean Woman
----- Contralto.
PROGRAM! ®.
PART I.
SELECTION
THE CAPTIVITY;
AN ORATORIO
(Composed A.D. 1864).
WORDS BY OLIVER GOLDSMITH.
l|crAonA ||cprcAentcd,
Chorus of Israelites, Chaldeans, Youths, and Maidens.
Scene— The Banks of the River Euphrates , near Babylon.
Argument. —The Captive Israelites, true to their Divine allegiance,
and encouraged by inspired prophets, refuse to join in the idolatrous
rites of their Chaldean oppressors. Heathen rejoicings and denuncia-
tions, on the occasion of a great festival, are mingled with prophetic
warnings of the impending doom of Babylon. The cruel torture and
death of Zedekiah are speedily followed by the triumphant approach
of Cyrus, who, in fulfilment of the Divine prediction, rescues the
captive Israelites, and overthrows the Chaldean power. Youths,
maidens, and prophets, in turn, welcome their benefactor, and all
unite in a Hymn of Praise to God.
INTRODUCTION.
RECITATIVE —First Jewish Prophet.
Ye captive tribes, that hourly work and weep
Where flows Euphrates murm’ring to the deep,
Suspend your woes awhile, the task suspend,
And turn to God, your Father, and your Friend;
Insulted, chained, and all the world our foe,
Our God alone is all we boast below.
\_Many of the numbers in the Oratorio being omitted, the blanks have
been supplied by brief descriptive particulars .]


CHORUS —Jewish Prophets.
Adagio assai.
Our God is all we boast be - low.
Our God is all we boast below,
To Him we turn our eyes ;
And every added weight of woe
Shall make our homage rise;
And though no temple richly dress’d,
Nor sacrifice is here,
We’ll make His temple in our breast,
And offer up a tear.
RECITATIVE —Israelitish Woman.
That strain once more ! it bids remembrance rise,
And brings my long-lost country to mine eyes:
Ye fields of Sharon, dressed in flowery pride;
Ye plains where Jordan rolls its glassy tide ;
Ye hills of Lebanon, with cedars crown’d;
Ye Gilead groves, that fling perfumes around.
Those hills how sweet! those plains how wondrous fair!
But sweeter still when Heaven was with us there.
AIR.
Larghetto con dolore.
O me -mo - ry! thou fond de - ceiver.
O Memory ! thou fond deceiver
Still importunate and vain ;
To former joys recurring ever,
And turning all the past to pain.
Thou, like the world, the oppress’d oppressing,
Thy smiles increase the wretch’s woe;
And he who wants each other blessing,
In thee must ever find a foe.


RECITATIVE —Second Jewish Prophet ,
CHALDEAN MARCH.
Allegro Maestoso.
[The approach of the Chaldeans is indicated by the distant music.]
But hush, my sons ! our tyrant lords are near,
The sounds of barbarous pleasure strike mine ear;
Triumphant music floats along the vale —
Near, nearer still, it gathers on the gale;
The growing sound their swift approach declares —
Desist, my sons, nor mix the strain with theirs.
[Chaldean Priests and Attendants enter, and endeavour unsuccessfully
to persuade the Jewish Captives to share in their idolatrous rejoicings.]
RECITATIVE —First Chaldean Priest.
But whence, when joy should brighten o’er the land,
This sullen gloom in Judah’s captive band ?
Ye sons of Judah, why the lute unstrung ?
Or why those harps on yonder willows hung ?
Come, take the lyre, and pour the strain along,
The day demands it; sing us Sion’s song,
Dismiss your griefs, and join our tuneful choir,
For who like you can wake the sleeping lyre ?


Allegretto.
Ev’ - ry mo - ment as it flows
First Chaldean Woman.
Every moment as it flows
Some peculiar pleasure owes ;
Come, then, providently wise,
Seize the debtor ere it flies.
First Chaldean Priest.
Think not to-morrow can repay
The debt of pleasure lost to-day;
Alas ! to-morrow’s richest store
Can but pay its proper score.
[Still refusing to join, and scorning the threat of ‘more formidable
terrors,’ the Captives affirm their reliance upon God.]
C H 0 RU S — lsraelites.
Can chains or tortures bend the mind
On God’s supporting breast reclined ?
Stand fast, and let our tyrants see
That fortitude is victory.
[The Chaldeans now threaten the rage of their ‘angry monarch,’
and seek to enforce compliance with his will. This also failing, more
gentle persuasion is attempted, but only with the result of calling
forth a prophetic utterance of the downfall of Babylon.]


RECITATIVE— Second Chaldean Priest.
Why this delay ? At length for joy prepare ;
I read your looks, and see compliance there.
Come on, and bid the warbling rapture rise,
Our monarch’s name the noblest theme supplies.
Begin, ye captive bands, and strike the lyre,
The time, the theme, the place, and all conspire.
DUET.
Allegretto,
k r^=zfs-^z=^s=q^-r«=”;zrqzzr^z=
See the rud -dy morn • ing smil - ing,
Second Chaldean Woman.
See the ruddy morning smiling,
Hear the grove to bliss beguiling;
Zephyrs through the woodland playing,
Streams along the valley straying.
First Chaldean Priest.
While these a constant revel keep,
Shall reason only teach to weep ?
Hence, intruder ! we’ll pursue
Nature—a better guide than you.
RECITATIVE— Second Chaldean Priest.
But hush ! see foremost of the captive choir,
The master-prophet grasps his full-toned lyre ;
Mark where he sits, with executing art,
Feels for each tone, and speeds it to the heart.
See how prophetic rapture fills his form,
Awful as clouds that nurse the growing storm !
And now his voice, accordant to the string,
Prepares our monarch’s victories to sing.


SOLO AND CHORUS,
First Jewish Prophet , and Israelites.
From north, from south, from east, from west,
Conspiring nations come ;
Tremble, thou vice-polluted breast;
Blasphemers, all be dumb.
The tempest gathers all around,
On Babylon it lies ;
Down with her ! down—down to the ground
She sinks, she groans, she dies.
Second Prophet.
Down with her, Lord, to lick the dust,
Down with her, Lord, to lick the dust,
Before yon setting sun ;
Serve her as she has served the just!
’Tis fix’d —it shall be done.
RECITATIVE — First Chaldean Priest.
No more ! when slaves thus insolent presume,
The king himself shall judge, and fix their doom.
Short-sighted wretches ! have not you and all
Beheld our power in Zedekiah’s fall ?
To yonder gloomy dungeon turn your eyes—
See where dethroned your captive monarch lies;
Deprived of sight, and rankling in his chain,
See where he mourns his friends and children slain,
Yet know, ye slaves, that still remain behind
More pond’rous chains, and dungeons more confined.
CHORUS— lsraelites.
Arise, all-potent Ruler, rise,
And vindicate thy people's cause—
Till every tongue, in every land,
Shall offer up unfeign’d applause.


RECITATIVE. —First Chaldean Priest.
Yes, my companions, Heaven’s decrees are pass d,
And our fix’d empire shall for ever last;
In vain the madd’ning prophet threatens woe —
In vain rebellion aims her secret blow;
Still shall our name and growing power be spread,
And still our justice crush the traitor’s head.
CHORUS- Chaldeans.
Coeval with man
Our empire began,
And never shall fall,
Till ruin shakes all.
With the ruin of all,
Then shall Babylon fall.
RECITATIVE —First Jewish Prophet.
’Tis thus that pride triumphant rears the head —
A little while, and all her power is fled.
But, ha ! what means yon sadly plaintive train,
That onward slowly bends along the plain?
And now, behold, to yonder bank they bear
A pallid corse, and rest the body there.
Alas ! too well mine eyes indignant trace
The last remains of Judah’s royal race :
Fall’n is our king, and all our fears are o er,
Unhappy Zedekiah is no more.
FUNERAL MARCH.
Largo con dolore.
_ nr» *■ * * * I*-
[The Israelites mourn the fate of their king, and await the vengeance
of Heaven, which quickly follows with the approach of Cyrus, J


RECITATIVE— First Jewish Prophet.
But, whence that shout ? Good heavens ! Amazement all I
Bee yonder tower just nodding to the fall:
Behold, an army covers all the ground,
Tis Cyrus here that pours destruction round :
1 he ruin smokes, the torrent pours along—
How low the great, how feeble are the strong !
And now, behold, the battlements recline—
O God of hosts, the victory is Thine !
C HOR U S — lsraelites.
Down with her, Lord, to lick the dust—
Thy vengeance be begun ;
Serve her as she has served the just,
And let Thy will be done.
RECITATIVE— First Chaldean Priest.
All, all is lost! The Syrian army fails ;
Cyrus, the conqueror of the world, prevails.
Save us, O Lord ! to Thee, though late, we pray ,
And give repentance but an hour's delay.
AlR— Second Chaldean Priest.
Andante Religiose,
Thrice hap - py, who in hap •py hour
Thrice happy, who in happy hour
To Heaven their praise bestow,
And own His all-consuming power
Before they feel the blow !
cap,ors ' vl,h co ™ rfice ’


RECITATIVE — First Jewish Prophet.
Such be her fate. But hark ! how from afar
The clarion’s note proclaims the finish’d war !
Cyrus, our great restorer, is at hand,
And this way leads his formidable band.
Now give your songs of Zion to the wind,
And hail the benefactor of mankind !
He comes, pursuant to divine decree,
To chain the strong, and set the captive free.
SEMI-CHORUS.
Allegretto.
Rise to rap - tures past ex - press - ing,
Youths. —Rise to raptures past expressing,
Sweeter from remember’d woes ;
Cyrus comes our wrongs redressing,
Comes to give the world repose.
Cy - rus comes, the world re - dress - ing,
Maidens.— Cyrus comes, the world redressing,
Love and pleasure in his train;
Comes to heighten every blessing,
Comes to soften every pain.
Prophets. —Hail to him with mercy reigning,
Skill’d in every peaceful art;
Who from bonds our limbs unchaining,
Only binds the willing heart:
FULL-CHORUS.
But chief to Thee, our God, our Father, Friend,
Let praise be giv’n to all eternity;
O Thou, without beginning, without end —
Let us and all, begin and end in Thee!
Amen,


AN INTERVAL OF FIFTEEN MINUTES.
Note. It is particularly requested that all who cannot remain
till the end of the performance (which is expected to terminate by
Half-past Ten) will kindly leave during this interval.
PART 11.
THE MELBOURNE EXHIBITION MARCH.
Arranged for Full Orchestra and Organ.


SONG—THE RAINY DAY.
( Composed A.D. 1576.)
Words by Longfellow.
Allegro Agitato.
The day is cold and dark and dreary;
The day is cold and dark and dreary;
It rains, and the wind is never weary.
The vine still clings to the mould’ring wall,
But at every gust the dead leaves fall.
My life is cold and dark and dreary;
It rains, and the wind is never weary.
My thoughts still cling to the mould’ring past,
But the hopes of youth fall thick in the blast.
Be still, sad heart, and cease repining,
Behind the clouds is the sun still shining;
Thy fate is the common lot of all,
Into each life some rain must fall,
Some days must be dark and dreary.
QUARTETT— LUNA.
f Unaccompanied.)
Larghetto. _
Be - hold bright Luna, in her tranquil course,
Behold bright Luna, in her tranquil course,
Across the dome of yonder dark blue sky;
She sweetly smiles upoma sleeping world,
And bids the darkness from before her fly,
And seek the region of its kindred gloom
Within some dark abyss or silent tomb.


Tis sweet at even, when day’s work is o’er,
With one we love to wander in the calm
Clear light reflected from bright Luna’s face,
And feel beneath her rays a gentle balm.
Love, shaded by the canopy of night,
Becomes ineffable beneath her light.
As time is sweet, O Moon ! do thou arrest
Those transient hours, and send them back to earth.
The mind, responsive to a sense of joy,
Shall grateful in return give gladsome birth,
And wing those thanks to thee, bright Moon alone,
Who reignest unrivalled on yon glorious throne.
SONG—MY NATIVE LAND.
(Composed A.D. J 554.)
Written at KillarneV by S. N. E.
Andante con express.
mf ~~ p . .
« .=t=±-=^±=:^ = * = ; I*^,l
tr * Z 1
My native land— there is a spell
My Native Land—there is a spell
In that sweet word—my Native Land;
W T ith feelings words would coldly tell,
I bid thy fairest scenes farewell.
I would that now thy generous hand
Were grasped in mine while thus I take
My leave of this enchanting lake,
1 hese purple hills, this fairy strand.
Waft, ye soft winds, the patriot’s prayer—
“ May plenty bless our country’s stay;
May toiling worth contentment share,
And wealth reward it day by day.
May heaven upon thy people smile,
And when the festive cup goes round,
O may this poor but peerless Isle
The heart’s dear choice be ever found.”


THE ARGONAUTS;
A CANTATA
(Composed A.D. 18S0).
WORDS BY J. W. MEADEN.
ARGUMENT.
The Departure. — (i) The Rest of the Golden Fleece in the
sacred Grove of Ares. (2) Rumour conveys abroad the fame thereof,
and paints glowing pictures of the beauties of the western lands, the
Garden of the Hesperides, &c.; adding a gentle warning against the
allurements of the Sirens, who, standing upon the shore, seek by their
songs to entice the mariners to destruction. (3) Attracted by these
reports, the Argonautic heroes set forth on their adventurous voyage.
Labouring at the oars, they sing with joyful hearts, and commit
themselves, alike in storm and sunshine, to the protection of the Sea-god.
The Return. —(l) After a lengthened absence, during which
many dangers and hardships have been experienced, the Argonauts,
returning in triumph with the Golden Fleece, once more behold the
walls of their beloved lolcos, lapped by the sparkling waters of the
Pagasaean Gulf. (2) Reaching the shore, they are met by bands of
maidens, who with singing and dancing conduct them to the gate of the
City. (3) Here their countrymen receive them with songs of triumphant
welcome, amidst which they proceed to the Temple of Neptune, where
with sacrificial rites they deposit the Golden Fleece, and dedicate their
vessel, the Argo, to the Sea-god, who, accepting the offering, raises it to
the skies, there to shine as a constellation for the guidance of mariners.
(4) Elated by their reception, the Argonauts joyfully redeem the vows
made during their absence, whereupon the whole assemblage join in a
solemn invocation to Neptune.
Note by the Author. —As in this instance the ordinary routine of
composition has been reversed (the labour of the composer having
preceded that of the writer), the latter has been compelled to act in a
somewhat arbitrary manner, both in his selection of the incidents to be
illustrated and his method of treating them. For this reason, also, the
circumstances attending the actual discovery of the Golden Fleece are
omitted, and the entire story reduced within the slenderest limits. For
the sake of unity, the scene of the consecration of the Argo, traditionally
located in the Isthmus of Corinth, is transferred to lolcos. —J. W. M.


Part I.—THE DEPARTURE.
INTRODUCTION.
RECITATIVE—BASS.
On distant shores, in solitude profound,
Where mystic shades the sylvan shrine surround ;
In sacred groves of deep and solemn gloom,
Where baleful stars predict th’ intruder’s doom—
By monsters guarded, and by magic spell—
The Golden Fleece illumes the silent dell.
CHORUS.
Come sail o’er seas of pleasure,
Where darkening skies ne’er frown,
To seek this regal treasure,
This prize of high renown.
Beyond the shadows olden
That guard the unknown west,
In the regions bright and golden
Where the red sun sinks to rest,
There fruits of golden lustre
Between the branches shine,
And grapes in purple cluster
Hang drooping from the vine.
There fair-brow’d maids lie dreaming
In bowers of blissful ease;
And resplendent cities, gleaming
Through the haze of golden seas.
Come, sail o’er glitt’ring waters,
By gentle zephyrs fann’d ;
While beauty’s fairest daughters
Stand beck’ning on the strand.
Their songs, like sweet bells ringing,
Float soft on the balmy air;
Fair and false so sweetly singing,
O wanderer, then beware !


THE HEROES’ SONG.
( Chorus of Male Voices.)
Allegro moderate.
JA A A fVT
Now bend we to the lab ring oar
Now bend we to the lab’ring oar,
That cleaves the glassy wave;
With haste we flee th’ enchanted shore,
The treacherous mermaid’s cave.
No luring joy our course shall stay,
No threatening danger bar our way.
Though angry tempests round us roar,
And Jove’s loud thunders crash ;
Though whirling torrents round us pour,
And the salt spray o’er us dash;
Our course to stay they strive in vain,
For the Sea-god rules o’er the heaving main
Part lI.—THE RETURN.
PASTORALE.


RECITATIVE-TENOR.
Once more, mid pastures fair and verdant groves enshrined,
The sun-lit seas before, the purple hills behind;
Guarded by frowning forts where watchful sentries stand,
By Neptune’s sacred shrine, and vestured priestly band/
The scene of home belov’d now cheers each warrior’s
sight;
lolcos stands in view, all bathed in rosy light.
CHORUS OF MAIDENS.
Now to the shore, a joyful train,
We gaily haste with dancing feet;
While loud we chant a glad refrain,
With smiles the warrior band to greet,
Bearing the Golden Fleece.
CHORAL SONG OF WELCOME.
Allegro con spirito.
i eele
tr f
All hail! ye sons of glo-ry,
All hail! ye sons of glory, through ev’ry age and clime,
Your names shall live in story, embalm’d by deeds sublime;
Your brows with wreaths undying immortal shall be crown’d'
And Fame, on swift wing flying, your praises shall resound.
/ e welcome you with singing, we greet you at the shore,
sacred chalice bringing, we glad libations pour;
Whfle votive floods are streaming, and costly victims slain,
I he Golden Fleece shall, gleaming, adorn the Sea-god’s fane.


Now at thy sacred altar,
Neptune, on thee we call;
With tongues that ne’er may falter,
To thee we give our all:
That thine by consecration
The Argo hence may be,
A shining constellation,
A light for those at sea.
SOLO, QUARTETT, AND CHORUS.
The Invocation,
Moderate e maestoso.
Great Nep-tune, ru - ler of the foam - ing wave,
Great Neptune, ruler of the foaming wave,
Whose mighty hand with trembling smites the world ;
By whose stern voice the howling winds are roused,
And stubborn mountains from their bases hurl’d.
To hear us, check thy rapid coursers’ flight,
And let thy car’s swift rolling wheels be stayed;
Behold our offerings borne across the wave,
Accept the gifts upon thine altars laid.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.






' - V ' V. : O' " ' 7
. ■■■
■
*-■ ' £ ■
■ ' ' ...
