





SELF-CONSISTENCY
A THEORY OF PERSONALITY
BY PRESCOTT LECKY
Edited and Interpreted by
Frederick C. Thorne, M. D., Ph. D.,
Editor, Journal of Clinical Psychology
ISLAND PRESS NEWYORK, N. Y.


Copyright, 1945, by Kathryn Lecky
Copyright, 1951, by Island Press Co-operative, Inc.


CONTENTS
Page
Foreword to First Edition, by Gardner Murphy i
Foreword to Second Edition,
by Dr. Frederick T. Thorne iii
Positive Values of Mr. Lecky’s Work 1
Chapter I
Prescott Lecky, a Biographical Sketch 9
Chapter II
The Influence of Behaviorism on Modern
Psychology 21
Chapter 111
The Validity of Personality Inventories 31
Chapter IV
The Individuality Record 45
Chapter V
Self-Consistency vs. The Doctrine of
Specificity 75
Chapter VI
The Personality as a Scientific Concept 99
Chapter VII
The Structure of the Personality 113
Chapter VIII
The Personality 149
Chapter IX
Self-Consistency as a Technique 167
Chapter X
Clinical Approaches to Personality Study 193
Chapter XI
A Nuclear Theory of Mind 219
Chapter XII
A Critical Evaluation of the Self-Consistency
Theory 237
Appendix I
Preventing Failure by Removing Resistance 245
Appendix II
Personal Counseling 257




FOREWORD
TO FIRST EDITION
This little volume represents the distillation of some
twenty years of work by Prescott Lecky in the fields of
psychology, psycho-pathology, and education. His de-
velopment was continuous, and his thinking both subtle
and systematic. The posthumous appearance of these
chapters gives the unified view of a creative thinker,
whose main aim as a psychologist was to achieve that
flexibility with unity about which he has so cogently
written.
It was my privilege to know Prescott Lecky well and
to learn much from him. We shared a dislike for closed
and rigid systems. His development took the direction
of constant and vital application to educational and to
adjustment problems among his students. I had not
known how mature his thinking was until some of these
chapters came recently to my attention.
The fundamental idea of organic unity and of the
capacity of the psychological system to maintain itself
against outside pressure is one which has become in-
creasingly familiar through the work of the Gestalt psy-
chologists, the work of Paul Schilder, and above all,
the brilliant systematic statements by Kurt Goldstein.
The fact remains that Lecky had in his own way developed
further than any of these the conception that the individual
must define for himself the nature of that totality which
he is. He must throughout life assimilate new experi-
ences in such fashion as both to be and to appear a liv-
ing unit. The practical consequence is that new habits
I


are made, and old ones lost, not in terms of sheer con-
ditioning or habit formation, not in terms of isolated
neural bonds, but in terms of assimilation, as the in-
dividual conceives the forward step to be a continuation
and fulfillment of himself.
This subtle and penetrating conception was for years
applied in teaching, in clinical work, and in business
situations; was tested, redrafted, and rewritten until in
these present chapters, the psychology of self-consist-
ency achieves mature expression.
The chapters as presented here have been edited by
Dr. John F. A. Taylor and represent the best integra-
tion of Lecky's work which can now be achieved. The
book which Lecky had for years planned was far from
finished. But these chapters are offered to the reader in
the hope that the emphasis upon the unity of the per-
sonality may supplement and vitalize many similar
studies which come from our clinics and laboratories
today.
GARDNER MURPHY,
Dept, of Psychology
College of City of New York
January 1944


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION
The posthumous publication of this little book in its
first edition was something of a financial gamble and was
made possible only by the generous assistance of Mrs.
Edith Clyde. Mr. Lecky was then largely unknown even
among professional psychologists and there was some
question as to how the new theory of personality would
be received. Even though not intensively publicized,
the significance of Mr.Lecky’s work won instant acclaim,
particularly among clinical psychologists, who were quick
to perceive the validity of his conceptions of the organi-
zation of personality. In the five-year period since the
data of publication, public demand to know more about
Mr. Lecky and his work has increased so constantly that
publication of his work in an enlarged edition was im-
perative. The first edition represented only the latter
half of a manuscript entitled The Personality As A Scien-
tific Concept, which had been left in unfinished state
by Mr. Lecky. Governmental restrictions on the use of
essential materials during the war made it necessary to
publish only a rough outline of the Self-Consistency
theory without the supporting evidence derived from Mr.
Lecky's researches which appeared in the first half of
the manuscript. The fifst edition might therefore be re-
garded as only an abbreviated segment presenting the
theory in disjointed fashion and without the background
material necessary to gain perspective on the origins
and validity of the theory.
In the second edition we have endeavored to include
all of the significant material omitted in the first edition,
together with additional chapters by the present editor
presenting a biographical sketch of Mr. Lecky, an ex-
tension of his ideas on clinical approaches to person-
ality study, and a critical evaluation of his whole theory.
III


Because of the disorganized state of unpublished manu-
scripts, personal notes, and materials submitted by
students from notes of Mr. Lecky’s lectures, your present
editor assumed the responsibility of rewriting and con-
densing the sections which appeared most deserving of
publication. In places, gaps in the original materials have
been supplemented with new sections and comments by
the editor who has contributed all of chapters 1, 11, 12
and 13, and parts of chapters 3, 4 and 10 which are in-
dicated by references to Mr. Lecky in the third person.
New sections written by Mr. Lecky himself include chap-
ters 2, 3 and 4 with slight revisions by the editor intended
to state basic principles as succinctly as possible while
omitting repetitious details. Chapter 1 presents a short
biographical sketch of Mr. Lecky with particular reference
to the dynamics of his style of life as it appeared to a
professional colleague. Chapter 2, a paper on the influ-
ence of Behaviorism on modern psychology, is included
because it throws much light on the trend of thinking
which led Mr. Lecky away from the conventional view-
point of his time and into pioneering explorations of
personality. Chapter 3 presents a summary of his ideas
on the validity of personality inventories, which indicates
the theoretical background out of which his own research
developed. Chapter 4 consists of a summary of the re-
search which was to be the basis of his doctoral disser-
tation. It includes the research data derived from his own
personality inventory, the Individuality Record, with brief
discussions of therapeutic implications. Chapters sto 10
constituted the subject matter of the first edition and are
reproduced almost without change. Chapter 11 represents
an elaboration by the present editor of certain ideas con-
cerning the clinical approach to personality which had
been discussed with Mr. Lecky many times. The last sec


tion of this chapter entitled "Reorientation” is a summary
of selections chosen directly from his own writings. Chap-
ter 12 involves an attempt to outline the nuclear theory of
mind more formally than is elsewhere available. Large
sections of this chapter are based on the notes of one of
Mr. Lecky’s former students who prefers to remain anony-
mous. A critical evaluation of some aspects of Mr. Lecky’s
work is presented in chapter 13. Concluding are three
short papers which appeared in the first edition, and the
first two of which comprise the only sections of his work
published during his life.
Frederick C. Thorne, M.D., Ph.D.
Editor, Journal of Clinical Psychology,
Assistant Professor of Psychiatry,
University of Vermont College of Medicine.
July 1950
Brandon, Vermont




POSITIVE VALUES OF MR. LECKY’S WORK
Orientation to Psychology. The existence of such a
diversity of viewpoints and theoretical confusion as cur-
rently exists in psychology is convincing evidence of
the need for a more valid approach capable of integrating
all the experimental facts. The self-consistency theory
of personality offers a more convincing interpretation of
functions involving higher levels of integration of the
global personality than any other theoretical position yet
developed. Dealing with phenomena which behaviorism
and other systems have been unable to treat adequately.
Mr. Lecky has outlined the basis for a new psychology
which is consistent with the trends of the newer physics.
During World War 11, the psychiatrist and psychologist
both came into their own through general recognition that
their function was to organize and integrate data from
all levels of integration in the organism. It has come to
be recognized that the psychological scientist is the one
most capable of evaluating the organism as a whole in
its most complex interrelations. To accomplish this task
adequately, psychological science must have a theoretical
background which deals realistically with all types of
data. The psychological systems of the past have not beeit
able to qualify for this necessary broad orientation, and
one after another has been abandoned as its shortcomings
were identified. Mr. Lecky attacked the problem boldly
by declaring that psychology must study the psyche in
all its manifestations and evolve a theoretical formu-
lation capable of explaining the organized individuality
which is a person.


Concepts of Mind and Personality. Much semantic
confusion. has been eliminated by the statement that
"mind", "personality", "psyche" and other terms do
not refer to objective realities but are merely conceptual
constructs devised to describe the more complex psychol-
ogical phenomena which cannot be observed or measured
directly but must be inferred rationally. The necessity for
evolving such conceptual constructs is discovered when
attempting to deal with larger units of behavior which can-
not be interpreted meaningfully in terms of single observa-
but only in terms of dynamic configurations or Gestalts
whose essential nature is in their patterns of organization.
For example, any psychology worthy of the name must be
able to deal effectively with consciousness which cannot
be objectively explained eventhougfi it is the most patent
fact of subjective experience. Without working hypotheses
concerning the nature of processes which cannot be ob-
jectively observed, scientific psychology must abandon
its birthright and become a subsidiary of physiology or
medicine.
Tho Principle of Unification, Motivation theory is
incomplete without recognition that the prime need of an
organism is to maintain its mental organization as a uni-
fied whole. The object of integrative forces in the or-
ganism is to preserve unity, particularly on the highest
psychic levels. All other needs may be conceived of as
subsidiary to this primary motive. As with the concepts
of mind or personality, unification cannot be observed or
measured objectively but must be inferred from the pat-
terns of organization.
Self consistency, Mr. Lecky recognized that the
characteristics of a person on the highest levels of
integration are determined by his style of life, i.e. the
individual organization of ideas and attitudes which are
acquired through experience and which control the high


est intellectual functions. The essence of this organi-
zation of ideas and attitudes is its self-consistency. A
person can only go in one direction at a time, or believe
one thing at a time. Inconsistency or ambivalence re-
sults in conflict or paralysis of action. Behavior ex-
presses the effort to be consistent and unified in organi-
zation and action. Ideas which are consistent with past
experience tend to be assimilated; those which are incon-
sistent tend to be rejected. If an inconsistent attitude
presents itself with sufficient urgency, it may force re-
organization of preexisting attitudes in order to eliminate
inconsistency and regain unity.
Reinterpretation of Psychological Theory. If the
dynamics of causality run not from part to whole as im-
plied in mechanistic theory, but from whole to part as im-
plied in the self-consistency theory, it becomes necessary
to reinterpret the dynamics of all personality functions.
If the individual is capable to some degree of defining
for himself the nature of that totality which he is and of
maintaining this organization against external pressures,
it becomes of the most vital importance to determine the
dynamic pattern of organization (mind) in each individual
case with particular reference to the ideas and attitudes
which are its elements. Perception, learning, memory
and forgetting, feeling, thinking and imagination must be
reinterpreted in terms of the pattern of the values of each
person, i.e. what the person thinks and feels about him-
self and the world. It is only by studying and interpret-
ing larger units of behavior, i.e. complete acts which
may last for months or years, that the true dynamics of
the whole personality may be understood. The task be-
comes, then, to discover the manner in which the various
psychological functions cooperate in what the organism
as a whole is doing.
The Inventory Method. Out of his investigations of


the nature of personality inventories and their results
came both a theory of personality and a more valid under-
standing of inventory methods. In contrast with the older
theory that inventories measured a trait of neurotic ten-
dency, Mr. Lecky demonstrated on both theoretical and
statistical grounds that they were simply measures of
"negative attitudes" in the various areas of life. Criti-
cizing previous interpretations of total inventory scores,
it is demonstrated that the presence of an average num-
ber of negative attitudes is to be considered normal
while excessively high or low scores are distinctively
differential of different syndromes of personality dis-
order. If it is recognized that the individual symptoms
represent attitudes rather than true psychological traits,
then they may be reinterpreted in terms of the attempts
of the organism to maintain its pattern of organization,
which may be modified by removing inconsistent or un-
tenable ideas or attitudes.
Method of Therapy. Although perhaps not as all-
inclusive as Mr. Lecky at first hoped it would be, self-
consistency as a technique has important practical and
therapeutic applications. As a method, it is indicated
in disorders characterized by rational and ideological
inconsistencies. By demonstrating the irrelevance of
previous ideas and attitudes leading to maladjustment,
preparation is made for the substitution of new and more
consistent organization of mind. This method, like al-
most all other forms of psychotherapy, is not new but
had never been developed in theory and practice so ex-
tensively.


LIMITATIONS
Theory of Emotionality. The attempt to explain emo-
tionality in terms of the attempt of the organism to re-
enforce an action which meets with resistance and thus
to maintain unification contains an important insight but
does not deal adequately with the mass of experimental
evidence indicating the magnitude of affective phenomena.
Emotional reactions do reenforce action tendencies of
the organism but they must also be understood as primi-
tive affective-impulsive responses which may be con-
sidered as maladaptive behavior when they supplant
higher intellectual problem-solving reactions. Modem
psychosomatic conceptions of the nature of emotion give
a much more comprehensive picture.
Treatment of Affective Disorders . With its main
techniques directed primarily against ideological-intel-
lectual components of personality, the self-consistency
theory may not be adequate in dealing with disorders with
a large affective component. The new nondirective
methods of therapy provide a valuable supplement in the
early stages of therapy, and also where it is desirable to
recognize and clarify emotional reactions. It will require
extensive further research to determine the validity and
indications of the methods developed from the theory of
self-consistency.
Other Etiological Factors. Unfortunately Mr. Lecky
passed away before he had the time or the experimental
resources to relate his new theory to the mass of ob-
jective evidence concerning other factors in personality
and the etiology of mental disorders. Some critics have
assumed that his failure to deal specifically with these
other factors meant that he did not consider them im-
portant. On the contrary, Mr. Lecky was always ready to


attempt to reconcile his theory with any experimentally
determined fact. He was extremely critical of current
psychological and psychoanalytic theories which could
not be objectively validated. His lectures, given ex-
temporaneously, revealed the comprehensiveness of his
biological and medical orientation more clearly than did
his written works.
Theoretical Limitations, At the time of his death,
Mr. Lecky had apparently abandoned Freudian concept-
ions of mental organization involving Id, Ego and Super-
Ego although he conceded that these conceptual con-
structs might have value in summarizing certain general
dynamic relationships. He was working on a nuclear
theory of mind to replace Freudian concepts but how far
his thoughts had actually evolved is not known to the
present editor. Chapter 12 represents our conception of
how he might have developed a nuclear theory had he
lived. This theory is admittedly incomplete since Mr.
Lecky himself stated that with limited time and resources
it was possible only to outline broad foundations upon
which a more detailed superstructure might be added
later. Although supported by a wide variety of research
results indirectly, Mr. Lecky’s main contribution was in
the form of a number of hypotheses which will need to be
validated by solid research performed by others.
It will be noted that Mr. Lecky did not concern him-
self with speculations about the nature of subconscious
or unconscious mental processes. Attempting to limit
himself to the consideration of what is scientifically
known in psychology, he repeatedly stated to students
that he was not particularly concerned with the nature
of ultimate reality as long as he could formulate con-
ceptual constructs which would enable him to predict
and manipulate personality functions. He believed that


a thorough knowledge of the organization of ideas com-
prising an individual mind was sufficient for the under-
standing of the dynamic relationships of that mind, and
was content to leave to others speculation concerning
the exact processes whereby these relationships are ac-
complished. This viewpoint is scientifically healthy
since it involves a clear recognition concerning how
little is actually known of brain function.
It remains for the future to demonstrate how valid
and practical these theories are in actual use. If he
were now alive, Mr. Lecky would have most certainly
cautioned the reader against attempting to organize a
new school of psychology on the basis of his contri-
butions. He was very critical of the development of all
"schools of thought" since such action tends to promote
intellectual isolationism and to prevent limited contri-
butions in one area from being integrated into the ac-
cumulated fund of scientific information. It would have
been his contention that the Self-Consistency theory of
personality simply represents an hypothesis which can
serve as an aid to thinking about behavior on the highest
levels of integration. The theory does not explain any-
thing in itself but suggests a method of synthesizing
the results of scientific research in order to perceive
the dynamic configurations of individual personalities.
F.C.T.




CHAPTER I
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Our first contact with Mr. Lecky was in the second
semester of Psychology 1 at Columbia College where he
was then an instructor. The first half of the course under
another instructor, had been unsatisfying and confusing.
Discussions of sensation, memory, association and learn-
ing seemed dead and unrelated to the problems of every-
day life. On the first day of the first semester we had
been told that such terms as mind, consciousness, will,
and imagination were taboo. The new Behavioristic
psychology then in vogue at Columbia had decided that
such things were not the proper study of psychology
since they could not be objectively studied even if they
existed, which was questionable. The whole first se-
mester had seemed sterile and dry and somehow unre-
lated to the richness of everyday experience. When Mr.
Lecky took over in February 1928, the discussions took
on new life. While thoroughly indoctrinated in experi-
mental theory and results, Mr. Lecky believed that psy-
chology was also a practical tool subject which would
not fulfill its potentialities unless scientific discoveries
were translated into practical application. Being pri-
marily interested in clinical psychology, Mr. Lecky lost
no opportunity to introduce clinical case materials which
would illustrate the significance of psychological find-
ings. A skillful teacher, he was able to attract students
by his friendly manner and to hold them by relating his
material to problems which they could understand.
During the winter of 1928*29, we took the advanced
course in the psychology of personality which was being
used by Mr. Lecky to develop his self-consistency theory


of personality. Here was presented a critical evaluation
of the deficiencies of the existing schools of psychology
in explaining phenomena on higher levels of integration
of the organism. We were given to understand that no
system of psychology could be considered to be com-
plete which did not effectively deal with conscious ex-
perience, personality dynamics, purposive behavior,
creative thought and with integration as a basic attri-
bute. The self-consistency theory was tentatively out-
lined as an evolutionary development related most di-
rectly to the psychoanalytic movement. Mr. Lecky had
intensively studied the works of Freud, Adler, Jung and
lesser figures with an objective orientation which at-
tempted to integrate eclectically all that was valuable in
each system into a more comprehensive formulation based
solidly on the experimental viewpoint of objective psy-
chology. During this phase of his development, Mr,
Lecky was closer in thinking to Alfred Adler, whom he
had encouraged to come to America and he was instru-
mental in securing Dr. Adler's appointment for a series
of lectures given at Columbia University. We have a
vivid personal recollection of accompanying Mr. Lecky
to one of these lectures and being introduced to Dr.
Adler.
Between 1930 and 1938 our contacts with Mr. Lecky
were less frequent and more informal, with many occas-
ions being presented for him to reveal his latest de-
velopments in thinking. This was an increasingly dif-
ficult period for Mr. Lecky. He had fallen into disrepute
with the departmental administration because of his ap-
parent failure to live up to his early promise when it
was expected that he would soon complete his doctoral
dissertation and publish his work. Because of personal-
ity characteristics to be outlined later, Mr. Lecky could


not bring himself to publish anything that did not repre-
sent his latest thinking, with the result that over the
years he published only two minor articles* in obscure
journals. Because of the established university policy
not to reappoint people who were not productive, Mr.
Lecky was relieved of his Columbia College appointment,
and his teaching activities were thereafter confined to
one or two courses in University Extension and Summer
Session. Most unfortunately, few of his colleagues ap-
preciated the originality of his thinking and he was rel-
egated to a position on the outer fringe of departmental
activities. This apparent rejection of his work troubled
Mr. Lecky deeply. He became progressively frustrated at
the lack of recognition and somewhat bitter toward life.
Perhaps the only encouraging trend in this phase of his
career was his personal popularity with students, who
were seemingly the only ones who appreciated the bril-
liance of his teaching. During this period he acquired
several mature students, several of whom were accepted
for private teaching and apprenticeships in the couns-
eling methods which he was developing. Because of the
restriction of his teaching activities, Mr. Lecky turned
in these years to the development of an extensive con-
sulting practice which was to bring him the case materials
upon which to test his theories.
In the winter of 1938*39, Mr. Lecky made a final at-
tempt to gather into an acceptable doctoral dissertation
the results of his work with a new personality inventory.
For this project he employed the services of the present
writer as a collaborator to work over and prepare the
data for publication. This work entailed a closer con-
tact with Mr. Lecky than ever before and many fruitful
hours were spent discussing the implications of his theory
*See Appendix I and II


and findings. Even with our close personal friendship
and professional relation, it was our impression that Mr.
Lecky was much further ahead in his thinking than he ever
stated publicly. He would frequently let drop remarks
inadvertently about new theories, the native of which
could only dimly be surmised from our knowledge of the
directions in which he was proceeding. On several oc-
casions he revealed limited aspects of these new path-
ways but usually omitting certain crucial details which
would have given complete form. The apparent reason
for this secretive attitude was that Mr, Lecky was feel-
ing somewhat paranoid about his failure to achieve de-
served professional recognition and was hesitant to re-
veal anything which another might claim as his own and
gain credit for. In any event, we were able to learn the
general outlines of his viewpoint but were forced to sur-
mise for ourselves what might be their detailed impli-
cations and applications. One of the purposes of this
little book is to extend Mr. Lecky’s self-consistency
theory in the directions inspired by his teachings.
HIS PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
By nature an intuitive student of personality, Mr.
Lecky became interested in psychology as a profession
while serving in the Army in World War I carrying out
an assignment to teach illiterate soldiers to write. He
was stimulated to begin an extensive study of the litera-
ture and to seek contacts with psychological work. On
returning to civilian life he gave up a promising career as
newspaper reporter on the old New York World to secure
a degree of Master of Arts in psychology at Columbia
University in 1922. He was appointed instructor in psy-
chology on the Columbia College faculty in 1924 and re


mained in that position for ten years, during part of which
time he acted as personality advisor to students. There-
after he gave courses in the psychology of personality
in the Extension Division until his premature death on
May 30, 1941 from coronary thrombosis.
His interest in personality early led him to make a
comprehensive study of Freudian psychoanalysis. He
was profoundly influenced by and generally accepted the
Freudian system of psychology as differentiated from the
methods of psychoanalysis. He taught that Freudian
theory provided the most dynamic interpretations of be-
havior yet available but that many of its individual con-
cepts should be evaluated critically. He was openly
critical of Freudian pansexuali&m and instinct theory.
While regarding Freud as one of the great thinkers of all
time, he cautioned that his theoretical positions reflected
the cultural influences of the Viennese environment.
There is great need for integrating the contributions of
objective psychology and those of psychoanalysis and
Mr. Lecky spent many hours working in these directions.
Feeling the need of securing first-hand contacts with
the European centers where the psychoanalytic movement
was flourishing, Mr. Lecky traveled to Vienna where he
studied under Dr. Alfred Adler during the winter of 1927*
28. For the remainder of his life Mr. Lecky was an ad-
mirer of Dr. Adler and integrated many of his concepts
into the new self-consistency theory of personality. He
was particularly impressed by the Adlerian insistence
that factors related to ego development could be more
important than sexuality in many personalities. From
the Adlerian theory of style of life, Mr. Lfecky elaborated
his ideas of the importance of discovering the person’s
conceptions of himself. In relating Freudian, Adlerian
and Jungian contributions to each other, Mr. Lecky stated


that Freudianism was preeminently concerned with early
phases of life in which sexual development was most im-
portant, that Adlerian psychology dealt with the struggle
of the individual to gain position in his environment, and
that Jungian contributions were more related to later
years in life when the individual tends to turn to religion
as his sexual and economic interests become weaker.
While in Europe, Mr. Lecky travelled to Switzerland
for a short visit with Dr. C.G. Jung. There is no evidence
that this contact made any major influence in his own de-
velopment, since Mr. Lecky later said that he had not
been able to make any close contact with Dr. Jung. Al-
though we are uncertain on this point, it is also believed
that Mr. Lecky at least saw Sigmund Freud while on this
trip.
These wide clinical contacts, unusual in psycholo-
gists of his day, made Mr. Lecky increasingly critical of
the Behavioristic psychology then prevailing at Columbia.
Even prior to the European trip he had begun to investi-
gate the significance of the newer physics for psychology.
On his return he began to read extensively of the works
of Einstein, Planck and Heisenberg, seeking to get away
from traditional mechanism which psychology had taken
over from the older physics. Mr. Lecky made consider-
able progress in attempting to relate the new physics
with psychology and presented this material in lecture
form which unfortunately is not available now. This ex-
cursion into related science is indicative of Mr. Lecky’s
determination to investigate any new development which
might possibly be related to personality study.
Mr. Lecky undertook for his doctoral research the
construction and validation of a new personality in-
ventory which would attempt to sample attitudes in each
of the areas in which human maladjustment is common.


Mr. Leckywas dissatisfied with the conception of neurotic
traits, and particularly with the assumption that any sum-
mation of items positively answered could be used as an
index of neuroticism. He believed that personality in-
ventories were actually measuring attitudes which were
variable rather than fixed characteristics of personality.
He therefore originated an Individuality Record which at-
tempted to measure attitudes in seven major areas of ad-
justment in life. In his capacity as student advisor, Mr.
Lecky was able to correlate changing patterns of retest
scores on his inventory with changes in attitudes of in-
dividual students as they matured during their college
careers. It was his conclusion that total scores were
almost meaningless but that individual items were highly
significant as cues to specific areas of maladjustment.
During the period of this research, he was evolving and
perfecting his theory of self-consistency which explained
many of the individual patterns of scores obtained on the
Inventory.
Along with his teaching, Mr. Lecky maintained for
many years a successful private practice as consulting
psychologist which was used as a proving ground for
his theoretical developments. With patients he had a
quiet, friendly manner which naturally instilled con-
fidence. Varying his method to suit the needs of each
individual case, Mr. Lecky was not afraid to experiment
with any method which might achieve the desired result.
He showed a remarkable sensitivity to the needs of his
clients, handling each situation according to the speed at
which the client was able to progress. He tended to al-
low his clients to proceed nondirectively but did not hesi-
tate to introduce directive interpretations when indicated.
He believed that good rapport would provide sufficient
reassurance and support so that the client would be able


to assimilate unpleasant insights. It is regrettable that
verbatim transcriptions of his interviews are not avail-
able since Mr. Lecky was a master counselor with more
than an average amount of common sense. He was able
to give realistic interpretations so tactfully as to trans-
mit critical attitudes without giving offense. He sugar-
coated many a bitter pill of interpretation and got the
patient to accept it.
THE MAN
Mr. Lecky was a scholarly appearing person with a
quiet, shy manner. Not particularly demonstrative, he
nevertheless had a dry sense of humor accompanied by a
sly twinkle of the eyes. Of medium height and slight
build, he had excellent neuromuscular coordination and
was a natural athlete, as his golf competitors will testify.
Dressing conservatively but smartly, he looked and acted
the part of a professional man. Thoroughly likeable, he
was a delightful companion either in work or play.
In many respects, Mr. Lecky resembled the traditional
concept of the absent-minded professor. Being constantly
engrossed with psychological problems, he tended to be
little concerned with matters not related to his major in-
terests. In spite of his psychological sophistication, he
could at times be incredibly naive concerning practical
details of everyday business. Evidence for his
cality may be seen in his hesitant, uncertain approach to
the problem of getting his doctoral dissertation accepted
and published. Although he had accumulated sufficient
data for an acceptable thesis at several points in his
career, he could never bring himself to completing the
final details necessary for accomplishment. Part of this
inefficiency maybe attributed to perfectioni Stic tendencies


which made him unwilling to publish anything which did
not reflect his latest views. He revised his dessertation
again and again, but was never completely satisfied with
the results. Similar comments apply to his attempts to
publish his theories in book form. He accumulated many
pages of manuscript but never seemed ready or able to
achieve a final form suitable for publication. This dila-
tory behavior was disturbing to his professional col-
leagues, who attributed it to personality inadequacies
without realizing the depth of the thought processes
which were evolving in his mind.
Until the end, Mr. Lecky was an imaginative, inde-
pendent thinker. It would have been easy at many points
in his career to have conformed to the accepted patterns
of time and place. But his was a restless intelligence
which accepted nothing on authority. At a time when ex-
perimentalism was the ruling principle in American psy-
chology, Mr. Lecky was wrestling with problems not
amenable to the experimental methods of that time. He
was interested primarily in the individual and was im-
patient with statistical and experimental procedures
which tended to conceal individual differences in favor
of measures of central tendency. To him, any system of
psychology which was not directly applicable to the
problems of everyday living was not worthy of the name.
He clearly recognized that science for science’s sake
alone can lead only to a sterile, blind alley divorced from
a reality in which there is a crying need for the potential
contributions of applied psychology.
The later stages of his life were colored by a losing
fight against the regimentation of a university environ-
ment which had little patience with an original thinker
who did not conform to the usual psychological theories
of his time. Already mentioned was the frustration at


tendant upon his failure to gain professional recognition
or even secure academic tenure. The loss of his academic
appointment not only meant loss of prestige and students,
but also financial embarrassment which was a cause of
worry. Living with a large family of small children in
a city apartment of limited size, his time was increas-
ingly taken up with the practical demands of earning a
living by the difficult method of securing a private prac-
tice and by the demands of his family life. These pres-
sures were reflected in progressively increasing ten-
sions both inwardly and in expressive behavior. His face
assumed a strained and disheartened expression and he
seemed more serious and less inclined to ready humor.
The increasing intensity of inward tensions finally was
manifested in coronary symptoms, followed by an acute
coronary thrombosis, and finally by an attack which
terminated life. Behind him he left only two short pub-
lished papers, a collection of incomplete manuscripts,
and a few students who had been sufficiently impressed
to be determined to eventually make known to the world
his name and work. The least that can be done in tribute
to a long-time fighter against great odds is to present his
ideas for whatever they may be worth.
The present writer has first-hand experience with the
odds against which Mr. Lecky struggled because, as a
student who accepted these theories, he also had to face
rejecting attitudes and frustration of efforts to develop
the system. In science, as in other areas, the pressure
exerted to conformism with the currently popular dogma is
so great that the deviant thinker frequently finds himself
professionally rejected and even ostracized by authori-
tarian powers determined to maintain the status quo. The
writings of Mr. Lecky must therefore be evaluated in the
light of his professional milieu and personality reactions,


with allowance being made for occasional evidences of
emotional biases and theoretical prejudices. The values
of his work lie in the broadness of his general concept-
ions rather than in details which may be subject to other
interpretations. If his theory has limitations, they may
be understood as reflecting the level of adequacy of the
scientific thinking of his time, the unfinished state of
his work, and the personality factors which are reflected
in his thinking. As with many original thinkers who are
in advance of their times, there was a tendency to an
over enthusiastic and militant defense of the ideas which
he considered important. Like many innovators, Mr.
Lecky was perhaps overzealous in attempting to explain
all the facts of psychology with his new theory. This
effort perhaps led him into certain logical inconsisten-
cies which will have to be corrected but which do not
detract from the over-all value of his systematic approach.
F. C. T.




CHAPTER 2
THE INFLUENCE OF BEHAVIORISM
UPON MODERN PSYCHOLOGY
Behaviorism is distinguished as a theory not by its
method but by its faith. Back of its insistence upon
strictly objective data is the belief that psychology
should model itself after the older sciences, not only in
experimental technique, but especially in respect to
scientific habits of thought. Like physiology, from which
it differs "only in the grouping of its problems, not in
fundamentals or in central viewpoint,’’ it holds to the
analytic approach and believes that all behavior phe-
nomena are reducible ultimately to terms of physics and
chemistry. The organism is taken as a physical object,
and hence its behavior must be governed by the same
principles as other physical objects. Mind and purpose
are illusions. The natural sciences, of which psychology
is one, differ only in subject matter; the problem is to
treat all natural phenomena in terms of a single system.
"About all we can do in the way of defining a science at
the present time,’’ says Watson, "is to mark a ring around
that part of the whole of natural science that we claim
particularly as our own.’’^
The attractiveness of behaviorism lay in its implied
promise to rescue us from the mind-body problem and en-
able us to study living things as the physicist studies
the non-living. This it proposes to accomplish by eli-
* Watson, J.B. Behaviorism. New York: People’s Institute
Publishing Co., 1925, p. 11.


initiating the concept of mind from psychology and study-
ing the body simply as a physical mechanism. In other
words, behaviorism believes that it can borrow the con-
ceptual tools of the physicist and make them serve its
purpose without the necessity of creating new tools of
its own.
In fairness to Watson, it should be said that his
original intention was plainly not so much positive as
negative; his real aim was not a psychology based on
physics but a psychology free from introspection. Fur-
thermore, his attack was based on the concept of mind
as something in the subject, a vitalistic entelechy dwell-
ing within or super-imposed upon the physical organism.
But in developing his argument Watson assumed that con-
sciousness and mind are identical, whereas in our sense
the mind is a concept with a strictly objective reference,
and cannot be apprehended in the slightest degree by the
method of introspection. It seems to us that the failure
of behaviorism to progress beyond the controversial stage
can be traced very largely to this error. The concept of
the mind as a means of dealing with the data afforded by
observation, comparable to the concept of the atom in
physics, is not antagonistic to behaviorism, but is pre-
cisely the ingredient that is necessary for the develop-
ment of an objective psychology. In avoiding the concept
of mind, behaviorism is forced either to adopt some equiv-
alent concept which is open to the same objection of in-
tangibility, or else to forego prediction and control be-
cause it cannot organize its data. The recent history of
behaviorism, indeed, shows clearly enough that it has not
disposed of the mind-body problem at all. On the con-
trary, as the premises contained in the behavioristic
platform are gradually worked out to their logical con-
clusions, it appears that the number of problems in which


behaviorism can take an interest without contradicting
itself will be reduced to zero.
Probably Watson himself did not anticipate at all that
his attack on the mind would lead to such consequences
as have evolved from it. He was not opposed to psy-
chology, but only to the introspective method. His follow-
ers, however, were not slow to realize that behavioristic
principles as stated left no alternative except to do away
with psychological concepts altogether and replace them
with the concepts of physics. Thus we find Weiss defining
the organism as a proton-electron aggregate, which, while
obviously true, fails to shed any insight into the problems
of higher level organization.
Kuo may be considered to have carried the behavior-
istic doctrine to its logical and most absurd conclusions.
For him, every action of the organism is passive or
'•forced” movement. l The S-R formula of behaviorism is
derived directly from physics and no behaviorist should
make any assumptions not in harmony with the concepts
of physical science. Differences between simple and com-
plex organisms are simply matters of quantity, and the
same materialistic principles apply equally well to inani-
mate and animate objects. Whereas Watson had declared
such mentalistic concepts as attention, sensation, per-
ception, will and imagery as unnecessary and inconsistent
with objective psychology but had retained thinking,
learning, memory and emotion as topics which could be
approached without introspectionism, Kuo insisted that the
retained topics are equally inconsistent and should be ex-
cluded also. No such terms are found in physics, nor are
they in any way necessary to explain the behavior of
1 Kuo Z.Y., The Fundamental Error of the Concept of Purpose
and’the Trial and Error Zoology , Psychol. Rev. 35, 1928,
pp. 416*426.


physical objects. For Kuo, the only selective agency is
the stimulus and the animal itself plays no part in the
so-called selection and elimination of movements. When
carried to such extremes, psychology disappears as a
scientific discipline and only the science of physics is
ultimate.
The answer to such reasoning is obvious. The concep-
tual units of physics, i.e. atoms, electrons, etc., are
theoretical constructs subject to the same objections as
the concept of mind, but with the considerable disadvantage
of having been devised to describe phenomena entirely
different from that with which the psychologist is con-
fronted. The behavioristic idea that the differences be-
tween sciences are only those necessitated by the division
of labor really belongs to the pre-Darwinian era. If we
accept the theory of evolution, we must also accept as
genuine the products of the evolutionary process, for if
there is nothing distinctive about the organism, evolution
itself is illusory and meaningless. On the other hand, if
the organism on different levels of integration presents
higher level gestalts which represent the appearance in
nature of a new type of unit, then it is the problem of the
scientist to evolve new conceptual units in which the
new qualities are provided for. It is obvious that such a
new unit must serve as the nucleus fora separate science.
Watson, Weiss and Kuo represented only the left wing
of behaviorism. The right wing, of which Tolman may be
considered a leader, was also unwilling to accept the con-
cept of mind but realizing the futility of a psychology
based on physics, offered the suggestion that purpose can
be defined objectively. Purpose is implied as a necessary
inference from the observation of persistent goal-directed
behavior. Tolman recognized that the concepts of drive,
tendency and purpose are theoretical constructsnot direct


ly perceivable in the same manner as space, time,velocity,
force, electricity, etc,, are physical concepts invented to
give order, coherence and explanation to actual appear-
They are entities inferred from their effects. How-
ever, Tolman persisted in the belief that purposes are
conditions of the organism ultimately analyzable into phy-
siological, chemical and physical processes if only we
knew enough. That Tolman’s reasoning does verge on the
animistic can be shown by reference to physics which is
the same authority to which he appeals. The inference of
an entity called purpose to account for persistent goal-
directed behavior is precisely equivalent to Newton’s
inference of an entity called "gravity” which both Edding-
ton and Jeans inform us must be regarded as just as much
of a demon as the supernatural agencies evoked by primitive
peoples. In other words, the assumption that purpose is a
definite process localized in the organism, rather than a
way of thinking about the organism’s behavior, will ac-
tually prevent a purposive psychology from gaining
scientific support, and rightly so. The Lewinian vector
analysis and concept of fields of force is subject to crit-
icisms of the same type but for different reasons.
Psychologists are properly interested not in movement
or in behavior as such, but in the organization of be-
havior; that is, in a higher unit, not a force, which we call
the personality. A purpose cannot be considered as an
actual drive but only as a conceptual means of condensing
and classifying certain observations in order that they
may be handled more conveniently. Evidence that condet>
sation is the only real function of the concept of purpose
can be seen from the examples which Tolman mentions—
1. Tolman, E.C., Purposive Behavior in Animals and Man, Cen-
tury, New York, 1932.


learning a maze, escaping from a puzzle box, nest-building,
sleeping, etc. In all of these illustrations the details of
the behavior are of no importance. But inasmuch as long
stretches of behavior, so to speak, have the same meaning
for us, we unify our own thinking by unifying the observa-
tion.
To clinch this point, let us bring out the fact that
psychologists cannot use a detailed observation even after
it is made. Interpretation in terms of meaning or purpose
is imperative. A detailed description of everything an
animal does in the course of running a maze, for example,
might easily cover many pages for each separate trial.
But unless these details can be unified they are useless.
Moreover, although the performance is different at each
trial, the unitary interpretation in terms of purpose is not
interfered with by such variations. To illustrate, let us
refer to the laboratory notes of Watson's well-known ex-
periment on conditioning the fear response. 1 In the report
of his experiments on the baby, Albert, the expressions
*‘negative responses” and “fear reactions” appear
larly. When we turn to the laboratory notes, however, we
find that on the seven trials which were necessary to es-
tablish the fear response, the baby on four trials fell to
the right, on twotrials to the left, and on one trial ‘'started
violently and cried, but did not fall over.” In a descriptive
sense, therefore, we can distinguish at least three dif-
ferent reactions, but Watson groups them into one, and
rightly so. He groups them noton the basis of description,
however, but on the basis of interpretation. The descrip-
tion, in other words, was promptly scrapped in favor of a
non-descriptive terminology which would organize the data
and enable all of the responses to be classified in the
same category.
1 Cf. John B. Watson, op. Cit., pp. 126*9*


This unifying tendency seems to be so universal that
some general function must be associated with it. We
therefore offer the suggestion that purpose is always
bound up with, and gives expression to, the temporal re-
lation between events. That is, purpose is a means of
dealing with a behavior sequence. Let us offer another
illustration. Recently we witnessed a motion picture of
the development of a plant taken by time-lapse photography
so that the whole process was speeded up on the screen.
One sees the roots in motion, burrowing, meeting obstruc-
tions, avoiding them and taking new paths; tendrils elongate
wave in the air till they strike a support, bend at the end
and coil around. As a result of the manifest coherence of
the plant's behavior, the impression of purpose becomes
irresistible. We are astonished to see that the plant be-
haves precisely like some new species of animal attempt-
ing to solve its problems. We are forced in spite of our-
selves to think of these phenomena as organized and
directed. Otherwise, it must be remembered, we could not
think of the sequence at all.
This example affords an opportunity to emphasize the
influence of method on conceptualization. No one, of
course, can force us to think about the sequence of the
plant's behavior, and if we do not wish to be purposivists,
we simply avoid thinking about it. But there is also nothing
to prevent us from breaking up the sequence into tiny
parts and studying each one separately. If it now be ob-
served that students of the whole and students of the
parts are nevertheless engaged with the same subject
matter in an objective sense, it is not so difficult to see
why purposivists and mechanists habitually disagree even
when working ostensibly on the same material.
Even though we hold that the idea of purpose is created
to serve our own needs, and cannot be demonstrated as a


force controlling the behavior of the organism observed,
nevertheless, from the standpoint of prediction, teleology
cannot be avoided. The reason is that the idea of purpose
is not serviceable in fact unless we use it, and there is
no way in which we can use it except by projecting it into
the organism we happen to be studying, very much as the
physicist projected gravity into the apple, and even in-
vented the ether as a medium on which the demon could
ride. It is therefore quite necessary to take our conceptions
seriously, even though we do not take them as final. Or to
state the issue more forcibly, the discovery that purpose
is a way of thinking rather than an objective fact is no
warrent for its abandonment unless we purpose to abandon
thinking also.
This view of the matter is an illustration of Dewey *s
statement that philosophy never solves its problems, but
merely gets over them. No advance whatever can be
claimed in respect to the metaphysical question of the
nature of reality itself. It is difficult indeed it is im-
possible to conceive that the purposive organization
which we suppose ourselves to observe is wholly of our
own construction, but we cannot insist upon the external
reality of our conceptions except as matter of faith and a
necessity. From a scientific standpoint, the fact that our
conceptions are personal and changing, and often even in-
consistent with one another, forces us to leave the whole
question open.
But it is the psychological problem not the meta-
physical one of the nature of reality which in fact has
caused the trouble so far as science is concerned. The
dualism of experience made it seem that the interpretative
and descriptive methods of approach were mutually contra-
dictory, and hence gave rise to the notion that mind and
body were independent entities. Any suggestion of inter


action between the mental and physical worlds, however,
was met with such powerful objections that the only escape
was a curious doctrine of insulated coexistence known as
parallelism. The greater simplicity of the new formulation
is therefore obvious, for it now turns out that the parallel-
ism is not psychophysical, but psychological, not a dif-
ference between modes of being but a difference between
the higher and lower thought processes. The contrast be-
physical and mental,corresponds to the contrast between
lower and higher units of condensation. In the physical
sciences the atom is a higher unit, a condensation of many
perceptions into a simgle conception. A plurality of de-
scriptive details has been integrated and organized into
an interpretative unit. It is a unit which overcomes the
individual features of the perceptions from which it was
derived, and hence, though not itself experienced, ne-
cessary in order to simplify and render intelligible that
which we do experience. The atom is what it does. And
so it is with mind, except that, in the traditional forms
of psychology, the subjective difference between percepts
and concepts was projected as the difference between
two orders of being and so led to a dualistic interpretation
of the external world. Yet the mind could not in the nature
of the case be represented as an observable object. A
choice seemed therefore to be demanded as to whether
such an entity might consistently be admitted into psy-
chological discourse. But except for the individual who
is able to stamp out in himself the tendency to create and
the wish to predict, the choice was deceptive. 1
1 The doctrine of parallelism, the double aspect hypothesis,
and the double language hypothesis, one or other of which is
accepted by almost everyone, all are capable of interpretation
in the same psychological terms.


To returnto behaviorism, it is clearchat themechanist,
having rejected purpose, now finds himself in a difficult
position. For it is obvious that he must employ some con-
densing device which has the same function as the concept
of purpose, regardless of what he may choose to call it.
It happens that what he does call it is determinism.
The psychological function of purposivism and deter-
minism, in other words, is the same. The principle of
cause and effect is simply a means of knitting events to-
gether conceptually, and the mechanist thinks of the same
cause as running through a series of events just as the
teleologist sees the same purpose running through them.
Both are expressions of relationship and sequence which
give the snapshots of perceptual experience a temporal
perspective. They are means of introducing time, order
and meaning into a world which otherwise would be un-
imaginably chaotic. It also follows, of course, that de-
terminism is not more defensible than teleology. We can-
not see the cause, or capture it by analysis, any more
than we can see or analyze out a purpose.
It is true that superficial differences exist between
determinism and teleology. The one attempts to maintain
that the sequence results from the push of the cause, the
other that it is due to the pull of the goal; one looks for
explanations in the past, the other looks to the future.
But it seems to us that these assumed differences can
hardly be taken seriously. The teleologist cannot deny
that the sequence has a beginning as well as an end, nor
can the determinist claim that once begun, the sequence is
infinite. Both are guilty of the absurdity of trying to con-
struct a line which has only one end.


CHAPTER 3
THE VALIDITY OF PERSONALITY INVENTORIES
General. The whole theory of testing rests upon the
assumption that the judgment which we make on the basis
of a small sample of behavior (the test) will agree with
the judgments made by competent observers based on a
larger sample of behavior. There is no point in raising
the question of validity at all unless there exists a unified
body of opinion whose standards we attempt to represent
in the test and whose judgments prove to be in agreement
with the results of the test. Hence a test by its very
nature is a social instrument whose usefulness cannot
possibly be determined in the laboratory. The test of
validity actually reduces itself to a test of consistency
among opinions. If the scale does what we expect it to
do, we say that it is valid. Our opinions and choice of
criteria create the problem of validity themselves, without
reference to the inherent nature of the individuals being
studied. The concept of validity in the latter sense is
sustained entirely by an artifact, i.e. that any criterion
which yields validation does so because it is based on a
standard which analysis proves to be identical with that
of the test itself. We should observe that the concept of
validity is restricted to testing and applied psychology,
and that statisticians in other fields rarely employ or
recognize it.
In contrast with the concept of validity which is based
on external criteria, the reliability of a test is determined
by internal criteria relating to its self-consistency. A
test which is not reliable or self-consistent is useless,
for unless the various parts of a test cooperate in the


function of the test as a whole, a unified interpretation of
what is being measured is impossible. In relation to in-
telligence testing, it should be observed that their relia-
bility is guaranteed in advance when the average perfor-
mance at each age is taken as the basis for selecting the
items. No other result would be possible. All other tests
whose items are graded in difficulty according to age, are
likewise obliged to correlate with one another, and in all
essentials might be regarded as different forms of the
same test. This internal consistency must not be regarded
as evidence of validity since the fact of reliability gives
no indication of what it is that is being measured.
Validity of Inventories. Mr. Lecky was very much
concerned with the criteria which had been used for the
validation of personality inventories. Pointing out that
all the inventories consisted of compilations of symptoms
as described by various psychiatric authorities, and
whose validity as a measure of neuroticism had been
accepted on the basis of psychiatric authority, Mr. Lecky
attempted to check on this supposed validity by summa-
rizing the data obtained by various observers using the
inventory method in studying groups of normal and ab-
normal subjects. Hollingworth (5) had been the first to
demonstrate that the high scores obtained by larger groups
of psychoneurotics were not due to mentaldisease itself,
but to situational factors. In the army hospital at Platts-
burg, N.Y. in World War 1, 117 psychoneurotic soldiers
tested before the armistice showed a median score of
22.5, while 202 cases tested after the armistice had a
median of only 12.0. Summarizing results of FlemingO),
Hollingworth (5), Bridges (2), Franz (4) and Papurt (7),
Mr. Lecky was able to show that the inventory could not


be used as a valid measure of neurotic tendency which
result was later confirmed more impressively by his own
research. Mr. Leckyfurther criticized Bernreuter's (1) use
of the demonstration of the mathematical reliability of a
test of self-sufficiency as justification for predicting the
existence of a mental trait on the same grounds that the
fact that a test or inventory is reliable has logically
nothing to do with the question of what it measures. The
use of the "criterion of internal consistency” by the
Thurstones (8) as evidence of a common core which they
interpreted as indicating the presence of a trait of neurotic
personality was also criticized by Lecky as begging the
question of what was actually being measured. Although
the Thurstones took the bold step of actually assigning
letter ratings of personality based on quantitative scores,
it is still not possible to identify what is being measured
since the inventory included questions representing the
efforts of various authors to summarize the principal
characteristics of neurotic personalities, introversion and
extroversion, ascendance-submission, and the inferiority
complex. Mr. Lecky rejected the concept that the person-
ality inventory was measuring neurotic tendency, intro-
version or the inferiority complex, and insisted that a
clearer definition of the implicit standard is necessary in
order to investigate the validity of psychiatric concepts
of neurotic ism, why these neurotic symptoms are not diag-
nostic, and why we cannot make a valid prediction of
psychiatric opinion on the basis of a neurotic inventory.
Confirmatory evidence concerning the lack of validity of
attempts to differentiate the abnormal on the basis of the
possession of psychiatric symptoms is indicated by the
work of Page, Landis and Katz (6) who demonstrated that
the diagnostic value of the accepted symptoms of schiz-
ophrenia is negligible.


Concepts of Normality. On similar grounds, Mr. Lecky
questioned the psychiatric concept that normality and
abnormality are related to quantitative rather than quali-
tative differences. The assumption that everyone is more
or less abnormal, and that differences in abnormality are
simply a matter of degree, appears to be based on the
psychiatric concept that abnormality is a function of
various traits whichmay be possessedto greater or lesser
degree. In relation to the measurement of neuroticism, the
personality inventories were validated on the assumption
that they measured a single trait of neurotic tendency as
revealed by the occurrance of symptoms which were re-
garded as being qualitatively similar, otherwise they could
not have been mathematically summated to give total
scores of neurotic tendency. When this concept is sub-
mitted to measurement, it is discovered that the single
variable, while internally consistent (reliable), has nothing
to do with abnormality as measured by its predictive
value. While no one supposes that the psychoneurotic
belongs to a different species, we do not say that physical
illness is a matter of quantity but rather that a condition
has arisen in which normal functions are disturbed. The
psychiatric conception that the abnormal may be simply
an exaggeration of the normal appears to imply the accep-
tance of a quantity theory of mental disease.
Critoria of Validity. The problem of what the inven-
tory measures or fails to measure is a crucial one and
maybe approached most logically by determining the nature
of the respective standards involved in the actual diag-
nosis on the one hand, and in the selection of significant
symptoms on the other. That the two standards are not
identical is evident. This problem may be approached by
inquiring concerning the factors involved in making the
diagnosis of psychosis or neurosis. "Abnormal” cases


were recognized before the advent of psychiatry and are
still reported in the first instance by untrained relatives
or friends. Clearly the criteria which govern this diagnosis
are not theoretical and technical but social. Mental cases
are not only a source of annoyance and unpleasantness
to those associated with them; they are irresponsible,
difficult to manage and socially incomprehensible. As
Freud has said, neurotics are a nuisance and a dilemma
to all concerned, including the psychoanalysts. Instead
of making a social contribution, they are a social liability
and are segregated for care and treatment by institutional
agencies when they become too much of a social problem.
Indeed, social symptoms of abnormality so far outweigh
the clinical symptoms in relation to what will be done with
each individual case that until recent years it was often
customary to confine the feebleminded and the insane in
the same institution, and even today it is not unusual to
find schizophrenics diagnosed as idiots and imbeciles.
Society makes the practical diagnosis, and the psychia-
trist merely confirms it by identifying a specific disorder
and thus determining a basis for rational therapy.
The social definition of abnormality is thus a reflec-
tion of a social attitude or emotional evalution. It depends
upon criteria which are determined by circumstance,
varying with the standards of the particular group in which
the subject is placed and which to some extent at least
are undiscriminating. It is not a scientific determination
in any sense, affording no etiologic insights, and in-
dicating no suggestions as to prevention or cure. Abnor-
mality from this standpoint is not a single variable and
hence is also not a matter of degree.
The diagnostic problem of psychiatry, then, was the
establishment of criteria independent of those of society,
by which a patient could be diagnosed in terms of the


symptoms directly, and not in terms of how laymen might
evaluate these symptoms. Kraepelinian psychiatry ap-
proached the problem of developing diagnostic criteria
to replace lay opinions by listing the symptoms supposed
to be descriptive of the various recognized syndromes of
disorder. This method involved the logical inconsistency
of assuming the validity of the symptoms as claimed,
arranging the symptoms in diagnostic categories or tests,
and then checking the validity by comparing test per-
formance of normal and abnormal groups. The result was
that the assumed validity vanishes when subjected to
statistical evaluation, but reliability appears. Let us
therefore evaluate the criteria by which these particular
symptoms were selected. This question is crucial, for
since the whole object of scientific diagnosis is to do
away with the social criterion of abnormality and to sub-
stitute another definition in its place, the immediate
problem is to discover what definition has been sub-
stituted. We believe that this standard was not of psychia-
tric origin but was borrowed by Kraepelin outright from
biology.
Biologists divide behavior roughly into two classes,
positive and negative. Taking the external stimulus as a
point of reference, positive behavior is that which aims
at contact with the stimulus, while negative behavior
attempts to avoid, reject or destroy the stimulus. Neurotic
symptoms are thus seen to be identical with negative
behavior. While the biologist is forced to base his de-
scriptions on purely objective phenomena in order to
avoid anthropomorphism, the psychiatrist uses a whole
group of emotional descriptions such as fear, rage, anxiety,
timidity, submissiveness, shame, discouragement, resent-
ment, frustration, jealousy, etc., identifying them as
neurotic symptoms. Such an identification is plausible


because negative behavior has always been a source of
social concern; in fact, the social evaluation is evident
in the choice of the term itself. If we now assume that in
certain persons the negative tendencies cannot be con-
trolled for some reason, i.e. because they are unconscious,
we have a satisfyingly simple explanation of the neuroses
which is supported by the preconception that negative
behavior should be punished. The belief that negative and
abnormal behavior are identical is reinforced by the oc-
casional behavior of psychoneurotic persons, whose
dramatic and sometimes violent expressions of fear, de-
pression, suspicion and hostility stand out in memory and
on the records with exceptional vividness. No record is
kept, of course, of similar behavior in normal persons.
If this analysis is sound, it means that psychiatry
(with the exception of psychoanalysis and there not com-
pletely) has not succeeded in setting up an independent
criterion of diagnosis apart from social considerations.
But there is this important difference that the social
criteria are wholly relative, depending upon the circum-
stances in which the behavior occurs, and the judgment
of normality or abnormality is made on a “common sense"
basis which takes these circumstances into account. The
psychiatric criterion, however, tends to be inflexible and
absolute with negative behavior as such being classified
as abnormal. When this identity is recognized, we see
how abnormality came to be conceived as a matter of
degree. Since some persons are more prone to negative
behavior than others, we are justified in assuming a
graduated difference in the frequency of such behavior,
and a normal curve of distribution. The common core which
runs through the symptoms may therefore be called the
negative attitude. This negativity may be conceived of in
terras of degree, or more scientifically, we may count the


number of illustrations and measure its extension. The
latter procedure is preferable for scientific purposes and
would undoubtedly be adopted if the concept of abnormality
involved was diagnostic in fact. As shown in the studies
mentioned previously, the knowledge of this standard
enables us to predict how the psychiatrist will diagnose
episodes of behavior, but not how he will judge the total
personality since in the latter case he relies on practical
judgment and experience with the social situation.
Mr. Lecky attempted to prove that neurotic inventories
really measure the amount of negative behavior by isolating
the individual items which show the highest correlation
with the whole scale. The most discriminating questions
maybe regarded as the "purest’ ’ in respect to quality and
reflect the central standard on which the test is constructed
with the highest fidelity. The mostdiscriminatingquestions
on the Thurstone (8) inventory are given below together
with statistical evidence given in parenthesis concerning
the number of unfavorable answers given by the fifty stu-
dents at either extreme of the distribution for Thurstone's
Chicago group and Lecky’s Columbia group.
A LIST OF THE MOST DIFFERENTIATING QUESTIONS
Are you troubled with feelings of inferiority? Yes.
(0-36) (0-65)
Do you get discouraged easily? Tes. (0-38) (0-41)
Are you frequently in low spirits? Tes. (0-30) (0-36)
Do you often feel just miserable? Yes. (0-40) (3*48)
Are you frequently burdened by a sense of remorse?
Yes. (0-39) (3*47)
Does some particular useless thought keep coming
into your mind to bother you? Yes. (0-35) (1*37)
Do you often find that you cannot make up your mind
until the time for action has passed? Yes, (0-35) (3*49)


Are you troubled with shyness? Yes, (0-33) (1-56)
Are you often in a state of excitement? Yes. (0-33)
(Not given)
Do you consider yourself a rather nervous person?
Yes. (0-32) (3-35)
Do you keep in the background on social occasions?
Yes. (0-32) (6-58)
Does your mind often wander badly so that you lost
track of what you are doing? Yes. (0-32) (1-27)
Are you in general self-confident about your abilities?
No. (0-31) (1-43)
Do you frequently feel grouchy? Yes, (0-30) (2-24)
Can you stand criticism without feeling hurt? No.
(0-25) (0-44)
Do you have difficulty in making friends? Yes.
(0-25) (2-47)
Does it make you uneasy to have to cross a wide
street or open square? Yes. (0-23) (0-24)
Do you get tired of work quickly? Yes. (0-25) (1-33)
The attitudes of fear, discouragement and uncertainty
sampled by these questions are too evident to need com-
ment. How well this conception agrees with psychiatric
observations may be judged by comparing the items on
this list of differentiating questions with the standard
descriptions of neurotic personality such as that of Vechs-
ler (9). Psychiatric theory, of course, does not explicitly
acknowledge the identity between neurotic disorder and
negative behavior, and most psychiatrists would deny such
a definition. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that these
are the concepts which are actually employed in theory
and practice. Conflict and inhibition are central psychia-
tric concepts, with fear and hatred being conceived as the
motives which require modification before conflict and


and inhibition can be resolved. Freud, stated that the de-
velopment of fear introduces symptom formation with de-
fense as the primary purpose of every neurotic symptom.
Adler described the neurotic as a person afraid to face
the problems of life because he feels inferior to the task.
Jung emphasizes regression; the patient has been defeated
and seeks relief in the phantasies of childhood. Rank
states the fear theory even more unequivocally and traces
the origin of neurotic disturbances back to the painful
trauma of birth. With the obvious exception of the somatic
school, it would indeed be difficult to discover any theory
of the neuroses which does not presuppose that motives
of fear and aggression constitute the essence of mental
disorder. In psychoanalysis, the negative emotions are
symbolized by the father and the positive emotions by the
mother, the conflict between the two giving rise to the
Oedipus Complex which is the “nucleus of every neurosis.”
This differentiation between positive and negative
behavior is at least several thousand years old and so
far has contributed nothing to scientific progress. Indeed,
its effect has been quite the reverse since it is merely
the old melodramatic conflict between the hosts of good
and evil. Sin, war, crime and neurosis all belong in the
same category as expressions of socially hostile forces
which possess their victims like evil spirits. This con-
ception of positive and negative behavior differs from the
dualistic religious conceptions only in its lack of faith
that the good willprevail.lt seems strange that the thought
of Freud should be cast in this archaic mold, particularly
since he has characterized religion as an illusion. Hol-
ingworth (5) was one of the first psychologists to recog-
nize and evaluate critically the conception of conflict in
relation to older demonological concepts.
The negativity dogma has also been accepted by be


haviorism, and thence has found its way back into
chiatry expressed in terms of the conditioned reflex. Again
we meet the assumption that approach behavior is good
while withdrawal is bad. It is evidently believed that if a
child can be kept in a predominantly positive attitude for
the first four or five years of life, tne danger of later mal-
adjustment is negligible. This might be called the habit
theory of the neurosis.
SUMMARY
The recognition that personality inventories are com-
prised of symptoms reflecting negative attitudes which
describe reactions to specific situations provides an ex-
planation for their statistical reliability and also for
their lack of validity in diagnosing the total personality.
Psychiatric theory has long implicitly accepted the as-
sumption that negative behavior is essentially neurotic.
From this basic assumption has come the concept that
abnormality is a quantitative exaggeration of the normal
and that the degree of abnormality may be measured in
terms of the number of negative behavior patterns which
reflect a trait of neurotic tendency. Yet this is what no
one actually believes, since it would be equivalent to
stating that behavior must be evaluated independently of
the situation i n which it occurs. Once this absolute valu-
ation is rejected, we are forced to abandon the idea that
any item of behavior has any diagnostic significance when
studied in isolation. Its normal or neurotic character is
not a matter of observation or description, but only of in-
terpretation within a given setting. Since the normality of
behavior cannot be judged except in terms of its relevance
to given situations, it must be emphasized that positive
behavior is just as likely to be irrelevant and neurotic as


is negative behavior. Since abnormality in the statistical
sense is simply a matter of deviation from central ten-
dency, low scores as well as high scores may be consid-
ered atypical. The low score made by many neurotics is
not a contradiction since these persons may be regarded
as being abnormally uninhibited. The scores of diagnosed
neurotics lie not only at two ends of the distribution but
also predominantly about the central tendency. It may
therefore be concluded that maladjustment cannot be iden-
tified with negative attitudes alone, since many neurotics
do not show predominantly negative behavior as recog-
nized by Freud, who stated that there are many neuroses
in which no fear is shown and that no one has yet been
able to differentiate what form the neurosis will take in
different persons.
In order to bring the statistic al treatment of neurotic
inventories into conformance with established practice,
it is necessary to identify the norm with central tendency.
This is in contrast with the assumption implicit in psy-
chiatry and in the standard inventories that the normal
person is one who has no negative symptoms, the norm
being placed at the zero point. The quantity theory of mal-
adjustment leads into the blind alley of postulating that
the essential difference between normality and abnormality
is the quantity of anti-social energy displayed in behavion
Quantity theory is merely the theory of faculties stated
quantitatively.
REFERENCES
1. Bernreuter, R.G. The measurement of self-sufficiency.
/. abn. soc, Psychol,, 28, 1934, p. 291*
2. Bridges, J.W. Emotional instability of college students.
/. abn, soc, Psychol,, 22, 1926, pp. 227-234.


3. Flemming, E.G. The predictive value of certain tests
of emotional stability as applied to college freshmen.
Arch. Psychol ., 15, 1928, <96, l-61.
4. Franz, S.I. Handbook of mental examination methods.
New York: MacMillan, 1919*
5. Hollingworth, H.L. The psychology of functional
neuroses. New York: Appleton, 1920.
6. Page, J., Landis C. and Katz, S.E, Schizophrenic
traits in the functional psychoses and in normal in-
dividuals. Amer. J. Psychiat ., 90, 1934, 1213-25.
7. Papurt, M.J. A study of the Woodworth psychoneurotic
inventory with suggested revision. /. abn. soc, Psy-
chol., 25, 1930, 335-352.
8. Thurstone, L.L. and Thurstone, T.G. A neurotic in-
ventory. /. soc. Psychol ., 1, 1930, 3-30.
9. Wechsler, I.S. The Neuroses, Philadelphia: Saunders,
1929.




CHAPTER 4
THE INDIVIDUALITY RECORD
Before the principle of self-consistency can be widely
recognized, it needs a variety of demonstrations. The older
personality inventories consisted of either (a) collections
of symptoms of negative behavior grouped all together as
parts of a single scale yielding a single total score, or
(b) were subdivided so as to supposedly measure traits
such as ascendance-submission or the inferiority complex.
Mr, Lecky constructed a new inventory, the Individuality
Record, in which the items were arranged in eight cate-
gories numbering 200 questions. The categories were social
confidence, cooperation, optimism, family, sex, work,
nervous symptoms, and physical symptoms. The names of
these categories were assigned arbitrarily and were con-
sidered to refer to areas of adjustment rather than to per-
sonality traits. Each category consisted of questions
which were theoretically and statistically related among
themselves but not to questions in other categories. If the
self-consistency conception is correct, Mr. Lecky antici-
pated that a constant pattern or organization of ideas and
attitudes would be reflected in positive correlations of all
categories with each other, and that a high consistency
of responses within each category would be caused by or-
ganized systems of values in these limited areas. No
matter in which field of behavior the frequency of negative
behavior is measured, it can be predicted that the inci-
dence of similar behavior in other fields will be positively
correlated. So much can be deduced from the reliability of
the whole scale before it is divided. On the basis of the
theory of self-consistency, it is to be anticipated that all


correlations will be positive, and reasonably high consid-
ering the number of items in each subtest. On the other
hand, we should not expect the intercorrelations between
the subtests to be the same, although this would follow
if the inventory was really measuring a unitary trait of
neurotic tendency. The concept of differential resistance
or negativity in different areas enables us to give recog-
nition to the role of the environment, and thus to allow for
the fact that situations vary in their difficulty, while
still avoiding the extreme environmentalism of stimulus-
response psychology.
Construction . The Individuality Record was based on
the Thurstone Personality Schedule with certain modifi-
cations. Fifty-nine of the Thurstone questions were clim-
ated, and 36 new questions substituted, making a total of
200 questions. The criteria for elimination of Thurstone
questions were infrequency of responses and nonaccepta-
bility on social grounds. In general, those questions which
elicited few significant responses among the 50 students
with the highest scores were eliminated as were questions
with morbid content which might be unacceptable to school
authorities.* The 36 new questions were invented as ex-
pressions of the negative attitude. In general, questions
which depend too heavily on age or experience were omitted
since they limit the range of subjects to which the inven-
tory is applicable. The grouping of the items into the
eight categories was done empirically.
Subjects, The subjects were 411 freshman from
Columbia College and 89 freshman from Seth Low Junior
College, a branch of Columbia University using the same
admissions office and entrance examinations. The test
* It must be recalled that this work was done in 1927
when university authorities were critical of anything
which bordered on the unconventional.


Table 1
QUESTIONS IN THE INDIVIDUALITY RECORD WITH
AVERAGE NUMBER OF SIGNIF ICANT RESPONSES FOR
EACH QUINTILE
SOCIAL
CONFIDENCE
Question
Answer
Scored No.
1
Quintiles
2 3*5
1. Are you troubled with shy-
ness? (0-33)
Yes 132
1
17 24
34 56
2. Do you mix with other stu-
dents easily?
No 109
2
7 24
27 49
was given as part of regular entrance examinations with
announcement of its confidential nature.
Method of Analysis. It was necessary to have exactly
500 subjects to facilitate item analysis. After scoring,
the records were arranged in rank order (according to score)
into five quintiles each with 100 cases so that the average
score for each quintile also represents the per cent of
negative symptoms. Table 1 presents the questions of the
individuality record showing the number of significant
answqfs for the 100 students in each quintile.
The reliability of the list was computed by two methods.
The reliability of alternate items in each category was
.940, while the reliability of alternate items of the whole
list without reference to category was .937. The reliability
of the Thurstone list was .946.
The correlation between the Individuality Record and
the Thorndike Intelligence Test was-. 826. The correlation
between the Thurstone Personality Schedule and the
A.C.E. Intelligence Test was +.037. It is evident that
there is little in common between the negative attitude
and what is measured by intelligence tests.


Question
Answer
Scored
NO.
1
gu in t i1 es
2 3 4
S
3.
Do you lack self-confi-
dence in social sitationa.
Yes
193
3
28
41
52
69
4.
Can you stand kidding? (0-15)
No
35
<0
7
7
3
18
5.
Are you usually in good
spirits? (0-9)
No
16
0
1
0
5
10
6.
Do you have difficulty in
making friends? (0-25;
Yes
99
3
8
14
27
47
7.
Do you like to be with other
people a great deal? (1-23)
No
134
3
20
29
39
43
8.
Do you often feel lonesome
even when you are with other
people? (1-42)
Yes
136
4
21
22
33
56
9.
As a rule, do you feel pretty
confident that your class-
mates accept you as an equal?
No
41
2
3
4
5
27
10.
Can you stand criticism with-
out feeling hurt? (0-25)
No
92
4
5
15
24
44
11.
Do you often feel self-con-
scious in the presence of
superiors? (4-45)
Yes
217
7
24
48
62
76
12.
Do you keep in the background
on social occasions? (0-32)
Yes
164
6
25
29
46
50
13.
Do you have difficulty in
starting conversation with a
stranger? (3-30)
Yes
176
6
29
39
45
57
14.
Are your feelings easily
hurt? (2-37)
Yes
167
7
16
34
44
66
15.
Do you find it difficult to
speak in public? (3-36)
Yes
190
7
27
48
47
61
16.
Do you hesitate to volunteer
in a class recitation?
Yes
112
5
17
21
28
41
17.
Do you often feel self-con-
scious because of your per seri-
al appearance? (5-39)
Yes
221
11
29
45
54
82
18.
Do you enjoy social gatherings
Just to be with people? (4-2?)
No
180
8
19
44
54
55
T9.
Do ever get stage fright?
Yes
168
8
18
37
52
53


Answer
Question Scored
No.
1
Quinti
2 3
lies
4
5
20.
Do you feel self-conscious
when you recite in class?
(2-36)
Yes
157
8
27
27
42
53
21.
Are you interested in meeting
a lot of different kinds of
people? (2-8)
No
65
3
il
17
15
19
22.
Do you mind having your
friends see you in the ten
cent store? (1-17)
Yes
44
4
2
8
10
23
23.
Do you often feel you do not
get your chance in social
conversation? (1-17)
Yes
85
6
13
15
21
30
24.
Are you bothered much by
blusning? (1-25)
Yes
139
10
22
27
35
45
25.
Do you find it difficult to
get rid of salesmen? (4-31)
Yes
118
9
15
20
34
40
26.
Do you ever take the lead to
enliven a dull party? (4-33)
No
212
14
36
38
55
69
27.
Do you like to be by yourself
a great deal? (7-30)
Yes
209
15
30
42
55
67
28.
Do you allow other people to
crowd ahead in liner (9-30)
Yes
185
15
25
35
43
67
29.
Does it bother you to have
people watch you at work even
when you do it well? (5-40)
Yes
207
17
25
41
53
71
30.
If you come late to a meeting
would you rather stand or
leave than take a front seat?
(7-33)
Yes
94
14
33
37
53
57
31.
Are you sometimes the leader
at a social affair? (6-32)
No
233
19
46
50
50
68
32.
Have you found books more
interesting than people?
(5-30)
Yes
187
19
25
35
50
58
33.
Do you take responsibility
for introducing people at
a party? (2-30)
No
213
23
40
42
47
61


Answer
Question Scored
No.
1
Quintiles
2 3^5
34. At a reception or tea do
you seek to meet the impor-
tant person present? No
233
26
38 51 54 64
COOPERATION
35. Do people find fault with
you more than you deserve?
(0-9)
Yes
31
0
2
3
6
20
36.
Have your teachers gener-
ally treated you right?
No
8
0
0
2
2
4
37.
Are most of the people you
know rather bigoted and
narrow-minded?
Yes
68
1
8
12
19
28
38.
Do you usually control
your tenper? (2-17)
No
53
1
6
7
12
27
39.
Do you frequently feel
grouchy? (0-30)
Yes
91
2
7
20
20
42
40.
Do you meet a great many
people who bore you?
Yes
138
3
20
23
36
56
41.
Do you get tired of people
quickly? (0-21)
Yes
63
2
4
9
12
36
42.
Do you lose your temper
quickly?(3-20)
Yes
82
3
8
12
23
36
43.
Are you touchy on various
subjects? (1-31)
Yes
101
4
13
13
25
46
44.
Do you think most people
are dull and uninteresting?
Yes
90
3
11
18
25
33
45.
Do you frequently feel that
you deserve a better lot
than you have? (1-20)
Yes
77
3
11
11
19
33
46.
Do you let yourself go when
angry? (3-24)
Yes
82
3
14
15
20
30
47.
Do you think people made
quite a lot of fun of you?
(0-8)
Yes
60
3
4
10
14
29
48.
Is there anyone you want
to get even with? (1-11)
Yes
34
2
2
5
12
13
(Note: This category was originally designated Soc ial Antagonism
or Resentment. The title was changed to enphasize that coopera-
tion is the problem to be solved.


Question
Do you know of anybody who
is trying to do you harm?
Answer
Quintiles
49.
Scored
No.
1
2
3
4
5
50.
(0-2)
Are you careful not to say
things to hurt people’s
Yes
10
1
0
2
1
6
51.
feelings? (1-14)
Do you have the habit of
contradicting people?
No
83
5
9
21
21
27
52.
(4-26)
Are there many people that
you dislike intensely?
Yes
103
7
15
24
22
35
53.
(1-13)
Do you think most people
are self-seeking or mali-
Yes
31
3
1
5
7
15
54.
cious? (4-13)
Do you feel slightly an-
tagonistic toward the
majority of people you
Yes
88
8
14
15
16
35
55.
meet?
Do you usually trust
people? (2-11)
Do you think you are re-
garded as critical of
Yes-?*
87
7
13
17
21
29
56.
No
54
5
5
14
12
18
other people? (4-32) Yes
OPTIMISM
125
11
19
20
30
36
57.
Are you troubled with
feelings of inferiority?
(0-36)
Yes
117
0
7
13
32
65
58. Do you lack self* confi-
dence? (1-35)
Yes
95
0
6
13
32
44
59.
Do you get discouraged
easily? (0-38)
Yes
69
0
1
5l
22
41
60.
Are you frequently in low
spirits? (0-30)
Yes
50
0
2
1
11
36
61.
Do yew often experience
periods of loneliness?
(1-39)
Yes
144
3
15
23
40
63
62.
Do things often go wrong
for you by no fault of
your own? (1-28)
Yes
111
3
10
15
26
57
COUBArFIi™-? 8 I Cmt^ 9Ty W * S o ri ? in . all y designated DIS-
COURAGEMENT. In this case also, however, the problem-
sol ying viewpoint is best brought out by anphasizins the
positive attitude.


Question
Answer
Scored
No.
1
Quinti les
2 3 4
5
63.
Are you easily moved to
tears? (1-33)
Yes
96
2
9
23
25
37
64.
Do you often feel Just
miserable? (0-40)
Yes
89
3
6
10
22
48
65.
Are you frequently burdened
by a sense of remorse?
(0-39)
Yes
105
3
8
17
30
47
66.
Are you cheerful and opti-
mistic about the future?
No-?
59
2
8
11
15
23
67.
Do you worry over possible
misfortunes? (2-37)
Yes
137
5
17
21
44
50
68.
Do you worry too long over
humiliating experiences?
(1-40)
Yes
190
9
24
30
54
73
69,
Do you feel that life is
a great burden? (0-41)
Yes-?
55
3
9
9
13
21
70.
Would you say that you
have experienced a good
many failures?
Yes
49
3
6
7
13
20
71.
Do you feel that you are
not satisfactorily adjus-
ted to life? (0-23)
Yes
65
5
7
9
15
29
72.
Do you occasionally feel
sorry for yourself?
Yes-?
120
9
18
19
26
48
73.
Have your friends ever
turned against you? (1-16)
Yes
60
4
9
9
18
20
74.
Have you had a good deal
of bad luck?
Yes
39
4
3
5
8
19
75.
Do you think you are usual-
ly unlucky? (4-20)
Yes
61
5
5
15
14
22
76.
Are you troubled by thought
of death? (3-12)
s
Yes-?
49
6
3
11
11
18
77.
Have you ever been de-
pressed because of low
marks at school? (2-30)
Yes
180
19
38
25
46
52
FAMILY
78.
Has your family always
treated you right? (0-11)
No-?
35
0
4
8
8
15


Qiestion
Answer
Scored
No.
1
I
2
Quintiles
3 4 5
79.
Have you been the scape-
goat in the family life’
(1-7)
Yes
13
0
1
2
4
6
80.
Do your parents give you
credit for having good
judgment?
No
53
1
4
6
11
31
81.
Have your relationships
with your mother always
been pleasant? (1-10)
No-?
53
1
6
7
12
27
82.
Do you get on well with
your brothers and sisters?
(0-9)
No-?
55
1
8
14
12
20
83.
Is your mother's nature
usually cheerful? (1-12)
No
53
2
6
9
12
24
84.
Do you think your parents
expect too much of you?
Yes
50
2
8
5
13
22
85.
Do your parents give you
reasonable freedom in
making your own decisions?
No
29
1
3
3
11
11
86.
Have your relationships
with your father always
been pleasant? (1-17)
No-?
91
4
9
13
24
41
87.
Did you have a happy child-
hood? (1-8)
No
40
2
1
8
9
20
88.
Did you ever have a strong
desire to run away from
home? (1-18)
Yes
75
3
8
18
18
28.
89.
Do you occasionally have
conflicting moods of love
and hate for members of
your family? (2-34)
Yes-?
144
7
25
27
35
50
90.
Is your home environment
happy? (1-13)
No-?
63
4
3
16
14
26
91.
Do you feel that your
parents interfere too
much in your personal
affairs?
Yes
72
6
9
14
20
23
92.
Were your parents partial
to any of your brothers
or sisters?
Yes-?
74
5
9
23
16
21
93.
Is your mother dissatisfied
with her lot in life? (4-18)
Yes-’
113
11
18 26
25
33


Answer
Question Scored
No.
1
Quintiles
2 3 4
5
94. Are your parents inclined
to be quite critical?
Yes
145
17
19
25
37
47
95. Was your mother the dominant
member of your family? (3-13)
Yes
110
11
22
21
25
31
96. Do you love your mother more
than your father? (5-16)
Yes
140
18
23
24
37
38
97. Were your parents happily
married? (0-14)
No-?
78
10
9
17
19
23
98. Were you your parents
favorite child? (3-12)
Yes
124
24
18
21
28
33
99. Do you love your father
more than your mother?
(1-5)
Yes
28
3
3
11
6
5
SEK
100. Are you shy with boys?
(0-23)
Yes
28
0
2
0
5
21
101. Looking toward the future,
do you expect to have
children?
No
35
0
5
2
9
19
102. Did childhood misinfor-
mation delay you in de-
veloping a normal atti-
tude toward sex problems?
Yes
94
1
11
16
24
42
103. Were you greatly shocked
when you learned the facts
about sex?
Yes
45
1
6
6
12
20
104. Do you expect to get
married?
No
29
1
6
2
4
16
105. Are you shy with girls?
(0-21)
Yes
165
5
28
28
42
62
106. Do you think you are less
attractive them other boys
(or girls)?
Yes
107
4
14
13
29
47
107. Are you easily shocked by
sexual topics, risque
stories, and the like?
(2-12)
Yes
22
1
1
3
6
11
108. Do you find it difficult
to pass urine in the
presence of others? (1-18)
Yes
78
3
9
17
19
30


Answer
Question Scored
109. Have you ever worried much
about questions of sex? Yes
No.
70
1
4
Quintiles
2 3 4
5 14 18
5
29
110. Would you say that you were
more or less ignorant of
sex? (2-12)
Yes
72
5
13
12
11
31
111. Is there a conflict in
your nature between sex
and morality? (1-24)
Yes
98
7
9
19
22
41
112. Do you think of sex as
something dangerous?
Yes-?
82
7
21
13
17
24
113. Would you say that you are
cynical about members of
tne opposite sex generally?
(0-26)
Yes
117
11
17
21
28
40
114. Do you believe most mar-
riages are happy?
No
143
8
20
29
43
33
115. Are you generally regarded
as indifferent to the op-
posite sex? (2-26)
Yes
192
17
39
32
52
52
116. Do you enjoy going to dan-
ces?
No
171
17
29
32
43
50
117. Do you limit your friend-
ships mostly to your own
sex? (5-26)
Yes
224
26
48
43
49
58
118. Do you believe all normal
people should marry?
No-?
134
22
26
26
30
30
119. Have you any friends of
the opposite sex who seem
worthy of your confidence?
No-?
228
32
53
43
48
52
120. Have you ever believed you
were falling in love?
No
216
36
57
48
33
42
WORK
121. Do you have trouble de-
ciding what to do next?
Yes
69
0
4
8
16
41
122. Do you ever get so dis-
couraged that you cannot
work properly?
Yes
104
1
13
14
25
51
123. Are you in general self-
confident about your abili-
ties? (0-31)
No
86
1
6
11
25
43


frestion
Answer
Scored
No.
1
Quintiles
2 3 tt 5
124,
. Does criticism disturb you
badly? (0-25)
Yes
58
1
1
5
15
36
125.
, Do you get tired of work
quickly? (0-25)
Yes
64
1
5
10
15
33
126.
, Are you absent minded 7
(1-21)
Yes
53
1
1
9
10
32
127.
, Do you often find that you
cannot make up your mind
until the time if or action
has passed? (0-35)
Yes
105
3
12
20
22
49
126.
On you do the little chores
of the day without worrying
over them? (0-13) No
29
1
6
3
6
13
129.
Do you make a large number
of plans which you never
carry out?
Yes
126
4
11
23
39
49
130.
Are you slow in making
decisions? (7-29)
Yes
158
6
18
28
45
61
131.
Have you the habit of
leaving a lot of tasks un-
finished? (0-20)
Yes
62
3
10
9
11
29
132.
Are you considered lazy?
Yes
45
2
5
9
10
19
133.
Do you day-dream frequent-
ly? (3-40)
Yes
238
15
34
48
62
79
134.
Are you systematic in car-
ing for your personal pro-
perty? (1-19)
No
110
7
18
24
28
33
135.
Does it disturb you to
think that someone else may
get a better mark than you?
Yes
145
11
19
23
42
50
136.
Do you feel that you must
do a thing over several
times before you leave it 7
(3-29)
Yes
135
11
24
27
28
45
137.
Do your interests change
quickly? (2-33)
Yes
124
11
15
26
27
45
138.
Are you inclined to let
things go until the last
minute?
Yes
193
15
27
47
45
59
139.
Do you like to take on
responsibilities? (1-20)
No
108
11
11
21
30
35


Answer
Question Scored
No.
1
Quinti les
2 3^
5
140.
Do you usually plan your
work ahead? (2-17)
No
93
8
18
17
28
22
141.
NERVOUS SYMPTOMS
Does it make you uneasy
to have to cross a wide
street or open square?
(Or23) Yes
50
0
2
10
14
24
142.
At night are you frequent-
ly troubled by the idea
tnat somebody is following
you? (0-9)
Yes
18
0
2
2
4
10
143.
Do you lose your head
easily in a dangerous situ-
ation? (0-12)
Yes
14
0
1
2
4
7
144.
Are you often frightened
in the middle of the night?
(0-16)
Yes
7
0
1
1
1
4
145.
Are you frequently troubled
with nightmares? (1-6)
Yes
12
0
1
4
3
4
146.
Does it make you uneasy to
go into a tunnel or subway?
(0-11)
Yes
5
0
0
0
2
3
147.
Do a great many things
frighten you? (0-13)
Yes
10
1
0
0
0
9
148.
Does some particular useless
thought keep coming into
your mind to bother you?
(0-35)
Yes
85
1
12
10
25
37
149.
Does your mind often wander
badly so that you lose
track of what you are doing?
(0-32)
Yes
60
1
7
8
17
27
150.
Are you troubled by the
idea that people are watch-
ing you on the street?
(2-30)
Yes
102
3
9
14
28
48
151.
Does it make you uneasy to
sit in a small room with the
door shut? (11-8)
Yes
25
1
2
2
8
12
152.
Do you get upset easily?
(0-21)
Yes
49
2
2
7
12
26


1
Question 1
Answer
Scored
No.
1
Quintiles
2 3 4
5
153.
Do you consider yourself a
rather nervous person?
(0-32)
Yes
80
3
8
13
21
35
154.
Are you often afraid of
contracting disease? (2-14)
Yes
87
3
10
21
22
31
155.
Do you have ups and downs
in mood without apparent
cause? (1-38)
Yes
172
6
16
32
57
61
156.
Do you have a great fear of
fire? (0-14)
Yes
12
0
2
3
4
3
157.
Are you frequently worried
about religion? (2-22)
Yes
67
3
10
14
14
26
158.
Are you frightened by
lightning? (2-16)
Yes
17
1
2
3
3
8
159.
Do ideas often run through
your head so that you can-
not sleep? (4-32)
Yes
165
8
18
40
45
54
160.
Have you ever been afraid
that you might Jump off
when you are on a high
place? (2-24)
Yes
94
5
8
20
29
32
161.
On you sit still without
fidgeting? (3-23)
No
83
5
10
19
18
31
162.
Are you usually cool and
composed in a dangerous
situation? (2-14)
No
35
3
1
5
10
16
163.
Have you ever had a ner-
vous breakdown? (0-5)
Yes-?
15
2
2
2
1
8
164.
Have you ever had the habit
of twitching your neck,
face or shoulders? (0-18)
Yes-?
52
5
6
13
10
18
165.
Are you afraid of falling
when you are on a high
place? (4-35)
Yes
162
14
14
39
45
50
166.
Do you dread the sight of
a snake? (6-27)
Yes
79
6
16
21
16
20
167.
Do you ever have a queer
feeling as if you were not
your old self? (9-42)
Yes-?
155
17
18
28
37
55
168.
Have you ever had the habit
of stuttering? (1-6)
Yes
31
3
7
5
8
8


Answer
Question Scored
No.
1
Quintiles
2 3 U
5
169.
Are you ever bothered by
the feeling that things are
not real? (8-33)
Yes-?
192
25
31
31
41
64
170.
Does it make you uneasy to
cross a bridge over a river?
(0-12)
Yes
10
1
1
2
4
2
PHYSICAL
SYMPTOMS
171.
Are you physically infer-
ior to your associates?
(0-14)
Yes
59
0
6
8
15
30
172.
Are you frequently both-
ered by indigestion?
(0-7)
Yes
15
0
0
2
2
11
173.
Have you a good appetite?
(0-4)
No
22
0
2
4
6
10
174.
Do you usually feel well
and strong? (0-8)
No
17
0
2
0
5
10
175.
Do you often have bad pains
in any part of your body?
(2-15)
Yes
23
0
2
4
7
9
176.
Do you feel tired most of
the time? (0-13)
Yes
14
0
0
1
4
9
177.
Are you bothered by flut-
tering of the heart? (0-11)
Yes
23
0
2
6
8
7
178.
Are you troubled much by
constipation? (0-9)
Yes
16
0
1
5
5
5
179.
Do you often have the feel-
ing of suffocating? (0-5)
Yes
9
0
0
1
4
4
180.
Are you troubled with poor
health? (0-33)
Yes
3
0
0
0
1
2
181.
Do you usually feel fatigued
when you wake up in the morn-
ing? (0-18)
Yes
45
1
1
9
10
24
182.
Do you often have queer, un-
pleasant feelings in any
part of your body? (0-13)
Yes
23
1
1
1
5
15
183.
Did you ever have heart trou
ble? (2-12)
Yes
33
1
4
8
5
15


Answer
Question Scored
No.
1
Quintiles
2 3 4
5
184.
Do your eyes often pain you?
(1-4)
Yes
47
2
2
6
13
24
185.
Do you feel well rested in
the morning?
No
47
2
1
8
12
24
186.
Does your heart sometimes
sound in your ears so that
you cannot sleep? (0-15)
Yes
31
1
5
5
11
9
187.
Do you often feel an awful
pressure in or about the
head? (0-11)
Yes
35
2
1
8
9
15
188.
Do things ever swim or get
misty before your eyes?
(0-19)
Yes
63
3
5
13
20
22
189.
Have you any physical de-
fects? (1-12)
Yes
69
3
14
13
17
22
190.
Do you like indoor sports
better than outdoor spots?
(2-16)
Yes
46
3
6
8
8
21
191.
Do you find it necessary to
watch your health carefully?
(2-19)
Yes
69
4
6
16
16
27
192.
Do you have headaches at the
back of the head?
Yes
13
1
2
2
2
6
193.
Have you been bothered by
vomiting?
Yes
11
1
0
2
2
6
194.
Do you sometimes have shoot-
ing pains in the head? (0-10)
Yes
37
3
3
7
9
15
195.
Do you have a great many
headaches? (0-8)
Yes
9
1
0
1
2
5
196.
Are you a crank about food?
(3-18)
Yes
100
8
11
27
21
33
197.
Do you usually sleep well?
(1-10)
No
17
2
4
0
3
8
198.
Would you rather work in-
doors than outdoors? (4-23)
Yes
84
11
9
17
16
31
199.
Since you were five years
old have you ever had the
habit of wetting the bed?
(2-6)
Yes-
? 36
5
8
6
4
13
200.
Do you prefer participation
in competitive intellectual
unusements to athletic games?
(6-24)
Yes
133
19
15
26
36
37


Distribution of
Table 2
Significant Responses of 500 College Freshmen
on the Categories
of the Individuality Record.
Number of Questions
Average Number
Significant Responses
Percent of
Answers Scored
Total
200
35.5
17.8
Confidence
34
10.1
29.8
Cooperation
22
3.1
14.2
Optimism
21
3.9
18.5
Family
22
3.3
14.9
Sex
21
4.7
22.3
Work
20
4.2
21.0
Nervous Symptoms
30
3.9
13.0
Physical Synfttoms
30
2.3
7.7
Results
General, The average number of significant responses
of 500 college freshman in each category of the Individual-
ity Record, together with the percentage in each case, is
shown in table 2.
If it isgrantedthat the Individuality Record represents
a fair sampling of life situations, then it is clear that
problems relating to social confidence are most charac-
teristic of college freshman (in 1927). Problems relating
to sex and work were next in importance, but with much
lower incidence. As would be expected in a highly selec-
ted group, problems relating to mental and physical health
had very low incidence.


Table 3
Correlations Between Categories
Total
Minus
Category
Conf.
Coop. Opt. Fan. Sox Work
Norv.
Phya.
Total
Ccnf.
.427 .553 .221 .531 .551
.467
.371
.80S
.637
Coop.
.525 .436 .294 .449
.441
.375
.677
.586
Opt.
.404 .304 .613
.621
.464
.795
.716
Fan.
.118 .302
.340
.322
.520
.396
Sex
.314
.313
.292
.578
.459
Work
.525
.417
.746
.656
Nerv.
.545
.738
.651
Phya.
.634
.546
Relation botwomn Categories. Correlations are shown
in table 3 between the scores on each category and every
other category, between each category and the total score,
and between each category and the total score minus
that category.
The correlations involving the scores on family and
sex, with the exception of that between sex and confidence,
tend to be noticeably lower than those in which these two
categories are not concerned. This results was antici-
pated since these topics are likely to result in higher
resistance than others.
Nogativo Symptoms and Ago. Analyzing the number
of negative symptoms according to age groups between
15 and 21, a consistent increase in significant problem
areas was noted with increasing age. The average score
of 11 subjects in the 15 year group was 29.9, and for 20


subjects in the 21*29 group was 45.0. The most consis-
tent increase was noted with problems related tooptimism r
The incidence of sex problems was consistently high in
all age groups but tended to decrease with age. Problems
in the areas of confidence, cooperation, family, work,
nervous and physical symptoms tended to increase with
increasing age but at varying rates. It thus appears that
the incidence of negative attitudes tends to increase with
age up to some point not yet determined, and this would
be expected since the difficulty and complexity of life
situations to be assimilated probably increase with age.
This result agrees with the general theory that a higher
than average number of negative symptoms does not indi-
cate the presence of a defect in greater degree, but the
rejection of a larger number of situations than average.
According to the self-consistency theory, new situations
may be rejected and assimilation perhaps not attempted
in an environment whose complexity is increasingly per-
ceived. If these scores were taken to indicate neurotic
tendency, then it would be inferred that the subjects were
becoming increasingly abnormal with increasing age. The
interpretation of the meaning of the score must therefore
be made on the norm for the age. Younger students do not
have lower scores than older students because they are
less neurotic or because they can assimilate situations
whichthe older students reject, but because the situations
themselves are not the same. Since the subjective signi-
ficance of the environment undergoes progressive changes,
reorganization is a problem which has no end. From this
viewpoint, a low score is more indicative of failure to
perceive problems than of neurotic tendency. The organi-
zation is on a lower age level on which such perceptions
would not be expected.
Order of Birth. In order to investigate the Adlerian


Teble 4
The Incidence
According to
of Significant Bespon
Birth Position
ises in
i Each
Category Tabulated
Order
No.
Av.
Score
Oonf.
Coop.
Opt.
Fan.
Sex
Work
Nerv.
Phys.
Oily
child
73
37.0
10.3
3.5
4.0
4.0
4.8
4.2
3.5
2.6
Oldest
child
197
33.8
9.6
2.9
3.5
2.8
4.7
4.3
GO
CO
2.1
Second
but not
youngest
59
40,7
12.0
3.8
4.6
3.6
5.3
4.5
4.4
2.6
Second
youngest
53
34.2
9.3
3.1
4.0
3.2
4.5
3.7
4.1
2.3
Inter-
mediate
55
34.7
10.2
2.9
4.1
3.0
4.2
4.1
4.1
2.1
Youngest
61
36.4
10.6
3.0
4.0
3.7
4.5
4.1
3.9
2.8
theory of the effect of birth order upon personality devel-
opment, the 500 records were analyzed relative to both
position and incidence of significant responses in each
category with results presented in table 4. The results
suggest that the positions of second but not youngest,
only child and youngest child are characterized by higher
incidence of negative attitudes than other birth positions.
Second children are said by Adler to overemphasize the


competitive aspects of life and to seek to overcome others.
The oldest child strives to preserve his accustomed place
in the sun, while younger children pursue, as it were,
from the rear. The second-but-not-youngest child gets the
first force of the oldest child's resentment and is likely
to lose heart and be overtaken by the third child as well.
It is significant that only children have a slightly higher
incidence of negative attitudes related to family problems.
Negative Symptoms and Physical Ratirfgs, Since all
students had received physical ratings on a four-point
scale by the medical officer, an analysis was made of
the relation between negative attitudes and physical
health. 220 students with A rating and no physical restric-
tions had an average of 35.4 significant responses. 154
students with B rating and slight restriction of physical
activity, had an average score of 38.0 with a slightly
higher incidence of nervous and physical symptoms. Se-
verely restricted students with C rating had an average of
44.9 significant responses with increased incidence in
categories. Six students with total physical disability
had an average of only 32.8 significant responses with
significantly lower incidence in each category except
family and sex problems. This lower average score may
be explained by the assumption that they receive more
attention and sympathetic treatment, have withdrawn from
competition in addition to being excused from it, and in
general do not have the same problems.
Negative Symptoms and Height. When classified ac-
cording to height, the extremely short group (60-63 inches
in height) had the maximum number of significant responses
while the extremely tall group had the lowest average.
When the categories are analyzed separately, it appears
that the extremely short boy has a more favorable family
relationship perhaps because he is favored, but a poorer
sex adjustment.


Table 5
The Incidence of Significant Reaponaea Tabulated According to
Beligioua Preference.
No.
Av.
Score
Conf.
Coop..
Opt.
Fan.
Sex.
Work
Nerv.
Phya.
Proteatants
200
35.7
10.5
3.0
3.7
3.3
4.9
4.3
3.7
2.3
Catholica
98
37.1
11.3
3.1
4.2
3.2
4.7
4.6
4.1
2.0
Jewa
162
31.3
8.3
2.8
3.4
2.9
4.4
3.4
3.8
2.3
Not Stated
44.4
12.1
4.7
5.3
4.8
4.7
5.3
4.4
3.2
"None*
24
54.4
13.5
5.2
5.8
5.5
5.4
6.1
'5.7
3.3
Childhood Residence. No significant differences were
noted between incidence of negative attitudes and rural
or urban location of childhood residence.
Religious Faith, Table 5 presents the results analysed
according to religious faith. The most striking result is
the high average scores of students not stating or denying
religious beliefs. In psychoanalytic theory, lack of religion
is related to antagonism toward the father which transfers
to father symbols, authority and restriction generally.
This hypothesis receives some confirmation from scores
in Cooperation and Family categories where the difficulty
of assimilation is evident. These results appear to dis-
prove the origin of religion in fear, since the presence of
definite religious beliefs is associated with good (low)
confidence and optimism scores. However, it might also
be contended that religious faith serves as a support to
organization and a defense against fear.


The Incidence of Sign!
Table 6
ficint Responses Classified According
to
Academic Status.
No.
Av.
Score
Conf.
Coop.
Opt.
Fa*.
Sex
Work
Nerv.
Rhys.
Probation
30
40.2
11.9
3.0
4.9
3.5
4.5
5.8
4.3
2.3
Warning
35
37.0
10.0
4.5
4.0
3.0
4.7
5.2
3.7
1.9
Average
392
34.5
9.8
3.0
3.8
3.2
4.6
3.9
3.9
2.3
Congrat-
ulations
43
40.3
11.9
3.4
4.1
3.6
5.7
4.8
4.1
2.8
Scholarship. An interesting example of significant
relationships uncovered through the individual analysis
of personality inventories was discovered in the relation
between incidence of negative attitudes and scholarship.
On the basis of scholastic records, the 500 students were
divided into 4 groups including (a)those put on probation,
(b) those warned to do better, (c) average students not
receiving special attention, and (d) superior students re-
ceiving letters of congratulation. From table 6, it might
be concluded that the average student is best adjusted
while superior and inferior students each have an higher
incidence of negative attitudes.
It has been suggested elsewhere that the norm is the
average with deviations either above or below being sig-
nificant but for different reasons. An excessively inhibited
attitude maybe as disadvantageous as an excessively un-
inhibited one. Personal experience with individual students


confirmed this hypothesis. Some poor students were ex-
cessively concerned and anxious over their failure, while
others tend to ignore their difficulties in extreme extra-
version. In an effort to secure objective confirmation for
this hypothesis, the entire group of 500 records was divi-
ded into three sections designated as below average (0-29),
average (30-40), and above average (50-130), The number
of students in each group was 217, 169 and 114. The num-
bers of warned and probationary students in each group
were 29, 15 and 21, and of congratulated students 15, 14
and 14. Fig. 1 indicates the percentages of inferior and
Fig. 1. Percentages of scholastically well-adjusted and
maladjusted students in different parts of the
distribution of total inventory scores.


superior students for the three parts of the scale. It will
be noted that the warned and probationary students tend
to lie at the two extremes, a result which is lost when
the scores are averaged. Since the lower third probably
included those students who are most uninhibited, this
result offers suggestive confirmation ofthebimodal nature
of maladjustment, i.e. with either a pathological increase
or decrease resulting in problem behavior. These figures
also support the fact that maladjustment is a purely rela-
tive conception. Students who appear to be well adjusted
by an objective standard (grades) may seem to be malad-
justed by a subjective standard, and vice versa. Unless
we are able to grasp the meaning of behavior as a whole,
which means a study of the valuations placed on the world
and on himself by each student individually, the informa-
tion gained from limited experiments may be subject to
fallacious interpretations.
Since the uninhibited students made low scores on
the "work*’ category, it might be supposed that since
they showed no great avoidance or negative attitude to-
ward work, they should do well in college. The correct
interpretation is that these students do not worry about
work or anything else. They do not avoid work but are
merely unconvinced of the necessity for it.
INVENTORY INTERPRETATION
One of the main values of the inventory method lies in
the aid which it may render in studying the attitudinal
and ideational organization of the personality. It is not a
test in the conventional meaning of yielding some total
score, but a device for presenting an array of facts which
must be interpreted as a whole. Instead of explaining any-
thing, it raises a problem to be explained -- namely, what


the values, themselves tending toward consistency,
which would account most reasonably for the behavior
which is observed. These values constitute the subject
matter of personality study and define the only possible
approach by which we can achieve a psychology capable
of prediction and control. This viewpoint does not mini-
mizethe influence of somatic factors which may determine
personality particularly in organic disease. It simply
emphasizes that in the morphologically intact and physio-
logically healthy organism, the main outlines of personal-
ity and behavior are determined by style of life, i.e. the
attitudinal and ideational organization.
The problem is to find a general concept by means of
which the phenomena can be interpreted in an organized
relation, i.e. as constituting a scale which samples a
series of fundamental attitudes divided by social evalu-
ation into positive and negative parts. The negative part
evidently comprises the group of motives or tendencies
which are sometimes described as avoidance behavior,
while the positive part is made up of approach activities.
The extremes of the scale may be described as an exces-
sively inhibited, cautious, hostile, suspicious and anxious
attitude at one end, and an excessively uninhibited, con-
fident, friendly grid credulous attitude at the other extreme.
The statistical results suggest that a person tends to
maintain a dynamic organization at some point on the
scale which is reflected in all his attitudes. This fact
has long been used by dramatists and novelists for keeping
their actors in “character”, and is recognized by Adler
in his description of the style of life.
This viewpoint differs from Freudian theory which
conceives the personality as a duality in conflict with
itself, i.e. the conflict between positive instincts (the
life instincts) and the negative or death instincts. It seems


quite possible that temporary conflicts may occur, but a
condition of permanent conflict necessitating a Super-Ego
and constant repression is a pure assumption. It is sig-
nificant that conflict presupposes irrelevance or incon-
sistency, for if one of the conflicting attitudes is appro-
priate the other cannot be. Organization at more than one
point of the scale, apparently, would be represented by
the phenomenon of multiple personality.
The normal person, then, is not the one with the lowest
score, but the one whose score corresponds to the mean
of his group. An excessive degree of positivity or nega-
tivity in any category of attitudes may lead to excesses
in opposite directions. The assumption of an absolute
norm would be invalid since it would presuppose that
everyone *s attitudes should be the same. Assuming that
any group is more or less homogeneous, the most typical
members would be those whose attitudes are most op-
timally adjusted to the type of problems they have to
solve. It might be anticipated that college students might
have higher average scores because they face problems
of greater complexity which require a corresponding
amount of hesitation and deliberation. The normal atti-
tudes of clerks, salesmen or mechanics could not be de-
termined by a study of college students but would have to
be determined for each group or individual independently.
THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS
The necessity for differential methods of treatment
for persons who lie toward opposite extremes of the
scale seems self-evident. If inventory scores and clinical
judgments reveal strongly negative attitudes, it is parti-
cularly important to avoid criticism or anything which
stimulates further negativity. Following McDougall, the


most extreme negative clinical type, the schizophrenic,
may be understood as a morbidly exaggerated and prolonged
state of sulking. The sulking or withdrawn attitude can
be diminished by a direct attack upon the organizing fac-
tor itself by reenforcing opposite attitudes.
Mr. Lecky used the Individuality Record in his treat-
ment plan. After rapport had been established, the scale
was explained to the client and his own attitudes mentioned
with respect to their relevance. Mr. Lecky believed that
students were more impressed with abstract interpretations
of their difficulties than by concrete explanations, even
though concrete suggestions may be made concerning
what may be done. In answer to questions concerning
specific attitudes, Mr. Lecky went through the inventory
discussing the significant items and asking the client
what he would like to do in the various situations. When
asked what he would like to do in a situation previously
responded to negatively, the answer is usually positive,
thus demonstrating the'irrelevance of previous responses
by comparing what he would like to do with what he does
in actuality. It is then explained that the undesirable
behavior is due to extremist attitudes engendered by past
experience. If he wishes to change, it will be necessary
to train himself in maintaining a new attitude. In addition,
Mr. Lecky sought to present some plausible interpretation,
which must, however, be acceptable to the client, to ex-
plain more in detail how extremist attitudes originate.
For example, use maybe made of Adler's description of
the typical discouragements suffered by children in differ-
ent positions in the family. This not only saves face, but
emphasizes the fact that present behavior is merely a
kind of inertia effect of past behavior rather than an ad-
justment to present realities. With the relatively minor
maladjustment found in students, the results of this pro-
cedure were very encouraging.


The student whose attitudes are excessively positive
or uninhibited, on the other hand, presents a different
and educationally more difficult problem. While the at-
titudes of the inhibited person are reminiscent of past
failures, that of the over-optimistic person seem to repre-
sent an equally selective emphasis on past good fortune.
He has a strong belief in personal luck, and confidence
in the future may be so exaggerated that he neglects to
work and prepare for the future. His assurance, affability
and talkativeness are so persistent that he is frequently
regarded as a nuisance, but the fact that he is actually
maladjusted is sometimes overlooked. For example, the
student with the lowest score of the 500 cases on the
Individuality Record was put on probation at his first
mid-term and called before the Dean. He came in full of
assurance and explanations, received a stern warning,
and left with his confidence and optimism at least super-
ficially unshaken. On the mid-year examinations he was
completely unprepared, failed completely, and was dropped
from college. In contrast, the student with the highest
incidence of negative attitudes remained in college with
a C average. Since over-positive persons are often dis-
tinguished by sociability, it is easily understood why
they are regarded as socially well adjusted, but the ad-
justment is only superficial. Apparently they are just as
unlikely asthe negative type to made a social contribution
or to satisfy individual desires. The positive individual
has more friends, but is more likely to be victimized by
others, to be taken in by bad investments, and in general
to act without giving due weight to unfavorable aspects
of the situation.
The only neurotic disorder on the positive side which
is now recognized is hysteria. described hysteria
1 Jung, C.G. Psychological Types. Harcourt Brace. New
York, 1923. p. 421.


as the extreme of extraversion characterized by an exag-
gerated rapport with others, a frankly imitative accommo-
dation to the situation, a constant tendency to appeal for
interest and to produce impressions on his milieu, and his
proverbial suggestibility. The fundamental optimism of
the hysterical type was also brought out in Hollingworth’s
study which found that the average score of hysterics on
the Personal Data Sheet was the lowest of any class of
patients studied. Similar results were observed from per-
sonal contacts with hysterical types of college students
encountered in the present research. These students pre-
sented a picture of gaiety and confidence under ordinary
circumstances, but when under stress their discouragement
and grief was frequently exaggerated. But the dramatic
nature of their symptoms, their rapid alternation to suit
the circumstances, the swift recovery, and the general
agreement by clinicians that the symptoms are supported
by the results they produce in the external situation, all
make it doubtful whether the underlying attitude has ever
changed at all. The symptoms appear to be means to ends;
the optimistic hysteric believes that such means will
work, and puts on the best show of which he is capable.
Indeed, many of the classic symptoms of hysteria have
been so well publicized that they have now disappeared.
The means to be employed in regulating theover-positive
person seem to be a puzzle to everyone. While recognizing
the dangers of over-regulation and criticism, suppressive
methods of therapy are apparently the method of choice
when applied judiciously with attention being given to
the avoidance of stimulating resistance. Passive or non-
directive methods merely encourage the over-positive
individual in his attitudes. Such individuals do well in
military schools and other regimented situations where
a firm but fair restraint is exerted.


CHAPTER V
SELF-CONSISTENCY VS. THE DOCTRINE OF
SPECIFICITY
Conforming to the rigid determinism of the nineteenth
century, the older forms of scientific psychology were
committed to a causal program in which behavior was
determined solely by two sets of factors, environmental
and hereditary. Thus we were given to consider opposing
theories of environmentally determined habits and natively
determined instincts similarto the doctrines of epigenesis
and preformation in early biology. In recent modifications
of psychological and biological theory, however, the or-
ganism itself is beginning to appear as to some extent its
own determiner. There is a coherence in the behavior of
any single organism which argues against an explanation
in terms of chance combinations of determiners and points
to an organized dynamic system which tends toward self-
determination. The inventory method brings out this co-
herence in a very striking manner.
The scores indicate that confidence in social situ-
ations, cooperation, optimism, a friendly attitude toward
other members of the family, companionship with the op-
posite sex, efficient work dispositions, freedom from ner-
vous symptoms, and a feeling of physical well-being are'
closely interrelated and tend to increase or decrease to-
gether. The data support this conclusion with such con-
vincing uniformity that the presence of a dynamic organi-
zation of some kind can scarcely be open to serious
question. In order that this finding may be consolidated
in a systematic way, however, it will be necessary to
to consider why other investigators have not been led to


this result, and why their data have seemed to point to
opposed interpretations.
The extreme positions in the controversy regarding the
problem of consistency as a characteristic of behavior
are represented on the one hand by psychiatry, which
finds a high degree of consistency, and on the other by
stimulus-response psychology, which finds almost no con-
sistency at all. Psychiatry bases its explanations on the
operation offerees located within the organism, stimulus-
response psychology on forces operative in the envir-
onment.
It is quite possible to present evidence in support of
either point of view. Using the inventory method, if we
gather as many symptoms as possible and combine them
all into one scale, as in the Thurstone schedule, we gain
the impression that the consistency of behavior is well-
nigh perfect. But if we go to the opposite extreme and
combine only pairs of items, inconsistency is emphasized,
for the chance of predicting from the presence of one
symptom that some other, symptom will also be found is
obviously negligible. When we correlate subordinate lists
of symptoms with other subordinate lists, however, and
find that the coefficients are positive, but that they also
vary widely from one another, it is apparent that the view-
point of both opponents is much too narrowly limited, for
this is merely a statistical way of bringing out the obvious
fact that behavior cannot be explained in terms of either
the organism or the environment alone.
The task of adaptation must be conceived in relation
to the organism and its environment jointly. The statement
that the environment controls the organism is the product
of a single point of view, exactly as true and as false as
the view that the organism controls the environment. Both
sides endeavor to alleviate the rigidity of their original


positions by making concessions to common sense, but
the concessions in no way change the basic framework
of the two conceptions as organized structures of thought.
These remain inflexible. In one respect, however, the two
theories are quite similar, for both are attempts to explain
human nature by means of concepts drawn from mechanics.
The psychoanalytic theory, as Lashleyhas pointed out,
is really a theory of psycho-hydraulics. Stimulus-response
psychology is a theory of psychotelephonics. Both theories
represent efforts to fit the phenomena of behavior into
one or the other of these familiar and simple thought-
models, rather than attempts to originate a truly psycho-
logical conception. In the one case, repressed motives
or instincts are thought of as liquids under pressure,
exerting an outward stress which is exactly equal at all
points. In the other instance, stimuli are thought of as
separate and haphazard incoming messages entering an
automatic telephone system.
We shall have occasion to criticize the psychiatric
viewpoint on the ground that it employs the theory of in-
stincts. But when we turn our attention to the stimulus-
response hypothesis, the direction of attack must be re-
versed. Instead of arguing against control by internal
forces, we must argue against control by external forces.
From an experimental standpoint, it should be noted
that self-consistency does not appear unless the condi-
tions of the experiment permit it to appear. The organiza-
tion does not reveal itself in the attitude toward any
single situation, but only in the consistency of the atti-
tude toward a variety of situations. We should not expect
to find general characteristics of behavior revealed so
clearly in a small number of situations. But if we place
our faith in the stimulus to begin with, set up the experi-
ment from that point of view, and formulate our theories


on the basis of studies in which the effect of each situa-
tion is investigated separately, the response will then be
attributed entirely to the situation. The interpretation of
the behavior as a tiny episode in the larger drama of in-
dividual self-maintenance will be excluded from consider-
ation. *
The telephone system analogy was borrowed from
physiology, in which the experimental methods employed
obscure the evidences of organization. At the same time,
the variability of responses is also obscured, and a mech-
anical interpretation seems to be quite adequate. In psy-
chological experiments, however, the variability cannot
be concealed; if it were really possible to predict the
response from the stimulus there would be no problem. It
is easy for the psychologist to account for this variability
on the ground that the total stimulation is never the same,
but this argument leaves the problem of organization or
habit more inexplicable than ever. If the stimulus is never
twice the same, then the same response can never be
aroused twice; and it is true that in a descriptive sense
both of these statements are correct. It therefore follows
that all behavior must be characterized by a variability
corresponding to the variability of the stimulus.
Yet habit, in the sense of stability, is the major
phenomenon of behavior as we know it. In spite of the
variability of the stimulus, most persons continue to be-
have in much the same manner day after day and year
after year. In the effort to account for this stability, there-
fore, an attempt is made by the mechanist to divert our
1. From our standpoint the term "general factor” is ob-
jectionable not because it is opposed to the doctrine of
specificity (which we are presently to but be-
cause it presupposes a plurality of psychological units
similar to mental faculties. But a single general factor,
the personality, seems to be fully justified.


attention away from the essential points at issue. Stability
he says, is due to learning, and learning is a matter of
forming reaction patterns, whereupon he invites us to
attempt to trace these patterns and lose ourselves in the
complexity of possible central connections. If we follow
him, of course, we are lost indeed. But a machine is no
less mechanical because it is complicated. There must
be a stimulus to set off the reaction pattern, and we
stubbornly insist that it is impossible for a theory which
explains variability of behavior in terms of the stimulus
to explain stability also in the same terms.
The fact is that descriptively and mechanically,
there is no stability in behavior, and habits do not exist.
There is stability in respect to goals or results, but none
in respect to movement. Nothing even approximating an
action pattern can be observed except in those experiments
which limit the subject's freedom and obscure the varia-
tions, as when a rat negotiates the narrow passages of a
maze. To obtain an adequate body of evidence which deals
unequivocally with the problem of stability, we must find
it in the field of tests, a branch of psychology which is
almost bare of theoretical adornment. Here we may hope
for the first time to gain some genuine insight as to what
stability really means and how it may be achieved.
There are two methods of measuring the reliability of
a test, the re-test method and the split-half method. The
re-test method consists in simply giving the same test
twice, with a suitable interval between, and correlating
the test results. This gives a direct measure of the simi-
larity between the two performances, and a high correlation
is taken as satisfactory evidence that the test is well
constructed. The results are not greatly affected by im-
mediate circumstances and hence are dependable. But
there has always been some doubt regarding the theoretical


justification of the split-half method. It is used because
empirical studies show that the actual results of the two
methods are usually about the same.
The split-half method consists in dividing the test
into two equal parts, scoring each part separately, and
correlating them with one another. Why the coefficient
obtained should be so similar to that which is found
when the whole test is given at separate times is an in-
teresting question.
Let us remember that in every case a test merely
samples the subject’s information. It does not attempt
to discover everything he knows. But how shall we de-
cide whether the sample we have chosen is really a fair
test of what he has learned? Using the re-test method,
we answer, because the performance is stable. When a
large number of subjects behave in approximately the
same manner, on the same test at different times, there
is good reason to believe that the questions are testing
something important and significant. The odd feature
of the split-half method is that it can predict the sta-
bility of the test in advance, a priori, on only one trial.
It tells us something at once about a test which other-
wise we should have to wait for several weeks or months
to discover.
This astonishing fact has nevertheless excited very
little attention. The oversight is not due to lack of in-
terest in habit and stability, of course, but to the in-
terfering faith that habit is somehow a matter of move-
ment and mechanics. The more carefully we examine
the split-half procedure, however, the clearer it be-
comes that what we are really measuring is the degree
to which the subjects have organized the material, and
that this is what enables us to predict the stability of
the test.


Does not the very fact that we are able to test at all
by sampling presuppose that the student’s knowledge
of the subject matter constitutes an organized whole?
But in that case it is mistaken to believe that a test
measures specific responses to specific stimuli. It is
really testing something general; if it were not, in fact,
it would be worthless, for whether the subject can or
cannot answer a specific question would have no in-
terest for anyone. Moreover, we pay no attention to the
separate questions, but only to the total score. Actually,
a wholly different test might be constructed which in
terms of the score would give the same result. Many
tests come in several forms, and this is true not only
of subject matter tests but also of tests of intelligence.
Spearman’s two-factor theory has brought the problem of
specificity versus non-specificity into sharp focus. In
our view, however, specificity is not due to a special
factor, but to the fact that the material has not been com-
pletely organized, as Spearman himself seems to suggest
by his emphasis upon the importance pf seeing relation-
ships.
That educational psychology, whose whole interest
should lie in the development of meaningful relations,
nevertheless continues loyal to the doctrine of mechan-
ism, is another of those incredible facts which serve
as grist for our mill. What possibly could be the ex-
planation for such stupendous blindness except the sci-
entifically disloyal attempt to remain loyal to a mech-
anical scheme?
But our major interest here lies in the total organiza-
tion, as implied in the use of such terms as character,
style of life, or personality. It is our view that behavior
is usually "in character” not because the separate acts
are related to one another, but because all the acts of


an individual have the goal of maintaining the same
structure of values.
Since a response is the act of an individual, the
question of individual differences in motivation and at-
titude cannot possibly be avoided. Just as the same
situation will be evaluated differently when a person is
hungry, thirsty, or tired, its significance will also change
according to whether the subject is discouraged or op-
timistic about the problem which the situation presents.
This evaluation is not determined by the external stim-
ulation as such, but by the interpretation which the sub-
ject gives to the situation in consequence of learning
and experience, hence, as we shall see, in terms of its
ease of assimilation. The recognition of the organism
itself as a determiner is merely a tardy acknowledgment
of the very obvious fact that each individual evaluates
the world in his own terras. Subjectively, a situation pre-
sents and defines a dynamic problem, and both the na-
ture of the problem and the means of dealing with it de-
pend upon the subject himself as the most important fac-
tor. The fallacy of objective valuation in psychology is
an over-simplifying tendency similar in many respects
to statutory law. In both cases the attempt is made to
eliminate the question of motive by declaring it to be
of no consequence.
The chief opponents of organization in the field of
personality are Hartshorne and May, whose ingenious
studies of dishonesty and deceit have shown that cheat-
ing is not general but specific. If a child cheats in one
type of situation, this does not indicate that he will
cheat in a situation of different type, nor is failure
to cheat in the first situation any guide to what he will
do in the second. They conclude that a general factor
of honesty does not exist, and advance a generalization


which they call the doctrine of specificity.”
"According to this view,” say the authors, "a trait
such as honesty or dishonesty is an achievement like
ability in arithmetic, depending of course on native ca-
pacities of various kinds, but consisting in the achieved
skills and attitudes of more or less successful and uni-
form performance. ... An individual’s honesty or dis-
honesty consists of a series of acts and attitudes to
which these descriptive terms apply. The consistency
with which he is honest or dishonest is a function of the
situations in which he is placed. ... We interpret these
facts to mean that the consistency of the individual is a
function of the situation.”^
The practical conclusion drawn is that educators
should endeavor to eliminate the occasion for dishon-
esty, and provide more opportunities ” for the success-
ful use by both teachers and pupils of such forms of con-
duct as make for the common General training
in character seems a hopeless task, for the so-called
virtues are not unified traits but a logical classifica-
tion of separate acts which are psychologically unre-
lated and independent of one another.
The outlook is doubly pessimistic because there is
no assurance that transfer can be expected, even if the
pupils are exercised in honest forms of conduct. On the
contrary, the evidence seems to show that transfer de-
finitely cannot be expected, for even minor changes in
the situation, leaving an abundance of common elements
apparently still in operation, nevertheless give rise to
significant differences. The report says. "We interpret
1. Hugh Harts home and M.A. May, Studies in the Nature of
Character, vol. 1, ''Studies in Deceit," Book One, pp.379*64.
By permission of The Macmillan Company, publishers.
2. See compiler's explanatory note.


these differences to mean that even such slight changes
in the situation as (that) between crossing out A’s and
putting dots in squares are sufficient to alter the amount
of deception both in individuals and in groups. This
seems to mean that a major change in the situation, such
as that from school to office, would make the amount of
carry-over too insignificant to be worth the effort.
The main objective of the Hartshorne and May in-
vestigation was an attack upon personality traits as
psychological entities or faculties, an idea which the
authors have shown experimentally to be untenable. Yet
it seems to us that on the positive side they have swung
to the other extreme. The doctrine of specificity appears
to be as false and as unpsychological as the notion of
faculties. If every act is the function of a specific sit-
uation, then, since transfer is virtually negligible, and
since the same situation admittedly occurs but once, it
follows that behavior is not predictable at all. For if the
situation is unique, then the behavior which is depend-
ent upon it is also unique, and attempts at training would
merely multiply the number of unique acts performed. If
this were true, the hope of a science of psychology would
have to be abandoned, for a science which can make no
predictions is worthless. A general tendency toward either
honest or dishonest behavior there, sufficiently in-
dependent of the variability of the situation to furnish
some basis for prediction, is essential to justify the ex-
sistence of psychology, at any rate as a science of the
behavior of individuals. We agree that psychological traits
are not mental entities, but it does not follow by any
means that specificity is the only altemative.Confidence,
cooperation, optimism, and so on are not entities either,
and yet there are relationships present which show that
1. See compiler’s explanatory note.


the doctrine of specificity is equally indefensible.
The interpretation of a dishonest act as merely a
specific and isolated habit assumes, of course, that
habit itself is a valid principle of explanation. This
theory leaves out of account, however, the only fac-
tor that could possibly afford an explanation, since it
is the only one that is constant in all of the experi-
ments: that is, the personality itself. Yet it can scarcely
be denied that dishonest acts are motivated, and are
committed not because they are dishonest but because,
as the child interprets the situation, they are the best
means available for gaining ends that seem to him im-
portant. It would seem to be self-evident that our in-
terests should be directed not toward the acts them-
selves, but toward the children who perform them.
But if it be admitted that situations exist for which
no response has been prepared in advance, then the as-
sumption that the child is honest in a given situation
merely because he has been trained to be honest is not
complete unless we also assume that he is dishonest
when such training is lacking, i.e., that dishonesty is
fundamental and appears spontaneously unless pro-
vision is made against it. But this would mean that al-
though honesty is specific, dishonesty is non-specific.
Yet one or the other must be non-specific in any case,
or it would be necessary to assume that new or untrained
behavior does not occur at all. Thus the mechanistic
position either defeats itself logically or is forced to
take refuge in an absurdity.
A logically coherent explanation is obtained, how-
ever, if we assume that honesty is non-specific and
fundamental, and that the child is likely to be dis-
honest from his own point of view only when he faces
a specific emergency. Cheating, as a rule, is a substitute


means to an end employed on those occasions when other
and more honest means are likely to fail; the child knows
what is honest, but believes that the consequences of
honesty would prove to be too disturbing. The fact that
the tests of honesty were achievement tests, made under
competitive conditions, is from this standpoint the crucial
factor in the whole experiment. If the element of com-
petition were removed, there would be no emergency and
we daresay there would be no cheating. It is necessary
to recognize that a good mark in a competitive perfor-
mance gains its significance from the social setting, and
is bound up with the child's organization of values in
such a way that its subjective importance may be en-
hanced enormously. In that case,' if his preparation does
not enable him to gain the desired result by independent
accomplishment, he may turn momentarily to any means
that will solve his difficulty.
From this point of view it seems much more fruit-
ful to inquire as to specific causes of dishonesty, and
leave the explanation of honesty to the need for consis-
tent self-organization. As a matter of fact, the study in
question was concerned exclusively with deceit or dis-
honesty, although conclusions were drawn in regard to
honesty as well. In accepting the validity of the doc-
trine of specificity as applied to dishonesty, therefore,
we accept everything that has really been proved with-
out in any way injuring our claim that the principle is
invalid as applied to honesty. It is possible to train a
child to act dishonestly in specific situations, but not to
make him dishonest in general. Even professional crim-
inals tend to be specialists in only one type of crime.
The explanation of dishonesty as emergency be-
havior finds support also in the physiological evidence.
The physiological changes which accompany decep


tion, as reported by Larson, Marston, Chappell, and
others, are identical with those which Cannon finds as-
sociated with emotional states of fear and rage. In other
words, deception occurs characteristically in situations
which evoke the emergency type of emotional response,
and the emergency theory as stated by Cannon is ap-
plicable to both phenomena.
The specificity of dishonesty is like that of illness;
illness can be explained in analytic terms, but health
cannot. In the same way, abnormal behavior must be ap-
proached analytically, but an explanation of normal be-
havior in specific terms is impossible. Descriptively,
however, the individual's efforts to avoid disorganiza-
tion stand out more forcibly and vividly, and force them-
selves upon our attention, while the evidences of an
undisturbed organization are so common and obvious
that they remain unnoticed. This makes it clear why de-
scriptive psychology is so unproductive of principles
that can be used as tools of thought. In asserting that
the stimulus alone controls behavior, it must endeavor
to explain customary and emergency phenomena, sick-
ness and health, normality and abnormality, honesty and
dishonesty, all in the same terms. A one-sided explana-
tion based on exceptions instead of on the rule is there-
fore its constant danger.
Like other investigations based on the stimulus-
response viewpoint, the deception experiment is not a
study of children, but of records of children’s test per-
formances. It is conceivable that the experimenters never
became acquainted with any of the children concerned.
Certainly they were not familiar with their customary
behavior, their individual histories, or their present prob-
1. See W, B. Cannon, Bodily Changes in Pain , Hunger , Fear,
and Rage (Appleton, N.Y., 1929)*


lems. The interpretation of what these records mean,
therefore, has nothing to do with the child as he really
is, for that has not been studied, but only with the mech-
anistic assumptions that are made about him. The chief
of these is the belief that, given this set of stimuli, the
child was obliged to respond as he actually did respond.
The organism is conceived as a machine which is free
to move at any moment in one direction only. The direc-
tion is determined not by the child, but by the incoming
stimuli acting as
of course, there is no need to study the child, for we
know enough about him already; but there is also no need
to perform experiments. If the child is controlled by stimu-
li, then the conclusion that his behavior is "a function
of the situation” is no discovery. No other conclusion is
possible, whatever the results; nor can it be changed by
multiplying experiments. The outcome is guaranteed by
the assumption which we make. The only conditions
which would bring about a refutation of the assumption
wouldbe the discovery that the circumstances had nothing
to do with cheating; either the child would cheat at every
opportunity, or never cheat under any conditions. Honesty
would be an all or none affair, and every child either a
saint or a criminal.
1. It must be understood that our intention in opposing this
belief is to emphasize not the idea of freedom, but the idea
of self-activity. The conception of free will, even as a pos-
sibility, betrays a preoccupation with anything save real in-
dividuals. Every real individual must exist in an equally real
environment, and it is readily seen that the problem of self-
maintenance cannot be self-determined, but is set for the in-
dividual by the environment. Our departure from the mechan-
istic position consists in the attempt to understand the de-
tails of behavior not as forced movements, but as motivated
acts.


The subjective evidence reported by Hartshorne and
May seems to support the emergency theory which we
have proposed, while the objective evidence leads to
the doctrine of specificity. The children were asked to
explain why they cheated, and "almost half of those who
answered the questions at all said that they cheated be-
cause the test was too hard. The next most frequent rea-
son given is ’to stand high,’ which is similar to the first.
Putting these two together, we have two-thirds of these
cases admitting that they cheated in order to do well on
the test.”
From numerous similar references, it seems to us
that the doctrine of specificity is by no means the only
interpretation of the Hartshorne and May results, but
simply the automatic consequence of the mechanistic
viewpoint. The doctrine of specificity does not explain
why dull, retarded, and emotionally unstable children,
and those who suffer from social and economic handi-
caps, were found to cheat more frequently than others.
But these facts fit the emergency theory perfectly. The
doctrine of specificity does not explain why deception
runs in families, by gangs, and by classrooms, and why
it is less in situations which are characterized by co-
operation and good will. It does not explain why even
the authors themselves employ such expressions as
"total character” and "self-organization.” We believe,
in a word, that the doctrine of specificity is not sup-
ported by the full range of the data, but only by the parts
which have been obtained by the objective method under
competitive conditions.
*We quote here a somewhat similar criticism by G.
W. Allport. He says. "Some investigators have argued
against 'general factors’ in personality on the grounds
of experimental work with such problems as deceit (Hart


shome and May), speed (Dowd), confidence (Trow), ac-
curacy (Hartmann). The fallacy in this argument rests
in confusing social with psychological concepts. It is
society and not the nervous system which is responsible
for such general concepts as 'deceit.' Of course, no boy
deceives in every possible situation. But because he de-
ceives, for example, in his arithmetic lessons and not at
spelling, there is no argument for saying that general
dispositions in personality do not exist. His arithmetic
may have been a source of failure with consequent feeling
of inferiority and fear of punishment. Seen in this light, a
thoroughly meaningful relationship obtains between this
conative system and the habit of cheating at arithmetic.
Every personality shows such congruence on a high level,
but statistical techniques which omit the motives and the
meaning of behavior cannot reveal such congruence.
Statistical methods need to give a more generous place
to the interpretative study of the values by which the
personality orients itself. *
The main scientific issue at stake in the controversy
is the predictability of behavior. Our position is that pre-
dictability is a function of stability and therefore of the
basic need for consistent self-organization. Among those
students of human nature who depend upon the method of
general observation for their understanding and insight,
the relationship between honesty and a self-consistent
mode of behavior is a persistent affirmation. Shakes-
peare writes:
**To thine own self be true.
And it must follow , as the night the day t
Thou const not then he false to any man.**
1. Gordon W. Allport, "The Study of Personality by the In-
tuitive Method," Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology ,
vol. XXIV (1929*30), p. lon. By permission of the American
Psychological Association, Princeton, N.J.


This view of the matter seems so natural that we find
it imbedded in language itself, for the words employed
to describe desirable "traits” of character are precisely
those in which the idea of stability is expresses. Ex-
amples of such words include "upright,” "strong,”
"sound,” "square,” "true,” "reliable,” etc. In the same
manner, undesirable traits are expressed by words which
reflect instability, such as "false,” "crooked,” "trea-
cherous,” etc. Indeed our whole civilization rests upon
the successful prediction of how individuals will usually
behave. Mutual confidence in such predictions is the in-
dispensable foundation of economic stability. The ex-
tension of credit would be a foolhardy gamble if the chances
of honest and dishonest behavior were even remotely com-
parable; and if contracts were as likely to be broken as
respected, there would be no intelligent reason for mak-
ing them.
The doctrine of specificity is, we repeat, itself a
prediction that behavior relationships are unpredictable.
We can submit the question to experimental test. When
applied to the items on the inventory, specificity would
mean that a given answer bore no relation to other ans-
wers, and furnished no hint of what performance might
be expected on the rest of the inventory. We have there-
fore taken a number of questions, selected from all of
the categories, and in each case compared the averages
of those students who gave a negatively scored answer
with the averages of those who did not. It .is evident
that a difference in answering even one question enables
us to predict with confidence that the two groups will
differ in the same direction on every category. The com-
parisons follow.


(i) Do
you m
ix with
other
students
easily?
No.
Av.
Score
Conf.
Coop.
Opt.
Fam,
Sex
Work
Nerv.
Phys
Yes 391
31.1
8.5
2.7
3.3
3.1
4.3
3.7
3.4
2.0
No 109
51.5
16.1
4.6
5.75
4.1
6.2
6.0
5.5
3.3
Mi)
Do you feel pretty confident
accept you as an equal?
Av.
that your classmates
No.
Score
Conf. Coop. Opt. Fan.
Sex Work
Nerv. Phys
Yes 459
33.5
9.5 2.9 3.6 3.2
4.5 4.0
3.7 2.1
No 41
58.3
17.3 5.6 7.0 4.3
6.5 6.9
6.2 4.4
(iii)
Can
you stand kidding?
Av.
No.
Score
Conf.
Coop.
Opt.
Fan.
Sex
Work
Nerv.
Phys
Yes 465
34.3
9.8
3.0
3.7
3.1
4.5
4.1
3.8
2.2
No 35
51.5
15.
5.2
5.6
4.7
6.6
5.5
5.3
3.7
(iv)
Do you feel slightly anagonistic
majority of people you meet?
A ..
toward
the
No.
/I V ■
Score Con/.
Coop. Opt. Fast, Sex
fork
Nerv. Phys
Yes 410
33.3 9.7
2.6 3.7 3.0 4.6
4.0
3.6 2.1
No 90
45.6 12.3
5.4 4.7 4.4 5.2
5.1
5.2 3.3
(V)
Are there many people that you dislike
Av.
intensely?
No.
Score Conf, Coop. Opt
. Fam. Sex Work
Nerv. Phys
Yes 469
34.3 9.9 2.9 3.7
3.1 4.6 4.1
3.8 2.2
No 31
53.4 13.0 6.7 5.9
5.6 6.5 6.1
5.6 4.0
Social Confidence:
Cooperation:


(Vi)
Are you
A v,
troubled with feel
ings
of inferiority?
No.
Score
Conf. Coop. Opt.
Fam.
Sex Work Nerv.
Phys
No 383
29.5
8.3 2.7 2.8
2.8
4.2 3.4 3.2
1.9
Yes 117
55.4
16.0 4.4 7.3
4.7
6.4 6.8 6.1
3.6
(Vii)
Do you
get discouraged easily?
Av.
No.
Score
Conf. Coop. Opt
. Fan.
Sex
Work
Nerv. Phys
No 431
31.6
9.2 2.8 3.1
3.1
4.4
3.5
3.5 2.0
Yes 69
59.7
16.0 5.0 8.9
4.5
6.3
8.6
6.2 4.3
(vi i i)
Do you
i often
feel just miserable?
Av.
No.
Score
Con/.
Coop. Opt.
Fan.
Sex
Work
Nerv.
Phys
No 411
31.2
9.2
2.7 2.9
3.0
4.4
3.7
3.3
2.0
Yes 89
55.3
14.4
5.8 8.2
4.6
5.8
6.5
6.5
4.1
(ix)
Were your parents partial
to
any of
your
brothers
No.
or sisters?
Av.
Score Conf. Coop
. Opt.
Fam.
Sex
Work
Nerv. Phys
No 426
34.1 10.0 2.9
3.7
2.8
4.6
4.0
3.7 2.3
Yes 74
43.6 11.0 4.4
4.8
5.9
5.0
5.2
4.7 2.6
(X)
Did you
have a
happy childhood?
.
No.
Score
Conf.
Coop.
Op t. Fam.
Sex
Work
Nerv. Phys
Yes 460
33.9
9.9
2.9
3.6 2.9
4.6
4.1
3.7 2.1
No 40
54.1
12.2
5.2
7.4 7.4
5.5
5.8
6.1 4.5
Optimism
Family:


(Xi)
Is your
home
environment
h«PPy?
Av,
No.
Score
Con/.
Coop.
Opt.
Fam. Sex
Work
Nerv.
Phya
Yes 437
33.6
9.9
2.9
3.6
2.6 4.7
4.1
3.7
2.2
No 63
48.6
11.6
5.0
5.9
7.9 4.6
5.2
5.0
3.3
(xi i)
Looking toward the
future, do you expect to have
No.
chiIdren?
Av.
Score Conf.
Coop.
Opt.
Fa n.
Sex
Pork
Nerv. Phys
Yes 465
34.1 9.7
3.0
3.7
3.2
4.3
4.1
3.8 2.2
No 35
55.0 15.3
5.1
5.7
3.7
9.7
5.7
5.5 4.1
(xiii) Do you expect to get married?
No.
A v.
Score Conf. Coop.
Opt. Fas i. Sex
Work
Nerv. Phys
Yes
471
34.3 9.9 3.0
3.7 3.2 4.4
4.1
3.8 2.2
No
29
54.8 14.5 4.9
6.1 4.2 9.9
6.2
5.1 3.8
(Xi v)
Do you think you
are less attractive than other
boys (or girls)?
Av .
No.
Score Conf. Coop
. Opt.
Fam. Sex Work
Nerv. Phy*.
No
393
31.7 9.1 2.8
3.4
3.0 4.0 3.8
3.5 2.0
Yes
109
51.5 16.1 4.6
5.7
4.1 6.2 6.0
5.5 3.3
(xv)
Are you
considered lazy?
Av.
No.
Score
Conf. Coop
. Opt.
Fam.
Sex
Work
Nerv. Phyt
No 455
34.0
9.8 3.0
3.7
3.1
4.6
3.8
3.7
2.2
Yes 45
51.4
13.3 4.8
5.4
4.7
5.7
8.3
5.6
3.6
Sex
Work;


(xv i)
Does
criticism disturb you badly?
No.
AV .
Score Con/. Coop . Opt
. Fast.
Sex
Work
Nerv.
Phys
No 442
32.3
9.2 2.9 3.4
3.1
4.4
3.7
3.6
2.1
Yes 5*
59.8
17.6 5.2 7.4
4.6
6.6
8.3
6.3
3.9
(xv i i)
Are you in general
aelf-confident
about
your
No.
abilitiea?
A v,
Score Conf. Coop.
Opt.
Fam.
Sex
Fork
Nerv.
Phys
Yes 414
32.2 9.1 3.0
3.3
3.1
4.5
3.5
3.6
2.2
No 86
51.6 15.2 3.8
6.8
4.1
5.6
7.7
5.3
3.2
(xvi i
i) Do
you have trouble deciding what to.do next?
No.
Av.
Score
Conf. Coop, Opt. Fam.
Sex Work
Nerv. Phys
No 431
32.1
9.2 2.9 3.4 3.2
4.4 3.5
3.4 2.0
Kes 69
57.2
15.7 4.6 7.1 4.0
6.2 R.7
.6.6 4.2
(xix) Are you frequently worried aboil religion?
Av.
No. Score Conf. Coop. Opt. Fam. Sex Work Nerv.
Phys
No 433 33.8
9.8 3.0 3.7 3.1
4.5
4.1 3.4
2.2
Yes 67 46.5
12.2 3.7 5.2 4.3
5.7
5.0 6.9
3.4
(xx) Does
it make you uneasy to
have
to cross a
No.
wide
Av.
Score
street or open square?
Con/. Coop. Opt. Fan.
Sex
Work
Nerv.
Phys
No
450
33.5
9.6 3.0 3.6 3.2
4.5
3.9
3.5
2.1
Yes
50
50.8
15.0 3.8 6.2 4.2
6.0
6.6
7.4
4.5
(xx i) Does i t make you uneasy to s i t
with the door shut?
in a
smal 1
room
No.
Score Conf. Coop, Opt.
Fam
. Sex
'Fork
Nerv.
Phys
No 475
34.5 9.9 3.1 3.7
3.2
4.6
4.1
3.7
2.2
Yes 25
54.8 13.8 4.0 7.4
5.0
5.6
6.6
8.1
4.2
Nervous Symptoms:


(xxi i)
Are you frequently bothered by indigestion?
A v.
No.
Score Conf. Coop.
Opt. Fam.
Sex Work Nerv. Phys
No 485
34.6 10.0 3.0
3.7 3.1
4.7 4.1 3.7 2.2
y«s 15
64.9 14.7 6.9
8.1 7.5
5.5 7.6 8.5 6.0
(xxi i i
) Do you usually feel fatigued when
you
wake up
in the morning?
Av.
No.
Score Conf.
Coop.
Opt.
Fam,
Sex
fork
Nerv. Phys
No 455
33.6 9.8
2.9
3.6
3.1
4.6
4.0
3.6 1.9
Yes 45
55.3 13.8
5.2
6.4
4.8
6,0
6.2
6.6 6.1
(xxivj
i Are you physically inferior
to your associates?
Av.
No.
Score
Conf. Coop. Opt. Fam.
Sex
(Fork Nerv, Phys
No
441
33.0
9.6 2,9 3.5 3.1
4.5
3.9 3.6 1.9
Yes
59
54.1
14.2 4.9 6.5 4.5
5.9
6.6 6.0 5.5
Physical Symptoms:
Thus we are able, on the basis of a difference in
answering a given question, to predict that the two
groups will differ consistently in the same direction in
each of the remaining categories.
The problem raised by these consequences is vastly
broader than the adequate interpretation of a single group
of experiments. The main question is, what alterations
are called for in the first principles which underlie our
scientific philosophy. When we realize that the Hart-
shome and May character inquiry is often cited as a
model of psychological technique, the disappointing re-
sults obtained may be taken as illustrative of what is
to be expected in all cases from a purely descriptive


We now propose to enter upon this larger
question.
1. The need for a reexamination of the conceptions now gen-
erally accepted may be evidenced by the fact that Hartshorne
and May themselves appear to be dissatisfied with the theo-
retical position which their results have forced upon them. In
the later volumes of the report, the discussion turns more and
more to problems of motivation and integration, and the doc-
trine of specificity to which the authors have committed them-
selves begins to appear rather as a handicap than a help. It
cannot be abandoned, however, because in a descriptive sense
it is unquestionably true, and they are caught in a trap that, it
seems to us, inevitably awaits the scientist who hope& to be
consistent and positivistic at the same time. The ineffectual
struggle to escape may be illustrated by the following passage
in Volume 111, "Studies in the Organization of Character'’
(Macmillan, N. Y., 1930), P« 2: "In dealing specifically with
human lituktions and responses, we have by no means implied
that character consists in an algebraic sum of specific positive
and negative tendencies. We have held open such considera-
tions, recognizing the propriety of the theory that there may be
an empirical organization of various tendencies among them-
selves and in relation to some general purpose or attitude which
does not consist of the mere sum of its parts."




CHAPTER VI
THE PERSONALITY AS A SCIENTIFIC CONCEPT
•’The synthetic method by which we
buildup from its own symbolic elements
a world which will imitate the actual
behavior of the world of familiar experi-
ence is adopted almost universally in
scientific theories.”
—Eddington
While the study of character would of course be worth-
less unless it were based on carefully established facts,
it is also apparent that the facts alone do not furnish
their own illumination. The central scientific problem,
therefore, is manifestly interpretation. The progress of
science depends not so much on new facts as on new
ideas, but psychology still defends the position that
facts are sufficient in themselves. ’’The aim of all sci-
ence,” says May, ”is the adequate description of the
subject matter with which it deals. The criterion of ad-
equacy may be anything you like, but it is usually pre-
diction and control.” The identification of science with
description is a phenomenon not only curious but im-
portant, for it is probably the most costly error into
which psychology has fallen. It rests on the assumption
that the stimulus is the determinant of the organism's
behavior, and hence, that a mechanical connection holds
of which description can inform us directly.
This mechanistic theory, of course, is itself an in-
terpretation, though it was not developed in reference
to psychological data, but was taken over from classical
physics in the effort to keep psychology consistent with


the scientific viewpoint as a whole. In physics, however,
the most authoritative of all the sciences in general
theory, the possibility of a direct step from description
to prediction is now in fact denied. The only exception
is in the statistical prediction of averages, a method
based on the expected repetition of past performances
and dealing with masses of units, but useless for pre-
dieting the behavior of individual units. Representing
the contemporary developments in physics, Jeans says
it is now believed that "there is no determinism in events
in which atoms and electrons are involved singly, and
that the apparent determinism in large-scale events is
only of a statistical nature. When we are dealing with
atoms and electrons in crowds, the mathematical law
of averages imposes the determinism which physical
laws have failed to provide. ... We are compelled to
start afresh. Our difficulties have all arisen from our
initial assumption that everything in nature, and waves
of light in particular, admitted of mechanical explanation:
we tried in brief to treat the universe as a huge machine.
As this has led us into a wrong path, we must look for
some other guiding principle."
Are we not therefore deceiving ourselves in trying
to keep our psychology consistent with a mechanistic
physics the limits of whose application have proved it
irrelevant to our proper task?
The current definition of psychology as "the study
of behavior" is as meaningless as a science of physics
described as "the study of motion." What is meant, of
course, is the behavior of organisms, but if the organ-
1. Sir James Jeans, The Mysterious Universe, edition of
1930 (Cambridge Univ. Press, England). By permission
of The Macmillan Company, publishers, U.S.


ism is the unit, and we study it descriptively, we thereby
suppress the integral character of the behavior itself.
By way of illustration, let us consider the behavior-
istic concepts of •'avoidance” and "approach.” These
are acceptable objective terms. It will be necessary to
point out at once, however, that in addition to the fact
that avoidance and approach have nothing to do with in-
trospection, it is equally certain that they do not accord
with the descriptive principles of behavioristic or stim-
ulus-response psychology.
Neither approach nor avoidance cam be described
in terms of bodily movement, but only in terms of di-
rection. The actual behavior of the subject may be either
reaching, walking, running, jumping, climbing, swimming,
using tools, opening doors, talking, or any other act with-
in his behavior repertory. The only constant factor in the
performance is the maintenance of reference toward the
goalthe subject is striving to teach. All notions of action
patterns and specific neural pathways become meaning-
less in view of the fact that the movements themselves
reveal no pattern. The so-called patterns observed in
the solution of problem boxes and mazes are mere il-
lusions and artifacts brought about by the exclusion
of other alternatives. A prearranged direction is imposed
on the animal by the conditions of the experiment, and
then when he discovers and follows that direction, his
behavior is described as an action pattern. The same
restriction that is placed upon the animal has so re-
stricted our own understanding that we have taken this
made-to-order phenomenon, which would instantly vanish
under natural conditions, and made it the very corner-
stone of our psychological theory.
A motor pattern is meaningless except in terms of
a line of direction toward a goal. But if the separate


acts are themselves treated as units, we lose sight not
only of the organism as a whole, but what is even more
important, of the unity of the behavior itself.
Many writers use the terms positive and negative
behavior interchangeably for approach and avoidance.
In the use of such terms there is clearly implied an as-
sumption that movement may follow either of two dif-
ferent lines, one toward and one away from a given point
of reference. Some situations induce approach, others
induce avoidance. It is obviously of the highest impor-
tance, from the standpoint of integration, to determine
whether such a classification of behavior is logically
justifiable.
Avoidance and approach express nothing more than
a change of spatial relations. It is not true that avoid-
ance is the name for one mode of behavior and approach
the name for another. Far from being mutually exclusive,
either term applies to any line of movement. One ob-
server may think of the subject as running away from
danger, but another may see the same behavior as run-
ning toward security. There is no choice between the
descriptions, for both are equally true. A horse frightened
by fire runs into the fire, away from the noise and con-
fusion where he stands, but toward the familiar stall
which in his experience spells security. The pangs of
hunger drive us to seek food, and the dread of lone-
liness impels us to search for a familiar face. The pur-
pose of the subject is not to approach or avoid, but mere-
ly to preserve his own integrity; the direction of the
behavior, toward or away from the stimulus which we
choose as point of reference, is in either case to be un-
derstood as the spatial aspect of a movement from a dis-
equilibrated condition toward one of equilibrium. The
organism itself has one purpose only.


The notion that some behavior should be classified
as avoidance and some as approach is therefore due en-
tirely to the failure to see the act as a whole. Neither
classification is strictly accurate, for if disequilibrium
spells avoidance and equilibrium spells approach, then
obviously both are present jointly. The same activity is
given two names because attention is directed to each
aspect separately.
The very fact that approach and avoidance are still
terms in common use, however, demonstrates that the
act as a whole in many cases is extremely hard to dis-
cern. Though its evidences are constantly visible as
movements, the dynamic process or tendency itself is
evident only when viewed in its entirety as a unit.
The point is that behavior is a story with a plot, and
the main duty of the psychologist is to discover that plot
and objectify it and fit it into the scientific scheme.
Otherwise, if we insist upon dealing with isolated inci-
dents only, our role becomes that of mere photographers
and mechanics. Since the latter course concerns itself
only with superficial details, naturally it is not at-
tended by the difficulties and uncertainties which go
with the latter task of explanation. But as a matter of
fact we have no choice but to perform this larger task. *
The conception of behavior as unified by reference
to a single purpose, namely, as die organism’s attempt to
maintain its own organization, is not a description of the
behavior which we are able to observe. On the contrary,
the purpose which unifies the behavior is not observable,
but is a creative condensation of the observed behavior,
an instrumentality which we employ in order to make the
1. We shall occasionally use the terms positive and ne-
?;ative in discussing conflict, as convenient designations
or opposed lines of action which may be attempted sim-
ultaneously, but the terms in that sense are relative
rather than absolute.


behavior intelligible to ourselves. Every science actually
has employed such creative condensations at every stage
of its development. Bacon’s assumption that the facts will
generate their own explanation if we gather enough of
them has failed to justify itself; the forward step has
always waited until the appearance of a unifying hypo-
thesis. But the biological sciences, suffering from in-
coherence and endlessly deploring their lack of integra-
ting conceptions, at the same time discourage creative
thinking and naively wait for the answers to their prob-
lems to be revealed by further observations.
Everyone would agree that the scientific notions of
the ancients, such as the cosmologies of Pythagoras and
Ptolemy, were the outcome of human creativeness. No
one would think of arguing otherwise today, for these
conceptions have now been superseded and have lost
their useful function. Indeed, the inadequacy of these
early efforts when Judged by present standards would
probably be accepted by many as the strongest proof of
their human origin. But more perfect systems also mist
be recognized as creations. Newton’s cosmology has
been found inadequate and replaced by that df Einstein,
and Einstein’s in turn will probably be superseded also.
Thus the view that scientific progress is merely a mat-
ter of continuous factual discoveries has the effect of
discouraging precisely the sort of thinking that is most
necessary in scientific wprk. Empirical facts can in the
end serve only as the raw material of science; in them-
selves, until they have been worked over interpreta-
tively, they are useless.
Until quite recently, it is true, creative productions
in the scientific field seem to have been regarded as ob-
jective discoveries even by their creators. If, as seems
probable, the illusion of objective reality was actually


demanded of scientific creations, we may then have the
historical key to explain the small role which psychology
has played in the scientific advance. For the concept of
mind or personality is incapable of being disguised as an
objective discovery, and hence could be attacked by its
critics as a fiction of the imagination, as indeed, in a
sense, it was. In order to avoid conflict with the other
sciences, therefore, psychology was required to abjure
the creative approach, and its development was retarded
as a consequence.
For the goal of psychology as a pure science is the
progressive development of a conceptual picture of the
personality itself. Actually, the concept of the person-
ality has made considerable progress in psychology al-
ready, forcing itself forward on its merits in spite of the
handicap of inconsistency with the descriptive point of
view. It has so entrenched itself, indeed, that we cannot
do without it. Even textbooks written from the objective
standpoint usually have a chapter on personality regard-
less of earlier chapters on sense organs, neurones, mus-
cles and glands. Yet no one attempts to describe the
personality in such terms, or to analyze it into cells,
tissues and organs, even though it is identified with "the
organism as a whole." We even listen respectfully to dis-
cussions of personality traits—introversion and extro-
version, ascendance and submission, intelligence, pug-
nacity, cooperation, native abilities, inferiority com-
plexes and what not. Dynamic psychology, so-called,
would be almost inarticulate without such a concept. In
experimental psychology, however, or in technical dis-
cussions which relate to scientific method, such recog-
nition is denied for the reason that the concept does not
refer to an observable entity.


But although the notion of a science dealing with a
subject matter not directly observable must have seemed
incomprehensible in the nineteenth century, when the
present traditions of psychology were established, it
does not follow that those traditions are appropriate for
the twentieth century. The more progressive sciences,
notably astronomy and physics, are passing into a new
developmental stage which has gained momomentum pre-
cisely in proportion as the old traditions were scrapped.
They have parted company with the literalism of classi-
cal physics and achieved a spirit of creativeness, of
self-reliance and freedom of thought which is fortunately
contagious. In the new scientific era now beginning we
venture to say that psychology will modify rather than
reject its earlier definition as the study of the psyche,
and will study openly and without apology the problem
of dynamic organization which always has been its chief
concern.
A scientific system is always the result of creative
activity rather than of factual discovery. The only dis-
covery involved is that of how well or how poorly the
system organizes the factual observations into a co-
herent and self-consistent whole. The problem is to put
meaning into experience, to organize our notions in re-
lation to experience. If this is true, then the hope of er-
ecting a science of psychology on the basis of descrip-
tion alone is a misconception of the task which will ac-
tually prevent such a science from developing. The
function of description is limited to the presoitation of
a continuous series of new facts to be organized, of new
complications to be provided for. In this sense it is a
fundamental condition for any genuine scientific achieve-
ment. Description states the problem and limits the solu-
tion, but we cannot have a solution unless we have a


problem to begin with. The solution is made in reference
to the descriptive data which limit the solution. It is
this feature of scientific method which distinguishes
science from metaphysics. Yet psychology seems to
persist in the assumption that description alone can make
a science. A number of instances may be cited in which
it can be shown that additional descriptive facts or pre-
dicates have even been turned into general principles
and treated as if they had explanatory value.
Let us select some illustrations at random. One of
the most familiar examples is the so-called law of exer-
cise. Because the subject must usually attack a problem
several times before he can be regarded as having solved
or learned it, the repetition itself is offered as an expla-
nation. Thorndike, Watson, Woodworth, Hunter, most of
the other textbook writers and the majority of educational
psychologists seem to regard the law of exercise as the
primary principle in learning, even though they recog-
nize that it is not the only principle. The synapse theory
on which it rests has been demolished experimentally
by lashley, and its theoretical critics are nunerous, but
there it stands nevertheless. Dunlap’s insistence that
the evidence shows no relationship between repetition
and learning seems to be regarded as an interesting argu-
ment that psychologists should know about but no one
seems to feel that such an attack is a challenge.
We can imagine the descriptive psychologist answer-
ing that after all repetition is an observable fact, and
that nothing can be done about facts except to accept
them. But this misses the point; we must accept facts
as facts, but there is certainly no compulsion to accept
facts as explanations unless they really explain some-
thing.


Another example is found in the use of tests. Let us
say that a child is deficient in arithmetic and we wish
to discover the reason. Tests disclose that he fails on a
variety of specific problems, such as carrying in addi-
tion, dividing when zeros occur in the divisor, and so on.
Instead of explaining the child's deficiency, however, the
result of the testing merely tells us wherein he is defi-
cient. Manifestly, he cannot be deficient because he makes
certain mistakes, for making mistakes and being de-
ficient are the same thing.
Let questions be given which supposedly are tests of
intelligence, and the same reasoning is found. Fail-
ures cannot be explained as due to low intelligence, for
low intelligence and failure on the tests are equivalent
by definition. Thus in the end we have the discovery
that children are deficient because they are specifically
deficient, and unintelligent because they are specifically
unintelligent. Intelligence tests are validated by cor-
relation with school grades or with other tests similarly
validated, although the higher the correlation which sup-
ports the validity the clearer it becomes that the infor-
mation is essentially identical, and that the test is mere-
ly a standardized method of statement substituted for a
method that is not standardized.
This is as far as description can go. The real rea-
son why children are deficient or unintelligent we do
not offer to explain, except to appeal to heredity. Oc-
casionally a deficient child, after special attention or
changing from one school to another, will show marked
improvement, but since the majority of children fail to
respond to such treatment the exceptions are overlooked.
The information obtained by tests is valuable perhaps
for practical purposes, but the ideal of a scientific sys-
tem has been forgotten. We have a psychometrics, but


we look in vain for a systematic psychology.
Just as there is no theory of intelligence or of learn-
ing, likewise there is no adequate theory of forgetting
in spite of innumerable memory experiments, no real
theory of thinking, no theory of consciousness; in short,
no explanatory principles at all to bring coherence into
our psychological labors. And the reason seems to be
that we are naively waiting for the answer to be re-
vealed by more facts. But is it not self-evident that
more facts will simply furnish more problems to be sol-
ved, that all these phenomena are interrelated, and that
the unifying conception needed to bring the facts into
meaningful relation with one another must be a creative
contribution independent of this or that specific ob-
servation?
No one has ever seen an atom, and physicists assure
us that no one ever will. It is an invention, a creation,
or, as Vaihinger would say, a fiction. But it makes no
difference that the atom is not an observable fact, for
the atomic conception has enabled man to arrange the
observed phenomena of physics into an organized re-
lationship. While we agree entirely with Watson that
psychology must travel the same path as the older sci-
ences, it by no means follows that the mind or person-
ality is an unscientific concept merely because we can-
not see it in a test tube. The use of conceptual units
defined according to the function they perform, far from
being contrary to science, is the scientific conditio sine
qua non.
The concept of the personality is an attempt to deal
in an organized way with all of the activities produced by
a single organism. We do not mean that an organizing
mind within the subject is a necessary inference from
organized behavior, as is sometimes argued.(That step


would involve us in the problem of reification.*) In our
view we do not know, and fundamentally do not care, why
the subject behaves as he does. But we most decidedly
care about our inability to predict what he is likely to do
next, and the concept of mind is created by us in the effort
to resolve our own difficulties. It is an essential tool to
think with, a means devised by the reasoner to assist his
reasoning, and for our purposes that fact is sufficient; it
is more necessary to think than to know, especially since
it is obvious that we shall never know without thinking.
It may be that philosophy aims at knowledge, but science
is satisfied with prediction and control.
The behavioristic movement has performed a useful
service in attacking the introspective method, but in at-
tacking mind as a concept it has placed itself in a dilem-
ma, for it must either abandon its opposition to intangible
conceptions or else admit that it is out of touch with the
scientific program in general. Introspectionism is not un-
scientific because it is non-mechanistic, for the phil-
osophic basis of behaviorism and introspectionism, as
Kohler has pointed out, is the same. Its real defect is
that it has thrown no light on the organization of behavior,
and hence does not assist us in making psychological pre-
dictions.
The negation of the concept of mind, however, has
the effect of forcing the positive assumption that psy-
chological problems are not as complex as they seem to
be. The consequence is that the theories which are ac-
tually used in the attempt to explain the behavior of or-
ganisms possess a degree of simplicity to be found in
no other science. How easy the task of the physicist if
he could develop a formula for atomic behavior as un-
complicated as the formula of stimulus-response which
the biological sciences apply to organismic behavior:
•Regarding an abstraction, a mental construction, as a
thing.


If we wonder then why psychology is at once the most
controversial and the least productive of the natural
sciences, the answer seems to be that it has virtually
abandoned its real task and turned its back on its own
subject matter. And yet, on the other hand, if a men-
talistic psychology had been proposed even a few de-
cades ago, it would probably have been so bitterly at-
tacked by mechanistic physiology and biology that it
could not have survived.
Woodworth remarks that humanity has been engaged
upon the problem of conceptualization since the be-
ginning, "though not always with a thoroughly object-
ive slant."
That is just the point. The essential objectivity of
science does not lie in its methods, but in its purpose
of prediction and control. It is objective because it is
useful, because it aims at results, not because it is
descriptive and literal. For that reason the test of ob-
jectivity is found in consistency and inclusiveness; the
truly objective concept must aim to organize all of the
phenomena, experimental, clinical, and observational.
The method, any method, is scientific in this sense if
prediction is the consequence, and unscientific if it is
not.
In our opinion, we have to build a wholly new psy-
chology, as different from the old as modern physics is
different from Newtonian mechanism. Just as the new
physics has given form to the ancient concept of the
atom, so the new psychology must give form to the still
older concept of mind or personality. If form belongs to
art, then let us endeavor to be artists. Nor should we
be surprised if all scientific creations resemble one an-
other in the style of their workmanship, since they are
not only symbolic representations of so-called external
events, but arrangements to serve our human need for
self-consistency.




CHAPTER VII
THE STRUCTURE OF THE PERSONALITY
Great as the need may be, actually to attempt to put
forward a conceptualization of the personality is a ha-
zardous undertaking. There are two reasons for this. In
the first place, at this stage of its development the con-
ception can be little more than a sketch, an attempt to
draw an outline. Evaluated in isolation from the problem
at which it is aimed, it will seem to many to be so spec-
ulative as to be useless. But the task at present is not
to defend, but simply to present the conception as we
see it.
The second reason is that a new conception is seldom
considered strictly on its merits in relation to the ob-
jective problem, but is likely to be regarded as rather a
disturbance of the status quo. The fact that the mechanist
must give up the conception around which his ideas are
organized at present before he can accept a new concep-
tion, and the certainty that he will resist the task of re-
organization until convinced of its absolute necessity,
together constitute a difficulty which it would be folly
to minimize.
Nevertheless we still have before us the fundamental
problem of first principles. We have tried to solve it by
means of concepts borrowed from classical physics, and
the effort has led to incoherence and increasing conflict.
What shall we do? Could there possibly be any answer
except to stop borrowing and think for oufselves, create
our own conceptions, develop our own science? And if
we accept this task we must do our best to go through
with it. We are obliged to be ideologists because there
is no other way of. classifying the behavior of a single
individual except teleologically, and we are bound to
classify before we can organize, and hence before we can


think. We are not concerned with the nature of the universe,
but with the problem of prediction and control in the field
of psychology itself.
Let us begin our presentation by noticing the rela-
tionships involved in the assimilation of food. To the
infant especially, food fs a problem; it must begin with
those foods which are easy to assimilate, and progress
to a more varied diet by easy stages. In a word, the or-
ganism must learn to solve increasingly difficult prob-
lems of assimilation, and develops because it does solve
them. Assimilation is not a matter of passive acceptance,
but a task. When accomplished, the disturbance of hunger
is removed and the organism returns to its normal state.
In the effort to maintain this state all parts of the organ-
ism cooperate.
Learning therefore is problem-solving, and the num-
ber of solutions achieved constitutes the organism's pre-
paration. The more adequate the preparation, the wider
the variety of foods that can be used to maintain the
normal state, and the greater the organism’s freedom
of choice and action, since it is no longer dependent
upon any particular food. It must likewise learn to defend
itself against germs and bacteria, to adjust to changes in
temperature, and to accustom itself in many other ways
to live in the world in which it finds itself. Stability is a
function of preparation.
Independence and freedom, insofar as they exist, are
thus the organism’s own achievement. Assistance can be
given by protecting the child against problems too dif-
ficult for him, and by presenting new problems at the pro-
per time, but the learning itself must be accomplished
by the child. He must develop his own repertory of solu-
tions. Since his preparation at any given time is limited,
however, and his history marked by failures as well as


by successes, the scope of his freedom is likely to be
rather sharply defined. That is, he tends to select and
avoid situations according to his estimate of his own
abilities. On the basis of past experience, he predicts
in advance whether new situations will be soluble or
insoluble, and c onsequently whether his organization
will be strengthened or disturbed if he faces the problem.
It is this limitation of his abilities which constitutes
the individual’s standard of values, the line between ac-
ceptance and avoidance. Thus we see that choice and
selection have their real basis in the individual him-
self, and the objective situation merely provides the
occasion for making a choice. To understand the indi-
vidual and the nature of his preparation, therefore, we
must study his choices.
It will be noticed that although our discussion of as-
similation began with the assimilation of food, it has
expanded into the psychological field quite naturally.
The relationships are precisely the same. We merely
shift the location of the problem from the internal en-
vironment to the external, from the interoceptors to the
to the exteroceptors. Psychological as well as physical
development depends upon problem-solving, and inde-
pendence and freedom are attained in proportion as the
individual is prepared to maintain his normal organiza-
tion in a greater variety of situations.
We are using the word "normality” here in a sense
proper to the individual organism, to indicate a non-
emergency state of organization. Learning begins with
a .problem which produces or threatens to produce an
emergency state, and proceeds in the direction of a
state of stability. Emergency or emotional behavior is
simply reenforced behavior } This change is usually de-
scribed in stimulus-response psychology as the elimi


nation of useless random movements. A performance that
is just being learned involves the activity of the whole
organism, but after learning the activity is confined to
local processes. If the original excessive activity con-
tinued, indeed, it would mean a failure to learn. Log-
ically, therefore, the evidence would indicate that the
process is not mechanical but economic, a question of
organic efficiency, cooperation, and division of labor.
Problems must be solved to prevent the too-frequent ap-
pearance of emergency behavior, which would inter-
fere with organic efficiency.
Since emergency behavior is usually identified with
negative behavior, however, let us point out that this
is only one alternative. The organism may regain its
efficiency by learning to avoid a disturbing situation,
but it may also accomplish this end by making more per-
sistent efforts to master the difficulty. In other words,
emergency behavior may be either positive or negative,
the criterion is not the direction but the lack of pre-
Moreover, after the activity has been perfected
either type of behavior may become unemotional. Normal
behavior is distinguished simply by its ease and effi-
ciency. Neither type of behavior, either positive or ne-
gative, would serve the needs of the organism as an ex-
clusive plan of action.
We come now to psychological assimilation, and face
a difficulty immediately in that the observer is unable
to perceive either what is to be assimilated, or what is
to do the assimilating. Everyone accepts the statement
that physical development is due to the assimilation of
food by the body because both food and body are sensory
or perceptual objects. But what scientific right do we
have to attribute psychological development to the as-
1. Cf. Stratton's view that there is only one emotion,
excitement.


similation of meanings and values by the personality?
Our answer is that if we are really determined to study
psychological development, there seems to be no other
consistent course to follow. We must conceptualize the
organism not as a physical system whose behavior obeys
the laws of mechanics, which is the physiological view-
point, but as an organization with psychological attributes,
which can think, choose, learn and remember. We cannot
change the subject matter of psychology, and unless we
are willing to admit that thinking, choosing, learning and
so on are nothing more than illusions, why should we try
to work with a conception which denies our subject mat-
ter in advance? The personality is a concept of the or-
ganism, created by us as a means of assisting our under-
standing of psychological phenomena. Without the concept
of personality, we cannot study psychological topics, for
physical systems by definition have no psychology. We
have not changed the organism, of course, but we have
changed our conception of it and think about it differently.
Since the personality is an individual unit, it evades
the application of mechanistic principles which are con-
cerned only with averages. Hence a new set of principles
is necessary. The obvious alternative, of course, is tele-
ology. The old teleology, however, was as sweeping in
its claims as modem mechanism; both teleology and
mechanism have claimed universal application and have
recognized no limitations whatever. But it now appears
that the two viewpoints are no longer to be regarded as
conflicting philosophic doctrines, one of which must be
accepted and the other rejected, but rather as different
methods of scientific approach, each of them appropriate
and valuable in its place. We need a new teleology,
therefore, which recognizes this distinction, and limits
itself to the study of individuals only.


Moreover, the new teleology must of necessity be con-
ceptual. By this we mean that the observer must be able
to find, as a means of unifying his interpretation, a com-
mon purpose in all of the phenomena of an individual or-
ganism’s behavior. This purpose is not to be confused
with sensory or perceptual goals, of course, and cannot
even be demonstrated on the perceptual level. It is a
purpose which is usually unconscious so far as the act-
ing organism is concerned, nor can it be made conscious
unless the data are treated conceptually. In the sections
to follow we shall endeavor to show that the goal for which
the individual strives is the maintenance of a unified
organization.
1. LEARNING
Let us begin by attempting to conceptualize a spe-
cific instance of learning. Most of us have vivid recol-
lections of the persuasions and cajoleries we demanded
of our parents before a castor oil bottle. There are many
persons who still profess an inability to drink orange
juice because it once served as a transparent subterfuge
for the castor bean. They still retain the effects of their
early experience, and orange juice evokes in them the
the same "response” as the castor oil once did. Let us
make this an example of learning.
In mechanistic psychology, our example would doubt-
less be treated as a familiar illustration of the condi-
tioning of a reflex or substitution of stimulus. As Pavlov
would say, it is "the result of diverting the nervous im-
pulse from one physiological path to another.” The orange
juice stimulus innervates the same motor fibers and
arouses the same avoiding response as the castor oil.
The reason why the substitution did not work the other


way (as the maker of the mixture evidently hoped) is sim-
ply that the avoiding response in this case happens to be
dominant. We are supposed to accept as an explanation
the statement that the organism is made that way. Our only
duty as scientists is to perform as many experiments as
possible and to describe what happens; we are not trying
to understand the organism’s behavior, but to formulate
the laws which it obeys. We shall not delay to criticize
the conditioned reflex theory, however, except to point
out that it is nothing more than a theory, that it fails to
agree with the evidence of many extirpation experiments,
and that it assumes specific connections instead of dem-
onstrating them. But before offering an alternative ex-
planation, let us consider another experiment.
In an investigation of form discrimination in dogs,
made in Pavlov’s laboratory, the results are also ex-
plained as phenomena of conditioning. Just before each
dog was fed, a circle of light’was thrown on a screen be-
fore him; but when an oval was shown no food was given.
After a few repetitions the animal was so conditioned
that saliva would flow at every appearance of the circle,
but never when the oval appeared. The two responses
are classified by Pavlov as excitatory and inhibitory.
Following this preliminary training, the shape of the
original 2:1 oval was gradually made more circular, until
the ratio between the semi-axis was 8:9, almost a per-
fect circle. Up to this point the differentiation had been
complete and constant, but now it began to fail and after
several repetitions disappeared altogether.
Meanwhile, says the account, the animal suddenly
changed its entire behavior. Previously it had been
perfectly quiet. Now it began to jerk violently about,
and literally squealed with excitement. Its teeth were
evident as never before. It tore off the apparatus which


mechanically stimulated the skin, and even bit through
the tubes which connected the observer with the room
enclosing the dog. The animal’s excitement continued
after it was taken into the experimental room. There it
barked violently, which it had never done before. Ap-
parently it was in a condition of acute neurosis, a con-
dition which usually lasted for several months. *
As in all conditioned reflex experiments, here also
the explanation offered rests upon hypothetical proc-
esses in the brain. But now let us suggest an explana-
tion in terms of the organism as a whole. It will be no-
ticed that the effect of the circle is evidently to or-
ganize the animal for one type of behavior, while the
sight of the oval induces a different organization. As
Pavlov’s own work on the physiology of digestion shows,
this process involves the whole organism - ; when saliva
is secreted into the mouth there is also a flow of gastric
juice into the stomach, and appropriate adjustments oc-
cur simultaneously in other parts of the body. These so-
called reflexes never appear singly, and it is apparent that
we are dealing with a wave of change involving the coop-
eration of all parts of the organism in preparation for a
certain type of activity. The idea that each of the organic
changes is a separate reflex unit is merely an artifact
produced by confining the observation to a single organ.
If we observe the whole phenomenon as it occurs in
nature, it is manifestly not confined to the brain or sal-
ivary glands, but represents a general adjustment of the
entire organism. In fact, the adjustment toward food may
be present even in the absence of physiological indica-
tions, as when the animal is striving to obtain food.
The circle then, we may say, induces one dynamic
tendency while the oval induces another; given either
1. Loc. cit., p.291* See previous note.


the circle or the oval alone, the organism is able to take
a unified attitude toward it. But the ambiguous figure
has the effect of inducing both tendencies; as Pavlov
says, there is a clash of excitation and inhibition. The
animal attempts to organize for two kinds of behavior
simultaneously, to do two things at once, and the re-
sult is disorganization and dynamic chaos. Furthermore,
it is found that the unified attitude cannot be maintained
thereafter even in situations which were not involved in
the experiment.
Returning now to our original example, it is clear
that the orange juice-castor oil mixture is also such au
ambiguous stimulus. The orange juice induces a tend-
ency to accept, the castor oil a tendency to reject. But
instead of disorganization and neurosis, in this case we
observe the so-called phenomenon of dominance, and the
unity is preserved. As a protection against disorganiza-
tion, in other words, the organism must learn to take a
unified attitude toward the combination as a whole, and
either behave toward orange juice as if it were castor
oil, or toward castor oil as if it were orange juice. Learn-
ing thus appears to be fundamentally a unifying process
whose goal is an attitude free from conflict.
It will be noticed, however, that neither neurosis nor
learning results except when tendencies interfere with
one another, which depends upon their proximity in time.
For example, if the orange juice and castor oil had been
given separately, with sufficient time intervening, there
would have been no conflict. It is therefore apparent that
the temporal relationships between tendencies are just as
significant for psychology and the tendencies themselves,
and perhaps even more so.
This point comes out very clearly in the study of trau-
matic neuroses, which are actual neuroses (not psycho


neuroses) brought about by sudden fright or shock and at-
tended by symptoms of profound disorganization, per-
sistent anxiety for no apparent cause, and recurrent dreams
of the traumatic episode. It is a curious fact that the
severity of the symptoms in such cases seems to be de-
termined by the lack of expectation rather than by the
shock itself. If the event is foreseen so that the adjust-
ment can be made gradually, the nervous consequences
are usually slight. Thus the conflict is due not to fear
but surprise; in fact, the state of fear or apprehension
of danger seems to act as a protection. Freud says, **ln
apprehension there is something which protects against
fright and therefore against the fright-neurosis.”*
This means that the ability to foresee and predict en-
vironmental happenings, to understand the world one lives
in and thus to be able to anticipate events and .prevent
the necessity for sudden readjustments, is an absolute
prerequisite for the maintenance of unity. The subject
must feel that he lives in a stable and intelligible en-
vironment in which he knows what to do and how to do
it, and his attitude of confidence and certainty is sup-
ported by this conviction. It is therefore not the physical
injury which causes the anxiety, but the breakdown of the
dcheme of understanding and prediction. In a world
which is incomprehensible, no one can feel secure. In-
deed, it is found that a physical injury prevents the onset
of nervous symptoms, probably for no other reason than
that it is comprehensible, and by its very concreteness
serves to confirm the predictability of the world and ter-
minate the episode. In the absence of injury the exper-
ience is rehearsed again and again in the effort to under-
stand and assimilate it.
1. Sigmund Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, tt-
C.J.M. Hubback (International Psychoanalytical Press,
London and Vienna, 1922), p«9»


The interpretations which serve as the basis of pre-
diction, however, rest upon no other ground than indivi-
dual experience. Immersed in an environment which he
does not and cannot understand, the individual is for-
ced to create a substitute world which he can under-
stand and in which he puts his faith. He acts in con-
sistency with that conception, derives his standards of
value from it, and undertakes to alter it only when con-
vinced by further experience that it fails to serve the
goal of unity. Since this self-made scheme of life is
his only guarantee of security, its preservation soon
becomes a goal in itself. He seeks the type of experi-
ence which confirms and supports the unified attitude,
and rejects experiences which seem to promise a dis-
turbance of this attitude.
The apparent stability of the habit system is there-
fore not to be interpreted as due to the fixation of path-
ways in the nervous system, but rather as the reflection
of a stable system of values. It follows that to change
the habits we must work on the values, not on the habits
themselves. Or, as the psychiatrist would put it, we must
treat not the symptom but the patient. New values, sub-
stituted for the old, must be organized or assimilated
into the system as a whole.
A realistic psychology, in other words, must recog-
nize that prediction and control is the problem of the
subject as well as of the experimenter. Both are seek-
ing to formulate concepts which are pragmatically valid
and consistent with experience.
Our next example is M. C. Jones’ well-known ex-
periment on unconditioning. A three year old boy, Peter,
was afraid of white rats, rabbits, fur coats, feathers,
cotton wool, frogs, fish, and mechanical toys. The ori-
gin of the fears was not known, but the rabbit seemed
to cause the greatest disturbance, and removal of the


fear of this animal was taken as the problem. The suc-
cessful technique was as follows: the child was seated
at a small table at the end of a room some 40 feet long,
where he was served his mid-afternoon lunch of crackers
and milk. Just as he began to eat, the rabbit was dis-
played at a distance in a cage, and then brought slowly
forward until "just far enough away not to disturb his
eating." This point was marked, and the next day the
rabbit was brought still closer until signs of disturbance
again appeared. In this way the distance was gradually de-
creased until the rabbit could be placed on the table
beside the food, and finally in the child's lap. At the end
of the experiment the child would play with the rabbit
with one hand and eat with the other. The fear responses
to cotton, the fur coat, and feathers were found to have
disappeared completely, and the child could tolerate rats
and frogs at least to the extent of carrying about the
boxes in which they were confined.
Again we have the conditions necessary to produce
conflict. The child is faced with an ambiguous dynamic
situation in which opposing tendencies are made to in-
terfere with one another, though in this case it is clear
that the experimenter has predicted the direction of the
dominance in advance, and in fact provided for it. The
ambiguity is slight, and the direction of unification clear-
ly indicated. The explanation of the learning, however,
must lie in the subjective revaluation of the situation
by the child in the effort to remove the conflict. The
situation containing the rabbit at a distance is as-
similated, and the child remains undisturbed while the
cage is moved closer. Then a new conflict is precipitated,
and the process of assimilating the new situation begins.
1. M. C. Jones. "The Elimination of Children’s Fears,"
Journal of Experimental Psychology, voI.VII (1924), pp.
382-90.


Most textbooks treat this experiment as an illustra-
tion of the process of conditioning, but as a matter of
fact it actually violates Pavlov’s definition of condi-
tioning. The rabbit is not a signal for food, nor does the
child make the same response to the rabbit that it makes
to the food. It merely fails to show the avoiding response
and nothing more.
Indeed, the same experiment can be performed quite
as well without food. All that is necessary is to provide
a situation which supports the normal organization of
the child, and to make sure that the disturbing stimulus
is kept within the child’s tolerance. We have used this
method successfully in the instance of a little girl just
past two years of age, who had been knocked down on the
street oy a police dog and severely startled. Though she
had formerly been unafraid of animals, she was now terri-
fied at the sight of any dog or cat. For some weeks there-
after while playing alone or after being put to bed, she
was often overheard talking to herself, saying, “Doggie
won’t bite me, Doggie won’t bite me,” which resembles
the efforts to assimilate the situation noted in cases of
traumatic neurosis. Held in her father’s arms, she was
taken near small dogs and urged to speak to them. This
was continued at irregular intervals for about a month,
after which she was taken to visit children who owned
and played with a friendly dog. Her parents then induced
her to pat the dog’s head, shake its paw, and so on, and
within a few days every sign of fear had completely dis-
appeared.^
1. Lecky's favorite illustration in this connection may be
quoted from his lectures; "I had just begun to develop
this theory of unified action when, one afternoon in the
country, my eldest daughter, aged 3/4, was awakened by a
heavy thunder and lightning storm, I have seldom seen a
storm more violent. She was sleeping when the lightning
struck a tree about 50 yards from the house. There fol-


It may be objected that mechanism in psychology
does not stand or fall with the conditioned reflex hy-
pothesis, for there were mechanistic formulations such
as the drainage theory before the work of Pavlov and
Watson, and others may be expected to follow. The real
issue is not, however, the accuracy of any particular
mechanistic theory, but the larger question of whether
or not behavior is automatic or voluntary, whether the
organism is passive or active.
Let us note that when a second stimulus is intro-
duced which is dynamically inconsistent with the one
to which the organism is then responding, the result is
usually described not as a conflict, but a distraction.
We may restate the question, therefore, to ask whether
the organism really is passive in this situation or whe-
ther it makes an active attempt to overcome the distrac-
tion. This question received a conclusive answer some
years ago in Morgan’s demonstration that extra effort
is put forth when distractions ln many cases,
indeed, the subject exceeds the speed of w °rk attained
before the distraction was introduced. A still simpler
answer to the question of passivity vs. activity is found
in the fact that attempts are often made to avoid situa-
1» John J.B. Morgan, ’’The Overcoming of Distraction and
Other Resistances,” Archives of Psychology, N 0.35
(1916) ,pp. 1-84.
lowed a terrific clap of thunder. The whole house shook*
and everybody retreated into his skin. Upstairs I heard
the children shrieking and yelling. I ran up and she was
standing up in bed trembling like a leaf. Obviously the
storm could not be stopped. So I pulled up the shade, drew
p chair to the window, took her on my lap, and said: 'Now
every time the lightning flashes the sky goes "Boom!”
We'll play a game and see if we can say "Boom" before
the sky does!' We didn't have to wait long before the
next flash. 'BOOM!' I yelled before the thunder came,
and I pretended to be quite pleased. We sat there shout-
ing 'Boom' and soon she joined in. and inside of fifteen
Dpinutes her disturbance was entirely past. Today she has
no fear of lightning whatever.” Editor's note.


tions which involve conflict. This detail is not allowed
to appear in Pavlov’s experiments, for the animals are
taken to the laboratory and strapped in a harness so that
avoidance is impossible. When Krasnogorski, employing
the same technique minus the use of force, presented
ambiguous stimuli to children, however, they refused to
return for further experiments, although during the train-
ing series when single stimuli were used they seemed to
enjoy the Outside of the laboratory, the de-
vices and subterfuges employed to avoid conflict are
often elaborated with great ingenuity.
If it be true that learning is essentially a means of
resolving conflicts, it follows that a conflict must always
be present before the learning can occur. This conclu-
sion, indeed, seems inevitable from a theoretical stand-
point, even though the nature of the ambiguity in any par-
ticular instance of learning may be difficult to demon-
strate. Conflict then is a necessary accompaniment of
personality development, and the progressive assimila-
tion of disturbing stimuli the only practical means by
which a stable organization can be attained. But in that
case a well-adjusted personality is not a matter of emo-
tional habits so much as an emotional achievement,
though after the learning has been accomplished, of
course, there is no apparent difference. If the habit the-
ory were applied in a literal manner, however, and the
child shielded from conflicts in order to exercise him
more thoroughly in so-called habits of confidence and
cheerfulness, we could confidently predict a profound
maladjustment later as the outcome of his lack of pre-
paration. It seems to us that behaviorism must give up
1. Cf.N.l.Krasnogorski, "The Conditioned Reflexes and
Children’s Neuroses,” American Journal of Diseases
of Children , vol. XXX (1925). pp. 760-4.


the habit theory and frankly recognize the organism as
a problem-solver before it can consistently explain its
own experiments.
It is also necessary to revise our conception of the
stimulus, for instead of setting off a single reaction arc
it is now seen to have the function of supporting or re-
enforcing the orientation of the organism as a whole. In
the experiment previously cited, the presence of food
when the child is hungry tends to support a state or or-
ganization which is favorable to the reception of food,
while the sight of the rabbit tends to support a state
which is favorable to flight, and unfavorable to the re-
ception of food. When the learning process acts to eli-
minate the conflict, however, the dominant attitude takes
over the supports of the vanquished. The same is true in
the case of distraction; once a person grows accustomed
to working under noisy conditions, for example, he may
find that he cannot work so well without the noise.
If we accept Pavlov’s distinction between excitatory
and inhibitory processes at face value, however, or the
behavioristic distinction between positive and negative
behavior, we might very easily make the mistake, as
psychiatry has already done, of assuming that normal
development consists in simply extending the environ-
mental field in which the positive attitude can be main-
tained successfully. But the flaw in this conception is
that the division of behavior into two groups does not
have an organic basis but is simply a classification em-
ployed by the observer. It is a valuable device for im-
pressing the idea of conflict upon us, but it assumes
that the organism is divided against itself. In point of
fact, a conflict does not mean a struggle between posi-
tive and negative forces in the nervous system any more
than it means the suppression of the unconscious mind


by the conscious. Physiologically speaking, all behavior
is excitatory or positive in an absolute sense, and in-
hibitory only in the relative sense that it may displace
the behavior which we happen to be observing. Never-
theless, the necessity for preserving the unity of organi-
zation remains, and also the fact that the organism must
solve its problems one at a time. It therefore follows that
a conflict may represent a clash between any two modes
of organization which are attempted simultaneously. We
recognize both the variety and the unity of organic orien-
tations when we say that attention is selective.
We must also say a word at this point in regard to
the refusal to attempt assimilation. When a situation is
avoided, of course, the conflict in respect to it is not re-
moved, and that situation remains an unsolved problem.
There is nothing unusual about this, for when an organ-
ism is free to choose, it frequently refuses to undertake
the risks involved in facing certain conflicts, as in the
case of the children who served as subjects in Krasnog-
orski’s experiment. Each must judge, his own strength.
But is it not strange logic to say that the "escape mech-
anisms" resorted to as the means of such avoidance are
themselves to be regarded as neurotic symptoms, as is
contended by psychiatry? If a person becomes actually
neurotic because he tries and fails to solve a conflict,
we are surely mistaken in believing a person neurotic
when he refuses to face the situation, especially if he
1. The attempt to classify attitudes as positive and negative
encounters an obstacle in that the characteristics of attitudes
which are said to belong in the positive group cannot be de-
fined descriptively except in negative terms, i.e., by the ab-
sence of symptoms of conflict. It would be absurd suppose
that the positive attitude must always be accompanied by a
flow of saliva, for example. Thus it usually happens, as we
saw earlier, that the terms come to mean almost the same as
desirable and undesirable attitudes, and for purposes of pre-
sentation we have fallen in with this usage when it seemed
advisable. Later, however, we shall endeavor to show that e
more justifiable contrast is that between a unified and dis-
organized attitude, regardless of the specific activity involved.


avoids it successfully and thus perhaps escapes an actual
neurosis. The point in question is not the appropriate
moral attitude to take toward the patient’s evasive be-
havior, but whether we have any scientific right to ex-
plain this behavior as a symptom of mental illness or un-
conscious conflict when there is no indication of dis-
organization.
It must be remembered that although the situations
encountered by the organism occur in series and merge
into one another continuously, a corresponding series of
sudden shifts from one attitude of the organism to another
would promptly result in disorganization. The same at-
titude must be maintained in spite of environmental chang-
es, a fact which is recognized in mechanistic psychology
as evidence of "perserveration.” Therefore, if the or-
ganism is unwilling to undertake a given task of assimi-
lation, it must avoid or prevent the appearance of the
disturbing situation; or, if this is not possible, it must
at least endeavor to detect the approach of the situation
in order to have sufficient time to make the adjustment
the attitude does not have to be changed.
Thus, even if a subject refuses to face the situation
in which we happen to be interested, he is still obliged
to face preliminary situations which would tend to lead
in that direction, so that learning does not cease, but is
displaced to an earlier point in the series. He now learns
to avoid "signals,” and the observer who attempts to
understand the behavior as an adjustment to the situation
in which it occurs may find it incomprehensible. The
point to be emphasized, however, is that this learning is
not essentially different from any other, and'has precisely
1. Cf. Sigmund Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
pp. 9-10.


the same goal. To call such behavior psychoneurotic,
on the assumption that it cannot be accounted for as
due to learning, but must be the manifestation of a dis-
order called a neurosis, betrays a limited conception
of learning, to say the least. Is it really so hard to under-
stand why the patient manifests "resistance” when the
analyst endeavors to reproduce the conflict situation?
One of Pavlov’s pupils, Krestevnikov, worked for a
year attempting to establish a conditioned reflex by pre-
senting the substitute stimulus after the original and
failed. The experiment consisted in sounding a met-
tronome immediately after the dog began to eat, instead of
before the food appeared. If the conditioned reflex theory
were correct, however, the substitution should have been
obtained, since the auditory center and the food center
were" active simultaneously. Under these conditions, ac-
cording to the theory, a connection between the two should
have been established. But the facts agree exactly with
the teleological interpretation, for when the bell comes
after the food it has no preparatory function, but is merely
a slight and ineffective distraction. The significance of
this explanation is made nuch clearer, however, if we
imagine this experiment performed with two stimuli which
reenforce opposed tendencies, such as food and an elec-
tric shock. In that case, if the shock were not too strong,
it would make no difference so far as the attitude was
concerned whether it came before or after the food was
presented; it would cease to act as a disturbance re-
gardless of the order of appearance, provided that the
food were not removed. If the shock occurred before the
food, it would be a signal; if it occurred while eating was
in progress it would be a distraction. But in either case,
with sufficient repetition, it would be assimilated and the
unity maintained.


2. PLEASURE
If our theory of learning is sound, it must also account
for the subjective phenomenon of pleasure, which itself
has often been urged to be the goal of learning. Again,
let us begin with a homely example. The taste of olives
is to some a pleasure, to others it is insupportable. How
can we account for this difference of taste?
We select this example because it is obviously im-
possible to explain the liking for olives by the usual de-
vice of postulating a. native or instinctive basis. It is
recognized that the enjoyment of olives must be acquired,
and that practically everyone finds the taste at first to be
unpleasant. In other words, an originally unpleasant ex-
perience must be transformed into a pleasant one.
Now, at least to all appearances, Pavlov has trained
dogs to enjoy electric shocks by giving the hungry animals
a weak shock just before food was presented. After the
weak shock had been assimilated a stronger one was
given, and so on until each animal could withstand cur-
rent of surprising intensity with perfect equanimity. We
are told that every sign of defense had completely dis-
appeared; the animal would merely prick up its ears while
its mouth watered with "true alimentary saliva.” But
the account of this learning from the standpoint of dy-
namic unification is not, of course, identical with that
given by Pavlov.
The fact to which we wish to call particular atten-
tion is that the animal had been fed many times in the
laboratory before the experiment began. This was nec-
essary to train the dogs to tolerate the harness. There
can be no reasonable doubt, therefore, that the hungry
animal was already organized for the reception of food
and his "food-seeking reflex” in operation before the


shock was applied as well as after. The shock might there-
fore be termed a distraction, a slight conflict which is as-
similated and mastered. A strong shock, on the other hand,
would have organized the animal for escape. The point
is, therefore, that the animal was able to learn to keep
going on a straight line, dynamically speaking, in the face
of a difficulty, and this is the explanation of the as-
sumed pleasurable effect. When the learning has been com-
pleted, of course, the shock loses its disturbing effect
and becomes a support.
The account of what happens dynamically when a per-
son eats an olive for the first time is not essentially dif
ferent from this. The customary preliminaries to the meal
have established the "food-seeking reflex” in advance,
but when the olive is tasted there is a tendency to revul-
sion, especially if the subject has not been warned and
is taken by surprise. Usually, however, it is understood
that the liking for olives is an achievement, and most
people probably approach the task as something of a
challenge to their self-control. They determine to con-
sume the olive in spite of its briny taste, and after some
practice discover themselves among the gastronomically
sophisticated group who enjoy the experience. The mo-
tive is not the attainment of pleasure but the attainment
of unity.
Tobacco, coffee, beer, whiskey, and some soft drinks
are originally unpleasant in taste or odor, and the liking
for them is achieved somewhat in the spirit of sport.
The pride of accomplishment on the part of those who take
coffee without sugar or their whiskey straight is often
quite obvious. It will be noticed that these substances
remain on the frontier of control, however, and are con-
tinuously pleasurable simply for that reason. If we could
learn to tolerate still more bitter, acrid, burning sensa


tions, other pleasures would replace our liking for coffee,
tobacco, and alcohol.
Perhaps the clearest illustration of the relationship
between difficulty and the pleasure of self-unification,
however, is found in the field of esthetics, and espe-
cially in f he psychology of music. The following descrip-
tion is taken from Moore’s admirable monograph, The
Genetic Aspect of Consonance and Dissonance.
*lt matters not with what period of musical history
we concern ourselves,” says Moore, "there is always
evidence that the great composers were being continu-
ally taken to task on the ground of impossible harmony.
Even Mozart was attacked by Hans George Nageli for
certain progressions in his "Jupiter” symphony;Beeth-
oven became notorious for outraging the tender feelings
of theorists of his day; fifty years later Wagner was
struggling to persuade the world to endure harmonies
which were to become shortly afterwards a chief re-
source for popular nights at the symphony.” 1
The only tonal combination which was pleasurable
to the Greeks was the octave. Aristotle asks, "Why is
the octave the most beautiful consonance?” and "why
is antiphonal singing (i.e., in octaves) more beautiful
than singing in unison?” 2 Among experienced musi-
cians parallel fourths and fifths were occasionally played
on some instruments, though the experts were evidently
experiencing pleasure in effects which others did not
appreciate. By the fifth Century A.D., however, the doubling
of the melody in fourths and fifths had become quite
Psychological Monographs , vol.
XVII (1914), N 0.2,.2, p.l. By permission of the American
Psychological Association, Princeton, N.J.
2. Quoted by Moore, loc.cit., pp. 23-4.


common; at this time the third was ranked as a paraphony.
But gradually the smaller and more dissonant intervals
also became capable of arousing esthetic pleasure. In
the fourteenth century the conservative Pope John XXII
forbade singing in thirds, on the ground that this interval
served only to intoxicate and not to soothe the ear. Fifty-
five years later the prohibition was set aside. The advance
of the third and sixth was accompanied by a decline in the
popularity of the fourth and fifth, but by the sixteenth
century the minor seventh began to compete with the third.
“We may say,” writes Moore, “that the history of each
of our present consonances has apparently been a gradual
development as dissonance, followed by a relatively short
transition period, and later a gradual development as con-
sonance. The typical case, in which we may observe all
the gradations, is that of the third. As a dissonance it
was at first too harsh for any use at all, but afterwards
was considered a useful interval if properly restricted.
Then follows a transition during which some seem to have
felt it as a consonance while others still considered it
dissonant. Later comes its general admission as a par-
allel interval, and still later its use in the final chord
of a cadence. Each stage, we have seen, had its char-
acteristic pleasure value. As a decided dissonance it
was essentially unpleasant; as a mild dissonance it was
pleasant according to the context; as a bare consonance
it was essentially pleasant, as for example to Monteverde,
who confessed his inordinate fondness for thirds; when it
becomes a more perfect consonance it begins to take on
a more empty character, as is instanced by our present
growing dissatisfaction with such music as that of Don-
izetti. ... The fifth today . . . has an unpleasant bar-
renness for most ears, so that it is not used consecu-
tively except for particular effects. The seventh, alto


gather too harsh for the twelfth century ear, comes later
to give much pleasure in the mildly dissonant chord of
the dominant seventh, and the boldness of contemporary
radicals augurs for it an eventual transition to the recent
status of the third, that of the most pleasant of conson-
ances."
Laboratory experiments also showed that as a diffi-
cult interval is heard more frequently, the degree of con-
sonance reported increases. "The bare consonance,"
says Moore, "possesses the highest pleasantness of all
intervals, but increasing consonance means for it a mark-
ed affective decline . . . ."
Moore concludes that "tonal synthesis may be con-
ceived as an undertaking, attended by success or fail-
ure on the part of the hearing organism. Success is ex-
perienced as the characteristic quality of consonance,
failure as that of dissonance. The inherent feeling value
of a particular interval is a function of two factors—
success and degree of difficulty. It is the barely suc-
cessful synthesis, in which the individual accomplishes
with difficulty the unification of a manifold, that he finds
the keenest pleasure. If the synthesis is effected with-
out effort he has little awareness of his accomplishment,
and therefore little pleasure. If, on the other hand, in
spite of his synthesizing activity, he is baffled by the
complexity of the manifold to be unified, he experiences
acute displeasure.”
Several times we have called attention to the fact,
omitted by Pavlov, that the same set or m otive must both
precede and follow the disturbance as a condition of its
unification. This point comes out very neatly in Moore’s
study also. "The twelfth century musician,” he writes,
1. Loc. cit., pp. 38-39*
2. Loc. cit., P« 62
3. Loc. cit., p. 19


“expressed satisfaction with the third—for him a disson-
ance— provided it was preceded and followed by a con-
sonance, and we ourselves do as much for the dominant
seventh which we still class as a dissonance.”^
The relationship between the pleasure derived from
an accomplishment, and the difficulty involved in it may
likewise be observed in the play of children. With in-
fants, according to Watson, loud noises and loss of
port are the original fear stimuli from which other fears*
develop by substitution. Yet if we observe children a few
years older we find them taking great delight in setting
off firecrackers and learning how to jump down from a
height. Since the games regarded as pleasurable lie on
the border-line of mastery, a list of the individual's pre-
ference in games may serve as a partial index of the
degree of preparation. As the difficulty of a game dim-
inishes, satiation begins. Work may also take the form of
a game, the business man often gaining pleasure from
overcoming the difficulties of manufacture or sales com-
petition; the craftsman from demonstrating his skill in
the control of plastic materials; the scientist from solving
experimental problems or unifying his view of conflicting
theories.
The same principle applies when sexual pleasure is
treated conceptually. Sex practices develop on a scale
of graduated difficulty, and satiation appears as each
stage is passed, as in games. Behaviof which represents
an apparently permanent halt or “fixation” at an inter-
mediate stage, due to unusually severe conflicts, is com-
monly classified as abnormal. Even with normal persons
however, moral, social and economic difficulties are so
abundant that conflict may be regarded as almost a con-
stant factor in sex behavior, at any rate before marriage,
1. Loc. cit., p- 33,


with the result that introspectively the pleasure derived
from this source may seem not only superior to but dif-
ferent from other pleasures.
But the idea of attaching distinctive forms of pleas-
ure to each motive separately seems to be quite unten-
able. Conceptually, all pleasure appears to trace back
to the primary motive of unification, instinct theories to
the contrary notwithstanding. Even the pleasure connected
with eating is not an exception, for the food which can be
assimilated at different ages is graduated in difficulty
and digestive problems are especially common among in-
fants and invalids. The recognition that pleasures have
a common source makes it very easy, however, to as-
sume that the common factor is a single instinct. Psy-
choanalysis, in tracing the origin of all pleasurable sen-
sations to a sexual basis, appears to have made pre-
cisely this error, for even the pleasure derived from lit-
erature, music, and art is attributed to repressed sex-
uality working itself out in disguised form through the
mechanism of sublimation.
As a result of this identification between pleasure
and sexual expression, Freud is enabled to interpret all
unifying tendencies as sexual in nature, and he has done
exactly this in his conception of the life instinct, or Eros.
In the search for an opposing instinct to account for
disjunctive tendencies, however, he postulates a common
psychological basis for mental conflict and social hos-
tility, which if true had escaped notice, even by Freud,
until the exigencies of theory-making brought it forward.
Instincts are classifications of behavior based on the
assumption that all acts which seem similar to the ob-
server are expressions of a single force. The number of
instincts in any system is therefore a direct measure of
the condensation achieved; as new relationships appear,


some classifications absorb others and expand, with the
result that the list grows progressively shorter. It is well
known that the number of theoretically postulated in-
stincts is diminishing. But although a plurality of in-
stincts may be reduced to a duality, further progress is
impossible in an instinct psychology because of the need
of explaining conflict. The attainment of a monistic scheme
demands thatthe theory of instinctive forces be abandoned
in its entirety, just as the concept of physical forces has
been abandoned in the new physics.
Thus a pleasure cannot be understood except in terms
of its history; it came into existence because a difficulty
was overcome, but as the difficulty diminishes it is de-
stined to pale, so that eventually the affective value of
most behavior approaches neutrality. Hence, since the
pleasure to be gained by repeating the same performance
is likely to be limited, we arrive at the unorthodox con-
clusion that continuous pleasure demands the continuous
solution of new problems, rather than a condition of re-
lief and passivity. The problems need not be of any prac-
tical importance, however, and may even be quite artifi-
cial, as in games and similar amusements. It is also true
that conflicts may be overcome artificially by the use of
drugs, and pleasure gained in that manner. But the gener-
alization that pleasure consists in the removal of conflict
by some means or other appears to hold true in all cases.
Opposed to this conception is the Freudian doctrine
that the pleasure principle has an instinctive basis, and
must be replaced by the reality principle in the interests
of self-preservation. The renunciation of the pleasure
principle is unavoidable, even though its repression by
the reality principle results in pain. Happiness, in Freud's
opinion, is unattainable, for although "it is the pleasure
principle which draws up the program of life’s purpose,”


on the other hand, "its program is in conflict with the
whole world.” The pleasure of the individual and the
welfare of society cannot be reconciled, for every in-
dividual in his search for pleasure is opposed to every
other. Each is intent upon the gratification of his own
instinctive demands, which are insatiable. Education,
custom, and civilization itself are therefore to be under-
stood as necessary devices of restraint to prevent the
outbreak of open competition and save the race from
self-destruction. The individual is not aware of his
hostility toward society because it has been repressed
into the unconscious.
These observations bring out the inadequacy of the
habit theory also. For it is obvious, as Dunlap has also
shown, that repetition may have the effect not of streng-
thening, but of eliminating a response; hence the con-
cept of learning as the fixation of reaction patterns by
exercise must be regarded as simply a mechanistic fic-
tion. Habits exhibit no more constancy than pleasures.
The facts demand that learning be conceived not as more
practiced and skillful subservience to environmental
changes, but rather as the achievement of self-control
and the ability to maintain a line of action in spite of
environmental distractions.
3. EMOTION
When we compare the behavior on the first and last
trials of learning series, it is apparent that a marked
reduction has taken place in the amount of energy ex-
pended on the task. Experimentally, however, the sav-
ing is measured only by the decrease in the time con-
sumed and the distance traversed, and since these re-
sults are brought about by more efficient use of the
striped musculature, we find that theories of learning
also deal primarily with changes which involve only the


striped muscles. It rarely or never happens that the skele-
tal and visceral behavior are studied together as an acti-
vity. This would readily be admitted. Since the presence
of appropriate visceral behavior cannot be conveniently
studied while the animal is in motion, and since the
technique demanded even when the animal is immobilized
is unfamiliarto most psychologists, the visceral phenome-
na are often considered as belonging to physiology. Thus,
because of the division of labor in the experimental ap-
proach,. the unity of the whole phenomenon has been ne-
glected, so that we study changes in the spatial pattern
under the head of learning, and changes in visceral be-
havior under a different name- ,, emotion.” Watson touches
on the point we have in mind when he speaks of train-
ing the viscera, but he then emphasizes the breach again
by contrasting visceral with verbal learning.
Instead of ascribing the increased efficiency to one
group of functions only, the facts would be stated more
accurately by saying that learning increases the effi-
ciency of performance of the organism as a whole. The
excess of energy expended on the early trials is no longer
necessary. In fact, if the original excessive activity con-
tinued it would mean a failure to learn. The evidence sug-
gests that the energy espended depends not on the task
itself, but on the estimate of the energy needed, that is,
on the judgment of difficulty. Weight-lifting experiments
show that the muscle contraction varies in strength with
the apparent size of the weight.
It has already been noted that the energy output is often
increased when a distraction is introduced, and we now
suggest that such reenforcement is all that is meant by the
term emotion. When a given action tendency meets with
interference, and the reserve resources of the organism are
brought to its assistance the organic condition corres


ponds to what is called an emotional state. If escape is
difficult, the reenforcement of that tendency constitutes
fear. If rejection is interfered with, anger appears. If the
sex motive is reenforced, the motion is that of lust. When
the scientific worker meets with a difficulty in his think-
ing here also the increased energy with which he seeks
a solution may be regarded as an emotional phenomenon,
though we have names only for those emotions which are
more widely experienced. The distinctive character of
the emotion depends upon the tendency, and the amount
of emotion upon the degree of reenforcement.
In the long view, then, emotion is not an independ-
ent element to be studied as an entity in itself, but the
characteristic of a habit in its immature stages. Emo-
tional behavior does not signalize the emergence of a
new force to be controlled by suppression, but the ap-
pearance of a new situation which the organism is not
prepared to meet. In fact, although emotion is associated
descriptively with inefficiency and lack of control, it
would seem to be in itself a means of assisting the acqu-
isition of control. As Stratton says, "Excitement and
emotion generally are not primarily and usually causes
of inadequacy, or reactions which reduce one’s adequacy.
They rather usually are reactions which increase our
adequacy; they supplement our routine modes of response
which at the moment appear inadequate. The real prob-
lem is not to control emotion, but to control the choice of
which tendency shall receive emotional reenforcement.
In other words, emotion seems to be a controversial
problem chiefly because it has been isolated from its
natural context. The James-Lange theory, for example,
1. George M. Stratton, "The Function of Emotion as
Shown Particularly in Excitement." Psychological Re-
view, vol. XXXV (1928), pp. 351-66. By permission of
the American Psychological Association, Princeton, N.J.


is interested in the visceral changes merely as a source
of organic sensations, and neglects the relation of these
phenomena to the activity as a whole. Instead of saying
that the action comes first and the emotion afterward, we
should say that the tendency comes first and the reen-
forcement afterward. And even so the reenforcement is
not a constant accompaniment of the tendency, but tends
to disappear. Although Watson criticizes James, he also
makes the mistake of placing ’'emotional responses” in
a separate category, and remarks that "our emotional life
grows and develops like our other sets of habits . Yet
it is obvious that emotional behavior is really the opposite
of habitual behavior. McDougall, who treats the tenden-
cies as instincts, goes to the opposite extreme, for he not
only combines emotion and instinct but keeps them com-
bined; in his view the emotion is the core of the instinct,
and remains practically unchanged in spite of learning and
experience.
Moreover, the effect of learning on a given performance
is to eliminate the need of attention as well as the need
of emotion. Consciousness is withdrawn from a problem
after it is solved, and directed toward a new problem.
Even the memory of the situation in which the learning
took place is usually forgotten, or as soon as the response
has been unified and the conflicts eliminated the attention
must be turned elsewhere. Given the fact that problems
must be attended to one at a time, and that new problems
are arising constantly, it is obvious that solved problems
must pass out of consciousness as a prime condition of
learning, just as emotion must disappear likewise. Typi-
cally, the learning of a single habit may be described as a
change from inefficient, emotional, and attentive behavior
to efficient, unemotional, and unconscious behavior. Other-
wise the unity of the organization could not be preserved.
2. John B. Watson, Behavorism (The People’s Institute
Publishing Co,, N.Y., 1925)* p*l3l»


As long ago as 1885 we find Dewey speaking of "the
familiar fact that emotion as excitement disappears with
definiteness of habit," yet we have seen that emotion
continues to be treated independently of learning, while
the orthodox explanation of forgetting is atrophy by dis-
use, a view based on artificial experiments in the mem-
orizing of nonsense syllables. These are the fruits of
mechanism applied to psychology. Psychoanalysis, on
the other hand, disregarding experiments and basing its
theory on clinical evidence, holds that memory and emo-
tion are often forced out of consciousness into a region
called "the unconscious," where they remain active
simultaneously with conscious processes. It thus tele-
scopes the time factor completely, assumes that all
tendencies are operative at all times, and hence in-
evitably comes to the conclusion that a person cannot
be internally adjusted until all conflicts between ten-
dencies are removed, which it admits to be impossible.
In the Freudian scheme every conflict that has ever
arisen should be reproduced, faced, and solved; the ap-
parent advantage of responding to signals and thus avoid-
ing conflicts is illusory, for the conflict persists never-
theless. But does not this show that Freud's own goal
is the unity of the organization, and that his pessimism
arises from a misconception of the function and purpose
of forgetting?
It may be interesting in passing to note how some of
the critics of teleology themselves deal with the prob-
lem of purpose. Speaking for behaviorism, Kuo says that
"the purpose is preconceived or created by the experi-
menter—the animal itself has no aim or That is,
the purpose is in the experimenter, and if the experimenter
and subject change places it appears that the locus of
1. Zing Yang Kuo, loc, cit., p. 424. For a more extended
discussion see, below, Chapter X.


the purpose must also be reversed; purposive organisms
therefore cannot be observed, and hence have no place
in the scientific scheme. Psychoanalysis, which attacks
the teleology of Adler and claims to be based upon psychic
determinism, actually devotes its whole attention to frus-
trated aims; but the aims belong to the libido, not to the
organism.
These subtleties in the past have played a role which
in a practical sense was indispensable, in that scientists
loyal to mechanism were thereby enabled to study be-
havior without being crippled by conflicts. From a theo-
retical standpoint, however, it seems obvious that they
are temporary expedients which sooner or later must be
discarded, Freud himself had grown dissatisfied with
his earlier formulation and was in the midst of making
alterations at the time of his death.
Among those who favor teleology, McDougall also
locates the purpose in the instincts instead of the indi-
vidual, and we note that he is favorable to psychoanaly-
sis, although his conception is by no means identical.
Adler and the Gestalt psychologists, however, both em-
phasize. the individual as a unit and take a position op-
posed to analysis. Adler’s demonstration that a common
plan and purpose runs through a wide variety of apparently
unrelated symptoms has a realistic quality that is sing-
ularly convincing, Nevertheless, it is impossible to sys-
tematize the Adlerian psychology as it stands, for the
assumption that all symptoms can be explained as pur-
poseful and organized efforts to achieve superiority con-
stitutes a logical denial of conflict and disorganization,
which in turn seems to be the only explanation of the
feeling of inferiority. But if the goal of unifying the or-
ganization be substituted for the goal of superiority, it
is evident that conflict can never be eliminated complete-
ly, and the contradiction disappears.


In Gestalt psychology, which confines itself mainly to
the perceptual aspect of learning, the implied purpose at
least seems to be the closing of gaps in perception and
the restoration of dynamic equilibrium. It seems not im-
possible that closure might also be interpreted as the
achievement of an adequate solution of a conflict, and
dynamic equilibrium as dynamic unity.
The broad perspective requires that learning be con-
ceived of not as a series of separate adjustments, but
as a single continuous process of development. The achieve-
ment of unity in particular situations would then be re-
garded as the manifestation of a general tendency which
aims at a unified attitude toward the life situation as a
whole. Development would have as its goal not only the
achievement of a unified system of behavior, but a stable
attitude of preparedness and confidence.
It is true that the solutions of problems must be worked
out one at a time, yet the evidence would indicate that
after a situation has been mastered, the separate responses
lose their identity, and merge into the general behavior
repertory. Or it might be still more accurate to say that
learning from the first is an alteration of the whole be-
havior system, rather than the addition of a new unit of
behavior. For example, when a conflict appears and a
new situation must be assimilated, the system seems to
be disturbed as a whole, with the result that during emo-
tional episodes even the most stereotyped acts may lose
their precision and regularity. This explains why emotion
is regarded as the cause instead of the result of inadequacy.
Moreover, the disorganization which follows, in case the
conflict proves insoluble, is also not specific but general.
In the absence of conflict, on the other hand, the affective
attitude is much the same in all habitual behavior, re-
gardless of what the subject is doing.


The problem of maintaining unity and of preserving the
integrity of the habit system is therefore the same, for
until an organized system of behavior has begun to de-
velop there is nothing, psychologically, to be disorganized*
And yetthe organism cannot continue todeve lop, or succeed
in maintaining its unity, except by repeatedly facing new
conflicts and risking the security it wishes to attain.
Learning is not mechanical but adventurous. If a certain
type of situation has been assimilated, its presence tends
to support the attitude of confidence, but if it has not been
assimilated the normal attitude is threatened, and the pro-
cess of assimilation itself brings about a temporary dis-
turbance. Thus the problem of development is that of
maintaining and strengthening the normal attitude by
gradually assimilating the situations which formerly had a
disturbing effect. To use a spatial metaphor, the field of
normal behavior grows at the expense of the abnormal.
The spatial conception of personality, and the idea of
personality development as the growth of a spatial field,
far from being novel is familiar to every one. Such ex-
pressions as broad-minded, well-rounded, etc., as con-
trasted with narrow-minded and eccentric, are in common
use. Adler speaks of the neurotic as having a small action
circle. Perhaps the clearest illustration of a spatial con-
ception of development, however, is found in Lewin's
discussion of the role of environmental forces in child
psychology.
"The'life-space' of the infant,” he says, "is extremely
small and undifferentiated. This is just as true of its
perceptual as of its effective spaoe. With the gradual ex-
tension and differentiation of the child's life-space, a
larger environment and essentially different facts acquire
psychological existence, and this is true also with respect
to dynamic factors. The child learns in increasing degree


to 'control’ the environment. At the same time - and no
less important - it becomes psychologically dependent
upon a growing circle of environmental events.
"The later extension of the child’s space-time beyond
the room and the family circle also means not only an in-
tellectual survey of wider relationships but, above all, an
extension of the environmental objects and events upon
which the child is psychologically immediately dependent.
The mere knowledge of a thing (for example, of the geo-
graphy of a foreign country, or the economic and political
situation, or even of immediate family affairs) does not
necessarily change the child’s life-space more than super-
ficially or even at all. On the other hand, psychologically
critical facts of the environment, such as the friendliness
or unfriendliness of a certain adult, may have fundamental
significance for the child’s life-space without the child’s
having a clear intellectual appreciation of the fact.”*
In the chapter to follow we shall present a conception
of how the values which constitute the personality are
organized. An attempt will be made to interpret behavior
as the effort to maintain this organization, as opposed to
the current concept of mechanical reaction.
*• Kurt Lewin, *'A Dynamic Theory of Personality tr. by
Donald Adams and Karl Zener, p. 74, By permission of the
McGraw-Hill Book Company, publishers.


CHAPTER VIII
THE PERSONALITY¹
"The world hath many centers, one for each
created being, and about each one it lieth in
its own circle. Thou standest but half an ell
from me, yet about thee lieth a universe whose
center I am not but thou art,”
- Thomas Mann , Joseph in Egypt
In this endeavor to give form and content to the concept
of the personality, it is important that the motive for the
undertaking should not be misinterpreted. Let us therefore
say at once that this conception of the personality is not
intended as a contribution to knowledge of the sort which
is verifiable by any merely descriptive account of an or-
ganism's behavior. Its value for scientific purposes is no
less on that account. It is simply, as we have said before,
a means to an end, but a necessary means if we are inter-
ested in the organization of behavior, and if we hope to
achieve a scientific understanding of another individual.
The present chapter is apparently the one upon which Lecky
was laboring when his work was cut short by his death. Its
fragmentary character- the manuscript represents only a tentative
first draft - is the more regrettable since it is clear that this was
to have been one of the most exacting, as it was the culminating,
task of his life’s work. The problem of composing his beliefs, of
formulating the doctrine in a way which might be adequate to ex-
press his ultimate intention is therefore only partially solved.
Unfortunately here least of all can any work of divination on the
part of an editor suffice to elaborate upon that intention which
emerges, though only incompletely, in the following pages.
Paragraphs have been added from one of Lecky’s occasional
papers, entitled, ’'The Theory of Self-Consistency,” Editor’s
note.


Until the end ofthe nineteenth century, the physiological
theory of stimulus-response, based on the analogy be-
tween the nervous system and a telegraph system, dominated
all psychological thinking. But the theory, which sub-
stituted the analogy of a hydraulic system and endeavored
to conceive of mental processes in terms of the behavior
of liquids under pressure, proved inadequate for clinical
purposes and was challenged by psychoanalysis. It was
this analogy which gave rise to such concepts as repres-
sion, emotional outlets, sublimation, drainage, equilibrium,
etc. Both theories attempt by the use of these analogies
to maintain the appearance of consistency with the tradi-
tions of mechanistic science.
The hydraulic analogy seemed to offer an alternative to
the telegraphic concept chiefly because of its greater
flexibility for dealing with problems of motivation. Instead
of relying on environmental forces acting as stimuli, it
postulated a group of internal forces seeking external ex-
pression. But it has never been possible to explain all
behavior as the expression of the same type of energy,
which would be quite necessary, of course, if the hy-
draulic figure were followed literally. Freud attempted to
confine his theory to the single instinct of love or sex,
but he was forced to recognize the so-called ego motives,
and later added the death instinct, which makes for ag-
gression and hatred. Similarly, Adler began with the aggres-
sive striving for power or superiority, but later was obliged
to admit the existence of social feeling and cooperative
tendencies. Other schools recognize much longer lists of
instincts. But in all cases it has been observed that
motives conflict and interfere with one another, which has
led to the belief that each different motive must be treated
independently. The result is that the hydraulic analogy
leads to a number of dynamic units, just as the telegraphic


concept, with its great variety of habits and reaction pat-
terns, leads to a number of structural units. Both theories
have thus succeeded in obscuring the integral character
of the organism's activity: the organization has either
been divided against itself or been reduced to a loose
aggregate of elements.
These mechanistic figures of speech have been useful
devices for preliminary organization of the data, but they
have not produced a conception of man which disinterested
students of the evidence are able to accept. After fifty
years of research under mechanistic auspices, psychology
is more disorganized in respect of its theoretical outlook
than ever before in its history.
Instead of assuming beforehand, therefore, that man is
a machine which is moved by forces, a lump whose future
behavior is predictable from records of its past behavior,
let us assume that as long as he remains alive he must be
thought of as a unit in himself, a system which operates
as a whole. His behavior must then be interpreted in terms
of action rather than reaction, that is, in terms of purpose.
Mechanistic theories, since they assume that activity
is only an effect of some antecedent cause, must attempt
to explain activity itself, and must therefore seek to de-
fine or isolate the case of activity. The usual formulation
is that the organism acts because it is stimulated. We
assume, on the contrary, that every organism, as long as
it remains alive, is continuously active, and hence con-
tinuously purposive. Life and activity are coexistent and
inseparable. We do not have to explain why the organism
acts, but only why it acts in one way rather than another.
A stimulus does not initiate activity, but merely tends to
modify in one or another way the activity already in progress.
Such a suggestion is by no means radical from a
humanistic standpoint. Any theory which is erected on the


basis of this principle of unified action, however, and any
technique derived from the theory for clinical use, is
automatically prohibited from assuming a plurality of pur-
poses. One source of motivation only, the necessity to
maintain the unity of the system, must serve as the uni-
versal dynamic principle. Not conflict but unity must be
the fundamental postulate.
Practically all schools of psychotherapy aim at the
elimination of conflict, in spite of the fact that conflict is
postulated as fundamental. Hence it is clear that they too
aim at unification as a goal, though the possibility of
attaining the goal is inconsistent with their premises. It
is obvious, then, that conflict must be assumed to be a
temporary disturbance only, a kind of illness in contrast
to health, rather than a permanent and necessary condition.
Though conflict is usually present, it is not due to the
structure of the personality itself. It is rather due to en-
vironmental changes which present a continuous series of
new problems to be solved.
Although we assume a constant striving for unity, we
do not assume that the outcome of the striving is neces-
sarily successful. The environment sets the conditions
of the problem which must be met, and in some instances
an adequate solution may not be forthcoming. If the out-
come could be guaranteed, as it' is in classical physics,
the mechanistic view would be reinstated and the postulate
of purposive striving would be unnecessary.
We propose to apprehend all psychological phenomena
as illustrations of the single principle of unity or self-
consistency. We conceive of the personality as an organ-
ization of values which are felt to be consistent with one
another. Behavior expresses the effort to maintain the
integrity and unity of the organization.
The point is that all of an individual’s values are or-
ganized into a single system the preservation of whose


integrity is essential. The nucleus of the system, around
which the rest of the system revolves, is the individual’s
valuation of himself. The individual sees the world from
his own viewpoint, with himself as the center. Any value
entering the system which is inconsistent with the indi-
vidual’s valuation of himself cannot be assimilated; it
meets with resistance and is likely, unless a general re-
organization occurs, to be rejected. This resistance is a
natural phenomenon; it is essential for the maintenance
of individuality.
By interpreting all behavior as motivated by the need
for unity, we understand particular motives or tendencies
simply as expressions of the main motive, pursuing dif-
ferent immediate goals as necessary means to that end.
Since the general motive always appears in the form of a
particular motive, however, it is never directly accessible
to introspection and cannot possibly become conscious
except as a principle or logical abstraction. * The changing
situation presents continuous problems of adjustment,
but the organization can make a unified movement only in
one direction at a time, which explains why only a single
tendency can be dominant at one time. In this way we
avoid the assumption of a primitive reservoir of motives,
represented in the Freudian scheme by the Id, or the need
for a number of distinct and independent dynamic units or
instincts such as McDougall postulates.
Freud clearly recognizes the unifying principle in his
concept of the life instinct or love, though he regards it
The present theory, even though it deals with values, does
not make use of introspective methods. A person’s values are
as much a problem to himself as another’s values are, and re-
quire to be understood by the same means of inquiry. This, we
believe, is the essential contribution of Woodworth’s inventory
method which enables us to study the data of personality by ob-
jective means. To this extent it Is necessary that we all of us
declare ourselves "behaviorists.”


not as primary but as derived from the sexual instinct.
The life instinct is contrasted, however, with the death
instinct, hate, which divides the personality again and
really sets up conflict as the fundamental principle. This
contradiction is avoided when, in accordance with our
view, the direction of derivation is reversed. The sex
motive must be thought of as ultimately aimed at the
achievement of unity in the same way as other motives.
The striving for unity is constant, the striving for sex
satisfaction variable, instead of the other way around.
The individual’s organization of values makes itself
evident in the regularity of his behavior. The organization
not only defines his role in life, but furnishes him with
standards which he feels obliged to maintain. These
standards become visible if we disregard the details of
his physical movements, and apprehend his behavior as
his standards translated into action.
The reliability of a child’s behavior, as indicated either
by tests or by general observation, is thus explained by
the theory of self-consistency as the outward expression
of relatively fixed internal standards. It is often argued
that the reliability of a test proves that the test is meas-
uring the child’s ability. All that any test can measure,
however, is the level of performance which is character-
istic of the child at the time when the test is given. It is
not the test which is reliable, but the child. Wc cannot
interpret the score simply as a measure of ability unless
we disregard the problem of resistance entirely, and assume
not only the presence of specific abilities, but also the
motive to use them to the limit.
It is important not to confuse these internal psycho-
logical standards with any sort of external standards of
how people in general ought to behave. There is nothing
to prevent a person from accepting these external standards


as his own and making them a part of his system. All
members of a family, for instance, define themselves as
members of the family and will act in consistency with that
definition. We think of ourselves also as belonging to
larger groups, for instance as all being workers in a
science, as all being Americans, members of the human
race, and so on. If we accept definitions of ourselves as
members of groups, it is just as necessary to maintain
these definitions as to maintain definitions of ourselves as
isolated individuals. 1 Yet if a person does not accept
them, he will not maintain them. The criminal is an obvious
example.
Let us think of the individual, therefore, as a unified
system withtwo sets of problems - one the problem of main-
taining inner harmony within himself, and the other the
problem of maintaining harmony with the environment,
especially the social environment, in the midst of which
he lives. In order to understand the environment, he must
keep his interpretations consistent with his experience,
but in order to maintain his individuality, he must organize
his interpretations to form a system which is internally
consistent. This consistency is not objective, of course,
but subjective and wholly individual.
The personality develops as a result of actual contacts
with the world, and incorporates into itself the meanings
derived from external contacts. Essentially, it is the or-
ganization of experience into an integrated whole.
Only those situations which enter into individual ex-
perience, therefore, enter into the personality and need to
be provided for. Ideally, then, we should begin by deter-
mining the nature of the individual’s experience, especially
during the first years of life, and observing the manner in
This is the basis for reconciling the apparent contradiction
between individual behavior and group behavior.


which this experience is organized. But from a practical
standpoint this is impossible; instead, we have to infer
the organization from the way in which present situations
are dealt with. That is why mechanistic explanations are
useless. We must have some means of obtaining sufficient
and relevant data to work with, but the real task is to
create from the data a conception of the subject which will
give us insight into his behavior and reveal its coherence
and purpose.*
The most constant factor in the individual’s experience,
as we have said, is himself and,the interpretation of his
own meaning; the kind of person he is, the place which
he occupies in the world, appear to represent the center
or nucleus of the personality. The next most constant
factor, as a rule, in the circle of the child’s experience,
and hence the next most important element in the structure
of the organization, is the mother. If we think of the infant
personality as made up of these two elements only, it is
clear that the first major problem which the organization
must face is that of assimilating the father.
The task is usually a difficult one. The father scarcely
enters the child’s experience until the second year, and
his incorporation into the system requires that the values
already established in regard to the self and the mother
' The only precedent which we have to guide us in this en-
deavor is Freud’s attempt to conceptualize the personality from
the standpoint of psychoanalysis. His scheme is a topographical
arrangement of the mind into three main departments, the Id, the
Ego, and the Super-ego, superimposed upon another three-way
classification showing the parts which belong to the unconscious,
preconscious, and conscious systems of ideas. The complexity
of Freud’s scheme to a large extent defeats his purpose. His
effort to organize the interpretation of clinical observations has
nevertheless been, we feel, an indispensable aid. The lack of
simplicity in the scheme can be traced directly to a corresponding
lack of simplicity in the theory itself, particularly with respect
to the idea of a divided personality which is part conscious and
part unconscious.


be altered. Consequently the entrance of the father not
only means that the personality is to that extent enlarged,
but also that it must undergo a process of reorganization.
Nor, as a rule, can the task be avoided. The child is in
somewhat the same position as Pavlov’s dog in a harness;
since he cannot escape from the home situations, he must
learn to evaluate it more realistically (Freud’s reality
principle) and unify his attitude toward a larger field of
experience.^
It is hardly necessary to point out that assimilating
the father really means assimilating situations in which,
the father plays a part. And since some father-situations
would naturally be more difficult than others to assimi-
late, it is obvious that the attitudes of acceptance and
rejection would be likely to fluctuate somewhat. In this
way we obtain what seems to be a reasonable explan-
ation of the so-called "ambivalence” of the attitude
toward the father. Ambivalence then must be attributed
not to the failure of repression; but to the variability of
the father’s behavior; he is accepted when he behaves in
one way, rejected when he behaves in another.
Indeed, we often notice a similar ambivalence in the
attitude toward the brothers and sisters. A new baby parti-
cularly, as Adler has shown, deprives the older children of
the mother’s attention and often meets with a hostile re-
ception from them for that reason. When assimilation be-
gins, however, the attitude changes back and forth until
We therefore fully agree with Freud that the course of future
development depends upon the way in which the Oedipus situ-
ation is handled, but it seems to us that the unity theory ex-
plains the facts more convincingly than the theory of a sexual
attachment to the mother. Furthermore, although it cannot be
denied that the conflict is one between love and hate, it is
evident that both motives are evoked in the interest of unity,
and it is also clear from the experiments in the previous chapter
that when the conflict is solved the hate is note suppressed, as
psychoanalysis maintains, but the love motive unified. Otherwise,
by definition, the conflict would not be solved.


acceptance predominates. The Oedipus situation is thus
not different in kind from other problem situations, and in
fact cannot be treated as an isolated problem in itself;
though the nature of the adjustment which is made to this
first problem will naturally have important consequences.
By the time the child is five years old, according to
psychoanalysis, the hatred of the father has been sup-
pressed and the conscious attitude is one of love. At this
point the latency period begins, and the libido subsides
to reawaken at the onset of puberty. Anna Freud writes,
"Instead of keeping pace with the further development of
the child, the sexual impulses now gradually lose their
energy, their libido, as psychoanalysis calls it. The
struggle for pleasure recedes more and more to the back-
ground." Yet it seems more reasonable to suppose that
after five years the child has succeeded in assimilating
the most frequent and typical father situations, and hence
has achieved his freedom from conflict and emotion by
virtue of continuous learning. The change in behavior can
be explained without resort to the theory of a mysterious
but temporary loss of sexual energy. From our standpoint,
such a change is a matter of necessity, for if the attitude
of rejection originally taken toward the father were unified,
it would involve everything associated with the father,
including the mother also.
But if the age of four or five marks the end of the task
of assimilating customary home situations, it also sees
the beginning of a new task. The child now begins to make
the acquaintance of children of its own age outside of the
home. Its circle of experience widens to include situations
in the school and on the playground, especially social
situations, which present additional Friend-
With regard to the task of "adaptation” the least mistaken
hypothesis, it seems to me, is Adler’s view that the needs of


ships are formed, new persons incorporated into the organ-
ization, and corresponding adjustments called for in the
values given to the self and the parents. This period seems
to have the function of preparing the child for social co-
operation. The personality is consolidated and strengthened,
and new supports developed outside of the family. Thus
it is the beginning of independence of the family.
With adolescence, however, a change of such crucial
difficulty and importance occurs in the structure of the
organization that emotional crises similar to those of early
childhood frequently reappear. This change, which usually
requires several years to accomplish, and sometimes, in-
deed, is not accomplished, is the displacement of the
parents from their former position by a member of the op-
posite sex. Occasionally there is open rebellion against
the authority of the parents, who in turn are called upon
to make adjustments on their own account. During this
period of instability and reorganization, when the adoles-
cent is revising his earlier values and changing his whole
outlook on life, the need of unity is most acute. This may
be seen in the growth of religious interests, idealism, and
the desire for membership in social groups.
For the present this brief sketch must suffice. We shall
now attempt graphically to represent the developing or-
ganization of values as a definite conceptual structure.
Let its form be represented as a sphere, with the concept
of the self or ego in the center, the concept of the parents
near the center, and close friends, relatives and acquain-
tances arranged in order toward the periphery. This is the
typical arrangement during childhood. After puberty there
is typically an alteration of the original relationships, with
society count as heavily as those of the individual, and that so-
cial interest and cooperation are as necessary to normal develop-
ment as a favorable environment. In any case, there can be little
doubt that the problems set by the environment are primarily social.


the parents being gradually displaced from their central
position by a newcomer into the organization, a member
of the opposite sex, who is usually regarded first as ac-
quaintance and friend, but finally is accepted as mate.
Thus a new constellation of values is established with the
husband or wife and children as the primary supports of
the organization. The conception may be indicated graphi-
cally as follows:
The Infant
Personality.
The Childhood
Personality.
The Adult
Personality.
Pets, toys, possessions, etc., and familiar stimuli ingeneral,
also enter into the child's organization, though they are
not represented in the diagram. The complication of rela-
tionships in the adult personality can be specified only
with difficulty by such diagrammatic devices.
We shall define the personality, then, as a unified
scheme of experience, an organization of values that are
consistent with one another. And we shall conceive the
study of human beings as the study of personalities. The
organization must be thought of, moreover, not merely as«a
figure of speech, but as in some sense a reality. Whether
the interpretations of behavior which are based on this
conception should be regarded as true or not will depend
to some extent on how one chooses to define truth. The
mechanist also believes that his explanations are true.


But so far as we are concerned, our search is simply for
an explanation that will prove to be illuminating and
fruitful.
We believe that all behavior must be explained in terms
of this system. It is too early to attempt an exhaustive
treatment, but some of the more familiar phenomena of
of psychology are interpreted as follows.
Identification represents the effort of the child to bring
his ideas of himself and his parents into more unified re-
lationship. He not only imitates his parents, but adopts
their views and opinions as his own. His parent’s religion
becomes his religion, their standards become his standards.
In this way differences are eliminated, and the bonds of
relationship strengthened by increasing the "consciousness
of kind.” Assimilation and identification go hand in hand;
the child’s weak ego, having originally no values of its
own, is readily adaptable and takes on those values which
aid in unifying the system as a whole.
An excellent illustration of the alteration of values
which accompanies identification is found in the book of
Ruth, 1,16-17,"For whither thou goest.l will go; and where
thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people shall be my people,
and thy God my God: where thou diest will I die, and there
will I be buried; the Lord do so to me, and more also, if
aught but death part thee and me.”
Most parents identify themselves with the child to some
extent, and try as it were to make themselves more as-
similable by taking over some of the child’s standards.
Such identification also occurs between lovers. When the
process is carried to sentimental extremes, however, as
when the parents talk baby talk, it is obvious that the
child will base its own values on unsound premises.
There may be differences of opinion as to the desirability
of some values, but it can hardly be of assistance to the


child to derive its standards from the observation of
childish behavior, whether on the part of its parents or
other children.
This point, it seems to us, is overlooked by those
modern theorists who would abolish the home altogether
and segregate the children into child communities under
scientific management where attachments to adults will
not be formed. For it cannot be assumed that adult values
are innate or instinctive in the child; and if they are not
to be obtained by identification with adults, it is difficult
to see from what other source they could be expected
to arise. It is easy enough to construct Utopias where
behavior is conceived as the automatic performance of
mechanical habits, but the problem of establishing in the
child a conception of life which will work to his benefit
cannot be approached so optimistically.
Resistance is the opposite of assimilation and learning,
and represents the refusal to reorganize the values, es-
pecially the ego values. With age, of course, the values
becomes more firmly established, and adaptability de-
creases. To the psychiatrist, the striving of the patient to
maintain his organization appears as a symptom of perver-
sity. To the educator it appears as an obstacle to learning.
But if we would really understand these resistances, we
must see them not as neurotic or abnormal manifestations,
but as wholly natural devices for avoiding reorganization.
If a person were able to adapt himself as readily as is
sometimes expected, he would have no personality.
Whether resistance be thought of as desirable or un-
desirable, therefore, is wholly a matter of the point of
view. The loyalty to individual values may interfere with
efforts to change them, but this loyalty is also the source
of honesty and integrity.
The following instance will illustrate that resistance
to learning also has its favorable side. For years the de


ficiency of boys in reading, as compared with girls who
receive the same instruction, has been widely recognized,
particularly in elementary courses. We have discovered
that this difference is due not to a lack of ability on the
part of the boys, but to a lack of reading material which
is suitable for boys. The boy from six to eight years old,
just beginning to learn to read, is mainly concerned with
maintaining the conception of himself as manly. He likes
to play cowboy, G-man and Indian. He tries not to cry
when he gets a bump. Yet this boy, when the reading lesson
begins, must stand up before his companions and read that
’’the little red hen says ’Cluck! Cluck! Cluck! - or
something equally inconsistent with his standards of how
he should behave. To be obliged to read such material
aloud, especially in the presence of others, is not consis-
tent with his view of masculine values. If a boy is trying
to maintain a standard of manliness on the playground, he
does not abandon that standard merely because he walks
from the playground into the classroom. When books on rail-
roads and airplanes are provided, they serve to support
these values and are assimilated eagerly. The point is,
of course, that the assumed defect in reading never was a
defect except from the standpoint of an unenlightened
school system, but on the contrary was a manifestation of
a wholesome, normal, and desirable resistance.
In the Freudian scheme, resistance is interpreted as
the patient’s desire to retain his neurosis, whereas we
interpret it as the desire to maintain his personality. This
enables us to point out that what the psychoanalyst calls
a neurosis and what we call the personality are virtually
identical. The patient is seeking to defend, not a mental
disease which the analyst is trying to remove, but a scheme
of life whichthe analyst is trying to change. Many analysts
admit this freely. While we may think of a person’s scheme
of life as unconscious in the sense that it has not been


consciously formulated as a whole, however, we could
scarcely attribute the unconsciousness to the mechanism
of repression.
The various so-called emotional states cannot be
treated independently, but must be regarded as different
aspects of a single motive, the striving for unity.
For example, love is the emotion subjectively experi-
enced inreference to a person or object already assimilated
and serving as a strong support to the idea of self. Grief
is experienced when the personality must be reorganized
due to the loss of one of its supports. Hatred and rage
are impulses of rejection and destruction felt towards un-
assimilable objects. The emotion of horror appears when a
situation arises suddenly which we are not prepared to
assimilate, such as the sight of a ghastly accident.
Experiences which increase the sense of psychological
unity and strength give rise to the emotion of joy and
feelings of pleasure. Occasionally a person’s own behavior
may violate his conception of himself, producing feelings
of remorse and guilt. In that case, the insult to himself,
as it were, may be eliminated either by reinterpretation,
or by seeking punishment sufficient to equalize the insult.
Fear is felt when no adequate solution of a problem can
be found; it is due to dynamic disorganization.
From our standpoint emotion is a concept which is
necessary only when the problem of behavior is stated
descriptively. A psychological theory which conceives of
motivation as a phenomenon of organization has no need
for the conception of emotion.
Thinking likewise has the aim of unifying the organiza-
tion of ideas. Logic and emotion, so-called, therefore, are
not in conflict, but work towards the same end. If most of
our thinking appears to have the purpose of merely ration-
alizing our behavior to make it seem consistent, of defending


conclusions already reached or justifying positions already
taken, this is, indeed, what would be expected under the
circumstances.
The Freudian theory of repression, which is regarded
as the cornerstone of psychoanalytic theory, has under-
gone so many revisions that the exact present meaning of
the concept is somewhat in doubt. The general idea seems
to be, however, that emotions which are denied expression
are suppressed into the unconscious, from which thereafter
they continually seek some means of escape. There is no
doubt that in certain cases this explanation seems quite
plausible, but inasmuch as it presupposes the existence
of emotion as a separate entity we are forced to reject
the theory of repression and seek to reinterpret the phe-
nomena from the standpoint of organization.
Let us take, for example, the psychological problem
raised when a person feels insulted. This means that
there has been thrust into his experience a value of him-
self or of someone with whom he is identified which he
cannot assimilate. This inconsistency is a source of dis-
turbance, and unless the person responsible ’'takes back”
the insult the disturbance continues. If he refuses to "take
it back,” there is an impulse to retaliation. That is, the
low value seems to be eliminated by hurling it back upon
its author.
But suppose that, for reasons of expediency, it cannot
be hurled back; what then? Shall we say with Freud that
the energy (death instinct) has undergone repression into
the reservoir of the Id, to seek expression later when the
life instinct is less active, or shall we rather say that the
organization continues to strive to remove the inconsistency
and unify itself?
To answer this question, let us turn to the evidence
of primitive behavior to which Freud himself so often


appeals. How would the repression theory account for the
exact balance between injury and reprisal provided for in
primitive codes of vengeance, or the conception that jus-
tice has not been done unless the punishment inflicted is
consistent with the crime? Obviously, the motive is to
correct the situation and make it more assimilable. We
quote an illustration from the ancient Hebrew law as given
in Leviticus, XXIV, 18-20; "And he that killeth a beast
shall'make it good; beast for beast. And if a man cause a
blemish in his neighbor; as he hath done, so shall it be
done to him; breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth;
as he has caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be done
to him again. And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore
it; and he that killeth a man, he shall be put to death."
The impulse to retaliation aroused when a person has
been insulted or treated unjustly is therefore not an accu-
mulation of energy waiting to be discharged, but a purposive
effort of the organization to rid itself of inconsistency.


CHAPTER IX
SELF-CONSISTENCY AS A TECHNIQUE
The crucial problem for all personality theories is the
theoretical basis of therapy, for the true significance of a
system emerges only when it meets a problem.
1. PSYCHOANALYSIS AND THE THEORY OF SELF-
CONSISTENCY
The behavioristic method of treatment, as developed
by M. C. Jones, has already been described in connection
with the theory of learning. The method consists in re-
ducing conflict by manipulating the external situation. We
have attempted to show that the elimination of the fear re-
sponses does not depend upon behavioristic principles,
and is not in fact explained by them. The demonstration
may be described in dynamic terms as follows. A child
who is afraid of rabbits is seated at one end of a long
room before a small table. An ambivalent situation is
then produced experimentally by bringing in the rabbit
at the far end of the room, while food is placed on the
table directly before the child. Both are visible at the
same time, as in Kohler's Gestalt experiments, and there-
fore act as parts of the situation as a whole. A conflict
ensues, and since the positive component has the ad-
vantage by pre-arrangement, the entire situation becomes
positive. Whatever the process by which this occurs, it
is evidently a biological necessity, for without it the
organism would be polarized toward two opposed goals
(food and safety) simultaneously, and dynamic inte-
gration would become impossible.


The psychoanalytic technique also works on the ex-
ternal situation in essentially similar fashion. The re-
quirements again are an ambivalent situation artifically
devised for the purpose. The predominant positive com-
ponent in the situation is found in the person of the analyst,
while the negative component is represented by the re-
produced pathogenic memories. In order to insure a suf-
ficient supply of negative material, special techniques
have been devised to obtain it even against the patient’s
resistance. Freud at first credited the cure to the nega-
tive component, and described the treatment as a mental
catharsis achieved by “acting off” the pathogenic re-
pressionals. It was soon discovered, however, that the
mere reproduction of ideas of guilt and shame was not
sufficient to produce a cure* On the contrary, if the re-
pressed material was brought out too fast or in the wrong
way, it had a positively detrimental effect. The curative
effect of the method was thus not in the mere catharsis
or abreaction; the cure lay in the human relationship with
the analyst, and unless the patient has such confidence
in the analyst as to find support and strength in him, the
abreaction was ineffectual.
The theoretical question is to understand why such
positive “transference” to the analyst mediates the cure.
For, according to the theory which we propose, the ana-
lyst is not responsible for curing the patient, but only
for producing a situation in which the patient is enabled
to cure himself. In the human relationship with the ana-
lyst the patient finds strength and support which enabled
him to assimilate experiences which he could not assimi-
late before. It does not follow that all problems are due
to unassimilable values. Most problems, I dare say, are
due to values that have been assimilated. They arise from
defects in the major philosophy of the individual, not


from special unhappy experiences but from the whole
structure of his system of values. Our chief problem in
psychology is not merely to change the attitude of the
patient to some special detail of experience, but to re-
vise his old philosophy and develop a new general out-
look. If a value is assimilated into the organization or
expelled from it, the process is not one of addition or
subtraction, but rather of general revision and reorgan-
ization.
According to the theory of self-consistency, we seek
those experiences which support our values, and avoid,
resist, or if necessary forcibly reject those which are
inconsistent with them. Neither acceptance nor rejection
can be practiced exclusively without endangering the
organization. Neither is abnormal as such, and neither
necessarily normal.
Shall we therefore conclude that the attempt to keep
the personality self-consistent is a neurotic phenome-
non? Yet it seems to us that this is precisely the con-
clusion to ward which the main current of psychiatric
thought has long been moving. By assuming that avoid-
ance, rejection, or resistance is an abnormal phenomenon,
it condemns as neurotic the effort to maintain a system
1. This is the respect in which the therapeutic method
of self-consistency differs from that of psychoanalysis.
Freud objected strenuously to the notion that psychoan-
alytic treatment depended on suggestion. So, similarly,
Lecky considered hypnosis inadequate as a method be-
cause it treated only the symptom, suggesting it away
without altering the system as a whole which had pro-
duced it. It will be remembered that Freud compared hy-
pnotism to a cosmetic concealment of defects, psychoan-
sysis to a surgical removal of them. Lecky says in his
lectures: "I think it is obvious that a really well develop-
ed psychotherapy should make use of both. We are under
the_ double necessity of taking away ideas that are in-
jurious to the system and of strengthening or introducing
ideas that will increase the internal strength of the sys-
tem. M - Editor’s note.


of values, and would sacrifice these values in favor of a
goal of mere social conformity. Instead of attempting to
strengthen the personality, it aims to weaken it. Instead
of respect for the individual, its attitude toward every
expression of individuality tends to be derogatory. It is
well known that the psychiatric approach in biography is
destructive and iconoclastic, and clinical analysis ap-
parently is not considered complete until the source of
the symptoms is traced to suppressed sexuality and
hatred, which involves for the patient a process of disil-
lusionment in regard to himself and his own motives.
Conformity to the standards of society doubtless has
its claims, and the alteration of values which prevent a
necessary reorganization and interfere with acceptance
of the social environment is often essential if the in-
tegrity of the personality is to be preserved. But the
analytic method seems to have confused the means with
the end, and lacks a theoretical guide as to where to
stop or what to aim for. The removal of resistance or
rejection appears to be regarded as the goal, so far as
theory is concerned, rather than the welfare of the or-
ganization as a whole. The normal person, presumably,
if there were a normal person, would find fault with noth-
ing and accept everything.
Inasmuch as the tendency to maintain a self-con-
sistent organization appears to be a fundamental char-
acteristic of human nature, however, the psychiatric pro-
gram as stated suffers from the practical objection that
it could not be carried out. It was designed to fit an ego-
centric caricature of man, instead of man as he is. It
overlooks the fact that resistance is prerequisite to in-
tegrity. The well-known phenomenon of resistance to the
analyst is therefore attributed to the patient s desire to


shield and protect his neurosis. The patient is said to
interfere with the analyst by standing in the way of his
attack upon the neurosis, as if he were willfully harboring
a definite entity of some kind which the analyst is at-
tempting to destroy. In contrast to this view, however, it
is apparent that resistance is in reality self-defense, the
effort to maintain the integrity of the personality
What seems to be perversity from the standpoint of the
analyst is merely self-preservation from the standpoint of
the patient. What seems to be a neurosis is simply the
patient’s individual and unique organization.
When standards of value are studied in isolation from
their context, it is bound to be conceded, of course, that
they have no value in themselves. Mechanistic science
has seized upon this fact as a warrant to wage a war upon
values. Nothing so relative and undependable can be tol-
erated in connection with the so-called scientific ap-
proach. But the scientific approach in the mechanistic
sense confines itself entirely to the use of analytic and
descriptive techniques which can never do more than
itemize a phenomenon into its parts. As a result, the phe-
1. Cf. the following remarks by Freud, in A General In-
troduction to Psychoanalysis, p. 248: "When we under-
take to cure a patient, to free him from the symptoms of
his malady, he confronts us with a vigorous, tenacious re-
sistance that lasts during the whole time of the treatment.
This is so peculiar a fact that we cannot expect much
credence for it Just consider, this patient suffers
from his symptoms and causes those about him to suffer
with him And yet he struggles, in the very interests
of his malady, against one who would help him. How im-
probable this assertion must sound! And yet it is so, and
if we are reproached with its improbability, we need only
answer that this fact is not without its analogies. Whoever
goes to a dentist with an unbearable toothache may very
well find himself thrusting away the dentist’s arm when
the man makes for his sick tooth with a pair of pincers.”
Used by permission of the Liveright Publishing Corpor-
ation, publishers.


nomenon in its original wholeness becomes invisible and
is then forgotten.
By way of doing justice to newer viewpoints in psy-
chiatry, it may be said that a gradual shift in psycho-
therapy from the effort to make the patient consistent
with society to the effort to make him consistent with
himself has been in progress since the beginning of the
nineteenth century. In the last few years this trend has
grown so rapidly that the more recent psychiatric con-
cepts can be reinterpreted in terms of self-consistency
quite readily. The term assimilation especially is now in
common use, despite the lack of theoretical definition.
Since 1920 even psychoanalysis shows agreement with
this tendency, and we find Freud using such expressions
as "the comprehensive unity of the ego." Nor is it, we
believe, merely a coincidence that these changes are
timed to agree with the current wane of egocentricity in
physical sciences. Science moves forward on a broad
front, and the compulsion toward consistency among the
separate branches of science is irresistible.
When an error is made in one field of science, its in-
fluence spreads to other fields, and this is particularly
true when the error occurs at the point of contact with
applied science where it is incorporated without critical
evaluation in various projects and programs of a prac-
tical nature. We especially have in mind the effect upon
education of the current idea that personality and char-
acter defects should be regarded as medical-psychiatric
problems, that the treatment of behavior problems is to
be classified as "mental hygiene", and that the educator
is thereby relieved of responsibility in the matter. On
the contrary, the problem has become chiefly medical be-
cause of educational neglect. The avoidance of the
questions which it raises may explain why education is


so often accused of failure to realize its social ob-
jectives.
Our belief is that education should attempt to make a
direct approach to problems of character and personality.
In reply to this belief it may be objected that the dif-
ficulties have not been well considered. The long course
of treatment required by psychoanalytically-oriented
methods may be mentioned, the lack of training and ex-
perience for handling these problems emphasized, and
cases cited for which a psychiatrist’s services would be
essential. These points need not be disputed, but they
still do not constitute valid arguments for contraindi-
cating the need for education to face its problem.
Mr. Lecky believed that educational shortcuts could be
developed which would replace or obviate the necessity
for psychoanalytically oriented case study. In regard to
psychoanalysis, a disintegration of its theoretical struc-
ture has been observable for some years, partly due to
internal differences and partly to external attacks. Freud
himself made admissions so sweeping that theoretical
support is withdrawn from many of the most important
concepts. If the theory itself is so confused, it may be
chat parts of the technique are invalid. It therefore seems
important to evaluate psychoanalysis to discover those
techniques which may have general application to edu-
cation.
The Freudian admission of primary importance in re-
lation to education is the abandonment of the older hyp-
notic and cathartic methods in favor of the transference
in mediating a cure. The essential element in the trans-
ference is the reliving of traumatic affective experiences
in a permissive situation where the positive feeling or
rapport with the analyst results in feelings of affection,
confidence and willingness to accept suggestions. Jung,
Adler and Rank went so far as to dispense with the tra


ditional psychoanalytic techniques while stressing the
importance of the establishment of a psychologically
adapted relationship which facilitates the telling of one's
life story, its past disappointments and present diffi-
culties, in a noncritical accepting atmosphere where the
interpretations of the therapist are reacted to positively
and may be accepted if their insights are genuine. This
method of therapy, lacking only modem psychological in-
sights, has been used for ages. Disregarding the tempor-
ary effects of reassurance, suggestion and sympathy, the
essential factor in psychoanalysis is somehow connected
with the realization on the part of the client that his past
is the explanation of present difficulties. In other words,
the therapy is a demonstration of irrelevance. In support
of this concept, let us consider the description of the
three stages of the analytic situation. First ensues what
might be called a reconditioning process in which the
positive value of the therapist overcomes the negative
values of the other parts of the situation, rapport occurs,
and the symptoms transiently disappear. The second
stage is the transference neurosis characterized by the
reenactment of traumatic complexes on the person of the
analyst. One form of irrelevance is exchanged for another
but the patient is still not cured. The third and most im-
portant stage, which represents the only new addition to
therapeutic technique, is the dissolution of the trans-
ference. This must be done, says Freud, "by proving to
the patient that his feelings do not originate in the present
situation.” * Thus the central feature of the psychoana-
lytic technique is basically educational.
Why the discovery of irrelevance should have the.effect
of instituting a permanent cure was not explained in the
1. Frued, S, A general introduction to psychoanalysis.
Boni & Liveright, 1920, p. 383*


psychoanalytic literature except by vague references to
insight and inner changes in the patient. According to
the self-consistency theory of personality, however, the
demonstration of irrelevance forces a realization of the
inconsistency of conflicting attitudes and a reorgani-
zation in the direction of regaining unity by the assimi-
lation of moje realistic attitudes and the rejection of
older untenable ones.
Mr. Lecky conceived of the personality as the true
psychological unit, even though the senses are unable
to perceive such a unity. It would be absurd to regard
the personality as a physical object, but neither is it
anything so vague as "how the person behaves" or
"the sum total of his habit systems". It is a definite or-
ganization of reaction potentialities which represents the
individual’s organized conception of the world, his unique
and peculiar system of values.* While objective be-
havior is swiftly and constantly changing, the person-
ality tends to be relatively stable and unchanging. It is
a system which resists change because of the necessity
of preserving its essential integration and unity. The
fact that the personality represents a system or style of
life, automatically creates a set of standards for ac-
ceptance and rejection governed by the requirements of
preserving the system. Behavior is not a matter of pas-
sive response, but of active rejection or acceptance of
new patterns or ideas. Each new experience must either
be capable of assimilation, or because it is inconsistent
with previously held ideas and attitudes be rejected, or
*This viewpoint suggests the desirability of re-evalu-
ating the scholastic concepts of "spirit" and "soul". If
these terms are recognized to be conceptual constructs
devised to describe relationships • which cannot be ob-
jectively demonstrated but only rationally implied, it is
possible that they may validly be used to refer to aspects
of personality which may have genuine subjective reality
to some persons.


force a general reorganization. The problem of the in-
dividual, therefore, is that of maintaining its organi-
zation and stabilizing its values. Positive and negative
behavior, approach or withdrawal, acceptance or rejection
of new ideas, all are the outward expressions of this in-
cessant task.
Evaluation of Experimental ism. That experimental
and statistical methods are the basis of modern science
cannot be denied. Scientists are correct in insisting that
pure research is the necessary foundation for all scien-
tific progress. Pure research must be conducted for its
own sake, and divorced from the practical considerations
of applied technology. But Mr. Lecky was highly critical
of the tendency among some psychologists to regard ex-
perimentalism almost as a fetish to the exclusion of all
practical considerations. * The great fight of American
psychology in the first half of the 20th century has been
to secure recognition as a Science. In order to attain
status with physics and chemistry, it was necessary for
university psychology departments to adhere to the most
rigorous scientific programs. Many individual psychol-
ogists became so permeated with the belief that experi-
mentalism is the ultimate in science that they came to
ignore or depreciate the great social demand for the ap-
plications of psychology. Since 1875, professional psy-
chology has been largely concerned with experimentally
oriented research and teaching to the point where both
the teaching and the literature have been almost exclusive-
ly preoccupied with experimental methods and results. It
has been sometimes overlooked that both science and ex-
perimentalism are but tools at the service,of humanity in
achieving a better way of life. Science for its own sake
is important, but of even more pressing significance are
the demands of Society for the applications of science. In


the past, both the teaching in psychology and professional
literature has been oriented in the direction of making
every student into a scientist, i.e. teaching him experi-
mental methods and detailed research results. But the
average student will never be a psychological scientist,
and his needs are best solved by giving him a working
knowledge of psychology with particular reference to the
understanding of personality and the psychology of every-
day life. Mr. Lecky was keenly aware of the desirability
of securing a working balance between psychology as
science and as technology. In his teachings he lost no
opportunity to relate the two, and by doing so, he best
served the needs of his students.
2. EDUCATION
The greatest handicap to constructive action in edu-
cation is the well-entrenched dogma that learning is the
direct result of teaching, a mechanical reaction to the
school environment instead of a purposive achievement.
Learning cannot be understood as a process of forming
separate habits, but only in terms of the development of
the entire personality. When one value has been ac-
cepted, it opposes the acceptance of other values which
are not consistent with it. Hence resistance must be ac-
cepted as a normal and necessary aspect of learning. In-
deed, a unified organization could not be maintained
without it. Early impressions are important not only in
themselves, but because they set the conditions for re-
jection of other values, whatever their nature, which would
tend to precipitate a conflict.
Nevertheless, since the experience of everyone is
more or less haphazard from an educational standpoint,
there are always present in the system a certain number


of values accepted on insufficient evidence. These
values, whose retention depends entirely upon the suc-
cess with which they can be. rationalized and made to
seem consistent, or at any rate not inconsistent, give
rise to resistances which are likely to be detrimental to
the individual.
The clinical technique which follows from the theo-
retical conception of the problem must therefore aim to
bring about in the subject a reexamination of those values
which block his development. Academic difficulties and
social maladjustments are both conceived of as due to
resistances arising from the subject’s conception of him-
self. If a student shows resistance toward a certain type
of material, this means that from his point of view it would
be inconsistent for him to learn it. If we are able to
change the self-conception which underlies this view-
point, however, his attitude toward the material will
change accordingly.
Let us take the case of an intelligent student who is
deficient, say, in spelling. In almost every instance
poor spellers have been tutored and practiced in spelling
over long periods without improvement. For some reason
such a student has a special handicap in learning how to
spell, though not in learning the other subjects which
are usually considered more difficult. This deficiency is
not due to a lack of ability, but rather to an active re-
sistance which prevents him from learning how to spell
in spite of the extra instruction. The resistance arises
from the fact that at some time in the past the suggestion
that he is a poor speller was accepted and incorporated
into his definition of himself, and is now an integral part
of his total personality. A standard is a conception that
a person maintains because he has accepted it as a part
of his personality. Standards need not be admirable, even


from the standpoint of the person who maintains them, so
long as he believes them to be valid. As in the present
instance, he may accept as his standard the conception of
his own inferiority in some particular respect. His dif-
ficulty is thus explained as a special instance of the
general principle that a person can only be true to him-
self. If he conceives himself as a poor speller, the mis-
spelling of a certain proportion of the words which he
uses becomes for him a moral issue. He misspells
words for the same reason that he refuses to be a thief.
That is, he must endeavor to behave in a manner con-
sistent with his conception of himself.
A study of the spelling behavior of these students
shows that each individual seems to have a definite
standard of poor spelling which he unconsciously en-
deavors to maintain. If his spelling test is cut in two, it
will be found that each half contains approximately the
same number of misspelled words. If we study his letters
or written theses, there is likewise a striking consistency
in the number of misspelled words per page. Strange to
say, the spelling of foreign languages seems to be im-
paired very little if at all, showing clearly that the dif-
ficulty cannot be attributed to eye movements, left-hand-
edness, or other mechanical interferences. Evidently the
conception of one’s self as a poor speller usually has
reference to one’s native language only.
The clinical technique consists in first finding sev-
eral strong values apparently unrelated to the value in
question which can be used as levers, so to speak, and
then demonstrating the inconsistency between these
values and the one responsible for the deficiency. Al-
most every student considers himself independent and
self-reliant, for example. On the other hand, it can readily
be shown that the poor speller expects his defect to be


condoned and treated sympathetically; that, in effect, he
has his hand out, begging for indulgence. If the contra-
diction can be demonstrated from his own viewpoint, a
reorganization becomes compulsory. His definition of
himself as a poor speller is vigorously rejected and a
determined effort made to establish the opposite def-
inition.
It is significant that not only poor spellers, but stam-
merers and others with similar defects, freely admit as a
rule that they accept themselves as they are and make no
effort to change. This is an excellent defense, of course,
for they feel no inconsistency, once the definition has
been accepted. And they often attempt to avoid the effort
of maintaining a more useful definition by referring the
defect to heredity or neuro-musclar maladjustment.
Those who claim that they “do not have a mathe-
matical mind” are likewise victims of their own resist-
ance. Such a student may have defined himself in child-
hood as the exact opposite of some unassimilable com-
panion who had been held up as a shining example of
mathematical proficiency. In other cases, remarks by
parents or teachers that the child was lacking in apti-
tude for mathematics seem to be the explanation. The
suggestion was accepted and is now a part of the stu-
dent’s conception of himself. In one instance, a stu-
dent who despised mathematics in high school and dur-
ing his freshman year acquired a sudden attachment for
the subject and became a professional statistician. This
boy’s older brother was proficient in mathematics, and
the two had been in conflict for years.
So-called laziness, lack of concentration, etc., are due
to the acceptance of definitions at cross purposes with


one another. Such individuals cannot act in consistency
with one definition without being inconsistent with another.
For example, a student may define himself as intelligent,
but poor in mathematics. To maintain the first definition,
he should make high grades in mathematics, but to main-
tain the second he should fail. However, since he must
act, as long as he is playing both roles at once he is
forced to compromise. His grades in mathematics will
split the difference somewhere near the passing mark, and
the teacher will characterize him as lazy. For his own
part, he will claim that he cannot concentrate, and the
claim will be perfectly true. This seems to be the ex-
planation of the characteristic level of performance al-
ready noted in regard to spelling. As long as the def-
initions remain unchanged, the characteristic rate or
grade of activity tends to remain constant.
The remedy is not to be found by means of tests which
reveal the specific weaknesses, therefore, or in persistent
drilling on the fundamentals, but only in changing the def-
inition. Energetic concentration simply means that a
person is free from conflicts and able to bring his united
efforts to focus on the task in hand.
What a person is able or unable to learn, in other
words, depends, to a large extent at least, upon what he
has already learned, and especially upon how he has
learned to define himself. Differences in native ability
cannot be summarily dismissed, but at present this ex-
planation is frequently dragged in simply to serve as an
alibi, both for the school and for the individual.
It should be repeated in this connection that a person
may accept any definition whatsoever if nothing has been
learned to the contrary to interfere with its acceptance;
while a contrary definition provides a sort of immunity.


We have an instance of a very slow boy who characterized
himself as “the slow one” and his brother as "the quick
one.” He felt so guilty when working too rapidly that he
had developed a large repertory of devices to use up the
necessary amount of time in order to be true to his role.
Attempts to teach him rapid methods of work naturally met
with complete failure as long as the original definition
was retained. Very often a troublesome child has unwit-
tingly been cast in that part by the criticism of parents or
teachers. A boy who has previously defined himself as
"good” would vigorously resist, of course, the suggestion
that he is "bad.” If his definition in this respect has not
yet been strongly established, however, he may accept the
role and consider the question closed. Thereafter he en-
deavors to perfect himself in the part to which he has
been assigned, and grows more and mote unmanageable
the more his behavior is condemned. Youths who are
placed in reformatories usually emerge not reformed, but
confirmed in their self-definition as social outcasts and
potential criminals.
Shyness, seclusiveness, feelings of insecurity and in-
adequacy, lack of friends and the like are symptomatic of
self-valuations which are not supported in the situation
in which the subject finds himself. They are not traits,
for they would disappear if a more favorable situation
could be found. In order to be favorable from the subject’s
standpoint, however, this would mean an approximation
of the childhood situation in which these values were de-
veloped and to which they then seemed to be appropriate.
Unprepared for the struggle of expanding his field of
action, and overestimating its difficulties, the subject
naturally clings to the few goals he has with greater tena-
city. But infantile behavior on the part of adults is the
signal for social attack. This precipitates a desperate


dilemma, for he can neither give up his cherished goals
nor safely pursue them. In the emergency, he is driven to
attempt an intellectual feat that might rank in other fields
as a creative masterpiece. By distortion of the action
lines, he endeavors to construct two behavior patterns,
one in reference to each problem, which will nevertheless
overlap throughout. If successful, all of the activity will
show “polarity,” and a single pattern will serve the needs
of “approach” and “avoidance” jointly. The numerous
antithetical relationships which Freud regards as the es-
sential mark of the neurotic character arise from the fact
that every symptom is part of a double What
we call the symptom of a disease is nevertheless, for the
subject, the solution of his problem.
The subject himself thus arrives quite naturally at
exactly the opposite diagnosis. From his own standpoint,
his values seem so consistent with one another that he
regards them as virtually axiomatic. He therefore turns
for support to fantasy, and puts the blame for his difficul-
ties on the external situation. Thus, in defending the
validity of his present scheme of thought and action, he
renders his problem more insoluble than ever.
On the other hand it must be remembered that everyone
has accepted numerous other values in addition to those
which cause his unhappiness. If this were not so, he would
be content to withdraw even further from the outside world
and retreat still deeper into fantasy. It is this inability
to unify on any course of action, in fact, which keeps
1. Thi s isthe explanation ofthevanous distortion and defense
mechanisms, resistance, repression, and the concept of an un-
conscious mind. As soon as it is recognized that symptoms and
dreams are a part of a plan to avoid discovery and criticism, as
well as a means to fulfill a positive wish, the whole picture
holds together and the notion of a personality divided against
itself becomes an unnecessary assumption.


him perpetually in search of a solution and gives us the
opportunity to help him toward a clearer view of his problem.
Attention must therefore be fixed on the values which
offer some hope of unified action. Nor are such values
difficult to find. We have already mentioned that most per-
sons conceive of themselves as intelligent and self-reliant.
Even more strongly founded, however, is the conception
of oneself as a person who is useful to others, willing to
hold up one’s own end, and capable of making a contribu-
tion to the group to which he belongs. At any rate, we
have never seen anyone who did not conceive of himself
in this way, though the values in question may be so
blocked that the external behavior fails to reveal their
influence. The test for the presence of any value, of
course, is whether a person is pleased when the value is
attached to him, or disturbed when charged with its oppo-
site.
The technique consists in making the subject aware
of his own inconsistency. The inhibiting definitions must
be seen as useless burdens from which he must try to free
himself, rather than as assets to be justified and retained.
But no matter how undesirable a given definition may be
from a social standpoint, it will not be rejected unless it
seems inconsistent from the subject’s standpoint. We do
not aim at consistency with the demands of society, but
only at self-consistency. Social ends must be approached
indirectly. In other words, if the personal problem is solved
and unity of action achieved,the social problem disappears.
Everyone’s behavior is logical from his own point of
view. If another person’s behavior seems illogical to us,
the reason is that we do not understand it, not that he is
irrational.
The behavior of others seems irrational and incompre-
hensible only when the definitions they are striving to


maintain bear too little resemblance to our own. The be-
havior of those whose definitions are similar to ours, on
the other hand, seems quite rational and natural; it is un-
derstandable for the simple reason that we would behave
that way ourselves.
A comparison with other theories will clarify both the
similarities and differences. We accept Adler’s principle
of the unity of the personality, though not his theory of
maladjustment as due to fear or discouragement. We agree
with Freud that the subject is usually unaware of the
cause of his difficulties, though we do not agree with the
theory of repression. Instead of trying to remove complexes,
we try to change definitions. The value of the analytic
approach, in our opinion, is to demonstrate how certain
definitions originated, and thus to bring about reconsidera-
tion of those which were arrived at prematurely. We extend
the Gestalt principle to include concepts as well as per-
cepts, but reject the equilibrium theory as a form of
mechanism.
Both Freud and Adler, it seems to us, implicitly em-
ploy the same method which we advocate explicitly.
Freud attempts to render certain values inassimilable, and
in this way to bring about their vigorous rejection, by as-
sociating them with sexual connotations which are not
acceptable. Adler attempts to bring about a reorganiza-
tion by interpreting the resistance as due to fear or cow-
ardice. Almost no one, it is safe to say, can assimilate
the idea of himself as either an Oedipus or a coward.
3. CONCLUSION
Self-consistency cannot be accepted openly by psy-
chiatry until the way has been prepared by sacrificing the
doctrine of a mind divided against itself, conscious versus


unconscious, love versus hate, good versus evil. Plainly
derived from demonology, the variety of forms which this
conception of human nature assumes, in theology as well
as psychology, shows how persistent it is, and how readi-
ly it reappears when a new disguise is offered. Thus the
psychoanalytic pursuit of unconscious complexes, with
no stated goal except to destroy them, suggests the super-
stitious fervor of the witch-burner, and psychiatry in
general may be thought of as engaged in a moral crusade
against the demon Neurosis. The motive, of course, is to
establish consistency by attacking the supposed cause
of inconsistency, but the diagnosis of inconsistency in
dualistic terms as due to repressed anti-social instincts
is entirely too primitive and indiscriminate for scientific
purposes.
Not only the doctrine of the unconscious must go, but
with it the intolerant dominance of the analytic and me-
chanistic tradition prevailing in psychology generally. It
would be foolish to plead with this tradition; but fortunately
we do not have to plead. No one can escape the necessity
of accepting the concept of personality unless he refuses
to face the facts. The realistic scientist who is willing
to consider the evidence of organization, and who follows
established mathematical procedure, has no other choice
than acceptance. He is obliged to perceive that the con-
cept of personality is necessary to enable him to think
about organization, to unify the interpretation of the data,
and thus to serve his own need for unification and consis-
tency. He is obliged to reject the concept of neurotic
tendency and the fiction of a norm at the end of a distri-
bution curve because such ideas lead to inconsistency.
And for the same reason he must find away to do without
reflexes and reaction patterns. He must do this for his
own sake, to preserve his own organization. The prob


lems of science are not abstractions, but the human prob-
lems of scientists. If we did not strive for consistency in
ourselves, what possibly could be the motive for seeking
and demanding consistency in abstract scientific formu-
lations ?
As a person grows older, and as situations change, it
is expected that new values will be assimilated into the
organization and old values eliminated; meanwhile the
organization must be kept consistent as well as may be
in the process. For this reason the normal life is never
free from problems. Many, overwhelmed by their difficulties,
seek advice from any who will give it, and they are for-
tunate indeed if they find a wise counsellor. But where
shall they turn for that objective advice, based on a sur-
vey of the relevant facts, which deserves to be called
scientific advice? Psychology at present cannot answer
that question, for the facts have not been determined. Yet
it seems to us that a scientific basis for the art of giving
psychological advice is by no means inconceivable, and
will begin to develop rapidly as soon as we have a psy-
chology which regards human nature and its problems in a
realistic perspective and abandons the study of imaginary
beings invented to fit our superstitions and dogmas. The
inventory method seems to us both a valid method of
gathering the necessary facts, and perhaps the only me-
thod which can force the recognition of self-consistency
and personality.




TOWARD A NON-MECHANISTIC PSYCHOLOGY
The persistent failure to evolve a unified psychology
has had consequences which are twofold. On the one hand,
there is a growing interest in the so-called organismic
conception, a tendency away not only from concern with
the minutiae of behavior, but even from the study of be-
havior itself except as a means to an end. The new goal,
as we interpret it, is the conceptualization of a unit alto-
gether new to the scientist, in spite of its age in philo-
sophy—the self, or in more recent and acceptable language,
the personality. In this view behavior is not to be regarded
as important in its own right, descriptively, but only as a
sign, an indication, a puzzle to be interpreted. Our primary
task is not the execution of more and more experiments,
or the continuous accumulation of more and more facts,
but the development of a conceptual scheme which will
enable us to see in the facts a significant and orderly
relationship.
On the other hand, the failure of the old psychology
has encouraged a spirit of pessimism. The task seems
hopeless. It must not be forgotten that the old psychology
was cut out according to the orthodox scientific pattern,
and thus derives an authority which does not seem open
to question, despite the fact of its fruitlessness. Most
psychologists undoubtedly like to think of themselves
as loyal supporters of the scientific tradition, and are
reenforced in this attitude by the nature of their training.
Nor is there any doubt in their minds that the new psychol-
ogical tendencies, particularly those which deal with the


concept of a self or personality, are quite irreconcilable
with the mechanistic scheme of things to which science
in general has become so firmly committed. Between a
system of thought which has stood for three centuries,
and which seems to many the most distinctive achievement
of the modern world—between this and a vague, half-
formed conception, tainted with vitalistic and religious
associations, what is there to choose?
This conflict is present not only in psychology at
large, but also in the minds of most psychologists indivi-
dually. In each case, how the conflict goes may be seen
in their sympathies; those who favor mechanism turn
toward sociology. Yet even the latter seem to regard the
mechanistic scheme as a model, a goal toward which to
strive, even though it may be unattainable.
But granted that compromise is impossible, what then?
If the mechanistic pattern of thinking is discarded in its
entirety, where are we to turn? To such a question, if we
face it frankly, there is only one answer: we must lay a
a new foundation and undertake the building of a new
psychology. We may also hope to join our efforts to those
of sub-atomic physics, which is also non-mechanistic,
in the development of a more realistic philosophy of
science.
From the other branches of science, however, we must
be prepared to expect not help but opposition, for in some
degree at least what is called scientific method represents
a reaction against interpretation. But that is because in-
terpretation in the past has often been used not for the
purpose of prediction and control but merely, as a rule,
to extend some contemporaneous dogma; it has savored
too strongly of rationalization. Psychology, of course,has
been the favorite province of this sort of interpretation.
But until very recently in the history of psychology, not


even an effort could be made to achieve a unified view
of the facts themselves, for the reason that the very facts
which constitute the problem were not then available.
Thus psychology is at the cross-roads. It must choose
between a mechanistic system which is applauded but will
not work, and a non-mechanistic system which has not yet
taken definite form.
The difficulties are impressive. No considerable scien-
tific support for such a movement can be expected until
after it has proved successful, or in other words, until the
need of support has passed. We cannot seek converts be-
cause we have as yet nothing definite, except a program,
to offer. Only those who, like the writer, feel that mecha-
nism is a simplification to the point of absurdity will be
disposed to commit themselves on faith and burn their
bridges behind them. When we insist that the understanding
of behavior must begin with the personality as a central
concept, and that activity must be interpreted as the
struggle of an organized system to maintain itself in an
unstable environment, it would be folly to proceed half-
heartedly or to temporize with contradictions. The first
necessity for a scientific psychology is the conviction
that behavior is meaningful and that each life story has
its separate characteristic plot. To discover that plot is
to understand the organism’s behavior, and to see in its
adjustment to the environing world the dramatic unfolding
of its own purposive achievement. An organism cannot be
understood as a machine, nor behavior as a mechanical
response to a situation. We do not give up mechanism
therefore, but throw it away as cheerfully as a convales-
cent his crutch.




CHAPTER X
CLINICAL APPROACHES TO PERSONALITY STUDY
The essence of the clinical approach to personality
study is in the empirical methods developed in the medi-
cal sciences. Being primarily concerned with the human
organism as a whole, clinical science has developed em-
pirical methods of intensively studying and treating indi-
vidual cases. This study is accomplished with procedures
involving direct observation and manipulation under all
the conditions in which life exists. Instead of being pre-
occupied with dialectic theories concerning how things
might operate, the empirical observer makes direct studies
to discover all that may be known about any given phe-
nomenon.
A classic example of the value of empirical observa-
tion lies in the simple experiment of Harvey, the great
physiologist, who discovered the direction of venous
blood flow by the simple expedient of compressing a vein
on the back of his hand and then observing the sudden
surge of blood toward the heart when he removed the finger.
This fundamental observation disproved in one blow all
the ingenious theories evolved byearliermen.lt illustrates
the general principle that even the greatest theorists may
be in error unless their ideas are well founded on em-
pirical observations.
The development of modern scientific psychology is in
contrast with that of modern medicine because of the dif-
fering orientations of theoretical vs. empirical methods of
personality study. Modern psychology has been character-
ized by the appearance of many differing schools of thought
with the result that there has been little uniformity or
agreement concerning the basic facts of the science. Ob


servers in neighboring fields have been confused at the
ideological differences between introspectionism, Beha-
viorism, Gestalt psychology, hormic psychology and other
schools. The existence of so many differing viewpoints in
a field considered to be scientific has led neutral ob-
servers to question its scientific validity.
In contrast, the modem era of medicine has been
characterized by the absence of differing schools of
theory or practice and by remarkable uniformity throughout
the world concerning basic concepts and facts. Adhering
only to empirically or. experimentally determined facts,
medical science has supplanted theoretical approaches
with empirical detailed studies of the human organism at
all levels of integration and under all conditions. From
empirical observations which have slowly accumulated
over hundreds of years, there has been gradually sifted a
body of objectively determined facts, most of which have
been validated by experiment, and the clinical experience
of the whole medical profession. The practical result of
these empirical studies has been that medical methods
have been standardized throughout the world so that the
best practitioners everywhere may be found using similar
methods. This universal agreement on a basic body of
facts is what makes scientific medicine so statistically
reliable and valid.
AVOIDANCE OF METAPHYSICAL PROBLEMS
The thoroughgoing empiricist concerns himself with
learning all that is to be known by direct observation ac-
cording to thelatest methods of time and place rather than
with metaphysical speculations concerning the nature of
the unknown. Refusing to become involved in theoretical
disputes over unsolved problems, the empiricist contents
himself with that body of scientific fact which is the
most valid knowledge existent in the material world. It


must be emphasized that schools of thought can exist
only in relation to unsolved problems or metaphysical
questions; conversely, there can be no disagreement con-
cerning objectively demonstrated facts. Part of the confu-
sion in modern psychology may be explained in terms of
theoretical disputes over unsolved problems or because
of attempts to construct theoretical systems on the basis
of limited data. In contrast, the medical scientist concerns
himself only with objective fact and depends upon more
intensive observation rather than upon theorizing in his
search to discover the nature of the unknown. It is signi-
ficant that all of the great medical discoveries have been
based upon empiric observations such as the discovery of
the nature of diabetes mellitus by noting the sweet taste
of diabetic urine.
The difference between traditional psychological and
medical approaches may be illustrated in connection with
the handling of the mind-body problem. Current viewpoints
among psychologists range from the rigid adherence of
the Behaviorist to monism (materialism and mechanistic
approaches), to the traditional dualism of scholastic psy-
chology. Most psychologists find it necessary to identify
themselves with some particular school of thought con-
cerning this and other controversial problems. In the
philosophical tradition, armchair psychologists have
sought to make their contribution by evolving newer and
more comprehensive theories of the nature of things. The
inevitable result of such a profusion of theoretical view-
points has been that many psychologists have dissipated
their efforts resolving ideological or semantic problems
rather than in collecting and collating empirical observa-
tions.
The empirical approach ignores such metaphysical
questions as the mind-body problem and concerns itself
with knowledge based on direct observations and scienti-
fic information. Placing the main emphasis on the study


of the organism as a whole, detailed information concern-
ing part function is related to the behavior of the whole
organism. The empiricist is interested not so much in
theories as in observations and objective facts which he
can elicit and check by himself. Theoretical constructs
may be valuable in certain stages of investigation in
which it may be desirable to formulate hypotheses to
stimulate further research but from the empirical view-
point, to discover new facts is the ultimate objective
rather than to formulate new theories. If sufficient facts
are discovered, then theoretical viewpoints become
unnecessary,
SEMANTIC DIFFICULTIES IN THEORIZING
From its philosophical antecedents, modern psychology
has inherited its interest in attempting to translate the
phenomena and meanings of life into verbal symbols. The
semantic difficulties in achieving a valid symbolization
of anything so complex as life and personality are stagger-
ing. As psychologists have begun to discover the semantic
problems in describing the complexities of behavior, ef-
forts to resolve these problems have typically resulted in
terminological complexities as the older terms used by
laymen have been replaced by newer vocabularies coined
to communicate the more precise meanings demanded by
scientific usage. Unfortunately, this trend toward the
’‘refinement” of concepts by redefinition of old terms and
the invention of new ones has resulted in a terminological
confusion which tremendously complicates the study of
psychology. Many concepts have become so ’’refined” as
to require many different sets of terms which the student
must learn to use if he is to comprehend the evolutionary
development of the various concepts. One of the results


of this preoccupation among psychologists concerning
niceties of terminology is that the student spends a large
part of his time learning to master the terminological mazes
and in keeping abreast of the latest fads. It is unfortunate
that many of the newer theoretical contributions in psy-
chology have been phrased in new and sometimes obscure
terminologies which increase the confusion by adding new
meaning to old terms. It may be concluded that semantic
difficulties have consistently attended the evolution of
psychological theory and have introduced much of the
confusion which exists in the field. Modem medicine has
largely solved this problem by introducing a standard
nomenclature of disease which is accepted everywhere. A
system has been devised for standardizing all terms, and
redefining old terms in terms of a more objective system.
A further and more important difficulty relates to the
inadequacy of existing terminology in describing the com-
plexity of personality. It must be recognized that it is
not possible with existing terminology to give an exact
description of any personality so as to describe the rich-
ness of expressive behavior which characterizes indivi-
duality. Here again, a notable difference exists between
the evolution of modern medicine and modern psychology.
The trend in medical education is to eliminate formal lec-
ture courses by (a) requiring students to become oriented
to each specialty by required readings, and (b) through
intensive contacts with case materials beginning in the
first year and continuing through the fourth year when
the work is entirely clinical. The result of this empirical
method is that the medical student experiences other
personalities with all the affective-intuitive-intellectual
resources of his own mentality. The medical student
learns by himself living through contacts with all types
of personalities under all types of conditions. The result


ing richness of impressions is more adequate than any
theoretical verbal construct can ever be. Clinical expe-
rience with this empirical method has led to the general!*
zation that the best instrument for the evaluation of a
personality is the well-trained human mentality.
In contrast, modem psychology has been largely a
laboratory science with students receiving few intimate
contacts with intensive direct personality study. Although
training in psychology has given the student comprehen-
sive knowledge concerning the historical development of
human thinking concerning personality, familiarity with
theory and schools of psychology has proven to be com-
pletely inadequate for knowledge of personality. The
failure of many psychologists to be able to deal effectively
with practical personality problems is thus related to the
inadequacy of their formal academic training and particu-
larly to the inability of existing terminology to deal ef-
fectively with the richness of personality.
BASIC ESSENTIALS OF CLINICAL TRAINING
Professional psychologists are occasionally bewildered
on discovering that the intelligent layman frequently has
a practical understanding of personality which approaches
in validity his own insights. Although unable to express
his insights. into personality with the approved psycho-
logical terminology of the moment, the layman develops
an intuitive understanding of personality which is learned
by having lived through and empirically observed with all
the resources of his own personality the behavior of many
other men in a wide variety of situations. The experienced
business executive, for example, has usually experienced
a variety of human problems far greater in scope than that
of many academic psychologists who became involved


with theoretical issues early in life and who have lived
in a relatively sheltered academic environment with only
a limited cross-section of human problems to deal with.
Substantial degrees of psychological understanding are
distributed throughout the entire population due to the
fact that every person has wide opportunities for empirical
personality study without any formal psychological training.
The experimental-statistical approach of modern psy-
chology is more primarily concerned with the description
of general principles and central tendencies than with the
dynamics of individual cases. When carried to extremes,
this trend has even resulted in a denial of the importance
of the dynamics of individual cases on the grounds that
it is a waste of time to attempt to describe individual
variations which have no general descriptive significance.
It has therefore become fashionable to write textbooks of
psychology which present a collection of isolated experi-
mentally derived facts which are supposedly representative
of everyone and no one.
The clinical method is primarily concerned with the
empirical study of individuals with detailed analysis of
the field of interaction of the organism meeting the en-
vironment. Although some importance may be attributed to
relating individual performance to measures of central
tendency and group variability, these objectives are secon-
dary to the basic purpose of understanding individual
dynamics. The clinical method therefore involves detailed
descriptions of all the individual situations in which
organisms are found. Although the number of individual
patterns is theoretically infinite since no two persons are
ever identical in all their characteristics at any one moment
or even for succeeding moments, in actual practice, how-
ever, constitutional and environmental foundations of
personality are constant and homogeneous enough so that


a number of basic syndromes both of personality traits
and of patterns of maladjustment may be identified. Mr.
Lecky was interested in describing the most common pat-
terns of maladjustment in the major areas of life and also
in cataloguing the various types of problem solutions
available in each life area. The existence of such a body
of information enormously simplifies both diagnosis and
treatment since (a) knowing the area of maladjustment, it
is possible to surmise possible aetiologic causes on the
basis of general probabilities without knowing the details
of the individual case, and (b) knowing the pattern of mal-
adjustment, one can experiment with problem solutions
which are known to be effective in other similar cases.
In order to make this method work, it is necessary to have
a wide empiric knowledge of the causes and solutions for
maladjustment.
It is not the purpose of this little book to present an
authoritative summary of all the facts of anatomy, bio-
chemistry, physiology, pathology, psychology and sociolo-
gy which are relevant for personality study. To do so
would require more or less complete reproduction of the
latest textbooks in these fields. The student will do better
to study the basic texts directly rather than to attempt
to learn the material second-hand, in order to decide
for himself what is important in each field. Our present
aim is to indicate how these basic sciences maybe related
in the empirical study of actual clinical material in large
samples so that the student comes to have knowledge of
all that is objectively known about the human organism
and all the conditions in which it exists. It is stated as a
basic axiom that every student must receive direct inten-
sive training in each of the basic biologic and social
sciences mentioned above. Such an extensive experience
provides a basic orientation concerning the various aspects


and levels of function in the human organism so that the
student comes to know empirically what is, and what is
not, possible in personality. After having completed such
a course of basic training supplemented by clinical exper-
ience, the student acquires a knowledge of personality as
a dynamic totality which is more complete than could be
possible from academic theoretical study alone. In con-
trast with the traditional academic approach to psychology
in which the student spent most of his time reviewing the
historical evolution of the various schools of thought,
modern empiric training emphasizes an organismic learn-
ing process in which the student learns with all the re-
sources of his personality through direct contacts with
case materials.
Because of his extensive training in all the medical
specialties, the modern physician has the widest opportu-
nities for empirical personality study of any specialist.
Sooner or later, the widely experienced physician gains
intimate personal contacts with a wide sample of people
under all conditions of living. Not all physicians have
utilized these opportunities for gaining insights into
personality, but even those with lesser sagacity have
usually gained practical personality insights which enable
them to deal effectively with minor problems. The dis-
crepancies between the attitudes of psychologists and
physicians may therefore be partially explained by the
differences between academic and clinical-empirical back-
grounds. Psychologists are better grounded in theory and
research methods, while physicians have a wider clinical
training and experience.
The basis of the most modern clinical training programs
is to provide the student with intensive contacts with
case materials and clinical procedures almost from the
beginning of training. Required readings are utilized to


orient the student with the formal subject matter in each
field, but the major emphasis is on learning by doing. The
student participates in this learning process with all the
resources of his personality by first-hand observation of
the methods of more experienced men, thereby learning to
evaluate methods and results through the accumulating
richness of wide experience. In this practical training
process, the student gradually masters the most modern
techniques of time and place including familiarity with
many details which have never been incorporated in even
the most authoritative texts.
This process of learning by participation of the whole
personality in a wide variety of training experiences is
necessarily a slow one, and should be differentiated from
mere rote learning of formal lecture material. The experience
of medical education has been that many students are
capable of intellectually memorizing the formal subject
matter of the medical specialties in much less than the
required four year course. But intellectual familiarity with
didactic textbook material does not insure that the student
will develop clinical judgment and practical ability. This
comes only through a slow conditioning process which
requires five to fifteen years of graduate and postgraduate
training. To require the degree of proficiency required for
certification in many of the medical specialties now re-
quires from four to seven years of practical experience
beyond graduation from medical school. Genuine maturity
of clinical judgment frequently is not attained until after
twenty or more years of training and experience. The
rapid evolution of new methods in ail the clinical spe-
cialties renders it necessary to study continuously
throughout one’s professional career in order not to drop
behind.


LEVELS OF PERSONALITY STUDY
The beginning student is frequently perplexed by the
fact that several divisions of biological and social science
profess to study the human organism and to offer relatively
complete systems of explanation on different levels of
complexity or integration. The history of psychological
science has been replete with attempts to construct
theoretical systems based on morphological, biochemical,
physiological, psychological or social approaches to
personality study. While all of these viewpoints have
contributed valuable insights into limited aspects of
personality, attempts to construct a comprehensive system
based on any one viewpoint have failed because personality
is so complex that there is no one specialty capable of
offering any complete explanation. Modern training re-
quirements are based on the recognition that only by
intensive and complete training in all the clinical special-
ties can a person know all that there is to be known
about the human organism and its behavior. Persons lack-
ing in this comprehensive training will necessarily be
limited in their insights and competence.
Recognition of the fact that a single unitary organism
shows behavior which may be studied on several levels
of complexity of integration renders it essential to attempt
a reintegration of clinical findings so that the unitary
nature of the organism is never overlooked. Although the
principles of holism have been developed by Gestalt psy-
chology, appreciation of the "wholeness” of the organism
depends not only on a verbal acceptance of Gestalt prin-
ciples but also on a practical working knowledge of how
data from the basic and clinical sciences may be inte-
grated in a genuinely holistic approach to personality
structure. Medical training provides a more comprehensive


opportunity for direct personality study than does the
more academic training of psychologists who rarely acquire
first-hand comprehension of the significance of the clini-
cal specialties in relation to each other. Fortunately,
however, one does not have to enter into formal medical
study in orde to gain intimate experience with clinical
methods of personalitv stud i. Persons with a broad train-
ing in the basic sciences and direct experience with the
methods of clinical practice may be able to acquire a
working knowledge of these empirical methods. For the
purposes of the present discussion, it suffices to state
that the basic sciences of morphology (normal and patho-
logical), biochemistry, physiology, psychology and sociol-
ogy are concerned only with limited aspects of the orga-
nism and that any complete understanding can only be
achieved through the synthesis and integration of all
facts available from all sources.
INTEGRATION THEORY
It is convenient to regard biochemistry, physiology,
psychology and sociology as dealing with different levels
of integration in individual human organisms which are
distinguished by morphological and physiological differ-
ences. Biochemistry is concerned with metabolic energy
transformations on cellular levels of personalityorganiza-
tion. These biochemical processes in individual cells
are the basic substratum of personality. Physiology is the
science of the functions of the organ systems of the body,
i.e. of part functions on the level of organ rather than
cellular integration. Psychology is concerned with the
higher level integrations of the total organism. Sociology
finally, studies the nature of phenomena related to the
interactions of individuals and groups. Keeping in mind


that every organism shows behavior on all levels of inte-
gration, it is important to emphasize that it is artificial
to regard data from any level of personality study in isola-
tion and without relation to functions occurring simulta-
neously on other levels.
A distinguishing characteristic of higher level integra-
tions in the organism is the appearance of new configura-
tions or emergents with properties which could not have
been predicted from knowledge of functions on lower
levels of integration. Thus organic systems manifest
properties over and -above those of cellular units, and the
whole organism manifests behavior patterns over and
above the characteristics of constituent organ systems.
Concerned primarily with high level integrations of the
organism, psychology must deal with those psychic func-
tions such as consciousness, affective-impulsive com-
ponents, intellectual functions and other phenomena which,
although dependent upon cellular and organ substratum,
present distinctive attributes which may only be under-
stood as emergents whose holistic properties constitute
new configurations greater than the sum of the parts
(lower level integrations). Thus, the subjective con-
scious awareness of jealousy or a beautiful sunset, are
higher level emergents which, although dependent on in-
tact lower level function on biochemical and physiological
levels, involve distinctive, higher level phenomena with
characteristics not predictable from knowledge of lower
level phenomena occurring simultaneously.
Much of the confusion in psychological theory has
resulted from failure to recognize clearly the relation of
the various basic sciences to integration theory. Attempt-
ing to apply systematically the methods and findings of the
basic sciences of biochemistry and physiology to personal-
ity study, it has not been recognized that while biochemical


and physiological explanations are valid on lower levels
of personality integration and are therefore the founda-
tions of personality. Nevertheless, higher level psycho-
logical functions present emergents which can only be
dealt with effectively on purely psychological levels of
interpretation. Behaviorism, for example, deals effectively
with lower level integrations of physiological functions
on reflex levels but is completely inadequate to deal with
higher level integrations and the resulting emergents.
Gestalt psychology made its prime contribution in dis-
covering holistic principles and other characteristics of
high level integration particularly in the field of percep-
tion. Freudian psycho-analysis attempted to deal with the
highest level integrations but with inadequate experimental
orientation and frequent failure to consider the interrela-
tions between higher and lower level integrations. The only
valid approach is one which encompasses the study of the
organism in all its aspects and on all levels of integra-
tion. To do so is to avoid the error of becoming identified
with "schools” emphasizing elementarism rather than
holism.
INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Under normal conditions the functions carried on at the
various levels of integration in the organism proceed auto-
nomously with biochemical and physiological processes
providing the necessary physical substratum for higher
psychic functions. The organization of the healthy organ-
ism is so perfectly balanced that under normal conditions
the metabolic and autonomic functions proceed efficiently
and automatically, thus allowing the higher psychic func-
tions to operate smoothly and without interruption. Under
ideal conditions of operation, the higher psychic functions
proceed parallel with and independently of lower functions.
Thus a normal healthy person whose transient physiologi-
cal needs are satisfied is free to go about a day of intel


lectual effort without interference from lower functions.
The perfection of integration of the normal healthy organ-
ism thus permits the effective functional isolation of
psychic and somatic functions. This functional indepen-
dence of higher from lower functions in the normal organ-
ism gives rise to those phenomena which led to the philo-
sophical concept of psychosomatic parallelism.
The philosophical concept of interactionism was evolved
to explain situations in which somatic factors determine
psychic functions or where psychic factors control somatic
functions. Under conditions of metabolic or physiological
disturbance or need, it is inevitable that disturbances in
lower level functions will be reflected in disturbances of
psychic functions which are dependent for their continuity
upon intact somatic function. Thus, any gross cellular or
physiological disorder will automatically interfere with
higher level integrations. Conversely, conflicts and other
psychopathological reactions may produce disturbances in
autonomic function which may result in transient or perma-
nent somatic disorder. One must therefore be constantly
alert to the possibility that disturbance on any level of
integration in the organism will be reflected on other levels.
If the complex interrelationships on all levels of inte-
gration in the organism are clearly understood with par-
ticular reference to phenomena which have led to the
philosophical concepts of monism and the various forms
of dualism, it will be understood that the controversies
between proponents of monism or dualism are spurious
and related to the artificial attempt to isolate functions
which cannot be validly considered except in relation to
all the functions of a unitary organism. The psychologist
will recognize that although lower level metabolic and
physiological processes can and do interact with higher
level psychic functions, under normal conditions these


psychic functions may be remarkably well insulated from
many types of disorder on lower levels. This functional
insulation of psychic from autonomic functions, as long as
the-nervous system is intact, provides the explanation for
cases in which psychic life appears unimpaired in spite
of progressive deterioration of the soma. Evidence from
psychosurgery, neurology and psychiatry confirms the
conclusion that under normal conditions the psychic life
may be so well integrated as to resist tremendous vicissi-
tudes of somatic support.
Although every organ system of the organism partici-
pates in the totality of behavior, higher level integrations
are mediated through the central nervous system which is
the direct somatic substratum of psychic life. Without
intact cellular structure and function in the nervous sys-
tem, normal psychic functions are impossible. But with an
intact substratum, psychic functions constitute an inde-
pendent internally consistent system involving higher
units such as affective experiences, sensation, memories,
thoughts and value systems which have no qualitative
counterparts on lower levels. Each level of integration
must be described and understood in terms of the function-
al units with which it is concerned. Thus, cellular meta-
bolic functions can only be described in biochemical terms;
physiological processes must be described in terms de-
scriptive of organ functions; and psychological functions
can only be dealt with adequately in terms of the contents
of conscious awareness even though these may be appro-
priately related to lower level integrations proceeding
simultaneously. It is thus illogical and invalid to attempt
to describe psychic experiences in terms of biochemical
processes or neural action currents.


MULTIPLE ASPECT THEORY
From the foregoing discussion, it becomes apparent
that the global organism may be described from multiple
aspects with the understanding that we are dealing with
a totality which possesses qualities which are functions
of Gestalts or wholes which are greater than the sum of
the parts. Anatomy, biochemistry, physiology and psy-
chology are not independent or mutually exclusive sys-
tems but merely different viewpoints from which a unitary
organism may be regarded. Every organism presents mul-
tiple aspects, any one of which may be made the subject
of systematic investigation. The relation of these various
aspects may be understood in terms of the various levels
of biological integration revealed in the functions of the
organism. It is only through a complete understanding of
the phenomena of integration that the interrelations of
somatic and psychic phenomena may be understood. This
understanding is perhaps best achieved by the empirical
study of all the basic and clinical sciences which include
all that is known about living things and man inparticular.
Any attempt to regard the organism exclusively from one
viewpoint or aspect is artificial and invalid.
The Essence of Personality. On the highest levels of
integration, the essential nature of the mature adult human
personality is determined by the unique pattern of affective
and intellectual attitudes which are determined by exper-
ience. It is on the level of intellectual symbolic behavior
that the widest individual differences exist. Every person
is indeed unique in all the aspects of his personality, but
variations on cellular and organ system levels do not as
significantly determine the individual configuration of
personality as do the feelings and attitudes characteristic


of psychic life. Ultimately, the effectiveness of any per-
sonality is determined not so much by its physical morphol-
ogy, its cellular metabolism, or its physiological functions
as by the system of feelings, ideas and habitual reactions
which determine its style of life. It is not the physical
characteristics of a book which determine its value, but the
ideas conveyed on its pages. Personality evaluation must
be conducted with constant reference to the old axiom that
you can’t tell what’s in a book by its cover.
Mr. Lecky was greatly influenced by the fact that a
large percentage of psychological maladjustments are
directly related to present conflicts caused by the failure
of the person to solve problems of everyday life with
existing resources. Although it is important to recognize
somatic etiologic factors when they exist, these may be
identified in only a small percentage of disorders. Con-
versely, the majority of psychological disorders are pri-
marily determined by purely psychogenic etiologic factors.
It therefore becomes of the utmost importance to evaluate
the past and present style of life with particular reference
to innate resources, habitual conditioned reactions, affec-
tive-impulsive patterns, ideas and attitudes which deter-
mine the style of life. On the basis of his comparative
experience with psychoanalytic vs. common sense analy-
sis, Mr. Lecky became convinced that although childhood
etiologic factors might be contributory to later maladjust-
ment, it is most important to evaluate the factors of the
immediate situation which cause conflict. It is always
scientifically desirable to elucidate etiologic relation-
ships but the ultimate goal is to determine what can be
done about it in the future.
For Mr. Lecky, the central problem in personality
theory was the study of the individual style of life with
particular reference to awareness and conceptions of Self.


Objective psychology had ignored or denied problems
relating to "Self” because of methodological inadequacies
which largely precluded its study of the subjective reali-
ties with which psychology as science should be distinc-
tively concerned. Mr. Lecky was greatly disturbed by the
failure of Behavioristic psychology to be able to deal with
subjective experience and higher level integrations. Reflex-
ology and other elementaristic approaches seemed adequate
only in explaining behavior on lower levels of integration,
and were totally inadequate in dealing with personality
dynamics of the type emphasized by psychoanalysis.
Although it is important to identify elementary attributes
and part functions of experience, the phenomena of higher
level integrations can only be understood in terms of com-
plete configurations or units of experience. Explanations
in terms of conditioned reactions, sensory units, action
currents, intellectual abilities, associations and • other
mental elements must be abandoned in favor of dynamic
interpretations related to an understanding of the total
situation or style of life. This approach was undoubtedly
derived from his intimate contacts with Adlerian Individual
Psychology which he attempted to extend systematically
and refine in harmony with the objective viewpoint of ex-
perimental psychology.
Rejecting the crude mechanistic stimulus-response
psychology then in vogue, Mr. Lecky attempted to discover
what factors in the organism were most important in deter-
mining the selective reactivity and goal-seeking behavior
so characteristic of individuals. Contrary to the Freudian
conception of adult personality organization being deter-
mined by infantile and childhood experiences, it appeared
to Mr. Lecky that the basic pattern of personality was
determined by the person’s conception of himself. This,
conception of one’s self was considered to be the nucleus


of Mind defined as the totality of conscious experience
unique to the individual. More important than anything else
is the attempt to discover what a person feels and thinks
about himself and about life. In other words, it is not so
much what a person is, or how he got that way, but what
he is going to do about it, which is important.*
Effective personality is only secondarily determined
by a healthy body, attractive physical appearance, level
of intelligence, temperament and other constitutional
factors. All these maybe present in a person who is gross-
ly maladjusted. It is only when these desirable attributes
are consolidated by effective training into an internally
consistent and valid style of life that the personality be-
comes adequate to deal with life. After postulating the
primary importance of style of life, it is necessary to
understand that this is largely determined by the person’s
philosophy of life including his educational and cultural
status, his mores, his traits and his Weltanschauung. To
the degree in which a person is capable of volitional con-
trol over behavior, this control is governed by his concep-
tions of himself in relation to the world. In situations
where he is not impulsively dominated by affective states,
a person does what he thinks he ought to do, based on his
experience. It is therefore important to systematically
sample a person’s ideas and attitudes in all areas of life
in order to gain insight into personality organization from
which future behavior may be predicted and modified. Mr.
Lecky believed that any valid system of psychology must
deal effectively with the more intangible phenomena on the
highest levels of integration. To fail to deal with the
totality of subjective experience is to miss the essence
of psychology.
♦This fact is recognized in many old folk-sayings, as in: Hand-
some is as handsome does.


If personality as a whole is considered to be a high
level Gestalt in contrast with reflex behavior and autono-
mic functions which are lower level integrations, it can be
studied only in terms of the whole organism. While experi-
mental and statistical methods may be effective in study-
ing part functions and central tendencies, the individuality
which is the essence of each personality requires the use
of clinical empirical methods for its individual study.
Reorientation. Instead of thinking of the various physio-
logical processes as mechanical effects which are auto-
matic responses to stimuli, they may be more validly
regarded as general behavior tendencies involving the
organism as a whole and require the language of psychol-
ogy for intelligent discussion. The co-operative participa-
tion of individual cells and organs in the behavior of the
whole organism would then be explained not as a matter
of external compulsion, but of inner necessity dictated by
changes in local conditions. This permits us to treat of
data in terms of action rather than reaction, and hence to
employ psychological concepts in dealing with physi-
ological functions. The diminishing importance of stimuli
has, in fact, been noticeable for some years in psychol-
ogy. This does not mean that the doctrine of control
through the stimulus has been abandoned by psychologists
any more than by neurologists. On the contrary, it has led
among mechanists to louder insistence upon the impor-
tance of internal stimuli. It is apparently their hope to
avoid the realization that a stimulus remains a stimulus
no matter where it originates.
That behavior is selective, and that the basis of selec-
tion must lie within the organism that makes the selection
is obvious; it cannot lie in stimuli from the environment,
else all organisms of the same species in the same situa-
tion would behave alike. Since selection cannot conceivably


be the function of a particular stimulus, some psycholo-
gists have attempted to make it the function of a particular
organ, such-as the brain. Even this assumption can be
sustained no longer, and the conclusion must be accepted
that the function of selection is not localized but belongs
to the organism as a whole. The problem appears in its
simplest form in those lower organisms which have no
brain or nervous system but exhibit selective behavior.
Manifestly a change in the physiological state must be
assumed to accompany every change in behavior, but be-
havior cannot be adequately conceptualized in terms of
these physiological states. Thus, the organic reflex does
not occur in nature as an isolated phenomenon; it is merely
observed as such because the field of observation is
limited and concurrent phenomena neglected. The actual
behavior unit is not organic but organismic. It is in terms
of this organismic unit, which immediately becomes invisi-
ble when we attempt to study it analytically, that behavior
must be conceived. The unity of the organism is a phe-
nomenon of organization. The concept of organization of
the organism refers to its dynamic state, and in order to
conceive of the organization as a unity, it is necessary to
give it a purposive definition and describe it in psycho-
logical language. The reason is that the unity is functional.
The organs actively cooperate in what the organism is
doing, and therefore the behavior of the organism must be
interpreted in terms of the psychological concept of mo-
tivation.
Instead of physiological concepts holding the key to
psychological problems, therefore, the real situation seems
nearer the reverse. For although the analytic type of ap-
proach is necessary to obtain certain kinds of facts, the
organization of the phenomena is at the same time con-
cealed by this technique, and a valid interpretation rendered
impossible. To escape this dilemma, we are forced to


assume that the direction of causality from a dynamic
standpoint runs not from part to whole, but from whole to
part, i.e. from higher levels of integration to lower. So far
as individual organs are concerned, integration is not so
much a forced mechanical operation determined by patterns
of stimulation as it is a co-operative response, a local
tendency to participate in the dynamic orientation of the
whole individual.
In general, it may be stated that the significance of a
stimulus to the organism depends primarily on the dynamic
state of the organism at the time the stimulus is received.
If the dynamic state existing at the moment is not easily
dislodged, stimuli which would evoke conflicting motives
will tend to be disregarded. If the motive present is not
strongly organized, or if the stimulus is one which cannot
be disregarded or revalued, the organism will be motivated
in a new direction, and if the former motive persists, a
condition of temporary conflict ensues.
It is of the highest importance to the organism that
this conflict be settled with a minimum of delay. Pavlov
has shown with dogs, and Krasnogorski with children, that
if a conflict persists, the outcome is a general disorgani-
zation, with inability to unify in any direction. The fact
that serious disorganization occurs infrequently seems to
indicate that the organism possesses the capacity of re-
enforcing one motive at the expense of the other, for it is
only by selection among the alternate lines of action that
unity can even be hoped for. This reinforcement, moreover,
cannot be understood as a function of the environment in
most situations, but only as a dynamic reorientation of the
organism. It represents an active effort of the organism to
preserve unity of action and avoid disorganization. The
experiments of Morgan, who has shown that the presence
of distracting stimuli often leads to a measurable increase


in both output and energy production, support the concept
of an organism reinforcing the original line of action in
spite of distraction. The phenomenon of choosing a single
course of action, and then carrying it out, is familiar out-
side the laboratory, and is often thought to indicate such
qualities as will-power, persistence, interest, strength of
character, or even of stubbornness, narrow-mindedness or
insanity. The point is that the subject persists in a course
of action independent of environmental stimulation. Con-
versely the failure to make and execute decisions is com-
monly regarded as evidence of deficiency or weakness of
character. The question of the desirability ot inappropriate-
ness of behavior, from the viewpoint of the observer or of
society, introduces subjective and egocentric criteria
which are irrelevant to the scientific problem. The indivi-
dual is governed by the necessity of maintaining unity or
self-consistency regardless of whether society approves
or disapproves of his method.
Another source of confusion which must be avoided is
the assumption that motives are independent forces which
seize control of the organism and compel it to do their
bidding. This is sheer demonology, and the fact that many
psychologists still think of their motives in this way is a
function of the mechanistic viewpoint which prohibits the
concept of self-activity in any form. We must think of
motives simply as states of organization. Finally, let us
point out that the logical classification of motives into a
few categories such as escape, hunger, sex,etc.,is achieved
by disregarding the real psychological facts of organiza-
tion in favor of an imaginary picture which agrees with
mechanistic preconceptions. Such theories, which leave
the individual’s problem out of account, become unneces-
sary when organisms are conceived as units in themselves,
each striving to maintain its individual unity in a contin


uous situation which is ever changing. Before a useful and
realistic psychology can be developed, its goal must be
changed from the study of behavior, which leads to mere
descriptive analysis of separate bodily movements, to the
study of dynamic systems taken as integrated wholes. We
shall hold, then, that the maintenance of unity is the pri-
mary goal of every living system. Pleasure is associated
with the achievement of unity, while pain is associated
with conflict and disorganization.




CHAPTER XI
A NUCLEAR THEORY OF MIND
Fundamental to any comprehensive theory of person-
ality is the question of the dynamics of mental organiza-
tion, i.e. HOW the individual mind evolves. The Self-
Consistency theory approaches this problem by postulating
that all behavior represents the operation of a universal
dynamic principle defined as the striving for Unity or Self-
Consistency. What must be kept unified and internally
consistent is the mind, the organization of feelings, ideas
and attitudes which has been evolved from the interaction
of the organism meeting its environment. The nucleus of
this organization of feelings, ideas and attitudes consists
of the person’s ideas of self. These ideas of self are arbi-
trarily identified as being positive and negative. Positive
ideas of self are defined as involving socially acceptable
(good) evaluations ranging from “I’m one of the boys. I
like most people and they like me, etc.’’ to “I’m a very
important person. I have a name to live up to, etc.” Nega-
tive ideas of self involve self-depreciation and awareness
of personal inadequacy ranging from “I’m not mechanically
inclined.’’ or “I’m no good at sports.’’ to “I’m just a fall
guy. Everytime I do something socially, I make a fool of
myself. Happiness is not for me, etc.”
Origins of Mind. As here defined, an idea is an inter-
pretation by a person of an experience (the interaction of
the individual, through the media of the so-called sense
organs, both internal and external, with internal and exter-
nal stimuli). An idea is the meaning of an experience
entirely from the point of view of the individual; it may
range from a vague mental image (visual, auditory, etc.)


to an hallucination, from a common sense observation to
a scientific concept. The interpretation of experience
begins at birth or even earlier. It may be that the infant
at birth has a personality which is organized about two
ideas, namely, feeding and security; this is not to imply
that consciously formulated ideas exist in the adult sense,
but simply to infer that there has been a dynamic inter-
action between the foetus and its environment characterized
by the development of these two needs in the organism.
In any case, the neonate is a dynamic organism, full of
available energy, equipped with a total apparatus which
makes possible the interpretation of experience, from the
start, and as a result of such accumulating interpretations
it evolves an organization of ideas which will largely de-
termine the directions of energy distributions. Very early
in development, the infant begins to differentiate between
the organism which is himself and the environment, and
these ideas of seif form the nucleus of the developing
organization of ideas which is mind. Recognizing the im-
portance of the fact that the infant’s earliest impressions
of the world are with and through its mother or nurse, but
giving a different theoretical interpretation from Freud,
Lecky believed that the origins of personality are deter-
mined by the behavior of the mother or nurse with particu-
lar reference to its consistency. If the growing infant is to
acquire a "nucleus” which has internal consistency, it is
imperative that the significant person does not exhibit
variable behavior. Variable behavior on the part of the
mother or nurse will make identification extremely difficult
or impossible, and the child’s earliest interpretations may
be so confused or conflicting as to result in lack of inte-
gration right from the start. Of course, pathological be-
havior on the part of the significant person, even if consis-
tent, may lead to relatively consistent overt behavior


in the child which will also be of pathological quality
because of its inappropriateness with reality.
The Role of Assimilation. The earliest interpretations
of the infant are automatically assimilated uncritically
because of the absence of any reference points from which
to evaluate them. These earliest ideas, particularly of
self, are fundamental in determining the nature of and the
rate at which new ideas are assimilated (completely ac-
cepted as an integral part of the total organization of ideas,
i.e. the mind). The criterion as to whether or not an idea
has been completely accepted is the behavior of the person,
for once an idea has been assimilated it must be main-
tained by the person unless displaced by a reorganization
of ideas. Ambivalent behavior in all areas indicates an
unstable nucleus lacking in self-consistency in which
contradictory ideas or interpretations compete for accep-
tance. When one is finally accepted and the other rejected,
ambivalency disappears as internal consistency is a-
chieved. This behavior may occur in a child which has
never clearly identified itself because of variable behavior
on the part of significant people in the childhood situation.
An idea formed as the result of a new experience, in
order to be immediately assimilated, must seem to the
individual to be consistent with the total organization
of ideas and particularly with reference to ideas of self.
Consistent ideas tend to be quickly assimilated. Incon-
sistent ideas may (a) be immediately rejected or ignored,
(b) be considered transiently, causing ambivalency until
accepted or rejected, (c) if presented cogently enough,
may force reorganization of mind with elimination of older,
inconsistent ideas and retention of newer, more consistent
ideas, or (d) may result in more or less permanent dis-
organization if the inconsistency is not resolved. It is
obvious that the organization of ideas which is mind is


very unstable and inconstant since it is being constantly
modified by new experience which results in a continuous
process of assimilation and reorganization governed by
the universal dynamic principle, the striving for unity.
Examples: Any part of the total stimulation of the organism
by its environment may lead to an interpretation
which is a function of the total organization of pre-
existing ideas. These may involve spontaneous
impressions or formalized presentations by teachers,
books, radio, hypnosis, etc.
An individual who, as the result of experience,
has assimilated ideas of superiority and has been
successful in maintaining these ideas of self, will
strongly resist any direct threats to these ideas,
for the striving for unity demands that these ideas
be maintained.
An individual who conceives of himself as in-
adequate may strongly reject reassurance by a
friend or the therapist and may develop feelings of
guilt if he undergoes an experience which violates
these conceptions of self. For until nuclear reor-
organization occurs, different conceptions are in-
consistent and would preclude unified action.
The Principle of Unification. Entirely independent
of any valuation placed by the person or by society upon
his unique organization of ideas, is the fact that he must
strive to maintain it because it is the only one he has.
The need of the organism to organize its experience into
an integrated whole is the basis for the principle of uni-
fication. A person must unify his experience in order to
have some internally consistent system upon which to
base action. Ideas which have been assimilated, those
which constitute the total organization of ideas (mind)
and which seem to the individual to be consistent with
each other, must be maintained. Evidence gained from
studies of experimental neuroses in animals and from
clinical observations of human neuroses indicate that


any breakdown in the ability to consistently discriminate
cues results in a neurotic disorganization of behavior
as the organism is unable to unify experience, and there-
fore cannot formulate a plan of action. The introduction
of inconsistent ideas must modify behavior in one of three
ways. Either it must act in such a way that the integrity
of the total organization of ideas will seem intact (con-
sistent), or it must reorganize the mind (particularly
ideas of self), or it must become disorganized pending
rejection of either alternative conflicting idea. Behavior,
reflects the need to maintain maximum consistency, i.e,
that pattern which will permit the maximum number of
ideas comprising the total organization to be maintained
or, conversely, that path which will involve minimum re-
organization.
MENTAL GROWTH
In the developmental sequence from birth to death, the
individual passes through a series of biological phases
each involving its characteristic problems of adaptation
and each being associated with types of experience which
the person must interpret and attempt to unify with pre-
vious experience. So-called normal (relatively "ordered”)
behavior is a reflection of a total organization of ideas
which has a relatively high degree of internal consistency
in relation to ideas of self as well as with the external
reality. As a person progresses through the various
eras of life such as childhood, adolescence, adulthood
and old age, maturational changes in his own constitution
together with varying patterns of environmental stimu-
lation produce a constant evolution of all ideas and par-
ticularly those of self. In order for the individual to
function with a reasonable degree of stability and hap


piness, it is indispensable that gradual and genuine
changes of ideas of self take place. Among other things,
this implies that conflict and reorganization are natural
phenomena accompanying maturation. Failure of this
process of assimilation and reorganization can only re-
sult in developmental fixations or regressions related to
failure of the total organization of ideas to reflect changes
in internal and external environments.
NUCLEAR COMPOSITION
Using the billiard ball analogy in which accretions
of new ideas are conceived of as taking place in con-
centric spheres about a central nucleus, it is of practical
value to study the composition of nuclear and external
layers in order to describe the unique organization in any
particular case. Clinical evidence of many types sug-
gested to Mr. Lecky that ideas of self (the individual's
interpretation of his own meaning) are the most funda-
mental in determining individual behavior. Unless this
organization of ideas about self has some degree of
coherence, no matter how infantile or artificial from the
observer’s viewpoint, a person will find it extremely dif-
ficult to function consistently; i.e. he may exhibit un-
usually variable overt behavior and thus be incomprehen-
sible to others. Therefore-, in attempting to visualize a
three-dimensional structure comprising the organization
of ideas at any given moment moving forward in time,
IDEAS OF SELF are arbitrarily placed at the center
("nucleus" as in modern dynamic concept of atom) with
all other ideas being arranged so that ideas strongly sup-
porting concept of self (either positive or negative) are
nearest to the nucleus, and other ideas are placed at
various distances away as they become less important to


ideas of self. It is conceived that ideas relatively close-
ly related to concept of self will be maintained more in-
tensively than other ideas, since one’s concept of self
is the innermost value and the foundation of the entire
organization. In the interpretation of a person’s behavior,
including making predictions or helping to reorganize the
personality, it is extremely important to obtain a com-
prehensive cross-section of his ideas which determine
moment-to-moment behavior.
A schematic representation of the nuclear organi-
zation of a specific clinical case is presented below.
Code:
Positive individualizing ideas of various "l’m
a successful family man." "I am unusually self-reliant.”
"People know they can trust me." Etc., etc.
Negative individualizing ideas of various strengths: "I’m
not much to look at." "I don’t think I’ll ever get a better
Job."
E Successful experience supporting a positive idea: Success
at work, etc.
F- Unsuccessful experience supporting negative idea: Boss
fires him, etc.
W, F, M. C, B, S, EL, ML Relatives: Wife, father, mother,
child, brother, sister, father-in-
law. Position indicates degree
of identification.
Fj, F 2, Social contacts with friends, associates, etc.
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of momentary nuclear com-
position indicating ideas and experiences which gre
contributing significantly to the pattern of dynamic or-
ganization of ideas.
This is a simplified diagram for a man, age 35, married
with two children, who has earned his own living since he
was 16. He is well adjusted and has predominately posi-
tive attitudes in relative to family, marriage, sex and work.
He has been bothered by problems in relation to social con-
fidence, cooperation with others and optimism. His health
is good but he is slightly hypochondriacal.


Experiences relating to his mother have influenced him
more than those with his father. He is closer to one sister
than to three brothers. Of all his relatives he dislikes his
mother-in-law least. He is not particularly close to either
child. Negative experiences in relation to others have sup-
ported a predominantly negative attitude in relation to his
own social attractiveness.
Individual ideas are never completely realistic in any
ultimate sense since, at best, they consist only of inter-
pretations which are subject to a variety of perceptual and
interpretational errors. Although Einstein's interpreta-
tion of the nature of the physical world is broader and
more realistic than most other people’s, neither Einstein
nor anyone else knows anything of the ultimate nature of
the physical world directly, but only from inferences.
Consistency with reality is therefore purely relative. In
the sense in which the word is used here, we are special-
ly concerned with the relative consistency of a person’s
nuclear ideas of self as evaluated by the most objective
standards such as by tests or the judgment of a trained
Fig. 1. A graphic presentation of
some core, central and peripheral
attitudes in a person reporting deep feelings of personal
inadequacy.


observer. We place such great emphasis on the nuclear
composition for we see it as the dynamic center around
which the whole personality is organized. The nuclear
composition determines moment-to-moment behavior in
the individual, and pathological disorganization or in-
consistencies may be regarded as the core of personality
deviations.
NUCLEAR REORGANIZATION
A person’s nuclear ideas concerning the meaning of
himself and the world are constantly undergoing revision
and reorganization as new experiences are presented
which lead to interpretations conflicting with older ones.
While older ideas and constellations of ideas (complexes)
tend to maintain themselves because of their internal con-
sistency and to cause the person to reject new ideas
which are inconsistent with existing organization, new
ideas with different values are constantly bombarding the
existing organization tending to force acceptance of them-
selves and the discarding of older untenable ideas. In a
normal person with a relatively high degree of consistency
of ideas both internally and with reality, the process of
accretion of new interpretations is gradual and harmonious
since the healthiness of the nucleus makes major reor-
ganizations unnecessary. The normal individual can take
minor reorganizations in stride as part of the maturational
process.
Where the earliest experiences have led to incon-
sistency or unrealistic interpretations, the nuclear com-
position may be relatively inconsistent and unhealthy so
that new experiences lead to interpretations conflicting
with the existing organization of ideas. Neurotic be-
havior is a reflection of the fact that the individual strives


to maintain the nuclear composition acquired in child-
hood and early life, behaving in accordance with immature
attitudes, and resisting conflicting new experiences
which would tend to force personality reorganization. Al-
though normal people undergo a constant process of
nuclear reorganization with the enrichment of experiences,
the neurotic personality clings to unhealthy and unreal-
istic organizations of ideas which may require external
intervention in the form of psychotherapy to effect the
needed reorganizations. Unless the striving for unity or
self-consistency can weld together the total organization
of ideas into some sort of unified whole or style of life,
dynamic disorganization occurs in a variety of patterns
determined by constitutional and acquired factors. It is
proposed that all neurotic and most psychotic phenomena
may be understood in terms of dynamic disorganization re-
sulting from the final failure of the individual to function
in unified manner, and that these acute disorganizational
phenomena, varying in type and degree, represent in par-
ticular acute nuclear disorganization (in other words,
they represent a dissolution of self). Schizoid personal-
ity reactions may be interpreted as attempts to withdraw
from contact with disturbing new ideas which cannot be
assimilated into existing organization and yet which can-
not be ignored because of their urgency. Psychotic ex-
citements may represent attempts to solve reorganization-
al problems by an excess of emotional reenforcement and
hyperactivity. The reactive depression, in contrast, repre-
sents a reaction of total defeat and hopelessness in re-
lation to new experiences difficult to assimilate. Both
neurotic and psychotic personality reactions are usually
related to nuclear disorganization and inconsistency be-
ginning in early life and incapacitating the total person-
ality when confronted with problem situations which re


quire a comprehensive reorganization of nuclear com-
position if any realistic solution is to be achieved. Too
often, deviant behavior persists because nuclear reor-
ganization fails to be accomplished and immature ideas
continue to determine behavior.
The speed and extensity of the reorganizational
process will be determined by the magnitude and urgency
of presentation of new ideas which are presented for as-
similation, as well as by the degree of inconsistency
with existing organization. If the "shock” of the new
ideas is too great, i.e. too difficult to assimilate into the
existing nuclear composition, the individual may become
disorganized to a degree which will make unified action
impossible. The degree of disorganization is a function
of both the type of pre-existing nuclear organization prior
to the "impact” as well as the exact nature of the incon-
sistent idea (from the viewpoint of the individual). The
rate of recovery from disorganization is a function of both
these factors, plus the nature of the environment in which
the individual continues to live, e.g. whether the person
continues to live with persons who might, retard recovery
whether he seeks and obtains competent therapy, etc.
The therapeutic handling of the reorganizational
process requires the highest degrees of clinical training
and experience. Only the competent therapist is capable
of handling technical points as they develop during thera-
py-
The Role of Emotion. Affective reactions of the or-
ganism may be regarded as instinctive-impulsive behavior
serving the basic biologic purpose of mobilizing resources
in the service of the basic needs of the organism. Al-
though the basic patterns of emotionality are determined
constitutionally, specific conditionings and attitudes are
understood to be learned from experience. According to


the self-consistency theory, so-called emotional phenom-
ena, rather than being regarded in any sense as separate
entities, are expressions of the single fundamental drive
for unity, self-preservation and reproduction. Although
emotional reactions may be analysed and described in
physiological terms since they involve physiological dis-
turbances in the organism, their organismic significance
can only be conceived in psychological terms. All emo-
tions can be traced directly to experiences which are in-
terpreted by the individual as SUPPORTS OF or THREATS
TO one or more ideas of self. An experience which is
interpreted as a support to one or more ideas of self is a
unifying experience and yields positive emotional re-
sponses varying in quality and intensity and usually
designated socially as Love. An experience which is
interpreted as a threat to one or more ideas of self, is a
disorganizational experience and will yield negative emo-
tional responses of Fear and Hate.
Both positive and negative affective reactions oper-
ate to reenforce and maintain the dynamic organization of
ideas. They modify the individual's behavior just as
may any other internal stimulus, but they are always but
an aspect (sometimes very important) of the TOTAL
SITUATION, and as always, the individual reacting to
the total situation to the best of his ability will move in
the direction of the greatest unity and internal consistency
from his own point of view. The real significance of emo-
tional components is any effect which they may exert on
nuclear composition, i.e. as any effect they may exert,
AS NO MEAN PART OF THE TOTAL SITUATION, on
the person's interpretation of himself.
The physiological response of the organism which re-
sults from interpretation of internal or external stimuli as
being a strong support for ideas of self (love) is a power


ful unifying force which, if genuine and enduring, will re-
veal its effect on the nuclear strength and composition by
significant changes in the individual's behavior. On the
other hand, an experience which is interpreted by the in-
dividual as a severe threat to ideas of self induces un-
pleasant physiological responses commonly known as hate
and rage. Since such reactions act as a threat to the
total organization of ideas and the nucleus in particular,
and also as a threat to the fundamental need for unity and
self-consistency, it is readily understandable why the in-
dividual may be stirred to great activity when under the
influence of these emotions.
Examples: If a person loses a strong support of self by
virtue of a natural death as of a wife, the phy-
siological response is known as grief.
If that support is lost by the result of intrigue,
murder, etc., the person will normally hate the
individuals responsible. If the individual does
not feel hate, it indicates an unusual nuclear
composition and strongly suggests that the or-
iginal emotion was never genuine love.
Good marks in school, social success, achieve-
ment at work, happiness in marriage, etc., are
all unifying experiences both because of the sup-
port to ideas of self and also the strong reen-
forcement of positive emotional states.
The important role of emotional reactions in neurotic
and psychotic states may be understood in terms of the
reenforcement given by affectivity to the trends of nu-
clear composition, and also because of the relative in-
accessibility of physiological components to modifi-
cation. Conditioned reactions on autonomic levels of
response are frequently very difficult to influence, and
may persist inappropriately long after ideological re-
organization is accomplished.
Dynamic Mechanisms. Many of the phenomena de-
scribed by Freud in his discovery of mechanisms of mind


may be reinterpreted in terms of these concepts of nu-
clear composition, nuclear reorganization and the striv-
ing for unity.
Resistance is determined by the nuclear structure
(Ideas of Self), with specific patterns being related to
the distribution of positive and negative ideas. Ex-
periences which are perceived as a threat to unifica-
tion will be resisted since their assimilation would
require reorganization of the nucleus.
The Freudian concepts of Ego , Super-Ego and Id
are recognized as valuable generalizations or in-
ferences but have no actual counterparts in mental
structure. It may be convenient to arbitrarily group
ideas or interpretations under these headings because
of their dynamic similarities, but the most important
factor is that of actual nuclear organization.
Repression occurs when new ideas or feelings are
interpreted as threatening to existing organization.
Dream distortion and symbolism, dissociation, humor,
error and many other psychopathological phenomena
may be understood in terms of the dynamics of nuclear
organization and the striving to maintain unity where
inconsistent ideas reflect disorgguiizational phenomena.
Infcntilism and fixation reflect failure of normal re-
organization responsive to normal maturation process-
es, i.e. the nucleus is largely composed of infantile
or immature ideas of self.
Escape mechanisms , as in alcoholism or drug ad-
diction, reflect the attempt to maintain inconsistent
unrealistic nuclear composition by refusing to face
new ideas which would involve a threat to ideas of
self and force a painful reorganization.
Conflict is a natural phenomenon, a process in which
by the constant assimilation of new ideas and atti


tudes the individual’s conception of himself evolves
continuously as he learns to define himself in terms
of ideas of self which have greater consistency both
internally and in relation to reality. Conflict only be-
comes pathological when disorganizational phenomena
become so acute as to destroy unity and cause dis-
solution of self.
Rationalization is a process in which an attempt is
made to preserve unity of the organization of ideas by
a method of self-justification whereby intellectualized
reasons are given to account for an unconsciously mo-
tivated thought or act. A plausible excuse makes it
possible to maintain a semblance of self-consistency.
Thinking, day-dreaming, and dreaming to lesser ex-
tent, are dynamic mental processes involving reor-
ganization and recombination of ideas regulated by the
need for unity and self-consistency.
Identification occurs when ideas consisting of in-
terpretations of enviable or admirable qualities in
other persons or institutions are assimilated into
nuclear structure and thereby result in enhancement of
self. Identification with undesirable qualities some-
times occurs in the presence of nuclear composition
characterized by negative ideas of self.
Feelings of inferiority have their origin in areas of
behavior in which the person is unable to maintain
one or more ideas of self. Once a negative idea has
been assimilated, the person will behave consistently
with his negative self-evaluation. Restriction of be-
havior then occurs, and negative attitudes may pro-
gressively pervade nuclear composition and eventual-
ly result in a neurotic structure with more or less dis-
organization.


Ambivalent behavior usually indicates that a given
nuclear idea is undergoing transformation. It reflects
unstable nuclear composition.
Projection describes the process of striving to main-
tain unity and self-consistency by attributing to others
the ideas and complexes which belong to oneself. In
pathological degree it can result in unhealthy nuclear
composition characterized by logically systematized
delusions which are maintained in the interests of self-
consistency.
Introversion characterizes a type of nuclear com-
position in which there is a tendency of interpret the
environment subjectively and with the self as the cen-
ter of reference. In extroversion , nuclear composition
is much more responsive to external stimulation and
much less concern with the subjective viewpoint.
Defense mechanisms tend to maintain positive ideas
of self by resorting to fictions. Threats to unity are
reacted to by withdrawal, escape mechanisms, symp-
tom elaboration or compensatory mechanisms.
Wish-fulfillment involves the vicarious satisfaction
of the striving for unity through dreams and phantasies.
Frustrated desires reflect themselves in compensatory
interpretations of experience.
The systematic application of the nuclear theory of mind
to all types of mental phenomena makes possible the ex-
planation of larger units of behavior in terms of compre-
hensive dynamic configurations capable of dealing with
the most complex units of mental organization.
Diagnostic Implications. In understanding the basic
style of life of a person, major emphasis must be placed
on the dynamic configuration of ideas which is his mind.
While constitutional factors on morphologic, biochemical
and physiological levels may determine the broad out


lines of a personality, its specific individuality is large-
ly determined by its total organization of ideas with
particular reference to the nuclear composition of ideas
of self. The nature of nuclear composition and of specific
ideas cannot be observed directly but must be inferred
from all types of expressive behavior. An evaluation of
the nucleus is based on more than just asking the in-
dividual to discuss his past, or even though comprehen-
sive psychoanalysis. The competent diagnostician also
gains insights from minute observations of overt behavior,
psychometric and projective tests, and other expressive
behavior. Particularly significant are the consideration
of areas of resistance, dream interpretation, hypnotic
phenomena and other methods long in psychiatric usage.
It is believed that no complete understanding of person-
ality is possible without understanding the ideas, at-
titudes and values by which men live.
Therapeutic Implications. In order to be effective
any form of therapy, including psychoanalysis, must re-
sult either directly or indirectly in a genuine nuclear
reorganization. The first step in therapy is to identify
ideas or attitudes which are inconsistent either internal-
ly in relation to other ideas, or externally in relation to
reality. The second step in reorganization consists of
demonstrating the inconsistency of untenable ideas under
conditions where the resulting conflict can be controlled
within reasonable limits. Third, new and more valid ideas
are introduced which are more consistent with the striving
for unity. A genuine nuclear reorganization results in the
rejection of immature or infantile interpretations which
are replaced with more consistent and realistic organi-
zations.


According to this theory, all other therapeutic methods
are secondary adjuncts to the main problem of overhaul-
ing the nuclear organization. Symptomatic and support-
five treatments, including the handling of affective re-
actions, may be very important in dealing with the prac-
tical needs of the immediate situation, but depth therapy
must primarily concern itself with nuclear composition
and reorganization.
Theoretical Considerations. The nuclear theory of
mind represents an attempt to summarize certain in-
ferences concerning the organization of personality de-
rived from clinical experience. It must be recognized
that the system here discussed consists of conceptual
constructs or abstractions inferred to explain observed
relationships. These conceptions have no objective
reality, and it is not too important for our purposes to
know the nature of the realities involved, since the psy-
chological system deals with ideas, attitudes and values
which are evolutionary emergents or gestalts which can-
not be explained or directly translated into morphological
or physiologic elements. The psychological system is
complete in itself, and may be understood in terms of the
subjective valuations of the units of experience.


CHAPTER XII
A CRITICAL EVALUATION OF
THE SELF-CONSISTENCY THEORY
It must be recalled that Mr. Lecky had begun working
on the self-consistency theory more than twenty years
ago at a time when objective psychology was at its strong-
est and to believe anything else was considered heresy
among professional psychologists. The present editor
met Mr. Lecky first in 1927 as a student in a section of
elementary psychology at Columbia College. At that time
Mr. Lecky was critical of both behaviorism and psy-
choanalysis in his teachings and was beginning to formu-
late the viewpoint expressed in this book. Following his
trip to Europe in the winter of 1927-28 to study with
Alfred Adler, his thinking began to evolve much more
rapidly. He had been particularly influenced by the
Adlerian concept of style of life and the Gestalt concept
that the essential nature of a complex organism is in its
dynamic pattern of organization. We took his course in
the psychology of personality during 1928*29 when the
basic outlines of the new theory were presented publicly
for the first time. In the succeeding years until his pre-
mature death in 1941, Mr. Lecky worked continuously on
the evolution of his ideas, but in increasing isolation
from his professional colleagues who did not understand
the brilliance of his conceptions. With the exception of
a few students who grew to almost idolize him, Mr. Lecky
came to do more and more of his thinking alone and with-
out the benefit of a critical give-and-take with profession-
al colleagues. During the last few years of his life, Mr.
Lecky found himself in a situation which tended to stimu


late defensive reactions in him which in turn exaggerated
the increasing gap professionally. Frustrated by lack of
professional recognition, Mr. Lecky tended to become
emotional in his increasingly bitter attacks upon the
mechanistic psychology then in vogue at Columbia. Al-
though generally self-critical, he could not refrain from
expressing these emotional biases both in lectures and in
written material. Many of his colleagues reacted critical-
ly to these affective outbursts, and tended to dismiss his
ideas as being the productions of an unstable visionary.
The more intensively did Mr. Lecky attack behaviorism
and mechanism in psychology, the more vigorously were
his ideas rejected and the more acute the vicious circle
of frustration and struggle to promote his ideas.
POSITIVE VALUES
The self-consistency theory of personality evolved
.rom an attempt to conceive of the organism as a unique
whole, a dynamic phenomenon whose most significant
characteristic is individuality. Basically important to
Mr. Lecky was the problem of explaining the coherence
and self-consistency observable in the behavior of every
person. Mr. Lecky believed that none of the older schools
of psychology offered a comprehensive theoretical formu-
lation capable of explaining all of the facts of experi-
mental psychology particularly on higher levels of be-
havioral integration. One by one the mechanistic ex-
planatory concepts borrowed from the older sciences have
proved to be inadequate when applied to larger units of
behavior. Much of the difficulty originates in the in-
ability of existing experimental methods to encompass
the more complex psychological phenomena which cannot
be directly studied but must be inferred rationally. Be


cause of the unwillingness of objective psychologists to
deal with phenomena which cannot be observed or mea-
sured directly, many psychologists from Wundt to Watson
have attempted to redefine psychology to mean something
else than the study of the psyche, i.e. to avoid subjective
phenomena such as consciousness and other high level
integrations. From the viewpoint of classical or mechan-
istic psychology, the chief objection to the personality
as a scientific concept is the fact that it cannot be ob-
served directly. Mr. Lecky faced this dilemma squarely
in his belief that any valid system of psychology must
explain all known facts concerning behavior including
both objective and subjective phenomena.
Mr. Lecky was one of the first to revolt against the
mechanism and materialism which characterized objective
psychology. His problem was how to effect a reinterpre-
tation of psychological data which would serve as a valid
nucleus for a new system. Because of the impossibility
of considering more than a small portion of the data to
begin with, he chose to begin with the central facts of
unity and self-consistency in personality. The importance
of approaching personality study as a whole was a recent
development dating only to the evolution of Gestalt psy-
chology, the implications of which are still only dimly
perceived. After having taken the bold first step of de-
termining to approach personality study by dealing pri-
marily with the most complex integrations of the or-
ganism, Mr. Lecky was faced with the necessity of achiev-
ing a theoretical reorientation which would relate data
gathered under mechanistic auspices and previously in-
terpreted in harmony with mechanistic theory. This
problem was approached not from the viewpoint a pre-
conceived theory but from consideration of accumulated
experimental facts. While recognizing that mechanistic


interpretations offered valid explanatory principles of
some relatively simple patterns of behavior on lower
levels of integration, the insistence on considering the
evidence as a whole and on the highest levels of in-
tegration must inevitably lead to the rejection of mechan-
ism in psychology as has occurred in modern physics.
The importance of the principle of unity or self-con-
sistency in behavior does not appear in any single experi-
ment, but when the results of many experiments are taken
together the concept of a unified personality emerges as a
logical necessity, i.e. the only generalization capable of
organizing and harmonizing the data in full perspective.
Mr. Lecky chose to approach this problem of the nature
of personality organization through the field of psycho-
logical measurements. His original interest in the mea-
surement of individual differences in respect to person-
ality traits, so-called, was stimulated by the inventory of
neurotic symptoms devised by Woodworth in 1917-18.
Given the psychiatric assumption that the larger the num-
ber of symptoms the greater the likelihood of neurotic in-
stability, Woodworth undertook to standardize the method
of measurement. The question of whether the inventory
method would discriminate between normal and neurotic
individuals is still the subject of extensive research, but
Mr. Lecky was more concerned with the empiric finding
that such inventories are statistically reliable. What
theoretical explanation can be offered for the internal
consistency and reliability of individual responses to
inventory questions? There was no doubt that the sta-
tistical data reflected a central factor or unity character-
istic of each personality. Thurstone interpreted the in-
ventory results as measuring neurotic tendency, a unitary
trait which might be quantitively measured in terms of
the sum of the neurotic symptoms admitted by each per


son. The necessity for assuming a unified trait of neu-
rotic tendency to account for the statistical evidence of
unity was supported by internal evidence and seemed so
convincing that the validity of the inventory method was
taken for granted even though external validation was
lacking. Mr. Lecky considered this assumption as being
too important to go unchallenged since a theory which
postulates unitary traits implies a pluralistic concept of
mental organization and cannot avoid becoming identified
with the discarded faculty psychology. If faculty psy-
chology was demonstrably false in the time of Herbart, it
remains false today and the various abilities and traits
now supposedly undergoing measurement are no more
valid when inferred from mathematical data than when in-
ferred from behavior directly. Moreover, it is evident that
as statistical studies in psychology accumulate, more
and more tests will be developed which are mathematical-
ly reliable, and the number of units or traits which must
be postulated to account for the reliability will therefore
increase indefinitely. Hence, instead of tending to unify
our conception of behavior, the traditional interpretation
which has been given to psychological measurements has
the effect of constantly adding new factors and thus pro-
gressively complicating personality study instead of
simplifying it.
The real problem resolves itself into the search for
some alternative explanation which will not involve us in
the contradiction of denying faculties and affirming traits.
Such an explanation must account for statistical reli-
ability but must not involve the assumption of mind as a
plurality of traits. An answer to this problem may be
achieved through study of larger units of behavior. As
the psychological horizon broadens, phenomena of higher
levels of integration are perceived which are beyond the


scope of traditional methods of investigation. Responses
formerly studied separately as though they were events
complete in themselves are now dimly seen to be parts
of more extensive processes whose nature we do not un-
derstand. Everywhere is encountered the evidences of
organization and interrelationship. The crucial question
is how to assemble the evidences of interrelationship in
order that the nature of the organization may be studied
as an independent problem. The problem is so important
that it stands as the central, unsolved enigma of every
experiment. The difficulty is that organization is bound
up with dynamics and may be approached from many view-
points. Although modern psychology has increasingly con-
cerned itself with the problem of motivation in relation to
dynamics, the existing approaches in terms of S-R pat-
terns, organic states, needs and relationships are largely
elementaristic and have not led to a general theory of
dynamics. These theoretical inadequacies may be re-
lated to methodological defects, particularly the custom
(born of experimentation) of studying bits of observable
behavior one at a time and rigidly controlled. If we can
obtain satisfactory evidence of the existence and nature
of behavior relationships, then at least we shall have
succeeded in presenting a large-scale fact to be ex-
plained. The problem is not one of reducing behavior to
physiological elements wherein its essential nature is
lost, but of perceiving larger generalizations.
Lecky's conviction that dynamic theories, to be use-
ful, must begin by framing and defining problems on the
psychological level (as compared with physiological or
lower levels), and must state them in terms of organi-
zation instead of as the problem of isolated behavior
units as such, finds confirmation from many sources. The
theories which have failed most dismally such as associ


ationism or Behaviorism, are precisely those which have
neglected this principle. Conversely, those theories which
have been partially successful, including Gestalt psychol-
ogy and psychoanalysis, were not only oriented from the
beginning toward problems of organization, but owe their
origin historically to the recognition of facts which other
schools of psychology had not faced squarely before.
Thus, pleasure or pain cannot be defined or understood
except in terms of the organization of the person who ex-
periences them. Failure to consider the organization of
the organism led the oldef mechanistic theories into the
error of arguing that the very occurence of an act is
evidence that some need is unsatisfied. The scientific
problem is not defined in the mere statement that be-
havior occurs. We must seek to understand individual
dynamics, since prediction and control that does not
apply to particular organisms is meaningless. The scien-
tific problem in psychology, therefore, is essentially that
of understanding individual organization. This is a
fundamental point, and a fatal one for the mechanist, for
it means that in the details of behavior each organism is
to some extent a law unto itself, and that prediction which
does not take account of this unique organization must
necessarily be invalid. If any general principles of be-
havior are to be found, they must deal with the meaning
or interpretation of acts in terms of organization, instead
of with the acts themselves.
The study of behavior from the interpretive standpoint,
placing major emphasis on the uniqueness of the subject,
has revived the earlier concept of a mind or personality
which mechanistic psychology had apparently overthrown.
Personality is therefore defined as the distinctive organi-
zation of a single individual. Mr. Lecky believed that the
personality inventory could be used effectively to approach
the problems of organization and integration since it in


volved a large variety of behavior indices which could
be studied simultaneously. The inventory responses
constitute an objective type of data which *tend to re-
veal what the person thinks about himself.


APPENDIX I
PREVENTING FAILURE BY REMOVING RESISTANCE
(Address given in 1938 by Prescott Lecky before the Mental
Hygiene Section of the New York Society for the
Experimental Study of Education)
Ever so often, a child who has formerly been deficient
in a certain subject suddenly seems to find himself, and
rises toward the top of the class. Such cases present an
interesting problem. Are we confronted by a miracle, or
do these spontaneous changes only seem miraculous be-
cause their study has been neglected? More important
still, assuming a clearer understanding of what takes
place in these rare cases, is it possible to bring about
similar results among large numbers of children? These
are by no means idle questions. With approximately half
of the pupils in our schools already below grade in either
reading or mathematics, to say nothing of other subjects,
the problem of what to do is an urgent one. Either we
must devise some effective method of raising the level of
accomplishment, or lower our educational standards.
Previous interpretations of spontaneous improvement
have usually been stated in terms of increased interest or
readiness. Since there seems to be nothing to do about
readiness except to wait for it to develop, however, and
since no practical method of increasing interest beyond
the present level seems to be available, these diagnoses
turn out to be little more than truisms which lead to no
constructive action. This point is borne out by the fact
that in the actual treatment of deficient pupils there seems


to be no alternative except to send the child to remedial
classes or recommend outside tutoring. These remedies
are apparently based on the belief that children need addi-
tional instruction for some reason in order to help them
to form the habits which they failed to form in the class
room. But even if our present remedial methods were Suc-
cessful in every case, the expense of tutoring so many
pupils would make this approach impracticable.
The Theory of Self-Consistency
The method described in this report is based on a dif-
ferent conception of the problem; namely, that the cause
of most failures in school is not insufficient or inade-
quate instruction, but active resistance on the part ot the
child. To make this point clear, we must give a brief
description of the theory of self-consistency, from which
the method is derived.
The part of the theory which interests us here is the
concept of the mind. According to self-consistency, the
mind is a unit, an organized system of ideas. All of the
ideas which belong to the system must seem to be con-
sistent with one another. The center or nucleus of the
mind is the individual’s idea or conception of himself.
If a new idea seems to be consistent with the ideas already
present in the system, and particularly with the indivi-
dual's conception of himself, it is accepted and assimilated
easily. If it seems to be inconsistent, however, it meets
with resistance and is likely to be rejected. This resis-
tance is a natural phenomenon; it is essential for the
maintenance of individuality.
Thus the acceptability of an idea to any particular
pupil is determined by his needs as an individual. In
order to understand the environment, he must keep his


interpretations consistent with his experience, but in
order to maintain his individuality, he must organize his
interpretations to form a system of ideas which is internal-
ly consistent. This consistency is not objective, of course,
but subjective, private, and wholly individual. It is dif-
ficult to understand resistance unless this point is borne
in mind.
From this standpoint, learning cannot be understood
as a process of forming separate habits, but only in terms
of the development of the entire personality. It follows
that no type of subject matter is interesting merely for
its own sake. It is interesting only when an individual
happens to be interested in it, because of the way he in-
terprets it in relation to his problem. Indeed, though
learning and resistance seem to point in opposite direc-
tions, they really serve the same purpose. In the one
case we are supporting the system from inconsistency
and conflict. Both are necessary in order that the unity
of the system may be preserved.
If the pupil shows resistance toward a certain type of
material, this means that from his point of view it would
be inconsistent for him to learn it. If we are able to change
the self-concept ion which underlies this viewpoint, how-
ever, his attitude toward the material will change accord-
ingly. With the resistance eliminated, he learns so rapidly
that tutoring is often unnecessary.
Such a change in the pupil’s attitude often results in
improvement which is quite astonishing. A high school
student who misspelled 55 words out of a hundred, and
who failed so many subjects that he lost credit for a full
year, became one of the best spellers in the school during
the next year, and made a general average of 91. A student
who was dropped from another college and was later ad-
mitted to Columbia was graduated with more than 70 points


of “A” credits. A boy failing in English, who had been
diagnosed by a testing bureau as lacking aptitude for this
subject, won honorable mention a year later for the literary
prize at a large preparatory school. A girl who had failed
four times in Latin, with marks between 20 and 50, after
three talks with the school counselor made a mark of 92
on the next test and finished with a grade of 84. She is
now taking advanced Latin with grades above 80.
Two of the poorest spellers in the High School of
Clifton, N.J.,were used to demonstrate this method before
a university class in psychology. Given twenty words to
spell, one missed all twenty and the other nineteen. The
school counselor, continuing the use of the method, reports
that both are now excellent spellers and have taken up
spelling as a sort of hobby. The results reported are taken
from the work of three different counselors, showing that
the method lends itself to general use in the school system.
These examples are selected to show how little we
are justified in judging the future potentialities of the
pupil by the record he has made in the past. In the ma-
jority of cases, of course, the improvement, if any, is
much less spectacular. But the fact that such extraordinary
results can be obtained at all, and by means of a method
which is still in the experimental stage, show that an
optimistic attitude in regard to the possibilities of the
school population in general is not unreasonable. The
greatest handicap to constructive action is the well-
entrenched, though perhaps unconscious, dogma that
learning is the result of teaching, a mechanical reaction
to the school environment instead of a purposive achieve-
ment.


PREDICTIONS BASED ON THE HABIT THEORY
ARE UNRELIABLE
The methods that we use, in other words, reflect the
theory that we accept. In psychology and education, theo-
ries are often accepted merely because they seem plau-
sible. In the physcial sciences, however, the value of a
theory is judged by its ability to make predictions that
are later verified by experience. Let us apply this test
to the theory that learning is a process of habit formation.
Most of us have been taught that habits are fixed by
exercise and the satisfaction obtained by practicing them,
and that predictions based on this theory can be relied
upon. Actually, however, such predictions often turn out
to be highly unreliable. A good example is thumb-sucking.
Certainly the child who sucks his thumb gives the act
plenty of exercise and gets enough satisfaction from it
to fix the act indelibly. Therefore if the habit theory is
true, we should be able to predict absolutely that the
child will continue to suck his thumb for the rest of his
life. But what really happens? Every year millions of
children who have industriously sucked their thumbs since
birth, and who have successfully resisted every effort to
change their behavior, quit the practice spontaneously
when they are five or six years old. The reason is that
they are beginning at this age to think of themselves as
big boys or girls, and they recognize that thumb-sucking
is inconsistent with the effort to maintain this new idea.
The changed conception of who they are, and the necessity
of making good in the new role they have accepted, fur-
nishes them with a new standard to which their behavior
must now conform. If a child continues to think of himself
as a baby, due perhaps to prolonged illness or over-
protection by the parents, the necessary standard is lack


ing and the thumb-sucking will continue. Parents often
invoke the "big boy" standard deliberately in the effort
to change the child’s behavior in many other situations.
WHY BOYS ARE SLOWER THAN GIRLS
IN LEARNING TO READ
The behavior of the child in the classroom must also
be understood in terms of the standards he is trying to
maintain. Let us take, for example, the well known fact
that boys on the average are slower than girls in learning
to read. Educational textbooks usually explain this by
saying that girls have more native ability in respect to
reading than boys. In terms of self-consistency, however,
the explanation is that to most boys the reading material
in elementary readers seems infantile and effeminate. The
boy from six to eight years old, just beginning to learn to
read, is mainly concerned with maintaining the conception
of himself as manly. He likes to play cowboy, G-man and
Indian. He tries not to cry when he gets a bump. The
greatest possible insult would be to call him a sissy. Yet
this boy, when the reading lesson begins, must stand up
before his companions and read that "The little red hen
says *Cluck! Cluck! Cluck!' "—or something equally incon-
sistent with his standards of how he should behave. If a
boy is trying to maintain a standard of manliness on the
playground, he does not abandon that standard merely
because he walks from the playground into the classroom.
When boys are given books about railroads and airplanes,
the resistance disappears, and they learn just as rapidly
and have as much "native ability" as girls.
Thus the pupil’s resistance to learning certain sub-
jects is really resistance to behaving in a manner which
is inconsistent with his personal standards. Eagerness


to learn, on the other hand, is due to the pupil’s effort to
maintain and support his standards. But he is not con-
scious of these standards, and explains his failures and
successes either in terms of ability, or as due to likes
and dislikes ovejr which he has no control.
STANDARDS RESPONSIBLE FOR FAILURE
Now suppose that a pupil thinks of himself as a poor
speller or reader, or as one of those unfortunates who
“just haven’t got a mathematical mind.” Is he merely
lacking a standard to maintain? Not at all. This concep-
tion, so long as he believes it to be true, is just as definite
as any other, and the standard is just as positive. Though
he seems to be saying ”1 can’t,” he is really asserting
”1 won’t try.” Many people find it hard to believe that a
person will defend and strive to maintain an idea which
is not to his advantage. But the evidence allows of no
other conclusion.
For example, if we examine the letters or themes written
by a poor speller, we find that he seems to have a standard
of how many words he should misspell per page. Often a
word will be spelled both correctly and incorrectly in the
same theme, but the average number of mistakes per page
remains approximately constant. If we give him two spell-
ing tests of the same length and equal difficulty, we find
approximately the same number of errors on each of the
tests. If we tutor him in spelling, the effect wears off
within a few weeks, and he returns to his characteristic
level. As one student said, ”1 can remember how a word
is spelled all right, but I can’t remember whether it is the
right way or the wrong way.” The presence of a standard
is also shown by the fact that many poor spellers in English
have no more difficulty than others in spelling foreign
languages.


In a study of remedial instruction in reading made in
the New York schools last year, ten percent of the pupils
who were tutored actually retrogressed in reading ability,
though their average I.Q. was slightly higher than that of
the group which made normal progress. How could this
be explained except in terms of the pupil’s resistance
to changing his standards?
Perhaps the most striking illustration of resistance is
the complete inability to read which is known as con-
genital word-blindness. Word-blind pupils are suffer-
ing not from a visual handicap, but a mental one. They
can see other things, including letters, but they cannot
"see” words. In many cases they have I.Q.’s above
normal, and often are proficient in non-reading subjects
such as arithmetic. But they think of themselves as unable
to read, and maintain this standard by rejecting the ideas
necessary for reading, for these ideas are inconsistent
with their self-conception and consequently cannot be
assimilated. "None are so blind as those that will not
see.”
The reliability of a child’s behavior, as indicated
either by tests or by general observation, is thus ex-
plained by self-consistency as the outward expression
of relatively fixed internal standards. It is often argued
that the reliability of a test proves that the test is meas-
uring the child’s ability. All that any test can meas-
ure, however, is the level of performance which is char-
acteristic of the child at the time when the test is
given. It is not the test which is reliable, but the child.
We cannot interpret the score simply as a measure
of ability unless we disregard the problem of resis-
tance entirely, and assume not only the presence of
specific abilities, but also the motive to use them to
the limit.


CHANGING STANDARDS BY AROUSING CONFLICTS
The problem of how to remove the deficiency, then,
is really the problem of how to remove the standard re-
sponsible for it. We cannot remove it ourselves, of course,
but if we can show the pupil that the standard in question
is inconsistent with his other standards, and endangers
the unity of the system as a whole, he will have to alter
it himself. It can safely be taken for granted, in the
majority of cases, that the "big boy” or "big girl” idea
of childhood has developed and reached a more mature
level, and hence that the pupil now thinks of himself as
self-reliant and independent. Obviously, the childish
standard which is causing the resistance does not belong
in the same system with these mature standards. The
pupil has not recognized the inconsistency, however,
because he has always managed to keep the conflicting
ideas apart. Reorganization is temporarily painful, and
in order to avoid it he has resorted to private logic and
rationalized the conflict away.
Our method must therefore aim to break down the struc-
ture of rationalization and bring the contradictory ideas
into intimate relationship. There is nothing novel in this
plan. All of us use it frequently. But it has to be used
with skill and understanding if we hope to circumvent
the pupil's effort to preserve the status quo in spite of us.
A pupil whose unconscious standards are preventing
his development in certain directions is really caught in
a trap. He set up the standard originally as a means of
avoiding conflict. By defining himself as unable or un-
willing to master a subject which seemed to be difficult,
he protected himself from a pain of contradiction by making
it seem consistent to fail. As a result, he finds himself
increasingly handicapped in the effort to maintain other


standards whose preservation is imperative; for example,
the ideas that he is normally intelligent and respected
by others as an equal- But the longer he maintains the
standard, and the greater the handicap becomes, the
greater the difficulty he has in escaping from his own
defenses.
To free himself, it would be necessary to set up a
new and higher standard supported by consistency alone.
This is by no means impossible, in spite of the influence
of past experience. But he cannot make up his mind to
this step because he is not clearly aware of the nature
of the problem. The picture of himself as caught in a
trap is hidden from his view. Hence he not only clings to
the inhibiting idea, but defends it by rationalizing to the
effect that since every one has his weaknesses, it is
foolish to worry about them. The rationalization masks
the problem so cleverly that the pupil sees no inconsis-
tency to be corrected, and hence has no motive for chang-
ing his attitude. As long as they are protected by their
parents and enjoy their customary social status, such
pupils as a rule take an optimistic view of the future,
anticipate a lenient and sympathetic attitude on the part
of others, and expect to be successful in spite of their
deficiency. Indeed, this attitude is necessary for defense.
In applying the method, we first explain to the pupil
that his deficiency is not due to lack of ability, but to a
standard which he created himself. We must make it clear
that the standard is unconscious, since this explains why
he has continued to maintain it. It is most important that
the interpretation of his difficulty be offered in a friendly
and uncritical manner. The attitude should be that this
is not our problem, but his.
The next step is to demonstrate that the pupil also has
other standards which likewise must be maintained; for


example, the conception of himself as self-reliant, inde-
pendent, socially acceptable, and able to solve his
problems by his own effort.
Finally, we call attention without criticism to the
inconsistency between mature and immature standards.
We make the conflict as clear as possible. In this way
we take advantage of the need for consistency and make
it work in the pupil’s favor instead of against him.
Many counselors make the mistake of trying to influence
the pupil by appealing to practical or material motives,
such as the need of arithmetic and spelling in business.
Our experience has shown that these appeals have little
or no effect. We can influence the pupil to change his
behavior in order to preserve his mental integrity, but
not in order to prepare himself to make a material success.




APPENDIX II
PERSONAL COUNSELING
The Theory of Self-Consistency in Personnel Problems
(An address given by Prescott Lecky at the Annual Meeting of
the American College Personnel Association, 1935)
Science at present adheres to the dogma that man is
a machine, not essentially different from other machines
except in complexity. His behavior consists of reactions
which are mechanical and purposeless. Every movement
is, in theory, completely determined by inflexible laws.
Science insists on this conception, and scientific method
in psychology presupposes it. If new methods are to be
developed, therefore, the old dogma must be overthrown.
But this is impossible so long as the aim of science
itself is restricted to the discovery of natural laws. Under
the circumstances, the persistence of the mechanistic
viewpoint is not difficult to understand.
The scientific view of man was not, however, arrived
at inductively by study of the evidence relating to man.
Instead, it was deduced from the doctrines of classical
physics and medieval theology. The conclusion was ac-
cepted before the evidence was examined, and we are
still seeking facts which will confirm the theory, rather
than a theory which will organize the facts. Since science
insists that every phenomenon of nature must be explained
in terms of law, the effort to account for the behavior of
man in terms of individual purpose would involve a contra-
diction of the scientific scheme as a whole. Consequently


though the accepted picture belongs to a period of thought
far removed from the twentieth century, it is protected by
the rest of the system of which it is a part. We are caught
in a vicious circle from which escape is impossible until
the circle is somehow broken.
The handicap imposed on the human sciences by the
mechanistic caricature of man cannot be exaggerated. But
mere criticism of the mechanistic hypothesis accomplishes
nothing. A false idea is not destroyed until it is replaced.
Either we must take a positive step and attempt to develop
a new way of thinking, or give up the problem altogether.
Until the end of the nineteenth century, the physiologi-
cal theory of stimulus-response, based on the analogy
between the nervous system and a telegraph system,
dominated all psychological thinking. But this theory
proved inadequate for clinical purposes, and was chal-
lenged by psychoanalysis, which substituted the analogy
of a hydraulic system and endeavored to conceive of
mental processes in terms of the behavior of liquids under
pressure. It was this analogy which gave rise to such
concepts as repression, emotional outlets, sublimation,
drainage, equilibrium, etc. Both theories attempt by the
use of these analogies to maintain the appearance of
consistency with the traditions of mechanistic science.
But this phase in the history of psychology is now
drawing to a close. Mechanistic figures of speech have
been useful devices for preliminary organization of the
data, but they have not produced a conception of man
which disinterested students of the evidence are able to
accept. After fifty years of research under mechanistic
auspices, psychology is more disorganized in respect to
its theoretical outlook than ever before in its history.
The hydraulic analogy seems to be displacing the
telegraphic concept chiefly because of its greater flexi


bility for dealing with problems of motivation. Instead of
relying on environmental forces acting as stimuli, it pos-
tulates a group of internal forces or instincts seeking
expression by devious outlets. But it has never been
possible to explain all behavior as the expression of the
same type of energy, which would be quite necessary, of
course, if the N hydraulic figure were followed literally.
Freud attempted to confine his theory to the single instinct
of love or sex, but he was forced to recognize the so-called
ego motives, and recently has also added the death in-
stinct as a means of explaining aggression and hatred.
Similarly, Adler began with the aggressive striving for
power or superiority, but later was obliged to admit the
existence of social feeling and co-operative tendencies.
Other schools recognize much longer lists of instincts.
But in all cases it has been observed that motives conflict
and interfere with one another, which has led to the belief
that each different motive must be treated independently.
The result is that the hydraulic analogy leads to a number
of dynamic units, just as the telegraphic concept, with its
great variety of habits and reaction patterns, leads to a
number of structural units. The personality thus comes to
be conceived as a plurality, not as a unity itself.
Mechanistic psychology, as already noted, is founded
on classical physics, which insists upon unqualified
determinism. In the new physics, on the other hand, it
has been found that determinism is valid only in reference
to averages; that is, for groups of atoms, but not for
single atoms studied individually. The behavior of indivi-
dual atoms, it seems, is not exactly predictable. Hence
the concept of law, which is the basis of mechanism, is
recognized as applicable only to statistical results in-
volving the behavior of a mass of units. This means that


the study of individual systems leads us into new scienti-
fic territory where the old ways of thinking no longer
apply. Here, since mathematical certainty is not attainable,
science must abandon its former goal and seek insight
and understanding instead.
Modern physics likewise frankly admits that the con-
cept of forces, employed by classical science to explain
the movement of physical objects, is not only undefinable
and hypothetical but unnecessary and confusing from the
standpoint of interpretation. For instance, no one would
claim today that invisible forces are competing for control
of the physical world; and, if such a suggestion were
offered, it would promptly be rejected as a return to de-
monology. In psychology, however, demonology persists.
We still think of the individual as controlled by instinctive
and emotional forces which conceptually play the same
role as devils and demons competing with one another for
the mastery. And we are bound to continue thinking in this
way until mechanism is abandoned and a new conception
substituted in its place.
Instead of assuming beforehand, then, that man is a
machine which is moved by forces, a mass whose future
behavior is predictable from records of its past behavior,
let us assume that as long as he remains alive he must
be thought of not as a complex mass of cells or molecules
or atoms but as a unit in himself, a system which operates
as a whole. His behavior must then be interpreted in terms
of action rather than reaction; that is, in terms of purpose.
Such a suggestion is by no means radical from a hu-
manistic standpoint. Any theory which may be erected on
the basis of this assumption, however, and any technique
derived from the theory for clinical use, is automatically
prohibited from assuming a plurality of purposes. One
source of motivation only, the necessity to maintain the


unity of the system, must serve as the universal dynamic
principle. Not conflict but unity must be the fundamental
postulate. But although we assume a constant striving for
unity, we do not assume that the outcome of the striving
is necessarily successful. The environment sets the condi-
tions of the problem which must be met, and in some in-
stances an adequate solution may not be forthcoming. If
the outcome could be guaranteed, in fact, as it is in
classical physics, determinism would be reinstated and
the postulate of purposive striving would be unnecessary.
Practically all schools of psychotherapy aim at the
elimination of conflict, in spite of the fact that conflict
is postulated as fundamental. lienee it is clear that they
too aim at unification as a goal, though the possibility
of attaining the goal is inconsistent with their premises.
It is obvious, then, that conflict must be assumed to be a
temporary disturbance only, a kind of illness in contrast
to health, rather than a permanent and necessary condition.
Though conflict is usually present, it is not due to the
structure of personality itself. It is rather due to environ-
mental changes which present a continuous series of new
problems to be solved.
This brings us to the question of why the mechanistic
psychologies have been able to survive so long. The
answer is that, in spite of their failure to meet the re-
quirements of logic, the evidence on which they rest is
usually accepted without question. The mechanistic sys-
tem of thought is erected on the axiom that the real world
is the apparent world, a claim which is by no means easily
set aside. The data of perception are accepted at face
value and the method adopted is the literal description
and exact measurement of so-called physical objects in
relation to other physical objects. A science which thus
overemphasizes the importance of perception, however,


cannot thereafter accommodate itself to the use of con-
ceptual thinking in the solution of its problems. Hence,
though imaginative and symbolic thought has always been
indispensable in the development of scientific theory, it
is still true that such thinking is tolerated only when suf-
ficiently disguised to conceal its true character. We must
now abandon this pretense and assert the right to create
concepts without the necessity of passing them off as a
part of the perceptual world.
The new developments in physics for example, began
with the emergence of the modern concept of the atom.
Formerly conceived of as merely tiny particles of matter,
all alike and not essentially different from larger particles,
atoms in the new physics belong in a different category
altogether. They are hypothetical structures or systems
created for purposes of interpretation. The question of
the existence or reality of the atom as now conceived
does not arise. As Eddington says, it has no definition
in the world of familiar experience. It is sufficient that
the concept is a scientific necessity without which the
problems of physics could not be solved.
Psychology evidently needs to create a similar con-
ceptual object, likewise for the purpose of making its
data intelligible. Descriptively, a human being is simply
a mass of cells; nothing corresponding to the mind can
be discovered. But it is possible to create a concept of the
mind and then describe the concept, and this is the method
which must be followed. It will be remembered that the
concept of the mind or personality is, in fact, even older
than the concept of the atom, but its disadvantage from
the standpoint of descriptive science is much greater. It
is so obviously not a physical object that psychology has
felt impelled to avoid it as a mystical speculation. Yet it


is no more mystical than the atom, and certainly no less
necessary.
If one tries to imagine physics deprived of the atom,
he can understand something of the state of affairs to be
found at present in psychology. An abundance of evidence
has been accumulated, both experimental and clinical, but
a unifying concept is lacking. Freud’s * ’topographical”
conception of the personality as divided' into three sys-
tems, the Id, Ego, and Super-Ego, is a definite step in
this direction, but he cannot condense the three to form a
unified system because he has not rejected the belief in
a plurality of instincts. The conception which is offered
here attempts to avoid these difficulties by rejecting the
mechanistic viewpoint from the start. Such a step was
virtually impossible, of course, for Freud, for the change
in physics has taken place only in the last few years. The
young scientist of psychology could never have hoped to
attack the mechanistic viewpoint unassisted.
We conceive of the mind or personality as an organiza-
tion of ideas which are felt to be consistent with one
another. Behavior expresses the effort to maintain the
integrity and unity of the organization. The point is that
all of an individual’s ideas are organized into a single
system, whose preservation is essential. In order to be
immediately assimilated, the idea formed as the result of
a new experience must be felt to be consistent with the
ideas already present in the system. On the other hand,
ideas whose inconsistency is recognized as the personality
develops must be expelled from the system. There is thus
a constant assimilation of new ideas and expulsion of old
ideas throughout life.
The nucleus of the system, around which the rest of
the system revolves, is the individual’s idea or concep-
tion of himself. Any idea entering the system which is
inconsistent with the individual’s conception of him-
self cannot be assimilated but instead gives rise to an


inconsistency which must be removed as promptly as
possible.
By way of illustration, let us consider the interpreta-
tion of why a person feels insulted or has his feelings
hurt. An insult is a valuation of the individual by others
which does not agree with his valuation of himself. Such
a contradictory valuation cannot be assimilated; and,
when thrust into a person’s experience, evokes an impulse
of rejection.
The conflict provoked by the inconsistency may lead
to several different kinds of behavior. One method of
handling the problem is to strike back and try to inflict
an equal injury upon the person responsible for the in-
sult. It seems to be necessary that the injury given be
equal to the injury received if the conflict is to be dis-
solved completely. Ancient codes of justice emphasize
this equality—an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. Vigor-
ous rejection and retaliation is especially apparent in
children because of their inability to unify on any other
basis. The inconsistency may also be removed by an
apology, again provided that the apology be interpreted
as equal to the insult.
Still another method is to reinterpret the disturbing
incident in such a manner that it can be assimilated. For
example, a child was deeply wounded when he failed to
be invited to a schoolmate’s birthday party. The incident
was painful because the values implied were inconsistent
with his conception of himself. When he discovered that
the party was a small one, however, and that several of
his close friends were among the uninvited he was able
to reinterpret the situation in such a way that the threat
to his values disappeared.
Finally, it is sometimes necessary to alter the opinion
one holds of oneself. This is difficult, for the individual’s


conception of himself is the central axiom of his whole
life theory. Nevertheless, a gradual change in the concept
of self is imperative to normal development and happiness.
This compulsion to unify and harmonize the system of
ideas by which we live provides the basis for the dynamic
aspect of the theory. It is only when a person is unable
to rid himself of inconsistencies that psychological prob-
lems arise. The function of the psychologist is confined
to diagnosis and demonstration. Once the subject, himself,
is made to feel the inconsistency in his scheme of life,
he can be depended upon to make the problem his own. He
is obliged to endeavor to alter the system in the direction
of greater consistency. In constructing his personal theory
of life, in other words, the individual follows the same
method precisely as the scientist in constructing and per-
fecting his theory of the world. Yet in both cases, despite
the need for adaptation to new situations, the resistance
to disturbance of the existing organization is readily
observable.
As we have already pointed out, the various so-called
emotional states cannot be treated independently, but must
be regarded as different aspects of a single motive, the
striving for unity. For example, love is the emotion sub-
jectively experienced in reference to a person or object
already assimilated and serving as a strong support to the
idea of self. Grief is experienced when the personality
must be reorganized due to the loss of one of its supports.
Hatred and rage are impulses of rejection and destruction
felt towards unassimilable objects. The emotion of horror
appears when a situation arises suddenly which we are
not prepared to assimilate, such as the sight of a ghastly
accident.
Experiences which increase the sense of psychological
unity and strength give rise to the emotion of joy and


feelings of pleasure. Occasionally a person's own behavior
may violate his conception of himself, producing feelings
of remorse and guilt. In that case, the insult to himself,
as it were, may be eliminated either by reinterpretation or
by seeking punishment sufficient to equalize the insult.
Fear is felt when no adequate solution of a problem can
be found; it is due to dynamic disorganization.
From our standpoint, emotion is a concept which is
necessary only when the problem of behavior is stated in
terms of the apparent world. The resemblance to the con-
cept of forces in classical physics, and to the concept of
spirits or devils in primitive theories of the world, has
been noted previously. A psychological theory which con-
ceives of motivation as a phenomenon of organization has
no need for the concept of emotion.
Thinking likewise has the aim of unifying the organiza-
tion of ideas. Logic and emotion, therefore, are not in
conflict, but work toward the same end. If most of our
thinking appears to have the purpose of merely rationaliz-
ing our behavior to make it seem consistent, of defending
conclusions already reached, or justifying positions al-
ready taken, this is, indeed, what would be expected
under the circumstances. Once a person is able to envisage
the relationships of his problem, however, to appreciate
the wisdom of sacrificing the ideas which interfere with
unified action, he devotes himself to the task of recon-
struction with an eagerness and sincerity which often is
truly amazing. And why not, indeed, when his own efficien-
cy and happiness are at stake?
Of special importance from the standpoint of education
is the phenomenon of resistance. When one idea has been
accepted, it opposes the acceptance of other ideas which
are not consistent with it. The problem of resistance has
received scant attention in educational psychology, which


conceives of learning as a process of habit formation
through exercise. Psychiatry, on the other hand, though
it recognizes resistance, regards it as a device to protect
the neurosis, and treats it as a phenomenon of abnormal
psychology. Yet the obvious fact that new ideas must be
harmonized with the old necessarily involves resistance
to conceptions whose assimilation would be difficult.
Hence resistance must be accepted as a normal and neces-
sary aspect of learning. Indeed, a unified organization
could not be maintained without it. E<trly impressions are
important, not only in themselves, but because they set
the conditions for rejection of other values, whatever their
nature, which would tend to precipitate a conflict.
Since the experience of everyone is more or less hap-
hazard, however, there are always present in the system
a certain number of ideas accepted on insufficient evi-
dence. These ideas, whose retention depends entirely
upon the success with which they can be rationalized and
made to seem consistent, give rise to resistances which
are likely to be detrimental in the long run.
The clinical technique which follows from the theore-
tical conception of the problem must therefore aim to
bring about in the subject a re-examination of those ideas
which block his development. Academic difficulties and
social maladjustments are both conceived of as due to
resistances arising from the subject’s idea of himself.
Obviously, the method must rely upon inducing the subject
to observe the system of contradictions in which he has
become involved.
Let us take the case of an intelligent student who is
deficient, let us say, in spelling. In almost every instance
poor spellers have been tutored and practiced in spelling
over long periods without improvement. For some reason
such a student has a special handicap in learning how to


spell, though not in learning the other subjects which are
usually considered more difficult. This deficiency is not
due to a lack of ability, but rather to an active resistance
which prevents him from learning to spell in spite of the
extra instruction. The resistance arises from the fact that
at some time in the past the suggestion that he is a poor
speller was accepted and incorporated into his definition
of himself, and is now an integral part of his total per-
sonality. His difficulty is thus explained as a special
instance of the general principle that a person can only
be true to himself. If he defined himself as a poor speller,
the misspelling of a certain proportion of the words which
he uses becomes for him a moral issue. He misspells words
for the same reason that he refuses to be a thief. That is,
he must endeavor to behave in a manner consistent with
his idea of himself.
In these cases, we find that his self-definition as a
poor speller, and consequently the resistance to learning
how to spell correctly, can usually be removed in from one
to five interviews. The majority become average or better
than average spellers within the space of two or three
months.
A study of the spelling behavior of these students
shows that each individual seems to have a definite stan-
dard of poor spelling which he unconsciously endeavors
to maintain. If his spelling test is cut in two, it will be
found that each half contains approximately the same num-
ber of misspelled words. If we study his letters or written
theses, there is likewise a striking consistency in the
number of misspelled words per page. Strange to say, the
spelling of foreign languages seems to be impaired very
little if at all, showing clearly that the difficulty cannot
be attributed to eye movements, left-handedness, or other
mechanical interferences. Evidently the conception of


one’s self as a poor speller usually has reference to one’s
native language only.
The clinical technique consists in first finding several
strong values apparently unrelated to the value in question
which can be used as levers, so to speak, and then demon-
strating the inconsistency between these values and the
one responsible for the deficiency. Almost every student
considers himself independent and self-reliant, for example.
On the other hand, it can readily be shown that the poor
speller expects his defect to be condoned and treated sym-
pathetically; that, in effect, he has his hand out, begging
for indulgence. If the contradiction can be demonstrated
from his own viewpoint, a reorganization becomes com-
pulsory. His definition of himself as a poor speller is
vigorously rejected and a determined effort made to es-
tablish the opposite definition. The result obtained is out
of all proportion to the effort exerted to bring it about.
Spelling assumes such interest that it is studied at every
opportunity, even from-the advertisements on street cars
and subway trains. An elaborate analysis to convince the
subject that his difficulty really is due to a fixed idea of
himself, does not seem to be necessary in the remedial
treatment of spelling. He should, however, be asked to
recall when he first accepted the role of a poor speller,
ceased to worry about it, and dismissed the question as
closed.
It is significant that not only poor spellers, but stam-
merers and others with similar defects, freely admit as a
rule that they accept themselves as they are and make no
effort to change. This is an excellent defense, of course,
for they feel no inconsistency once the definition has been
accepted. And they often attempt to avoid the effort of main-
taining a more useful definition by referring the defect to
heredity or neuro-muscular maladjustment.


Our experience also shows that unless a person has an
unusually optimistic view of the future he would not be
likely to anticipate a lenient attitude on the part of others
in regard to errors in spelling. This optimism also appears
in the fact that poor spellers seem almost universally to
count on the services of stenographers who are good
spellers, and many are able to quote the names of several
people who became famous in spite of a deficiency in
spelling.
Those who claim that they ”do not have a mathematical
mind” are likewise victims of their own resistance. Such
a student may have defined himself in childhood as the
exact opposite of some unassimilable companion who had
been held up as a shining example of mathematical pro-
ficiency. In other cases, remarks by parents or teachers
that the child was lacking in aptitude for mathematics
seem to be the explanation. The suggestion was accepted
and is now a part of the student's conception of himself.
In one instance, a student who despised mathematics in
high school, during his freshman year, acquired a sudden
attachment for the subject and is now a professional sta-
tistician. This boy's older brother was proficient in mathe-
matics, and the two have been in conflict for years.
The method has also been applied to the treatment of
occupational maladjustments and marriage problems. In
these cases the nature of the definition responsible for
the difficulty is not so obvious. It must be deduced from
the individual’s history and his present attitude and be-
havior, considered in the light of the theory. The diagnosis
made must be acceptable and convincing to the individual
concerned, of course, and must be built up as a logical
solution of the problem under consideration. The subject
should be urged to co-operate in stating the self-definition
as accurately as possible before its consistency is
called in question.


So-called laziness, lack of concentration, etc., are due
to the acceptance of definitions at cross purposes with
one another. Such individuals cannot act in consistency
with one definition without being inconsistent with another.
For example, a student may define himself as intelligent,
but poor in mathematics. To maintain the first definition,
he should make high grades in mathematics; but, to main-
tain the second, he should fail. However, if he must act,
as long as he is playing both roles at once, he is forced
to compromise. His grades in mathematics will split the
difference somewhere near the passing mark, and the
teacher will characterize him as lazy. For his own part,
he will claim that he cannot concentrate, and the claim will
be perfectly true. This seems to be the explanation of the
characteristic level of performance already noted in regard
to spelling. As long as the definitions remain unchanged,
the characteristic rate or grade of activity tends to remain
constant.
The remedy is not to be found by means of tests which
reveal the specific weaknesses, or in persistent drilling
on the fundamentals, but only in changing the definition.
Energetic concentration simply means that a person is
free from conflicts and able to bring his united efforts to
focus on the task in hand.
What a person is able or unable to learn, in other words,
depends, to a large extent at least, upon what he has
already learned, and especially upon how he has learned.
Differences in native ability cannot be summarily dismissed,
but at present this explanation is frequently dragged in
simply to serve as an alibi, both for the school and for the
individual. Character traits, so-called, are likewise attri-
buted to heredity.
It should be remembered in this connection that a per-
son may accept any idea whatsoever if nothing has been
learned to the contrary to interfere with its acceptance;


while a contrary idea provides a sort of immunity. We have
an instance of a very slow boy, for example, who charac-
terized himself as "the slow one" and his brother as "the
quick one.” He felt so guilty when working too rapidly
that he had developed a large repertory of devices to use
up the necessary amount of time in order to be true to his
role. Attempts to teach him rapid methods of work naturally
met with complete failure as long as the original defini-
tion was retained. Very often a troublesome child has un-
wittingly been cast in that part by the criticism of parents
or teachers. A boy who had previously defined himself as
"good" would vigorously resist, of course, the suggestion
that he is "bad." If his definition in this respect has not
yet been strongly established, however, he may accept
the role and consider the question closed. Thereafter, he
endeavors to perfect himself in the part to which he has
been assigned, and grows more and more unmanageable the
more his behavior is condemned. Youths who are placed
in reformatories usually emerge not reformed, but confirmed
in their self-definition as. social outcasts and potential
criminals. To make sure that this definition is shared by
all of its members, many gangs require a term in reform
school as a prerequisite for membership.
Shyness, seclusiveness, feelings of insecurity and in-
adequacy, lack of friends, and the like are symptomatic of
self-valuations which are not supported in the situation in
which the subject finds himself. They are not traits, for
they would disappear if a more favorable situation could
be found. To be favorable from the subject’s standpoint,
however, would mean a situation approximating the child-
hood situation in which these values were developed and
to which they then seemed to be appropriate.
The subject himself, however, arrives quite naturally
at exactly the opposite diagnosis. From his own standpoint,


his values seem so consistent with one another that no
important changes are possible. He therefore turns for
support to fantasy and puts the blame for his difficulties
on the external situation. Thus, in defending the validity
of his present scheme of thought and action, he renders
his problem more insoluble than ever.
On the other hand, it must be remembered that numerous
other values have been accepted in addition to those which
cause his unhappiness. If this were not so, he would be
content to withdraw even further from the outside world
and retreat still deeper into fantasy. It is this inability to
unify on any course of action, in fact, which keeps him
perpetually in search of a solution and gives us the oppor-
tunity to help him toward a clearer view of his problem.
Attention must therefore be fixed on the values which
offer some hope of unified action. Nor are such values dif-
ficult to find. We have already mentioned that most persons
conceive of themselves as intelligent and self-reliant.
Even more strongly founded, however, is the idea of one-
self as a person who is useful to others, willing to hold
up one’s own end, and capable of making a contribution to
the group to which he belongs. At any rate, we have never
seen anyone who did not conceive of himself in this way,
though the values in question may be so blocked that the
external behavior fails to reveal their influence. The test
for the presence of any value, of course, is whether a per-
son is pleased when the value is attached to him, or dis-
turbed when charged with its opposite.
As always, the technique consists in making the sub-
ject aware of his own inconsistency. The inhibiting defini-
tions must be seen as useless burdens from which he must
try to free himself, rather than as assets to be justified
and retained. But no matter how undesirable a given defi-
nition may be from a social standpoint, it will not be


rejected unless it seems inconsistent from the subject’s
standpoint. We do not aim at consistency with the demands
of society, but only at self-consistency. Social ends must
be approached indirectly. If the personal problem is suc-
cessfully solved and unity of action achieved, however, the
social problem seems to disappear.
Since each personality is an organized system in which
every idea is related to every other, it is obvious that any
attempt to force the issue and remove the resistance by
attacking it simply misses the point completely. For this
reason the consultant will probably be more successful if
he does not try too hard. In dealing with children, it will
be noticed that parents and teachers, whose peace of mind
is affected by the child’s success or failure, usually can-
not set aside their personal interest in the matter and are
likely to become impatient. We may with advantage remind
ourselves that only the individual himself can solve his
problem, and he must necessarily solve it in his own way.
Preaching to the subject, telling him what he ought and
ought not to do, trying to get him to accept our ideas and
standards is ineffective for the reason that he has already
accepted other ideas. His resistance to our suggestions is
not due to obstinacy but to inability to accept them until
the contrary ideas have been reconsidered and rejected.
A comparison with other theories will clarify both the
similarities and differences. We accept Adler’s principle
of the unity of the personality, though not his theory of
maladjustments as due to fear or discouragement. We agree
with Freud that the subject is usually unaware of the cause
of his difficulties, though we do not agree with the theory
of repression. Instead of trying to remove complexes, we
try to change definitions. The value of the analytic ap-
proach, in our opinion, is to demonstrate how certain defi-
nitions originated, and thus to bring about reconsideration


of those which were arrived at prematurely. We extend the
Gestalt principle to include concepts as well as percepts,
but reject the equilibrium theory as a form of mechanism.
Both Freud and Adler, it seems to us, implicitly employ
the same method which we advocate explicitly. Freud at-
tempts to render certain values unassimilable, and in this
way to bring about vigorous rejection, by associating them
with sexual connotations which are not acceptable. Adler
attempts to bring about a reorganization by interpreting the
resistance as due to fear or cowardice. Almost no one, it
is safe to say, can assimilate the idea of himself as either
an Oedipus or a coward.
When the concept of the personality is developed in
greater detail, it will bear, we believe, an even closer re-
semblance to the concept of the atom. Ideas seem to jump
from one orbit to another within the personality just as
electrons change their relative positions within the atom.
There are other similarities also. In some of its aspects
the electron must be conceptualized as a wave, in other
aspects as a particle. The same is true of an idea. When
we speak of an idea entering the system, the closest anal-
ogy from the material world is that of a particle or bullet
passing through a surface of separation. But when we
speak of a person behaving in consistency with an idea,
we think in terms of a wave of activity following a definite
direction. Moreover, structural and functional concepts
have been present in psychology since the time of Wundt
and Brentano, when the atom was still regarded as a sub-
microscopic billiard ball. In view of the obvious differences
between the descriptive data of psychology and physics,
the similarity of the conceptual structures developed for
interpretative purposes is truly remarkable.
