

SELF RULE
IN
MELANESIA
Leonard P. Maenu'u




SELF RULE
IN
MELANESIA
by
Leonard P. Maenu’u
Permanent Secretary
National Planning
Office of the Prime Minister


The Virtues of Man
An idle person is no person
Without purpose no man is a man.
Whereas the virtues of man.
Stand upon the soil of
self rule,
self determination,
self help.
The glories of a plant;
Are in the beauty of its flowers.
Such that the birds so proclaim,
Yet
no glories,
no proclamations;
There can be.
Without roots that lay silently.
In the dirts of the soil.
L.P.M.


CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
INTRODUCTION
Part I - Devolution Process
Rationale of Devolution
Relevance to Solomon Islands
Foundations for Devolution
Part II - Arrangement and Administration
The Public Service
Disection of the Public Service
Structural Construction
Finance
Figure 1 - Responsibility Devolution - Central
Government and Provincial Government
Figure 2 - Comparative Gradings of Posts in both National and
Provincial Governments
Figure 3 )
) - Differences in Construction and Structural Establish-
Figure 4 ) ment of National and Provincial Government Organi-
sations.
Page


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to sincerely thank the Honourable Solomon S Mamaloni,
Prime Minister of Solomon Islands, for his encouragement and
guidance, which make it possible for this booklet to be completed
within a relatively short period of time. My thanks also go to Mr
Wilson Ifunaoa, Secretary to the Cabinet and Public Service, for the
support he has given during the period of writing up. I also wish to
thank Grahame Nicholls for editing my draft and of course Mrs.
Maria Deromoa for typing the manuscripts. Finally but not the
least my thanks also go to the Government Printer, Mr Patrick
O'Callaghan and the Government Printery for their valuable assist-
ance in printing.
Any ommissions, deficiencies, or misleading expressions con-
tained in this booklet remained solely those of the writer.
LP.M.


INTRODUCTION
Devolution is a subject which is very much alive in many of the
developing countries of the South Pacific Region, particularly the
newly independent nations. Several countries have stated their
intentions of devolving functions to lower authorities. On the whole,
however, this is a new development in any country and the results
are yet to be seen.
This booklet is primarily aimed at assisting the processes of
devolution which are considered to be appropriate to Solomon
Islands. Basically it consists of two parts, the first one is called,
"Devolution Process" and the second one is "The Arrangements
and Administration."
The first part deals with the basic thoughts and concepts of
devolution as are applicable to Solomon Islands. Especially it is
illustrated in this part that these concepts are not pure dreams but
relate directly to and embody Melanesian philosophies. That is,
these concepts are not totally new but are based on and coincide
with local traditions. In simple terms, therefore, this means that the
administrative apparatus of the country is to be built on home
ground principles. Part one also stresses the fact that devolution is
to take place within a unitary system of government, and that
provincial authorities are an integral part of Solomon Islands, which
will remain a single nation, the National Parliament being the
supreme body. The unity of Solomon Islands as one nation is
ensured by the existence of a national Constitution, acts of Parlia-
ment and national policies which have effects throughout the
country. Though provincial governments are given authority to
formulate their own policies and pass ordinances, these are subject to
the national Constitution, Acts of Parliament and national policies.
The second part of this booklet deals with the necessary
administrative arrangements which are required for effective and
meaningful devolution. The most important of these relate to man-
power and finance.


Staff serving in provinces are largely drawn from the same
sources as those serving with central government. Their careers are
not different as they are all from the same national public service
pool of manpower. And here again their services are not limited or
confined to any single province, nor to National Government.
Over the years the majority of officers, will have a chance of serving
with most provinces as well as the National Government. Regarding
young officers particularly, by the time they reach high ranks in the
Public Service a number of them will have served in all the provinces.
Drawing manpower from a single source is seen as an additional
strength in the unity of Solomon Islands. Firstly it avoids and
reduces grounds for discrimination between officers working with
the National Government and those working with provincial govern-
ments. Secondly, the fact that officers are able to serve in all
provinces is an instrument for drawing people together. This of
course, encourages the feeling of personal attachments amongst
members of the public services. Officers know their colleagues who
are working in other provinces and also in the National Government
personally, which is very important for mutual understanding in any
organisation.
Training of manpower will remain the responsibility of the
National Government. There are two main reasons for this, firstly
to maintain equality of standards throughout the country, and
secondly, it is an expensive undertaking. These are both important
considerations. To maintain uniformity of standards in the country,
the first step must be uniformity in training, and in' order to avoid
escalating expenses, centralisation of training facilities is required.
The National Government will also continue to be responsible
for tapping funds from outside sources before these are channelled
through to provinces. This is not oy any means distrusting provincial
authorities, but rather a standard practice which is acceptable to
foreign governments and internationai organisations.


Part I
Devolution Process
Rationale of Devolution
Devolution is a process whereby one party gives over certain
functions that are its responsibility to another party for reasons of
mutual benefits. The party giving over these responsibilities is usually
of a higher, if not the holder of the authority, over the one who
receives it. It is therefore important to understand clearly the extent
to which this mutual relationship should apply. Without such under-
standing much is left to individual interpretation and this can lead to
considerable confusion. Such confusion can easily impair the
relationship and thus be a source of tension, thereby defeating the
whole purpose for which devolution is intended.
Devolution alone does not mean much, on either side of this
equation there is total devolution and partial devolution. Total
devolution is precise enough to understand, but partial devolution
has certain measures or some boundaries. However this is not at all
clear nor is it sufficient for purposes of implementation. The bound-
aries needed to be spelt out in clear terms to avoid disputes and
arguments.
It is one of the basic policies of Solomon Islands Government to
give out substantial functions currently under its responsibility to
provincial governments. The term devolution therefore is being used
in this regard as an expression of this intention. But this is all em-
bracing and the need to clarify the relationship between the national
government and provincial governments is of vital importance. This
policy does not advocate total devolution, nor does it anticipate
partial devolution. Rather substantial devolution is intended, but this
is equally vague.
The National Government wishes to give over the majority of
its functional responsibilities to provincial governments in so far as
these responsibilities relate directly to and in respect of activities in
provinces. To enable this, the national Parliament passed an Act in
1981 called the Provincial Government Act. This sets out the basis
upon which provincial governments are established. By virtue of this
Act, provincial governments, are authorities in their own rights.


However, whereas the Act does not give them automatic authority to
assume responsibilities immediately from National Government
controls, it nevertheless provides for making arrangements to this
effect.
Arrangements whereby National Government gives over
responsibilities for functions held by it to provincial government
have to be either by way of subsidiary legislation or other forms of
legal instruments. These will specify the relative degree, either by
subject matter or generally, of the extent to which devolution can
take place. As provincial governments are permanent parts of the
total development process of Solomon Islands, it follows therefore
that these arrangements are also permanent. However, the Provincial
Government Act also provides for the surrender of certain devolved
functions to the National Government by provincial governments if
so desired. But again this is not automatic, and negotiations must be
completed before such surrender is carried out.
While, provision is made in the Act for provincial governments
to relinquish some of their responsibilities to the national Govern-
ment, similar provisions have not been made to allow the National
Government to withdraw devolved functions should it be necessary
to do so in the public interest. But as the original authority holder
for functions so devolved, it is assumed that the National Govern-
ment has the power to withdraw any of these functions from any
provincial government if it feels that a provincial .government is not
acting responsibly. Such occasions would be very few, but it is
important to realise this particular relationship. It is an area which
can cause considerable confusion and can also result in conflict if not
fully appreciated.
Regarding the formulation of this basic policy for devolution
of functions to provincial authorities, it is understood this will take
place within the overall frame-work of a unitary National Govern-
ment. There is therefore no intention of splitting the country up into
several independent governments. For this reason provincial
governments, although at the local level are answerable to their own
people, they are on the national level also answerable to the National
Government. This accountability by provincial governments both to
their own people and the National Government, is very important.
For it ensures that provinces will be conscious at all times that both
the National Government and the people have interests in all matters
devolved to them.


Accepting this as the basis for devolution as expressed in the
policy, there is little room or scope for a power struggle within the
country. The limits of these relationships between provincial govern-
ments and the National Government are all contained either in the
Act or in other legal instruments as they come into force from time
to time. It is intended that this relationship should be one of cordial
and mutual understanding. Essentially provincial governments and
the National Government are all serving the same people and their
aims are to this one purpose. They all want to do the best for the
people. Nothing is therefore worse than duplication of effort. Apart
from such a situation being more costly to administer, the people
will be caught between two rival actions and the door to power
struggle is opened.
Devolution, in as far as it is envisaged by the Solomon Islands
Government, is really one of harmonisation, in which certain authori-
ties are delegated to other bodies to carry out particular functions.
But this does not mean to do away with the fact that in the final
analysis, the National Government is still overall responsible and
ultimately answerable to the peoples of Solomon Islands, Within
this frame work the only area open to power struggle should be
between political parties, initially at the national level but also
very likely at the provincial level.
Relevance to Solomon Islands
Is the policy of devolution just a dreamt up ideology? - how
relevant is it to Solomon Islands?. There is a world of difference
between dreamt up ideas and ideas which arise out of practical
experiences. The first are based on untested presumptions which
need to be proven, and the latter are based on proven facts obtained
from the field.
It takes a most adventurous person to venture into the first
category, as in that direction lay many unknown and even
unquantifiable pitfalls. The magnitude of these unknown problems
can only be effectively measured on the occasions they eventuate.
Their numbers cannot be counted until the end of the project.
Finally the succes of the project is largely questionable until the end,
when an analysis can be carried out. Monitoring and regular assess-
ment during the life of the project is undoubtedly a very essential
part.


The second category is perhaps what most conservatives use to
a greater extent. Obviously it is very safe to walk on secure grounds.
No one in his right mind can dispute this fact. This approach takes
account of almost everything right from the beginning. And if there
are any margins of difference at the end of the project, these are to a
large degree not unsurmountable.
With regards to devolution, Solomon Islands is really in mid-
stream. It is a new concept as far as modern government and
administration is concerned. The Westminister system of government
which the country has inherited from Britain is largely based on
centralisation. It means having a very strong central administration
so that all decision are taken at a central location, particularly with
regards to policies and other very important matters. Very little can
therefore be done at local levels without clearance from the central
administration. Solomon Islands, as stated, inherited this system
from the British Government, and for the last four or so decades this
was adopted without question. However, the British administration
was possibly not aware that the inhabitants of Solomon Islands were
caught unexpectedly in the course of events when this form of
foreign administration came into force.. There was much confusion
among the people. Decisions which they very well knew were within
their customary right to exercise suddenly became forbidden. The
central administration alone was allowed to take those decisions. No
one really knew what was going on, overnight the traditional leaders
had been stripped of their authority. What caused this unexpected
change was a mystery to them. It is however true to state that today,
even after many years living under this foreign administrative system,
confusion continues to exist. Traditional leaders (if there are any
left) still do not fully appreciate or rather do not accept this perma-
nent and consistent erosion of their authority.
The Government's policy of devolution is consistent with
Melanesian traditions. The concept therefore is not new, although
the practice has been abandoned for a long time. Melanesians, of
which Solomon Islands are, traditionally live under tribal admin-
stration. Tribes are usually by way of blood relationships. Each one
is fully responsible for the welfare of its people. This includes, not
only administration, but security and defence, insurances, ceremo-
nies, law and order, education and science, religion etc. Almost all of
these are now dead to the present generation. During the days of
tribal administration tribes were all independent of each other.
Each one was organised according to what its administration


decided, even the gods were separate and could not be shared with
other tribes. This degree of independence is not possible to re-
surrect today, as obviously the God Jehovah, who is universal,
cannot possibly be claimed by one group alone as their own.
But beyond ail this, there is a striking relationship, which
though not being enforced by any overall authority is very real and
effective. The tribes, as already stated, are truly independent of
each other, however, there are common land boundaries between
them. But the fact remains that tribes do not depend on others for
their sun/ival. Quite apart from the bonds that tribes have by way of
common land boundaries, the people are firmly related by common
behaviour and beliefs. Peoples of different tribes observe the same
principles, respect, standards and beliefs, even if they belong to
different administrative groups. These customary practices are similar
or exactly the same and run throughout several tribes, particularly of
those from the same island.
Present Solomon Island people can learn quite a lot from these
tribal administrations. Especially with regards to their common
behaviour and beliefs, this is a root subject, and is very relevant even
in present administrations. Simultaneously this then brings in line
the question of standards. These common modes of behaviour
ensure consistency in standards and practices. A deviation from
these presents certain degrees of threat and a cause for concern
which must result in conciliatory measures being taken as such de-
viation usually adversely affects other parties. If the case is between
two (2} given tribes it must be sorted out through various means
which are available, including tribal warfare. The same philosophy
applies today between the National Government and provincial
governments, where either of them may be in breach Of the arrange-
ments between them, except, it is expected, not to the point of
physical warfare. Such an instance would, of course, be a case for
courts to settle, and hooefuiiy awards duly paid.
Foundations for Devolution
The basis for devolution is already established. Not only
through the Provincial Government Act alone, but more so with
regards to the philosophy behind it that devolution is not totally new
in Solomon Islands. As stated already this has historical relevance to
the country and there should not be any need for concern. But it is
only proper and just that the government should be founded upon a


local deep rooted philosophy, which is original to the country.
For those countries in which the idea is new there are obvious
grounds for concern, but this should not be the case in Solomon
Islands.
It is, however, important to mention at this point that the ideas
of devolution are those indigenous to Solomon Islands, but the
introduced administrative systems of organisation will remain in
operation. That is, the present system of elections of parliament-
arians both to the National Government and provincial government
will continue. This then forms the base line upon which devolution
will grow. In this context Solomon Island people, through elections,
convey authority and mandate their politicians to have authority
over them, limited and restricted only by provisions of both the
constitution and Act of Parliament.
The two principal pillars upon which all this will be built are
the indigenous philosophies of Solomon Islands and the introduced
administrative machinery. From these everything else will flow.
There is no specific mention made of further devolution from
provincial government administrative centres to other local bodies
such as area councils. Silently, this is of course, part of the whole
exercise but making mention of such at the outset could be seen as
directing provincial governments to comply. It would be self defeat-
ing on the other hand if provincial administration do not devolve
further to Area Councils. Such arrangements will ensure that
devolution is truly at work and in accordance with Solomon Island
traditions. Hopefully, therefore, provincial governments will be able
to see their way as and when necessary in making such arrangements
as they consider appropriate, which will allow certain authorities to
be delegated to area council level. They are quite entitled to do this
if they so wish.
Subjects to be included in such devolution and the limits that
are to be applied to area councils again, is a matter resting firmly
with them. The relationships between area councils and their
respective provincial governments will be very much similar to that
between the National Government and provincial governments.
In the event that an area council is not performing well or misuses
the authority given to it, the provincial government still has the
power to withdraw this authority.


Solomon Islands will remain a single nation under the National
Government, see Fig. 1. The devolution is but part and parcel of an
interplay between the various factions within, and under an umbrella
arrangement of the National Government, the only supreme autho-
rity of the nation. All the different parts, actions, interactions and
intergrations will collectively make up a system of administration of
the country. The national Constitution, which will remain the
supreme law of the country, is an element which binds everything
firmly together and which is an expression of being one. Subordi-
nate to this are Act of Parliament. Acts may come into force from
time to time and will apply throughout the country. They can be
seen as the next reel of elements which support the national
Constitution in firmly binding Solomon Islands together as one
nation. A further factor additional to these two is the existence of
national policies. The three factors mentioned The national Con-
stitution, national laws and national policies, together constitute
the binding forces which hold Solomon Islands together and keep the
country intact. Without these there will be disintegration not only
between National Government and provincial governments but also
between provincial governments and their own area councils. The
national Constitution, national laws and national policies more or
less establish the external limits beyond which devolution cannot
take place. That is to say, devolution can take place as far as these
three institutions permit and any acts which are outside these limits
may be either unconstitution or unlawful. Of these three, perhaps
the one which is likely to face some problems and misunderstandings
will be the national policies.
As national policies will involve subjects of controversial sub-
stance it is important that some attention be given to them. In this
regard it is presumed no one will dispute the fact that the national
Constitution and Acts of Parliament will apply throughout the
country without compromise. But the same statement cannot be
made for national policies. These policies, by all intentions, are
guidelines for management proposes. Their main objectives are to
make sure that developments throughout the country are uniform.
Therefore they emphasise the importance of proper management of
the resources of the country.


Fig 1
Provinces Of Solomon Islands
RESONSIBILITY DEVOLUTION - Central Government and
Provincial Government


The main component parts of these resources are finance,
manpower and natural resources. It is very important that plans for
the use of these resources must be made carefully and policed
effectively, because wasteful use of the country's resources will lead
to greater hardship for generations in the future. Both the National
Government and provincial governments should therefore be more
concerned with the future welfare of the country rather than today.
The reason being that today will soon be gone and becomes part of
history, but plans should aim to bear fruit only at future dates.
Solomon Islands will continue to be one country and so it is
essential that national policies are made to reflect this underlying
and fundamental principle. Such policies are then interpreted into
a National Plan, which contains but the main objectives. Develop-
ment programmes are then drawn within the context of these object-
ives. These may take place in stages for the purpose of phasing of
activities meaningfully. Having national policies should simply be
interpreted as uniformity. That is, the country is a single nation,
therefore uniformity or a national standard infers unity.
As already stated, national policies really mean and should be
seen as a system of standardisation for effective resource manage-
ment, which is important. This will mean then, that the country will
continue to have a uniform standard of education, health services
etc. Managing a single or uniform standard is by far the more
effective and less costly than with several different standards.
Different standards require that training must be spread out to cover
the different needs as well, so that the development of common
efforts in containing, say, any major diseases prevailing in the
country will become unproductive. The same thing is true with
regards to policies for the utilisation of resources, i.e. timber,
fisheries, agriculture or minerals. If proper plans are not made, these
resources, as well as being used up within a very short period of time,
are also liable to be wasted through careless utilisation practices.
These considerations are fundamentally important for the overall and
future development and well being of the country.
National policies, as already stated, serve as guidelines, and may
be subjected to change if such is found to be necessary. Therefore,
with respect to any particular policy which is found to be restrictive
and limiting, regarding the effectiveness of provincial governments, it
is purely a question of taking up the matter with the National
Government for appropriate changes to be made. Such a mechanism


provides for a healthy relationship so that provincial governments are
not prevented from being able to take part in the making of national
policies. It is therefore imperative that their support of the national
policies should be unreserved. These, as is already seen, rank third to
both the Constitution and Acts of Parliament in the list of factors
which will continue to hold the country together. In total there-
fore, they constitute and provide the basic instruments of stability
for the whole country. Unnecessary violation of any of these three
vital factors could easily lead to instability and will be of immense
expense to peoples of Solomon Islands as a whole.
Under the joint arrangements described above, provincial
governments are empowered to make their own legislation. They will
be known as ordinances, not Acts. These ordinances must not ex-
ceed any provisions of the national Constitution nor the provisions
of any Acts passed by Parliament. The application of such ordi-
nances will extend only as far as the jurisdictional limits of the
province making them. That is, they apply locally but do not
extend beyond the limits of their own provincial authority. It is
very much hoped that the ordinances, in many respects will bear
some relationship to customs and traditions of the local comm-
unities. Should this be so, a major gap, which so far has been left
unattended, can be given attention.
Provinces, in a similar manner, will be able to make their own
policies and these again are limited to their own areas of respon-
sibility. It is expected there may be instances where these provincial
policies can be identical with national policies, but they may not
exceed the scope of the national policies. In some ways the provin-
cial policies could be in the form of development programmes.
They can also be interpreted as parts of and constituting the sub-
stance of any provincial development plan.
At this point it is important to dwell a little more on the
question of ordinances which provinces may pass from time to time.
Mention has been made of the inclusion of some of the customary
practices as well as traditions, which are still important for the
welfare of local communities, in the ordinances. This will then
mean that traditions which are valuable are safeguarded, but more
than this they are put into practice and enforced by legislation.
Already the judiciary is able to absorb this, as there is already in
operation a system of local courts which deal with cases of breaching
local customs. The inclusion of important customary traditions is


surely a step forward and a major improvement in the government
organisation of Solomon Islands. Presently the local courts function
on the basis of understood and accepted customary practices. These
are, in many cases not documented, so that it is very important to
note that documentation of accepted customary practices in the
form of ordinances is a step in the right direction for Solomon
Islands people generally. The old generation, who know and have
the full knowledge of these unwritten customs and traditions, will
in time have to give over the responsibility to a new generation.
Without written records of these customary traditions, future
generations will find themselves faced with great difficulties in
deciding the principles which such traditions aimed to safeguard.
Ordinances, as mentioned, should contain important customary
values for each provincial area. These should form the basis for any
law reformation if this is required in the future. There will be no
real need for a Commission, which .may be established to carry out
the task, of touring the country extensively. What is left to be done
is really an examination of provincial ordinances, and extraction
from them subjects which are common or similar. The extracts
should then form the basis of a Bill which can be presented to
Parliament, which if passed, would become an Act. By this means,
Solomon Island laws will be seen to have roots which are traditional
to the country.
17


Part II
Arrangements and Administration
The Public Service
Manpower for both the national and provincial governments is
drawn from the same source, that is from the civil service. This is
more advantageous in many ways and is consistent with the overall
aims of uniformity. There is therefore little room for anyone to
think that officers serving with provincial governments are of lower
status than those serving with the National Government, which
could be a real problem otherwise. All officers will have received
equal training before taking up employment, either with the National
Government or provincial governments. In all cases they will be
initially recruited as members of the Civil Service prior to taking up
their posting assignments. The Public Service Commission is there-
fore the recruiting agent in all cases, except of course for casual or
non-established workers.
Qualifications for all personnel of the civil service working with
the National Government and provincial governments are in all
respects equal. For example, all doctors, nurses, teachers, or agri-
culturalists etc. who are working with provincial governments, are
equally competent as those working with the National Government.
The manpower requirements for both the national and provincial
governments are seen together as one. That is, there is a total re-
quirement for the country as a whole and allocations are mainly a
management function. Appropriate training will be given and is
to be based on the national needs, rather than individual needs.
The civil service in this case, can be seen as another binding
element additional to the national Constitution, Acts of Parliament
and national policies which hold Solomon Islands together as a single
country. This is more physical in a sense and people can see it
clearer than they can the Constitutions, Acts of Parliament or
national policies. Because members of the civil service can be posted
around from province to province or to the National Government,
undoubtedly this can create a healthy atmosphere through which a
broader understanding is developed among all members of staff, and
also at every level. The experience of officers will cover provincial
affairs as well as national affairs. This will go a long way in main-
taining the continued stability of the country.


The future careers for members of the civil service, in this
regard are broadened, as are their perspectives. Where in the past
only a few posts were available for advancement of officers to the
high ranks, the base is now made wider. Furthermore such advance-
ment is not limited and biased towards the administrative cadre as
has been the case but extends to include the professional and tech-
nical cadres as well. Promotions and advancements are now not
limited to services only within the national governments. Officers
can now also look forward to promotional prospects in provinces.
There will continue to be few posts within the National Govern-
ment remaining on slightly higher grades. These are the Chief
Justice, Speaker of National Parliament, Attorney General, Auditor
General and Permanent Secretaries etc., which are very few in
number. Some of these posts are required by the national Con-
stitution, and could not therefore be applied at provincial administra-
tions.
Staff posted to provinces in fact are on secondment, their terms
of employment and conditions of services remain those as offered to
them by the Public Service Commission on their first appointments.
The Public Service Commission will continue to deal with major
disciplinary cases and final dismissal of officers. Understandably
some disciplinary functions can be delegated by the Public Service
Commission to provincial authorities as necessary. This is to allow
them to utilise resources allocated to them in the most effective
manner, and in accordance with their needs.
The training of manpower, both for provincial and national
governments, is best carried out centrally. Therefore this function
is to remain an expenses of the National Government, although
provinces will also be the users of the products. Training is usually
an expensive exercise, and by all intentions an undertaking which is
to remain the responsibility of the National Government. This being
so the National Government will not make any claims to provincial
governments for reimbursement of the cost of training. This is
regarded as a back up service provided by the National Government
which is desirable for a meaningful devolution. Manpower is one of
the very important component parts of effective devolution apart
from money. And so it is essential that staff given over to provinces
must be of a calibre capable of shouldering the responsibilities
assigned to them.


Dissection of the Public Service
Currently the Public Service is made up of officers from the
lowest ranks at level 3 to those of the highest ranks at level SS.I or
SS.2. In provinces the highest level is at Lll, which is only one (1)
level below the highest level (SS.I) in National Government. This
clearly indicates that the quality of officers serving in provinces is
not by any manner of means below that of those working with the
national government. Those on the SS.I scale in National Govern-
ment are Permanent Secretaries. There are also certain SS.2 posts in
National Government, these are actually constitutional posts, e.g..
Chief Justice, Speaker of the National Parliament and the Chairman
of the Public Service Commission. These do not therefore fall under
the normal career posts for advancement in the Civil Service.
Regarding the comparative gradings of posts in both national
and provincial governments, mention is already made that there is a
difference of onlyone(1) scale, which is SS.I. All other posts rank
equally. The highest post in the provinces is L.ll, which is
equivalent to an Under Secretary in National Government. In
professional Ministries such as Medical, Education etc., the Under
Secretary post is usually held by specialist officers. There are also
occasions where specialist officers can advance to SS.I scale, in
which case their scope of responsibilities as Permanent Secretaries of
a Ministry, is suddenly broadened to include all other allied subjects
of the Ministry.
Other matters of relevance need to be mentioned here for
purposes of clarification. Officers who serve with the National
Government have functions which essentially concern the affairs
of all the provinces throughout the country. Their counterparts who
serve with provincial governments on the other hand, are more
concerned with the affairs of their own and individual provinces.
Regardless of this fact, it does not necessarily mean that responsi-
bilities of officers serving with provincial governments are less than
those serving with the National Government. The main reason being
that when functions are devolved to provinces, some of the responsi-
bilities carried by officers of the National Government are given over
so that the load at the centre is reduced very considerably. Because
of this it is only proper that provincial posts be upgraded sub-
stantially.


In furthering the unity of the country, the whole public service,
regardless of where officers are working, is dissected into four (4)
distinct segments as follows:
Policy formulation and co-ordination
. Policy formulation and implementation
. Programme/Project formulation and implementation
Programme/Project implementation
As can be seen from figure 2 the upper segment of the civil service
ranges from L. 10 to Level SS.2. Practically this sector is to interpret
both national and provincial government statements into policies and
when these are implemented, it will also co-ordinate and monitor
them in order to ensure that all projects are consistent with these
policies at every stage.
The next segment is from L.B to L.ll. This group is involved in
the formulation of policies but is also responsible for overseeing the
implementation of policies.
From L. 5 to L. 8 is the next segment, whose task is to identify
and formulate projects or programmes consistent with stated
policies. When projects have been developed this segment is also
responsible for implementating them.
The last group of this sequence of segmentation includes L. 2
to L. 5. This group consists mainly of field people, whose task are
to implement projects or programmes according to specifications.


Fig 2
THE CIVIL SERVICE


In all these cases there are obvious overlaps between each seg-
ment with the next one immediately above or below. These overlaps
are both essential and important, as they are intended to allow
officers of the categories below to be involved in activities of the
segments immediately above. This will serve as a catalyst for train-
ing, to equip officers of the lower levels with some knowledge of the
responsibilities of the grades above them. These officers are by all
intents and purposes candidates for filling the posts above them in
the future, and such preparation for their future advancement is to
be seen as an essential part of the machinery.
Some of the officers of the low segment, particularly those at
L. 2 and L. 3, are among the ranks of semi-skilled workers. They will
have emerged from the non-established work force. Through long
years of working in the field these officers are able to acquire certain
specialist skills which enabled them to advance through the ranks.
Their skills are, in the majority of cases, related to implementation of
programmes. But in this segment are also officers who are at the
beginning of their careers having recently recruited into the Public
Service from secondary or tertiary institutions. This is usually the
case with L. 3 and L. 4 officers, and in many respects they are
trainees. Initially they will learn how to implement projects and
programmes, and over the years gradually work their way up through
the ranks as far as they can go.
The process of gradually bringing up officers applies at all
segments/levels until an officer reaches the top of the scales. As in
every organisation, as officers advance upward from grade to grade
there will be fewer post available in number, and only a handful can
fill them even if there are more eqpally competent officers available.
In order to simplify discussions and presentations, officers of
both the national and provincial governments are presented together
in the segmentation of the civil service. This does not mean, how-
ever, that they are doing exactly the same jobs, which is really a
duplication, therefore an enormous expense and a waste. Here it is
important to mention that those segments in the sectors indicated,
perform their duties within their own areas of responsibility. That is
to say officers in the provinces will be performing similar duties, but
these are confined to the jurisdictional limits of their own provincial
authorities. At the same time officers of the National Government,
although appearing to perform duties not entirely different from
those done in provinces, are functioning much more on the national


level. These officers will view Solomon Islands as a single develop-
mental unit of which the different provinces are integral parts. All
the different activities of provinces are therefore assembled together
here, and will represent in total sum what Solomon Islands is doing
or has done.
Structural Construction
The construction and structural establishement of the national
and provincial government organisations contain differences. These
are given in figures 3 and 4. The basic differences really grow from
the fact that in provinces the structures are weighted much more
towards operational functions, whereas in the National Government
the structures are mainly based on professions or specialisations. It is
important that this basic difference and the reason for it is appre-
ciated. One deals with the implementation of programmes out in the
field while the other deals with maintenance of professional stand-
ards by way of analysing projects to see if they are in keeping with
minimum national standards. The two are complementary, for one
produces information and the other utilises such information for the
benefit of the country as a whole.
It is important to mention that the whole process of devolution
revolves around the operational structures of provincial governments.
In other words, a strongly based structure means efficiency. But the
structure, in order for it to be fully functional and productive, needs
to be backed up by appropriate financial inputs and competent
manpower. The organisational structures in provinces may be
regarded as the foundation upon which it is possible to construct the
type of government machinery necessary for devolution. For these
will influence greatly the kind and number of work programmes and
projects that will be carried out in the country, whether generally or
at any given period of time.
On the other hand, the structures of National Government
Ministries are such that they provide necessary back up services.
The aim is to streamline and facilitate feed back of information
which provinces require. With the information available provinces
will then be in a position to make decisions quickly. Specialisation
therefore is necessary, and officers need to spend their efforts in
looking only at specific problems which are affecting the country.
They will, in so doing, be able to disseminate relevant information
to provinces to help guide their work in as far as such specialist
fields are concerned.


As with training, research is also of great importance for im-
provement of standards and performance. Similarly, research is
usually an expensive undertaking and it is necessary that this
function remains with the National Government. It would be
expensive and time consuming if provinces were to carry out research
work of their own. Apart from this, it also delay provincial work
programmes, as resources may be diverted to do research work. On
the other hand research work may be neglected if resources are taken
away for other things. In such cases the results derived from research
would not be at all complete, and could not be effectively analysed.
Certainly research has to be conducted at locations in provinces, and
there will be close co-operation, for it to be carried out properly,
between provincial government administrations and the central
government administration. But the main point here is that high
powered staff in provinces should be spared from getting tied up too
much with specifics and details. However, the results of research will
be made available to them in a form which is ideal for their use.
Where the results of any research is found to be of sufficient
interest, information should be provided to all Provincial Assemblies.
They will each decide individually whether they are interested in
pursuing a development programme based on such results. Should
any province decide to do so, the specialists at the central adminis-
tration have to provide back up services as required.


Fig 3
PROVINCIAL MINISTRY - PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT
A STRUCTURE BASED ON OPERATIONAL FUNCTIONS.


Fig 4
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL SERVICES
A STRUCTURE BASE ON SPECIALISATION FUNCTIONS.


Finance
Both national and provincial governments might find it desir-
able to continue operating similar budgets, based on recurrent and
capital budgeting. As a guide it will be useful to seek to operate
balanced budgets. With regards to recurrent budgets, these are
usually presented as recurrent revenues and recurrent expenditures.
Therefore if the aim is to maintain a balanced budget, expenditure
should equal revenues for any given year. That is the amount of
spending in any year must match the amount of funds collected for
that year.
In provinces particularly, their revenues are largely from per-
sonal taxes, licences and other fees chargeable for services, and
investments. It is likely that revenues collected by a province may
not be sufficient to meet all its recurrent expenses, in which case a
submission is then made to the National Government for bridging
finance or for grants. National Government revenue, is obtained
mainly from import and export levies, customs and excise fees,
company fees, income tax, profit from investments and other charge-
able fees for services. These are all taken into consolidated funds,
and allocations are made according to approved budgets.
For purposes of simplification it is necessary, therefore, that
provincial budgets are approved by their Executives befo r e the
national Parliamentary approval at the budget session. As a guide-
line the period between provincial budget sessions and national
Parliamentary budget sessions should be at least three (3) months.
Naturally this will require different financial years. All provinces
may have one financial year, purely for accountancy purposes, and
the National Government will have another of its own.
Capital budgets as far as possible should be strongly biased
towards productivity areas, the main reason being that if these are
not properly allocated, it will be very difficult to maintain a balanced
budget when recurrent charges which need to be financed from
consolidated funds eventuate in the future.


For obvious reasons outside sources of finance will continue to
be tapped by the National Government before they are channelled
over to provincial authorities. Foreign governments, including
international organisations, who give aid to the country prefer to
deal with the National Government rather than individual provincial
authorities. Firstly, although they realise there are several provincial
governments in the country these are essentially not independent
countries. Rather they are local authorities which are aimed at
fostering active development of local communities. But the National
Government will retain overall responsibility for all matters relating
to foriegn relations. Secondly, aid donors prefer and find it simple
to complete few documents instead of several documents that would
be required if they were to deal separately with all provinces when
processing aid requirements.


