



OTHER WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR
MANAGEMENT DEBTS
LOOKING ON THE BRIGHT SIDE
HOW TO MAKE A SMALL SHOP PAY
THE SPECIALTY SALESMAN KELVIN
FIFTY-TWO WAYS TO BE RICH
HOW TO WRITE WELL YOUR MEMORY
THE MEANING OF LIFE
UP-TO-DATE MANUFACTURING
UP-TO-DATE SALESMANSHIP
THE TWELVE WORST MISTAKES IN BUSINESS
ADS. AND SALES BETTER BUYING
CLIMBING UP CREATIVE THINKERS
THE 100 PER CENT. OFFICE
THE STORY OF ARTIFICIAL SILK
TIPS TO TRAVELLING SALESMEN
BETTER SALESMANSHIP
PRINTED SALESMANSHIP
BETTER ADVERTISING HUMAN NATURE
BETTER BUSINESS LETTERS
TWELVE TIPS ON FINANCE
TWELVE TIPS ON WINDOW DISPLAY
HANDBOOK FOR FOREMEN MORE NET PROFIT
AXIOMS OF BUSINESS
THIRTEEN TIPS ON LUCK
THE GREATEST COMPANY IN THE WORLD
THE QUALITY OF OUR GOODS ,
THIRTY GREAT LIVES
THE MEN AT THE TOP
SUCCESS AND HAPPINESS
GETTING OVER DIFFICULTIES
THE ART OF CUSTOMER-FINDING
A COMPLETE PUBLIC SPEAKING COURSE
FACTORY EFFICIENCY THE ROMANCE OF STEEL
THE ROMANCE OF THE REAPER
THE HISTORY OF THE TELEPHONE
THE LIFE OF CYRUS HALL MCCORMICK


SELLING
BY
SHOWMANSHIP
THE EFFICIENCY MAGAZINE
By
HERBERT N. CASSON


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
BY TREND AND COMPANY PLYMOUTH


CONTENTS
BEFORE THE CURTAIN RISES . . 7
I “ THE SHOW’S THE THING ” . 13
II P. T. BARNUM —THE FIRST GREAT
SHOWMAN . . .29
111 THE PYSCHOLOGY OF SHOWMANSHIP 4 1
IV APPLYING SHOWMANSHIP TO A SALES
CAMPAIGN . . .69
V THE VARIOUS ELEMENTS OF SHOW-
MANSHIP . . .103
VI THE ART OF PROPAGANDA . . 131
BEFORE THE CURTAIN FALLS . 141




BEFORE the curtain rises, on the six
Acts of this book, commonly known as
chapters, may I say a few introductory
words ?
This is, as far as I know, the first book ever
written on Showmanship, in which the prin-
ciples of it are applied to the increase of sales
and the personal success of all manner of
people.
The demand everywhere to-day is for more
and more entertainment. The most popular
thing is the Show. Is it not a strange fact,
therefore, that we who are not Showmen have
never studied the art of Showmanship and
applied more of its methods to our businesses ?
If I were asked what British trade and
commerce are in most need of at the moment,
I would say :
(i) A reduction of thirty per cent, in tax-
ation and freedom from government inter-
ference.
(2) A greater element of Showmanship in
our methods of selling and advertising.


To put it in another way, we need a hundred
thousand fewer Bureaucrats and at least a
hundred C. B. Cochrans, who would show us
how to call favourable attention to our goods.
We make goods of high quality. All the
world knows that in a vague way. But is that
enough ? No. In almost every industry we
are suffering from over-production, or in plain
language, from not knowing how to sell.
Selling is a harder task than it was thirty
years ago. We have more competitors than
our fathers had. And in the art of attracting
favourable attention, we have been soundly
beaten by the theatres and circuses and cinemas.
The professional Showmen have developed
the art of entertainment to the highest point
ever known, while we have lagged behind. Our
little Punch and Judy Shows in the business
world are childish when compared with the
gorgeous spectacles that are being staged by
professional Showmen.
To advertise in an ordinary way is not
enough. There is a flood of commonplace
advertising and most of it is unprofitable. Our
new problem, now that advertising is so uni-
versal and so expensive, is how to make it
conspicuous and believable. Unless people


notice, like it and act on it, our money is
wasted.
Selling goods is like catching fish. Now that
there are so many fishermen and now that the
fish are more wary, we must be sure to have
the right bait. We must know what is most
likely to move a fish to action. And we must
study the methods of the most successful fish-
catchers.
As to the right bait for people, we know that
nothing else is as universally attractive as a
Show. Whenever people visit a city, invariably
they go to a Show. People who haggle over
pennies in a shop, spend their money gladly
on theatres, circuses and cinemas. That is why
there must be more Showmanship in the selling
of goods.
As to my fitness for writing this book, I can
only excuse my presumption by saying that I
have often been called “ the Showman of
Efficiency.” I have never objected to the title,
although it is usually bestowed on me more in
criticism than in praise.
Efficiency has to be sold. It has to be
popularized. Almost always, it comes into a
firm because of some outside stimulant and not
because of the initiative of the people in the


firm. It needs its propagandists—its Showmen.
There are not half enough of them in any
country. And so does every shop and every
factory need a Showman.
Whenever a thing is done in a big way or a
new way, so as to impress people favourably,
that is Showmanship. Whenever a product is
made conspicuous and attractive and remem-
berable, that is Showmanship. It is always
Showmanship when a fact or idea or product
is stamped upon people’s memories in a striking
way.
We in the business world have no choice in
the matter. We must give people what they
want. The customer is the boss. We must
find out how to secure the favourable attention
of a blase public. There is no doubt whatever
that the big fortunes that will be made in the
next twenty years will be made by those who
know and use the new methods of Showman-
ship.
HERBERT N. CASSON
Dale Abbey,
36, North Side,
Streatham Common,
London, 5.W.16.


THE
“SHOWS THE
THING”




Chapter I
“ THE SHOW’S THE THING ”
WHAT does every child like most ? A
Show. Where do most grown people,
of all ages, go when they want relax-
ation and pleasure ? To a Show. What is the
one universal unfailing joy of the whole human
race ? A Show.
Are not hundreds of millions spent every
year to see Shows ? Even in a period of
depression, the theatres and circuses and
cinemas are running full blast. People wear
old clothes and eat less food and go to Shows.
A large percentage of Dole money, as every
Relieving Officer knows, is spent on Shows.
When I was a lad of fourteen, a coloured
wagon, pulled by a team of well-matched
horses, drove into our village and remained for
a week. It was a glorious week for the people
of our village, who were a hundred miles from
a good theatre.
There were four men in the wagon, all good
singers, Every afternoon and every evening


they gave a concert in the main street and sang
the popular songs of the day. After the concert,
the chief man gave a jolly talk and described
the marvellous curative powers of “ Wizard
Oil,” which he sold for 2/- a bottle. Practically
every family in our village and a large number
of farmers bought bottles of this “ Wizard
Oil.” They were almost compelled to buy it.
No doubt, in the local chemist’s shop there
was a medicine quite as good and probably
cheaper. But the chemist had no Showmanship.
He did not play on a guitar and sing songs.
And so the “ Wizard Oil ” wagon sold more
bottles in a week than the chemist did in a
year. That was my first lesson in the value of
Showmanship and I have never forgotten it.
There have always been Shows, but Show-
manship has evolved much faster than Sales-
manship. A century ago, there were only the
Punch and Judy Shows and a few crude, ill-
staged plays in little theatres. The main Show
was the Army on land and the Navy on the sea.
There were the Shows of royal parades —
Kings and Generals on horseback in gaudy
uniforms. There are better Shows than those
to-day in the windows of the big department
stores. There was the travelling organ-grinder


with his monkey or there was a man with a
trained bear. And there was little else.
To-day there is, above all else, the Cinema.
The Cinema can reproduce any kind of a Show.
It can bring any scene or event from any part
of the world. It means, too, the mass produc-
tion of Shows, so that a Show that has cost
£lOO,OOO may be seen for a shilling or for
sixpence.
The Cinema has done more than any other
one thing to raise the standard of Shows, con-
sidered as spectacles, and to cheapen them
and put them all over the world.
The Cinema has made people Show-mad.
It has made them much more difficult to
interest by all the old-time methods of sales-
manship. It has made them connoisseurs of
Shows. People who have seen ‘ ‘ Hell’s
Angels ” are not as likely to be attracted in
the future by ordinary posters, advertisements,
booklets and selling talk.
In America alone the film industry now
employs 336,000 people. It has a capital of
£500,000,000. It gained 10,000,000 customers
a week in 1929. It spent £20,000,000 on
advertising. It uses 15,000 advertisements a
day. No other industry can show figures of


growth like these. And it is all Showmanship.
In the art of attracting the public, the Cinema
is leading the way. It has taught us the value
of handsome buildings, light colour, drama,
comedy, action and quickness. And the
question for all merchants and manufacturers
is : “ how far can we learn from the Cinema
to make our shops and our goods more
attractive to the public ? ”
We must now cinematize salesmanship. We
must learn how to sell to the eye. We must bring
more events and more sentiment into business.
The film experts know how to do this and we
must follow them as closely as we can. I
venture to say that the most popular shop in
any town, in 1940, will be the one that is most
like a Cinema.
Showmanship ! Is not the whole world
ruled by it ? Are not most monarchies and
Governments kept popular by Display ? As
a clever German author —Paul Cohen-Portheim
—says : “All the display that surrounds the
King, Court and Society is at bottom a circus-
parade for the benefit of the people. The
King driving to the opening of Parliament in
his gilded coach, and the Peers in their coronets
and ermine, constitute a welcome pageant for
the populace, the more so as they know, or


rather, think they know, that these splendid
figures have no real power.”
This observant author says : “ In any case,
the last thing the average Englishman wants is
to abolish the display of the Great. He is much
more likely to dream of being one of the Great
himself.”
Showmanship counts for just as much in
England as it does in any other country in
Europe. We English, according to our national
custom, belittle ourselves by saying that we are
unemotional and stolid. The truth is that we
are as emotional as the Italians or the French,
but we have our feelings under better control.
As a German writer has pointed out, we pro-
duce as much good artistic work as any other
nation, but we make less fuss about it.
Is it not true that modern drama had its
birth in England ? Did not England produce
Shakespeare ? Did not the drama spring up
and develop in spite of the Puritans ? As a
foreigner has saicf: “ The English have had a
sense of the drama from the very beginning.”
Our so-called stolidity is only skin-deep. We
produce great plays and great spectacles. And
no other nation appreciates a stupendous Show
more than we do.


Is not London a City of Shows ? Have we
not the Lord Mayor’s Show every year —a
genuine circus parade, with Red Indians and
elephants and fancy coaches and horseback
riders all in costume ? The poor Lord Mayor
is decked out like a musical comedy actor. He
rides in a circus coach. There is no other such
sheer Showmanship in any other city in the
world, in connection with municipal govern-
ment.
Do we not have the changing of the Guard
in Whitehall every morning at eleven o’clock ?
Is it not a Show ? What else can it possibly
be than a spectacle for the entertainment of the
public ?
Do we not have the Crystal Palace fireworks
every Thursday evening during the summer —
the most vivid spectacle in London ? And did
we not have the first World’s Fair in the world
in the Crystal Palace in 1851 ?
Have we not got our Kursaals, our “ Wakes,”
our Carnivals, our Fairs, our Tattoos and our
pageants ? Do we not have our seaside play-
grounds ? Are we not as a nation conspicuously
fond of Shows ? We are.
The popularity of Shows does not mean that
a nation is decadent or shallow-minded. Quite


the reverse. We are all children—we grown
people. But some children are clever and some
are stupid. And the cleverest are those who
have the best Shows.
There were plenty of Shows in the Roman
Empire at the height of its power. There were
games and victory parades and grand spectacles
and gladiatorial contests. A Roman Emperor
sold himself to the people by giving them
plenty of Shows.
As everyone knows, there is in most countries
to-day any amount of political Showmanship.
It is mostly of a discreditable sort, as it consists
of promising money and benefits to voters. It
is a species of bribery at the expense of the
tax-payer. It is very successful. It is a Show-
manship that has put most political govern-
ments into power and has created great
National Debts. It is anti-social. It is destruc-
tive. But as Showmanship it has been univer-
sally effective.
Even religion has its Shows. It has its
temples, cathedrals, vestments, ceremonies,
processions, miracles, music, singing, bells and
so on. Mahometanism has its pilgrimages to
Mecca. Buddhism has its bathing in the
Ganges. And the religion of primitive tribes
has its voodoo rites and its medicine men.


The great founders of religions were simple
men, who put spiritual things first, but every
priesthood always develops its Shows in order
to hold the attention and gain the money of
the populace. Every long-established religion
builds great temples and cathedrals as show-
places. It creates litanies and performances.
It becomes more and more spectacular as it
loses its spiritual zeal. It markets its wares by
means of Showmanship.
Almost every city has its showplace, created
either by nature or by man. London has St.
Paul’s and the Houses of Parliament. Man-
chester has the Royal Exchange and the Ship
Canal. Edinburgh has Prince’s Street. Berlin
has the Brandenburger Tor and the Schloss.
Vienna has the “ Ring.” Interlaken has the
Jungfrau. Prague has the view of the cathedral
from the river. New York has her skyscrapers
and Riverside Drive. Denver has Pike’s Peak.
Tokio has Fuji. Sydney has her harbour. Agra
has the Taj Mahal. Every city has at least one
great sight that its citizens display with pride.
Even Kansas City points to her prairies and
Oldham points to her chimneys. A city must
have a Show.
In the Stock Exchange, there is the Show-
manship of the ticker-tape and the bulletin-


board. The prices move up and down. If
they move up quickly, there is a boom. If
they move down quickly, there is a depression.
There is the daily excitement of watching these
price movements. This accounts for the
fascination of speculation.
There is the Showmanship of a Prospectus.
No one can deny that. The success of many a
flotation of securities depends upon the Pros-
pectus. There is the massing up of the assets
—the flaunting of the names of distinguished
Directors the ‘ ‘ estimated profits ”- the
pointing out of an opportunity to investors.
All gambling is spectacular. What show-
place is more alluring to an adventurous mind
than Monte Carlo ? There is the spinning of
the wheel that in a few seconds brings a gain
or a loss. There is a sinister fascination in
seeing people suddenly become richer or
poorer. There is always the chance of a
bankruptcy or a fortune. That is why there
will always be gambling—because it is in its
very nature a Show.
Many of the greatest national leaders have
been Showmen. Certainly Napoleon was. He
engaged the first publicity agent in history.
He advertised his victories. He shaped public
opinion in favour of his plans.


He sent out Proclamations when he conquered
a nation, in order to win the people on his side.
He always posed as a Liberator. “ Half of his
conquests,” says Emil Ludwig, “ were made
by the power of words.” He put the most
eminent men in his Cabinet. He walked
through his army before every battle. That is
why he won forty great victories. He was
always a Showman.
One of our most successful British Showmen
was Lord Northcliffe. He owed his success
mainly to the fact that he knew how to compel
the attention of the public. He was the ablest
Public Opinion expert whom London has ever
known.
He believed in “ stunts.” Why ? Because
they make people talk and people buy the
newspaper they talk about. He insisted that
his Daily Mail should every day have a talking-
Eoint. Every afternoon, in a conference with
is editors, he asked : “ What is the talking-
point for to-morrow ? ”
He knew that people talked about simple
things, such as sweet peas and better bread
and Teddy Tail and model homes. He was a
boy-hearted man and he knew that most men
are boys at heart. He knew that nearly every-
one loves excitement and when there was no


excitement in the news, he made some of his
own.
As Hamilton Fyfe has said : “ He was a
master of mass-suggestion. He knew how to
fall in line with people’s thoughts and feelings
and how to create thoughts and feelings.”
Was this not Showmanship and is it not what
every merchant and manufacturer wants to do ?
Is it not true that the event of the year that
makes the most vivid impression upon people’s
minds is always something in the nature of a
Show —something daring or dramatic or tragic ?
In 1930, for instance, there was the flight of
Amy Johnson from London to Australia. There
were many Show-points in her famous flight.
She was a typist —one of the thousands of
typists in London. She had no help from the
Government. She had only a second-hand
aeroplane —one of the smallest in England.
She had never travelled overseas before, either
in aeroplanes or in any other ways. She knew
only the English language. She flew into a
monsoon and mastered it. She had adventures
with savage tribes. She flew 12,000 miles,
across land and sea. And what impressed us
most was the casual way in which she did it.
She just thought she would do what no other
girl had ever done and she did it. In a few


weeks the fame of this young Typist-Adventurer
was known round the world. She gave us an
unforgettable Show.
Our ablest professional Showman is, beyond
doubt, Mr. Charles B. Cochran. He has
brought more striking entertainments and
spectacles to England than any other man.
He does everything on a big scale. He makes
a fortune quickly and loses it and makes
another.
He took in £30,000 for the Carpentier-
Beckett fight. He paid £21,000 in royalties
for a single revue, “As You Were,” and£27,ooo
for “Afgar.” His alterations to the New Oxford
Theatre cost him £BO,OOO. He lost money by
producing Shows that were too foreign to suit
the English public— ‘ ‘ Mayfair and Mont-
martre,” “ Cyrano de Bergerac,” Russian
Dancers, “ Chauve-Souris,” etc. He is more
than a Showman. He is an educator of public
taste in the matter of entertainments and at
times he has gone too far ahead of the crowd.
But he has done more than anyone else to
teach us the principles and methods of
Showmanship.
So, as we have seen, Showmanship is the
one best way to attract the attention of the
public. It can do as much for the selling of


goods as power machinery has done for pro-
duction. And now that our chief trouble in
the business world is under-selling—now that
we can produce more goods than we can sell,
we must concentrate our attention upon
Showmanship.




P. T. BARNUM—
THE FIRST GREAT
SHOWMAN




Chapter II
P. T. BARNUM—THE FIRST GREAT
SHOWMAN
IT is impossible to write a book on Show-
manship without giving a chapter to Barnum.
Of all great Showmen, he was the first and
the most daring and original. It was he, more
than anyone else, who created the profession
of Showmanship.
His full name was Phineas Taylor Bamum.
He was a Connecticut Yankee. He was a
Showman for nearly sixty years. It was he
who first learned the art of attracting the
favourable attention of the public. And his
career is of great interest to all business men
who have goods to sell to the masses.
He was a large man, with a broad face, a
high forehead, a strong nose, keen eyes and a
smiling mouth. His life was written by him-
self. More than a million copies were sold.
In England it is published in two large volumes,
at two guineas, by Alfred A. Knopf.
Bamum was born in America in 1810. His


father was a poor farmer who died with more
debts than assets when young P.T. was fifteen
years old.
Consequently, Barnum had to support his
mother. He began work as a boy in a small
shop. He soon made the shop prosper, as he
tried out a number of schemes for increasing
the sales.
He left the shop to run lotteries, which were
legal at that time. He was a skilful salesman.
He could sell £4OO worth of lottery tickets in
a day.
When he was twenty-one, he started a
weekly paper, The Herald of Freedom. This
soon cost him his own freedom. He was
sentenced to sixty days in prison for making
an attack upon the town authorities. This gave
him his first notoriety. He became a town hero
and when his sentence expired, the citizens
met him at the door of the prison and brought
him home in a carriage with four horses.
He sold his paper and set out as a Showman.
His first exhibit was an aged negress —Joice
Heth. He bought the right to exhibit her for
£2OO.
She claimed to be 161 years old. Also, she
claimed to have been the nurse of George


Washington. She had every appearance of
great age, although in all probability she was
not more than ninety. Barnum flooded New
York with posters about her and made the
beginning of his fortune.
In a couple of years, Joice Heth died. Barnum
then established his famous “ American
Museum,” where he exhibited all manner of
freaks and oddities, some genuine and some
sheer humbugs.
He made it pay. How ? “ My puffing was
more persistent,” he said, “ my advertising
more audacious, my posters more glaring, my
pictures more exaggerated, my flags more
numerous and my transparencies more
brilliant.” He had a band at the door —a poor
band, “so as to drive the people inside,” he
said. And he had searchlights on the roof.
Barnum’s idea of salesmanship was to first
secure something new or peculiar or exciting
and then to magnify all its interesting qualities.
Always, he really did have something wonder-
ful to show the people, but he put the magnify-
ing glass of imagination over it and described
it in a torrent of superlatives.
It was Barnum who discovered the power
of the Poster. He was the first to have large


flaming posters, all ablaze with bright colours
and startling adjectives. Special hoardings had
to be set up for them.
He always wanted a glare of publicity. He
wanted to make people open their mouths as
well as their eyes. His posters were a Show in
themselves. Nothing like them had ever been
seen before in any country.
Barnum was the first Showman who realized
that the average brain is dull and the average
life is drab and dreary. People are half blind.
They must be given something big and blazing
to look at, if they are to be moved to action.
People are half deaf. They must be shouted
at, to compel their attention.
He knew that people live monotonous lives.
They see the same old things. They toil in a
treadmill. He was deeply impressed by the
grim tragedy of the struggle for money. He
loved above all to see a great crowd of people
with bright faces, all alert with curiosity and
the joy of life.
He discovered the saleability of “ news ”
long before any journalist discovered it. What
is news ? It is something exciting—something
different —something extraordinary. The tallest
giant in the world —that is news. The smallest


dwarf —that is news. A white whale —that is
news.
In 1842 he discovered a dwarf—Charles S.
Stratton. He promptly christened him ‘ ‘ General
Tom Thumb.” He had him driven through the
streets in a tiny carriage made of tortoise-shell,
decorated with silver and drawn by eight
elephants. That was his conception of the
way that a dwarf should be introduced to the
public.
In 1843, he brought Tom Thumb to England.
He engaged the Egyptian Hall in Piccadilly
and gave three Shows a day. The hall was
packed. Queen Victoria took a lively interest
in the talkative little dwarf and this made him
the talk of England.
In 1849, Barnum brought Jenny Lind —the
“ Swedish nightingale ” to America. At the
first concert, he took in £3,400. He advertised
her so well that there was a “ Jenny Lind
Mania ” in the United States. In a week or so,
Barnum could have sold his contract with her
for £lOO,OOO. He had agreed to pay her £2OO
per concert, but he was so delighted with her
success that he paid her £27,400 for the first
sixty concerts.
In 1865 his Museum burned down. He rebuilt


it and in two years it burned down again. This
double loss started him out on the road with
a circus—the “ Greatest Show on Earth”.
This circus steadily grew larger and larger.
Wonder was added to wonder. He claimed
that his tent big could seat 30,000 people and
it was filled twice a day. I saw this circus forty
years ago. I can still remember it vividly. As
an entertainment and an excitement, there had
never been anything, up to that time, that
could hold a candle to it.
Inside the big tent there were three rings in
which three Shows were given simultaneously.
And outside these rings there was a large outer
ring, in which the Roman Chariot Race was
run.
In 1882, Barnum bought the giant elephant
“Jumbo ” from the London Zoo. In London,
Jumbo had not been specially advertised, but
Barnum spent thousands to make him famous
as a world’s wonder. He staged Jumbo. He
made everyone in America keen to see him.
Unfortunately, poor Jumbo lived only for three
years longer. He was struck by a railway engine
while on a tour through Canada and instantly
killed.
In 1889, Barnum brought his vast circus to


London and housed it in Olympia. Tens of
thousands of people still living can remember
it. While in England, Bamum gave a lecture,
in more than a hundred halls, on “ The Art
of Money-Getting.” Some of his precepts
were as follows :
Select the kind of business that suits your
temperament and inclinations.
Whatever you do, do with all your might.
Engage fit employees—men of good habits.
Advertise —do not hide your light under a
bushel.
Do not scatter your powers—concentrate.
Let your pledged word ever be sacred.
Be sober—avoid all intoxicating drinks.
Be hopeful, but not too visionary.
On his return to America in 1891, he was
taken ill and died at the age of eighty-one. He
had lived down the harsh criticisms that had
been made of him. He received many honours
from the people of his home city—Bridgeport.
Many people visit his grave.
Now that he has been dead forty years, we
are beginning to appreciate the value of his
life. He was a man of solid worth. He set out


to entertain people and he succeeded beyond
his dreams.
He had many eminent English friends —
Gladstone, Thackeray, Matthew Arnold, Kean,
Lord Rosebery and many others. Gladstone
read his Life with great interest and said to
Barnum: “ I have only one complaint to
make, that it is printed in too small type.” The
Times said of him in 1889, “ He created the
metier of Showman on a grandiose scale.”
Barnum had many contrasting qualities, as
most creative men have. He showed many
humbugs to the public, but he was a zealous
moralist. He never drank intoxicating liquors.
He lectured often on temperance. He went to
church regularly, though he did not believe in
a hell. And he always carried a Bible in his
bag.
He once remarked that ‘ ‘ the American
people love to be fooled,” but he was essentially
an honest man. For instance, he once en-
dorsed the notes of a friend for £lOO,OOO. The
friend failed and Barnum worked for four years
to pay off the indebtedness. He was heroically
honest.
Throughout his whole life, he was a man of
unbounded optimism and self-confidence. He


took many risks. He had many troubles, any-
one of which would have broken most men.
He was burned out five times. Yet, at the end
of his life, he wrote : “ This is indeed a
delightful world to those who have the temper-
ament, the resolution and the judgment to
make it so.”
He created the new art of Showmanship,
which we in the business world have been
slow to appreciate and use. He taught us how
to secure the favourable attention of people,
and this, as we now realize, is the first element
in Salesmanship.




THE PSYCHOLOGY
OF
SHOWMANSHIP




Chapter 111
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
SHOWMANSHIP
HOW to make people take notice, in the
midst of exciting events and all manner
of distractions —that is the vital problem
to-day for everyone who has goods or services
to sell.
People do not notice ordinary things. They
do not notice the things that are in front of
their eyes every day. They notice only what
is new or unusual or spectacular. People are
blind to ordinary things—that is a troublesome
fact that we have to admit.
A man may walk down a street with his eyes
wide open, but he may see only four things in
a mile of walking. Seeing is a mental thing.
It is not the eye that sees. The eye is only the
window through which the brain looks. We
see only what the brain thinks about —that is
the truth of the matter.
If you ask a man —“ What have you seen
to-day ?” he may reply—“ Nothing.” His


eyes have been open, but there has been
nothing unusual to compel his attention. He
may have glanced through a daily paper that
contained fifty advertisements. He may have
walked past a hundred shops and a thousand
people. But at the end of the day he has no
vivid recollection of anything that he has seen.
This proves the need of Showmanship.
When we read history, we see that the human
brain has always lain dormant unless it was
stirred up by outside stimulants. It has been
stirred up by danger, by love, by hunger and
cold, by war, by new inventions, by travel and
so on.
In a civilized nation, it is stirred up more
or less by the daily news and by magazines and
books. Books are the supreme stimulant of the
brain, as soon as a high level of intelligence is
attained. Such books as Gibbon’s Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire or the Meditations of
Marcus Aurelius, can influence only the few
minds that have been well developed.
The human brain, in a word, is not self-
starting. It requires a stimulus. This is proved
by the story of the rise and fall of nations. An
ignorant nation can be stirred only by its fears,
passions, appetites and fanaticisms, while a


cultured nation can be stirred by great thoughts,
works of art and ideals. But always there must
be a stimulus.
There was a flood of Thought in Europe
after the seven Crusades. Why ? Because the
Crusades were events of Showmanship.
The first Crusade set out in 1096. For two
centuries these Crusades were the main excite-
ment in Europe. There was even a “ Children’s
Crusade ” in 1212 —one of the saddest and
maddest expeditions that has ever been known.
Fifty thousand children set out from German
and French homes to walk to the Holy Land
and almost all of them perished or were
enslaved.
The point is—these large armies of inert,
stupid people travelled from northern Europe
to Palestine or Turkey. They saw many new
things. They discovered interesting civiliza-
tions. They passed through hundreds of towns
and villages and stirred up the inert brains.
Eventually, they discovered what they were
not seeking for —the ancient educational books
and buildings and art-work of Greece and
Rome. They discovered, to tell the truth, that
it was the Christian world, not the pagan world,
which was ignorant and in need of salvation.


They discovered accomplishments and virtues
in the Mahometan world which they did not
possess at all.
By means of the Crusades, the superstitions
of the Middle Ages in Europe were more or
less overthrown. Their absolute power over
the human mind was overthrown by the stimu-
lant to thought that came from the Crusades.
Little did Peter the Hermit know what would
be the real result of his mad zeal.
The fact stands out, indisputably, that with-
out Peter the Hermit—the mad Showman —
there would have been no Copernicus, no
Galileo, no Descartes, no Erasmus, no Voltaire.
For a thousand years it had been a crime to
think, in Christian Europe. Thinkers were
persecuted and burned at the stake. All the
energy of the brain was repressed by command
of the priesthood. The Crusades were the
first great Shows in Europe for ten centuries.
They were the first tours to far-off countries.
They were started by superstitious fanatics,
but their result was to create thousands of
active brains.
They brought in, eventually, the Renaissance,
which began in Italy and spread northwards
over Europe. The Renaissance partially


destroyed scholasticism and feudalism and
created a national and semi-scientific spirit. It
brought the dawn of the Scientific Age in
which we are now living.
When Constantinople fell, in 1453, many
Greek scholars fled to various other cities in
Germany, France and England. And wherever
they went, they stimulated thought and research.
Then came the invention of printing and the
discovery of America. Then came the great
Show —the voyage of Columbus. Then came
many inventions and discoveries —all great
events —all Showmanship. The dull brains of
Europeans were stirred into action. Thought
became so universal that it could no longer be
prevented.
About a hundred and fifty years ago, the
wave of Creative Thought broke down all
barriers. It swept away the obstructions that
had been built up in the Middle Ages. Since
then, bigotry and ignorance do still exist, but
they have lost their power to persecute and to
kill.' Pioneers are still obstructed and often
vilified. But, at least, they are not murdered.
Then came machinery and industrialism and
capital and great businesses. One stimulant
followed another. Railways and steamships


came and made travel quick and cheap and
possible to the masses. People were no longer
like trees, rooted to one spot.
Then came newspapers —daily Shows of the
events of the whole world. Telegraph lines
were strung over the land and cables were sunk
along the bed of the sea. The human brain was
stimulated daily. There came an era of Show-
manship and people were compelled to think
and to abandon their lethargy and their
traditions.
To-day the whole world is aquiver with
Thought. Few brains are continuously inert.
There are now so many events —so many new
ideas and discoveries —so many Shows, that the
problem is how to create a Show that will
compete successfully with all the other Shows.
In a word, Showmanship has conquered the
world. It is now the supreme force in moulding
public opinion. And public opinion has now
become dominant.
Whoever can create a new Show, a striking
attraction that compels the favourable opinion
of the public, has discovered the secret of
riches. He has found out how to sell his
services or his goods.
In spite of all the progress that has been


made, it is still true that we must teach people
to appreciate both the new things and the
valuable old things. Civilization is not yet
safe from democracy.
The natural impulse of the mob is to destroy,
not to appreciate. A pack of Communist fools
burned down the noble Hall of Justice in
Vienna. Another pack of fools destroyed whole
streets in Dublin. And the most destructive
pack of fools that the world has ever known
has seized and impoverished and enslaved the
whole nation of Russia.
Again and again, in recent times, the noblest
works of artists and builders have been
destroyed by mobs. Even in Berlin, a mob has
smashed the windows of Wertheimer’s —the
most magnificent store in Germany. Fools
always want to destroy the things that they
are too stupid to appreciate.
To-day the danger is that the mass o'f the
people take civilization for granted. They do
not know how it has been built up. They do
not know how fragile it is, nor how few people
have created it. They must still be taught by
Showmanship to value the comforts and
luxuries that have been made for them.
Often, after I have given a lecture on


Efficiency, the man who moved the vote of
thanks has said : “ Of course, Mr. Casson
has dealt with the obvious. He has told us,
in an impressive way, what we already knew.
The fact was that I had told them of things
that were in front of their eyes that they had
never noticed —the opportunities of increasing
the net profits of their businesses.
The Obvious ! It is what few people ever
see. There is an obviously right way to lay
bricks, but bricklayers have not discovered it
in two thousand years. There is an obviously
right way to find new customers and to keep
old customers, but only one shopkeeper out of
a score ever discovers it. There is an obviously
right way to breathe, to speak, to sing, to work,
but few people discover the right way for
themselves.
Once the right way is told to them and
demonstrated by as much Showmanship as
possible, they say “Of course, but they had
never thought of it before. The right way is
always like a puzzle or a trick in magic. It is
as simple as A.B.C. as soon as you learn it, but
not before.
The rarest thing in the world is Thought.
There are few Creative Thinkers. Most people,


when they believe they are thinking, are
only remembering —a totally different mental
process.
In every country, a few men and women,
usually working alone, create the improvements
that give us a higher type of civilization. These
improvements have to be displayed to the mass
of the people. If not, then the mass of the
people are hostile to the improvements.
When steam machinery first came in, for
instance, nothing was done to teach working
people to appreciate it. Consequently, there
were riots and strikes and machine-smashing
and “ ca’canny”. Trade Unions sprang up
that regarded machinery as the destroyer of
jobs. There were a hundred years of industrial
war. All for lack of a bit of Showmanship in
selling the idea of machinery to the masses.
Every new improvement must be sold to
the people. When any large new machine is
put into a Works, there should be a demon-
stration of it. It should be explained to the
workers from their point of view. This is never
done, but would it not be wise ? What chance
has a new machine when it is chucked into a
Works and left to the ill-will of its enemies?
Should there not always be a bit of Showman-


ship when a firm brings into its Works a new
efficiency ?
It is still true that most jobs are monotonous,
and a monotonous job, as we know, dulls the
mind. All routine is apt to prevent thought.
When the average mind is left alone, it remains
inactive. This need not be so, but in general
it is true.
To-day people are free to think as much as
they please. Even the monotony of the job sets
the brain free to think of other things, but very
few workers take advantage of the opportunity.
What a chance to think is given to every
employee who does repetition work ! The work
is really being done by the fingers. Very little
mental attention is required. The brain is set
free. What, then, does it do ? It does nothing.
Only once in my life have I seen a factory girl,
on repetition work, reading an instructive book.
People who have non-monotonous jobs are
invariably brighter-minded. Take, for instance,
shop assistants and commercial travellers —
their minds are usually alert. Why ? Because
they are being constantly stimulated from out-
side. They are always meeting strangers. They
are compelled to have active brains. Their
work is educational. It develops them into a


higher class. Hundreds of our ablest business
men had their abilities developed by a number
of years on the road as commercial travellers.
It is a law of memory that we remember what
we see vividly. A man of fifty can remember
quite clearly the first circus that he saw as a
boy, but he has entirely forgotten the shops
that he saw as a boy. He saw the circus vividly.
Its stirring events made a deep impression
upon his memory. But he saw the shops with
dull eyes when his mother sent him to buy
goods. They have faded out of his mind years
ago.
The average brain, I must repeat, is half
asleep. The quality of consciousness is very
low. The streets are filled with trance-walkers.
People are not keenly interested in their daily
work nor in the ordinary happenings of the
day.
People work because they must. It is only
the ambitious and intelligent few who know
what the joy of work means. People do many
things from a sense of duty or because they
have been taught the habit of doing them. But
—and here is the vital point —they all go to a
Show because they want to go. People of all
classes do, No sense of duty sends anyone to


the cinema. One of the most universal desires
of all people, in every nation, is to be enter-
tained.
Few people can provide their own entertain-
ment. They find themselves caught in the
toils of a stale routine. Few people have active
pleasant thoughts. Their minds are dull or
worried by displeasing fears or memories. They
want to be taken out of themselves.
Consequently, a Show —a Display—takes
temporary possession of their minds and gives
them a vivid sense of pleasure. It makes them
more alive and happier. This is the psychology
of Showmanship. It makes people forget their
troubles and gives them a keener sense of being
alive.
What, then, are the elements of Showman-
ship that attract and please people. They are
such things as size, oddity, skill, beauty, music,
lights, colours, fun, sex appeal, excitement,
wonders, combat, oratory, famous people and
things, good food, drink, games, great events
and so on.
People are always attracted by something
different. Once, Sir Herbert Tree, on a swelter-
ing day in August, put a huge block of ice in the
foyer of his theatre. “ What good will that


do ? ” asked a friend. “ Not much,” replied
Tree, gaily, “ but it looks so damned thought-
ful.” He was a Showman.
The attractions of a circus may, I dare say,
be summed up as follows :
(1) The Big Tent or Hall with its glaring
lignts, flags and bunting.
(2) The wild animals in cages, the lion-
tamer, etc.
(3) The clowns, with their painted faces,
queer clothes, jolly talk and silly antics.
(4) The acrobats and other performers.
(5) The clever and beautiful horses.
(6) The other trained animals.
(7) The dare-devil feats.
(8) The parade.
(9) The brass band.
(10) The general atmosphere of novelty and
excitement.
Always, there is one supreme novelty or
attraction —something new and superlative.
This one thing is featured in large type and
with pictures on flaming posters. It is the big
talking-point. It is the one thing that makes
every circus different from every other circus.


As every Showman knows, there must always
be one attraction that is unique.
There is seldom any dignity in Showmanship.
No one pays sixpence to see the most dignified
man in the world, but people pay hundreds of
millions of sixpences to see Charlie Chaplin,
who has no dignity at all. Many a business
firm, petrified by dignity, would do well to
remember this fact.
A Showman, with complete abandon, thinks
only of delighting the crowd. He is called
“ blatant”. He doesn’t mind that. He knows
very well that most great leaders of the populace
have been blatant. You may call him what you
please, as long as you don’t call his Show dull
and uninteresting.
At the theatre, people are attracted by absurd
or thrilling situations. One playwright, who
has had forty plays put on the stage, says that
the public loves best a race or a rescue. They
enjoy seeing a struggle or a danger. And they
insist upon seeing a happy ending.
They do not want to see a race that ends in
a draw, nor do they want to see a person over-
come by a danger. At the last moment, there
must be a rescue or the play would not be
popular.


Newspapers, those of the largest circulation,
know what attracts the public. It has been
found that the best stimulant to circulation is
a General Election. The sales on the day
following are the highest of the year. The
second best stimulant is a prize-fight between
heavy-weights and the third best is a murder
mystery or a scandal in high life. Politics,
prize-fights and crime make a newspaper’s
circulation leap upwards. But we in business
life cannot use these three stimulants. We
must have others that are on a higher plane.
The standards of business are higher than the
standards of journalism.
It is generally agreed that people are im-
pressed by size. A great hotel with a thousand
rooms is more attractive than a small fifty-
room hotel. A great ocean liner of 50,000 tons
is a floating Show. It is irresistibly attractive.
An immense department store, with five
thousand sales people, draws customers like
a magnet. A full-page advertisement is more
impressive than a quarter page and may bring
ten times the results. The larger a theatre is,
the more likely it is to be filled.
In Great Britain, the three greatest crowds
are brought together by the Derby, the Boat-
Race and the Cup Final. The latter is the


smallest of the three, as we have no football
ground that is half big enough to hold the
people who want to go to it. There would be
200,000 people if we had a ground large
enough to hold them.
This proves that the most popular thing in
Great Britain is sport. And it proves that we
must, as far as we can, bring the spirit of Sport
into business life, both in the making and in
the selling of goods.
Once transform a businessjni&agame and
the dull eyes will Brighten and there will be
favourable attention on the part of the public.
We endure business, but we love Sport. Our
brains wake up when there is a contest and
when prizes are to be won.
A game is a Show. That is why games are
so popular. Why are there crowds of 60,000
people on a cold afternoon in winter on the
football grounds ? Because the skill of the
players makes the game a Show. Because
every good player has his style —his technique
—his Showmanship.
There is a clash between two rival teams.
The situation changes every moment. The
crowd is held tense. It is expectant or alarmed.
It approves or disapproves. For ninety minutes
it forgets everything but the game.


As everyone knows, horse-racing is the royal
sport of England. It receives more attention
from the popular newspapers than either
politics or business. There is always a race
somewhere.
There are large crowds. We spend more
money in betting on horses than we do on
buying any of our foods. Why ? Because a
horse-race is a Show. It is a desperate contest
that depends on the speed of the horse and the
skill of his jockey. It is vivid. It compels the
most excited attention.
Then there is prize-fighting. The most
expensive of all Shows is a fight for a champion-
ship. The fight may last for only a couple of
minutes, but the great hall is packed. Why ?
Because a prize-fight is the most desperate of
all contests. At any moment, one of the fighters
may be knocked senseless. There may be a
new champion. A prize-fight is brutal. Yes.
But so are most men. We love prize-fighting
with the backs of our heads —with all the old
instincts that we have inherited from our savage
ancestors.
Then there is novel-reading. It must be
confessed that many of the best sellers appeal,
as prize-fighting does, to the backs of our
heads. Certainly the war novels and the sex


appeal novels do. And their sale is enormous.
A novel is popular because it is a Show in
the form of a story. It has action and feeling
and heroes and heroines and wicked people and
adventures and a plot. Few people read
biographies. Fewer still read essays or business
books. Only the few who have an active mind
life can read the books of the great Thinkers.
The average mind must have a story. It must
have a Show.
Then there is travel. Why does everyone
want to visit foreign countries ? Because a
foreign country is a Show. Because it is more
or less like a circus. It has many new things —
strange things—spectacular things.
The effect of travel upon the brain is very
noticeable. There is almost a chemical differ-
ence between the brain of the man who has
travelled and the brain of the man who has not.
The travelled man has a broader outlook. He
is always more tolerant. His brain is more
alert. He is more teachable. He has been
ripened, as you might say, by his experiences
in other countries. His mind has been stimu-
lated by many shows.
Men who remain in one place all their lives,
unless they read, become like vegetables. They


have had no stimulants to wake them up. They
often have a vocabulary of a few hundred words
only. The front of their brains is unploughed
by thought. Their life is only a smouldering
fire. It has never brightened into a blaze.
Contrast a Londoner with a yokel from a
country village, miles from a railway. The
difference would be striking. Morally, the
two men might be very similar, but intellectu-
ally they would be far apart. The Londoner’s
brain has been stirred up by a thousand Shows,
but the yokel’s brain has lain inert.
So, as we have seen, the great value of
Showmanship is that it destroys the apathy
and inertness of the brain. It arouses the
sleepers like an alarum-clock. It gives people
a vivid interest in life.
What, then, does this mean to the merchants
and manufacturers who want to sell more goods ?
It means this —that if you want to sell goods to
a person, the first thing to do is to wake him
up—to send some blood to his brain—to put
some life into him. It is hard to sell to a half-
alive person, whose will-power is feeble.
Most people spend their lives in a trance of
routine. Their eyes are dull. Their brain, at
least the front of it, is inactive. They have no


strong desires, except for food, drink, sleep and
entertainment.
There are, to tell the truth about the human
race, three grades of people :
(1) The Cerebrum Grade —those who are
ruled by the front of the brain —the Thinkers
and Creators and Organizers. They are 100
per cent, alive. They are wide awake. They
are the complete human beings—the finished
products of millions of years of evolution.
There are very few of them. There are very
likely none at all in Thibet. There may be
five per cent, in the most advanced European
cities. They are the Efficient Few —the people
upon whom all the progress of the world
depends.
(2) The Cerebellum Grade —those who are
ruled by the middle of their brains. They are
ruled, not by thought, but by desires. They
think at times, but not creatively. All their
attention is given to small personal matters.
Their will-power is strong when their desires
are aroused, but they follow habit and tradition
in most things.
They have possibilities of intelligence that
may be developed by stimulation from outside.
In nations like Britain and Germany, the


people in this grade are the great mass of the
population. In a country like Russia, there
are very few who have reached this grade.
(3) The Medulla Oblongata Grade —those
who are ruled by the back of the brain. They
are almost as low as automata. They are not
clearly self-conscious. They have no initiative.
They never think. They learn very little. The
front of the brain lies idle and the middle is
poorly developed.
They eat, drink, work, sleep, procreate and
do little else. They have mass ideas and a
mass will. They live in herds, like the lower
animals. The intelligence of the herd depends
upon the intelligence of its leader. Probably
two-thirds of the human race are in this grade.
And how to develop them up into the two
higher grades is the supreme problem of the
future.
So, as business means selling goods to as
many of the human race as possible, we must
have some means of waking up the dull brains.
How can we secure the keen attention of
people who are ruled by habit ? How can
we change automata into customers ? How
can we brighten the dull eyes and stimulate
the feeble wills ?


You can now see the folly of those who say,
“ Good goods sell themselves”. Nothing sells
itself except the ordinary necessities of the
people. Meat sells itself in Britain. Rice sells
itself in China. Black bread sells itself in
Russia. But the whole range of higher-class
goods does not sell itself anywhere.
The first act in all salesmanship is to create
favourable attention. This means arousing
apathetic brains and compelling indifferent
people to take notice and to be pleased with
what they see.
The Front-Brain people are few and far
between. They constitute a small market. If
we sell goods to them only, our business will
remain a small one.
The Middle-Brain people are vastly more
numerous. They act when they are stimulated,
but the stimulation must come from outside.
If left alone, they buy the usual things and
no more. But if new ideas and new goods
are pushed on their attention in a striking and
pleasing way, they are quick to observe and to
buy.
As for the Back-Brain people, they are almost
always poor. They can be stimulated to increase
their buying-power to a certain extent. They


are the lowest grade of human beings. There
are more or less of them in every country.
They can be stimulated to buy more sweets,
more bright clothes, more toys, tobacco,
chewing gum, soap, etc. But they cannot
afford to buy the more expensive goods.
It comes to this—that most of the people in
any country are in a rut. They are living lives
of routine and the routine has dulled their
brains. They are the slaves of Memory and
Habit. They will do to-day what they did
yesterday unless some stimulant comes from
outside.
This outside stimulant, I wish to point out
in this book, is Showmanship in all its various
forms.
There must be a scene, a display, a poster,
an advertisement, or an event that is out of
the ordinary. All ordinary things are ineffective,
as they do not wake up the apathetic brains of
the mass of the people. There must be some-
thing different of a spectacular nature —
something that makes people look and talk.
There must be news. News is the one thing
that interests people of all grades— peasants
and scientists alike. There must be some
brain-stimulating thing, whatever it may be.


And whoever can learn how to call attention
to his goods by means of a Show or by means
of News, has solved the problem of increasing
his sales.
This is true in the more civilized nations
as well as in the more backward ones. Few
people are as civilized as they seem. Civili-
zation has been thrust upon them by the
Creative Few. They cannot be judged by
their money or their clothes.
Whoever appeals to the Back-Brain will have
a crowd. Whoever appeals to the Front-Brain
will have only the higher-class few. We must
suit the bait to the fishes if we wish to have a
good catch.
We may carry this thought up to a higher
level. The scientific basis of Salesmanship may
be stated as follows —the latest conception of
the universe is that it consists of Energy, active
or potential. Very little is active. As Sir James
Jeans, the famous Cambridge scientist, says :
‘ ‘ The tendency of modern physics is to resolve
the whole material universe into waves and
nothing but waves. These waves are of two
kinds —bottled-up waves, which we call matter,
and unbottled waves, which we call radiation
or light.”
When we set fire to a piece of coal, we


release its bottled-up energy. The fire is a
stimulant. It makes the coal active. And as
we human beings are part and parcel of the
universe, and not demi-gods set down in the
midst of it, the same law applies to us.
When we stimulate the brain by something
very attractive—when we set fire to the brain,
as we might say—its energy ceases to be
“ bottled-up”. It becomes active. A process
of thought and desire is started. The will is
likely to come into play.
The success of Showmanship is shown by
the fact that it makes inert brains alert and
active. It creates energy. It awakens the tor-
pid. It quickens a keen interest in the minds
of indifferent people. It does to the brain
what fire does to a piece of coal, figuratively
speaking.
To express this idea in another form, I
would say that the human brain consists of a
workshop and a warehouse. The workshop is
the thinking part of the brain and the ware-
house is the memory. Most people are ruled
by the warehouse. They live by habit. They
seldom use the workshop.
They only think when they are compelled
to do so by some outside influence. Whenever


they see or hear something attractive, they use
the workshop. They think. They create new
desires and opinions for themselves and put
them in the warehouse of the memory.
Consequently, you can now see the immense
importance of Showmanship. It compels
people to take notice, to cut free from the rule
of memory and to form new beliefs. It creates
new buying habits. It discovers prospects and
ripens them into customers. It leads people
to have new wishes and these wishes become
the Will and lead to action. That is the
psychology of Showmanship.


APPLYING
SHOWMANSHIP TO A
SALES CAMPAIGN




Chapter IV
APPLYING SHOWMANSHIP TO A
SALES CAMPAIGN.
TWENTY years ago it was thought that
the principles of Efficiency could not be
applied to sales. In 1912, on one
occasion, I asked Harrington Emerson—the
oldest of Efficiency Experts—“ Why do we
not apply the principles of Efficiency to
sales ? ”
He replied : “ Because there are too many
variables.”
Several years later, he changed his opinion.
He became deeply interested in Salesmanship.
He found that the variables of Salesmanship
could be studied and that selling could be
made more scientific.
We can never, perhaps, have the same
control of selling that we can have of manu-
facturing. In manufacturing, we are dealing
with our own employees. We can tell them
what to do. But in selling, we are dealing with
the public, over whom we have no control.


There are great outside forces that influence
selling. There is fashion, for instance, which
often makes or mars a sales campaign. There
is the general business situation, which may
change at any moment. And there are always
outside competitors.
We have no control over these outside forces,
but we may study them. We may have know-
ledge. We need not act wholly in the dark.
We may watch the trend of fashion. New
fashions spring up in Vienna, Paris, London,
Berlin, or New York. New colours become
popular. New designs catch the fancy of the
public. We can study these. We can keep our
goods in touch with the fashion of the day.
There is now such a thing as Market
Research. We find out what people are buying.
We notice what women are wearing. We read
our trade papers. We gather in as much
information as possible before we set out to
design our goods.
All this is scientific, as far as it goes. Science
is precision and prevision. It means studying
what is now happening so that'we may be able
to know what will happen in the future. When
we act because of knowledge, that is scientific.
When we act in the dark and take a chance,
that is unscientific.


In selling, we can never know everything,
but we can know a great deal. And the more
we know, the larger our sales will be.
Every Sales Campaign should be planned for
months in advance. We should try to overcome
risk as far as we can. First, the goods are
designed to suit the market. The quality, style
and price must be right. Then the travelling
salesmen must be trained. To merely give
them samples is not enough. They must be
taught how to display the goods. They must
be told what to say.
They must be taught how to sell to the eye,
so that they will secure the favourable attention
of customers. They must learn all the quality
points of the goods, so that they can tell these
to the retailers.
Then there must be advertising. Names
should be given to the goods—names that will
help the sale. Paris dressmakers are now naming
their dresses after perfumes —a very attractive
idea. These names should be made known to
the retailers and the buying public. Every
manufacturer must help to resell his goods.
Window displays should be prepared for
retailers. Leaflets and posters must be printed.
Quality cards may be printed, too, and attached
to the goods.


Some manufacturers now send specially
trained sales people to the large retail shops,
to help the sales people to sell. This is the
“ follow through ” of salesmanship, as a
golfer would say.
In these days, it is not enough to make
goods. We must make the market as well. It
is not enough to sell goods to wholesalers. They
are apt to wait for a demand. They are not
likely to create a demand.
First, we must find out what customers want.
Then we must let them know that our goods
are on sale. We must have two campaigns—
one to reduce the cost of manufacturing and
one to increase sales. And in the latter cam-
paign we must use the principles of Showman-
ship as well as the principles of Efficiency.
When a new product is about to be put on
the market, the Master Problem is how to stage
it. The name of the goods is as important as
the name of a play. As every theatre-owner
knows, many a play has been either made a
success by a good name or killed by a bad
one.
One of the most suggestive books I have ever
studied was killed by a bad title. It was called,
The Equilibration of Human Aptitudes. It has


gone out of print years ago. Few people bought
it. If it had been called, “ Making the Most
of Ourselves,” it would have had many readers.
Then, when a striking name has been chosen,
there must be a set of effective Headlines for
the advertisements. These must tell the
Quality-Points of the product, from the point
of view of possible buyers.
There should be a Booklet that tells the
story of the product. Every product has a
story. There must be some human interest.
A mere statement by a chemist or a Works’
Manager is not enough.
In a word, the problem is how to make the
product interesting- —how to have it talked
about. All this, as you can see, requires real
Showmanship.
This art of making things attractive and
interesting comes into every sales process,
unless the article is bought from necessity and
habit. Even sugar manufacturers in America
have learned to wrap their cubes of sugar and
to give them a name. Even in the selling of
common necessities we have found it possible
to make a certain brand conspicuous and more
desirable.
First impressions are very important. That


is why there are now so many handsome shop-
fronts. That is why chocolates are sold in
beautiful boxes. They could not be sold for
4 /- a pound if they were handed over in paper
bags. A thing must, as far as possible, be made
to look its value, else it will not be appreciated
by the buyer and he will grumble at the price.
An American chocolate company made a
serious mistake in its selling methods in 1929.
It tried to cut down the expenses of wrapping
and advertising. It offered the public slightly
larger bars of chocolate unwrapped. Also, it
practically stopped advertising. In a word, it
eliminated all the Showmanship.
The result was that the sales at once fell off.
The experiment was a complete failure. This
firm will not make any more unwrapped bars.
And it has resumed its advertising.
A wiser experiment would have been to
increase expenses for wrapping and adver-
tising. It should have put on brighter wrappers
and employed a more skilled advertising agent.
Better wrapping and advertising—that would
have been a wiser policy.
, | m,_ J ,, r _ r , ||L m mi<niii' | imnn" r wwiiiirii>»w
“ Beauty is only skin-deep,” said a thought-
less writer. It does not need to be any deeper.
Beauty justifies itself. Good appearance is a


solid asset. Who wants to look inside the walls
of the Taj Mahal ? Who cares what the
canvas is, on which a great picture is painted ?
“ Put your best leg foremost,” we say. We
should. This applies to the selling of goods
as well as to the selling of ourselves. It means
that when an article has five Quality-Points,
they should be pointed out. The customer is
not likely to discover them. If customers are
not shown all that they are getting for the
money, they will decide that the article is too
dear.
Salesmanship can be cinematized by the
right display of an article—by keeping it in
° . r T ■'i . 1 - _«HiMii»iirn r TTT*Mir I 1 ° 1,1
motion. It should not be put on the counter.
When it is moved, it attracts the eye. It
becomes a moving picture. It is alive. It is
easier to sell live things than dead ones.
Mr. Phil W. Warner, Sales Manager of
Berlei, Ltd., corset and brassiere manufacturers
in Sydney, Australia, has built a theatre in his
shop. He shows tableaux of his goods.
Dramatized selling, he says, or selling by
stage presentation, is a dramatic portrayal of
the goods, ideas or services, strong and effective
enough to attract people and increase sales.
The Stage, he says, supersedes the display


window and the newspaper announcement as
a means of making a strong impression upon
the minds of the customers. His firm now
uses a Stage instead of the stereotyped manne-
quin parade, which has lost its novelty. Always
there must be something new.
He gives his theatrical portrayals such names
as :
The Coronation of the Queen of Fashion.
The Spirit of the Hour.
So This is Elegance.
Youth Triumphant.
Radiant Women.
Lady ! Be Beautiful !
These displays, he says, have a stimulating
and instructive effect upon the sales people.
They learn to appreciate their goods. Every
sales person receives a portfolio, giving the
facts about the display and about the garments
that are being shown. Every Stage picture lasts
for a week.
Customers not only buy the goods. They
associate them with the beautiful Stage display.
And they learn to look upon the shop as a place
of entertainment as well as a place of mer-
chandise.


Another shop, Meer & Frank, Portland,
Oregon, has displays of goods at the employees’
entrance —a new display every morning. The
purpose was to break the monotony of the long
day’s work, and to give the shop assistants a
good start.
The employees’ entrance is usually a dull,
dreary place, and the aim was to brighten it
by having a display of gaily coloured goods.
But these displays have increased the sales
both to employees and customers. “ Every
employee has at least five friends,” says Mr.
Meier. “We have 3,000 employees. To
secure their interest in our goods is no small
matter.”
In this case, Showmanship was used to make
the sales people appreciate the goods they were
expected to sell. This is an instance of drama-
tized Staff Training. It should be adopted by
other large stores.
An English company, Burroughs Adding
Machine, Ltd., also uses dramatized Staff
Training. In 1930, at its annual Conference
of salesmen, ten short playlets were acted out
on the stage of the big ballroom of the Park
Lane Hotel in London. The actors were the
salesmen and lady demonstrators of the com-


pany. Each playlet showed how a difficulty in
salesmanship can be met and overcome.
In one playlet, the prospect has decided to
buy a competing machine. The Burroughs
salesman takes him in hand, shows him the
superiority of the Burroughs system, wins him
over, and makes a sale.
In another playlet, a competing salesman
comes in to sell a machine to a man who has
decided to buy a Burroughs. He makes false
claims for his machine. The prospect cross-
examines him. The technical points of the
two machines are ruthlessly compared and
the man buys a Burroughs.
There were 200 salesmen present —keen,
able men. They were fascinated by the play-
lets. In no other way could they be taught
so thoroughly and so quickly.
This Conference lasted for three days. The
salesmen met the heads of the Company. They
were addressed by the heads of departments.
Their questions were answered. They sang
their company songs. They were filled with
enthusiasm as well as information. They
wound up with a jolly banquet and went back
to their territories as strong as lions. That
was an instance of Showmanship being used
for the purpose of Staff Training.


Some products are in their very nature
spectacular. This makes them easy to sell and
enables the makers to obtain a fair price.
Gramophones, for instance, speak for them-
selves. They give an entertainment. What
they do is amazing. They reproduce a song,
a piece of music, a speech or a concert.
The old Biblical saying of a camel going
through the eye of a needle was not as striking
as what actually is done by a gramophone. A
whole grand opera may pass through the point
of a needle. A gramophone is a world’s wonder.
It is in itself an instance of Showmanship.
That is why, even when it was a new product,
it was so easy to sell.
Motor cars, too, and wireless sets and
vacuum cleaners and fire extinguishers have
been easy to sell, because they can be demon-
strated in a striking way. They give a Show
to the prospect.
But there are other products that have few
entertainment possibilities. There are coal and
iron and steel and soap and raw materials. The
soap manufacturers have solved their selling
problem, but the coal and iron and steel and
raw material people have not. Some day, no
doubt, they will.
Coal is in itself a world’s wonder. It is hard


black sunlight. It has the same elements as
the diamond. It can be broken up into bright
dyes and gases and electrical power. There
will come, some day, a great Showman who
will compel us to appreciate the wonders of
coal.
The fact is that everything may have a bit
of display. Even a cutlet may have a frill
around it. Even a plate of cold meat may have
a few sprigs of parsley. Even a saucepan may
be blue. Even a hammer may have a red
handle.
Showmanship has been used with striking
success in selling fountain pens. Formerly,
nearly all fountain pens were black. Black
is not a colour. It is not attractive. To-day,
fountain pens are brightly coloured. They are
tinted like marble. They are put in handsome
cases —pen and pencil together. They catch
the eye. They compel the favourable attention
of passers-by.
Why are oil paintings sold for such extra-
ordinary prices ? Because they are sold by
the most subtle and effective Showmanship.
At an auction of paintings, the room is darkened.
Only one painting is shown at a time, on an
easel, lit up by hidden lights. Everyone in the
room is compelled to concentrate his whole


attention upon the painting. Then there is the
rivalry of the bidding,urged on by the auctioneer.
That is why such astonishing prices are bid for
paintings. The selling of them is a Show.
In America, house lots are sold in a striking
and spectacular way. A tract of farm land, on
the outskirts of a growing town, is bought at
a low price. It may be fifty acres or it may be
a thousand. Roads and streets are built into
it. A dozen or more of handsome houses are
built. And the tract of land is given a pleasing
name, such as “Manor Park” or “Maple
Highlands.”
Then, when the houses are sold and occupied,
there is a great sale of lots. A brass band is
engaged. Free transportation is often provided.
Flags and bunting are put up. The land is made
gay and attractive. Food and drink are served
free. There is often a speech by the Mayor or
by some other well known public man.
A great crowd of prospects is brought to the
spot and in a single day hundreds of lots are
sold at a high price. All this is Showmanship
and it has been enormously successful. There
is no good reason why this method should not
be used in other countries.
The best instance of selling land by Show-


manship that I have seen in Europe was the
creation of the Terrace Barrandove, three miles
from Prague. A young man of thirty-two,
named Havel, bought 600 acres of waste land
that lay high on the bank of a river. He built
a road into it. Then he built a large restaurant,
a dance-hall, a swimming-pool and terraced
tea-gardens. He made it all a blaze of red and
yellow. When he had finished his development,
he offered two hundred house lots for sale and
he is now selling them rapidly. He created a
new suburb of pleasure by Showmanship.
Was not the immense motor car industry
started and developed by races —by Shows ?
Did not Henry Ford first become famous as
the winner of a race ? Has not many a make
of motor car first come to the front by its
speed on a race-track ?
The farm machinery industry, too, was
started by Shows. Cyrus H. McCormick
invented the first practical reaper in 1831.
But he did not sell one for ten years. The
farmers would not buy it. In 1841, he sold
two. In 1842 he sold three.
Then he hit upon the idea of having demon-
strations. Several competitors had sprung up.
He had contests with them, to see which could,
most quickly and cleanly, cut a field of grain.


These contests were the first Shows that had
ever been given to farmers. They were attracted
in large crowds. By 1859, more than 50,000
reapers had been sold.
Andrew Carnegie, the Scottish steel-maker,
started his profitable trade with Japan by the
use of a little shrewd Showmanship. He made
his chief salesman a Showman. He picked out
a handsome, well educated salesman. He had
him made a Colonel. He dressed him up in
a bright uniform and sent him to Japan. And
the result was a flood of orders.
It has now been found that a whole trade
can greatly increase its sales by co-operative
Showmanship. It can advertise its products.
It can adopt a trade slogan. The florists can
tell the public to “ Say it with flowers ”. The
paint manufacturers can say, “ Save the
surface and you save all ”. The banana
importers can say, “Eat more bananas”.
The launderers can say, “ Let the laundry
do it all . And so on. There has been a
notable increase in this co-operative advertising
and it has been remarkably successful.
Even a town can sell itself by means of good
Showmanship. It can bring in more customers
and more citizens. It can attract National
Conventions. The best example of this is


the rapid growth of the American city of Los
Angeles, which is now the fifth largest city in
the United States. It owes its unparalleled
development to clever and persistent “ city-
boosting,” as the Americans say.
Even a nation can sell itself by Showmanship.
It can have a Trade Exhibition or a World’s
Fair. Did we not in Great Britain have our
Wembley ? And are we not in 1931 having a
large British Trade Exhibition in Argentina ?
It has been found that these Trade Exhibitions
stimulate exports. They are, in fact, great
Shows and inevitably they attract new buyers
and increase sales.
The manufacturers of Czechoslovakia have
built a huge “ Sample Fair ” at Prague. It is
a ten-storey building, no yards long. It is
divided into 3,000 rooms. It is a Showplace.
It has been of tremendous value in stimulating
the foreign trade of that country. It is plain
that every country should have such a ‘ ‘ Sample
Fair ”.
Even many churches are now using as much
Showmanship as they dare. Some of them are
decorated with flags and bunting to advertise a
“ Sale of Work ”. Others have popular singers.
Many clergymen announce sermons on timely
topics. They put up large placards. They


use displays of flowers. All this has nothing
to do with religion. It is pure Showmanship.
Even science needs and might have its
Showmanship. It needs more speakers and
writers who can popularize it. It, too, requires
the favour of the public. Only a few centuries
ago, scientists were put to death by stupid
nations that regarded science with fear. Science
requires a great deal of money for research.
This money must come from the public. There
are few men who do more useful work than
those who popularize the discoveries of scien-
tists.
“ Why not advertise Science ? ” asks Sir
Charles Higham. “We need a great adver-
tising campaign,” he says, “ to inform the
many of those wise things now known only
to a few. We need a wedding of the scientific
mind and the selling mind. Too many scientific
men ignore the sales department. If the
scientific mind cannot simplify the story, the
selling mind can.”
It can now be seen that Showmanship does
not mean blatancy and the deception of the
public. It is not at all the art of fooling the
people, as many people seem to think. It is
true that in the past a number of Showmen
have been charlatans and humbugs, but there


is no good reason why Showmanship should
be in any way dishonest.
Deception may make a sale to a new cus-
tomer but it loses him as well. Business is the
art of finding and keeping customers. That is
why Advertising must be believable and why
Showmanship must be honest.
Showmanship does not mean putting the big
apples on top of the box and the little apples
underneath. No. It means grading the apples
and letting people see what they are getting. It
means telling people of the value in health of
“an apple a day ”. All the prosperous apple-
growers have already learned this lesson.
The fact is that honesty in Showmanship
began when it came to be used by merchants
and manufacturers. They did not travel about,
as the circus men did. They had to face the
same people, year after year. And if you stay
in the same place, you have to be honest.
It is a most significant fact that the merchant
who built up, single-handed, the largest retail
business in the world, was John Wanamaker —
the first merchant who dared to be a Showman.
When he died, he had 17,000 employees. He
had three great department stores. He had a
£5,000,000 stock of goods. And he had a vast


fortune, all built up by applying the art of
Showmanship to the selling of goods.
He made his store a Showplace. He hung
600 paintings on the walls. He began every
day by giving a pipe-organ concert. He had
a cinema in his store and a Grand Court of
Honour and the first Fashion Parades and the
first large advertisements and all manner of
Exhibits. He compelled people to notice and
talk about his store. And his example is to-day
being followed, more or less, by all successful
merchants. Every department store is now a
Showplace.
Many dignified Directors and even some
Sales Managers say that they do not believe
in “ stunts ”. No, they don’t, and their
Balance Sheets, very likely, show what they
lose. I am all for “ stunts ”. Every live
aggressive firm should have at least one a
year. A “ stunt ” is more than talk. It is
an event. It is something done. It is a Show.
The first great believer in “ stunts ” in
England was T. J. Barratt, Chairman of
A. & F. Pears. He spent £ 20,000 to reproduce
the “ Bubbles ” painting by Sir John Millais.
It was money well spent. It created one of
the greatest advertising successes that England
has ever known. He once bought 30,000


French pennies, stamped “ Pears ” on them
and put them into circulation. There was no
law against defacing foreign money and French
pennies were then in circulation in England.
By means of his “ stunts,” Mr. Barratt made
“ Pears ” the first famous soap in the world.
John Mackintosh built up his immense
toffee business in Halifax by means of ‘ ‘ stunts ”.
His first scheme was to offer a £250 Model
Cottage and hundreds of other prizes for the
greatest number of coupons. His second
“ stunt ” was a “ Scholarship Contest ” to
be won by writing the best essay. And his
third scheme was to send a tin of toffee to
every M.P. He made the House of Commons
talk about toffee.
Eaton’s, the Toronto department store, sent
out a special four-carriage train in 1930. It
travelled 4,000 miles, stopping for a day or
longer at every station. By this means it
secured thousands of new customers. That
was a very striking instance of Showmanship.
Another more recent instance was the
marvellous banquet of the employees of the
Heinz Company on November Bth, 1930.
There were 11,000 employees, sitting at the
same time at banquets all over the world.


The banquet, or series of banquets, was
held to mark the opening of a new theatre for
employees in Pittsburgh. All the diners in
various countries sat down at the same time—
at 8 p.m. in Pittsburgh and at 1 a.m. in
England, and so on. All the dining halls were
linked together by wireless loud-speakers.
Speeches were made by President Hoover and
Mr. Howard Heinz and they were heard by
the 11,000 diners. That was a “ stunt ”. It
was a Show that brought a valuable amount
of free publicity and that did much to increase
the good-will and enthusiasm of the em-
ployees.
The most talked-of “ stunt ” of the Wana-
maker store in 1930 was the bringing of a
Paris gown from Paris to New York by
aeroplane. It was carried by Coste and Bellonte,
the French airmen. It was a Callot gown —the
first ever carried by aeroplane across the
Atlantic. It attracted fifty thousand women
to the Wanamaker store.
But the most daring and spectacular ‘ ‘ stunt ”
undertaken by any department store is the
annual circus-parade of Macy’s in New York.
In this parade there are fancy chariots, clowns
and make-believe animals. Balloons are released
and £lO is paid for every one that is brought


back. This parade moves down Broadway—
the principle street in New York.
This circus-like publicity must be profitable,
as Macy’s sales in 1929 were over £20,000,000
and its net profits were £1,572,700. If this
store —one of the largest and most successful
in the world—can throw aside its dignity and
have circus-parades and “stunts,” it would
seem that smaller and less successful stores
would do well to follow its example.
On a visit to Prague, I found a remarkable
store —a new kind of a shoe-shop. It is part
Show and part shop. It is one of the shops of
Tomas Bata, who is, in my opinion, the ablest
maker and seller of boots and shoes in the
world.
The people were pouring into this shop at
the rate of thirty per minute. It is as popular
as a circus. People are attracted by the low
price of the shoes, by many electric lights, by
free telephones, by fifteen chiropodists, by
gramophone music on every floor, by cheap
lunches, by a playroom for children and by a
shop-front that is as attractive as that of a big
cinema.
This Bata shop shows what a shop ought to
be like. It is a pioneer of the new Showmanship


in merchandising. It is not a mere warehouse
with counters, as most shops are. It is a gay
place of music and lights and entertainment
and hospitality. It draws rich and poor alike.
It is irresistible. It pulls people in as though
it were the big tent of a circus. It is easily
the most conspicuous and the most popular
building in Prague.
If the question is asked —what can a small
shop do in the way of Showmanship, the
answer is—it can do enough to make itself
conspicuous and popular. It need not do
nothing merely because it cannot do everything.
It can hold its own, and more, if it dresses
its windows well and often, puts a touch of
style in the windows and becomes a friendly,
sociable place. This, every small shop can do.
Any small shop can prosper if it can learn to
make people like to go there.
A shopkeeper in a small town or in a
suburban street has a tremendous advantage
—he can call his customers by name. He can
remember their whims and wishes. He can
give them a personal service.
Also, he can give his shop a distinctive name.
He can paint the shop-front a bright colour.
On one occasion, I had a small shop painted


a bright yellow. It was on a corner, next door
to a red garage. When it was yellow, it seemed
much larger and cleaner. And its trade at
once increased.
Any small shop can have a coloured awning,
instead of the usual shabby, dull awning, made
of sail-cloth. It can have a bright coloured rug
at the door. It can have neat overalls on its
sales people. And it can have something unusual
in the window.
The most successful small shop I have ever
known is one in Western America. It is in a
small town of only 5,500 people, yet its sales
have risen to over ,£lOO,OOO a year. It is
always having “stunts”. It has spectacular
Sales. It makes itself known and talked about.
It brings customers from farms thirty miles
distant. And it does this by Showmanship.
What, for instance, might a launderer do ?
He can show in his window a shirt that has
been washed thirty times. He can have dazzling
white vans and drivers in white overalls. He
can have his laundry painted white. He can
tell how many tons of soap he uses in a year.
He can have a parade of his white vans once
a week. He can have the most spotlessly clean
business in his town.


One outfitter turned his shop temporarily
into a Show by having a “ Dress the Mayor ”
Contest. He put a large variety of shirts, ties,
hose, handkerchiefs, suspenders and hats in
his windows. Each one was numbered.
The person who selected the articles that
best suited the Mayor received a set of the
articles as a prize. The contest lasted for
eight days. There were 211 contestants. The
winner was a woman. She chose a lavender
ensemble. She reasoned that as the Mayor
was a white-haired man, lavender would best
suit him. This contest was the talk of the town
during the week. It made plenty of fun, and
it brought many customers to the shop.
A baker doubled his pie sales by a little
Showmanship. He called his pies—“ Mrs.
Wagner’s Pies ”. He wrapped every pie in a
dust-proof, moisture-proof glacine container.
He printed on every container the name of
the pie. He gave handsome pie-racks to re-
tailers. Inside every container he put a leaflet
that told the Quality-points of the pies. He
standardized the prices. He advertised with
showy posters. He created an excitement
about pies. Naturally, he doubled his sales.
A fish dealer in Nova Scotia sold 25,000,000


pounds of fish in 1929 by creating an excite-
ment about fish. He engaged women to travel
about giving public demonstrations on the
cooking of fish. He gave talks to women’s
organizations. He wrapped his fish in waxed
paper and sold it by post. He offered prizes
to school children for the best essays on fish.
He gave away scholarships. He advertised
the slogan—" Fish is the National Dish ”. He
gave away recipe books. He taught women
new and better ways to cook fish. In a word,
he became a Fish Showman.
Showmanship may be used in the smallest
personal affairs or for the welfare of a whole
nati°n. It may be anything from lipstick to
Wembley. There is an insurance salesman who
uses a cancelled cheque as an Exhibit. It has
enabled him to sell £200,000 worth of in-
surance. Years ago, he lost the sight of one
eye. He received £l,OOO from an insurance
company. He became one of the salesmen of
this company and he was given the cancelled
cheque. He showed it to every prospect. There
was a bit of human interest in it. It was his
little Show and it enabled him to secure
favourable attention.
Any merchant or manufacturer, large or
small, can attract the attention of the public


by keeping in touch with Fashion. Fashion
is not altogether a guessing game. There are
now professional Fashion experts, employed by
the large department stores. They study the
trend of Fashion. They keep an eye on Vienna.
For men’s fashions, they study London. And
always they watch the “ Famous Forty ” and
the Creative Thinkers of Fashion in Paris.
Motor cars made women’s hats smaller.
Aviation suggested the helmets. The Deauville
scarf was used first by a lady friend of a certain
King. She used it to cover a red blotch on her
pretty shoulder. Once, Sarah Bernhardt
appeared on a Paris Boulevard dressed entirely
in white. This made white the dominant
colour for the season.
In general, fashions are created by a few
great geniuses in Paris, Vienna and London,
and by the whim of the most beautiful ladies
who happen to be in the limelight. Very few
firms lead in fashion. The others scramble
after them as quickly as possible. And even
the most artistic and creative firms make a
mistake now and then. Fashion, so it seems,
depends about 60 per cent, on genius and 40
per cent, on chance.
A touch of Fashion lifts a product or a shop


up to a higher level. It helps to maintain prices.
It catches the eye of the shopper. It is new.
It is interesting. It is “the latest”. It is
irresistibly attractive to most women.
One of the most important trends in Fashion
is the growing importance of what we call
“ ensemble ” —the harmony of the things in
a group. We are learning to have more taste.
We want things that match. We do not want
a jumble of furniture in a room nor a jumble
of clothes. A woman now wants a hat and a
bag and a pair of shoes and a necklace—all to
match her gown.
As a nation, we are still more or less colour-
blind. We still associate our greys and browns,
and our pinks and reds, but we have learned a
great deal about colours in the last ten years.
And the next ten years will see even greater
progress in this direction.
We are compelled to pay attention to Fashion
because a new style is a Show. It is an eye-
catcher. It makes people talk. It attracts most
the people who have the most money to spend.
And Fashion is now extending its realm and
taking in all manner of merchandise.
So, as we have seen, the element of Show-
manship comes into the selling process and


cannot be ignored. It means the escape from
Oblivion, which is the deadly enemy of every
firm or individual selling services or goods to
the public. Over the graves of tens of thousands
of businesses, we might well write the epitaph
—“ Killed by Oblivion ”.
What happens, for instance, to the average
small shop ? It puts in a stock of goods—
ordinary goods. It puts them in the window
in the ordinary way. The front of the shop is
ordinary. The poor little shopkeeper thinks
that he must do only the ordinary things, or
else he is too lazy or stupid to do anything
different. He does nothing distinctive. He
wants to be as much like his competitors as
possible. He never dreams that he must be
a Showman.
Many people pass his door, but only one
out of a score gives even a glance at his shop.
To nineteen out of twenty passers-by, his shop
is in Oblivion.
He gets only a small percentage of the
possible trade of his own street. His expenses
are more than his profits. And in a year or
two his little capital is exhausted, he cannot
pay his bills and up go the shutters —‘ ‘ Killed
by Oblivion ”.


A young dentist or doctor or lawyer or
architect has the same trouble in the first ten
years of his professional career. He starts in
Oblivion. He is not allowed to advertise. He
has a far harder problem to solve than any
shopkeeper has.
He has no shop windows —nothing but a
small ordinary brass plate. He cannot have a
“ Sale ”. He must wait for clients. All he
can do is to join a church and a club and make
as many friends as possible. He is forbidden
by the code of his profession to use any Show-
manship. This is, in my opinion, a wise code.
It prevents any professional man from be-
coming an advertising quack or charlatan. But
it makes a quick success almost impossible.
A non-advertising professional man must
spend at least four years learning his technique.
Then he must struggle on for about ten years
before he has enough clients to make a good
living. He is enormously handicapped because
he is not allowed to use any of the methods of
Showmanship.
The main reason why both professional men
and commercial men fail is because there were
not enough people who gave them favourable
attention. Their percentage of the patronage


of the public was too small. They lived in
the dark, and the dark kills businesses and
professions just as effectively as it kills plants.
In the business world, at least, we can use
more Showmanship and we must. We must
move our advertising up to a higher plane.
Why ? Because there is so much of it. Oblivion
is harder to overcome to-day than it was thirty
years ago.
The greater part of our advertising is
commonplace and non-conspicuous. People
have become blind to ordinary advertising—
that is the plain truth which we must face.
They see only the advertising that is novel
and eye-catching. And no advertising pays
unless people notice it.
The next step forward, in the development
of business methods, is to use a greater
element of Showmanship in our Selling and
advertising.




THE VARIOUS
ELEMENTS
OF SHOWMANSHIP




Chapter V
THE VARIOUS ELEMENTS OF
SHOWMANSHIP
IN the matter of Showmanship, a man must
begin with himself. His appearance and
manner may be a great asset to him. He
has to sell himself. He must create favourable
attention by his general appearance, his deport-
ment and the expression of his face.
A distinguished American once said to me
—‘ ‘ The trouble with President Hoover is that
he doesn’t know how to shake hands.” A very
wise observation ! Many other men have this
same fault. They spoil every interview by
giving a clumsy, non-cordial greeting to a
visitor. To offer a limp hand indifferently to
a man is like throwing a splash of cold water
over him.
The A.B.C. of Showmanship is to have a
pleasing appearance and a cordial, congenial
manner when meeting people. That first five
seconds of greeting—how important it is ! It
is just as important in business as it is in
politics.


There are many men in business life, and
on the selling side, who are temperamentally
unfitted to be salesmen. They do not like
meeting people. They do it because they must.
They are, to tell the truth, much better fitted
to be lighthouse-keepers. They have no
Showmanship at all.
A salesman, in fact, must be a walking Show,
in the sense that he gives a first impression of
friendliness, honesty and likeability. He must
take a keen pleasure in meeting people. He
must be quick to make friends. One of the
best definitions of Salesmanship is that it is
the art of liking and pleasing a customer, and
helping him to get what he needs.
Women pay more attention to personal
appearance than men. The “ Beauty Par-
lours ” prove that. Almost every girl does
her best to improve her looks. Why not ?
She becomes a Show-woman as far as she
dares. She thinks continually of her personal
appearance and attractiveness.
A man cannot go as far in self-decoration
as a woman. He cannot use powder and rouge
and lipstick. He is restricted by custom in
the matter of his clothing. But he can at least
have a well-fitting suit of clothes. He can
have a tie to match his suit. He can have his


trousers pressed. And he can have an expression
on his face that makes his customer feel at ease
and glad to meet him. This is not much, but
thousands of salesmen neglect it.
Many an actress can say truthfully : “ My
face is my fortune,” and it is also true that
many a salesman can say, “ My manner is
my fortune.” Many a merchant who has
climbed high above his competitors knows
that he owes a great deal to his manner and
his personal appearance.
There is an element of Showmanship, too,
in a handsome conspicuous building. At last,
we in Great Britain are coming to realize this.
For generations, we have had the plainest and
ugliest business buildings in the world. We
even took a strange pride in dinginess. We
avoided display, as though it were a trivial and
inconsequent thing. We concentrated on
stability and reliability and that led us to
neglect appearance.
But we are now erecting more suitable and
more handsome buildings. Even the Bank
of England, which was for a century the
plainest and dingiest of all great banks, is now
being rebuilt. The “ Big Five ” banks have
erected large and noble Palaces of Finance.


The big shipping companies have created a
whole street of fine buildings in the City. The
old Hudson’s Bay Company has rehoused
itself. So has Lloyd’s. Almost all our large
organizations, with the sole exception of our
railways, have now realized the value of size
and appearance in their buildings.
We have learned that even the oldest and
solidest of firms must give some thought to
appearance —to Showmanship. A good Balance
Sheet is not enough. A great firm must be
suitably housed. We are now aware of this
and we have had a boom in rebuilding, as
anyone can see who rides on top of a bus
through London.
One London firm that has set the pace in
this matter of Showmanship is J. Lyons & Co.
—the caterers. This firm has given Londoners
a number of large dining palaces such as few
other cities possess.
Their magnificent “ Corner Houses ” con-
tain such dining-rooms as no Emperor a
century ago ever dreamed of, yet they are
wide open to the public and the prices are as
low, considering the buying power of money,
as in the shabby little eating-houses of twenty
years ago. It is almost incredible that there
can be such grandeur, such a glory of lighting


from invisible lights, such good music and
good food, at such prices.
In the Corner House near Piccadilly Circus
there are 3,500 electric lights—as many as a
whole street of shops usually has. The total
candle-power is 2,000,000. More than 30
miles of cable and wire are used in the lighting
system alone.
The decorations are in green and gold
mainly. The sales girls are dressed in green,
instead of the everlasting black or white.
Wherever you look, there is light and colour.
It is beyond a doubt one of the most brilliant
buildings in England. Its windows are ex-
quisitely dressed, with artistic mannequin
dolls, all in daring colours. This one building
can serve meals or teas to 40,000 people a day.
Music ! Light 1 Bright colours ! All this
is Showmanship in the selling of meals and
it is very profitable. It pays 35 per cent.
There is a new restaurant in Berlin, the
“ Hans Vaterland,” which is now the best on
the Continent, from the point of view of
Showmanship. There are eight separate
restaurants under one roof —Bavarian, Austrian,
Rhenish, American, Turkish, etc.
The walls are so built as to give an illusion


of distance. A scene from each country is
displayed. In the Rhineland restaurant, for
instance, there is a view of the Rhine, with
boats moving on it. Every hour there is a
thunder-storm, with clouds and real rain and
with the stars showing in the darkened sky.
In every restaurant the waiters are dressed in
national costumes and national foods are
served. The entrance hall is vast and silvered
and ablaze with hidden lights. All this is
Showmanship, used for the selling of food and
drink. How can shops continue to be plain
and dingy, when their customers have dined
in such palaces as this ?
More and more shopkeepers are following
the example set them by restaurants, cinemas
and theatres. They are learning how to make
a shop a Showplace. One jewellery firm in
Southend—R. A. Jones & Sons—turned its
shop into a spectacle for its Christmas cus-
tomers in 1929.
The entire shop was redecorated. The walls
were adorned with frescoes and landscapes.
There was a painting of a street in Cairo and
another of a port on the Mediterranean and a
third of a scene in Venice.
One wall showed a windmill and moonlight
scene and another wall showed a bridge span-


ning a river. The windows became caves, lit
up with coloured lights. Naturally, such a
shop was crowded during the whole of
December. It was the talk of the town.
Many a firm is now paying attention to the
appearance of its offices. But we still have
hundreds of dim and shabby offices in Great
Britain. Many a company, with large reserves,
is doing its business in an office that looks like
poverty. The windows are dirty. The lights
have scraps of paper for shades. The desks
were made in 1875. The rugs or carpets are
dirty and torn. There is a little heap of litter
on every cabinet and in every corner. All the
clerks are ashamed of it.
Should not every office be more or less of a
Showplace ? Does it not represent the firm ?
Why should it be dingy and colourless ? Why
not have flowers in it ? And coloured curtains ?
And up-to-date lighting ? And modern equip-
ment ? Would not a better and brighter office
create a favourable impression upon customers
and greatly please and stimulate the staff of
office workers ?
One company in California has recently
reconstructed its offices. It has decorated
them so that they look like a series of Spanish
bungalows. Trees are painted on the walls.


Clouds are painted on the ceiling. There is
brightness and colour. Why not ?
As to window displays, there is no need to
urge that they should be improved. It is
now generally agreed, by all merchants who
think at all on the subject, that the windows
of a shop should be a Show. There are now
a number of helpful books written on window-
display. There are professional experts. There
are monthly magazines. The problem of
increasing sales by Showmanship in the win-
dows has now been solved by hundreds of
merchants.
The new idea in window display is that a
window is a stage. The goods are the players.
The display must be dramatized in such a way
as to call favourable attention to the goods.
This means the use of artistic forms and
designs. Also, a great use of light.
More art and more light must be used, but
they must not call attention to themselves.
They are secondary to the merchandise. This
is a fact that many merchants have overlooked.
Shops do not sell art. They do not sell light.
They sell merchandise. And they should use
art and light only to increase the sales of the
merchandise.


Many a shop window is turned over to an
artist who does not know anything of salesman-
ship. He is allowed to do what he likes with
it. The result is a very startling display, but
it does not sell goods.
It may be taken as a general rule that the
artistic designs should not be so striking nor
so freakish as to distract attention from the
goods.
Fixtures should not be too ornamental.
Backgrounds should not be too decorative. If
they are, the people on the pavement look at
the fixtures and the background rather than
at the goods.
There is a new style in art-work, window
display, and furniture. It is called modernistic,
or cubistic, or futuristic. Advertisers and
merchants are using it. It is the fashion of the
moment. And few know the story of it. It
aims at making something different. So far,
so good. But it makes freaks, for the most
part. It is the cult of queerness. It is almost
always grotesque.
In 1940, shop windows will be still more
like the stages of theatres. There will be
revolving platforms, such as the one at the
London Coliseum. There will be spot-lights


of different colours. There will be more
moving displays—more dramatized selling.
There will probably be more people in the
window and fewer dummies. And artists and
decorators will be required to know the
principles of Salesmanship.
We now have 174 Schools of Industrial Art
of various kinds in Great Britain. Some are
useful and some are not. There are more than
50,000 pupils at these Schools, but only 6,000
are full-time students. The others attend
about ninety hours a year.
These Schools, eventually, will develop the
art of Showmanship. They will be ruled less
by the artist and more by the Sales Manager.
They will enable us to compete more success-
fully with France and Austria in the matter of
design. At present, only 42 per cent, of the
designs used by our calico-printers are made
in Britain. The rest come from France.
In all Showmanship, it is the novelty that
counts. Copyists make a poor success. Most
copyists are mere cheapeners. They are com-
pelled to accept lower prices. That is why our
Schools of Design must be taken in hand and
developed until their students become creative
and original. Why should we continue to pick


up the crumbs that fall from the table of
French art ?
Then there is the matter of lighting, which
is so important in all Showmanship. Lighting
is a new art. In 1855 we were using candles.
Then came oil lamps—a great improvement.
And to-day we use Welsbach mantles and
electric light. We have more than twenty
times the light that we had in 1855.
It is worth noticing that the first people to
use plenty of light were the Showmen. Barnum
put moving searchlights on the roof of his
“American Museum ”. No merchant, as yet,
has done that. There was always a blaze of
light at the door of every Big Tent. Every
successful Showman has had a passion for
light.
The first Business Exhibition in Europe that
was well lit was Wembley. It had 3,000,000
electric lights. And, for the first time, the
lights were well placed. The light was thrown
where it was needed, not in peoples’ eyes.
Lighting is like advertising—if you do it
badly, it is an expense. If you do it well, it
is an asset. If you have one electric light where
you ought to have two, or if you have a lot
of broken Welsbachs, your lighting is costing
H m


you far more than you think. Lighting is a
business-building force. It can be used to
increase sales and to raise the prestige of any
firm.
Most small shops are badly lighted. They
are more like caves than shops. Many shop-
keepers look upon electric light as an expense.
They are quite wrong. Good lighting helps to
bring people into a shop and makes the goods
look brighter and more attractive.
Light is a salesman. The theatre-owners
know this. They are almost the only people
who have perfect lighting. There is no shop
in London that appreciates light as Drury
Lane Theatre does.
We are only beginning to appreciate the
value of colour lighting in window displays.
Any shop can at once make itself distinctive by
the use of coloured light in its windows. Spot-
lights, too, are very effective. They put a bright
light in the right place and compel the attention
of the passers-by.
Our merchants have now realized that shop
window lights should be hidden. But they have
not yet learned to use spot-lights, as the theatres
do. A window should not be lit evenly all over.
It is not a hall. It is a stage. Light should be
placed only where it is wanted.


One American draper has four spot-lights
in his window. These spot-lights concentrate
the light upon the merchandise. They leave the
background in semi-darkness. It compels the
passers-by to look at the merchandise and
nothing else.
A blaze of light compels attention. It makes
an article stand out vividly. It prevents a
person’s eyes from wandering all over the
window.
The fact is that nothing else attracts the eye
as light does, and most sales are made by the
eye. The optic nerve is twenty-two times
stronger than the nerve that leads from the
ear to the brain. That is a fact that most
shopkeepers forget.
Good lighting means no glare and no dim-
ness. It means plenty of light on the goods,
and not in people’s eyes. Unshaded electric
lights, blinding and dazzling people —that is
not good lighting. Broken and flickering
Welsbachs, throwing as much shadow as light
—that is not good lighting.
There should be more light inside your shop
than there is outside. That is the point to bear
in mind. Every customer should have an im-
pression of light, not dimness, when he enters


your shop. There are some shops, in London,
too, which ought to advertise —“ Customers
will please bring their own lanterns, as lighting
is not provided.”
People love light as much as moths do. They
dislike dark places. Several Scottish coal miners
were rescued from a mine, where they had
been imprisoned for nine days. When they
were rescued, one of them said, “ the awful
darkness seemed worse than the pangs of
hunger.”
All manufacturers would do well to appre-
ciate the value of better lighting in their mills
and factories. Tens of thousands of workers
are toiling in dim light.
‘ ‘ Better lighting increases profits by at least
one per cent.,” says a Dutch engineer—Mr.
Van Stam. There are some factories, he says,
where there is only one-tenth as much light
as there ought to be —dim, twilight places
where the workers can see nothing clearly.
I have myself seen weaving sheds in Lanca-
shire where the light was so bad that I could
hardly see what time it was by my watch.
This Dutch engineer has made a study of
factory lighting. He says that seven per cent.


of factories use 55 P er cen t- °f artificial lighting.
Less than half their light is daylight.
He says that:
17 per cent .use 5 per cent. of artificial lighting
10 „ 10 ~ »
10 „ 15 » ”
13 „ 20 „ »
8 „ 25
4 » 3° >» ”
4 » 35 »» ”
5 „ 45 »»
7 » 55 » ”
According to this, 20 per cent, of all our
lighting in factories is artificial lighting ; and
nearly all our artificial lighting is much inferior
to daylight.
I have seen men working in Manchester by
the dim, flickering light of a miserable gas
flare. I have seen scores of factories where
men and women were working in a sort of
moonlight, with only a broken gas mantle to
save them from utter darkness. How can
accurate work be done in such caves ? An a
how can these factories be kept clean and
orderly when they are only half-lighted ?
Mr. W. Tudor Davies, who has written a
good book on the Rationalization of Industty,


tells of a test that was applied to him in a Ger-
man factory, to prove to him the importance of
good light.
He was asked to pick out 10 screws of the
same size and design, first of all under dim
light, then with a good light with glare, and
finally with a good light without glare.
It took him 29 seconds to pick out the 10
screws in a dim light, it took him 12 seconds
with the second light, and only ro seconds
with the perfect light. This proved that he
could work almost three times as fast if he
had a good light without glare.
This is a matter that every Works Manager
and every Office Manager should look into. It
is quite possible that many workers are only
doing one-third of a day’s work every day
because of the bad light.
Few manufacturers, as yet, realize that there
must be a bit more Showmanship in a factory,
to make the work more attractive to the em-
ployees. The looks and the lights of a factory
matter a great deal to the employees, especially
to girl workers. A worker who is pleased with
his factory does more work and better work
than one who dislikes it. To have contented
workers means to have more output and a


lower wage-cost, as all efficient Works Managers
know.
The two latest developments in lighting are
flood-lighting and the hiding of lights behind
great strips of tinted glass.
So far as I know, the best instance of flood-
lighting in Great Britain is the Royal Pavilion,
Brighton. It is lit up at night in colours —rose,
yellow, and green. It looks like a palace in
fairyland. Other good instances of flood-
lighting are the Carreras and Firestone build-
ings and the War Memorial at Sunderland.
As yet, no shop has been lit up in colours.
Why not ? It would at once be the most
talked about shop in the town. It would be
superior in attractiveness even to a cinema.
In the dark days of December it could be lit
up at 4 p.m. It would attract people during
two business hours, and the lighting scheme
would widely advertise the shop every evening
for more than six months in tne year.
Shops can be lit up from below or from
above or from across the street. The Chambre
de Commerce in Paris is lit up brightly by
lights in the courtyard. Any building can
make use of flood-lighting.
As for the use of lights behind tinted glass,


the best instances of this can be seen in Berlin
and Prague. The new Karstadt store in Berlin
has strips of clouded glass, lit up by electric
lights and running to the height of the building.
Also, it has continuous windows, running from
the pavement to the roof. It is easily the most
conspicuous of all department stores.
Then there is the matter of Colour. This,
too, was first discovered by Showmen. They
discovered the value of Red. They threw aside
black and grey and brown. There are no black
nor grey nor brown flowers. And this very
important fact was first discovered by Show-
men.
The selling-power of colour is now generally
admitted. Publishers are putting bright jackets
on their books. Even the most useful business
books are now appearing in red and yellow
jackets. The most brightly coloured cartons
are being used by manufacturers. The first oil
stoves that became popular were those that had
light blue cylinders. Even a short motor car
can be made to look longer by the use of long
lines of bright colour.
There are now coloured sheets and pillow-
covers and they have become strikingly popular.
There are coloured saucepans. Even kitchen
utensils are becoming gay. Why not ? People


are almost always likely to buy what attracts
the eye and dull colours are practically in-
visible. The eye passes over them without
interest.
A new idea in window display is to have
spot-lights of different colours, flashing in turn
on the goods or the display figures. For instance,
there may be a red light and a green light.
These make a good pair of colours. Or there
may be amber and blue, which give a striking
contrast.
Two different messages may appear on the
same card, by changing from one colour of
light to the other. A gown with red stripes in
it may have the red stripes disappear under a
blue light.
Black goods must never be shown under a
red light, as it makes them look rusty ; and
white goods must never be shown under an
amber light. As you can see, changing lights
can make a window of brightly coloured goods
most fascinating.
Mr. M. Luckeish, in his book Light and
Colour, gives many instances of the increase of
sales by means of colour. He says that a man’s
favourite colours are blue, red and violet; and
a woman’s favourite colours are red, blue and


violet. Pure colours are more popular than
tints or shades. The one colour that compels
attention is red. It attracts three times as
many people as blue and five times as many as
purple.
One merchant, says, Mr. Luckeish, made
experiments in sending sales letters on coloured
paper, with tinted envelopes. He got most
replies when he sent pink letters with blue
envelopes. He got almost three times as many
replies as when he sent out white letters in
white envelopes.
A seed company has found that the coloured
pages of its catalogue make nine times more
sales, per page, than the black and white pages.
A mail-order firm has found that when it
sends out leaflets with pictures of skirts in
colours, it has ten times as many sales as when
it sends out black and white leaflets.
This is a fact worth hundreds of pounds a
year to many firms. A leaflet in colours, if you
have a large edition, is only twice as expensive
as one in black and white ; and if it makes nine
or ten times more sales, it is the cheaper of the
two.
Reports from firms using coloured adver-
tisements say that colour increases the results


from four to ten times. One cloak and suit
company is now printing a 402-page catalogue,
with 60 pages in colours. Another mail-order
firm is printing 120 pages, out of 1,650, in
colours. A linoleum firm paid £4OO more for
500,000 booklets, to have them in colours, and
the sales were grealty increased.
Colours must be appropriate. A firm that
makes cosmetics tried to use a red container,
but women would not buy it. Few women want
a bright red object on their dressing table.
The Laws of Colour should be studied by
all drapers, wall-paper manufacturers, silk
manufacturers, cotton and wool manufacturers,
shirt manufacturers, dressmakers, milliners,
decorators, painters, carpet and rug manu-
facturers, window-dressers, printers, etc.
The French and Italians are superior to us
in matters of taste, because they have studied
Colour. They have appreciated Colour and
we have not. Their eyes are no better than
ours ; but their eyes have been trained and
ours have not. So, now that we are taking
stock of our national defects, the time has
come for us to study the Laws of Colour.
To begin with, there are three grades of
colours —Primary, Secondary and Tertiary.


The Primary Colours are Blue, Red and Yellow.
The Secondary Colours are Green, Orange and
Purple. The Tertiary Colours are Citrine,
Russet and Olive.
Basically, there are only five colours —Black,
Blue, Red, Yellow and White. The Greeks
used to paint all colours with these five. Black
and White are negative—not really colours at
all. Grey and Brown are half-caste colours.
Yellow is the sister of White ; and Blue is the
sister of Black. Green is the central colour,
adopted by Nature as the summer colouring
of the world.
Red is the extreme of colour. It is the apex.
It is the most positive —the most vivid. Orange,
too, is a violent colour. It fatigues the eye by
its intensity. Blue is the coldest colour, and
Orange is the warmest. White is the purest
and Brown is the foulest.
When one colour is diluted with another the
result is called a “hue ”. When a colour is
diluted with white it is called a “ tint ”. When
it is diluted with black it is called a “ shade ”.
Red and Green harmonize, perhaps, best of
all. Other perfect harmonies are Yellow and
Purple—Blue and Orange—Black and White.
These colours harmonize because they are


complementary to each other. The colour
which harmonizes best with White is Light
Blue ; and the colour which harmonizes best
with black is Rose. Orange, too, goes well with
Black, and also Yellow.
The colours that clash are :
Violet and Purple.
Red and Pink.
Blue and Green.
Orange and Yellow.
Purple and Blue.
Red and Orange.
Blue and Black.
Violet and Black.
How often you have noticed the Colour
Clashes of posters and advertising booklets !
How often you have noticed in a vague way
a certain poster or booklet was ugly ! How
often you have been struck by a violent colour
clash on a gown or a woman’s hat or in a shop
window ?
One of the Laws of Colour is the Law of
Contrast—when two different colours are
placed side by side each brings out the opposite
in the other.
For instance, if you place Orange and Green
side by side, the Orange becomes Redder and


the Green becomes Bluer. If you place Red
and Yellow side by side, the Red becomes
Bluer and the Yellow becomes Greener.
Every colour has an aureola of its comple-
mentary colour. Red has an aureola of Green,
Green has an aureola of Red. Orange has one
of Blue ; Yellow has one of Violet, and so on.
White intensifies its neighbouring colours •
it makes them more vivid. Black dulls its
neighbouring colours ; it makes them less vivid.
If you put an Orange ribbon on a Yellow
dress, the ribbon will appear redder than
before. If you put it on a Red dress it will
appear more Yellow. A Grey pattern on Rose
appears Green ; on Orange it appears Blue ;
on Yellow it appears Pink ; on Blue it appears
Orange ; on Violet it appears Yellow.
A Black pattern on a Red ground appears
Greenish; on a Green ground it appears
Reddish-Grey; and on a Blue ground it
appears Orange-Grey.
Black blues white. You will improve White
paint by mixing a little Black with it. Black
greens Yellow and purples Red. Red is made
Yellow by Blue ; it is made Blue by Yellow •
it is made brighter by Green or White ; and
it is made duller by Black. In a painting, a


Grey footpath through a Green meadow
appears Reddish.
As you can see, these Laws of Colour have
many practical applications. For instance, if
you are displaying White goods, the best back-
ground is Blue. If you are displaying Black
goods the best background is Yellow.
If your furniture is made of a Yellow wood,
it should be upholstered with Blue. If it is
a Red wood, it should be upholstered with
Green. If you use Red with mahogany, it
takes the Red out of the wood. If you have a
Red carpet in a room with mahogany furniture
you are injuring the looks of the mahogany.
When you have mahogany furniture the
proper colour for the carpet is Green.
If you have bric-a-brac or anything else of
bright colours, you can prevent these colours
from clashing by putting White in between.
If you want clear, vivid printing, the best
is Black ink on White paper. The second best
is Black ink on Light Yellow or Yellow-Green
paper. The third best is Black on Light Orange
paper or Light Blue.
The worst colour for the complexion is
Violet, because it makes the face look either
Yellow or Green.


People who do not know the Laws of Colour
should not use bright colours at all. They
should confine themselves to Black, White,
Brown and Grey. These are the safe colours
for those who do not know the Laws of Colour
Combination.
So, as you can see, the elements of Show-
manship can be applied to almost every phase
of the selling process. There can be Show-
manship in the use of coloured or oddly shaped
delivery vans. Have not many vans become
practically circus-wagons ? There can be
Showmanship in the awning of a shop or in
the mat at the door or in the bags and wrapping
paper.
The better the Showmanship, the better the
sales. There is no longer any doubt about that.


THE ART
OF PROPAGANDA




Chapter VI
THE ART OF PROPAGANDA
A BOOK on Showmanship would not be
complete without a chapter on Propa-
ganda. This is the art of shaping public
opinion by means of articles in publications,
by means of news in the daily press, or by
means of books, lectures, letters, leaflets and
interviews.
There is propaganda for all manner of pur-
poses—for winning votes, for securing legis-
lation, for making actors, actresses and public
men famous, for bringing about social reforms,
for getting money from the Government, for
floating loans, for launching new products, for
popularizing theories, schemes and conspiracies,
for persuading people to join a church and so
on.
The volume of propaganda is enormous. No
one knows how much there is. In my younger
days I was for four years on a great daily paper,
and I saw the flood of it beating in upon the
editors.
“ Newspapers should tell the truth,” say


people who know nothing about the newspaper
game. The Truth ! What is the Truth ?
Any newspaper that printed “ the truth, the
whole truth and nothing but the truth ” would
be ruined in a week. Every newspaper man
knows that.
Every newspaper is censored—censored by
its libel lawyer and by its news editor, who
decides the amount of truth that is safe to
print. There are about fifteen news editors
who filter the news that is given to the British
people. There is no such thing as a “ free
press ” anywhere in the world.
Not only is the news sifted. It is coloured,
too, very often, by the policy of the newspaper
owners. There are different brands of the
Truth. The bare, naked, unadorned truth —
it is as impossible and, very likely, as un-
desirable, as absolute nudity on the stage.
An honest and fearless newspaper or magazine
does its best to print as much truth as possible.
But the difficulties are terrific. Before people
are told anything, it must be borne in mind
what they already know and believe. An
article on the origin of Christianity that could
be printed in Japan, could not be printed in
any Christian country. And an article about
what goes on in Shintoist temples could be


printed in London, but it would send the
writer to prison in Tokio.
A clever journalist—George Seldes—recently
wrote a book on The Truth Behind the News.
(Faber & Gwyer). He pointed out that foreign
correspondents are blocked and their news is
censored in most of the countries of the world.
The censors and the Foreign Offices decide
what is to be told.
There are about 150 American and British
journalists abroad. In most countries they are
spied upon. They write only what they are
allowed to write. Many of them have been
put in prison. They are trying to tell the truth,
but they are not allowed to do so.
“ In at least ten European countries,” says
Seldes, “ the journalists, as soon as they
arrive, are immediately surrounded by propa-
ganda agents —and are loaded up with statistics,
information, interpretations, explanations, etc.”
They are offered pay for sending to their
papers articles that have been written by
propagandists. Some accept the articles and
the money. Most do not. As you can see,
to discover and print the truth is not simple
nor possible.
The point that I want to make, for the


purposes of this book, is that the so-called
“ news of the day ” is a hodge-podge of truth
and falsehood and all manner of opinions. And
it all goes towards making the hodge-podge
that we call Public Opinion.
Consequently, as a part of the work of Show-
manship is to create and shape Public Opinion,
we need to know the methods of the propa-
gandists. We cannot ignore the immense power
of the daily press. Politicians never do. Most
of them are highly skilled as propagandists. But
most business men are wholly in the dark as
regards the machinery of propaganda.
Propaganda, as you can see, is masked adver-
tising. If a fact can be told to the public in an
article, it is more effective than if it is told in
an advertisement. And it costs less. Often, it
costs nothing.
As most people know, there are scores of
press agents in London. Some are carrying
on a useful and educational propaganda on
behalf of hospitals or other institutions that
serve the public. And some are concocting
tales to make a low-grade actress famous.
The fact to remember is that propaganda is
of all sorts. It is used for the highest and the
basest purposes. It may be truth or it may be


lies. It may be an endeavour to j>ut more truth
into the news, or it may be nothing more than
a scheme of puffery or even swindling.
Many business men of high character shrink
back from using it. They regard it as vulgar
and blatant self-advertisement. They prefer
oblivion to the blaze of a light which they have
lit. They even dislike reporters. They do not
want to be mentioned in the news of the day.
They write the word “ Private ” over their
doors and they fancy that by doing this they
will escape the prying attention of the public.
Bankers are especially averse to publicity.
There is a great banker in London and another
in Berlin and a third in New York who refuse
to be interviewed. They work in a sacred
privacy, as though there were no newspapers
—as though Public Opinion were a thing too
far below them to be noticed.
In my opinion, this ignoring of Public
Opinion and propaganda and showmanship is
a mistake. No powerful creative man can mark
himself “ Private He is not private. He is
wrapped up in the same “ bundle of life ”
with millions of his fellow-citizens and it does
matter to him what people think.
The big fact is that every strong wise man


must be an educator of the public. He cannot
sit quietly in his office and allow any Tom,
Dick and Harry to concoct the news about
the affairs in which he is concerned. If he
does, sooner or later he will be sorry. He will
find his great plans thwarted and overthrown.
There has been a notable instance of this in
America in the career of John D. Rockefeller.
He is a wise, humane, competent business man.
He has never promoted any matter that was
harmful to the welfare of his nation or the
world. But he abhorred publicity.
For the first thirty years of his business life,
he refused to be interviewed. He shut himself
away from the eyes of the public. He carried
on his beneficent plans in the strictest privacy.
Temperamentally, he shrank from any form of
self-advertisement or propaganda. He became
the “ Mystery Man ” of the United States.
What was the result ? A terrific propaganda
sprang up against him and his firm —the
Standard Oil Company. A vast tissue of lies
was woven about him by irresponsible scribblers
and demagogic politicians. He became the
best-hated man in the United States.
So intense and powerful did this hatred
become, that the American Government took


action and smashed his great company into
thirty-five fragments.
Many foolish and unjust things have been
done in America, but there was never a more
destructive folly than this. It was Rockefeller’s
company that established the oil industry of
America upon a solid basis. It was his company
that led the way in foreign trade. It was his
company that set an example to all other
companies, not only in efficiency but in the
humane and kindly treatment of employees.
Yet his great firm was smashed by a stupid
law as though he were a conspirator against
the welfare of the public.
Rockefeller had nothing to hide but he
believed in the policy of hiding. He did not
realize the power and the stupidity and the
destructiveness of Public Opinion.
To-day he has changed his mind. He has
a Publicity Agent—a man of high character and
ability. He now gives news to the daily press.
He allows himself to be interviewed. He has
even written a book in which he describes the
history and methods of his company. He has
completely abandoned his antagonism to
propaganda.
The result of this change of policy has been


remarkable. The hatred of him and his com-
panies has disappeared. He is no longer vilified
and slandered. His thirty-five companies are
now vastly more prosperous than his one big
company ever was, at the height of its pros-
perity. They made net profits in 1930 to the
amount of over £57,000,000. And not even the
mouthiest political demagogue in America is
threatening to take any action against them.
Here is unanswerable proof that a policy of
secrecy is unwise. Every firm and especially
every great firm in either industry or finance,
must have a policy of propaganda. If you do
not tell the public the facts, then lies will be
invented. The public will first become sus-
picious and then hostile. And no firm is strong
enough to stand up against the ill-will of a
whole nation.
A great man should not try to be invisible.
He should be a man amongst men. He is
expected to show himself on occasions. He
is expected to talk. He is not a god on Olympus
and he should not try to act as if he were.
There can no longer be any wise opposition
to propaganda when we remember what it
accomplished in the winning of the war. It
is now generally known that the Germans were
beaten mainly because they suddenly lost the


will-to-fight. They became disheartened and
the cause of this was largely the amazing cam-
paign of propaganda that was carried on by
Lord Northcliffe. He changed the Public
Opinion in the German armies. He destroyed
the fighting spirit in the rank and file and the
Allies won. That is, at least, my opinion of
what won the war. And it is generally believed
both in Germany and Great Britain.
Now that business men are in danger in
almost every country in the world —in danger
of destructive taxation and government inter-
ference and crude schemes of public ownership,
they must enter upon a campaign of propa-
ganda. They must “educate their masters”.
They must help to shape Public Opinion, so
that our great structures of business and
finance shall not be pulled down.
There are wise, legitimate methods of
propaganda. There are methods that do not
violate any canons of good taste. There are
non-sensational newspapers that can be used.
There are dignified ways of talking even to the
masses.
The public has a right to know many things,
even about the operations of a private company.
More and more we are turning on the light and
compelling firms to make known facts that


hitherto they have regarded as secrets. There
is a demand for more and more publicity, and
it is better for a firm to talk of its own accord,
and not wait until it is clubbed into talking.
A business man, even the most reticent and
inarticulate, may have a book written for him.
He may call in a skilled writer—a master of
expression—and have the story of his firm
written, so that the truth may prevail against
the falsehoods.
In a word, propaganda is a part of Show-
manship that no large firm can safely ignore.
The people must be taught. There is no
greater power in the world than the truth
WELL TOLD.


THE reader who has persisted to the end
of this book must now have a livelier
and more vivid sense of the importance
of Showmanship. It is a larger matter than
he had thought it was, if, indeed, he had given
it a thought at all.
The scientific reason for it, the need of an
outside stimulant for dull or over-taxed brains,
cannot be denied. And the practical value of
it in attracting the favourable attention of the
public and increasing sales, cannot be ignored.
The reader may agree that this Formula of
Showmanship would have a magical effect upon
our dwindled trade. It would help us to hold
our home market against outside Showmen, and
to have better success in selling our goods
overseas.
“ But,” he says to himself, “ I was never
meant to be a Showman. I dislike the spec-
tacular in my own business. What would
people say ? I would make myself ridiculous.
lam not running a circus. I am not at all
fitted to run a circus. I am a plain business


man. I shall continue in my humdrum way.
And that’s that.”
To this I would say, as my last word, “ This
book is a warning, as well as a book of instruc-
tion. It is written to point out that Showman-
ship has already come into the business world.
You must either accept it and use it or fade
out of the business world.
“ What you say is spoken by the voice of
Inertia. You don’t want to give up the easy
routine by which a business is run stupidly.
“ You want to continue to try to sell hosiery
wrapped in grey paper parcels, and to sell
black telephones to the south Mediterranean
countries, and to have commonplace, invisible
shop-fronts and to use advertisements that are
as dull as a Blue-book.
“As one of Arnold Bennett’s characters says
in his new novel, Imperial Palace, ‘ What
England stands for is the status quo ’. Yes, it
is. That is why there is the necessity for this
final word. The most powerful thing in Eng-
land is Inertia. That is why there are only
22,000 people, in all our 45,000,000, who are
rich enough to pay Super-tax. That is why
business is bad and why we have been beaten
by so many competitors.


“ The time has come to give up our stodgy
ways —our greys and browns and blacks—our
casual salesmanship and our Civil Service-like
routine.
“ We have no Divine right to any market.
We are no longer the only people who have
well-equipped factories. The only way where-
by we can hold our trade and develop it is by
making both ourselves and our goods more
interesting.
“All our competitors agree that while we are
a slow-moving people, we can always do a thing
when we must. We stand still as long as we
can, but when the pressure becomes too great,
when it makes us uncomfortable, we move
forward.
“ We are all for comfort and if the price of
comfort is that we shall learn to walk on our
hands—why—we will learn to walk on our
hands. We have always been adaptable under
pressure.
“ In the matter of Showmanship, that pres-
sure is now being applied. All the excuses
that spring from Inertia cannot make you deny
this fact.
“ There are certain other excuses which have


more weight. They spring from modesty and
a genuine dislike of the methods of the Show-
man. You do not want to be a boaster. You
shrink from seeing your name on a flaming
poster.
“The answer to these excuses is that Show-
manship has now been developed. It does not
need to be boastful and blatant. There can be
Showmanship that is all in good taste. Every
nation is developing its own type. You need
not be vulgar in order to be effective.
“ If you have goods or services to sell, you
must do something unusual to attract the
favourable attention of the public. No matter
what your temperament is, no matter what you
think nor how you feel, you must now proceed
to learn and use this new art of Showmanship.”
THE END.


THE CASSON BUSINESS BOOKS
A COMPLETE LIST
Ads. and Sales .. .. s/~
Am I ? 45 Amusing
Mental Tests
By J. G. Frederick .. 5/-
Axioms of Business .. 5/-
Better Advertising.. .. 5/-
Better Business Letters .. 5/-
Better Buying .. .. 5/-
Better Salesmanship .. 5/-
Brain Workers’
Handbook, The 5/-
Climbing Up .. .. 5/-
Complete Advertising
Course 7/6
Complete Public Speaking
Course 5/-
Creative Thinkers . .. 5/-
Debts! How to Collect Them 5/-
Fifty-two Ways to be Rich 5/-
Getting over Difficulties .. 5/-
Greatest Company in the
World, The 5/-
Handbook for Foremen .. 5/-
How to make £5O an Acre
By W. P. Seabrook .. 5/-
How to Write Well .. 5/-
How to make a Small Shop
Pay 1/-
100 Per Cent. Office, The 5/-
Human Nature .. .. 5/-
Kelvin .. .. .. 7/6
Looking on the Bright Side 3/6
Management .. .. 5/-
Mail Order Made Easy
By Max Rittenberg .. 5/-
Meaning of Life, The .. 5/-
Men at the Top, The .. 5/-
More Net Profit .. .. 5/-
New Art of Customer
Finding, The 5/-
Printed Salesmanship .. 5/-
Quality of Our Goods, The 5/-
Shaping Your Career
By W. J. Caton Norris 3/6
Specialty Salesman, The . 5/-
Story of Artificial Silk, The 5/-
Success and Happiness .. 5/-
Thirteen Tips on Luck .. 5/-
Thirty Great Lives .. 5/-
Twelve Tips on Finance .. 5/-
Twelve Tips on Window
Display 5/-
Twelve Tips to Travelling
Salesmen 5/-
Twelve Worst Mistakes in
Business 5/-
Up-to-date Manufacturing 5/-
Up-to-date Salesmanship . 5/-
What is Wrong with
Britain—and Why
By S. Turner 1/-
Your Memory .. • • s/-
These Books Interest, Inspire and Instruct
Sold by all Booksellers or post free from Publishers
The Efficiency Magazine
KENT HOUSE, 87, REGENT STREET, LONDON, W. 1


THE
EFFICIENCY MAGAZINE
The Leading Business Magazine
in the British Empire.
UICUT MIT (All
Latest
Business
News
and '
Ideas
iency
:a7 ur r J
MM
IMA
This Unique Magazine has more than
120,000 readers a month. It is a
Business Tonic.
Sold by all Newsdealers or by
Subscription : 6/- a year.
Send 6 d. in stamps for Sample Copy.
KENT HOUSE
87, Regent Street, London, W.l


“ Up-to-Date Bulletins for Business Men ”
A Series of Practical and Stimulating Booklets
No. 1 Right Costs. A Way to Increase Net Profits.
By James F. Whiteford, M.I.M.E.
By an eminent Efficiency Expert. Shows the importance of
a Right Method of Costing.
No. 2 How to Make a Small Shop Pay.
By Herbert N. Casson.
It gives twenty points How to Improve a Small Shop.
No. 3 What is Wrong with Britain —and Why.
By Samuel Turner.
Giving a real cause of Business Depression.
No. 4 How to Keep Customers.
By Herbert N. Casson.
After you have got customers, you must keep them —this
Booklet Shows How.
No. 5 The Science of Money Making.
By Herbert N. Casson.
It tells what Methods to adopt to Make Money.
No. 6 Using Photographs to Increase Sales.
By Herbert N. Casson.
Shows how Photographs can be used to Increase Sales.
No. 7 How to Keep Well and Live Longer.
By Herbert N. Casson.
All about Keeping Well.
The Bulletins are well produced and printed
Only 1/- each
From Booksellers or Publisher
THE EFFICIENCY MAGAZINE
KENT HOUSE,
87, Regent Street, London, W.l


. BOOKS ON .
SALESMANSHIP
THAT SHOW YOU HOW
TO SELL EFFICIENTLY
By
HERBERT N. CASSON
For the Retailer.
UP-TO-DATE SALESMANSHIP
This Book gives the R.I.D.S.A.C. Formula for
efficient Selling.
This formula will enable any shopkeeper to increase
his sales, please his customers, and raise the reputa-
tion of his Business. It is also an Ideal Book for
Staff Training. 57-
BETTER SALESMANSHIP
Here is a book for the Shopkeeper and Manager
only.
It deals with:—
The making of Sales
Plans.
Keeping Customers.
Getting new Customers,
Maintaining Prices.
Selling Technique.'
Service.
Turnover.
Training Shop
Assistants.
Successful Shopkeepers.
25 Practical Suggestions.
5/-


For the Traveller.
TWELVE TIPS TO TRAVELLING
SALESMEN
This is the first practical book for commercial
travellers.
It will show any travelling salesman how to increase
his sales.
The Spectator says:—“ An eminently sensible
book.”
On the Road says :—“ Well worth reading. ’
5/-
THE SPECIALTY SALESMAN
It gives a practical, definite method of selling for
Specialty Salesmen, showing how he can sell more,
more easily. 5/-
For the Director and Sales Manager.
PRACTICAL SALES MANAGEMENT
By Frank Dunn, m.s.m.a.
There is nothing theoretical nor foreign in this
book. It shows any manufacturer or wholesaler
how to manage his travellers, and increase sales.
Order from Booksellers, or
THE EFFICIENCY MAGAZINE
KENT HOUSE, 87 REGENTSTREET, LONDON, W.l


LEARN
TO SPEAK WELL
The one most condensed and practical
hook of instruction on the art of Public
Speaking is-
A COMPLETE PUBLIC
SPEAKING COURSE
By HERBERT N. CASSON
This Book was formerly sold in 12
Text-Books for £5 ss. It has now
been brought within the reach of
everyone by being published in a
single volume for 5/- post free.
It gives 25 exercises and 101 Points
on Public Speaking.
Sold by all booksellers, or post free from —
THE EFFICIENCY MAGAZINE
Publishers ;
Kent House, 87, Regent Street,
London, w.i.


DOES YOUR BUSINESS RUN SMOOTHLY?
MANAGEMENT
THE SECRET OF INCREASED NET PROFITS
By HERBERT N. CASSON
We have had a number of American books on
MANAGEMENT but here is the first one that gives
the BRITISH point of view.
It points out that there are three WRONG sys-
tems of Management.
It deals with the making of NET PROFITS,
the building of an efficient ORGANIZATION
and the handling of EMPLOYEES
It is the first book on MANAGEMENT that
points out how to develop the SPIRIT OF SPORT
in a business.
The final chapter on “ THE HUMAN TOUCH ”
is well worth the price of the book to any Managing
Director, Merchant, Shopkeeper, and all Employers.
Here are the CHAPTER HEADINGS :
1. Wrong Systems of Management.
2. Labour, Capital and Management.
3. Net Profits depend on Good Management.
4. How to Build an Efficient Organization.
5. Good Management requires Knowledge and
Control.
6. Good Management means Business Building.
7. Making the most of Employees.
8. The Spirit of Sport as an essential of Good
Management.
9. The Human Touch.
5/-
Sold by all Booksellers or post free from Publisher
The Efficiency Magazine
KENT HOUSE, 87 REGENT STREET, LONDON,W.I




