

Sense
About
Sex
A
Woman
Doctor




Scnse About Sex
By A WOMAN DOCTOR.
“ Thou art one with the rest. I must love thee in them.
Thou wilt sin with the rest—and thy mother must stem
The world’s sin. Thou wilt weep—and thy mother must dry
The tears of the world lest her darling should cry !
I will do it—God helping !
“ And I stand not alone. I will gather a band
Of all loving mothers from land unto land.
Our children are part of the world ! do ye hear?
They are one with the world—we must hold them all dear !
Love all for the child’s sake ! ”
CHARLOTTE PERKINS STETSON.
ALL BIGHTS RESERVED.
ADELAIDE I
Printed and Published at the Office of “ ThS CeNTURy, ”
Hindmarsh Square.
1905.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Part I. —Shame 1
„ ll.— Parenthood ... 11
„ lll.—Pre-natal Influence 23
„ IY.—Mistakes in Marriage 31
„ V.—Sex Physiology 39
„ Vl.—Practicable Continence (Supplement).


PREFACE.
By the Author of “PERFECT HUMANHOOD.”
“ It is said by farmers that a good pear or apple costs
no more time or pains to rear, than a poor one; so I would
have no work of art, no speech or action, or thought, [or
child], or friend, but the best.”
-EmersEmerson’s Essay,
“ Nominalist and Realist.”
THE writer of this book, herself a medical
woman, could have chosen no greater field
of effort, nor one likely to yield richer results,
than that shown in the following pages, where
she endeavours to instruct the reader in the most
essential, yet, alas, the most neglected, as a rule,
of all sciences, the knowledge of the laws of right
generation.
Yet every other subject pales into insignifi-
cance before this supreme question, How to have
the best possible children born ? Not only that,
but, How to so control and direct the procreative
energy that, when not needed or desired in one
particular direction, the vivifying force may still
inspire the life, burning upward and outward
with a “ smokeless ” flame.
No one can read these pages and not feel the
single-minded wish of the writer that men and


women should learn to honour themselves, and
in doing so honour the Creator whose handiwork
they are.
This little book is not only a brief for the ba-
bies (it is that most certainly, for, as the author
says, “ I must revert to the child, it is involved
in every thought, affected by every aspect of
sexual activity”), but it is a powerful eye-opener
for adults as regards the conditions necessary for
married happiness, and explains the reason why
there is sometimes so much disappointment and
disillusionment in the first year of married life.
It is impossible to over-estimate the import-
ance of wide dissemination of sexual science
truths. This is emphatically knowledge that the
mass of the people should possess, whatever else
is withheld from them, for most young men and
women are likely to become, at some time or
other, lovers and parents, and should therefore
be trained to understand both their powers and
their responsibilities.
No better primer than this little book could,
I think, be written for them, and I trust that the
author will follow it up by a suitable work for
the opening mind of little ones, as well as by a
larger work some time on this same subject for
adults, for the world is now calling for fearless
and honest expression from every earnest thinker
on these vital topics.
AGNES NESBIT BENHAM.
PBEFACE.


PART I.—SHAME.
“Without shame the man I like knows and avows
the deliciousness of his sex,
Without shame the woman I like knows and
avows hers.”
WHITMAN.
THE idea of the inherent and inseparable in-
decency of Sex is responsible for much, if
not all, of its abuses and wrongs. This idea, one
may say, is practically universal.
It is firmly held by adults, who lose no oppor-
tunity of passing it on and impressing it on their
juniors, on all convenient occasions.
It is taught even to the tiny infant, as soon as
its mind can be reached by instruction of any
kind. •
Many children thus acquire the belief that not
only the acknowledgment, but even the posses-
sion of sexual apparatus and powers is a dis-
graceful and degrading thing. Many persons
cling to this belief in later life. Not only con-
cealment from others is taught, but many chil-
dren are taught a method of dressing so that
their nakedness is largely concealed even from
themselves in solitude.


A neglect of the body thus scorned inevitably
results ; and, sad to say, persons thus imbued
with false modesty, filled with a deeply rooted
belief in the indecency of sex and of nakedness,
are as a direct result rarely cleanly in their ha-
bits. The body so regarded with contempt is ill-
treated, and the parts most needing thorough
cleanliness for the maintenance of health, most
liable to become offensive to sense as well as de-
fective in function by constant acquaintance with
dirt, are those ignored in the scanty ablutions of
their unworthy owners —by some persons never
being washed at all from one year’s beginning
to its end.
Now we must clearly recognise the difference
between modesty and what is really immodesty,
between that respect for the highest function of
mankind which leads to reverential treatment of
the organs concerned in its exercise—a respect
which forbids discussion or exhibition in any
careless or flippant manner, or to any save inti-
mates who can realize the sacred privilege they
enjoy—between this respect, and that widely dif-
ferent impulse to concealment called shame—in
itself a shameful thing !
These divergent and incompatible feelings are
yet on the surface, curiously enough, often so
similar in manifestation as to be commonly con-
fused with one another.
Of course the indecent point of view, even as


the reverential, has its origin in the human mind—
that complexity, that wonderful crucible, wherein
incompatibles are fondly believed to become com-
patible, good things to be made evil, and evil
good —but in what mind, far back in the world’s
history, did it first take root ? A root destined
to bring forth such hideous flower of hate and
distortion, such poisonous fruit of corruption and
ruin, that had that parent mind but had a pro-
phetic glimpse for one instant of a millionth part
of the terrible harm to follow the inrooting, it
must have withered with the horror of the vision.
Then would the world have been saved incalcu-
lable injury, disease and anguish, such as not
this writer, nor likely enough ever another, can
hope to picture for the turning aside of human-
ity’s course from the paths of endless sorrow, and
its creating God’s boundless humiliation.
For we shame and insult God in the exact mea-
sure that we shame and insult his handiwork.
We illogically and blindly deny the purity and
beauty of one set of organs and functions, while
we glorify another, no less and no more deve-
loped within us by the Creator acting through
Nature’s evolutional laws—-no less and no more
reflecting in our own persons that God-form,
those God-functions which, we are told in one of
our oldest records, Were given us when “ God
made man in his own image.” Who ever thinks
of God as having the noble, splendid power of


sex P Why, the very suggestion is likely to
bring an accusation of blasphemy from the in-
consistent pretender to greater reverence than
we ourselves possess.
let, as the Creator of two-sexed mankind,*
the reflex of himself, God must possess both won-
derful powers —to quote Edwin Arnold : “ The
mystery of maternity and majesty of paternity.'’
What a mystery, what a majesty ! And if only
mankind could retrace its strayed steps, could
come to realize how far and how crookedly
it has wandered from a true idea of God, and so
of itself (for the higher and nobler its thought of
God, the higher and nobler its thought and its
treatment of itself must inevitably become), the
world would see, side by side with the new and
healthy ideal, a fresh inflow of vigorous, healthy,
sane humanity, with a respect and care for all
its functions equally, which would lead to the
establishment of complete health and happiness
for every living man and woman.
I have already referred to the teaching of chil-
dren to regard their sexual organs as indecent.
Tins is not only unnatural and false, but cruel as
well, since it leads to much unnecessary shame
and mental suffering for the unhappy young
people so instructed.
Man}- boys and most girls experience a most
* “So God created man in his own image, in the image of God cre-
ated tie hun, male and female created he them.”—Gen. i. 27.


painful shock when they discover that their pa-
rents have indulged in what the)' themselves have
inferential!)' taught their children are disgusting
and indecent actions, in order to bring these
same children into the world. The loss of re-
spect for their parents which must follow such
a discovery is often never made up for again, and
the lowered regard is very apt to enter into all
other aspects of life—for the children reason, “ If
our parents have either lied all their lives to us
about these things, or else are innately degraded
in mind and body, according to their own show-
ing, how are we to take their word about any-
thing else, how are we to trust their teaching in
other directions ? ”
It is a terrible position for a parent to deliber-
ately put himself in ; 'but in any case the major
part of the resultant suffering is the child’s.
This sort of bringing up is responsible for not
only physical suffering to growing lads and girls
at puberty, through neglect of what they are
told are their shameful bodies, and through con-
sequent ignorance of their duty to treat those
same unfortunate bodies with the care and safe-
guarding especially required at that period. It
is responsible for great agony of mind and a feel-
ing of mental and moral degradation in these
young people at the awakening of passion for
the other sex, and the really natural and harm-
less interest in their own and the other sex’s phy


sical formation and functions. They think it is
wrong of them to cherish this interest and to feel
sexual attraction, yet are unable to quench or
resist their instincts —by Nature implanted, we
must remember, and stronger than shame or the
most firmly rooted artificial convictions—and so
are led to seek information, and later on sexual
gratification, from the most unworthy and dam-
aging sources. Many young men, and women
too, thus travel the ruinous road of degradation,
first of mind, and then of body.
Those who do not seek sexual information and
gratification from 'without, often contract the in-
finitely injurious habit of self-excitement or self-
abuse, their curiosity and awaking sexual feel-
ing demanding some outlet, and finding vent,
alas, in this most destructive solitary vice. Now
these terrible results wo aid not follow the devel-
opment of sexual power in young people taught
all their lives to respect and reverence their bo-
dies and their every function as equally natural,
beautiful and God-given.
It should be plain to any reasoning being that
we cannot teach the indecent and degraded point
of view to a child up to a certain age, and then
reverse the instruction and endeavor to inculcate
the reverential and sane idea.
We must begin at the beginning, or we shall
miserably fail in attempts to remove early w T rong
impressions. During the first few years of life a


child learns what he never forgets, and what will
always enter into his thoughts and reasonings du-
ring his whole later life, whatever and however
opposed his later instruction may be.
Therefore we must begin at the beginning.
We must teach the infant, the child, the youth,
cleanliness of mind and body, healthful and
truthful ideals in all directions, if we are to have
a clean-minded, clean-bodied, healthy and true
man or woman as a result. And the cleaner our
own minds are —the better instructed and more
firmly convinced of the righteousness and sanity
of God’s work we ourselves are—the better
teachers, the safer guardians of our children we
shall prove. Therefore it is our duty as parents
and teachers (and what man or woman is not
liable to become, to some degree at least, a
teacher of the young?) to qualify ourselves by
intelligent enquiry and wide reading for the
truthfullest and most honest instruction of the
children who come within our sphere.
We must not leave the children’s instruction
wholly to school teachers, however efficient these
may be, for a child must learn much that is es-
sential before he arrives at school age, especially
with regard to sex. Sex is brought before his no-
tice in a thousand ways, through the actions of an-
imals, through human relationships, and through
the growth of plants—though he but dimly per-
ceives the workings of sex in this last. Yet it is


through botany that one of the best beginnings
of sex study and comprehension can be obtained.
In the holy and beautiful loves of the flowers can
a child be shown a delicate parallel to the equally
natural and pure intercourse of animals, and so be
led to the knowledge of sex power and propaga-
tion in the human race, learning throughout an
increasing reverence for the marvellous com-
plexity and subtlety of the working of the
strongest force in nature.
How could a child learn a more beautiful and
tender thing—a thing to make it love and rever-
ence as it never knew how before —than that its
mother carried it about, loving it, planning for it,
building it, in a wonderful place all its own in
her body for months before any one ever saw it?
It should hear the wonderful story of its growth
from two tiny cells, one hers and one given by
its father, up and up through many stages to be-
ing a real live baby, that could breathe all by it-
self now, and drink milk which its dear mother
gave it, instead of sleeping comfortably and warm
in the safe nest she held it in so long.
Isn’t that a better thing, isn’t that a truer story
for a child to hear than the cabbage theory, or
the doctor’s bag hypothesis ?
And if it be said that it is a difficult and deli-
cate task and one a woman may well falter at,
knowing her own imperfections and believing at
heart perhaps still in the impurity of sex, I say


in reply that the woman with true self-respect
and the right sort of modesty and the clean sort
of mind will he able to speak to her own child
better than anyone else could. She will not be
the woman to leave such knowledge to be im-
parted by coarse, imperfectly educated acquain-
tances ; and a truly loving mother who wishes
the best for her child will see and face her duty
and accomplish it with delicacy, tact and rare
success.
As for the mother who says, “ Oh, I cannot
speak of such things, I should feel so awkward,”
or some such excuse, I am sorry that any mother
exists to-day selfish enough to put her false mo-
desty before the wellbeing of her child, ignorant
enough to think instruction unnecessary, heart-
less enough to consider any corrupt and vile
source good enough for her child to hear such
C O
things through —-and can only hope a healthier
public and private opinion will soon grow past
her, and her type be speedily lost sight of.


REINFORCEMENTS.
“ Hold, ye faint-hearted ! Ye are not alone !
Into your worn-out ranks of weary men
Come mighty reinforcements, even now !
Look where the dawn is kindling in the east,
Lit with the glory of the better day —
A countless host, an endless host, all fresh,
With unstained banners and unsullied shields,
With shining swords that point to victory,
And great, young hearts that know not how to fear—
The Children come to save the weary world! ”
CHARLOTTE PERKINS STETSON.


PART IT.—PARENTHOOD.
“ This is not only one man—this is the father of those
who shall be fathers in their turns,
In him the start of populous states and rich republics,
Of him countless immortal lives, with countless em-
bodiments and enjoyments.”
WHITMAN.
IF we look with clear eves we cannot fail to be
struck with the evident object of the beauty
of the human form, winch is naturally to us the
most beautiful thing in the world.
JSTow, it is beautiful to us really because of the
power of building up other human beings. I
mean, nature takes care that we find it beautiful
so that we shall be attracted to mate with one
another.
The recognition of this fact concerns us, per-
haps only some of us, as artists and scientists, but
the existence of this fact concerns all of us as
human beings.
We are not healthy, natural men and women
if we do not feel this powerful call of attraction
to the wonderful human form, and to that of the
other sex in particular.
Whitman says : “A summit and flower of evo-
lution is the feeling a man and a woman have for


eacli other, and we are to branch boundlessly
out of this lesson until it becomes omnific, and
till one and all delight us and we them.” *
We attain the power of creating new lives only
when we have reached the flower of our brief ex-
istence, and with the power of building up other
entities many of us lose also our strength, our
activity, beauty of form and the best of onr po-
wers, and then begin to decay and gradually
fade away towards death, as far as Nature is
concerned being done with.
[Yet there are others of us who discover great
power in authorship, in statesmancraft, in sci-
ence, during the later years of life when the pe-
riod of physical reproductivity is over, and in
these we have evidence of what we may call the
evolution of Nature’s point of view ; for in the
lower animals, who live but darkly on the intel-
lectual plane, we often see death follow repro-
duction.]
Now, seeing that Nature lays such stress on
this great function of ours, ought we not to assist
her, or at least to give her every opportunity of
assisting- herself?
o
To do this, to make ourselves the best possible
parents, we should use every endeavor to build
* It will surely be plain even to those who have not elsewhere made
the acquaintance of the poet Whitman, that he here refers to the evolu-
tion of monogamio love into that great humanitarian feeling called al-
truism.


ourselves up toward perfect liealth. And perfect
health is not physical or mental alone, it must he
both, physical and mental health being inter-
dependent ; moral health, again, is absolutely de-
pendent on both of these.
A thoroughly healthy man or woman cannot
.help being happy and living in accord with the
dictates of nature; and that is being truly
moral.
How criminally neglectful of our duties to our
children the majority of us are, is only too ob-
vious on the slightest observation and reflection.
We see many who have absolutely no right to
become parents at all marrying and producing
children without the least heed of their true na-
tural duty of health and sanity.
They seem to think that obeying the artificial
law of obtaining a licence to associate and share
their interests is enough, and ignore the necessity
of obtaining Nature's licence.
Sometimes they themselves suffer. Consump-
tive women have their death hastened by child-
bearing—a fact contrary to popular belief —but
the great burden of the punishment falls on the
children.
Even the untrained eye can note hundreds of
poor pitiful babies who should never have been
born at all, and other hundreds who should not
have been born when and as they were.
Thought and preparation on the part of their


progenitors would have made them able to grow
to healthy, happy men and women. Xegiect and
thoughtlessness are responsible for their mental
or physical unfitness to do their full life’s work,
their duties as parents in their turn and as citi-
zens of the world.
“ And what is this brought as atonement for these?
For our blind misdirection, our death and disease ;
For the grief of our childhood, the loss and the wrong ;
For the shame and the sin and the sorrow thereof—
Dare you say it is love ?
“ Love ? First give Freedom—the right of the brute !
The air with its sunshine, the earth with its fruit.
Love? First give Wisdom —intelligent care,
That shall help to bring out all the good that is there.
Love ? First give Justice ! There’s nothing above !
And then you may love ! ”
Everything depends on our being born well.
Our success in any direction is great and com-
plete in proportion as we are well-born, as our pa-
rents have taken thought for us and done their
best towards giving us a right start in life.
We should make it our aim to be the best pos-
sible parents ; right from birth that should be the
object of all training, all culture. • Ourselves will
benefit all the more ; we cannot lose by such
care. It would be best for the ideal to be con-
sciously striven for, to be earnestly and thought-
fully sought after, and a great public feeling
should be aroused and maintained as to the duty


of health—every sort of health and as much as
we can get.
In the Virgin Mary motherhood has been shown
forth as a worshipful thing. She is known and
noted for her motherhood above all. Selected,
we are told, by God for the great task of produc-
ing the body of Christ, rejoicing greatly at this
elevation, caring for his childhood, helping his
manhood, mourning his death, we see her the
loving mother all the time.
All religions have a goddess parallel with
Mary, in all the allegories her counterpart may
be found. The worship of Motherhood is a uni-
versal idea.
Now, can any woman conceive a higher hope,
a more glorious purpose, than to bring forth a
perfectly formed, noble natured child, who will
do his best for the world and his kind, who will
help the race forward with his counsel and ex-
ample P
Can any man find a greater, a prouder thing
than this to do—to lend his strength, his fore-
sight, the best that is in him, to help a woman in
her work ; not only to make it possible, but to
smooth her way to happy motherhood, by all
the care, all the love, all the health he is capable
of?
"Every Woman should be a happy mother-—she
cannot be a good mother otherwise ; and how
can she help being happy when she is well fitted


for her high task, well endowed with natural
gifts of bod} T and mind, and well mated with one
whose delight it is to assist her with all his best
thought and action ?
This is the picture of the possible, this is the
ideal.
Has not each one of us a right to the best ?
Has not each woman a ciaim to happy mother-
hood, each man a claim to happy fatherhood ?
And there is more in fatherhood than we are
in the habit of recognising or admitting. There
is more duty and more joy, more to work for and
to live for. It is not the mother alone who
should build, who should cherish and train and
watch over her child. It is not alone to assist
her that each man should perfect himself; his
own indispensable duty, his indisputable right in
building and training his offspring is greater than
he often dreams.
And since it is quality we must strive for, and
quality which will do the world’s work, we do
not need to distress ourselves about doctrines of
over-population and need for limitation of fami-
lies, since if the right care and time be expended
on each child there will be no danger of too great
a number being produced, and each child born
will be welcome to the world, will have his place
as well as his right here
Here in Australia we hear, it is true, more of
under- than of over-population, and recently


much attention has been directed to the declining
birth-rate.
It does not seem to occur to the many who
rush to print to proclaim the Australian woman’s
duty to produce in more prolific fashion, that
their energies would more logically be applied if
they worked and agitated for the saving of the
lives of those born already.
Half the children born die before the age of
five years ! Most, and who knows if not all,
these premature deaths are preventible.
Whether born of married or single parents, a
child is a prospective citizen whose future life
and works may be of immense benefit to his
country. 1
Let society frown on and legislate against un-
wed and otherwise unprepared motherhood as
much as it will; when once that motherhood is
a fact, it is our duty to make the best of the fact
and of the child.
I think many persons who speak of a child
who has no place think of the so-called illegiti-
mate —the child whose parents are not legally
married.
Now, the only real illegitimate is Nature’s ille-
gitimate, the unfortunate child whose parents
have been cruel, wicked enough to bring it forth
with an unhealthy body, an unsound mind.
Such a child ought never to have been born,
and some people advocate the painless putting to


death of all who are born crippled, diseased or
idiotic.
This is about as reasonable and logical a pro-
ceeding as allowing a pure stream to be the re-
ceptacle of sewage, and then going to expense
and trouble in filtering and purifying the water.
We must keep the stream of life clean and. pure,
we must avoid the bad conditions that lead to
the contamination of humanity’s river by the
birth of the unfit.
Of course, this need for good conditions of life
is just what all scientific reformers concern them-
selves with, and it seems hardly necessary to
point out how dependent on good social condi-
tions, sane laws and healthy public opinion is
parenthood in its best and highest sense.
We must have a state of living and working
which permits of our giving time and effort to-
wards the attainment of our ideals.
Women will not be able to become truly good
and happy mothers or men tender and helpful
fathers, while they strive and exist in a life which
is all strife and only existence.
It is the duty of all who recognise that many
do go through life without sufficient opportunity
for growth, without sufficient rest, without suffi-
cient joy, to help to reform, to remodel the pre-
sent plan of civilization. And who can help re-
cognising that much is pitifully, terribly wrong in
the apportioning of opportunity, rest and pleasure P


There are some who rest all the time—“loaf”
we may call it. They do no work, no real work,
all their lives, and so lose the joy that is in true
useful work audits alternation with repose; a
deep gulf lies between these individuals and those
who work so hard and so long that they lose joy
in their work for want of contrast.
There are limited classes who have really all
the opportunity—it is no proof of equal oppor-
tunity that occasionally some one comes up from
the depths “ far down, unknown, ” and makes
his presence felt and his name to be on all
tongues.
And pleasure. We know there are many who
spend all their time in the pursuit of it, and by
that very reason can never completely enjoy
what they hold; lack of contrast again !
There are others, a still greater number, who
have no pleasure, no joy in life, for the reason
that they have no true rest; they have no time,
no room for it. Neither art nor nature has a
chance to brighten their lives, to shed beauty on
their eyes, music in their ears. Those eyes have
been too long strained at their toil, those ears
are deafened by the noise of machinery, the clamor
of commerce.
The hope, the great saving hope for these
starved souls is in the mothers.
The longings, the strivings for the true and
beautiful, all unattained by a mother, fill her


child with possibilities beyond her fairest dreams.
Parents hand on far more than their own powers
(unless we admit what is true in a sense, that
the highest that man can know lies latent in
the humblest, the most undeveloped individual).
Their continued aspirations, their hopes for
their children, bear fruit in a marvellous manner
(not yet realized by the general run of mankind,
or we should progress more rapidly) in brain
power, in physical strength and beauty, in any
direction, in fact, in which the thoughts of
the mother especially have steadily and earnestly
turned.
The thoughts , you see, become in the child
developed actualities.
A mother can endow her child with the tem-
perament and faculties of an artist or architect,
a musician, a singer, an engineer— anything, if
she will resolutely turn her constant hopes and
determined will towards such an end.
The Greeks knew this well.
They used to surround those who were to be
mothers with beautiful pictures and statues, to
fill their minds with impressions of physical beau-
ty, and they protected them from painful and
hideous sights and from all that was untoward
or distressing,
The Spartans were very insistent on physical
culture. Their youths and maidens were en-
couraged to excel in running and other games,


and to take pride in gaining the best development
possible.
They found the human form the most beauti-
ful thing they knew, and instead of feeling shame
for it, they delighted in public trials of strength
and skill, in which the competitors appeared in
Nature’s garb alone.
And it is interesting to note that, perhaps be-
cause of their healthy and natural public senti-
ment, they were a very moral community,. and
unfaithfulness in marriage was unknown.
Why should we not care for beauty and health
as much as these ancients at least ? We need
not imitate all their customs and manners in or-
der to obtain the same advantages, but we can
cultivate a general ideal of health and sanity, and
make that our first object.
It would be a good thing for Australia if instead
of going in crowds to see horseraces and football
matches, the people generally took delight in
themselves participating in exercise and healthy
contests in the open air.
I cannot now deal fully with the question of a
deliberate intelligent choice in marriage, with the
object of giving the best possible conditions for
the children.
I believe that in an absolutely sane and na-
tural state we could trust that impulse of attrac-
tion Which we call love ; only nowadays we are
so hedged round with artificiality that it cannot


be easj r for everyone to distinguish all the vary-
ing attractions and minor loves and friendships
from that greatest and strongest love which na-
turally calls together man and wife.
It is easy enough to tell when it once does
come, though, and if this natural attraction, so
strong, so subtle and so binding, were made the
only reason for marriage and the bringing forth
of children, mankind would not stay long on the
plains of mediocrity—we should climb to the
mountain tops of development and achievement.
It is through yielding to the guidance of
healthy natural feeling like this and by the de-
velopment of a deep sense of responsibility in
the mothers and fathers of the race, with the
wide spread of public opinion making health a
virtue and disease a crime, that we can hope to
attain perfection-—some day !


PART III.—PRE-NATAL INFLUENCE.
“ When a man is born, the gate of gifts closes behind him.”
EMERSON.
I HAYE a Iready referred to the scientific fact
that a child is very deeply affected by its
mother’s thought during the period before it is
born.
Many people only remember this fact in its
power of being associated with evil; that is, they
believe firmly that if a woman is frightened by
an ugly sight the child is liable to be marked
correspondingly.
This may sometimes occur, but the more im-
portant side of the fact is that the child’s dispo-
sition, temper and mental power can be astonish-
ingly acted on and modified by the mother’s own
temper, mental attitude and efforts.
Very much of this is effected unconsciously,
but very much more may be done deliberately
and with intelligent direction.
See what a power is thus placed in an expec-
tant mother's hands I


What a force to work good or harm for her
child, so dependent on her for every impression
it receives.
Why, even its impressions of its father must
come through her ; after his tiny potent cell has
once united with, hers that they may join to form
the nucleus of the child, he can do nothing fur-
ther directly to add his influence in the building
of their child.
True, he can do very much by his treatment
of the mother.
He can work to make her life comfortable,
surround her with beautiful things, watch her
health, ease her mind of worry, love and cherish
her, and through her his child.
He will be well repaid in the child, be sure of
that.
If his wife's mind is filled with loving, grateful
thoughts, the child will love him. If she can
regard him with respect and admiration, reve-
rence his noble qualities of character and dispo-
sition, and see beauty in his face and form, the
child will not only love him, but tend to resem-
ble him in appearance and disposition.
And in the other direction, conscious or un-
conscious aversion will tend to build up a want
of sympathy, an inharmonious relationship be-
tween himself and the child, and he will be bit-
terly repaid for unkindness and selfishness.
Then again, a mother can deliberately use her


mind-power to overcome any of the weaker, less
admirable qualities in herself and her partner.
By definite, continued effort she can interpose
her will to soften a harsh temper, straighten a
dishonest tendency and make for beauty rather
than for the reverse in form of mind and body.
Very much, too, may be done to make the
coming child industrious, intelligent or specially
talented in any direction, by its mother’s bend-
ing her own attention to any subject in which
she wishes her child to shine.
Even if she is not clever herself, her interest
and effort in any direction will give her child a
strong lift mentally.
If she studies to the best of her ability mathe-
matics, languages, art, music, and faithfully en-
deavours to improve herself in these or any di-
rections, the mental impression will be manyfold
greater on the child’s plastic and unconscious
brain, and it will probably be clever even to bril-
liancy as a mathematician, linguist, artist or mu-
sician accordingly.
There are obtainable authenticated and de-
tailed accounts of the formation of the child’s
faculties beforehand in this manner, some of the
cases being due to the mother’s attempts at self-
education merely, some to deliberate influencing
of the child, its mother understanding the prin-
ciple on which she was working.
Personal beauty itself is worth a mother’s at


tendon, especially if slie concentrates her wish
on form as well as face. The beauty of many of
the poor in Italy is attributed to the number of
pictures by great artists of the Madonna with
the infant Jesus, which are to be seen in churches
especially, and on which the loving adoration of
the poor mothers is turned.
Now, would not many a mother restrain her
ill-temper, her selfishness, or any evil traits in
her mind, if she could learn to realise the im-
mense power she had over the child ?
Even for her own sake it would pay to prac-
tise self-control prominently among the virtues.
What a blessing an even tempered, sunny natured
child is in a house ! It is a little unconscious re-
former, and other members of the family are ab-
solutely ashamed to exhibit bad feeling in its
presence, to show weakness which even the baby
does not suffer from.
It may be noticed that in many families the
first child born is not of so sunny a disposition,
so pleasant a temper, so brilliant a mind, as it
might naturally be expected to be.
It certainly should be particularly well en-
dowed, for its parents’ love should be fresh and
ardent, and their health unimpaired by what un-
fortunately does often detract from it later on—
over-indulgence in physical delights on the part
of the husband, with resulting coarseness of
mind and body, and satiety and weakness of the


wife’s body and passional responsiveness, through
a corresponding overtaxing of her more delicate
mechanism.
Yet, as I say, this first born is often seen to
be morose, unresponsive and unloving, or irrita-
ble and difficult to live with in later years.
And I think the cause is to be found in disap-
pointment and resentment finding a place in its
mother’s mind during its pre-natal period.
She has found that her marriage implies far
more self-surrender, more quenching of her own
individuality, less of companionship and much
more of passional demand from her husband than
she had any idea of before taking her vows.
And while she does not see how to alter her
partner’s attitude, or how to escape from the
sense of degradation which the idea of being
merely or largely a convenient accessory to his
comfort brings, she dwells in the solitude of her
own mind on her disappointment and her bitter
awakening.
And what a solitude it is !
She cannot find voice to plead with her hus-
band, so near her and yet so different from her
girlish idea of him, and she shrinks from reveal-
ing even to her dearest and most intimate friend
the disillusionment that has overtaken her.
Gan we wonder that her bitterness of mind,
her lonely brooding, her resentment, find expres-
sion in her unfortunate child’s nature ?


Later ou, she becomes perhaps reconciled to
some degree, finds solace in domestic interests,
friends and children, and gets used to the more
superficial relationship with her husband, which
replaces the fond dream of deep sympathy, ten-
der consideration and lofty companionship.
Thus her calmed mind is able to hand on at
least a more placid disposition to later children,
and a more friendly attitude towards their fa-
ther.
Or perhaps the couple are fortunate enough to
grow to a better understanding and mutual con-
sideration and forbearance, with corresponding
advantage to the offspring.
Still, all these intermediate years, though bring-
ing a gradual and ultimately even a happy read-
justment of affairs, have left their mark upon the
children born during this time, in proportion to
the amount of discord prevailing during their
pre-natal periods.
And the basic, lasting wrongs to these can ne-
ver be fully redressed.
Remember this, yet remember also that pa-
rents may hope by care and a happier training
after birth somewhat to sweeten young lives em-
bittered by sad pre-natal experience.
A general recogxution of the great power over
their helpless unborn held in trust by parents,
and of the correspondingly great duty which is
theirs, is the foremost need of the present day.


Without it our progress can be but slow, even
as in the past. With it our race may advance
by leaps and bounds, and find in its grasp who
knows what huge, undreamed of potencies and
powers ?


“She gave him comprehension of the meaning of love :• a word
in many mouths, not often explained. With her, wound in his
idea of her, he perceived it to signify a new start in our exis-
tence, a finer shoot of the tree stoutly planted in good gross
earth ; the senses running their live sap, and the minds com-
panioned, and the spirits made one by the whole-natured con-
junction. In sooth, a happy prospect for the sons and daugh-
ters of Earth, divinely indicating more than happiness : the
speeding of us, compact of what we are, between the ascetic
rooks and the sensual whirlpools, to the creation of certain no-
bler races, now very dimly imagined.”
GEORGE MEREDITH'S
“Diana of the Crossways.”


PART TV.—MISTAKES IN MARRTAGE.
“ There are passages of affection in our intercourse with mor-
tal men and women such as no prophecy had taught us to ex-
pect, which transcend our earthly life and anticipate Heaven
for us.”
THOREAU.
I SAID before that men and women depend on
each other, and must study to understand
and consider each other in order to arrive at
right conclusions and to achieve good ends, and
in their sex relations especially is this true.
Now, the thing needful for a successful and
happy marriage is a good beginning.
It is a bad beginning that does the harm in
nearly every instance, for usually the wife at
least recognises that she cannot keep up without
loss of health and self-respect the licence in sex-
ual indulgence which the couple practise in the
early period of the union ; but she finds it quite
another matter to convince her husband of this,
and still more difficult to induce him to alter his
habit of frequent indulgence, once formed.
Then she must start fair, and how ?
The best hope for a woman entering the mar


ried state is herself to understand, and to begin
from the very first hour with a complete and
straightforward understanding with her husband,
that her body and soul are not handed over to
his keeping because she has signed a certificate
with him.
She must realise and make him realise that for
the healthy satisfaction of his sexual appetite her
own responsiveness is absolutely necessary, and
that to secure this he must put her feelings first
right through their life together.
Now, I don’t mean that she must put herself
first to the extent of coldness and selfishness ; if
she loves him, she will be glad to respond to his
advances while her affection is left unbruised by
brutality, unwearied by neglect and selfishness
on his part.
But he, her husband, must on all occasions
make sure not to press his advances when she
cannot respond, whether her unwillingness be
due to simple lack of passion for the time, or to
actual ill-health or weariness.
He will have unspeakably greater satisfaction
and comfort himself in this way, even though the
number of occasions on which his passion is fully
exercised be much fewer than would otherwise
be the case, and he will further ensure to himself
the lasting love and responsiveness of his wife,
instead of, as is the rule, finding that he has
worn out her capacity for passion in a year or


less, and has henceforth to be content with a
passive, though unprotesting, yielding up of a
weary satiated victim.
A man who sustains the latter and common
relationship with his wife seldom if ever feels
real satisfaction in sexual indulgence with her,
and so gets in the way of making intolerably
frequent demands on her, in the vain attempt to
satisfy his passion, which it is impossible to sa-
tisfy by any such unnatural relationship.
He cannot gain the exchange of force, of ani-
mal magnetism, which mainly is responsible for
the high pleasure naturally felt in the act of pro-
creation.
It is not the getting rid of the material a man
contributes towards a possible child, not this,
but the wonderfully intimate contact and the
special magnetism evoked by it, that gives the
highest delight.
It can be readily understood that this special
magnetic force does not result from a sexual
union in which one is, if not absolutely anta-
gonistic through horror and distaste, at least a
passive and unresponsive partner, rather than a
loving, alive, sympathetic sharer.
And why not an equal sharer ?
Why should it always be taken for granted
that a woman is devoid or almost devoid of pas-
sion P
It is not natural. We do not see any such ab


sence of feeling in the females of other animals,
which indeed show plenty of vigour and force
in their sexual affairs, and are never made to un-
dergo a victimising such as is so terribly com-
mon amongst us—they are never raped.
Horrible word, horrible thought, rape !
But it is commoner in marriage than outside
it, if we use the right word in the right place.
We must pity intensely any woman who for
any reason or under any circumstances is so'ter-
ribly treated.
Yet on the other hand, a man is to be pitied
who marries a woman expecting to find warm
response in his wife, and finds never more than
toleration.
That man is unfairly treated, he has been de-
ceived, for no woman should marry if she can-
not feel that she would be glad to unite with her
partner not only for the sake of having children,
but because she loves the man naturally and
warmly for his own sake.
If not, she is depriving him of a natural right
and will suffer in return, perhaps in the end more
than he.
And think of the result to the child !
(I must revert to the child. It is involved in
every thought, affected by every aspect, of sex-
ual activity).
What a much better chance of full vitality,
healthy body and sound mind it has when be


gotten in love by two free passionate parents!
What are its hopes of a healthy, happy life, if
of life at all, when it is born of brutal force on
one side, distaste and repulsion on the other ?
Indeed, should we not regard it as a fortunate
circumstance if Nature so far rebel against the
continual unnatural relationship of its parents
that it dies and is cast off in a miscarriage, or
wails but a short time after birth before sinking
to the grave it should never have been born to
fill?
How could we hope that it should make a
good, self-controlled, wife-respecting man, or a
good, healthy, self-respecting woman ?
It is too much to ask of outraged Nature to
give true health and sanity in the offspring of
what are really unhealthy, insane sexual prac-
tices, however concealed under the cloak of the
marriage licence.
The licence is surely not for licentiousness !
The freedom marriage gives to unite and pro-
duce children should not be used to unite in any
brutal ignorant way and produce just any mise-
rable kind of children.
We need to wake up our consciences, for our
own sakes as well as for the children’s.
Have not all a right to health and happiness ?
Then why don’t they claim it ?
I don’t want to rob men ; if women were hap-
pily, healthily considered in marriage, men would


gain all along the line, and learn to look back on
the ancient, ignorant, selfish, onesided variety of
marriage with horror and reprobation, as well as
with wonder at the blindness of its participants.
When we consider the right of a woman to say
when there shall and shall not be passional in-
dulgence on the part of their husbands, welcome
to what is very intimately bound up with the
question: the right to say when and how they
shall bear children.
Now, a woman should never undergo unwill-
ing maternity.
. The bearing of a child whom she loves long
before its birth to a man she loves and honours
must always be the greatest delight, the highest
privilege in life to a woman.
This great function of maternity should never
be profaned and the mother outraged by unwill-
ing or unfit motherhood.
More than this, I say there should be no chance
maternity.
Parents should wish for and deliberately unite
to produce every child born.
Thus they would be able to choose the best
time and the best conditions for the child’s pro-
creation, and the mother would take time and
opportunity to build the best she knew for her
welcome child.
Think of the gain in love to the child, and in
the force love always gives !


Think of motherhood under favourable con-
ditions of affectionate guardianship by the father
—a father who would hope and work for his
child’s as well as its mother’s best interests, no
less than that mother herself.
Think of the child born only to welcoming
arms, and its grateful parents’ fostering care.
Can we not hope for our race to grow up to
beautiful characters, noble citizenship, under such
conditions P
And such conditions, such choice, are the
right of all mothers, of all children.
Now, of course I shall be told that we never
can induce men to concede such rights, even if in
theory they be made to agree to their beauty and
justice. It will be said that old Adam is too
strong in them.
Poor old Adam! Probably a perfectly self-
controlled, sane man as far as sex instincts go,
since he had no bad heredity to fight, and yet
made such a post to hang responsibility on!
I shall be told that a man has passions which
must be exercised at least occasionally, and some
will claim frequently, in order to keep him in
good health, let alone in good temper!
Yet absolute abstinence from the exercise of
their sexual function is not necessitated by the
most thorough consideration of their wives by
husbands.
I know that this is so, and shall endeavour to


explain in detail later on how married people can
govern the natural result of exercising their pro-
creative powers without resorting to any unnat-
ural practices.
The method called “ Practicable Continence,”
while giving full physical gratification does not
tend towards sensuality, but rather to the devel-
opment of the magnetic and spiritual sides of
married love, thus aiding natural upward growth
of our manifold being.
“THE CELESTIAL LOVE.
“ Bat God said,
‘ I will have a purer gift;
There is smoke in the flame ;
New flowerets bring, new prayers uplift,
And love without a name.
Pond children, ye desire
To please each other well;
Another round, a higher,
Ye shall climb on the heavenly stair,
And selfish preference forbear ;
And in right deserving,
And without a swerving
Each from your proper state
Weave roses for your mate.'
“ For this is Love’s nobility,—
Not to scatter bread and gold,
Goods and raiment bought and sold !
But to hold fast his simple sense,
And speak the speech of innocence,
And with hand, and body, and blood,
To make his bosom-coupsel good.
For he that feeds men serveth few ;
He serves all who dares be true.”
EMERSON.


PART V.—SEX PHYSIOLOGY.
“ I sing the body electric.
“ If anything is sacred the human body is sacred,
And the glory and sweet of a man is the token of man-
hood untainted,
And in man or woman a clean, strong, firm-fibred body
is more beautiful than the most beautiful face.
“ Clear and sweet is my soul, and clear and sweet is all
that is not ray soul.
“ Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any
man hearty and clean,
Not an inch nor a particle of an inch is vile, and none
shall be leas familiar than the rest. ”
WHITMAN.
'll it ANY men have the idea that the fluid which
is ejected in coition is regularly secreted,
and must be regularly or at least fairly frequently
expelled, that they may remain in good health.
This is a most mistaken notion, and founded
on a wrong conception of the nature of this
fluid, known as semen.
In the human body there are certain fluids
formed for the purpose of carrying off waste
matter that can only harm if it remains in the
system. These are excretions—the urine and
sweat are typical examples.
There are certain other fluids which contain
no such waste, but are made up of special chem


ical compounds destined for special work. These
are secretions—the digestive juices, such as the
bile, are among this class, as are also the tears
which continually moisten the eyes. Now, these
latter need to flow all the time in small quantity,
or the delicate membrane covering the eye would
become dry and liable to thicken and obscure the
sight. The digestive fluids, on the other hand,
are only secreted when there is a definite call for
their use, as when food is taken into the stomach
and gives the needed stimulus to their flow.
Now the semen is a secretion also, but differs
from both the tears and the digestive juices in
its manufacture and method of being disposed of.
Like the tears, it is constantly secreted in small
quantity, and passes on into a sac where it is
stored ; but unlike them, and more like the di-
gestive fluids, is only poured forth when there is
a special call for it —at the culmination of sexual
intercourse.
But the great characteristic that distinguishes
the semen is its high nutritive value to the rest
of the body, when, instead of being expelled, it
is reabsorbed from the sac in which it is stored.
This reabsorption occurs in a regular manner,
being only partially arrested by sexual excite-
ment, which also causes a temporarily increased
production of semen by the testicles. If no ejec-
tion takes place there is for a time a larger quan-
tity of semen present in the sac, and naturally


increased absorption takes place to equalize the
ratio of production and distribution which has
been temporarily altered.
What becomes of the semen absorbed from the
sac in this manner ?
In answering this question let me refer to the
phenomenon known as internal secretion.
There are certain glands in the body which
for a long time puzzled physiologists. It was
found that they were indispensable, not only to
proper health but even to life itself, yet the an-
swer to the obvious enquiry why this was so
formed a riddle for many years unsolved.
For these glands have no duct or channel by
which to pour some manufactured fluid into the
stomach or intestine (as for instance that largest
gland, the liver, has) and so assist or modify di-
gestion. Neither do they extract deleterious
waste matters from the blood and expel them, as
the kidneys do.
Their work is more subtle than that of kidneys
or liver, yet no less important; for if they are re-
moved the patient may recover from the operation
but in a short time will show a marked change in
his whole physical condition.
To take one example, the thyroid gland, which
is situated in the neck in front of the windpipe,
and weighs only lor 2 ounces. The removal or
destruction by disease of this gland causes mental
dulness, thick speech, general lethargy, a stupid


expression, and an alteration in appearance due
to broadening and thickening of nose, lips, cheeks
and other features. The final result is inevitably
insanity and death, unless the loss of the organ
is made up to the patient by administering regular
doses of the corresponding gland obtained from
animals.
Now, it is plain that this thyroid gland, like
the others of its class, effects some profound mo-
dification of the general nutrition of the body, and
markedly of the brain. This it seems to do
through some action on the character and com-
position of the blood (which flows through it very
freely, the vessels bringing and taking it away
being numerous and large for the size of the
gland).
This action is believed to consist in the supply
of some material necessary to the proper nourish-
ment of the various tissues, which are so terribly
affected by its loss when the gland is destroyed.
Now the sexual glands—the ovaries in women,
and the testicles in men—have, in addition to
their reproductive power, this faculty of internal
secretion. Their functioning produces a subtle but
extremely important effect on the general state
of the body and mind. We are all acquainted
with the great alteration in appearance, disposi-
tion and general health which results from men
or women being deprived of their sexual power
by disease or operation ; but not every person


who knows of this alteration knows also the real
cause.
Many doubtless believe that it is the loss of the
reproductive power simply, which in some way de-
presses mind and body and causes the change;
whereas the actual fact is that it is the cessation
of absorption back into the blood of the mysteri-
ously complex material the sexual glands alone
are able to manufacture.
The obvious inference derived from the study
of these facts is that it is well not to waste, by
unnecessarily frequent sexual intercourse, that
precious material, the semen, which has such in-
valuable effect, when properly conserved, on the
health in general and the mental powers in par-
ticular.
It is a matter of common observation that the
continent man is the one best able to work his
brain constantly and at high pressure without
weakening or breaking down, whilst the roue not
only has not the normal taste and capacity for
brain work, but breaks down more readily under
any mental strain (and we may class the sensual
“ constant ” married man as a roue, from the
standpoint of the present discussion). And not
the roue only, but the man hereditarily weak in
sexual power, or he who has unhappily wasted
his force by solitary losses, exhibits these charac-
teristics.
In point of fact, the only necessary occasion


for deliberately producing an emission of semen
is when the procreation of a child is desired. All
other emissions are wasteful, and rob the body of
needed vital force and material.
Yet we must remember the fact already alluded
to —that healthful sexual stimulation has a bene-
ficial effect in increasing the activity of the sex-
ual glands, and is therefore to be sought, though
not to an extent extreme enough to cause any loss.
We are familiar with the stimulation to dare
and achieve which falling in love produces in all
individuals all the world over. Especially when
the beloved object is accessible and some de-
monstration of sexual feeling allowed—as in the
restrained yet ardent caresses of an affianced pair
—do we frequently see not only the happiest,
but the most productive period of a man’s whole
life, particularly if his attention be turned to-
wards intellectual labors.
But unfortunately the termination of court-
ship in marriage often sees the end, or at any
rate a falling off in this happy state of affairs,
and the thoughtful must regret that the more
complete satisfaction of natural animal desire
obtainable in marriage should coincide with a
loss of energy, enthusiasm and enterprise, and
besides this too often be followed by a lessened
respect and love between the couple who should
now be in closer bond of sympathy than before,
if possible.


Of course this falling off is not due to more
complete animal satisfaction in itself, but to the
misuse—that is, the abuse —of the opportunity
for full exercise of passion.
Very few seem to discover for themselves at
the beginning of married life, the wisdom of
moderation and self control. Those who dis-
cover it later on have not always the will to
break themselves of the bad habit of over indul-
gence which has been formed, and many men
who recognise that something is wrong in their
relationship with their wives do not understand
just what that something is, or why they fail of
the happiness they expected to find in the com-
plete exercise of passion.
The great reason for the final dissatisfaction of
the married man is that from selfishness or igno-
rance, generally simply from want of thought, it
does not occur to him to make sure of his wife’s
responsiveness in the sexual embrace. Unless
this is ensured on every occasion he exercises
his passion he will lose her love and respect.
For how can a woman truly love and respect
a man who plainly puts his own gratification be-
fore hers. Nay, does not even trouble to en-
quire whether she experiences any gratification
at all at any time ?
In how many thousands of homes is this the
case!
Yet if these shortsighted husbands truly loved


their wives they would find in themselves first
the consideration to make sure of responsive
feeling in their wives during intercourse, secondly
the self-control to refrain from demanding that
intercourse on occasions when the wife could not
respond, whether that inability were due to ex-
haustion, illness or simple lack of passion for the
time being.
The gain would be infinite to themselves, to
their wives, and not least important to' their
children.
How many think of the children liable to re-
sult from any of the occasions of sexual indul-
gence ? How many even think of these —let
alone care!
Gain to themselves, because the enjoyment of
intercourse is infinitely more to a man when his
partner is not only unresisting, willing, but ardent,
aye, even equally so with himself. Ask any hus-
band who has the good fortune to know this re-
sponse ! Ask him if he would not sacrifice at
any time frequency of indulgence to the fulness
and height of rapture he knows through this re-
sponse.
Gain to their wives in retaining the healthy
normal feeling towards their husbands (a woman
is robbed of most of her joy in life if this feeling
is killed in her through the abuse of her body by
her thoughtless or selfish partner). Gain in the
improved health which I have explained follows


natural passional awakening in either sex as long
as the passion is not worn to tatters through ig-
norance and greed of pleasure, and gain in love
and tenderness towards the husbands, whose wives
find them still lovers in chivalrous. consideration
and manly self-restraint.
Gain to the children in that constitutional and
mental vigor which can only be imparted to
them by parents themselves possessing the
sound physical and mental health which the
right combination of continence and passion
implies.
Most children—poor, little, unfortunate, help-
less victims !—are robbed of vitality while yet
unborn, as well as when at the breast, which can-
not give them all the nutriment they need when
the mother who bore them has to submit to un-
natural demands during her pregnancy and her
nursing period.
This is the reason that children of unmarried
mothers are often more vigorous and sound both
mentally and bodily than those born in wedlock
—their mothers having conceived them in true
passionate feeling and borne them unexhausted
by unseasonable demands from their fathers.
Unthinking, criminally irresponsible though these
fathers may be, they yet have not, as a rule, the
opportunity or wish to keep up sexual relation-
ship with the woman they have wronged, and so
do not rob their children of vitality as well as


the home and care these children, no less than
those of the married, have a natural right to.
Now, it is not necessary for men and women
to unite in sexual connection only on those com-
paratively rare occasions when a child is desired
as a result of the exercise of passion.
But it is necessary to fullest health and the
truly highest satisfaction that neither participant
shall proceed in the sexual act to the extreme —
that is, to the culmination in which a seminal dis-
charge is obtained by the man and a reception
by the woman —except on the occasions of in-
tended procreation.
By a proper exercise of self-control and a de-
finite determination beforehand, as well as dur-
ing coition, a husband and wife will find it not
only possible, but after some practice quite easy,
to refrain from the final orgasm.
They will in this way experience the highest
delight through a thorough interchange of mag-
netism, along with the sense of satisfaction that
no loss is entailed, and will be left with a feeling
of exaltation and vigor very different from the
feeling usually resulting from the culminating
discharge—which is a discharge not only of ma-
terial but of force and vitality.
In some of the lower animals it is a fact that
this sexual act, involving as it does so great an
expenditure of vitality, means death to the male
participant immediately after its accomplishment,


even as death to the female may follow the pro-
duction of offspring.
Nature does not regard the individual. She
has her eye on the maintenance of the race
through reproduction, and apparently cares not
if, in the accomplishment of this, already existing
units waste their strength even to the point of
death.
As an exemplification of this fact witness the
absolute craze for sexual indulgence many in-
valids manifest, notably consumptives, who often
become parents a few days before death.
Consumptive fathers, indeed, often die months
before their ill-equipped and unhappy offspring
enter the world in which they have so little hope
of becoming healthy, happy and benefiting citi-
zens.
To the point just here is the story I once heard
an eminent university professor tell of a mise-
rable quince tree he remembered growing in the
garden of his boyhood. It was always sickly
and did not bear fruit till the year it died, when
with what was evidently an expiring effort it pro-
duced a wretched crop of wizened little quinces
and then succumbed!
But we have to circumvent Nature, though we
must not directly disobey her commands.
Our desire to develope ourselves as individuals
must guide us to the way whereby we may fol-
low up evolution on the material plane with that


fuller progress on the mental and spiritual sides
of our human character which forms the natural
and logical sequence.
Following this course, we shall supplant to a
very large extent the embarrassing and exhaust-
ing expenditure on attempts at propagation, as
demanded by Nature, by the production of brain
children in literature, science, philosophies and
arts.
We shall find free scope in these fair and.wide
fields for the energy drawn from our powerful
sexual batteries, which are generative in more
senses than one.
We are not to waste the force in useless dis-
charge. We must transfer its application to the
work most required, simply altering its plane
of action, and thereby infinitely increasing its
power.
Who can say how much greater improvement
mankind may experience through this course,
since the finer and more delicate the machinery
set in action the greater the resultant possibi-
lities.
The lion is more complex and more powerful
than the worm, and the man of higher spiri-
tual and mental growth than his comparatively
brutish brother.
Like all living things we spring from the earth,
like all we should follow the trend up and out
into the clear air and light.


READ
“ PERFECT
MU/nANHOOD”;
A NEW BOOK
ON SEX AND SOCIAL SCIENCE.
Appealing Chiefly to Thoughtful People.
Written and Published in Australia by an
Australian Woman.
Post free 4/9, direct from the Author, Mrs. Agnes Nesbit
Benham, 20 Davenport Chambers, Currie Street,
Adelaide, S.A.
SUMMARY OF CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION.
Part I.—LOYE AND PASSION.
Passion a Normal Force.—Purely Unmoral—Like Fire, a good
Servant, but a bad Master.—Passion Transformed, not Ex-
punged, the Secret of Ascension.—“ All plus is good, only put
it in the right place. ” —Passion is the Driving Power of the
World : Boilers explode, and bodies of men are wrecked, from
the same cause, Hindrance to Expansion.—Possibility of this
Transmutation of Power. Where the Key Lies.—Good and
Evil Comparative Terms only.—“ Whom God hath joined to-
gether”: How does God Join? —Is it not through Affinity?
—Marriage of Atoms and Birth of Worlds.—Sexual Selection
the Principle of Progress throughout the whole Animal King-
dom. —Coming to Man, has the Institution of Legal Marriage


tended to Strengthen or to Impede this Progressive Principle ?
—Attraction of Love forms a Natural Ladder of Ascension.
Part lI.—MARRIAGE.
Marriage a Progressive Institution.—At Present Imperfect, and
Buttressed (so Grant Allen affirms) by Prostitution.—Mr. Lecky
and Mr. Lilly on the Courtesan. —Prostitution a far Worse Evil
than the Old System of Concubinage.—lllegitimate Children :
Their usually Terrible Fate, attributable to Society’s crass Su-
perstition regarding Marriage.—Marriage Cannot Make that
Right which would otherwise be Wrong, nor can it make Right
Wrong.—Why should we not form our own Ideas upon Sexual
Ethics, as much as upon the subject of Religion or Politics? —
Only that Union True Marriage which is Synonymous with
Love-mating.—Natural Love Impulse the very Fountain of Life
Power.—Explains why “love children ” are often Remarkably
Well Endowed Pre-natally.—Sacredness of all Human Life. —
Chastity a Single-minded Direction of Life’s Forces, Physical,
Mental, and Spiritual. —Divorce Preferable to Continued Inhar-
monious Marriage.—Position Contrasted of Married Women in
Burmah and in India.—The Plea for Love no Plea for Licence.
Part lII.—BUILDING OF THE HOUSE OF LIFE.
Mother Chief Architect.—lnfluence of Heredity and Idealism.
The Mother’s Imagination the most Potent Building Factor. —
Motherhood a Trust. Mothers, not necessarily Wives, are
Reckoned in Nature’s great Cosmical Scheme.—Man, in put-
ting wifehood first, has made the Initial Blunder of the Ages.
—Man’s Part in Parentage.—Souls in Prison. —The Unwelcome
Child.—Life’s Currents “set awry,How Children may be
Born Bright, Healthy, Loving, and Gifted, spontaneously lean-
ing to the side of Goodness. —The World’s Regeneration More
Quickly Accomplished by Understanding the Laws of Right Ge-
neration than in any other way. —To Every Holy (Healthy) Fa-
mily is a Christ-child Born.
PRESS OPINION'S :
“ The Advertiser ” (Adelaide) says :
“Mrs. Benham illustrates her thesis by quotations drawn from
many sources ; indeed, every page reveals evidence of deep and
ADVERTISEMENT.


wide reading, and if an excessive leaning towards the emotional
can be overlooked there is a good deal in her work, in the way
of information and suggestion, which may be heartily recom-
mended to the attention of the “thoughtful people ” for whom
she writes.”—August 20th, 1904.
Mrs. Eliz. Towne (Editor of “Nautilus) says :
“ Mrs. Benham is a delightful writer,”
“ Lucifer ” says :
‘‘ A radical discussion of love and passion, marriage and the
horning of first-class babies. She shows how essential passion
is to human existence, .... and teaches the responsi-
bility of parenthood. I predict a large sale of this book, for the
ability of the author raises her far above the level of the average
writer on sex topics.”
“The Register ” (Adelaide) says :
“ An outspoken writer In this little work Mrs.
Benham has treated an exceedingly delicate subject with ex-
ceeding delicacy, and yet vigorously and in a firm and outspoken
manner, so that there cannot be any excuse for mistaking her
meaning. Diversity of opinion will naturally be entertained
regarding the contention which she urges with great force and
eloquence—that the marriage tie should not be so rigidly bind-
ing as it is when it keeps together a husband and a wife whose
life may be spent in unending mutual hostility and repulsion.
There can, however, be no questioning of the moral courage re-
quired by any woman who sets her face against social conven-
tions by writing in such a strain ; and no unbiased critic will
cavil at the judgment that the argument could not have been
conducted in a more seemly way than it has been by Mrs. Ben-
ham, whose writing in many parts is impassioned, and in some
even brilliant The literary allusions and quo-
tations in the book are evidences of an extensive range of read-
ing, just as the little volume itself is a proof of high mental cul-
ture on the part of its author.”
ADVERTISEMENT.


EPOT FOR SALE OF ADVANCED LITERATURE,
20 DAVENPORT CHAMBERS,
CURRIE STREET, ADELAIDE, S.A.
BOOKS FOR SALE by Mrs. BENHAM at the
above address :
“Perfect Humanhood. ” By Agnes Nesbit Benham. Treats of
Love, Marriage and Parentage in a striking, original and
fearless way. Cloth bound, with Portrait of the Author,
price 4/6 (posted 4/9).
“ First Steps in Mental Science.” By the same Author. In
Pamphlet form, price 6d.
“Sense About Sex.” By a Woman Doctor. With Appendix
on “Practicable Continence ” (to Adults only), price 11-
All Publications by Elizabeth Towne (one of the brightest and
breeziest of American New Thought writers), as follow ;
“ Experiences in Self-Healing.” 2/3
“ Constitution of Man.” 2/3
“ How to Grow Success. ” 2/3
“ Joy Philosophy.” Bound, 4/6
“ Happiness and Marriage. ” 2/6
“Just How to Wake the Solar Plexus,” and all
other pamphlets by same Author, 1/2 each
(posted 1/3).
Also “Tokology,” and “ Karezza,” each containing valuable ad-
vice to married women (by Dr. Alice Stockham), kept al-
ways in stock; and many other books of special interest
not easily obtainable elsewhere.
