

Sensational Exposure
OF
W. M. Hughes, P.C.
Prime Minister of Australia
THE WINDSOR EVICTION
This is the report of a case in
which Prime Minister Hughes figured
so prominently in 1911. He, with
men hired for the job, threw an
old man, his wife and family into
the street at Windsor.
As the evidence shows, “Billie”
was badly biffed and exposed beyond
repair. •
READ THE STARTLING EVIDENCE!
PRICE: One Shilling




FOREWORD
*This book has been written up for the public
interest. The reader will see that the contents
are of so startling a nature, that for reference to
other acts of “Billie's” (such as the case of his
gardener, the widow and her house in Melbourne,
the £25,000 smell, and many more) it has been
discovered unnecessary to divert from his hor-
rible conduct in the Bellinger case.
Comment in this case was hardly necessary,
though I have drawn a picture of Billie, explain-
ing him in the Great Labor Movement, with his
conduct then and after.
“Little Billie” surely will not now object to the
public of Australia having a fuller knowledge of
THE MAN, who for so long duped and bullied
his way through.
Politics is a hard hitting business, and “Little
Billie” is a pastmaster at hitting, consequently
he will not object to me acquainting the people of
his past conduct. —I am,
Yours truly,
T. W. McCRISTAL.


Under “Billie's” Hunnish administration. Read report of this cruelty on opposite page.


FLOGGING AT RABAUL.
PHOTOGRAPHIC EVIDENCE.
(“Leader,” Melbourne, December 3, 1921.)
That the recent statements published regard-
ing the flogging and ill treatment of natives in
New Guinea were more than justified is proved
in a convincing manner by the photograph which
is reproduced among our illustrations. An article
published in “The Age” last week referred to the
fact that, by way of punishment, natives at Ra-
baul had been strung up to a beam by the wrists,
by means of a leather strap, or rope, the unfor-
tunate victims being in some cases only just able
to touch the ground with their toes. The pain
caused was very great. It was pointed out that
the then Administrator had taken action to put a
end to the punishment as it was reported to him.
The medical orderly, who has recently returned
to Melbourne from Rabaul, has shown us the
photograph taken at Rabaul, clearly evidencing
this brutality in full swing. It shows four native
“boys” on the verandah of a building at Rabaul,
each suspended by the wrists from a cross beam.
In two cases it is possible to see clearly that the
victim is barely on tip-toe, while on the ground
below the verandah are six other “boys” in
charge of native police and of white men—one in
Australian uniform. The camera thus shows in
a striking manner the need for the most stringent
watchfulness on the part of the Federal Govern-
ment over the treatment of the natives.
Referring to cases of flogging of natives at
Atlinzi in 1919, the same medical orderly stated
that he could verify the statements in “The Age”
article to the effect that several cases of flogging
had occurred. He himself had actually seen
“boys” flogged on three occasions. The victims
were laid across salmon boxes and were thrashed
with canes. On one occasion the reason for the
punishment was that the native concerned had
stolen a pipe from a police boy.


W. M. Hughes as an Adventurer
Having left Wales in his young days, like many
more of his kind, he set sail for this land, relying
upon his capacity to deceive and “hold on” to
that thing desired, Australia has found herself
blighted by the twisting political character of
this man, William Morris Hughes, P.C., and Prime
Minister of Australia.
Landing here, he set to work.
It is reported of him that he “tried his hand
at many things, from travelling the country
preaching freetrade, to revolution in the Sydney
Domain. , _ T , .
It was in the ’9o’s that the old Sydney Wharf
Laborers' Union woke up and discovered a new
revolutionist had suddenly planted himself down
amongst them, not as a practical worker, but as a
cunning windy word-spinner.
It has been often related that two prominent
workers for the Union of those days, one who
died of starvation in the 1917 strike, and the
other man still alive and well known on “The
Rocks,” were they who unearthed this new cham-
pion for their cause. .
It has been stated that a meeting was being
held at midday outside the old A.U.S.N. wharf,
and addresses were being given by officials, when
the two unionists in question introduced their
new-found champion, W. M. Hughes. His flow
of oratory was so startling, his knowledge of lan-
guage so complete, and his revolutionary sincerity
so pronounced, that he at once convinced the
“mob” of his usefulness to “their” welfare.” He
was accepted, and W. M. Hughes was set.


Many of the old men of the organisation say
to-day that in those days, when Hughes came
amongst them, his toes were poking out of his
boots, and the tail of his shirt showing through
the wrong holes of the seat of his trousers. It is
claimed by these men, who once were fond ad-
mirers of his, that they contributed money to
clothe him that he may look respectable as their
candidate for Parliament. He is alleged to have
accepted the money and clothing from these old
Unionists, and entered Parliament as one of their
reps, in the first Labor Party. He so impressed
the watersiders with his ability to champion their
cause, that after becoming a “financial” member,
but not a working member, they elected him,
creating a special position for him as General
Secretary.
When the whole of the Wharf Laborers of the
Commonwealth decided upon federating, W. M.
Hughes took a big part in the agitation, and was
elected their first President of the Federation.
To this position he hung until he proclaimed him-
self a military conscriptionist in 1916, when he
was expelled from the Federation for treachery
to a life-long cause, the cause that lifted Hughes
from obscurity to that of Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth, hobnobbing with Imperial “big
guns.”
W. M. Hughes’ name figures prominently in
many of the balance sheets of the Old Sydney
Wharf Laborers’ Union, and, later, those of the
Federation.
Many people think that he, though General
Secretary of one Branch and President of the
Federation, whilst acting in the Courts on behalf
of the organisation was giving his services patri-


otically, because of his love of the cause, and of
the fact that he was receiving a good Parliamen-
tary salary.
Those who are under that delusion should in-
stantly set to and become acquainted with the
fact that Hughes charged full Barristerial fees
for his appearances in Court on behalf of “his”
organisation, the men who say they clothed him
in his political infancy.
It is perfectly true that there are many men
who would never have Hughes other than an im-
postor and a traitor. He knew this, and gave
much time in denouncing them, and heaping ridi-
cule upon them to the satisfaction of his sup-
porters, who were certainly many.
Those who claim to know him intimately say
that he was then a most mean man. Many state-
ments have been said of him, that, if true, one is
compelled to wonder how it was the man was
never found out long before 1916.
But what this book is going to deal with mainly
are statements and accounts of doings that can
be procured and on hand for reference.
It is my desire that the public of the country
should be fully acquainted with this shameless
home wrecker, and after a full acquaintance drop
him back to the country of his birth. Australia
has most certainly suffered long enough at the
hands of this man.
W. M. Hughes first entered the State Parlia-
ment with the first Labor Party. On the estab-
lishment of Federation, he went for the larger
position and larger salary—and won, still repre-
senting the same people for vVest Sydney.
For nine or ten years the Federal Labor Party
struggled along, and at each succeeding election


gained adherents to the Party, when, in 1910,
they were returned with a majority, and formed
a Labor Ministry under Andrew Fisher, then an
honest, sincere, and well-respected Labor leader;
but Andrew’s trip and stay in England amongst
the Imperial “big guns,” like Hughes, settled him
amongst the working class.
In this 1910 Labor Ministry, Hughes was At-
torney-General. He was still a firebrand advo-
cate of smashing the sugar monopoly, the tobacco
monopoly, the coal combine, land monopoly, and
all such pernicious evils that were responsible for
the appalling misery and poverty on the side of
those who fed, clothed, and supported him, while
on the side of their opponents were to be found
all the luxuries and joybells of life.
At the deep chasm, Hughes was righteously
moved to denounce the ever-increasing exactions
of those whom he now champions.
W. M. HUGHES, ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA,
LEADS THE ATTACK UPON AN OLD MAN’S
HOME, HIS WIFE AND CHILD,
AND COMES A CROPPER IN COURT.
In this case about to be related, W. M. Hughes,
then as Labor Attorney-General and Acting
Prime Minister of Australia, was really shown in
the 'true light of being one of the meanest and
most cruel “champions” in Australian history.
His political and industrial record up to this
incident, of about 20 years, we leave alone, and
get on to the then important item of the day—
his disgraceful conduct and savage attack led by


himself, a gang of “gentle comrades,” specially
picked from the toughs of Sydney, to assault and
throw out of bed and home an old man, Bellinger),
hia wife and child. f
As was reported in the press on that occasion,
in June and July, 1911, we give it word for word
as printed in both papers, the “Herald” and “Tele-
graph.”
Then W. M. Hughes was a “Labor” man, and
it can be relied upon that they gave a full and
detailed account of the cruel case.
To-day, W. M. Hughes is a Labor renegade.
He is the little imperialistic conscriptionist idol-
ised by the same “Herald” and “Telegraph.”
The exposure of Hughes on the farm incident
injured him considerably in the Labor cause, and
it is quite likely, knowing that yet hunt
him down, that it was a factor which influenced
him to join the enemies of Labor.
We here reproduce the articles from “The
Herald” and “Telegraph” of June 2nd and 6th,
1911, giving the headings as set out in both
papers, and the result of his appeal against a
verdict for heavy damages, published in the same
press of July 28th, 1911, when it was so ignomin-
iously dismissed by the Full Court:
MR. HUGHES’ FARM.
ALLEGED BREACH OF AGREEMENT.
STATEMENTS OF FORCIBLE EJECTMENT.
CLAIM FOR £lOOO.
(“Sydney Morning Herald, 5 ' June 2nd, 1911.)
An action against Mr. Hughes, Acting Prime
Minister, arising out of the working of a dairy


farm, was commenced in the Banco Court yes-
terday, before the Chief Justice and a jury of
four.
Mr. Horace De Lissa, instructed by Mr. L. B.
Bertram, appeared for the plaintiff; and Mr.
Wise, K.C., and Mr. L. Armstrong, instructed
by Mr. J. B. Moffat, for the defendant. This
was an action brought by Richard Bellinger,
farmer, against William Morris Hughes, to re-
cover compensatoin for alleged breach of agree-
ment in regard to the working of a dairy farm.
The case for the plaintiff, who is 50 years of
age, was that he entered into an agreement on
May 15, 1909, with the defendant, by which, in
consideration of the plaintiff going into possession
of a farm at Windsor, and working it as a dairy
farm, and paying the servants necessary for its
efficient and proper working, defendant promised
to provide from the date mentioned all horses,
cattle, cows, machinery, and appliances, and pay
plaintiff one half of the money obtained by the
defendant from the sale of the products of the
farm after deducting therefrom the rent payable
by plaintiff to the defendant. Plaintiff said that
he entered into possession on May 26, 1909, but
the defendant afterwards repudiated the agree-
ment, and neglected to provide the stock and ap-
pliances necessary to carry on the farm efficient-
ly, whereby plaintiff was prevented from properly
and efficiently working the farm, and lost much
of the expense incurred by him in employing and
paying servants, and had been deprived of the
profits which would have accrued to him from the
performance by the defendant of the agreement.
Plaintiff also complained that defendant had neg-
lected to pay him the half-share, amounting to


£9/14/-, of the sale of certain products of the
farm, but this liability was not denied, and plain-
tiff had since signed judgment for the amount,
which about the time of the eviction was tendered
to him and refused. He further sued defendant
for assaulting and imprisoning him, and wrong-
fully evicting him from the farm. Damages
were laid at £IOO9/14/-.
The defendant filed a number of pleas, denying
the breach of agreement alleged, and stating that
plaintiff was not always ready and willing, as he
asserted, to carry out his part of the agreement.
He also said that plaintiff was not an efficient or
a competent person to carry out the agreement,
and failed to maintain the farm in a state of
scrupulous cleanliness as was necessary for the
efficient and proper working of a dairy farm;
that he allowed the premises and utensils to be-
come in an unclean and filthy state, whereby de-
fendant lost the profits which he would otherwise
have made, and the farm was rendered of less
value. He was willing to set off, by way of cross-
action, so much of his claim in this respect as
would meet any loss proved by the plaintiff.
With regard to the alleged assault and imprison-
ment, defendant pleaded that as the plaintiff re-
fused to give up possession after he had re-
ceived notice to do so, he ejected him, using no
more force than was necessary for the purpose.
To this latter plea the plaintiff replied that more
violence was used than was at all necessary.
Counsel for the plaintiff, in opening the case
to the jury, said that defendent held the position
of Federal Attorney-General, and was at present
also Acting Premier of the Commonwealth, and
the case presented some unusual features. Plain-


tiff, who was a married man with 10 children, saw
an advertisement in the “Sydney Morning
Herald” on March, 1909, about a farm at Windsor,
and he replied to it. He subsequently saw de-
fendant, who said he was the owner of the farm.
When he went up to the farm he found it in a
neglected state. The cows were very poor, and
the buildings were in a more or less dilapidated
state. After he took possession on May 26, he
was registered as the proprietor, and defendant
went to Melbourne. A good deal of correspond-
ence took place between them with regard to the
farm, and on June 30 defendant, who had re-
turned to Sydney, asked him to get some lime
to wash the dairy buildings, as the inspector for
the Fresh Food and Ice Company, to whom the
milk was supplied, insisted upon this being done.
When he received the monthly cheque for the
milk plaintiff placed it to the defendant’s ac-
count in the Bank of New South Wales, Windsor,
but he never got a penny for his share during
the time he was in possession. The area of the
farm was 75 acres.
Plaintiff, in the course of his evidence, refer-
ring to a conversation with defendant about the
farm, said he told Mr. Hughes, referring to the
stock, that ‘‘They had been ringing them into
him,” and that some of the cows were old. They
were the poorest lot of cows that he ever saw
together. He pointed thait out to defendant,
and told him that out of eight cows two were
good, and the others were “rotters.” Defendant
replied, “I do not think you are a practical farm-
er.” Plaintiff answered, “Are you ?” and defend-
ant said, “I know something about it,” and ad-
ded, “Will you go out?” Witness replied, “I will


if I get compensation for the work I have done.”
“Well,” said defendant, “I will put you out.”
Plaintiff then said to him, “As far as I know
I am a partner in this business, and if you have
any demand to make make it in writing, and I
will consider it. Considering 'the state of the
farm I would rather be out of it than in it, but
I cannot lose my time.” On one occasion he took
exception to the defendant using Government
stamps on his correspondence, as he did not like
to become a party to it. Defendant (according to
witness) then said, “Oh, that is the style of man
you are; you will not suit me, and I must get
rid of you.” That was on July 12, and witness
told defendant that if he had anything further
to say he had better put it in writing. Defendant
subsequently sent him a letter, giving him notice
to quit on July 21. On July 12 he went along the
road with defendant to try to get his share of the
money from the products of the farm which had
been sold, but defendant said he had not got
the returns from the Fresh Food and Ice Com-
pany. On the following Monday, July 19, wit-
ness was ploughing, when defendant came along
with two others in a trap, followed by a sergeant
of police. Defendant told him that he was going
to put him out, and plaintiff replied, “I do not
think you are.” Defendant then went to the
horses, and attempted to remove the swingle-bar
from the plough, but was prevented from doing
so. Plaintiff then spoke to the constable, and
they all went up to the house, including Arthur
Hughes, defendant's son, and a man named Joe
Nicholls, who said they were in possession for
the defendant. Witness replied that he would
not allow them to remain there, and he was turn-


ing towards the door of the room when Arthur
Hughes and Nicholls jumped on his back, and
held him arms. They then tried to put him out,
and defendant, coming along, told them to put
him out. Witness appealed to the constable for
protection, but was informed that Mr. Hughes
was within his rights. He then showed the con-
stable the agreement, and the constable went into
the yard with defendant, and had a conversation
with him. The constable afterwards came back
to the house, and said to plaintiff, “If you do not
touch them, they will not touch you,” and they
all went away, except Arthur Hughes and Joe
Nicholls, who locked one door of the room and
nailed up the other.
On the morning of July 23 Arthur Hughes and
Nicholls informed witness that they were in pos-
session of everything. The dairy utensils were
locked up.
On July 24 Arthur Hughes and Nicholls came
through from the kitchen into the dining-room,
and upon plaintiff asking them what they were
doing Hughes said, “We have come to put you
out.” They started to remove the things, but
witness prevented them. Constable Moffatt was
standing outside at the time, but took no part in
the struggle. Arthur Hughes and Nicholls again
jumped on witness’s back, and tried to force him
out, but he got away from them, and they went
out of the house talking. He saw Arthur Hughes
with an axe, and called the constable’s attention
to the fact, and he made him put the axe down.
Arthur Hughes afterwards said to him, “You
have beaten us to-day, but we will bring 50 men,
and put you out,”


On Monday, July 26, defendant came to the
farm, bringing with him two men, whom he did
not know, but who appeared to be labourers, also
a neighbour named Rutter, and Nicholls and
Arthur Hughes. Defendant said, “Are you going
out?” and plaintiff said “No.” Defendant then
said, “Then I will put you out.” The plaintiff re-
torted, “I do not think you will.” Defendant then
ordered the men to remove the furniture, but
witness prevented them from doing so. .Nicholls
then got a bar of iron, and said to witness, “I
will murder you; I will put you into the hospital.”
The men then got behind witness, and rushed
him. Two of them held his arms, and the other
put his arms round his waist, and forced him
on to the verandah. One of them kicked him in
the shins, and another kicked him in the back.
He got away from them, but they afterwards
got hold of him again, and forced him into the
road. Again he escaped, and went back to the
house. He was, however, again seized. Two of
his sons tried to help him, but one of them—
Sydney—was struck on the head with a bar of
iron, and was knocked down. He was lying on
the ground bleeding profusely from the head.
Defendant, Hughes, was taking part in the as-
sault, and holding one of his (plaintiff’s) sons.
Plaintiff told him he was a cowardly cur, when
defendant rushed at him and struck him in the
face with his fist. He also said to the plaintiff,
“I will put you out if it costs me £1000.” Wit-
ness replied, “It will cost you more than that if
you are not careful.” Defendant said he would
have to go out and get more men, and he after-
wards returned with eight men, including Arthur
Hughes and Nicholls,


They stood all around witness, and Arthur
Hughes gave out a yell, and then they all rushed
at and seized him. He cried out that they were
hurting him, and one of the men replied, “We
will not give you a show, because you are too
much of a bullock for us.” His arms were twisted
round behind his back, and one man had his arms
underneath those of witness with his hands press-
ed on the back of his neck, forcing his head for-
ward. He was kept in that position for three
hours, and suffered much pain. One of his fingers
was dislocated, and his right arm was injured
so much that he had been unable to use it since
for heavy work. It was towards the close of the
day when this occurred. A cold wind was blow-
ing, and he was perished. His wife tried to pro-
tect herself in a manner, but they kicked her
and locked her up in the house. After the men
had got the witness into the road they let him
go, and he and his family had to travel five miles
into Windsor, and stop for the night in an empty
house. They had no bedding, as the things were
scattered along the road. In consequence of his
injuries witness had to be assisted in dressing,
as he could not do anything for a time.
In cross-examination by Mr. Wise, witness said
that when defendant gave him notice to quit he
insisted that he was entitled to remain for 12
months. He also insisted that he was a partner.
Q.: Was there any other way in which defend-
ant could have got you out except by force ?«
Yes; by compensating me for loss of time.
Q.: Then, if you had got money, you would
have gone out?—Yes.


Q.: Is that not an old practice of yours, to go
into a place, and after a time say that you wanted
money to go out ?—Never before.
Q.:Did you not have a farm on shares from a
man named Cummings?—Yes.
Q.: And did you not remain for four months
after you were told to leave? —No; I remained
there sufficiently long to know that Cummings
did not intend to carry out his contract.
Q.: You brought an action against him?—Yes.
Q.: And you lost it?—Yes.
Q.: And you have not paid the costs of that
action ?—I have not been called upon to pay them.
Q.: Had you any other litigation over share-
farming?—Never.
Q.: Not with Hawkesbury College?—No; I had
a contract with the Hawkesbury College, but
threw it up because I did not get paid.
Q.: Did you threaten an action?—l may have
done.
Q.: Did you not have a farm on shares from a
Mr. Barker, had you not?—Yes.
Q.: Did he give you notice before you left?—
No; I gave him notice. It was a droughty time,
and I would not stop.
Q.: Did yau make any trouble at that time?—
Not much.
Q.: Had you any other farm?—Yes; at Mus-
wellbrook, but I only stopped there three months.
It was poor land, and I left because I had a better
offer.
Q.: Did you tell a man named Simpson you
were going to bring an action against him?—
No.
Q.: Or the owner of any other share farm?—
No; not until this.


Witness, continuing, said he had a farm at
one time for about seven months up the coast.
He thought he came down about six or seven
years ago, and during that time he had been do-
ing share-farming. He considered himself a
competent farmer.
Q.: Did you represent to the defendant that
you were a farmer of experience and capability?
—I ,
Q.: How old were these two sons who worked
for you?—One was 18, and the other 15 or 16.
Q.: Could either of 'them milk ’
Yes; both of them were capital milkers.
Q.: And the other boys you had on the farm
were immigrants?—Yes; I gave them ss. at first,
but raised it to 10s.
Q.: Do you wish the jury to believe that when
these assaults were taking place on the 19th and
24th and 26th July, you were quite peaceable?—
Yes; I was quite peaceable. I ought to have
knocked them down.
Q.: And all your people were peaceable with
you ?—Yes.
Q.: Had not one a gun ?—No.
Q.: And another an axe? —-No.
Q.: And another a bar of iron?—No; you are
looking at it on the wrong side.
Q.: Did not one of your sons assault one of
the men with an iron bar?—No.
Q.: Did you not try to bite the defendant?—
Yes; when he struck me in the face while I was
struggling with three or four men. There were
men assisting defendant, and they were armed.
Q.: Now I want you to be very careful about
this. ' lam dealing with July 20. Will you swear
you were not carrying an axe-handle? —No.


Q.: Did you strike at anyone?—No; I swear
I did not.
Q.: Will you swear that one of your two sons,
or one of the two boys, was not carrying an
iron bar?—No, he was not.
Q.: Was not one carrying a gun?—No.
Q.: Was not one carrying an Indian club, and
attempting to strike either at Mr. Hughes or one
of his party?—No.
Q.: On July 19 did you not take up the swingle-
bar of the plough, and try to strike Hr. Hughes
with it?—No.
Q.: And did not his son Arthur go up to pro-
tect him?—No.
Q.: And did not Sergeant Norris tell you to be
careful?—No, not that I know of.
Q.: Did not defendant say to Sergeant Norris:
“This man has been dismissed by me, and I
want you to remove him. Will you remove
him ,, ?—No.
Q.: Did you not take up the swingle-bar, and
threaten to brain defendant?—No.
Q.: Did not defendant tell Sergeant Norris
that he was the lessee of the farm, that he had
dismissed you, and that he had put his son
Arthur and the man Nicholls into possession?—
No.
Q.: Did you not then again threaten defendant,
and did not Sergeant Norris warn you to be
careful?—No.
Q.: Did he not tell you that you had to go, as
you had no business there?—He said something
to that effect.
Q.: Now, on July 24, had you taken any steps
to clear out?—No, I had not.


Q : Now, on July 26, did not one of Mr. Hughes
party go for protection to Sergeant Norris in
consequence of the row he had had with your
party ?__ l do not think so. I sent for Sergeant
Norris.
Q.: Had not there been a good deal of scrap-
ping going on ?—Yes. , _ XT
Q.: Were you still being held when Norris
came up?—Yes. , . ~
Q.: And he could see you trussed up m the
way you described? —Yes, and I asked him to
release me.
Q.: Did he do so?—No.
Witness, continuing, said he saw the farm be-
fore he took it and knew there were no prospects
for three or four months; but he took it because
he was guaranteed £2/10/- per week for three
months. He intended to work the farm and make
it of use. He told defendant before he went into
possession that the farm was in a terrible state,
that he could not do anything with it for some
time and wanted something to live upon.
Sydney Bellinger, a son of the plaintiff, corro-
borated his father’s story as to what took place
on July 26, and said that he was struck on the
head and lay on the ground with his head bleed-
ing, and was too sick to take any P m the
contest. In cross-examination he denied thathe
struck defendant with a club, broke his hard, telt
hat, and made his head bleed. He remembered
his father saying he would knock anyone down
who touched him. .
Constable John C. Moffatt gave evidence as to
what took place on July 26. Plaintiff was being
held by three men when he got to the farm. He
was struggling, but he could not say whether he


complained that the men were hurting him. He
was struggling violently to get away. Defendant
had a hard hat on, and it was pretty well battered
in, but he did not see any abrasions on defend-
ant’s face. He did not see a gun.
Wm. Robert loung, dairy inst/ector for the
Fresh Food and Ice Company, said he visited 'the
farm the second week in July, 1909. He found it
in a fair state, but directed them to whitewash
the dairy. It was not a first-class dairy farm.
Albert Bellinger, another of plaintiff’s sons,
aged 16, also gave evidence; and William Henry
O’Brien, produce merchant, of Windsor, said he
remembered the farm being sold for £3650.
A WINDSOR EVICTION.
MR. W. M. HUGHES AND HIS FARM.
ACTING PRIME MINISTER SUED FOR £lOOO.
EXCITING STORY IN THE BANCO COURT.
“Telegraph,” June 2nd, 1911.
The Commonwealth Attorney-General (Wil-
liam Morris Hughes) figured yesterday as de-
fendant in a suit brought by Richard Bellinger,
a farmer, in the Banco Court, before the Chief
Justice (Sir William Cullen) and a jury, in which
the plaintiff claims £IOOO for alleged breach of
agreement in connection with the working of a
farm in the Windsor district on the share prin-
ciple, and for alleged assault. Mr. De Lissa (in-
structed by Mr. L. B. Bertram) appeared for the
plaintiff, and Mr. Wise, K.C., and Mr. Armstrong
(instructed by Mr. J. B. Moffatt) for the defend-


ant. It was pleaded, in defence, that no agree-
ment had been broken, and assuming that an
agreement was made, it was broken by the
plaintiff through inefficiency and want of clean-
liness in working the farm; also 'that the assault
was commenced by the plaintiff, who was a tres-
passer, and defendant only used what force was
necessary for ’the purpose of putting Bellinger
off the farm. Defendant entered a cross action
for assault.
CONDITION OF THE FARM.
Mr. De Lissa promising that the story of the
assault would read like a chapter from “Deadwood
Dick,” called the plaintiff, Richard Bellinger, a
farmer, of Robertson, who stated that he was a
married man with a family of ten. He came into
communication with Mr. Hughes 'through an ad-
vertisement in the daily papers inviting applica-
tions from persons willing to co-operate with
him in the running of his dairy farm at Wind-
sor on the share principle. His application elicit-
ed a reply signed “Rex.” Subsequently he met
Mr. Hughes, and the terms of agreement were
arranged. Together they went to inspect the
farm in January, 1909. It was the most disgrace-
fully kept farm he had ever seen, and he had seen
a good many. The dairy was in an awful state,
was not whitewashed, and stood in the middle
of the cow yard. The outhouses were in a filthy
dilapidated condition. An agreement was made
by which Hughes was to pay the rent, and plain-
tiff was to be a co-partner in the farm, during
the remainder of the lease, 61 years. He had two
sons working for him on the farm, and hired two
boys.


TROUBLE COMMENCES.
The witness stated that he experienced diffi-
culty in getting the necessary plant to work the
farm, and found that not only was the land in a
hoplessly neglected state, and unfit for pastur-
age, but the stock was about the most inferior
lot he had ever seen together. Somebody had
taken advantage of Mr. Hughes’s inexperience
and rung in on him the oldest cows in the dis-
trict. There had been disputes between him and
Mr. Hughes regarding plaintiff's share of the
returns from the dairy, and £2 was the only sum
he had ever received as his share during the time
he was on the farm.
ACTIVE HOSTILITIES.
Continuing his story from the time that hos-
tilities commenced, the witness said: On July 12
I was in the dairy, when Mr. Hughes came up,
and we got into conversation. I told him the
difficulty we had with regard to the stock, and
my fear that we would make a heavy loss at the
end of the season. Hughes said: “I don’t think
you are a practical farmer.” I asked him if he
was. He said he knew something about it. He
asked me if I would go out. I said: “If I get
compensation for what I have done I will go out.”
He said: “I can put you out.” I said: “You can,
if you pay me.” I said: “I am a shareholder or
partner in this business, but if you have any
offer to make, make it in writing, and I will con-
sider it. I would just as soon be out of the
place, seeing the condition it is in.” I also took
exception to his making use of Government
stamps.
Mr. De Lissa: Never mind that.


Mr. Wise: Let him go on. It will serve to show
the man’s malice.
Witness (continuing): I said, “I am getting
these letters with Government stamps on, and I
do not like being a party to a fradulent practice.”
Hughes said, “Oh, that’s the sort of man you are.
I will get rid of you.” I said, “If you have any-
thing further to say, put it in writing.” We went
over to the house, and he gave me a written
notice to quit on the 21st. To that I replied, in
writing, directing his attention to the agreement,
but stating that I would be satisfied to relinquish
my interest in the farm on being paid a reason-
able amount of compensation. I went with him
along the road, trying to get my share of the
money out of him, but he said he had not got
his returns from the Fresh Food and Ice Com-
pany. Subsequently he went behind a gate and
wrote out a receipt for the money, and handed it
to me to sign. I refused, but wrote out a receipt
myself, and signed it for £9/14/-, for which
amount he gave me a cheque, and asked me to
sign the blank butt, which I foolishly did. I
afterwards wrote to Mr. Hughes, informing him
that after further consideration I had decided
to return the cheque, as his getting me to sign
the butt after giving a receipt inclined me to
think he might have some ulterior object in
view.
WHAT HAPPENED IN THE PADDOCK.
“I continued my work as usual*” witness went
on, “till the following Monday. On that day I
was down in the paddock, and saw the defendant


Coining along with two other people in a trap,
followed by the sergeant of police. They came
to the fence, and Mr. Hughes called out, ‘Here,
I want you.’ I said, ‘lf you want me you will find
me over here.’ He came over and said, Tm going
to put you out of this.’ I said, ‘I don’t think you
are/ and went to get hold of the lines to go on
with my ploughing. Mr. Hughes unhooked the
swingle bar, and I hooked it on again. His. son
Arthur came over and got hold of the lines. I
saw then that there was going to be a lo't of
trouble, and called on the sergeant of police to
look after the horses. All hands then went up
to the house, and when I went into the kitchen
I saw Arthur Hughes and Joe Nicholls (who
said they were in possession for Mr. Hughes). I
said I could not allow them to stay, because I
was in possession. I turned towards the door to
go out of the kitchen, when they jumped on me
from behind, caught hold of me, and twisted my
arms behind me, and tried to put me cut of the
building. Mr. Hughes came in, and calling out,
‘Put him out/ grabbed me by the neck. I shook
them off, and asked the sergeant to remove them,
because I had been assaulted, and wanted pro-
tection. He said that Mr. Hughes was acting
within his rights. I showed him the agreement,
and asked him to show his authority for what
he was doing. The sergeant took the defendant
away into the yard, and had some conversation
with him. I asked the sergeant what he was
going to do, and he said, ‘lf you don’t ’touch them
they won’t touch you.’ They all went away then,
except Arthur Hughes and Nicholls, who re-
mained in the kitchen. They nailed up one door
and locked another.”


CUT WITH A CHOPPER.
“After this,” witness continued, “we proposed
to go on with our work as usual, but Nicholls
and Hughes said they were in possession and
would not allow the boys to use the implements
or the milk cart. They were therefore prevented
from going on with their work. Hughes and
Nichols remained in possession until the 24th
On that day I was in the house, and Arthur
Hughes and Nichols came in through the back
door to the dining-room. I asked them what
they were doing. They said, ‘We have come to
put you out.’ I told them they would not do any-
thing of the sort. They started to remove the
things, but I prevented them. Constable Moffatt
was there at the start, but took no part in the
proceedings. When they got a chance they
jumped at me from behind and pushed me out
of the door and tried to put me out of the house
altogether, but I got away from them and went
back into the house. Hughes had a sharp chop-
per in his hands, and in attempting to prevent
him from taking out the furniture I got cut on
the finger. The policeman made him put it down.
They stayed there a while, and Nicholls said, ‘lf
we can’t get you out to-day, we will bring 50
men and shift you.’ They then went back into
the kitchen.
REINFORCEMENTS.
“On Monday, 26th,” witness went on, “the de-
dendant (Hughes) drove up about midday with
three others in a trap. Two of the men were
strangers to me, but they seemed to be rough
labourers. They came in all together by the back
door, the defendant, his son, two strangers, Nich-
olls, and the man he had working there, Ritter.


Hughes said: ‘Oh, you are here yet, are you?’
I said: ‘I am.’ ‘Well, are you going to get out?’
he asked. I replied: ‘No, lam not.’ He said: ‘l’ll
put you out.’ I said: ‘I don’t think you will.’ He
(Hughes) turned round to the men and said:
‘Put all these things out,’ meaning the furniture.
Hughes tried to stop me from going to protect
my property, but I pushed him aside and got be-
tween the men and the furniture. Nicholls got
a bar of iron, and, holding it up, said: ‘I will
murder you; I’il put seme of you in the hospital.’
They got behind me, and, rushing at me, got me
by the arms and forced me cut through the back
door, but I got away from them. They then sur-
rounded me. and kicked me on the shin and on
the back. They got hold of me again and pushed
me out on the road. I struggled free and return-
ed to the house. My sons were there when the
scrimmage was going on, and tried to help pro-
tect the property, but one of them was seized by
the arms and the other was hit ever the head
with a bar of iron, and fell on the floor, where
blood ran from his wound. Hughes had hold of
my thumb at the time. I turned round and
called him a cowardly cur. He rushed at me two
or three times, and struck me on the back of
the neck.
MORE REINFORCEMENTS.
“After I returned to the house they were con-
templating another attack, and defendant said:
‘I will put you out if it costs me £lOOO. I said:
‘lt will probably cost you about that amount be-
fore you’re finished.’ After a while they went
out and said they would get more men. After-
wards nine men came up—the defendant, the
two men from Sydney, Nicholls, Arthur Hughes,


Ritter, two Hibberts, and Stevens. They came
in at the front door. They got around me, Arthur
Hughes let out a yell, and they all rushed at me.
Wherever one could lay hold of me he grabbed
at me. I cried out, ‘You are crippling me.’ Some-
one said, ‘lt doesn’t matter: you are too much of a
bullock for us.’ They dragged me out on the
street, where, applying some very painful twists
and grips, they held me down on the road for
three hours. I was strained very badly. My
finger was dislocated, and my right arm so twist-
ed that I have not since been able to use it freely.
In the meantime they were carrying out my
goods, and throwing them into the road. They
finished just at dark. It was in July, and I was
nearly perished by the cold breeze. My wife had
tried to protect herself, but they locked her up
in the house. When they had got everything out
of the house the men who had been holding me
down let me go, and my wife and sons came out.
We had to travel five miles into Windsor after
dark, and stay in an empty house all night with-
out food, fuel, or bedding. We succeeded in get-
ting a cart to bring our property away, but it
was morning before the cart got to the place. On
the way we called at the chemist’s shop, and got
a bottle of lotion for the boy’s head and my own
injuries.
BELLINGER’S PEACEFULNESS.
“You got notice to quit on June 21, didn’t you?”
asked Mr. Wise.
“Yes,” replied the witness.
You thought you had a right to stay there for
12 months? —I did.
You thought you were his partner?*—Yes.


Was there any way, except by force, that he
could have got you out?-—Yes.
How? —By compensating me for my iaboui
and loss of time.
Isn’t that an old trick of yours?—Not at all.
I never did it before. . .
Didn’t you have a farm on the share principle
with Cummings, and bring an action against him
and refuse to leave his farm?—No; I left it.
Didn’t you remain four months after he told
you to leave? —I remained to see if he was go-
ing to carry out his contract.
You brought an action and lost it?—Yes.
Have you paid the costs? —No, and I don t in-
tend to do so until I am asked for them.
Did you ever have any other litigation over
share farming?—Never.
With the Hawkesbury College?—No; I had a
contract with them, and threw it up because I
could not get paid.
Was it on the understanding that you were a
competent farmer that Mr. Hughes engaged
you?—l do not know.
Did you represent to him that you were ex-
tremely experienced and capable 7 —l did.
Do you wish the jury to understand that when
these assaults took place you were quite peace-
able?—Yes; I was too peaceable; I ought to have
knocked them down.
You were quiet all the time? —Yes.
Had one of your boys a gun in his hand?—No.
Another an axe?—No.
Another a bar of wood or iron?—No; you are
talking about the wrong side.
Didn’t you smash open the head of one of the
men ?—No,


DIDN’T BITE MR. HUGHES.
Did you bite Mr. Hughes?—No. I tried to when
I was struck on the back of the neck, and was
struggling with three or four men.
Will you swear that on the 26th you were not
carrying an axe-handle and threatening to strike
Mr. Hughes?—Very likely I picked up some-
thing, probably an axe-handle, to protect my pro-
perty. I may have threatened to strike anyone
who touched my property.
Did you threaten to strike Mr. Hughes?—l
did not.
Did you strike at anyone else 9 —l will swear I
did not.
Will you swear that during the trouble one of
your sons was not carrying an iron bar or an
Indian club?—l will swear it.
Why did you take the farm, knowing it was in
such a bad condition ?—Because I was guaranteed
payment of £2/10/- a week for three months.
You were going to take this amount out of Mr.
Hughes for working a farm you knew was no
good?—Yes. It had to be put in order.
Did you tell Mr. Hughes that?—l did, and he
knew it.
What condition was the dairy in ?—ln a beastly
mess. I myself had to wipe the plague spots off
it with a bag.
And you sent milk from this dairy to Sydney?
—I did.
Several witnesses, including plaintiff’s two
sons, were then cross-examined, who gave the
plaintiff’s statements general endorsement. Con-
stable Moffat said he saw Bellinger being held
down outside his house. lie was held there until


a portion of his furniture was put out. He was
struggling and complaining of his treatment. The
condition of the farm was described by other
witnesses. Mr. William O’Brien produce mer-
chant, of Windsor, said the property had been
sold a day or two ago for £3650.
VERDICT FOR £255.
AGAINST MR. W. M. HUGHES.
FOR BREACH OF AGREEMENT AND
ASSAULT.
THE JURY DIVIDED.
STAY OF PROCEEDINGS GRANTED.
“Telegraph.” 6th June, 1911.
The action brought by Richard Bellinger, a
farmer, against William Morris Hughes, Com-
monwealth Attorney-General, was continued
yesterday in the Banco Court, before the Chief
Justice (Sir William Cullen) and a jury. The
plaintiff claimed' ’£looo for alleged breach of
agreement in connection with the working of
a farm in the Windsor district on- the share prin-
ciple, and for alleged assault. Defendant de-
nied that there had been any agreement or
breach as alleged, and entered a eross action,
claiming damages for assault. Mr. De T lV sa Ob-
structed by Mr. T«. B. Bertram) appeared for
the plaintiff, and Mr. Wise. K.C.. ant Mr. Arm-
strong (instructed by Mr. J. B. Moffatt) for the
defendant.
Counsel on both sides addressed the jury, and
agreed to his Honor instructing the jury as to


WATERSIDE STRIKE LEADERS,
Billie” in the past as a “successful” Waterside Strike Leader.


“BILI.IE” OF TO-DAY.
Smiling in the light of his glory ami ambition, having kicked” the strike- leaders aside, now settles down on
£25,000 amidst the “Governor” elass, whom he formerly denounced. Thus the two Billies.


the nature of the contract, if any, existing be-
tween the parties respecting the share-working
of defendant’s farm at Windsor from the writ-
ten documents put in evidence in the case.
WHAT THE BARGAIN MEANT.
The Chief Justice accordingly read the agree-
ment between Hughes and Beliinger, which pro-
vided that the necessary stock and plant should
be provided by the defendant and the labour and
work by the plaintiff. The rent was to be the
first charge upon the proceeds of the farm, and
the balance was to be divided equally, provided
that during the first three months if, at any
time the plaintiff's share did not amount to
£2/10./- per week, defendant was to make up the
difference. A further clause related to payment
for calves at various ages up to two years. The
best judgment his Honor had been able to form
was that the bargain amounted to the appoint-
ment by Hughes of Bellinger as manager of his
farm, his duties being set out in the contract
and his remuneration being provided for so as
to depend upon the value of the produce raised
on the farm, there being a guiaantee that during
the first three months the amount of remunera-
tion would not be less than £2/10/- weekly. Did
it stipulate further any fixed time during which
the agreement was to operate? Plaintiff’s coun-
sel suggested that it did, because there was an
arrangement for payment for calves. He could
not, however, read that as a stipulation that the
contract should last for two years or any fixed
time, though neither party, of course, dreamed
that it would terminate in two months. The
question as to what would be a reasonable amount
of notice of discontinuance must be decided after


careful consideration of the circumstances.
Where there was a fixed wage as in the case of
master and servant, ordinarily there was a well-
understood custom recognised by the law which
enabled one to say easily what amount of notice
of discontinuance must be decided after careful
consideration of the circumstances. Where there
was a fixed weekly wage as in the case of master
and servant, ordinarily there was a well-under-
stood custom recognised by the law which en-
abled one to say easily what amount of notice
was a fair one. In a case where a man s remun-
eration depended upon the produce of a farm,
upon which necessary work had to be done to put
it in condition to produce, it might be very un-
fair to immediately terminate a bargain, but it
was the duty of the jury, weighing all the cir-
cumstances, to say what would have been a
reasonable notice. If they fairly thought that
the plaintiff had been wrongly put to loss by the
comparatively abrupt termination of the con-
tract, they would consider the fact in his favor
in determining his claim for breach of contract,
if they were pursuaded that what might be done
to him on that account wa snot wiped out by
the loss which defendant asserted he had been
put to by the negligent and inefficient manage-
ment of his farm.
THE EVENTS OF THE 19th.
The other grounds upon which damages were
claimed, continued his Honor, were assault and
false imprisonment. The suggested false im-
prisonment was the detention of the plaintiff s
person held on his own ground and on tne road.
In this action the plaintiff was only suing for
his own personal damage. The first question


which arose was, had the time arrived when the
defendant could rightly treat the plaintiff as
being wrongfully present on his land? The bar-
gain had been one terminable on a reasonable
notice, the solution of the question depended
upon whether reasonable notice had been given.
If reasonable notice was given, and it became
the duty of the plaintiff to vacate the premises
in the time mentioned in the notice, then after
that date the plaintiff would have put himself
in the wrong by insisting upon stopping upon
another man’s property when he had no business
there. That, of course, would not touch the
events of the 19th, as to which Hughes could not
rely upon the notice, but stated that any dam-
age the plaintiff suffered was due to his own
fault, because he was the aggressor, and attacked
two of Hughes’s men. The truth between the
two parties had to be decided by the jury.
WHEN VIOLENCE IS JUSTIFIED.
Referring to the alleged assault of the 26th,
his Honor pointed out that if a case had been
made out of violence against the plaintiff, or
threats of violence with the power and dispo-
sition to carry them out, then, of course, there
would be a cause of action unless some offence
could be made out against the plaintiff which
would excuse them. On the 26th the period of
notice had expired, and it was considered a reason-
able notice, then the plaintiff had no right to be
on the premises on that date. Although the
law did its utmost to prevent private quarrels
being arranged by private warfare, so to speak;
although the law provided remedies for griev-
ances and expected every good citizen to observe
them and avoid adjusting his own quarrels, there


were some occasions on which resort to moderate
force was excused by the law, just as there were
cases in which the law excused resort to extreme
force. Where, for instance, a burglar broke into
a house and the safety and lives of the inmates
were endangered, the law excused the use of ex-
treme force; also in self-defence, a man was al-
lowed to kill another person when attacked and
threatened with loss of his own life. In other
cases —in that, for instance, of a dismissed ser-
vant who refused to leave the premises—the use
of such an amount of force as would not endanger
life or limb was excused. If during a scuffle,
entered upon with the intention of using mod-
erate force, the person who was being attacked
suddenly assumed a violent aspect, a defence
might arise where, in sheer self-defence, the use
of more than moderate force might be justified.
“THESE INGLORIOUS SQUABBLES.
“There has been an extraordinary conflict of
testimony about these inglorious squabbles, con-
tinued his Honor. “You will have to say whether
in your opinion, assuming you find that the no-
tice was sufficient, and that the plaintiff ought
not to have been there —because if you find that
the notice was not sufficinet, and he was rightly
there, and they wrongly tried to eject him, they
will be responsible for the trouble brought about
—but assuming he had no right there, and the
notice was a good one, you have still to a sk youi-
selves whether the statements of the plaintiff ot
acts of aggression committed upon him, beatings
and threatenings with dangerous weapons, are
true; and secondly, if true, whether resort to that
violence was in any way justified by the aggres-
siveness of the plaintiff himself.” The issues as


summarised by his Honor for the jury were:—
Loss through alleged failure to provide horses,
cattle, machinery, and appliances in accordance
with the agreement; loss through alleged fail-
ure to make up the amount of £2/10/- per week,
and loss through alleged wrongful determination
of the agreement; against which were to be set
off sums of £2, and £3/6/- paid, £9/14/- for which
judgment had been signed, also any amount the
jury might consider defendant entitled to on the
cross-action set up for alleged failure to conduct
the farm properly. The remaining count was
damages, if any, for alleged assault and battery
and false imprisonment.
THE DECISION.
The jury retired at 4 o’clock, and did not
reach an understanding until nearly 9 o’clock
when, through his Honor, they invited the part-
ies to accept a majority verdict. After consul-
tation, counsel consented.
The foreman announced that the majority of
the jury had agreed that plaintiff was entitled
to £5 in consequence of deiendant’s failure to
make up the amount of £2/10/- per week during
the term mentioned in the agreement, and to
£lOO for breach of agreement. On the count of
assault and battery and false imprisonment they
found for plaintiff and awarded him £l5O dam-
ages. The total verdict was £255 damages for
plaintiff.
Mr. Armstrong applied for a stay of proceed-
ings on arguable grounds—whether a verdict
ought not to have been directed on the 7th plea,
as to the assault and battery, and as to whether
the jury, under the circumstances, were justi-


fied in finding a verdict for the amount stated,
on the contract counts seeing that the basis for
it was so largely conjectured.
Mr. De Lissa consented, and his Honor granted
a stay of proceedings until the hearing of a mo-
tion before the Full Court, on the usual condi-
tion that the amount of the verdict is meantime
lodged in court.
One need only study the evidence of the case,
and W. M. Hughes has been truly revealed as a
man who never should have been clothed as he
was by the admiring Unionists 30 years ago, men
in those days who mistook the man to be one of
their own, instead of what he really was —a hypo-
critical imperial humbug, ready to urge others on
to fight while he abstains from joining in.
Here was one of the foremost Labor Leaders
in Australia, at the time, Acting Prime Minister
in a Labor Ministry, who thought so little of his
position, the movement, and the dignity attached
to same, apart altogether to the principle under-
lying the case, was quite unconcerned of the re-
sults to the Movement, that uppermost his one
aim was to gratify his own greedy ambition.
How, after the above case, people could seri-
ously accept him as a Labor enthusiast, it is hard
to judge, because if ever a man was so exposed
that he deserved instant expulsion from the move-
ment, it was W. M. Hughes. Yet the great move-
ment nassed no comment, and Hughes went on
in his "effrontery by carrying the case to a higher
Court in an appeal, thinking to beat the poor
farming family, because of lack of funds. In this,
“Little Billy” was sadly mistaken, and again
was knocked back by the decision of the judges


presiding, when Mr. Justice Pring said: “In all
the circumstances, there were no grounds for up-
setting the verdicts.”’
His Honor was supported by his two colleagues,
Mr. Justice Sly and Mr. Justice Ferguson, and
again this cowardly breaker of agreements had
to foot the bill by paying the costs of the case.
A REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE.
The reader on going through the evidence will
see where Hughes had purchased, or somehow
became in possession of, a farm (which might be
interesting to know).
In this case we see where William Morris
Hughes, having a farm of 75 acres, was quite
willing to allow it worked on the “share” prin-
ciple, for in March of 1909 he advertised in “The
Herald” re the shareworking of his farm at Wind-
sor, and he being prepared to let it out on the
above terms for a period of 61 years.
The advertisement was answered by one
Richard Bellinger, a man who had been farming
all his life, and now 50 years of age, with a family
of 10 children.
Hughes promised to provide all horses, cattle,
cows, machinery and appliances, and to pay Bel-
linger one half the money obtained from the pro-
ceeds of the farm, after deducting the rent pay-
able by Bellinger to Hughes.
Bellinger entered into possession of the farm
on May 26th, 1909. Then after Bellinger had
settled himself on the farm, we now see where
Hughes played his questionable trick upon the
honest, unsuspecting old man Bellinger by repu-
diating the agreement, in so far as cancelling it,
and which ended so disastrously for “Little Billy.”


Of course, Hughes filed a number of pleas—in
fact, denying everything; and, strange to say, one
of his pleas was, “That Bellinger was not an effi-
cient farmer, and not competent to carry out the
‘agreement’!”
How tragic, this coming from Hughes, particu-
larly the latter assertion. Of all men who would
not burk at breaking agreements, Hughes can
be counted in the forefront, as the evidence in
this case has disclosed, wherein the several judges
ended up by disbelieving the story told by “Little
Billy,” and gave a verdict accordingly.
We read in the evidence where, according to
agreement, Bellinger would place the monthly
cheque, the result of the farm, to Hughes’ ac-
count in the Bank at Windsor. But the evidence
had disclosed where Hughes then refused to pay
back to Bellinger his share after the work done.
In this it would be typical of William Morris
Hughes, in so far as the many thousands that
he has received from the people of this country
in the public life, what has he given in return
that stands to his everlasting credit, but much
to discredit him.
If the reader will notice, it will even be seen
that Hughes’ greed for wealth was so keen that,
for his own business, was using the people’s
stamps, evidently Parliamentary stamps allowed
members, and because Bellinger notified Hughes
of his disapproval of the practice re the stamps,
it is alleged Hughes said: “Oh, that is the style
of a man you are; you will not suit me, and I
must get rid of you.”
We read in the evidence where Bellinger ac-
companied Hughes along the road, requesting
payment. Finally, the Labor Prime Minister’s


big heart being touched, we see where he went
behind a gate and wrote out a receipt for Bellin-
ger to sign. Bellinger refused this, but wrote
out and signed his own receipt. Hughes, hand-
ing him a cheque for the amount of £9 145., then
caught Bellinger in an unguarded moment by get-
ting him to sign a blank cheque butt (presumably
the butt of the cheque just handed Bellinger).
Later on, Bellinger returns this cheque to Hughes,
as, said by Bellinger, “Hughes might have had
some ulterior motive for inducing me to sign this
blank butt.”
The following week Hughes once more appears
on the scene, driving on to the property with two
other men in a sulky, followed by a sergeant of
police. Hughes threatened to “eject” Bellinger.
“I WILL MURDER YOU ”
In the assault upon the old man it has been
shown in the evidence that Hughes resorted to
the foulest thing possible. We see where he so
degraded himself by calling his son Arthur into
the dirty piece of business, in addition to calling
several men from Sydney of a violent and ag-
gressive type, from the most dangerous localities.
It is shown where Hughes’ chosen “pet lambs,”
along with himself and son, conjointly attacked
this old man, invading his home, and without
authority, unlawfully entering his home and
proclaiming themselves in possession. Arthur
Hughes (son) and other “comrade” jumped on the
old man from behind, and held both his hands,
trying to forcibly throw the old man out, at the
direction of this “Labor” renegade and Prime
Minister of Australia, “Little Billy.” Arthur
Hughes (son of the “General” in this drama) now
picked up an axe, evidently to deal with the old


man, but was prevented from using it, when young
Hughes threatened “that they would bring 50
men to smash up the home of the old man.”
On Monday, the 26th of July (1910, presum-
ably), the now “victorious” William Morris
Hughes appeared on the scene considerably rein-
forced, with several other “comrades,” presumably
more of his constituents. When the old man re-
fused to vacate his home, Hughes, the proclaimed
champion of the rights of the workers, then or-
dered his “associates” to break the old man’s
home up, by throwing everything out into the
street.
One of Hughes’ chosen “companions” exclaimed
(to Bellinger), holding a bar of iron over his head,
“I will murder yen; I will put seme of you in hos-
pital.”
BOY OF 16 LAID OUT WITH IRON BAR.
“They got behind me” (meaning little “Billy”
and his “select” company), “and rushed me; got
me by the arms, forcing me out through the back
door. I got away; they then surrounded me, and
kicked me on the shin and back. They forced me
out on to the road. My tried to help me, but
one of them was seized by the arms, and the other
(boy of 16) was hit over the head with an iron
bar, and laid out by a Hughes “retainer.” The boy
lay on the ground for some time “bleeding pro-
fusely” from the head, unheeded by “gentle Little
Billy,” who was taking part in the smashing up of
the old man’s home, and holding one of the old
man’s sons, when the old farmer told Hughes that
he was a ‘cowardly cur.’ Hughes, seeing that Bol-
linger was helpless, as he was being held tight,
rushed him and struck him on the face.”


At this stage, the discredited and contemptible
“Little Billy,” “Labor” Acting Prime Minister of
Australia, again went for more of his “braves,”
this time returning with nine men to help on the
cowardly and dirty work of this “gentleman” and
Labor Prime Minister.
HUGHES DEALS WITH THE WIFE, AND
THEY SLEEP IN AN EMPTY HOUSE-
SHIVERING.
“They got around me. Arthur Hughes (Billy’s
son) let out a yell, when they then all rushed me
and grabbed me wherever they could.
“They dragged me out into the street, where,
applying some very painful twists and grips, they
and little Billy held me down on the road for three
hours. I was strained very badly. My finger
was dislocated, and my right arm so twisted that
I hav3 not since been able to use it freely. In
the meantime they were carrying out my goods
and throwing them into the road. They finished
just at dark. It was in July, and I was nearly
perished in the cold. My wife tried to protect
herself, but they (including Labor’s champion,
little Billie) locked her up, ‘after kicking her.’
“When they had got everything out of the
house, the men who had been holding me down
let me go, and my wife and sons came out. We
had to travel five miles into Windsor after dark,
and stay in an empty house all night, without
food, fuel, or bedding.
“On the way we called at a chemist’s shop, and
got a bottle of lotion for the boy’s head and my
own injuries.”
Thus ended a sad day for an old man of 50
years of age, brought about by ar act of one who


had travelled the length and breadth of Austra-
lia preaching justice and happiness to the pro-
ducers of all wealth, and whilst so preaching this
doctrine through Labor’s ideals, he was actually
carrying out the Irish landlords’ eviction pobcy,
which gives one the creeps on reading such sad
history.
hughes discredited.
Here one shudders to think William Morris
Hughes, Labor Prime Minister of Australia, had
so discredited himself in the eyes of all.
This traitor to Labor amply proved himself in
this case as a man quite unworthy of further co -
sideration as a champion of the class .hat first
gave him his upward lift.
The conduct of the man in engaging bullies and
followers from the slums of his own electorate,
that they may assault and injure this old man,
throw his food and chattels into the street whilst
assaulting his wife and child, whom they knocked
senseless from a hit over the head with a bar ol
iron has amply branded him to be one whose
proper place should have been a long sentence
hark at “umbrella mending.’
' Though Hughes armed himself with a strong
legal squad to fight his case m Court against this
poor farmer, his conduct being so despieable and
case so weak, after his awful exposure, that he
lost on every count, the jury giving a verdict
against him for assault, imprisonment, breach of
contract, and wages due, the jury awarding £255
in all to be paid out by this Labor renegade..
Billie had the effrontery to appeal to higher
Court, and was again biffed out there, with costs
once more against him. This man, who for so
long has played the chief part of dictator in Aus-


tralian politics, has been allowed to usurp to
himself such a role, and single-handed to “govern”
and harass the country under his infamous War
Precautions Act, hampering and restricting trade
and liberty for several years, even after the war
the war that he took so contemptible a part in
—-m announcing that he was going to sail in one
ship, then slip back, only to sail away under a
neutral flag—on an American ship.
Of course, those who have now read of him in
his callous attack upon the old farmer at Wind-
sor can quite understand his conduct in the latter
case.
JUDGE’S SUMMING UP.
On June 6th, 1911, the Chief Justice (Sir Wil-
liam Cullen) summed up before the jury, and it
was very evident by his remarks that he culti-
vated a withering contempt for this man, W. M.
Hughes, only because of the fact of his cowardly
and contemptible conduct over the farm episode.
After the counsel for both sides had addressed
the jury, the Chief Justice began his summing
up by first reading the contract relating to the
working of the farm agreed upon between Hughes
and Bellinger.
His Honor concluded his lengthy summing up
of the case by stating: “There has been an extra-
ordinary conflict of testimony about these in-
glorious squabbles.”
“You will have to say whether, in your opinion,
assuming you find that the notice was sufficient,
and that the plaintiff ought not to have been
there— because if you find that the notice was
not sufficient, and he was rightly there, and they
wrongly fried to eject him, they will be respons-
ible for the trouble brought about. But assum-


ing he had no right there, and the notice was a
good one, you have still to ask yourselves whether
the statements of the plaintiff of acts of aggres-
sion committed upon him, beatings ana threaten-
ings with dangerous weapons, are true, and se-
condly, if true, whether resort to that violence
was in any way justified by the aggressiveness
of the plaintiff himself.”
The issues as summarised by his Honor for the
jury were:—Loss through alleged failure to pro-
vide horses, cattle, machinery, and appliances m
accordance with the agreement; loss through al-
leged to make up the amount of £2 10s. per week,
and loss through alleged wrongful determination
of the agreement; against which were to be set
off sums of £2 and £3 6s. paid, £9 14s. for which
judgment had been signed. The remaining count
was damages, if any, for alleged assault and bat-
tery and false imprisonment.
Readers will have here read an impartial sum-
ming up by a judge who (with the counsel tor
both sides agreeing upon) submitted the Five
Points to be decided upon by the jury as read
above.
Here was this man Hughes, who made himself
quite notorious throughout the world during the
war, not on anything statesmanlike he may ha ve
achieved, but purely upon the name We Soldiers
of the A.I.F. had achieved, in so far that he ex-
ploited that name by the fact alone that he, Wil-
liam Morris Hughes, P.C., was the Prime Minister
of the Commonwealth, the country made famous
by our standing up to the Great German Military
Machine, inflicting defeat after defeat upon the
highly drilled German soldiers.


William Morris Hughes exploited our deeds,
and undone much of the good name we made for
the people of Australia.
When the reader now looks back to this shifty
little toadying imperalist and “Labor” renegade,
sitting in the Court facing judge and jury, feel-
mg himself being whipped by the tongue of an
able barrister, and the scowling looks of judge
and jury, for what may rightly be termed one of
the foulest deeds man can be guilty of, especially
as it was t*ie act of one who fulfilled the proud
position for Labor, as being Commonwealth Attor-
ney-General and Acting Prime Minister, and here
to-day read of him, hear him, extolling his own
political virtues, and condemning to helfand dam-
nation all his old political associates, many who
gave him the helping hand to success, one is com-
pelled to ask: Are the citizens of Australia a pack
of boneheads?
I am compelled to ask this question because of
allowing this man, convicted for dishonor, dis-
honoring his own agreement with a hardworking
old man, to remain in the present position where
it is possible for him to dishonor Australia, be-
cause since ’the dishonoring of that agreement
away back in 1910 he was expelled from the
Movement that lifted him from rags and advers-
ity, again for treachery and dishonor to Labor,
yet he remains in the confidence of Australian
citizens, not because the people of Australia know
him, but merely because he is not yet known and
fully exposed as the expert twister and gentle
evicter that the jury found him.
In other words, the effect of the verdict of the
jury was, that Hughes was a man unworthy of
trust, who would not think twice about dishonor-


ing his written agreement or word of mouth, and
evade paying for service rendered wherever it
suited him, as well as attacking a man being held
by a band of unprincipled hirelings, hired by
Hughes himself for his dirty work.
And the verdict of the jury was that defendant
(Hughes) be fined £5 for failure to make up the
amount of £2 10s. per week as agreed upon, and
£lOO for his breach of agreement. For assault
and battery and false imprisonment (which in-
cluded the locking of the old man and wife up
whilst they—Hughes and his roughs—smashed
the old man’s home up) Hughes was here touched
up fo * another amount, £l5O, as damages. The
total verdict being £255 damages against William
Morris Hughes (P.C. now), then Acting, but for
many years up to now Prime Minister of Aus-
tralia.
This verdict branded Hughes immediately as
unfit to further sit in the Parliament of any
country other than that portion of Mexico where
they do similar deeds, but with this difference,
when they do a similar act they are prepared to
risk their lives, and not seek the assistance of the
law as Hughes did in calling the police to accom-
pany him and his rough hirelings from the cor-
ners,
Not being satisfied with his drubbing and pub-
lic exposure as a most dishonorable citizen, the
haughty, cocky, one-time “revolutionist" Hughes
thought his position and money would yet carry
him on to victory against this poor farmer,
banged and knocked about by Hughes and his
“bodyguard," so he appealed to the Full Court on
July 27th, 1911, and reported in “The Telegraph’’
of July 28, 1911, thus:—


MR. HUGHES’ FARM.
NEW TRIAL MOTION.
BEFORE THE FULL COURT.
“Telegraph,” 28th July, 1911.
Before the Full Court (Mr. Justice Pring, Mr.
Justice Sly, and Mr. Acting-Justice Ferguson)
to-day an application was made on behalf of Wil-
liam Morris Hughes, Acting-Prime Minister and
Attorney-General of Australia, for a new trial.
The appeal arose out of the action heard be-
fore the Chief Justice and a jury of four, in
which Richard Bellinger claimed £lOOO damages
for alleged breach of agreement and assault.
The verdict was for plaintiff, the damages being
fixed at £225.
The grounds on which defendant in that action
now appealed were that his Honor was in error
in directing the jury that the agreement declared
upon had been proved, because the only evidence
of such alleged agreement was in writing, which
did not prove such agreement; that there was no
evidence, of the damage to plaintiff by the breach,
if any, of the alleged agreement; that the jury
might, and should have considered whether the
agreement, if any, was terminated by a reason-
able notice, because plaintiff denied the right
of the defendant to terminate the agreement al-
leged by any notice; that his Honor was in error
in directing the jury, as to the fourth count, that
the plaintiff was entitled to remain on the land
if the agreement alleged had not been terminated
by reasonable notice.
Defendant also submitted that his Honor
should have directed the jury that the agreement


gave the plaintiff no right to remain upon the
land against the wish of the defendant; that the
plaintiff was a trespasser on the land upon July
19, and all subsequent dates; that the defendant
was, therefore, justified in using reasonable force
to remove him; that the defendant had proved the
issue raised by the second plea, and that, there-
fore, the only question for the jury was under the
new assignment; that the verdict was against evi-
dence and the weight of evidence; and that the
damages were excessive.
Mr. Armstrong and Mr. Hodgson (instructed
by Mr. J. B. Moffatt) appeared in support of the
application, and Mr. H. de Lissa (instructed by
Mr. L. Bertram) for the plaintiff respondent to
oppose.
In giving judgment, Mr. Justice Pring said that
defendant (Hughes) was lessee of a farm of 75
acres. He was apparently anxious to obtain some-
body who would work that farm on shares. He
published an advertisement in the newspapers,
and the result was that plaintiff met him, and
they had a conversation about the matter. At
that conversation certain terms were agreed up-
on, under which Hughes was to buy the stock
and all the plant necessary, while Bellinger
should find the labour and work the farm. That
was on May 15, and both parties signed it, but,
as he gathered from the summing up of the
Chief Justice, it was really subject to confirma-
tion. The first contention with regard to defen-
dant was that there was no contract. It was
said that all that the memo, was was a guide.
That argument was based upon the fact that
both plaintiff and defendant referred to it as a
guide. Therefore it was said that thgre was no
contract between the parties, His Honor could


not follow that. It was treated by the parties
as an agreement, and the mere statement that
it was a guide did not meet the argument. Most
contracts could well be described as guides. In
addition to that, there was the fact that plaintiff,
with defendant’s consent, entered upon the farm,
and worked it exactly in accordance with the
terms written down to be followed. Therefore
there was no ground whatever for the contention
that there was no concluded contract with the
parties. Matters went on until July 12, when
defendant appeared to become dissatisfied with
plaintiff. It had to be determined whether reason-
able notice had been given plaintiff to quit. The
farm was to be used apparently for the purpose
of carrying on a dairy. It was in a very bad
state, and according to the evidence everything
was out of order, and a good deal of labour was
required to put the farm into a workable posi-
tion. The season was about the very worst time
of the year. Plaintiff was given nine days to
quit. It was left to the jury by his Honor the
Chief Justice to say whether that was reasonable
notice. The jury, most properly, he thought,
considered it was not, and he could not conceive
of any jury finding anything else. Then came
the question of damages for breach of contract.
The jury found in favour of plaintiff for £IOO.
Now it was contended that no more than nominal
damages should be given. There was quite suffi-
cient evidence to justify the jury in giving plain-
tiff £loo—it seemed to him to be very fair and
reasonable. .
There was a count for assault, continued Mr.
Justice Pring. The jury found in respect of
those assaults the sum of £l5O for plaintiff.
With regard to the assault on July 19, it was ad-


mitted that there was no justification for it.
Therefore plaintiff was entitled to obtain some
damages. The jury assessed the damages for
both cases, and it was contended that it should
have been done separately. His Honor was glad
that his decision had the merits of common-
sense, because if it had gone the other way it
would have had the effect of seriously affecting
share farming.
In all circumstances his Honor said he thought
there were no grounds for upsetting the verdicts.
Mr. Justice Sly and Mr. Acting-Justice Fer-
guson agreed, and the appeal was dismissed with
costs.
This time Mr. Justice Pring, in summing up
once more against Hughes, said: “He could not
follow that the agreement was not a contract, but
merelv a guide ”as raised by Hughes. Mr. Jus-
tice Pring said: “Most contracts were guides, or
could be described as such.”
Here, again, W. M. Hughes is being hard hit.
Mr. Justice Pring remarking: “The jury most
properly considered the ‘notice to quit’ was un-
reasonable, and he could not conceive of any jury
finding otherwise.”
“Then came the question of damages for breach
of contract, amount £100.”
“That no more than nominal damages should
be given,” as raised by “Little Billie.”
His Honor said on this: “There was quite suffi-
cient evidence to justify the jury in giving plain-
tiff £IOO. It seemed to him to be very fair and
reasonable.”


In finally bumping Hughes out of Court, and
upholding all previous deceisions in convicting
William Morris Hughes, his Honor said: “In all
the circumstances, he thought there were no
grounds for upsetting the verdicts.”
Mr. Justice Sly and Mr. Justice Ferguson
agreed, and home-wrecking, agreement-smashing
Hughes had to pay the costs of the case.
So endeth the Windsor scandal, and exit Hughes
and his hired dingoes, falling a cropper because
of his cowardly business and absolute dishonesty.
HUGHES AS A “GENTLE EVICTER ”
During and since the great war we had been
accustomed to read of the unspeakable cruelty
of the Turks towards the Armenians resident
within their empire.
The reader has already read where Hughes had
hit the old man in the face whilst he was held by
the cowardly gang. You have also read of where
either Hughes or one of his hired curs had hit
the lad over the head with an iron bar, and laid
him out on the ground, with olood flowing freely
from his broken, head. Shortly after this crack
over his young head he regained consciousness,
but all this time the boy’s mother had been pushed
into a bedroom and locked in, after herself being
assaulted by either Hughes or one or more of
his chosen companions.
At any rate, whether he committed any of the
brutal acts or not, Hughes stands responsible for
the whole of this dirty business, and should have
immediately been expelled from the movement
which first lifted him out of the rut.
Take this closing incident of the day, where the
old man, with soro body ani aching heart, his
assaulted wife, and injured boy, who was laid


out because of the crack over his young head
with an iron bar, were now all compelled to drag
their weary bodies five miles along the road in a
bitterly cold winter night, searching for a house
in which to sleep.
On road a chemist was visited, the family
having called in and procured a bottle of lotion
and bandages by which they dressed their wounds
inflicted upon them by Hughes and his hired
brutes from the slums.
We here have the spectacle of this renegade,
Hughes, having employed this gang to throw the
family of poor workers, their bed and household
goods, pell-mell into the roadway, with now no-
thing before them but pain at the traitorous
conduct of one whom they were prepared to place
full trust in, if only because of the fact ©f being
the Labor Prime Minister.
But what must have been the amount of dis-
appointment breathed by these workers, now
facing a cold, dreary night, with neither food nor
blankets, and now compelled to put the night in
(father, mother, and sons) all huddled up to-
gether in an empty house in Windsor, doing the
night on the strength of “Little Billie” having
put the boot in, aided by his hired valiant com-
panions, to smash up a working-class home.
“Billie,” and his comrades in arms, smashed
this home, as they also smashed the young head
of a member of the family, and left him laid out
in his own blood.
Things were now moving fast, and “Little
Billie” must have something to show for his ex-
penses in hiring these brutal and dangerous col-
leagues to accompany him on his very discredit-
able task.


Having read the story of the case, the reader is
compelled to ask: “Can this be the same ‘Little
Billie’ whip was for so long associated with the
Cause of Labor?” And one of Bellinger’s sons
at the time was actually a Wharfie, whose or-
ganisation “Little Billie” was President of, and
some whom Billie hired to do this dirty work
were “useful friends.” We realise that the
tender mercies of the small boys were such as
to allow them regard Hughes in the light of a
fiendish Turk, in dealing out as he did fiendish
and callous conduct to a family of his own class.
This is the same man that long before, and
ever after, has been indignantly denying the
many accusations of the capitalist press that
“the Labor Policy was destined to break up happy
homes and dissolve the marriage tie,” etc. Com-
ing as it did from “Little Billie” should most cer-
tainly be the greater shock to the public on learn-
ing what a despicable individual is this same
gentleman now proclaiming his political virtues
and loyalty to the throne of England, and at the
same time denouncing all and sundry in his
sinister, sneering and sectarian-like way those
whom he has betrayed.
The act and conduct of the man Hughes in this
scandalous case at Windsor was evidently a long
pent-up outburst of treachery and unspeakable
dishonesty, while he suffered himself to remain
with the working class and associated with the
councils of their organisations.
Little did the Labor Movement suspect that
within its ranks was a man who would “come at”
mob violence in smashing up the home of a mem-
ber of his own class, assaulting the wife and
mother, and laying out with a smash over the


head from a bar of iron an innocent child of 16,
his offence being that he tried to protect his
father and mother from the push of roughs
and curs organised by the Labor Renegade, and
now Nationalist darling, William Morris Hughes,
acting the modern and up-to-date adventurer in
his betrayal, and for so doing accepted what
many decent people believe to be a political bribe
—that £25,000. '
The reader having waded through the facts re-
lating to the incident whereby W. M. Hughes
displayed such reckless “bravery” in the leading
part taken by himself in the assault upon the old
man’s home, has before him now the fact that
he is still Prime Minister, but with this distinc-
tion, that Hughes has been accepted as the mouth-
piece to the anti-Labor forces (called Natianal-
ism) in the Commonwealth.
The “Nationalist” section of the community
having accepted Hughes to their fold, as leader
and spokesman, must now accept full responsi-
bility for his brutal attack upon the Bellinger
family at Windsor.
They must accept full responsibility also for
the fact that, in addition to having a man as
leader in the public life of the Commonwealth,
was guilty of callous conduct in carrying out an
organised eviction, reminiscent of the worst days
of the Land League in Ireland, aided by a gang
of Sydney’s toughs, was also so unfair that he
refused to pay the man his wages and compen-
sate him for the improvements effected upon the
farm.
You have rer.d where Hughes tried to repudi-
ate his own signed contract with this hardworking
old farmer. In this is revealed (in addition to


the cowardly assault part) the true value of the
word of Hughes as a man and a politician. You
see where the judge disbelieved him, and you see
the “great” value placed upon his conduct, in so
far that their decisions were all against him.
Finally, we have him sailing merrily slong as
“Labor” Attorney General until 1914, when war
took complete control of his enthusiasm. Because
of acting the part of traitor to the party that all
his political life he belonged to, he was expelled.
That, apparently, was the opening he for so long
waited. With many more such renegades he
joined forces with the “Liberals,” and called
themselves the Nationalists. He was now in a
stronger position than ever, even though numeric-
ally he may have been weaker : he had the back-
ing of millions of pounds to now “put the boot
in” to his old associates and the working class
per medium of his War Precautions Act. Many
men who were admirers of Hughes prior to his
1916 act of treachery now found themselves be-
hind the bars because of the fact of denouncing
Hughes and his war madness. In the late war
Hughes revealed himself as being utterly incap-
able of calm control. If ever one loved the
“glory” of war limelight, it was Hughes, but al-
ways careful enough to keep out of the reach of
a big German shell.
Hughes in his many peregrinations abroad
through England and France exploited the good
name made by the A.I.F. In fact, as we see him
in his disreputable conduct towards the Bellinger
family, so we see him in the politics of the coun-
try. He dragged his character and the fair
name of Labor through the mire in the cowardly
assault case aided by crooks from Sydney’s back


lanes, and the Nationalists accepting, as they
have done, a champion twister, must now
accept full responsibility before the public if they
are still further prepared to shelter this man
who was convicted for breach of agreement, as-
saulting husband, wife and children, and Wrong-
ful imprisonment.
And, furthermore, if the people of his elector-
ate still endorse him as their representative in
Parliament, then we must say they would re-
duce chemselves to his own cowardly level. But
I believe, on reading the full facts of the case, as
every opportunity will be given for so doing, the
electors can only logically come to one conclu-
sion—that is, if Hughes would be so dastardly
in smashing up a poor man’s home, and at the
same time attempt to repudiate his own signature
to a solemn contract, he is equally dangerous in
the public life of this country.
I have written this up for the benefit of the
people lam fully aware very few are acquainted
with the facts of the case, besides the great sec-
tion who know nothing whatever of it, when it
must come as a great shock to all to think that
their leading citizen had played so foul a part with
a gang of toughs in the smashing of a humble
home, and subsequently to be so discredited in
the Courts of the country, before a jury of his
countrymen, where he was beaten and convicted
on every count,, and forced to pay damages for
his shameful conduct in that sad case some years
ago.
The Hughes then is the same to-day. He was
a menace to the peace and happiness of a quiet
home at Windsor. He rendered homeless an un-
fortunate family. He compelled the mother, who


bore children (whom Hughes or his cowardly
“comrades” bashed over the head with an iron
bar) to trudge a lonely road for five miles on a
cold, dark night, seeking other shelter. They
bashed this mother, whilst they cleared the
home. His brutal hirelings held the old man
down whilst the wreckage was being pelted into
the street. The old couple and injured children
found shelter in an empty house, but huddled
together to keep themselves warm, because they
had no blankets or soft bed to lie upon. They
shivered, whilst the victorious Hughes at the
head of his cowardly troop of back-lane smashers
marched off to sleep comfortably on soft beds
elsewhere
And Hughes is a menace to the peace and hap-
piness of Australia to-day.
When you, reader, stop to think of the plight
of this family on that cold night in July, all
brought about by one preaching the glad tidings
of the gospel of Labor, and highly paid for so
doing, who was the trusted leader of the workers
of the country, what must your feelings be to-
wards one who acted shamefully, and later to re-
nege on all his former political associates and
doctrines then preached.
He immediately became a Labor renegade and
rat.
He associated himself with all those forces he
formerly denounced. He sold his life-long prin-
ciples upon which he crept into the highest and
most honorable office in the land, the office of
Prime Minister, but he discredited and fouled
that high and honorable office, and the very pre-
sence of the man in that high office ever since has


not added to the reputation of it. Convicted as
Hughes has been for so foul a case, he has fouled
that office and sullied the fair name of Australia.
It now remains for the people of his electorate
to restore that good name prior to being be-
smirched by Hughes, and in that respect a big
responsibility rests upon many honorable men
and women now connected with the Nationalist
Party to tell “Little Billie” he is no longer wanted
in the public life of this country.
The people of Australia look to the proud people
of North Sydney to rid the National Parliament
of Australia of this political humbug. Will North
Sydney rise to 'the occasion ? YES!


“Billie” cracks the Conscription whip


