





IN THIS COLON?,
(/i .yJ. tyJ
A DUTY OR A SIN:
A TRACT
BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF
TWO LECTURES
UPON THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH,
BY THE
Right Reverend EDWARD COPLESTON, D.D.,
SOMETIME LORD BISHOP OF LLANDAFF.
The name of schismatic is on all sides disowned, and they who estrange them-
elves most from us take it most heniously when we apply it to them. But they
ust pardon us if we cannot forbear the use of a word, because they dislike it; for
by a schismatic we all understand one who unnecessarily separates himself from
lat body of Christians among whom he resides, then he who does the thing must
;e it ill that we give him the name.— From the Charge of Bishop Hough to the
of the Diocese of Worcester, in the year 1728.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OP NEW SOUTH WALES.




LECTURE I.
I propose to enquire into the nature of that Church which
is the depositary and guardian of the doctrine revealed by
Our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Apostles, as necessary to
be believed in order to our everlasting salvation; and how
far the authority of that Church extends in regulating the
faith and practice of its members.
For as on the one hand, we contend that our religion was
not set adrift in the world to be preached or explained
according to the will and fancy of individuals, so, on the
other, we maintain that there exists no human authority
warranted to impose upon us its own dictates in religious
matters, as entitled to implicit obedience.
Now, that from the first promulgation of the Gospel there
has been a distinctly and permanently embodied society ,
established by our Lord Himself, beginning with His first
disciples, and spreading wider and wider, as the Gospel was
propagated among mankind, is evident from the earliest
ecclesiastical historians; and this society it is which we
denominate the Church.
The purposes for which our blessed Lord instituted this
Society appear to have been principally these two, —Ist, the
preservation and dissemination of His doctrines in their
original purity; and, 2nd, the mantenance of peace and
good order among believers.
Hence it must evidently be a visible society. It might,
indeed, appear superfluous to notice so obvious a circum-
stance, had not an attempt been made to limit the Church
to an invisible society of those who have “ finished their
course ” upon earth, in the faith and fear of God; an
attempt which would wrest from all ecclesiastical estab-
lishments their claim to Divine authority. This extravagant
notion is refuted by our Lord Himself, who declares thatv\


the Kingdom of Heaven (by which is to be understood the
Christian Church) is like a “ certain king, which made a mar-
riage for his son, and sent forth his servants unto the high-
ways, who gathered together as many as they found, both
had and good: and the wedding was furnished with guests.”
Now the description of a Church, the members of which
are both bad and good, cannot be confined to those whose
names are written in heaven.
I have said, that by the kingdom of heaven is here to be
understood the Church ; but as it is also used (as well as the
equivalent expression, the kingdom of God) in some
passages, in another sense to signify the society of just men
“ made perfect” in the next world, has probably contributed
to lead inattentive or uncandid readers into this confusion
of thought, which has terminated in their denying the
existence of the visible Church.
That this society was not only instituted by Christ, but
further, that the mode of admission into it was prescribed
by Him, and restrained according to His will, we collect from
His answer to Nicodemus compared with His charge to His
disciples. He said to the former, “ except a man be born
of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the king-
dom of God ;” here He lays down the mode and condition of
admittance into His Church, namely, to be born of water,
and of the Spirit; and that Christian baptism was what He
had in view as this mode and condition, is plain from His
charge to His disciples, “Go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
Now as every society must be regulated by certain
officers, Christ has placed officers over His Church, “ I
appoint unto you a kingdom as my Father hath appointed
unto me. As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you,”
and as this commission is not to be limited to the eleven
Apostles, the remarkable words which follow clearly prove,
“ Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world.”
Accordingly, in order to preserve that continuity of suc-
cession in the officers of the Church which is here implied,


we find the Apostles taking care to appoint and ordain
other ministers as Christ had ordained them, and trans-
mitting to these a portion of the authority they had received
from Him; being by this means themselves the first of
a series which continues unbroken to this day. It is
worth while to remark, that this continuous succession of
the Christian priesthood, furnishes an unanswerable argu-
ment on the side of our revelation, being a standing argu-
ment, as it were, of its Divine origin. If any set of men,
springing up in the present day, were falsely to profess
themselves the regular successors in an unbroken series of
some who had been originally appointed by the author of
certain miracles, to testify those miracles as eye-witnesses,
and to preach the doctrines of their master; and were they
to add, that these doctrines and these miracles had been
constantly proclaimed by numbers of these preachers from
the time of the first founder of the religion until now, who
does not see that so impudent a falsehood would be suffi-
ciently refuted by every one’s experience ?
The very circumstances which render it impossible
to gain credit for a perjured story of this nature now, would
also have rendered it no less impossible to do so at any
anterior period; the pretensions, therefore, of the Christian
priesthood must be founded in fact, since we are thus com-
pelled to trace it up to the very period when sensible
miracles were professed to be wrought, which, if unreal,
men’s senses would have enabled them to detect and
expose.
It seems advisable to remark this great and most im-
portant distinction between the Christian priesthood and
that of Pagan or Mahommedan nations, none of which fur-
nish any evidence for their respective religions, since none
of them even profess to have their origin in an unbroken
series up to the actual performance of visible miracles ?
But, secondly, the Church of Christ is a spiritual society;
He has Himself expressly told us that His kingdom is not
of this world; it was not set up in opposition to temporal
sovereigns; it claimed empire only in the consciences of
Christians, and did not in worldly affairs interfere with


their submission to civil governors. The enemies to which
it was opposed were sin, the world, and the devil, against
which we promise at our baptism to fight manfully under
the banner of Christ crucified.
The spirituality of Christ’s kingdom is proved by His
example no less than by His words ; He steadily resisted
the attempts of the people to make Him a king, and refused
to interfere in the questions concerning the obedience of
the Jews to the Roman Government; and His Apostles in
like manner inculcated the duty of obedience to the civic
authorities under which they lived.
Thirdly, the Church of Christ is an universal society,
both with regard to place and time. The more solemn
acts of Jewish worship were confined to Jerusalem ; whereas
the disciples of Christ were commanded by their Master,
to “go out into all the world, and to preach the Gospel to
every creature; for to the blessed Jesus, God hath given
“ the heathen for His inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for His possession and hence we use the expres-
sion, of the “ Holy Catholic Church” (or Church Universal)
to indicate that it was our Lord’s design to found one com-
munity of unlimited extent. The word Church, however,
is frequently applied in a narrow sense to every single
branch of this great community ; it is thus that St. Paul
speaks of having the care of all the churches; we read
elsewhere also, of the first founded churches in Asia ; and
we find the same name continually applied to other such
subordinate communities, all of which could distinctly trace
their origin mediately or immediately, from the first church
at Jerusalem, from which they were oft-shoots, and deduce
a regular succession of pastors from the Apostles them-
selves. The Christian Church is also an universal society
with respect to time. The Jewish economy, which was
only the shadow of good things to come, but not the
substance, was to cease. When Christ appeared its work
had been accomplished. Like the forerunner of the
Messiah, the Mosaic dispensation sunk before the increase
of the gospel ; the new law, which was to be “ written on
man’s heart” and to teach him the worship of God “in


spirit and in truth,” was to last for ever; and this the
Jews themselves rightly understood, though they were
mistaken as to the nature of Christ’s kingdom; they were
therefore, at a loss how to reconcile that saying of Jesus,
that He should be taken from them, with His being the
Messiah. “We have heard out of the law that Christ
abideth for ever ; and how sayest thou, the Son of man
must be lifted up ?”
The Christian Church, then, is not merely a number of
people agreeing in the same articles of faith or in the same
act of religious worship ; but it is, moreover, a society , not
of man’s, but of Christ’s, forming a society of spiritual
incorporation, of universal extent both as to home and
place ;of which Christ Himself is the head, and all in-
dividual Christians who have been regularly admitted to it,
the members. Neither is it left to the choice of each in-
dividual whether he will maintain his connection with it
or not. If he is a disciple of Christ he must be a member
of Christ’s Church, and, being such, he is bound to com-
ply with those reasonable conditions, which are essential
to the good order and preservation of society. It has
been already remarked that the Church, being a society
must be regulated by certain officers, and that Christ has
appointed officers for this purpose. These governors of
the Christian community, besides their commission to preach
the gospel, are required to enact such canons and laws
in spiritual affairs as shall tend to edification; whereby
it is not meant that they have authority to change any
of the divine laws, or impose any article of faith or rule
of moral duty, or to prescribe any terms of salvation
which are neither expressly contained in the scriptures,
nor can with certainty be inferred from them ; but only,
that they are invested with power in all such things as
relate to the outward peace of the Church ; and if it
appears that things of this kind are left undetermined by
the scriptures, and further, that it is necessary they should
be determined then, we cannot doubt but that Christ has
entrusted the governors of the church —with authority to
determine them. Now, that these are not particularly


determined by scripture is very evident, for the rules of
scripture are all general. We are commanded to assem-
ble together for the worship of God, but the times and
places are not expressed. We are commanded to “ follow
such things as make for peace and edification” and to
“do all things decently and in order.” But the parti-
cular methods by which order must be maintained and
edification promoted are nowhere stated. Still it is neces-
sary that these things he settled to prevent disorder and
confusion. And, accordingly, we shall find that the
Apostles and primitive governors of the church, besides
the standing rules of the gospel, established many regu-
lations as the several occasions of the churches under
their care required. In many of St. Paul’s epistles espe-
cially to those addressed to the Corinthians he prescribes
particular rules for the decency of divine worship, the
avoiding of public scandal and the administration of other
things not determined by Christ. He speaks also of
customs which he or other Apostles had appointed and
which the Church observed. There is, and ever will be
the same necessity of instituting rules for the peace and
government of the church as existed in the apostolic age,
and consequently, there is good reason why this part of
the apostolic authority should be transmitted to the rulers
of the church in all ages. And as one of the circum-
stances which constitutes the unity of the Catholic
Church is the obligation which all its members lie under
(whether they fulfill it or no), to trust in Christ as their
Saviour and maintain the doctrines of scripture, (these
being of universal authority), so, in matters of mere dis-
cipline (since these need not be necessarily everywhere
the same), it seems but reasonable to allow authority as
to such matters existing in each place.
Where the authority of the governors is so clearly
marked out, the subjection of the members to that autho-
rity is necessarily implied. Where the Divine law sanctions
the former, it demands by immediate consequence the
latter. But these dictates of reason are confirmed by the
voice of inspiration : “We beseech you, brethren,” says


St. Paul, “to know them which labour among you; and
are over you in the Lord, and admonish you ; and esteem
them very highly in love for their work’s sake.” And, again,
the same Apostle enjoins his Christian brethren among the
Israelites to ‘‘obey them that have the rule over them, and
to submit themselves ; for they watch for your souls, as
they that must give account.”
But if a power of ordaining rules for edification be con-
veyed by the Divine decree to the governors of the Church,
they must also be invested with authority to enforce the
laws which they have deemed it expedient to enact, by
judging and censuring offenders.
This authority they derive from their blessed Master,
who declared to St. Peter (which declaration applied
equally to all the Apostles, and, as we have already
observed, applying to them in their pastoral character,
descended to their successors in that department) that he
would give him the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, that
whatsoever he should bind on earth should be bound in
Heaven, and whatsoever he should loose on earth should
be loosed in Heaven.” And the same authority which was
bestowed on them by Christ, we find conferred by St.
Paul on Timothy, to whom he thus writes: —“ Against
an elder (a presbyter or minister) receive not an accusa-
tion, but before two or three witnesses.” And to Titus
the same Apostle gives the following charge,—“ A man
that is a heretic, after the first admonitions reject.”
The jurisdiction here asserted generally for the sake of
preserving order in the Church is more especially called
for in the admission of persons authorized to fill the
pastoral office; for to any one who duly considers with
what solemnity our Lord appointed His Apostles to their
holy office and with which they transmitted to others the
authority they received it will appear sufficiently evident
that no man is permitted to intrude himself into the ministry
on his own authority.
The presumptuous arrogance of self-constituted teachers
is the more striking on account of the disregard they
show to the precepts, and the examples contained in that


very Gospel of which they claim to be ministers; besides
that, their conduct is so manifestly destructive of that
unity and good order, and which are the very objects
principally proposed in the institution of a Church.
There are unfortunately in the present day, but too
many who are guilty of this bold usurpation; with all the
charity that is due to the persons of such offenders and
with all the compassion we may feel for the ignorance and
delusion, under which some of them labour, we are neither
required nor allowed to think lightly of their offence. The
only pretence they have to urge is, that of an immediate
personal call from the Holy Spirit himself. A pretence
which certainly ought in all reason to be supported by the
display of miraculous powers such as were possessed by
the Apostles, and by which they fairly established their
claim to an immediate commission from God. All of these
indeed were appointed by our Lord Himself during His abode
on earth except St. Matthias and St. Paul who were
chosen by Him after His ascension. St. Matthias upon whom
the lot fell that preferred him to Joseph called Barsabas,
after the eleven had prayed to the Lord Jesus that He
would show whether of these two He had chosen ; and St.
Paul who was called in a manner sensibly miraculous.
All the other Christian Ministers of the primitive
Church received their commission mediately or immediately
from the Apostles, who were so far from thinking the
regular, distinct, and solemn appointment of them a matter
of small import, that they did not dispense with it even
the case of those who had received the extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Spirit. Their charge to the disciples
on the occasion of the first institution of deacons
was this— ‘ Brethren, look ye out seven men of honest
report full of the Holy Ghost and of wisdom, whom
we may appoint over this business, the persons thus
selected were as we read, set before the Apostles, and
‘ when they had prayed they laid their hands on them’.
Another conclusion which we cannot hut infer from an
attentive view of the authoritative, distinct, and regular
institution of the Christian Church is, that it cannot be


allowable for any one to make groundless divisions it it,
or wantonly to separate from it. Such conduct is uni-
formly and severely reprobated both by Christ and His
Apostles, the prayer of the former for His disciples was that
they might ‘be one.’ St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans
warns them to mark and avoid those who ‘ cause divisions
among them;’ and he strongly censures those that existed
in the Church of Corinth: every one of you saith lam
of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of
Christ. Is Christ divided ? This conduct of theirs he
calls c carnal,’ that is savouring of the original corruption
of our nature, and unsuitable to the regenerated followers
of Christ, and it is observable * that he is not here
charging them with any heretical opinions, but merely with
the sin of party-spirit and schism.
Heresy, indeed, and schism usually go together, but they
are in themselves two distinct offences, and of this it is
the more necessary to remind you, because there are not
a few who think very lightly of the guilt of schism and
who seem to imagine that, provided a man adheres to the
right faith, his union with or separation from the Church
is a matter of very little moment, and may be determined
according to his own taste or convenience ; a notion which
if we consult the Bible, we shall find to be utterly
unwarrantable.
The toleration, which is very properly practised in this
country has led some incautious minds to form a most falla-
cious judgment with respect to the nature both of heresy and
schism. Because no legal compulsion is employed either to
control men’s religious opinions or to bring them within the
pale of the Church ; some persons are hence led to consider
both religious opinions and religious conformity as matters of
no great consequence in a moral point of view. They ought,
indeed, to be left to the decision of every man’s own con-
science, but he is accountable for his decision in the sight of
God, and he will be most fearfully accountable indeed if he
regards them as matters of indifference. Doctrines, indeed,
and practices contrary to the Word of God we are bound
to resist by whatever Church they may be enjoined, but


when no reason of this kind can be alleged we are no less
hound to coformity. All separation must either be a duty
or a sin. That the resistance of the Reformers of our
Church to the abuses and encroachments of the Church
of Rome was both justifiable and necessary, and that the
English Church, as settled by them, is of a character truly
Apostolical, and such, that a secession from it is justly
chargeable with the sin of schism, it will be the object of
the concluding Lecture to establish.


LECTURE 11.
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
It was the object of the last Lecture to prove that the
Christian Church is a Society established by Christ and
His Apostles, and that the preservation of its unity was the
last and most earnest charge of our Lord Himself to His
disciples. In the present Lecture *it was intended to show
that the Church of England, as constituted at the Refor-
mation, is a true member of that Universal Church to which
no earthly limits are assigned, and, consequently, that it is a
violation of Christian unity to separate from its communion.
The first part of the inquiry, therefore, relates to the dis-
putes between us and the Church of Rome, comprehending
a multitude of controversies, into the particulars of which
it would he impossible now to enter. We shall confine our
attention, therefore, for the present, to that claim to infalli-
bility and spiritual supremacy which is asserted by the
Church of Rome, and which we deny. This may, indeed,
be called a hinge of the whole controversy, for if once the
claim be made good, all examination of disputed doctrines
must cease at once ; and it becomes the immediate duty of
all Churches to submit to that decision which is dictated by
the lawful sovereign and instructor of the rest. But when
we demand Scriptural proof of this extraordinary claim, we
are referred to the single text of St. Matthew’s Gospel, the
eleventh chapter, the sixteenth and eighteenth verses.
When our Saviour, in reply to the first confession of
St. Peter, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living
God,” says “ Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth
shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose


on earth shall be loosed in Heaven.” Hence it is concluded
that this Apostle was invested with superior authority over
the rest ; and (what is still more strange) because St. Peter
afterwards preached at Rome and suffered martyrdom there,
it is further concluded that the first Bishop whom he ap-
pointed over the Church in that city, and all his successors,
are entitled to the same superiority. The first and most
obvious answer to this interpretation of Scripture is, that
this superiority was neither claimed by St. Peter nor
acknowledged by the other Apostles.
In his own epistle he makes no allusion whatever to such
a privilege, nor have we any evidence, either in Scripture or
in the writings of the fathers, that it was ever thought of—•
Nay, in this question about requiring the Gentile converts
to conform to the Mosaic-law, St. Paul we know withstood
him to the face ; and in the full assembly of Apostles and
elders at Jerusalem, when this question was discussed—St.
James and not St. Peter presided. If called upon for our
sense of the passage, we answer, that we regard it as a pro-
phetic declaration of what afterwards is so plainly related in
the Acts of the Apostles. By the preaching of St. Peter
the Church was first opened at Jerusalem, above three
thousand Jews being converted in one day ; and by the
instrumentality of the same Apostle, Cornelius the first
gentile convert, was made, and the door which they had
hitherto believed to be shut against the heathen world was
thus opened by him. Upon this rock therefore, figuratively,
may the Church of Christ be w ell said to be founded. But
that his successors in a particular church, which was not
even the scene of these transactions, are also the rock or
foundation spoken of, is a conceit, not only unwarranted in
Scripture but absolutely without meaning.
That the latter part of the text conferring the power of
the keys had no special relation to St. Peter, but to the
Church which he was to have the glory of beginning, is
sufficiently evident from the same words being addressed
afterwards by our Saviour to the Apostles collectively with-
out any distinction, Mat. 18. But, say the Papists, as the
Scripture does not contain all that is wanted for the regu-


lation of the Church, and as its meaning is liable to be
variously understood, there exists a necessity for some
infallible guide to settle all disputes, and to preserve
uniformity of faith and practice.
Now, supposing this necessity admitted, (which is in fact,
merely an opinion of theirs, resting on no warrant of Scrip-
ture,) yet there is a total absence of all proof that the Church
of Rome is constituted this infallible guide, or that it
possesses a right to convene general councils, or to preside
in them for that purpose. On the contrary, there never
existed a time when this privilege was allowed or acquiesced
in by their Universal Church.
The Churches of imperial and great cities were allowed
a precedence and dignity of rank, although this was occasion-
ally contested, hut that the superiority or control of the
Church of Rome over those of Constantinople, Alexandria,
or Antioch, was admitted, is contradicted by all history.
In fact, the ascendancy she acquired in the west was the
slow and gradual result of a systematic ambition employing
every expedient of worldly policy to promote its views; and
one of the worst consequences, has been the encouragement
rather of blind superstition than of enlightened religion,
because that frame of mind is obviously the most disposed
to servile obedience and submission.
With this part of the subject, then, I will proceed no further,
observing only, in the language of the acute Chillingworth
that the Romanists’ argument is manifestly a circle. They
prove the infallibility of the Church from a text of disputed
meaning, and they maintain their own interpretation of that
text to be right, because the Church is infallible.
But since the Church of England was confessedly for many
ages in close and intimate alliance with the Church of Rome,
consulting her authority and obeying her decrees, is it not a
departure from the law of Christian unity to renounce that
connection, and to withdraw altogether from her communion ?
Rather let us say, was the Church of England, when
resolved to reform its own errors and corruptions, to be
restrained by the Church of Rome, and by the fear that
she would pronounce us heretics ? Such is the correct state


of this question. For the authority of that Church over us
being disallowed, it is rather for them to say why they do
not follow our example and reform themselves. We were
conviced that many fundamental errors and gross corrup-
tions had grown up in the Church, and we resolved, in the
work of reformation, to make the Scriptures our sole
standard of doctrine, and to conform, as nearly as possible,
to the primitive Church in matters of discipline and practice.
We acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a branch of the
true Church, corrupted, indeed, and polluted, as we ourselves
once were : we lament their errors; we pray for their
amendment, and we would gladly give them the right hand
of fellowship in the performance of the same good work.
But in the meantime, we contend that we ourselves also are
an integral member of the Catholic Church of Christ, having
that sure and certain token of it, an unbroken succession of
ministers from the time of the Apostles, and holding as we
do the Holy Scriptures genuine and uncorrupted for our
rule of Faith. Even had the doctrine, then, of the Church
of Rome been unexceptionable, though we might respect
her counsels and listen to her advice , we should by no
means yield to her authority , and while her doctrines remain
fundamentally corrupt and vicious, we think it not only
allowable, but expedient and even necessary to withdraw
from her communion. Upon these simple* principles the
great work of reformation was begun and carried on in this
country. Unlike some of the reformed Churches on the
continent, we rejected nothing from the mere spirit of
opposition to the papal see ; and whatsoever appeared to be
agreeable to Scripture, to have been approved and adopted
by the primitive Church, or to be conducive to edification,
was carefully retained. In order to ascertain these points,
the writings of all the early fathers were thoroughly
examined, as well as the acts of the first general councils.
These documents were used as evidences of the practice
and opinions of those times, but the golden rule through-
out observed, and which has been justly styled the vital
principle of the Reformation, was, that Scripture, and
Scripture only, is the rule of Faith.


The principal corruptions in matters of doctrine, were
the sacrifice, as it was called, of the mass, which led to the
idolatrous adoration of the elements of bread and wine ;
the denial of the cup to the laity; image worship ; adora-
tion of relics ; the doctrine of purgatory, and of the merit
of good works; the worship of the Virgin, and the invo-
cation of the Saints as mediators for man. In matters of
discipline and practice also the errors were many and
grievous, performing services in an unknown tongue, keep-
ing back the Scriptures from the people ; the sale of
indulgences ; enforcing celibacy on the clergy and auricular
confession on the people, deceiving them with false stories
of pretended miracles, besides enjoining a host of super-
stitious rites and ceremonies which had obtained complete
possession of the peoples minds, and usurped the place
of all true religion. In the prosecution of this work (which
may be said to have been completed in the fifth year of
Elizabeth, when our articles and Liturgy received their
final sanction), nothing is more remarkable than the
spirit of sobriety and moderation which governed the pro-
ceedings of our Reformers. They compiled a Liturgy
embracing all that was pure and valuable in ancient forms
of prayer, prescribed decent and solemn ceremonies,
retained episcopacy, and regarding a Christian nation as
a Christian Church, they declared the temporal govern-
ment in ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs to belong to
the same sovereign.
It was scarcely to be expected that in a reform which
extended over a considerable portion of Europe, every
country should be guided by the same moderate principles.
At Geneva, in particular, under the guidance of Calvin, a
Church was established on the principle of departing as
widely as possible in every respect from the institutions of
the papal see. Not only were corrupt and superstitious
practices abolished, but the wdiole exterior of religious
worship, the habits of the ministers, the form of adminis-
tering the sacraments, and all other ecclesiastical ordinances
were studiously changed ; whether they were good or bad
w r as not the question ; they were regarded as having once


been papal. The observance of festivals was forbidden,
and instead of purifying and amending the Litany, all set
forms were superseded by the extemporaneous prayer of
the minister. Professing to be guided solely by what they
found in Scripture, without regard to the practice even of
the earliest Churches, they established a perfect equality
in the priesthood, all of whom were called Presbyters, a
form of Church government which was adopted in the Low
countries and in Scotland, where it has continued to the
present day. In England, from the first, there were men
of enthusiastic minds, who, in their resentment against
the see of Rome, were inclined to pursue the same
measures.
During the persecution of Queen Mary’s reign many of
these fled to the Continent, and having taken refuge among
the reformed Churches there, more especially at Frankfort
and Geneva, they returned in the following reign, confirmed
in their antipathy to every form of the English Church
which bore the slightest resemblance to the popish cere-
monies. Hence arose that sect of Dissenters, who, under
the name of Puritans, opposed the system of Church
government established in the reign of Elizabeth, enter-
taining opinions hostile to the civil as well as to the religious
establishments of the country. Under James I. they in-
creased in numbers and influence, and at length, in the
reign of his unfortunate son, overthrew the constitution
both in Church and State. The objections most strenu-
ously maintained by them, related to the clerical vestments,
and to certain forms, which as relics of popery they called
idolatrous ; such as the sign of the cross in Baptism, the
ring in marriage, bowing at the name of Jesus, Church
music, the observance of festivals, and days in commemora-
tion of saints.
If indulgence had been granted them in these points,
they declared their readiness to remain in conformity with
the Church of England; but it is remarkable, that after
their separation, the clamour raised about these matters
soon died away, and few, if any, it is presumed, would
assign them as sufficient grounds for leaving our communion.


In points of doctrine there was no difference, but soon
after the schism was effected other exceptions were taken
to our ecclesiastical system. More particularly—First, the
use of precomposed forms of Prayer in public worship.
Secondly, to the royal supremacy. Thirdly, to the order
of Bishops of distinct from and superior to, the presbytery.
And being now at liberty to follow the vent of their own
inclinations, they established a communion similar in all
these respects to the Reformed Church of Geneva. Upon
no one of these points it is my purpose to enlarge—
Suffice it to observe on the first, namely, set forms of
prayer, that the practice rests upon authority which it
would be presumptuous to resist; set forms of prayer were
used by the Jews in a religion founded by God Himself;
they are sanctioned by our Saviour, who has enjoined the
use of one prayer, and has given it as a pattern for the
composition of others. There were liturgies in the primi-
tive Church, ascribed to St. Peter, St. Mark, and St,
James ; and whether we admit them to have been actually
composed by those persons or not, certain it is, that they
were used by congregations of primitive Christians ; and
that the names common prayers, constituted prayers’, fre-
quently occur in the writings of the earliest fathers, who
also speak of prayers used by the Apostles.
2ndly.—On the subject of Royal Supremacy much is not
required to be said in the present times, for the objection
is not often heard, and, perhaps the words of our Church
article will now be allowed by most of our opponents to be
a sufficient answer. ‘ Where we attribute to the king’s
majesty, the chief government, we give not to our princes
the ministering either of God’s word, or of the sacraments,
but that only prerogative which we see to have been given
always to all godly princes in Holy Scripture, by God Him-
self ; that is, that they should rule all estates and degi’ees
committed, to their charge by God, whether they be eccle-
siastical or temporal and restrain with the sword the stub-
born and evil doers.’
Srdly.—The third point of difference, which has been
the cause of much controversy, is the government of the


church by Bishops. The title of Bishops, and his spiritual
office could not be questioned, but the Puritans denied
any distinction between Bishops and presbyters, contend-
ing that of old they were used indiscriminately, and that
ordination, as well#as other spiritual functions, might be
discharged by presbyters alone, of which, however, they
gave no sufficient proof. On the other hand, the argument
for the distinct order and office of Bishop is unfolded
with so much clearness, learning, temper, and candour,
in the seventh book of the Ecclesiastical polity, that
(waiving the question whether that part of the woi’k be
rightly ascribed to the great Hooker or not), I would refer
you to that for entire satisfaction on this point, as well
as on every other subject in dispute between us and the
Nonconformists of that age. Episcopacy then is, proved
to have been the form of church government sanctioned
by the Apostles and adopted by every church for fifteen
centuries.
The imposition of hands by the presbytery is added to
that of the Bishop, because such appears to have been the
custom in ancient times. There is, however, abundant
proof, that Bishops often ordained without the co-opera-
tion of presbyters —none, that presbyters ever ordained
without a Bishop. Certain too, it is, that some of the
more moderate Reformers on the Continent lamented the
interruption of this order, as a matter of necessity with
them rather than of choice. We cannot close our view of
these dissensions without offering a few remarks upon the
danger of hastily indulging private opinions and inclina-
tions in matters that concern the peace and good order
of the church.
Conscience has been commonly the first excuse; but
nothing is more deceitful than the plea of conscience,
where prejudice, or passion, or dislike, or impatience of
constraint, or love of rule and management have also room
to operate. The first dissenters, as we learn from their own
historian, Neale, justified their separation on the ground of
conscience. They could not endure the slightest vestige of
popish ceremonies. The interval, however, of a few years


was sufficient to dispel the prejudice, and it is no longer
pleaded in vindication of the measure. But the breach once
made is not easily closed, and various causes now combine—
pride, confirmed habit, entangled interests, long opposition,
and mutual animosity —which render a reunion more and
more difficult. Neither does the evil stop here. Schism is
ever found to be the fruitful parent of schism. Within a few
years, out of their own bosom, arose the sect of Inde-
pendents ; enemies not only to Episcopacy, but to all Church
government; and from that time downwards, numerous sects
have continued to spring up, till at length the very idea of
union as a Christian duty seems to be lost from people’s
minds ; and the motive for joining one sect rather than
another, in defiance of all Scripture and all authority, is
founded in each man’s private inclinations, and thus verify-
ing to the letter, the prophetic warning, that times should
come when men would not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts should heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears.” —(2 Tim., chap. 4, v. 3.)
These evils, again, are fostered and encouraged by a
specious profession of liberality, and a false notion of
Christian charity. Christian charity is due to all men, even
to unbelievers ; but it is no charity to leave men in ignorance
upon points which affect their most important interests.
Neither, again, can we allow the praise of liberality to
that which at best is no more than indifference. Liberality
consists in hearing with that which we disapprove ; but if
there be no fault in disagreeing with us, what liberality is
there in allowing the disagreement ? or, how can he be said
to practise charity, who concedes nothing ?
Far be it from us to deny liberty of conscience, or to
treat conscientious scruples with disrespect, but if we fail to
warn a brother of the danger of his way, we are wanting in
our duty, and we become in some measure chargeable with
his destruction. And if an indulgence of private humour
in religious matters be, as daily experience seems to prove,
the prevailing error of the present times, it becomes us
all, as members of the true Church of Christ, to stop its
progress whenever we possess the means of doing so. We


shall thus, at least, stand clear of the guilt of partaking in
other men’s sins. Neither is the evil yet so rank as to
forbid all hope of cure.
If our endeavours be earnest and persevering we may con-
fidently expect the aid and blessing of Almighty God, who
has promised never to forsake his Church, and who declared
from its first foundation ‘ that the gates of hell should not
prevail against it.’
The duty of using such endeavours cannot be too
earnestly impressed on the minds of such of those especially
as are destined for the ministry. How little hope soever we
may have of ever seeing the evil of schism totally and
finally removed, we are, nevertheless, both obliged and
encouraged to use our exertions in each 'particular case, for
its prevention and diminution.
Sickness, poverty, and many other evils, we can never
expect to see banished from the earth, but we are not,
for that reason to sit down in desponding inactivity, without
endeavouring to the utmost of our power to lessen these
evils. It is in this manner that God has thought fit to make
trial of our patience, our benevolence, and our zeal.
Not however, that I would exhort you to engage in acri-
monious controversies and vexatious bickerings. Let us,
rather, according to the Apostle’s precept with meekness
instruct those that oppose themselves; “ and be careful to
give no scandal in anything that the ministry be not blamed.”
Let us endeavour, by our learning, by the soundness of our
doctrines, by diligence in all our spiritual functions, by a
gentle, and blameless deportment, and by a purity of life,
to keep those committed to our charge in the right way,
and to win over those who have departed from it; and let
us earnestly pray that God will be pleased in His good time,
to heal the dissensions of His church, and to recall to His
flock those who have wandered in error, that we may at
length become one fold and one shepherd.
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 370, George-street, Sydney.




