

Co.
Khw; ;w; C->.
4':
C. Q PRINT, ROCKHAMPTON.
lx<Oi
F\RST^-
an Essay on
?»fve Commonweal %>\ii
By E. N, R.
'l S




SEPARATION FIRST:
AN ESSAY
The Commonwealth Bill.
“ 18. IST. IR/.”
“ Nature fills up all space with her limitless productivity.
If we observe merely our own earth, everything that we call
evil and unfortunate is so because nature cannot provide room
for everything that comes into existence, and still less endow
it with permanence.
“Everything that comes into being seeks room for itself and
desires duration: hence it drives something else from its place
and shortens its duration.”— Goethe’s Maxims.
Printed by E. Gostelow, C.Q. Printing Works,
William Street.




JD ED I CATION.
HER MAJESTY QUEEN VICTORIA,
AND TO THE
Lotal People of Central Qheenland,
®jj m f ages ate iebicatefr*


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.—lntroduction, Object, Scope, and Method of this Essay.
CHAPTER ll.—The 123rd and 127 Clauses, and the Rival Policies of
Separation and Federation First.
CHAPTER lll.—How the Union may be Endangered in this Generation
CHAPTER IV.—What State Rights in Australia really mean.
CHAPTER V.—Amendment of the Constitution.
CHAPTER Vl.—Monarchic Federation.
CHAPTER Vll.—Conclusion.


SEPARATION FIRST:
AN ESSAY ON
THE COMMONWEALTH BIEL.
CHAPTER I.
INTBODUCTION.
THE OBJECT, SCOPE AND METHOD OF THIS ESSAY.
“However strong a Government may be, it cannot easily escape from the
consequences of a principle which it has once admitted as the foundation of
its constitution.”—(De Tocquevilles, Democracy in America.)
IT is well to state at the outset that the writer of these pages is not
by any means opposed to the consummation of that higher act
of Australian Union known as Federation.
Sir S. W. Griffith in his recent address said “ The essence of
Federation is common action, sharing with others in the exercise
of powers, which relate to matters of common concern, allowing
others to have a voice in these matters so far as they concern
ourselves, while they reciprocally admit us to a voice in the same
matters so far as they concern them.”
Understood in this way every believer in progress, everyone who
believes in the possibility of a higher civilisation is a Federalist,
co-operation is an enormous gain and civilisation is co-operation.
“ Some men ” to quote Sir S. W. Griffith again “ are by temperament
disinclined to share the troubles or joys of others, and have so strong
a confidence in themselves that they think nothing is to be gained by
association with others. On the other hand there are many persons
to whom any proposal of united or fraternal action at once commends
itself as probably having in it some element of good, and who are by
temperament disposed, even, perhaps with undue rashness to accept
any plausible scheme of associated action,” Here Sir Samuel
sketches the attitude of those who are commonly known as
Individualists and Socialists, of those who don’t want Federation at
all and those who want it at any price. These classes he continued
“represent the extremes, but between them there is the vast body of
moderate persons who are neither repelled by the mere suggestion of


brotherly action, not prepared to accept a scheme on the mere
suggestion that it is beneficial. And these fortunately are the persons
who will decide the matter.' 11
It is to these persons who can take a moderate balanced view of
things that the writer addresses himself, and his object is to try and
persuade them to exert themselves to bring about a further amend-
ment of the Commonwealth Bill. And as these pages have to be
written before the fate of the Act—its acceptance or refusal —is
decided—it is necessary to point out that even if it is accepted ‘in
toto,’ this essay need not be written in vain, since the Act has to
receive the assent of the Crown before it can become law. If the
great body of persons who hold moderate views unite in appealing to
the Crown for amendment, at the same time stating their reasons
with that ‘ animated moderation ’ which commands the attention of
all civilised persons, surely their appeal cannot be in vain ?
Sir. S. W. Griffith considered the Commonwealth Bill in a calm
and moderate way by the dry light of intellect, but the present writer
submits that even his intellect was not unbiassed in this
matter of amendment, for after pointing out that those who
avoid both the extreme of No Federation and the extreme of
“ Federation at any price ” are fortunately the persons whose
influence will be decisive, he again falls back upon the opposition,
the dualism of opposite extremes, from which he wished to escape.
He says “ Each man who thinks that the bill is capable of improve-
ment must consider whether the defects which he thinks he finds
in the scheme are so fatal to it as a whole as to require him to reject
it, or whether the scheme as a whole offers so many advantages as
to turn the balance in its favour. The alternatives are “ Federation
under this Constitution ”or“ No Federation,” Why so ? If those
moderate persons, whose voice so far has hardly been heard above the
din of the rival parties, desire amendment why should they not be
permitted to bring it about and to delay the bill for that purpose ?
It cannot be that delay would endanger Australian Union altogether,
for as the Hon. B. E. Wise said “ the people always wanted union,
but the politicians were hostile.” The popular desire for union is
generally admitted. Now it cannot be denied that the interests of
both Central and Northern Queenslanders are very imperfectly
represented in the Queensland Parliament, or that this Parliament
has prevented their representation in the Federal Convention. It is
questionable even whether the Queensland Parliament perfectly
represents the interests of the people of South Queensland. At any
rate the Queensland Parliament is responsible for keeping Queens-
land out of the convention. The only representation it has had is
through Premier Dickson at the Premiers Conference, and Premier
Dickson had not then been approved as Premier by the electors of
Queensland. There are many persons in Queensland utterly opposed
to his policy, and it has beeu stated in the Queensland Press, that the
Dickson ministry does not even now represent a majority of the


electors of Queensland. New South Wales rejected the Bill once and
amended it in her own interest. There is no just reason then for
saying with Sir. S. W. Griffith “ Federation under this Constitution
or No Federation ” unless indeed the capability of suggesting
reasonable amendment is not a possession of the Queensland people.
And this is evidently what Sir. S. W. Griffith thinks. He himself
was largely intru mental in framing the Bill of 1891, of which the
present Bill is largely a copy. He and other delegates from Queens-
land were present at the ’9l Convention, but they were nominated and
not popularly elected. “ Therefore ” says Sir. Samuel “ Queens-
landers have had no inconsiderable share in the framing of the
Constitution. Moreover it is a fact that suggestions made from
Queensland during the sitting of the last convention were carefully
considered and in many cases adopted.” Thus Sir Samuel Griffith,
not now a politician but a Chief Justice who can with difficulty restrain
himself from descending into the political arena, considers that he, a
few nominated politicians and a somewhat weak and unpopular
Premier are to be the judges who shall decide whether reasonable
amendment is within the capacity of the Queensland people. Thus,
assuming an authority which is not legally or naturally his, our Chief
Justice says, we must take the Bill intact or leave it altogether,
He says, “Whether the presence of Queensland representatives
would have resulted in any material change is a question of no 'practical
moment. Surely if such representation would have brought about a
material change the absence of such representation is a question of
great importance. Our Chief Justice continues :“I may be per-
mitted to express my individual opinion that some matters of detail
would have been altered and I think for the better , but that no alteration
would have been made in essential principles .
In this Sir Samuel Griffith may be perfectly right. Had Central
Queensland been represented in the Convention, she would certainly
have tried to amend the 123rd Clause, and might have succeeded so
far as the admission of Queensland into the Federation as three states
and it was precisely the fear of this by the southern majority
which kept Queensland out of the Convention.
But an amendment of the 123rd Clause so as to allow of three
Queenslands would not have brought about any alteration of the
4 essential principles ’ of Federal Union.
Now the 123rd and 127th Clauses do embody the most essential
and vital principles of Federation itself. Sir Samuel Griffith assumes
that the people of Australia want Federation. If this is really true
his advice to take the Bill and amend it afterwards is very reasonable.
But this does not warrant the ‘ indecent haste ’ displayed by the
Queensland Government and the advocates of the policy of 4 Federa-
tion first,’ nor does it justify the determination of that Government to
exclude, it is said, 40,000 men in Queensland from the privilege of
saying whether they want or do not want Federation, as embodied in


the Commonwealth Bill, a bill too which provides ‘ one-man-one-vote.’
Sir Samuel Griffith, living on the serene heights of his legal Olympus
does not display * indecent haste ’ and has perhaps, busy over his
criminal code, lost touch with popular opinion both in Queensland
and Australia at large. But men who are in practical contact with
the people do exhibit an unreasonable haste and warmth in advocat-
ing the policy of ‘ Federation First!’ How can this be explained ?
Well the fact is that in a young country like Australia, there is a
rapid change and progress of public opinion. And even since the
97 —98 Convention there has been a change of opinion, a change
which Sir Samuel, Conservative and busy as he is, has failed to
recognise, a change which practical politicans do recognise and fear.
Fear because the politicians are almost all Federalists while they
recognise that if the change or progress of public opinion proceeds
any further the * essential principles of Federation,’ alluded to by Sir
Samuel, will themselves he called in question and in danger.
If so, as the 123rd and 127th Clauses are essentials of Federalism,
it is obvious that if discussion is not stopped by the acceptance of the
Bill, the dominance of Southern Queensland and Brisbane over the
North and Centre will be in danger.
This is the simple explanation of the * indecent haste ’ displayed
by the Queensland Ministry at present. If the Bill is accepted, it will
then be too late, it will then be absurd, to call in question the
essential principles of Federalism which are the foundation of the
Commonwealth Bill, the foundations on which the whole
political structure stands, the principles from which all its
detailed provisions proceed. If the 123rd and 127th clauses
e.g are amended so as to allow of a general provision
being made for the creation of New States and the
alteration of the existing state boundaries, such an amendment would
necessitate an entire alteration of the architects designs for the new
political structure. It would mean a widening of the base so as to
allow of greater height and the adoption of a different style of archi-
tecture. For instance, if our politicians want to build upon American
Republican lines, and the people of Queensland and the majority of
the people of Australia want to build upon English Monarchical lines,
as there is good reason to think, it is obvious that delay is advisable,
that we may settle the style of architecture. To build up a vast
political fabric and then to find afterwards that it must be altered from
its very foundations and in every detail, must entail enormous expense
and inconvenience to the people who find shelter under its roof. And
as states are not built up by quiet masons with stones and mortar, but
by ambitious energetic politicians with the bodies and blood of men,
on whose consent and mutual trust the permanence of the structure
depends, it is not only expensive to adopt an unsuitable style which
must be changed but highly unwise and dangerous.
Moderate people will perhaps think that the writer of these
pages at least exaggerates when he accuses our politicians of


attempting to build according to one style of architecture when
they know that the majority of the people desire another style, so
proof of this must be given.
Asked to express an opinion of the amended bill, Sir. J.
Downer, 8. A., a member of both conventions, said *‘ most seriously
altered in favour of the more populous colonies.” Sir R. C. Baker,
8.A., likewise a member of both conventions said, “ All the altera-
tions made in the Commonwealth Bill since 1891 have weakened
the Senate and made the House of Representatives, and its com-
mittee the Executive, more powerful. The Bill, as settled in
Melbourne in 1898 went to the furthest limit in this direction to which it
was possible for a true Federalist to follow. The Premier’s suggestions
would turn the Senate into a sham. ... If the guardian of State
rights and State interests is to be an appendage of the House of
the larger colonies, if the smaller colonies are prepared to trust to a
Legislature so constituted the forty two important subjects to be
delegated to the Federal Parliament, the smaller colonies had better
trust the Federal Parliament altogether and save the enormous expense of
six governors , twelve Houses of Legislature Sfc. It is no use having the
disadvantages of Federation if we are to have none of its advantages.
These opinions of pronounced Federalists are very significant.
To quote Sir J. Downer again, “In New South Wales the invasion
(of State right and the power of the Senate) began by the provision
inscribed at the instance of its government, that, in the event of
difference, the two Houses should sit together, and a majority of
two-thirds should rule, This I opposed at the time, although the
weakening of the Senate was not substantial, but accepted in
Melbourne as the only modus vivendi Later, the same colony which
demanded this concession asked for more, as it always has done,
and the agreement of the Premier’s substitutes for the weakening
of true Federal principles already agreed to — what amounts , in effect, to
amalgamation .”
Dr. J. Quick, the author of a Digest of Federal Constitutions, &e.,
said “If the less populous colonies can accept modifications tending
towards nationalism in the constitution, I, for one, would not object.
I am glad to see a disposition to accept them in those colonies.”
This was said in reference to the Premier’s amendments. But the
most unequivocal testimony of all, as to the trend of public opinion
against Federalism, and towards Nationalism comes from the Hon. A.
Deakin, of Victoria. The following is taken from a pamphlet written
by Mr. H. B. Higgins, of Victoria, who is an opponent of the
Commonwealth Bill and advises us, unlike Sir S. W. Griffith, to try
and improve it still more.
“I would like you to mark what Mr. Deakin said in the Federal
Council the other day. His object was to induce Mr. Dickson of
Queensland, and Sir J. Forrest of Western Australia to become
advocates of the Bill with such amendments as the Premiers should
recommend. They were inclined to ask, you know, for another


Convention. What did Mr. Deakin say ? “I hope on reconsider-
ation, even our friends from Queensland will note that, just as the
measure of 1891 was an advance on the Federal Council Act of 1884,
which established this Council —a distinct advance in a liberal
direction—and just as the measure of 1897-8 was another advance
towards unification on the Bill of 1891, if another Convention were
called together, there is a very large section in New South Wales , in
South Australia , and in Victoria who will endeavour still further to enlarge
the popular powers. I would ask my honourable friends, therefore, to
remember if that effort were successful, they might find themselves
confronted with what should be to them a less acceptable measure
than this. The set of the tide is unmistaheahle. It has been firm first to
last—from the inception of the Federal movement to the present time
—in the same direction. I admit that it cannot advance indefinitely.
Complete unification is not sought, and is certainly not provided for at
present. The amendments proposed by New South Wales, are, some
of them, in the same direction — which appears to he the trend of the
whole of the people of Australia —and therefore , they may well ask them-
selves whether they would not act wisely in accepting this measure with
its imperfections.”
Well, you see, says Mr. Higgins, Mr, Deakin’s advice to the
Premiers who had not consulted their electors, to Premiers who have
not been regarded as very favourable to Democratic aspirations —his
advice was “ Take this Bill, for if you don’t, a more Democratic, a
more National Bill will follow, and "be forced on you.”
These words of Mr, Deakin, who some call a Radical, plainly
prove the writers contention that some of our political leaders
are quite aware that the people meditate and wish for a
radical change of the essential principle of our union;
they show that Federal Radicalism means really a radical
distrust of the people—Mr. Deakin does not trust that
large section of the people in his own colony even.
His words explain Premier Dickson’s hurry and also why he does not
want those 40,000 men to have a vote, and further they put
into cold clear language the policy of those who cry “ Federation
First,” which simply means, accept the essential principles of Federa-
tion and especially the 123rd clause, because if these are once accepted
it will be impossible for those large sections of the people alluded to
to effect their will. If Mr. Deakin had not thought that acceptance
of the proposed constitution would prevent, at any rate for generations
to come, any radical change of principle in our form of government,
he would not have objected to another Convention; and if he had not
thought that the matter was urgent, that public opinion was almost
ripe for accepting the idea of a union closer than the federal, with its
manifest imperfections he would not have recommeded his honorable
friends to accept the constitution without delay. There can be no
question that Mr. Deakin betrayed a profound distrust of the people
whom he represents. As the extension of the suffrage, though an


ideal to be aimed at is in practice a matter of expediency, it is quite
possible that Mr. Deakin may be right in distrusting, Victorians,
South Australians, and New South Welshmen. But can there beany
question that, if the trend of the whole people of Australia is as Mr.
Deakin thinks, towards unification, it is extremely unwise to adopt a
Federal form of government with the many radical defects which W.
Bagehet in his “ English constitution ” says it has, unless that con-
stitution can be easily amended so as to take the form desired by the
whole people of Australia. There must be a radical defect somewhere
in the constitution of Mr. Deakin himself or he would perceive the
folly of trying to stem the irresistable tide of Democracy by the
barriers of an inelastic written constitution before it has reached the
limits set by natural conditions.
But we have to thank Mr. Deakin for putting the matter so
clearly and forcibly. Mr. Deakin is a moderate and reasonable man
and most moderate people will agree that unification novo with our
very imperfect representative machinery would be disastrous.
Federation should however only prevent unification in the original
sense of the word, that is it should prevent by coming before it.
Many will agree with Sir S. W. Griffith when he said that “ ample
provision is made for amending the constitution,” but such people do
not call in question the essentials of Federation at all, they assume
like Sir S. W. Griffith that these are to be unalterable. Thus R. R,
Garran in his Coming Commonwealth, says with regard to amendment,
“ If the territory of each State, its basis of representation in each
House of the Federal Parliament and perhaps a few other important
State rights are protected in this way against the possibility of
infringement (i.e. without the consent of the States affected) there
will be no need of an excessively stringent process in respect of
other constitutional amendments. It will probably be enough to
ensure that all such amendments shall receive the assent in
some form of a majority of the nation and a majority of the States,”
Now this is precisely what our constitution does. When then
Sir S. W, Griffith says that the constitution will be easily amended
according to the will of the majority, he does not mean in the
essentials of Federalism, but only in the less important or secondary
matters of the constitution, he would probably not dispute the fact
that the fundamentals of our constitution are placed beyond ‘ the
possibility of infringement.’ Of course from Sir Samuel’s standpoint
this is as it should be, but then he does not see that the tide of
democracy is washing away the very ground that he stands on, that
therefore his Commonwealth Bill is a structure like the Rockhampton
School of Arts, built upon unsound foundations and that continual
pumping and binding with steel bands will be necessary if it is not
to fall to the ground.
If unification is desirable his very first step is likely to be wrong*
and this error is likely to increase with every subsequent movement.


He says until the functions of the new engine of Government are
determined, it is impossible to judge of the suitability of the plans
proposed for its construction.
This is his first move after assuming the federal position. Sir
Samuel himself would readily admit that the functions of a
Consolidated National Government are much more extensive than
that of a Federal Government, more extensive and more intensive too,
and that therefore if ultimate unification is contemplated the plans
proposed should be altered so as to allow both of a greater extension,
and a greater concentration of power. To put this into concrete
language. If Federalism is to progress into Nationalism provision
must be made by the constitution for a single elective head and
a National Referendum, that is amendment must be possible in these
two directions.
The present writer has read Sir S. W. Griffiths contribution to
the Federal discussion with the greatest interest, and admires
exceedingly its method, its wide grasp of the whole subject and the
clear calm intelligence displayed therein but at the same time has to
say that to discuss the details of a constitution without first making
sure of the soundness of its first principle is a wrong method
altogether, and that this authoritative declaration of our Chief
Justice, as it is likely to decide many who were wavering in the
balance, is likely to do much harm because it will blind moderate
people to the main issue, and lead them to suppose that all is well
when all is not well. As De Toequeville said of the American
Federal Democracy, “ however strong a Government may be it cannot
easily escape from the consequences of a principle, which it has once
admitted as the foundation of its constitution ”
And so it may be said of our intellectual giant, the Chief Justice.
However strong his intelligence is he cannot easily escape from the
consequences of the principle which he has adopted. To hit the
golden mean it takes more than intelligence in political matters. It
takes a heart that can fully sympathise with the aspirations
of the people, and in this it must be admitted that
our Chief Justice is somewhat wanting. Hence it is that
he is more in sympathy with Mr. Deakin’s policy of distrust than
with the trend of opinion of the whole people of Australia. If the
policy of “ Federation First ” is unwise, must not the same thing be
said of the policy of “ Separation First ”as commonly understood If
union is difficult now it would be still more difficult to unite if more
independent States came into existence, if more State rights had
to be compromised.
There is a well-known philosophical maxim, expressed thus by
another Samuel, S. T Coleridge. “ Every power in. nature and spirit
must evolve an opposite, as the sole means and condition of its mani-
festation, and all opposition is a tendency to reunion.” An instance
of this law we see in the opposition of the two policies of Federation


First and Separation First. The rival policies are helping to make
each other clearer and the tendency to reunion is already observable.
Thus the great apostle of Federation First in Rockhampton,
C. H. Buzacott, M.L.C., at last. allows lhat “ as a purely abstract
proposition we may readily admit that a man may be a true Federalist
and yet oppose the Commonwealth Bill of the Convention,” and Mr.
Curtis the great apostle of Separation First, though a Federalist, said
in Parliament, “ If the people of Australia could give an articulate
expression of opinion upon the whole subject they would tell you,
this is not the thing we want. They want a union of the people of
Australia, and all this talk about State rights is a fallacy. Where are
the people to get their State rights from ? To what extent will this
territorial sovereignty exist ? The whole thing is a fallacy, and it is
not conducive to the well-being of the people that such a doctrine
shall be set up and advocated.” And Mr. Curtis can appeal to history
to prove this, for it was precisely because the doctrine of State rights
was set up and advocated in America as superior to National right,
that the war of secession became necessary there. The present writer
does not agree with Mr. Curtis that State rights are a fallacy.
Individuals have rights and so should States have rights but in both
cases these rights are conditional not absolute. And Mr. Buzacott
recently tried to show that under the draft constitution the State
right of territorial integrity could be made conditional on the will of
a majority of the electors in a majority of the States and the national
majority.
The advocates of the rival policies then are practically in agree-
ment about this, that State rights ought not to be considered
absolute, that even in the most fundamental matter of the con-
stitution, amendment ought to be possible in accordance with the
will of the majority of the people. Yet to use Q-arran’s words,
State rights are as a matter of fact protected against the possibility
of infringement without the consent of the Parliament and people
of the States directly affected.
The object of this essay is to illustrate the necessity and wisdom
of further amendments of the constitution, it is not an attempt to
criticise the Bill in every detail, that would entail enormous labour
and prove ineffective in the end. There is, however, in considering
every constitution one matter of the most vital importance, and on
this matter the writer wants to concentrate the attention. And this
matter is the amending power. Who shall possess it and how shall it
be exercised, and how shall it be constituted ? “ The importance,”
wrote Garran “of the amending power is obvious when it is
remembered that it is the one power which is supreme over the
federal constitution. The amending power (when it exists) is in fact
the real legislative sovereign which presides directly over the
constitution and so indirectly, over the dual sovereignty of the Nation
and the States.” The central idea of the science of politics is that of
sovereignty, of rule, and it should deal with the birth, growth,


distribution and concentration of the sovereign power or right to rule.
Thus this essay must be to a certain extent a contribution to the pure
science of politics.
The very idea of a constitution is something that is fixed and
stable, something which has been built up in the course of ages in
accordance with practical experience. Thus a constitution ought not
to be easily alterable except in unimportant matters. But as the
universe is constantly changing every constitution ought to be free
from absolute rigidity. “To become crystallized, fixed in opinion,"
wrote Professor Clifford, “is to lose the great characteristic of life,
by which it is distinguished from inanimate nature, the power of
adapting itself to circumstances. This is true even more of the race.
There are nations in the east so enslaved by custom that they seem to
have lost all power of change, except the capability of being des-
troyed.”
Therq is little fear of young and vigorous Australia being
crystallised by any constitution however rigid, but there is a
certainty if a too rigid constitution is accepted, or if that constitution
wrongly distributes the sovereign power, that it will be broken
violently instead of being altered gradually and continuously as it
might be were a better constitution adopted. In the case of America
there was such a wrong distribution of power. The authority of the
States was recognised much too fully, and it took a tremendous civil war
to alter this distribution and give the final sovereignty to the nation.
Our constitution likewise recognises much too fully the right of the
States. If we are to avoid a castastrophe similar to the ‘ war of
secession/ we should settle this matter of the sovereignty before we
unite indissolubly. As the 123rd and 127th clauses embody these
State rights, and as they are the clauses which will prove the most
difficult to amend of any in the draft constitution, the method
adopted in this essay is to concentrate the attention upon them to
enforce the necessity of amendment, to consider suggested amend-
ments, and to show how they can best be amended.
If these clauses can be safely amended, all the other provisions
of the constitution can be amended and amended more easily. Hence
the method adopted must be the best and should be the most
profitable.
And as the object of the writer is simply and solely to promote
the cause of peace, prosperity and progress in the Commonwealth of
Australia, moderate minded persons at least should give these pages
their unbiassed consideration whatever their shortcomings may be.


GHAPTEE I.
THE 123 ed AND 127th CLAUSES AND THE RIVAL POLICIES OP
SEPARATION AND FEDERATION FIRST.
“ Kings, whether despotic or constitutional, and consolidated Republics too, can
seldom indeed be got to give up a single inch of their territories except by
force.”— Freeman’s History of Federal Government.
THE 123rd and 127th clauses are really the moat significant
provisions of the Commonwealth Bill because they embody the
essentials of Federalism. Federalism implies that certain rights
are guaranteed to the uniting States which cannot be infringed or
taken away unless the States themselves consent.
If the States surrendered their entire rights to the Govern-
ment which they establish in common, they would be no longer
sovereigns and Federalism would be impossible unless that Govern-
ment thought fit to give them back again the rights they had
resigned.
For instance, England was once a Heptarchy but was reduced
to unity and the seven kingdoms became mere provinces. And
the seven colonies of Australia would be merely provinces if they
agreed to invest a single government with unlimited absolute power
such as the English Parliament now possesses.
But the Australian colonies have been granted by the crown
constitutional rights. Some of these rights they propose to hand
over to a Federal Government, but some rights they propose to retain
absolutely so that the Federal Parliament cannot possibly interfere
unless asked to do so. The result of this is of course that the
Federal Parliament will be a body quite unlike our existing State
Parliaments, their authority is limited only by the Imperial power
which created them. Our State Parliaments however as they
propose to themselves create another governing body with authority
over them all, are reconstituting an authority which shall be
limited not absolute. And this reconstituted authority must to a
certain extent supersede the Imperial power. The bill says, ” this
act shall bind the Crown.” This is equivalent to an express declara-
tion that the created shall henceforth set limits to the power of
the creator. This is evidently an entire reversal of the most
important principle of politics both Australian and Imperial which
requires the most careful consideration. If the Imperial authority
is to remain supreme, if Federation under the Crown means
anything at all, Anstralian Federation should mean simply that
henceforth the Crown is to treat A ustralia as a whole, that instead


of dealing directly with the different parts, it is to deal with a single
body representing the parts. This would involve no loss of Imperial
supremacy, it would simply mean that the Crown gave up the right
of direct interference and control, just as the owner of a property
who wishes to enter political life ceases to directly control his
employees and appoints a manager to act for him. He gives up no right
which he possessed before and can always, if he pleases, take up again
the authority which he delegated to another simply because it was
convenient to do so. But Australian Federation as proposed by the
Commonwealth Bill is entirely different from this. It is as if there
were several managers of an estate who proposed to the owner that
the powers which he had granted them to exercise should be hence-
forth inalienable, should hold good even against himself, that he
should give up entirely and completely his right to interfere with his
managers if he thought they were not managing their respective
departments properly.
There is manifestly a vast difference between giving up the right
of direct interference, and giving up the right of interference
altogether. And the Commonwealth Bill does propose that the
Crown shall give up certain rights entirely. And it does it in
this way. It proposes to put an intermediary between the
State Parliaments and the Crown, and to forbid the interference of
the Crown except through this intermediary. But this intermediary is
not to posess the same power of interference which the present seven
intermediaries have. Thus by limiting the power of the intermediary
it results that the power of the principal is absolutely limited.
It is very necessary then to consider in what respects the
Imperial authority is limited by the ingenious device for giving
the Australian managers, the State Parliaments, powers which
hitherto they have not legally possessed.
And this of course brings us to the consideration of those clauses
of the Bill, e.g. the 123rd and 127th which guarantee to the States
absolute rights, rights that is which cannot be taken away without
their consent.
The importance of these clauses ought now to be evident for if
the Crown gives its assent to them, allows itself to be bound by them,
it virtually resigns its sovereign amending power in the most vital
and important matters of Government.
It is as if the judicial authority in a State were to announce
publicly that henceforth offenders against the law, though they might
be tried and even condemned could not have any penalty inflicted
upon them unless they consented to be punished. It is the
abandonment of the principle of compulsion in politics in favour of
the principle of consent.
This may or may not be advisable, but clearly this change ought
not to be made without full consideration.


But it must be pointed out here that unless the Crown does
resign some of its authority absolutely to the Australian States true
Federation of any sort is impossible.
The American States could federate because they declared them-
selves independent. The Australian States have not done so, but
they, to all intents and purposes, ask the Crown to grant them
independence when they ask the Imperial authority to give its assent
to Federation. And there can be little doubt that were the Crown to
say, “ I cannot allow you to federate,” many Australians would be
prepared to say at once, “ If you object to Federation we shall simply
declare ourselves independant of you.”
The Federal Constitution Act, then marks a critical point in
Australian and Imperial history very similar to that, which was
marked by the American Declaration of Independence.
And this is not in the least realised by the people of Australia
who are not aware that Federalism implies a radical change of the
principle of Government.
To come to the clauses, the 123rd and 127th, which embody the
essentials of Federalism.
The 123rd clause provides that a New State may be formed by
the division or union of States, but only with the consent of the Parlia-
ments of the States affected; and at the Premier’s Conference it was
further provided by an amendment of Clause 127 that the limits of a
State cannot be increased or diminished or in any way altered, without
the consent of the majority of the electors voting in the States
affected.
Thus the territorial integrity of the existing Australian colonies
is absolutely guaranteed to them and at the same time the right of
interference held by the Crown is absolutely taken away.
It is plain that if a State is to be considered a sovereign power
this territorial integrity must be absolutely guaranteed to it. If this
“ State right” is not put beyond the possibility of infringement there
is no guarantee for the independent existence of that State at all.
It might be altered out of existence altogether at the pleasure of a
dominant majority in the Federal Parliament. Thus if this fundamental
State right is not absolutely secured, all other State rights dependent on
it must be insecure too. If Federation is to exist at all then something
like the 123rd clause must be part of any Federal constitution and as
a consequence of this if the Australian colonies are to federate at all
the supremacy of the Crown must be to this extent absolutely
limited.
It is perfectly natural to find New South Wales, that colony
which is the oldest and whose individuality is most distinctly pro-
nounced, taking the lead in the Federal movement and seeking to
“ bind the Crown ” for the Imperial authority has exercised more
than once against the wish of New South Wales, the power which the
B


1523rd clause is intended to take away from it, And that the Crown
exercised this power much to the advantage of Australia is proved by
the existence of Queensland and Victoria. Surely this is a good
argument against taking away from the Crown the independent right
of creating New States and therefore a good argument against
Federalism itself. Is New South Wales, which has always shown its
determination to use its power unjustly, to be allowed to dictate to the
power which has had to enforce justice ?
The fact too might be pointed out that colonial Parliaments
generally have not made a good use of such territorial rights as they
possess ; that they have allowed absentees to acquire vast areas ; that
they have permitted the formation of immense private estates to the
detriment of the present generation and still more to the detriment
of future generations of the Australian people. This would lead any
sensible person to the conclusion that if the higher act of Australian
Union is to be consummated the territorial rights of the existing
State Parliaments ought to be curtailed rather than be increased and
made absolute as must be the case under the present or any other
scheme of true Federation. If the power of the Crown is to be taken
away in this matter it is to the interest of the Australian people that
the power which the Crown resigns shall be exercised by the Australian
Government, But this implies of course that the Australian States
ought not to be in any true sense of the word sovereign powers.
The other provisions of the last paragraph of the 127th clause
i.e., the proportionate representation of any State in the House of
Parliament and the minimum number of representatives of a State in
the House of Representatives, of course follow naturally from
the idea of State sovereignty. Sovereigns must be considered
equal in some respects, and these provisions guarantee to them the
conditions of equality which cannot be taken away without their
consent. . . . ,
It is plain that rights which cannot be taken away without the
consent of the States themselves, ought to be placed in a different
category from other rights guaranteed by the constitution which can
be taken away or altered by a majority vote of the Federal Houses,
and a majority vote of the majority of States, or the nation. This
distinction not having been made has led to great confusion. People
do not realise that while the constitution may be easily amended in
many respects, it will be almost impossible to amend those points of
it, which cannot be altered without the consent of the State Parlia-
ments and electors.
But that this must be so is easily seen, if we consider that no
State is at all likely to resign its absolute State Eights unless all the
States agree to do so simultaneously. If the State rights in question
could be amended simply by a parliamentary majority in the separate
States, the process of amendment would have been simpler, though
not perhaps easier, than it will be now that the consent of a majority
of the electors is required also.
■ tmtn: ‘i ■■■; :n


People who ought to know better have maintained that the
essentials of Federalism as contained in 123rd and 127th clauses can
be amended without the consent of the State Parliament or State
electors, and thus the people are deluded into the belief that the
constitution can be easily amended so as to bring about that
unification, which Mr. Deakin admits to be the trend of the whole
people of Australia. But by and by the people will find that they
have been trapped, and then those who misled them are likely to have
a rough time of it.
Even the Sydney Bulletin professes to be in favour of Federation
only because it considers it a step towards nationalism.
And yet the Sydney Bulletin recognises that the 123rd clause at
least will, if once agreed to, be unalterable. Thus it wrote (October
22, 1898), “ The alteration demanded by the majority in New South
Wales is that the guarantee offered to each province against any
alteration in its boundaries, shall be declared to be absolutely and
'permanently unalterable under all circumstances. The New South Wales
Assembly accepted the idea by a large majority. Tet it is a miserably
unjust and nearsighted idea, and contains probably more evil
possibilities for the future than any other item in the draft constitution”
We are often told that the objection to the 123rd clause is merely
a Central Queensland or Rockhampton fad. But from the above
quotation it is evident that there are others besides Central Queens-
landers, who recognise the injustice, unwisdom, and dangerous nature
of this provision. Dangerous, for if and it can hardly
be disputed—the 123rd Clause embodies the essential condition
of Federalism —the mere fact that people and sections
of the people object to the 123rd clause proves th^t
they do not want Federalism at all, proves that they
are not prepared to accept the very first principle of the union
they are asked to enter. Those who object to this clause may not
clearly understand now that they cannot object to it without
objecting to Federation itself but they will find this out when it is
too late. And then finding that the constitutional fetters cannot be
removed peacefully they will attempt to to break them violently.
To agree to a union, to enter into a partnership while we object
to the most important article of association is utterly foolish, and it
is worse, it is criminal to enter an association which is to be legally
indissoluble, which is to bind us and our children for all time
unless we clearly understand what we are committing ourselves too.
And those who want Federation without the 123rd clause, when as
a matter of fact a union without such a clause would not be a
federation, prove that they do not understand the terms of association
at all.
And this is the position in which the two champions of the rival
policies of Separation and Federation First now stand. Both Mr.


Curtis and Mr. Buzaeott profess to be Federalists and yet as we
have already seen they neither of them believe that State rights
ought to be considered absolute. They both question the wisdom of the
123rd clause and both wish to surmount the difficulty caused by its
stringent nature. But they apparently fail to perceive that the
difficulty can be avoided without either altogether abandoning
Australian union or accepting union on the terms proposed.
Thus Mr. Curtis thinks it necssary to refuse the Bill in toto,
and Mr. Buzaeott thinks its necessary to accept it in toto. Mr.
Curtis’ justification for refusal is that the Bill once accepted can
only be amended, as far as the 123rd clause goes, with immense
difficulty; Mr. Buzacott’s justification is that it can be easily
amended if accepted. Thus the Record of June 12th says, “ The
whole Bill is of infinitely more importance than any one of its
clauses and can be far more easily amended after Federation than
before it has been accomplished.” That is to say the details of the
Bill are of more importance than the essential principle from which all
the detailed provisions directly proceed as a logical consequence. To
make such a statement as the above simply proves that the author of
it has no grasp of principle and thinks that the Bill contains no
fundamental principle at all. The first part of this chapter shows
clearly that there is such a principle and that it is the sovereignty of
the States in fundamental matters. The “ Federation First ” policy
then may be expressed thus.
“ Accept the first principle of the Commonwealth Bill and
after you have done so begin to attack it or to use a metaphor,
erect an elaborate and expensive structure and as soon as you
have done so start undermining the foundations ”
Can a more futile or absurd policy be imagined ? Futile and
absurd because to do so after the building is erected must endanger
the comfort and even existence of all those who find a home or a
shelter beneath its roof. Futile and absurd because, in this case,
as the foundation is a principle, if the principle is to be removed
another one must be put in its place and a change of principle
involves a change in the plan of the whole building.
We surely ought to remember what the policy of Federation First,
the policy of pure compromise came to in America. Bryce wrote
of the American constitution “It was and remains what its authors
styled it, eminently an instrument of compromises, perhaps the
most successful instance in history of what a judicious spirit of
compromise may effect. Yet out of the points which it was for
this reason (i.e. the necessity of compromise) obliged to leave
unsettled there arose fierce controversies, which after two generations
when accumulated irritation aad incurable misunderstanding had been
added to the force of material interests, burst into flame in the


war of secession,” America federated in a hurry. Bryce admits
that if the great mass of the citizens had had the chance they
“ would probably have pronounced against the constitution.”
“ The chief sense of hostility was the belief ” he says “ that a
strong Central Government endangered both the rights of the
States and the liberties of the individual citizen All the
colonists were republicans, attached to the principles of local self-govern-
ment, and animated by a common pride in their successful resistance to
England which they hated with a true family hatred. . . The fear
of foreign interference the sense of weakness both at sea and on land,
against the military monarchies of Europe, was constantly before
the minds of American Sta l esman, and made them anxious to secure at
ail hazards a National Government capable of raising an army and
navy, and of speaking with authority on behalf of the new Republic.”
How different the conditions in Australia. We have no fear of
foreign powers. The people instead of hating England are generally
loyal to the Imperial connection. As in every State we have a
representative of the Crown whom the great majority of the people
treat with respect; we cannot be said to be republican. And
instead of being hostile to a strong Central Gavernment, as Mr.
Deakin points out, the great majority of the people and especially
of the native born population desires a tmified and powerful Govern-
ment.
The Australian colonies are not, like the American States after
they had declared independence, sovereign powers. Why should our
constitution then lay such emphasis on State rights ? “ the cause ”
as Bryce said “of that immense complexity which startles and at
first bewilders the student of American institutions !, Why is
it necessary to have a similar complexity here ? If Australia desires
to be one, why that dual form of control which Garran says is an
essential of Federation ? Do the Australian-born wish to be spoken
of as Victorians, or South Australians, or Queenslanders, or New
South Welshmen. Not at all ! They wish to be called Australians.
Do the people of Australia reverence these so called State rights, and
wish for the complexity of Government which must follow from their
recognition ? Not at all ! As Mr. Drake the editor of Queensland
Progress wrote in 1894. “ The interests of the people as men and
women, are seen clearly to be in the direction of unity ; and the
division into colonies is as clearly seen to be artificial. On all
the great questions of the day in the too much neglected domain
of social legislation, the views of nine-tenths of the people of all the'
colonies are in practical harmony. It is in matters relating to trade and
property, more particularly property in land, that local differences and *
antagonisms arise.. Rivalries between different ports for the' profits 1
of trade, and the increments of land values, consequent upon the growth of
population, are accountable nearly entirely for our intercolonial
differences, and upon these local differences and rivalries is built the


iifhole fabric of intercolonial party politics” Take this statement of Mr.
Drake’s in connection with that of Mr. Wise that “The people
always wanted union hut the politicians were hostile ,” and we have the
whole secret of the emphasis laid upon State rights in the Federal
Commonwealth Bill, and the whole secret too of the “ indecent haste’’
which the advocates of the policy of “ Federation First ” display.
The politicians, except a few of the best and the labour members,
really represent ‘ vested interests ’ and are afraid of trusting the
democracy. Therefore are they utterly opposed to unification and
desirious of getting the people to accept Federalism before it is too
late, before the public mind can realise what Federalism is and what
State right really means. - , ,<
The issues raised by the 123rd and 127th clauses, as they are
vitally important, must lead to the questioning of the very first
principle of Federation itself. Therefore the first Federationists tells
us the objection to these clauses is a fad, therefore they seek to confuse
issues by trying to persuade us that the constitution will be easily
amended when they know very well it is not so.
There was excuse for Federation in a hurry in America, there is
nO excuse here but a mean and ignoble one. The acceptance of com-
promise there resulted in the War of Secession, but not until after two
generations. The advocates of Federation First evidently suppose that
not they but their children will have to bear the consequences of their
miserable policy of putting off the settlement of vexed questions like
this of Separation ;' the matter is not likely to be fought out while we
hre alive they think. But let theni make no mistake. The War of
Secession was not explicity about State rights, was Hot explicity about
the fundamental principle of union. Here the case is different
Those Who object to the 123rd clause are really calling in question the
Vdry basic principle of the proposed union and there is good reason fo*
saying that this matter will have to be settled, either peacefully of
otherwise in this generation and that those who advocate a mean and
ignoble compromise Will have themselves to bear the evil consequences
of their own foolish or criminal neglect of principle.. , f y
‘ A State ’ wrote Stuart Mill “ never is or can hope to be exempt
ffc|m internal dissensions until mankind is vastly improved. Collisions
smst occur between powerful sections of the people. What enables
ations to weather these storms ? Precisely this—-that however im-
portant the interests about which men fall out, the conflict does not
affect the fundamental principle of the system of social union which
happens-to exist.” . ,
As we have seen the acceptance of the principle of Federalism
dbes affect the fundamental principle of our existing social system, not
only the* Australian but the Impenal system of government. ••<s«
And the objection to the 123rddense is a protest raised by those
Who do not Wish to sCe a'gobd principle of goveChintent abandoned in
favour of a principle which has led in America to enormous political


corruption. It is a protest which if not listened to by the Imperial
authorites will be listened to before long by the people of Australia
who desire a strong popular Government, and it is a protest which will
be listened to and approved of by the people of the Empire, let the
self interested middle classes and the Governments which represent
them say what they please.
And it is curious how history repeats itself. “ Everywhere in the
South,” wrote the historian Mackenzie, of America, “ the idea pre-
vailed that allegiance was due to the State rather than to the Federation.
And thus it came to pass that when the authorities of a State resolved
to abandon the Union, the citizens of that State felt constrained to
secede, even while they mourned, the course upon which they were forced to
enter. South Carolina was the least loyal to the Union of all the States.
She estimated very highly her own dignity as a sovereign State. She held in
small account the allegiance which she owed to the Federal Government ,”
Is not New South Wales the South Carolina of Australia ? Has
she not played fast and loose with Federation to secure her own selfish
ends? Has she not despised and scorned the Federal Council which,
but for her, might have grown by this time into a thing of life and
real usefulness ? She has misled the other colonies, taught. them dis-
loyalty to the Crown, drawn the Premiers from their allegiance to their
own people so that New South Wales should have the capital. Because
New South Wales fears for her own territorial integrity she has bound,
or attempted to bind, the whole people of Australia, the Premiers
nothing loath. New South Wales having now made the best possible
bargain for herself, having secured her own state rights absolutely
against the Australian Government, says to the Premiers: “ I agree to
the Constitution as amended by me, J desire no further change.
Federation is impossible without me. Accept the Bill as it is, or I stand
put and the whole movement comes to an end.” Impressed by this
ex cathedra utterance, the other Premiers (who have secret hankerings
themselves after absolute sovereignty) agree, though quite unauthorised
$0 do so, and tell the people of the colonies —“We, the Premiers pf
these cplpnies, having agreed that the Constitution is all it should bp,
pall upon you as patriotic citizens to accept the measure intact,; further
ajnendment is impossible.” Why? Ask some of the people. “Be-
cause we, the autocrat! of Australia, have decided in council
that no further amendment ip necessary or desirable.” And the
Queensland. Premier, afraid lest the Bill be rejected aha
■further amendment made necessary, objects to—it is said —40,000
adult males in, Queensland, not on the rolls, being allowed to vote.
Why ? “ Oh, Because,” says the Premier, “ 1 have promised the othpp
Premiers not to interfere with the existing electoral laws for the
purpose of taking the Referendum on the Commonwealth Bill.” Thup
pTew 'South Wales, having first bound the Premiers, succeeds in bring-
ing the pepple, of Australia to accept the bargain she has made, Bvjt
New Sputh "Wales means in th|s case.the Reid-cum-Barton
and a powerful section in frew £outh Wales is opposed to the Bill ;


and it is largely because the people in the various colonies do not
understand what they are commiting themselves to, that the ruling
minorities in Australia are being backed up as they are now. But
when the people once understand what they have committed themselves
to, the ruling minorities will no longer be backed up ; and then, in-
stead of as in America, the authorities of the state leading a reluctant
people into a secession war, the people will be gladly led against the
state authorities who have done all they can to prevent a form of
union which shall secure the supremacy of the nation over the states;
and the minority which objects to the 123rd Clause because it is wrong
in principle and subversive of good government, will then have the
people of Australia with it against the ruling minority in New South
Wales. Thus time brings its revenges. But to make explicit, to
make manifest, the change of principle which the people of Australia
desire and to express it in constitutional forms takes time. And
before the popular aspiration can produce its effect the draft consti-
tution will be accepted. What is to be done then ? Well if the people
of Central Queensland whose national interest and general welfare is
most directly and immediately threatened by the 123rd and 127th
clauses can only arrive at unanimity they can appeal to the Crown to
grant their acknowledged claim to independence. Because the rest of
Australia is prepared to abandon a sound political principle is no good
reason why they should do so. If they see that to unite on the terms
proposed is dangerous to the peace of Australia, if they see that the
people of Australia will have to break through the constitutional forms
which they cannot amend why should they not stand forth like men
and say ‘ We will have nothing to do with such a union.’ Then
their State might become an oasis in the desert of Federal misrule.
The great things of history have always been done by little States.
What is England herself but a tiny speck upon the globe ? Did not
Greece save her own liberty and modern civilisation when she stood
firm against and beat back the hordes of Asia ? Did not the Dutch
triumph over the Imperial might of Spain. “ From the hand-breath
of territory called the province of Holland,” wrote Motley “ rose a
power which waged eighty years warfare with the most potent empire
upon earth, and which, during progress of the struggle, became itself
a mighty State, binding about its own slender form a zone of the
richest possessions of earth, from pole to tropic, finally dictating its
decrees to the Empire of Charles.” If there are any men in Central
Queensland they will raise the standard of c Separation First,’ total
Separation from the iniquitous union forced upon the people of
Australia who are at present too intent upon sport and trade to
stand up for their own liberties. This is the true policy of
* Separation First * a policy which is not of our own seeking, but
is forced upon us. Are we going to be misled by those weaklings
who ‘ Accept the Constitution and then appeal to the Imperial
authority to save us ?’ Is there the slightest chance of the Imperial
Parliament amending any provision of the Constitution ? A Queens-


land Premier not long ago defied the Imperial Parliament to grant
Separation. Mr. Chamberlain’s recent reply to the Separationists
memorial is proof that he will do nothing. And if further proof is
wanted, the case of Newfoundland furnishes it. The legislature
of that colony decided to hand it over to a syndicate despite the
protest of a strong minority of the people. Appeal was made to
Mr. Chamberlain and backed up by the Governor. He expressed
his sympathy with the appellants but declined even to advise the
Queen to withold her assent to the act in question. An Imperial
power which admits its inability to shield those under its protection
from injustice is a sham, a snare and a delusion. Mr. Chamberlain
is a commercial gentleman, a gentleman who says that commerce, not
character, founded the empire. In his inspired moments he even
says that commerce is the Empire. He is no Imperial Statesman,
He is much better at taking the duty oflt leather and dried apricots
in favour of commercial gentry, that at liberating peoples, and
making syndicates aware that it is their duty to develop the territories
they possess and to educate those who acknowledge them as masters.
An Imperial power that cannot do and mantain justice is doomed.
Lord Burghley said long ago that England could only be ruined by a
Parliament and Mr. Chamberlain seems the very man to ruin England
by breaking up the Empire.
We can appeal to the Queen in Council, although we are told
that she will do nothing against the advice of Her Ministers.
She, who has before now on critical occasions shown herself to
posess much political wisdom, is not likely to resign the last vestige of
real political power to Parliaments which resolutely express their
determination to abuse it, without a protest.
She can hardly wish it to be said that in her reign and with her
consent the first step was taken which led to the dismemberment of
the Empire. She knows well enough that the English nation, unlike
Mr. Chamberlain, has a soul above commerce.
But what can she do ? She is at the mercy of Parliament and
can withold her assent and that is all.
Those who say we should accept the measure offered us, and then
appeal to the Crown, that we should not fight the matter out here to
the best of our ability are surely advocating a most mean and ignoble
■course. They are afraid to stand up like men aqd wish to throw all
the responsibility upon an aged women over eighty years of age.
They would ask the lone widow of Windsor to make a solitary stand
against a combination of the Australian and Imperial Parliaments,
against a combination of Australian and Imperial syndicates. And
if one woman fails, they are prepared to lie down and place their
necks for ever under the heels of the oppressor. And that is their
proper place, for such slaves can never be fit for freedom. Appeal
to the Crown by all means, and that appeal if properly made is not


likely to be made in vain. But when the consent of the Crown is
given we should be prepared to stand up like men and take the freedom
that is granted us defying anyone to say us nay. But such an appeal
should be made at once, and certainly before we accept a constitution
which says “No appeal shall be permitted to the Queen in Council in
any matter involving the interpretation of this Constitution, or of the
Constitution of a State, unless the public interests of some part of
Her Majesty’s dominions other than the Commonwealth or a State are
involved.” If we accept the Constitution we shall have nothing to
rely upon except the ‘ Divine right of insurrection ’ which always
remains when no other way of amendment is open.
But the people of Central Queensland demoralised by a long
course of Parliamentary despotism and syndicate rule, is not in a
heroic mood. If the Crown consented to give the people their
independence, they would probably be afraid of standing alone; afraid
of New South Wales and autocratic Premiers; afraid to uphold the
sovereignty of the people against the tyranny of Parliaments, afraid
of calling in question that doctrine of States Rights which “ was
conclusively refuted by the blood shed in a hundred battles from
Manassas "to Petersburg, by the surrender of Lees’ army ” when
America became a nation. :i w ..
So it is necessary to show to a blind people how, if the cry of
Federation first prevails, the excessive recognition of State Rights
expressed by the 123rd and 127th clauses may in this generation
endanger the union; to show that,.the little rift within the lute is
visible even now which must silence all the music of our hopes.
/.•>;) ivft-ft f A
CHAPTER 111.
. ■■ • •
HOW THE UNION MAY BE ENDANGERED IN THIS GENERATION.
»\f . , wi'-Hi I,} jtreoe,'- itw ii“- "’(■■■ <n>: tvo< i
“If ever the free institutions of America are destroyed, that event may be
attributed to the unlimited authority of the majority, which may at -some future
time urge the minorities to desperation, and oblige them to have recourse to physical
force.”—(Db Tocqukvillb’s Democracy in America.)
SUPPOSING- that the futile cry of “ Federation First ” prevails
in Queensland, it is worth while considering how the umpn may
* be endangered; how 1 the Federal craft—or rather raft—may come
t’6 grief on the rock of the 123rd and 127th Clauses. The people of
Central and Northern Queensland desire that their territories shall
bedome independent states of the Commonwealth. Both the Northern
and Central representatives, and the Northern and Central people, object


to the 123rd Clause, and consider that the Federal Government should
have power to divide states and create new states. The only difference
of opinion is as to whether Separation should precede or follow
Federation. ,
Mr. Philp is the most influential Northern member. He says —
“ There is no time now for making alterations. Accept the Bill,
because it will only leave things as they are and will not prejudice our
cause. The question must be fought out in the colony itself.” Mr.
Philp is a Minister, he controls Townsville newspapers, and, though
there is a strong minority in the North which completely distrusts him,
the Northern people seem to think his advice good. Mr. Philp has,
however, so many Federal interests in other parts of Australia that
with him Northern separation is quite a secondary consideration. Of
course, bis arguments that the Bill leaves things as they are is really
an argument against it, for if we wish to consummate the “higher act”
of union it is mainly because we think that it will improve matters
{political. It augurs ill for the union if it does not do so, and instead
eaves the old vexed questions still to be fought out. Then again, it is
simply untrue that Federation “ will not prejudice our cause.” It
most certainly will do so. In the first place, until the Crown formally
resigns its right of interference, such interference will not be uncon-
stitutional. After Federation it certainly will not interfere unless the
peace of Australia is in danger and Australians are about to come to
blows. Again, suppose that after Federation the South was forced or
was willing to let the North and Centre go. Queensland has no power
to secure the entrance of two more Queenslands into the Federation
as independent sovereign states. The Federal Parliament can admit
hew states “ on such terms and conditions as it thinks fit,” and such
terms and conditions include the extent of representation in either
House of Parliament. Dr. Quick, in his explanation of the Bill,
expressly says —“If any existing colony were partitioned into two or
more colonies, such colonies could not expect equal representation .” In
fact, as Queensland is certain to become one of the biggest and most
powerful states of the union, more powerful and populous than either
New South Wales or Victoria or, in fact, any other colony, there is
certain to be resistance on the part of the other colonies to any pro-
posal to give her that triple representation whicn she must be allowed
if she is to enter the Federation as three sovereign states on equal
terms with the other original states. And there is this further reason
fot resistance: a great part of Queensland is tropical and many
maintain that her territory cannot be developed without coloured
labour. Such is the difference between North add South that capable
observers, like Misi ShaW, of the Times, think that Australia is likely
to ;be 'divided ihto tropical and Australia. Tropical
Australia to be ruled over by a sinall arid aristocratic body of white
BieU, temperate AUstraHa to be ruled over-by men and perhaps women
in "accordance with a democratic constitution based upon universal
suffrage.


As the Federal Parliament is empowered to deal with the alien labor
question, and as the North may be in favour of coloured labour
while the South is certain to demand its utter exclusion, the Southern
colonies are likely to object to any increase of Queensland representa-
tion beyond that which cannot be avoided under the terms of the
Constitution.
How is it that the Northern Separationist’s are so blind as to
follow the leadership of-Mr. Philp ?
Let Mr. E. Y. Reid of Rockhampton, a ‘ believer in Separation ’
though strange to say a supporter of the Dickson ministry, answer.
Mr. Reid it must be mentioned has lived in the North and knows all
about it and Mr. Philp. “ The North ” he says “ has profited by its
apostacy. The Centre, unfortunately for itself, perhaps, had remained
faithful and suffered for it.” Mr. Reid is one of those who have lost
heart, one of those who are not prepared to champion the cause of
freedom, simply because it is a losing game. The heroic Mr. Reid,
likes to be on the winning side, and is not inclined “to waste tissue in
trying to obtain Separation ” for this reason solely, that he thinks he
would be on the losing side. The fact is that Mr. Reid is too closely
connected with the syndicates and cannot afiord to part company with
them just at present and join those who prefer freedom and justice
to comfort and conventionalism. But if there is one thing that the
syndicates desire it is peace. Perhaps they will see before long that
they are going the right way to make it impossible.
The North has profited by its apostasy and that is why Mr. Philp
has the majority on his side. The North is in alliance with the
South. The Centre is squeezed between them, and thus is at their
mercy, and that is why the Centre has remained faithful. In Aus-
tralia, as religion with its cardinal doctrine of self-abnegation, has
quite ceased to be a factor in politics and almost ceased to be a factor
in social life, everyone is working for his own interest class or
individual. But has the Centre remained faithful ? Mr. Reid has,
as we have seen ‘ apostasised ’ in the most cold blooded way and with
him the whole class of managers and employees of the Banks and
financial institutions which rule in Central Queensland, because they
fear the ascendency of labour which, as it feels the pinch of Brisbane
misrule most directly has remained faithful. But before long even
the syndicates will see that Separation is in their interest.
The New South Wales amendments have weakened the
Senate and the financial institutions will find their Central
properties taxed very heavily to provide for Federal as
well as Brisbane extravagances. The North has been bought.,
As long as Brisbane is liberal to those who rule in Townsville,
Separation in the North is not likely to become a live question.
But why is Brisbane liberal ? Simply because it is its interest to be
so. It does not want to lose its taxeable areas of the North and
Centre, and while it feeds the North with sugar plums the Centre is


powerless. If the North was treated as ill as the Centre there would
be a combination against the South. The demand for Separation
would become popular and intense and the Imperial Government
would have to pay attention to it. But if the policy of ‘ Federation
first ’ prevails the Brisbane policy will be changed. The North as
well as the Centre will be at the mercy of the South. Brisbane will
no longer have cause to fear Imperial intervention having made and
enforced that contract with New South Wales to bind the Crown. A
reasonable statesman like, Sir S. W. Griffith, will no longer be able to
say to the Queensland Parliament, as Sir Samuel did in 1892, “If
this House declines to rise to the occasion, then its functions will be
taken out of its hands and these duties (i.e, of granting autonomy) will
be performed by the Imperial Parliament.”
The Queensland Parliament, after Queensland has been drawn
into the Federal net, after the - pernicious principle of the absolute
sovereignty of a State Parliament in a Federation * under the Crown,’
has received the sanction of the Queensland people, will become far
more imperious and haughty with respect to the claims of both the North
and Centre for independence, than it was under Premier Byrnes, or is
under Premier Dickson, for it will be absolutely master of the situation
in a way that it never was before. Anyone who knows human nature
will expect that a body possessed of absolute power will abuse it.
And a numerous body is more likely to abuse absolute power than a
monarch for responsibility cannot be fixed upon it in the same way,
and its despotism cannot be tempered by assassination. And the
syndicates should remember that the motto ‘Socialism in our time’ has
disappeared from the first page of the Worker , and that its author has
got into Parliament where he is quietly working his way towards the
leadership of the Labour Party. ‘ Socialism in our time ’ is likely to
be the formula which the leader of the first Constitutional Opposition
we have had in Queensland for some time will endeavour to carry into
practice.
After Federation the Brisbane Parliament will be absolute, the
irritation of the Centre will increase, the North too will find that it
has been bought and—sold. Mr. Philp and his newspapers will be
discredited or to keep his leadership will have to turn against the
South. The South already objects to the excessive Northern
influence in the Cabinet. There will be a Ministerial reconstruction
and then of what use will the rumoured bargain be between the
North and South ? It is one thing to make a bargain, another to
carry it out. If Mr. Philp cannot enforce the bargain made his
unpopularity in the North may be such that he will be unable even
to get into Parliament at all. Then the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company in which it is said that he is interested will find its interests
in the North menaced by the majority of the Southern colonies. Mr.
Philp having signed an unwise contract will find it before long his
interest to repudiate it, to repudiate the most essential clause of it.
It is lumoured that a bargain has been made to divide Queens-
land into two States, so that the Centre shall be split in two, half


being given to Townsville as a taxeable area, and half to Brisbane for
the same purpose. But when that Ministerial reconstruction is
effected Mr Philp will find himself left out, will be calmly told by Mr.
Dickson or perhaps Mr. Higgs, that it is now impossible to fulfill the
contract made before Federation. Federation he will be told has
changed all that, or the Brisbane majority may express itself willing
but point out that New South Wales objects to any increase in the
representation of Queensland. Its mouthpiece will express sorrow
at its present disability, and Mr. Philp will have to content himself
with that amendment so generously allowed Queensland by New
South Wales, that Queensland may be divided for the purpose of
Senatorial representation. Mr. Philp is likely to reject this with
scorn for of what use will such representation be when the Southern
majority in the Federal Parliament can always have its way in case of
difference of opinion ?
The Centre too would reject this generous offer with scorn as it
is probable that Queensland is meant to be divided into two for in
this case the Centre might be deprived entirely of its right of electing
a single Senator of its own, . , r »
Mr. Philp relies upon the increase of population in the North
and Centre to win Separation from Brisbane. But Brisbane has the
start and must keep it naturally for many years or generations to
come. Besides, having the political power she can encourage the
increase and concentration of population in the South, by spending
liberally on public works there, by purchasing back estates and
settling people on them. And Mr. Higgs is certain to have some
socialistic scheme of settlement to be tried in the South, and in this
no doubt Mr. Drake, the remnant leader, the ‘ mild amalgam ’ as the
Australasian calls him, will assist. The Brisbane minister even now
refuses to repurchase lands in the Centre, instead of near Brisbane
even although a financial institution wishes to sell out.
Even now in anticipation of the North and Centre falling into
the Federal net the foundations are being laid on a vast scale for new
Lands Offices in Brisbane. Of course when the North and Centre are
tied absolutely to the South, when Separation is out of the question,
there can be no danger of increased expenditure, for the purposes
of centralisation, being found useless. Even Mr. Murray and the'
Eockhampton Record , the Ministerial organ, will have to begin
denouncing Brisbane centralisation and the maladministration of lands
again—after Federation. v
If the North had been wise it would have abandoned its selfish
policy long ago and made common cause with the Centre before
Federation. It will certainly have to do so after, yet, after, its only
way of escape, its only way of winning freedom will be to repudiate
the Federal contract so selfishly blindly and foolishly made.
The irritation of the Northern and Central people will then grow
and increase. The wise minority, and it is almost always the minority
that is wise, will become a majority. Even the Record and the
Hi if 4,


syndicates will return to their senses, or perhaps the editor of the
"Record will return to his Brisbane haunts to enjoy the sweets of
centralisation and the reward of his ministerial advocacy. He is no
Don Quixote ready to go forth to fight windmills to his certain
discomfiture, he is more like Sancho Panza who followed his master for
good reasons, and expects to be rewarded perhaps, like Sancho, by the
Government of an island for his complaisance. Then the other editor
of the Record who is a Separationist, but has been misled by his
colleague will keep the Record on the straight path. Sancho—never
did believe in genuine Separation. He only believed in provincial
self-government and bitterly regretted the rejection of Sir Samuel’s
scheme of Queensland Federation, which has now blossomed forth
into Australian Federation with New South Wales to rule Australia
as Brisbane would have ruled Queensland. The enlargement of the
scheme has, however, disclosed its glaring defects still more plainly.
The Centre wisely rejected the smaller scheme. Is it going to be so
misguided as to accept the enlargement with the old flaws staring it
in the face ?
The Morning Bulletin and the People's Newspaper (Rockhamp-
ton) are both against Federation as proposed, so is ihe Western
Champion. We shall see a new organ of opinion springing up in
Townsville or the old organs will come round at their masters bidding
and sail on the other tack; and the editor of the Queens-
land Progress too is likely to come to his senses when after
the deed of Federation is done he is left out in the cold,
the remmant even following other gods. For if Mr. Drake
will read again his own pamphlet on “ Federation Imperial
or Democratic ” he will find that he has recently apostasised from his
true self. An article of his reprinted from the Commonwealth
(December, 1894) has already been quoted in reference to State
Rights. His arguments against Imperial Federation apply almost
verbatim to Australian Federation. Why does he not say now as he
said then “ surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.’*
Ah ! well! he is now one of the Australian fowlers !
He wrote in 1895 “ The future belongs to the National Party,
and no work that is done now will be unfruitful because too
democratic, but inevitable failure and disappointment will wait upon
any attempt to stifle the awakening aspirations of the Australian
people, and crush their expanding energies within the limits of a
narrow hide-bound conservatism ” He prates about the consent of
the people. Why then do we find him in alliance with Mr. Deakin
and his policy of distrust of the people ? Why then do we find
him voting with Mr. Higgs against Mr. Kidston’s amendment,
and helping to disfranchise thousands of electors who might
for all he knows vote for Federation. Why do we find him in alliance
with the South attempting to stifle the aspirations of the Northern
and Central Queensland people, aspirations too which are no


‘awakening’, but wide awake and acknowledged ? Is Mr. Drake
playing a part ? Not at all! lie is simply fighting for Queensland
nationalism for Queensland’s right of self-government, just as the
Central and Northern people ought to be, but are not. Why ?
because they do not trust in Brisbane majority any more than
Mr. Drake trusts a Southern Australian majority. If Brisbane
had treated the North and Centre fairly Queensland would have
been in the Convention and would have been able to resist the
encroachment of New South Wales. The source of all our troubles
is the distrust politicians entertain of the people a distrust which
thev cannot get rid of. Naturally the people distrust them and
will distrust them still more when they find how they have been
misled by them. Mr. Drake will come round and join the
minority yet. Brisbane will reject him but perhaps Charters
Towers will open its arras. It is wonderful how different things
look from a new centre of vision. Even now he says, “ So strong
is the objection to the 123rd clause that many who are otherwise the
strongest of Federationists declare that they will actively oppose the
passage of the Bill.”
And so little does Mr. Drake understand what Federalism
means that it does not occur to him that strong Federationists who
oppose the 123rd clause are not Federationists at all and when once
they see their mistake are likely to be its strongest opponents.
Mr. Drake wrote of the enthusiasm of Australian natives for a
United Australia, how Federation is discussed with enthusiasm by
young Queensland “ A match ” he says “ only is wanted to set young
Queensland on fire,” and “ perhaps it will be applied by Mr. Barton
and the Hon. Alfred Deakin, who is to address public meetings in
Queensland within a few days.” However young Queensland does
not appear to have caught fire nor is Barton or Deakin the man to
strike the match. Deakin with his policy of distrust of the people,
with his patent paper collar for stifling the enthusiasm of Democracy
as it rises from the depths of Australian life and seeks to find full
utterance.
The Australian natives desire Australian nationalism unity and
independence and they have small respect for the existing State
barriers.
Yet we find them enthusiastically supporting Federation which
makes State divisions absolute ; absolutely prevents Australian unity,
binds Australia absolutely to remain a dependency of England, fails
to provide an elected or approved National Head or a National
Referendum, establishes the absolute dominance of the State
Governments, which says Mr. Drake “ seem to be more or less
artificial contrivances of foreign origin for the purpose of outwitting
the people and securing the dominancy of the classes. This is the
fruitful source of all weakness. . . The result is a continual fight
between this governing class, having the control of the machinery


of govermaent, and the great bulk of the people who have the
Constitutional right to he rulers, but who have not yet the knowledge
and experience to enable them to use their power effectively and make
good their right.”
Does the Australian Natives Association represent the dominant
classes of the towns then or has it not cut its political wisdom teeth ?
A bit of both probably. But the Australian Natives Association will
yet wake up and find that the Constitution is not Australian in
origin at all, that it is a weak “ amalgam,” a mechanical mixture of
all of “ foreign contrivances ” invented for the purpose of safe-
guading the interests of classes, and that the 123rd and 127th Clauses
are the most perfect embodiment of Constitutional distrust in the
great mass of the people.
The Australian Natives Association is largely a town organisation
manoeuvred by gentlemen of the legal persuasion. The pure and
uncontaminated Australians live in the bush and are not yet enrolled.
They know many things whispered to them by the wattles, as the
winds play upon them ; they have leant their ears in many a secret
place and know the secret of true national greatness—trust in one
another. To them the stars of midnight are dearer than all the
gaslights of the city. The foreign spirit of political distrust is ad-
vancing now in Queensland against them and their liberties, and they
may learn before their town comrades what Mr. Drake does not
know viz : that ‘ Constitutional Democracy ’ is but a legal euphemism
for distrust of the people.
But when the Australian native does gain political knowledge
equal to his political aspirations, when Mr. Hume Cook’s new party
gets the lead, he will ask those political experts, many of whom are of
foreign origin, to give an explanation of the indecent haste they have
displayed in fixing their paper collar upon the throat of young
Australia, ask an explanation in a wny that is likely to prove rather
disconcerting to them, and rather dangerous to the ruling minority.
If Mr. Drake is going to set Queensland on fire he had better strike
the match before Federation and conve-i the amalgam into an organic
substance. Enthusiasm like fire is a good servant but a bad master.
But the spark of true liberty usually comes from the altars of the
past and is handed on from nation to nation like a live coal, sometimes
even kindling conflagrations as it passes. In Queensland at any rate
it is plain from the foregoing that there is dangerous material ready
to take fire if the present friction between the South and the Centre
and North increases.
And there are minorities and organs of opinion in the other
colonies which even now realise the dangerous nature of some of the
provisions of the Federal constitution, especially the I23rd and 127th
clauses. An agitation is certain to spring up after Federation for
their amendment. It will be found that the miscalled national Parlia-
ment is powerless for the purposes of vital constitutional amendment.
c


A powerful section of ike people will seek to increase the powers of
the Federal Parliament, so as to amend the 128 rd and 127th clauses
without the consent of the States. Such an agitation must inevitably
fail as it threatens the very base of the Federal structure. Then an
agitation for secession from the legally indissoluble union will arise.
The Southern States will point out the fact that the people of
Northern and Central Queensland agreed to the terms of the union
and agreed that it should be indissoluble.
The secessionists will explain that they did not realise the
difficulty of amendment. They may quote the Sydney Bulletin to
this effect. “If the Federal union is a failure the way out-is easy—
easier than the way in. All that is required ia to amend the
one word ‘ indissoluble ’ out of the preamble and to pass an
amendment declaring the union dissolved.” “ Put not your
trust in newspapers ” will be the Southern reply. “If we
all agreed to dissolve the union dissolution would .be well
enough, but we New South Welshmen, we Victorians do not
agree. Trusting in your good faith we have made all sorts
of binding arrangements, we have committed ourselves to great
expenditure. You entered the Federation of your own free will,
you cannot now repudiate the agreement.” The ruling minorities
would be against dissolution in every State. Politicians everywhere
would be against any radical change in the direction of amalgama-
tion, for this would' mean that their own services could be largely
dispensed with. The Imperial authorities too would be against
dissolution especially it there was any danger of a disturbance of the
peace. Do they not look upon Australian Federation as a step
towards Imperial Federation and do they not object to Separation
because they think it would make Imperial Federation much more
difficult P No a union like this of Federation once entered into
cannot be dissolved peaceably. But an unjust union cannot be
permanent, and if it cannot be dissolved has to be broken. So by
and by in Queensland we may hear some speaking of the ‘ divine
right of insurrection,’ and passionate feeling will be roused. Southerners
will seek to prejudice the cause of the North, by accusing Northern
Queenslanders of desir'ng secession in order to introduce coloured
labour for the development of their tropical territory and in order to
save the sugar industry. Some event, like the explosion of the Maine,
saj a kanaka outrage, will precipitate matters and the call to arms
to save the union will be heard. The Southern people will determine
to put down the Northern secessionists by force. It will of course bo
said that the would-be secessionits could do nothing but submit to
superior forces. But wait a bit ! When the passions of men are
roused, they do queer things. Dominant races are not easily cowed,
and when driven to desperation do not stick at trifles. The Northern
secessionists might resort to a desperate expedient which perhaps would
not only destroy the Federation violently, but might also put au end
to the hope of young Australia of building up a higher civilisation of


the white race here. Japan is within a fortnights sail of Queensland,
she has the most powerful navy in the East, which she would only be
to glad to find some profitable use for, for her people are overtaxed,
to provide it; they grow discontented and Japanese politicians, who
intellectually are equal or superior to many Australian politicians,
would be only too glad of an opportunity to direct the attention of
the people from domestic matters. A ‘ Resident ’ writing in the
Contemporary Review (October 95.) says, “Among the happy results
of Japan’s encounter with China is one of the utmost importance
which readily eludes the ken of European politicians. For this war
has, for the time, averted the utter breakdown of Japan's new constitutional
machinery .” ‘ For the time,’ and Japan has just failed to float a ten-
million loan ! There are a good many Japanese in Queensland.
Thursday Island almost belongs to them. A war against the
secessionists of the North would if successful entail the expulsion of
the Japanese. Japan would be roused. Japan who would only be
too glad to possess unutilised portions of Northern Australia, as an
outlet for her surplus population and as a field for the enterprise of her
mining engineers and scientists. Nothing would be easier, then, for
the secessionists driven to desperation to make an alliance with Japan,
to promise her a considerable territory as the reward of successful
assistance. Japan might demand the use of Thursday Island as a
naval base while the war lasted. AH this being agreed to, before the
Southern Federalists could strike a blow the Japanese fleet
might be dictating terms to Sydney and Melbourne on pain of
bombardment, having first annihilated by sheer force of numbers the
brave but utterly inadequate naval squadron which defends our
coasts.
There is nothing absurd or improbable in these suppositions. If
Americans could be so roused as to engage in fratricidal war, there is
no reason why Southern and Northern Australians should not come to
blows. As it is the South little understands or sympathises with the
necessities and aspirations of the North. A powerful fleet is not built
in a day and in modern war “preparedness ” is more than half the
battle. And Japan is prepared and may have to do something in the
next few years to save the utter breakdown of her constitutional
machinery especially if she finds her borrowing power gone. Craig
in his “ Federal Defence ” says, “The tone of the Japanese press
during the late war with China was strongly hostile to England. It
even wrote of annexing Australia and other islands —in fact, warning
England like a Moscow editor,” and again “ Russia in 1885 arranged
a well planned raid against all the Australian capitals in the event of
war.” Sir Henry Norman “ regarded it as an absolute certainty that
Australia would have to resist an attack ” in this generation.
Japanese and Russian men-o’-war already know enough of our coasts
and harbours.
A civil war in Australia, especially if an alien power was brought
would probably be the signal for a tremendous international conflict


in the East. The Pacific would become a pandemonium, the scene of
the explosion of the surplus forces of Europe.
Such an international conflict has been prophesied again and
again, and a disastrous alliance between the white and yellow races
even has been prophesied. And though from such a conflict the
Anglo-Saxon race would emerge triumphant, it would have a very had
time of it and the centre of our civilisation might, as has been
predicted by a capable English writer, F. Greenwood, pass suddenly
from the West to the East.
And though it appears as if the great battle of Armageddon must
come sooner or later before there can be peace on earth and good will
amongst men, though it appears as if disarmament cannot be brought
about save by mutual destruction, after the manner of the Kilkenny
cats, it is to be hoped that Australians will not strike the detonator to
explode the military magazine of Europe so close to their own shores.
And yet that simple looking and little understood 123rd clause
may prove the source and occasion of a disastrous conflict during
which it would fare ill with a divided Australia.
Surely it would be better if we Australians could arrive at
unanimity as to the fundamental principles of our union at any rate before
we accept the new constitution. Then when the great battle does
come we can meet a world in arms with a united Australia, and in 0.
H. Pearson’s words “ guard the last part of the world in which the
higher races can live and increase freely for the higher civilisation ”
But as long as there is any difference of opinion about the 123rd
clause every one capable of political thought must admit that we have
not arrived at that unanimity necessary for stable union, and that a
collision may occur at any time between powerful sections of the
people which will affect the foundations of our social system. Many
Australians wish for manhood and independence but manhood has its
dangers and responsibilities, dangers from which hitherto the Imperial
supremacy has shielded us. If we are ripe for complete self-govern-
ment we should reconstitute for ourselves some sovereign authority to
take its place. And if the jealousy of the Australian colonies is such
that they cannot trust any Australian body with the sovereign right of
granting self-government to those who are ripe for it and anxious for
it, then that is a proof that those colonies are not ripe for complete
independence. If, despite this unripeness, they are left by the Crown’s
assent to learn from harsh experience that is no reason why Central
Queensland should be left as a bone of contention, why the richest
gold mine in the world should bo left exposed, as it would be if civil
war eventuated in the way described, as a tempting bait, to the
invaders. Some Separationists would prefer to see Central Queens-
land made a Crown colony rather than to see her dragged into the
Federation at the tail of Brisbane. And perhaps after a little
experience of < Democratic Federation' the aristocrats of finance, who
have a right to protection by the State just as much as any one else,


will find in this suggestion the happiest solution of their difficulties
and the best way out of the awkward position in which the policy
of ‘ Federation First ’ will leave them if they are shortsighted enough
to adopt it.
CHAPTER IV.
WHAT STATE RIGHTS IN AUSTRALIA REALLY MEAN.
“ The influence of a capital in a large State is almost sure to be for evil, because it
must be either indirect or violent. Even in the best regulated States, an undue
attention will often be given to the local interests of the capital, and advances
from the National Treasury will be more freely made on its behalf than in behalf
of other parts of the Kingdom.”— Freeman's History of Federal Government.
WE have already noticed Mr. Drake’s remark, that the human
interests of Australians are in the direction of unity while “ the
division into colonies is clearly seen to be artificial.”
“ An Australian ” whites :—“ We may look forward to a great
future for our country when our narrow provincial jealousies are
ended, and our ridiculous political frontiers abolished.”
The Sydney Bulletin says : “ Its idea of Federationis to make an
Australian nation —to obliterate the Queenslander and New South
Welshman and Victorian and all the rest so completely that their
separate existence will be forgotten, and make Australians of them
all. . . And instead of the dictum that it is the first duty of every
province to preserve its own territory, this paper would like to
substitute the axiom that it is the first duty of every Australian to
preserve the territory and interests of Australia, and that the interior
divisions of the continent are merely for convenience in the matter of
local government. . . No Englishmen now-a-days wants to quarrel
or tight with his fellow Englishman because the boundaries of
Northumbria or Mercia or Wessex have been interferred with. The
old seven kingdoms have served their term and been dropped. . .
Considering the intense loyalty which most of the New South Wales
provincialists have for England they would do well to follow Englands
good example in this matter.”
And yet strange to say, Mr. Drake, the Native Australians, and
the Sydney Bulletin are all to be found warmly advocating the Federal
Commonwealth Bill which does all it can to make the existing
political divisions absolute and unalterable, and unification is
generally discredited. Probably these warm advocates of the measure
all find things in it they disapprove of, and look upon it as a step


towards better things, but it is surely a strange way to begin union
by making the existing artificial divisions much more distinct and
difficult to remove than they are now. The only reason they give for
this extreme recognition of State Territorial rights is that the people
of these colonies are so jealous of one another, that union of any sort
would be impossible unless these territorial rights were absolutely
guarranteed. Thus because these advocates are in such a hurry to
bring about union, they are prepared to accept a Federation which
will make a closer union later on impossible without destroying the
foundations of the Constitution. They are prepared to risk all the
evils of a civil war, like that which in America arose from precisely
the same cause viz : an undue recognition of State rights, rather
than wait a few years. Mr. Deakin recently (May, 1899) said “if
any further demands for a restriction of senatorial power, such as I
could myself vote for , were made, it would lead to the disruption of the
Federalist Party in this colony, many of whose best supporters would
then oppose such an amended scheme.”
It may well be asked then what is this Federalist Parfy that it
should be allowed to endanger the future peace and prosperity of
Australia ? What right has it to oppose the trend of the whole people
of Australia? Is it not a very unwise course to fasten upon Australia
a form of Federation which the people do not w'ant simply to purchase
the support of the Federalist section? Is it not paying much too big a
price for their support? Mr. Drake’s remark has been quoted that
“ Rivalries between different ports for the profits of trade and the
increment of land values, consequent upon the growth of population,
are accountable nearly entirely for our intercolonial differences ; and
upon these local differences and rivalries is built the whole fabric of
intercolonial party politics, A great advance would be made towards
Federation if we could only restrain the fury of politicians who, under
the pretence of a narrow local patriotism, are intent upon stealing
their neighbours’ trade by means of differential railway rates and
border taxes.”
Thus it would appear that the Federalist Party is largely com-
posed of the politicians themselves, who are often, like Mr. Philp,
largely interested in commerce, or like Mr. Dickson, interested in the
increments of land values.
The Federalist Party is then the ruling minority, the party in
power, the party which has framed the Constitution, the party which
is in such a hurry to force it upon us simply to protect its own vested
interests. The politicians, Mr. Wise told us, were “always hostile to
union.” We see now why; and this once seen and admitted it must
be admitned too that the support of the Federalist Party is purchased
at much too great a price when that price is the absolute territorial
integrity of the States. For if there is one question which concerns
the whole people of Australia it is the land question; land is the
fundamental condition of national existence. If there is one matter


more than another with respect to which an Australian Government
ought to have unlimited power it is with respect to laud. “ The land
of every country belongs to the people of that country ” wrote Stuart
Mill. . . “ Those persons who possess large portions of the earth’s
surface,” said W. E. Gladstone, “ are not altogether in the same
position as the possessors of mere personalty. Personalty does not
impose limitations on the action and the industry of man and the well-
being of the community as possession of land does, and, therefore, I
freely own that compulsory expropriation is admissible and even sound
in principle.”
“ To make away into mercenary hands, as an article of trade, the
whole solid area on which a nation lives, is astonishing as an idea of
statesmanship,” wrote Professor Newman ; and yet this is what our
so called statesmen virtually do when they ask us to accept a constitu-
tion which absolutely limits the power of the Federal Parliament with
respect to land matters. The Federal Parliament will, it is true, have
power to tax land, but only so as not to discriminate between States
or parts of States; so that, though the whole land of one colony might
be sold to a syndicate, the Australian Government would have no
power, right, or duty to tax this land heavier than the land of another
colony, where it might be owned bv thousands of independent yeoman
farmers ; though in the one case tl>e profits of industry would remain
entirely in the country, and in the other might go entirely out of it.
Is this what the people of Australia desire ? Has their opinion ever
been asked in the matter ? Do they in the least understand what they
are committing themselves to if they accept this Constitution so
strongly recommended by their politicians ? To these questions the
answer must be an emphatic “ No ! ”
While the Crown continues to exercise the right of granting self-
government it cannot, indeed, tax the people of Australia ; but it can
always prevent the unjust incidence of taxation by allowing the people
of localities overtaxed to govern themselves and tax the lands within
their own area, and spend the proceeds of taxation on improving their
own territory.
The 123rd Clause will take this power away from the Crown and
at the same time deprive the Australian Government of the power of
preventing the unjust incidence of taxation and the unjust expenditure
of the proceeds.
English law recognises no absolute right of private property in
land. The Crown, as representing the nation, is the sole absolute
owner; and this is in accordance with, and means precisely the same
thing as, that social law expressed in the Bible thus: “ The earth is
the Lord’s and the fulness (i.e. the increase or profit) thereof ” The
Governments,. the politicians of Australia, are the stewards, the
trustees of the national estate. They have maladmimstered the lands
of every colony in defiance of well recognired social law; and now


they, the managers of the estate, propose to make themselves a present
of it, and ask the people of Australia, the rightful owners, to sign a
deed which shall give them, the unworthy managers, an unassailable
title, because they see that the lord of the estate, the Crown—who
has been absent for so many years—is about to appoiut a Viceroy to
administer it in the interests of the people of Australia. A Viceroy
who may require of these stewards an account of their stewardship.
The Crown is simply the first servant of the nation, exercising the
sovereign authority in the name and with the consent of the people.
But the Crown has individual rights, including the right to own land,
just as much as every other individual has. When the Crown repres-
entative arrives in Australia what will he find ? He will find that he
has no right to a single inch of soil ; that he has no right to have even
a home of his own. He will hear that the managers of the Australian
estate saw his coming from afar; that they met together in secret
conference and undid tbe work of the representatives of the people
in convention; that they quietly arranged that the Commonwealth
territory and permanent seat of Government should be within the
borders of New South Wales ; that the temporary seat of Government
snould be in Victoria. By those Clauses—the 123rd and 3271h—
which we have confined our attention to, it is brought about that if
New South Wales wishes she can decline to hand over any territory
to the Commonwealth at all. As many in New South Wales consider
that Sydney ought to be the capital, and as Victoria aud New South
Wales are jealous of one another, it may very easily happen that there
shall be no proper Commonwealth territory at all, and that the
Governor-General shall be worse off than the birds of the air and the
conies of the rocks in that he has no home to call his own. This is
what Sir Samuel Griffith says with reference to the provisions made
by the Premiers as to the Federal capital:—
‘‘l am inclined to think that these provisions will have far
reaching effects. The Governor-General will probably reside at
Melbourne during the early sittings of the Parliament, The other
States will not, however, be willing that he should, even temporarily,
have his residence at Melbourne alone. And I am disposed to think
that they will become so accustomed to his residence at one or other
of the State capitals, that his residence at the Federal Capital will not
for many years be more than occasional, and that as a consequence
the importance of the capital and the expenditure incurred in fitting
it for a seat of government will be much less than is generally
supposed. What provision will be made for housing the Governor-
General at the State Capitals, while in residence, may safely be left to
tbe wisdom of the State Parliaments.”
The Constitution then, Sir S. W. Griffith thinks, will be further
amended, so that all the principal capitals of Australia may bave the
benefit of tbe Governors expenditure and presence. And the State
Capitals will be so accustomed to this arrangement that in all
probability they will object to his having any permanent residence


anywhere. The truth is that the inhabitants of the present capital
cities do not want to see a National Capital arise at all which might
throw into shade their splendours. No doubt if Sydney or Melbourne
could be made the Federal Capital there might be such a capital, as
in this case there would be a considerable increment of land values,
but as all the existing capitals would like to be the Federal city the
probable result is that there will be no Federal city at all, and the
Governor-General will remain a mere hanger on of the existing
Governors.
Provisions for housing him may safely be left to the wisdom of
the State Parliaments says Sir Samuel.
As the State Governments have maladministered the peoples
estate for so many years and do not wish to have to give an account
of their stewardship, it is of course wordly wise on their part to have
the Crowns representative as much as possible under their thumb,
and if there was a Commonwealth Estate and Commonwealth City
he would be too far removed from the influence of the atmosphere of
the capitals, and might become unduly independent of them.
It is well then to consider whether these managers of the peoples
estate, who propose to grant to themselves this estate in perpeturity,
have displayed much wisdom in the past. If they have not, we may
reasonably object to take Sir Samuels advice and trust to their
wisdom in the future.
W. Epps in his “ Land Systems of Australia ” (1894) written in
Sydney, says of New South Wales under responsible Government.
“ The land system of New South Wales is now a monument of
muddle stupendous in its dimensions, and fraught with incalculable
mischief to the present and succeeding generations. Its chief value as an
object lesson is with respect to its defects.” He gives statistics to
Erove that “ while during 15 years the total area of different holdings
as nearly doubled, those under 200 acres show scarcely any
perceptible increase, and those between 200 and 1000 acres have
increased by less than 50 percent. On the other hand, the area of
holdings between 1000 and 10,000 acres has more than doubled, and
the same applies to holdings of over 10,000 acres. These facts read
together with the authentic statement that the average size per
bolding has increased from 315 acres in 1876 to 816 acres in 1892.
can leave no manner of doubt that the alienated land is not being
taken &p for the purposes of cultivation by small holders, but is
passing into the hands of a few landed proprietors” The result of
this locking up of the lands is “ that the total value of the agricultural
produce of the colony does not show an increase proportionate with
the increase of population, or even of the rural population ” . . .
There was not only a relative but also an actual decrease in the value
oi the total produce from tillage, despite the fact that 14$ millions of
acres of land had been alienated, for the presumed purposes of
agriculture.**


Another result of this locking up of the lands is the concentration
of the people in the capital cities, “ The increase of population
during the 20 years which closed with 1891 was 181 per cent for the
metropolis while that of the country districts amounted to 104 per
cent. The population of the whole colony more than doubled itself
during this period, the total for 1891 showing an increase of 125 per
cent compared with 1871. These are astonishing facts which prove
that the people are neglecting the occupation and cultivation of the
soil as a means of living for a town life. They show also that if the
same state of things continues the population of the whole colony will,
at the end of another 40 years, be some five millions, of whom two-
and-a-half millions will be in the metropolis. There is outside of
Australasia no instance in the history of new countries to compare
with this tadpole growth which, if permitted to continue for another
hundred years would result in the total population of the colony
being over 60 millions of souls, with a population in the metropolis
alone of some 45 millions. Such a prospect is apalling. It is
probably a reductio aisurdum ; hut it is the logical sequence to the present
progress of settlement .”
In Victoria it is much the same. “ While the population has
increased by nearly 270,000 in 10 years (1881 —1891) only about
70,000 person have been added to the rural population, the remainder
having all congregated in the city of Melbourne. These facts alone
are positively alarming in themselves, and the figures which indicate
the occupations of the people are equally calculated to arrest attention.
The primary producers—those engaged in winning from the soil, such
as agriculturists, pastoralists, miners—have barely increased in
numbers at all, there being a total for 1891 of 119,082 only, as
against 117,712 in 1881.”
The writers conclusion is : —“ It is here made manifest beyond
doubt, that the existing land systems in the colonies, as a whole, havo
not resulted in bringing about genuine settlement —while the
population of all the colonies has increased rapidly, the public estate
has been passing at a terrific rate into private hands, cultivation has
been practically at a standstill, and the number of persons engaged in
winning from the soil shows an increase quite disproportionate to the
increase of the total population. As a means of placing on the land
a large rural population the present systems have failed miserably.
The time has come for the people of Australia, if they desire that the
remaining portion of their territory adapted for close settlement shall
not pass entirely into a small number of great private holdings, to
bestir themselves and face the position.”
This is how the stewards of the people’s estate, the State govern-
ments of Australia under 1 irresponsible government ’ have malad-
ministrated the land, selling the capital of the nation to find the
means for their often injudicious and extravagant expenditure. And.
now these same trustees ask the people of Australia to give them.


as their reward the estate in fee simple, so that the * State right ’
of maladministering the public land shall be theirs for ever and
ever, let the Crown and the Federal Government say what they
please. This is what assent to a constitution with the 123rd and
127th clauses means.
If Australian union is to do us any good, the Australian
government must have power to deal with the lands of these colonies
if the State Governments prove themselves as incapable of good
legislation as they have hitherto done. If the people give their
assent to the ‘ draft constitution ’ the chances of getting control of
the public estate will be gone. They will then have to attack the
evils of land monopoly from below and storm the political fortresses
of the monopolists in detail.
If the Federal Parliament has power to deal with the land
question they can, not attack but command the State strongholds of
monoply from above. And if they neglect this opportunity they
deserve all that may befall them. And as they all seem wedded to
Federation the opportunity apparently must be lost. For territorial
integrity, absolute right to land, is a sine-qua-non of Federalism. If
the people want the license which Federalism must give, they must
pay for it that is all.
It may interest Australians to know that in Federal America
“ several attempts have been made to impose special taxation on
absentee landowners, but these have hitherto been defeated by clauses
in the leases binding the tenants to pay all taxation which may be
imposed. Here the occupiers of land owned by absentees are res-
ponsible for local rates which, of course, may or may not be deducted
from rent. Of course, the State Parliaments can tax absentees
specially, but the Federal Parliament will not be able to do so, and it
is evident that nothing but radical land legislation, reassertion of the
first principle of English land laws, will do Australia much good.
Bad systems of land legislation and the enormous concentration
of the people in the capital cities are closely related facts, To grant
to the States absolute rights, as must be done in accordance with Federal
principles, means a continuance and intensification of the evils we are
suffering from to-day State rights in Australia mean neither more
nor less than the rights of the capital cities where the voting strength
is.
If we accept Federation we grant a monopoly of power to the
capital cities; the cities will become still more crowded with non-pro-
ducers, and the country will be still more denuded and enslaved than
it is now.
New South Wales is, according to Epps, the '* awful example ” of
the colonies in respect to land matters, and New South Wales the
last state to be trusted with the absolute control of the land, leads


the Federal movement. Freeman wrote : “ Kings, whether despotic
or constitutional, and. consolidated republics too, can seldom, indeed,
be got to give up a single inch of their territory except by force.”
The “Consolidated Republic” of New South Wales has, it
appears, even now within her boundaries districts which do not
rightfully belong to her. It has been pointed out more than once in
the Queensland Parliament that the Clarence and Richmond districts
under the terms of the Imperial Act, which has not been repealed,
belong to Queensland. Mr. Curtis, M.L.A. for Rockhampton, said
during the debate on the address-in-reply, May 18th, 1899:—“The
Imperial Act which was passed ratifying the constitution of New
South Wales, fixed the northern boundary of that colony at the 30th
parallel, but, owing to some conspiracy between Sir W. Denison,
Governor of that colony, and the then Secretary of State for the
Colonies, in the letters patent the boundary was put at the 28th
parallel; so that New South Wales has ever since held the Clarence
and Richmond district which legitimately belongs to Queensland ; and
there is no doubt that if Queensland goes into the Federation under
this Bill as it is framed, New South Wales will be able to hold that
district for ever, as well as the Riverina district in the South, which
properly belongs to Victoria. lam sure that if the people of
Australia were consulted as to what they would like, they would say
they would like that in the institution of a Federal Government, it
should be established as a national and sovereign government, so that
it could do what was desirable to be done in the interest of Australia
as a whole. It should certainly have the power, amongst other things,
to divide these huge colonies into smaller and more compact States.”
But it would not at all suit the book of the Premiers of these
“ Consolidated Republics,” and especially Mr Reid’s book, to give the
people a chance of saying whether they would like “ a national and
sovereign government. 4 ’ So the fallacy is busily spread abroad by even
high-minded men like Mr. Deakin that to reject the present Bill would
be disastrous : such is the painful demoralisation of public life in
Australia, thanks to a long course of irresponsible parliamentary rule.
It would no doubt be disastrous to 44 State rights ” as absolute , to
reject the Bill. But had the people of Australia the opportunity they
would vote this absolute doctrine to the political lumber room together
with that docrine of the 44 right divine of Parliaments to govern
wrong,” which Spencer calls the 44 great political superstition.”
But what are the Governors, the Crown representatives, in these
colonies doing ? They are openly giving their approval to a Bill
which at one and the same time proposes to curtail the rights of the
Imperial authority and the rights of the Australian people.
Has the general public demoralisation, the vicious atmosphere of
the capital cities tainted them too, or are they like Sir W. Denison in a
conspiracy against the Crown and the people ?


The Sydney Bulletin is at any rate not afraid to speak out. This
is what it says about Sydney which aspires to be the Federal capital
of Australia (April 22nd 1899).
“ When the Federal vote comes to be taken New South Wales
electors will in fact be asked ‘Do you vote for a continuance and
aggravation of the Sydney tyranny, for a continuance and extension
of the Sydney monopoly ? . . . The people of Sydney are masters of
the community, they make and unmake ministries; instead of the
country ruling the capital, the capital rules the country. The back
blocks are defrauded of the money which should be spent not in
feeding an unproductive population, but in assisting the pioneers of
productive industry ; the backblocks are defrauded of the men who
should be pioneers of productive industry, but who find that employ-
ment is obtained under pleasanter conditions in Sydney. . . The New
South Wales pyramid is tottering on its apex. The population of
Sydney is 417,000, of the whole of the rest of the province 906,000.
The province is depending for its life upon a comparative handful of
producers —and upon loan moneys, with the interest and capital
charged to posterity. This state of things cannot last. New South
Wales does not want the capital at Sydney. New South Wales would
be more stable and prosperous with the population of Sydney dis-
tributed over a dozen towns, over a hundred districts. Sydney is a
great belly which is starving the members, it is stealing from the
country the blood and money needed to make the country thrive. It
is time to end all this. Every man in New South Wales who “ has
the interest of the province at heart, every man in Australia who has
the interests of the nation at heart, will vote in the coming contest
against Sydney —for New South Wales and Australia.”
It must be noted here that the Bulletin puts New South Wales
before Australia. But if it is right to vote againt Sydney it is right
to vote, for the same reasons, against Melbourne and Brisbane and
every capital city of Australia, for they are all ‘ great bellies ’ starving
the provinces over which they rule. And to vote against the
dominance of the capitals is to vote against State rights as made
absolute by the 123rd and 127th clauses, that is to vote against the
fundamental principle of Federation.
“ A Conquest ” Freeman said “ destroys a city, it not un-
commonly regenerates a nation.”
Australia is plainly conquered by her cities and the nation
degenerates. Must we rely upon the guns of the invader for a new
lease of life or can our statesmen do anything to help us regenerate
ourselves ?
Their answer to this query is—the 123rd Clause —the object of
which is to continue to the capital cities the right of taxing vast areas
the lands of which they have maladministered, and the revenues of
which they have misappropriated in order to pamper the city


populations who have the voting power, in order to keep the un-
employed who congregate more and more in the capitals in good
humour. But the truth is that our Ministers are themselves but the
slaves of the cities. They cannot help themselves. . . And this
dominance of the cities is a growing evil.
In 1897 the population of Australia numbered 4,410,151 and of
this number the capital cites alone held 1,247,517, or more than a
fourth of the total population.
And Sydney and Melbourne contained between them 876,000
people or nearly a fifth of the total population.
New South Wales is the Bulletin says, “ a pyramid tottering on
its apex ” and so is Victoria. Both Sydney and Melbourne have
drained the life blood of their provinces till they can drain no more.
Deprived of their wonted surplus nourishment they feel desperately
low spirited, they both want another “ boom,” especially a “ land
boom,” badly. Hence tbeir anxiety for Federation, their wish to
become Federal capitals so that they can tap a fresh source of
nutriment and drain the life blood of all the provinces of Australia
to themselves.
No doubt Mr. Dickson got his quid pro quo at the Premiers
conference when the “ steal ” of the national capital was made, part of
it we know —the right to dominate over the whole of Queensland for
all time, and perhaps there was something said about a Brisbane
University and other little matters.
A splendid University for the use of the Federalist Party while
the people of the back blocks are to be left in rude ignorance. It
does not do to let the country people know too much, for after all
they outnumber the city populations by 3,162,634. If national
regeneration is to be brought about by other means than the guns of
the invader, it must be done by rousing the country people to assert
their rights against the cities.
But there is little hope from this quarter since as Hare
remarked: “ The people residing beyond the limits of towns and
boroughs have comparatively small means of combining to forward
their own claims. The very nature of a country life, the very nature
of landed property, in all the occupations and all the pleasures they
afford render combination and arrangement —the sole means of
procuring and exerting influence—in a manner impossible amongst
country people. Combine them by all the art you can, and all
the industry, they are always dissolving into individuality.”
And after Federation the system of large elecl orates will be dead
against country representation for as Hare says: “ In considering
the process of interesting greater numbers in the constitution by
investing them with political rights, we meet with the fact that the
proportionate interest felt by the constituency appears to diminish as


the numbers o£ the constituency increase. It is found that in the
larger constituencies about 55 per cent., and in the smaller ones 92
per cent, of the electors recorded their votes on the occasion of con-
tests at the same general election.” The apathy of even town and
suburban voters even is marked in Australia, the Bulletin thinks that
they ought to be brought to the polls by the scruff of the neck and
compelled to vote. But what is the good of an unintelligent vote ?
If the country is to become master of the cities evidently the country
people want much better chances of educating themselves Great
evil as the dominanceJof|the cities is it undoubtedly makes for progress
and wants not to be done away with altogether but simply lessened.
But what are we to think of politicians and ministers who instead
of encouraging the efforts of genuine reformers to settle people on
the country do all they can to concentrate the people in the cities
by all sorts of centralising measures We can do very well with-
out any more capitals. The Federalists have surely all the capitals
they want. When we have money to spare we can build a
Commonwealth city like the city of Camelot to the sound of music
and “ therefore never built at all and therefore builtjfor ever we
can build in due time to the music of Australian concord a city,
where it ought to be, in Central Australia, not a Federal city in
New South Wales built, like pyramids of Egypt by the toil of
unwilling slaves, the producers of provinces. As they build
pyramids on their apex in New South Wales, the country builders
are likely to be bnried under the mass of ruins when the ‘ tottering
pyramid ’ falls as it must, unless indeed, the omnipotent Parliament
of New South Wales can hold the laws of gravitation in abeyance.
New South Wales has already one Federal city and it is called
‘Necropolis.’ Surely she cannot want another! “The preponder-
ance of capital cities ” wrote He Tocqueville “is a serious blow
upon the representative system ; and it exposes modern republics to
the same defect as the republics of antiquity which all perished from
not having been acquainted with that form of government.” We
enjoy representative institutions, nevertheless we experience the
truth of Freeman’s remark that “ local bondage is quite possible
under a representative democracy, while local freedom is quite
possible under a monarchy.” Our own continent wants colonising
and why should Australian governments refuse a liberty which has
not been denied by England ? In an immense continent like Aus-
tralia we require much greater local freedom than is necessary in a
tiny island like England. Sir Henry Parkes said that as a matter of
reason and logical forecast it cannot be doubted that if the union
were inaugurated with double the number of the present colonies the
growth and prosperity of all would be more absolutely assured. He
agreed with the principle that excessive area is not only unnecessary
but positively detrimental to national growth and development and
distinctly affirmed the necessity of dividing the colonies of Queens-
land, South Australia and Western Australia. When we consider


the size of those colonies, Queensland 668,497 square miles, South
Australia 903,690 square miles and Western Australia 975,920 square
miles the absurdity of their being ruled for all time from Brisbane,
Adelaide, and Perth surely needs no exposure. Why should these
immense territories be entailed on their present owners ? Why should
the younger members of the Australian family be compelled to
remain in dependence on their elders or be forced, if they wish to set
up house for themselves, to leave the family domain altogether P
It is sound reason to argue that union should precede any
further grants of self-government, but it is utterly irrational to say
that the union shall be such as to make independence of the present
Parliaments impossible. Separation from Brisbane does not mean
Separation from the Australian Commonwealth. A good many people
whose sympathies outrun their judgment seem to be of the opinion
of a lady who recently expressed her views on Federation in the
Sydney Morning Herald , and wrote that “ Separation, division are of
hell, while love and union are of heaven.” Have these worthy people
never heard of the “ division of labour ” which every scientist knows
is a marked feature of every form of high organisation, an essential
condition of progress. If these worthy people had had their way
there would have been only one race of men, one breed of cattle and
dogs, one language and one nation. They seem to think that unless
people are tied together indissolubly by act of Parliament, society will
fall to pieces quite forgetting that if man was not essentially a social
animal there would be no society and no Parliaments at all. As has
been remarked in this connection. Cat and dog often lie down near
one another peaceably, but tie them together and then see how they
will fight. Parliaments came into existence to grant supplies to the
Crown, and at first they had to be forced to appear when summoned.
Now representative bodies are supreme and the idea seems to have
got abroad that these bodies own the people they tax, and that if
anyone escapes from their area of taxation the _political bond itself
is in danger. The true aim of the Statesman is not to make great
cities or a State great in commerce or war, but to produce a noble
growth of men and women. But this seems to be almost entirely
forgotten in Australia. “It can hardly be doubted ” Freeman wrote :
“ that the system of small Commonwealth raises the individual
citizen to a pitch utterly unknown elsewhere, while the system of
large States abolishes local warfare and diminishes the bitterness of
political strife.”
There is no reason why we should not combine the advantages ot
both systems. If by intercolonial free-trade we could get rid of the
rivalry for profits of trade, and if by just land legislation we could
bring to an end the trade in land values the supposed necessity for
an elaborate constitution based upon the dogma of State right would
disappear like a dream. We could then become at once rivals and
comrades, rivals in sport and art and science, in the great art of
living. But to secure a few economies in commerce and administra-


tion, we are to be tied with all sorts of legal bonds and to have
another Parliament which, wise or foolish, cannot possibly deal with
the root of all our evils, or fulfil the ends which justify its existence.
The price demanded by the Federalist Party is not worth paying!
Those who speak of Separation, of isolation, as being unmitigated
evils simply display their own profound ignorance and want of mental
balance. Isolation is the method of progress “ Isolation,” wrote
Darwin, “is an important element in modification of species through
natural selection.” “ Progress,” wrote Professor Daumond, “ can
only start by one or two individuals shooting ahead of their species ;
and their life again can only be conserved by their being shut off
from their species. Unless shut off from the species their acquisition
will either be neutralized in the course of time by the swamping effect
if inter-breeding with the common herd, or so diluted as to involve no
real advance.” All great things, great men and nations are prepared
in secret, in isolation, and not till they come to maturity can the
barriers be safely removed. And those well meaning but foolish
people who denounce Separation and go into raptures about
“ brotherly love with our sister colonies ” —is New South Wales the
only male colony ?—are the same people who are most anxious to
isolate Australia by protective barriers against the Empire, against
the other “ children of a common mother,” who wish to exclude all
but the white races, and by and by when Hume Cook rules, it will be
all but native born Australsans, from the immense territory of Aus-
tralia. But isolation is after all only a temporary phase of universal
progress. The universe is one and the superior products of isolation
have eventually to be shared with all. And for this purpose there is
always a connection, a bridge of some sort which prevents absolute
isolation. And it is well worth the consideration of the Central
Queenslanders whether they should not make a stand against the ex-
clusiveness of Native Australains in the interest of humanity, even if
for a time Central Queensland has to become a “ closed State,” closed
that is not against the outside world but against Australia. If they
do so, they must command the sympathy not only of England, whose
sovereign cannot possibly countenance an exclusive policy if she
wishes Australia to remain a part of the Empire, but also of the most
civilized persons of every nation of the earth. And by adopting for a
time the policy of isolation, Central Queensland may be able to inter-
mediate for Australia when her narrow exclusive national policy
brings down upon her the wrath of foreign nations. Every nation of
the world has some contribution to make to the human Commonwealth
before the genius of humanity can realise its full perfection and the
method of progress has always been “ selection.” Natural selection
has done much, human conscious selection must complete the work.
At any rate if Central Queenslanders do not make a stand their fate
is plain. The limits of true Federation have already been passed,
thanks to the action of New South Wales, and the end can only be a
unification with New South Wales as the dominant unit while the
D


other colonies became virtually provinces following her lead. The
Sydney Bulletin is wise in its generation when it supports Federation
for it sees well enough what the result must be and therefore advises
Australians to vote in the coming contest against Sydney, it is true,
but for New South Wales and Australia. Queenslanders should not
be so blind as to fall into the trap and should vote solid against the
Bill, for Queensland and the best interests of Australia. And if
Queensland at large, misled by the Government which has sold it, does
fall into the snare Central Queenslanders should avoid the bird lime
of the fowler and stand up for the rights of humanity against the
rights of the cities of the plain and then appeal to the Crown in
council to exercise its “ saving power.” Better total Separation than
submersion under a still more disastrous “ majority rule.”
CHAPTER V.
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION.
“ The greatest, apparently, of all difficulties in establishing true popular
Government is the difficulty—it should perhaps be said the impossibility—of
keeping the national pulse in a State of of habitual and healthy animation.”—
W. E. Gladstone.
WE are told on all hands that it is impossible to amend the
Commonwealth Bill that we must accept it as it is or reject it
altogether. And no one maintains that this is so because the
measure is perfect. It is so simply because those in authority have
announced that it shall not be amended.
The people of Central and Northern Queensland, however, have
to consider whether it will be possible or desirable to amend the
constitution once it is accepted.
Of course if amendment of the 123rd or 127th clauses can only
be brought about by civil war every conscientious person should
reject the Bill.
Several methods of amendment have been suggested and most
people in Northern and Central Queensland seem to think that the
Federal Parliament should have the power to grant Separation, that
is, that Separation should be brought about by a majority vote in
Parliament. Of course such a suggestion is entirely inconsistent with
the recognition of State rights. It would put the very existence of
the State at the mercy of party intrigue. We should have American
“ gerrymandering ” on a vast scale.


Under the American constitution the States are left to determine
the districts within their own areas, for and by which members shall
be chosen for the House of Representatives.
“The aim of gerrymandering,” writes Bryce, “is of course so to
lay out the one membered districts as to secure in the greatest possible
number of them a majority for the party which conducts the opera-
tion. This is done sometimes by throwing the greatest possible
number of hostile voters into a district which is anyhow certain to be
hostile, sometimes by adding to a district where parties are equally
divided, some place in which the majority of friendly votes is sufficient
to turn the scale. There is a district in Missisippi—the so called
shoe-string district —500 miles long by 40 broad and another in
Pensylvaijnia resembling a dumb-bell. South Carolina furnishes some
beautiful recent examples. And in Missouri a district has been con-
trived longer, if measured by its windings, than the State itself into
which as large a number as possible of the negro voters has been
thrown.”
We have only to imagine party feeling running strong, say
over the alien labour question, to see that we might have the most
astonishing and uncomfortable developments of Elbridge Gerry’s
invention if the State boundaries were at the mercy of Parlia-
ment.
And the question is not whether amendment of the 123rd
clause and the provisions of the 127th clause relating to State
limits is possible, but whether such an amendment is possible
without destroying Federation itself. If amendment is impossible
without risking the existence of Federalism the Federalists who are
also Separationists should reject the measure or they will find
themselves completely bound.
As there is no reason to expect that Southern Queensland
will consent to Central and Northern Separation the problem is
how to create two new States without the consent of the Queens-
land Parliament. And as the North must be a separate State if the
Centre is, the problem is narrowed down to the formation of
Central Queensland into a new State despite the 128 rd clause.
It is quite possible that the majority of the electors of Queensland
might give their consent as if the country was roused against the
dominance of the capital, the country population outnumbers the
population of Brisbane by about 379,000. An amendment of the
constitution might be proposed in the Federal Parliament the object
of which was to repeal the 123rd clause. Evidently the clause
could not be repealed with respect to Queensland alone, its repeal
must affect all the States. Of course there would be a strong
opposition raised by the State politicians. But as in the more
populous colonies there is a desire for unification, and as the
Australian natives desire a strong National Parliament this opposi-
tion might be overcome but not without rousiug the country voters


all over Australia against the dominance of the cities. As the
country population outnumbers the population of the capitals, in
Victoria by 717,595, in New South Wales by 908,210, in South
Australia by 216,919, in Tasmania by 132,547, in New Zealand by
684.361, there might easily be a strong majority in the Federal
Parliament in favour of repealing the 123rd clause. Of course
the Senate would oppose, and the matter would have eventually to
be referred to the electors of the States, The State electors
realising that State rights mean neither more nor less than the
rights of the capital cities would approve of the amendment But it is
not at all likely that the amendment would simply be for the mere
removal of the 123rd clause. It would take a great amount of labour
and agitation to remove the clause and this labour would not be
undergone to secure a mere negative result, and the electors of the
States, other than Queensland, would not take sufficient interest in
the matter unless the result of the agitation affected them directly,
so that in order to get rid of the 123rd clause it would be necessary
to propose an amendment which would make some general provision
for the grant of self-government whenever the people of a district
within one of the existing States desired autonomy. It would be very
difficult to prescribe a definite area, population and revenue as the
conditions of Separation. And the matter would probably be left to
the discretion of the Federal Parliament. Thus after all the trouble
the result would be open to the objections already raised —the danger
of ‘ gerrymandering ’ &c., —the matter would be left to the decision of
a party majority in the Federal Parliament. Thus to amend the 123rd
clause would endanger Federalism itself, and not only this, the
necessity of raising the country against the capitals would endanger
the authority of the State Parliaments altogether. The result of
trying to amend the 123rd clause after Federation would be to bring
about a consolidated government and a simple national referendum as
decisive in the matter of constitutional amendment. And both unifi-
cation and the national referendum are denounced by all Federalists
Every Federalist then who is also a Separationist is placed in a
awkward dilemma Like Mr. Deakin he wants to accept the
Bill because another Convention might result in unification instead
of Federation. Yet to accept the Bill is to resign all hopes of
gaining independence without risking the destruction of Federation.
But now why are both Federation and Separation thought
necessary in the case of Australia ? In the case of Seperation
because the minority is unjustly treated by the majority. And Feder-
ation is necessary too for precisely the same reason, viz : that the
smaller States are not prepared to trust themselves entirely to the
majority of the larger States. And our Governments too object to
extending the franchise because they are afraid of the majority,
afraid of the labour vote. Keduced to one expression, Federation,
Separation, and minority rule imply a distrust of the people. And
constitutionalism from beginning to end implies a similar distrust.


Stuart Mill wrote, “ All trust in constitutions is grounded on the
assurance they may afford, not that the depositaries of power will not
but that they cannot, misemploy it.” The experience of ages proves
that those who enjoy absolute power as a rule abuse it. It is
necessary then to prevent this abuse by constitutional arrangements.
Evidently then as we are all afraid of majority rule it is necessary to
provide some constitutional means of limiting the power of the
majority. Central Queenslanders have good reason for distrusting
the majority in the Queensland Parliament and Queenslanders have
good reason for not trusting their fate entirely to the majority in the
Federal Parliament. And yet the result of this distrust is deadlock,
is that justice remains undone and the whole country suffers thereby.
We want therefore some constitutional means of protecting minorities
however small, in other words we want to guarantee to every in-
dividual certain inalienable rights. If there are no such individual
rights, State rights are a fallacy and Federation itself is irrational
and ought to be abandoned in favour of unification. If there are
such individual rights then the rights of individuals and minorities
must stand good against the State Parliaments just as good as the
rights of the State Governments against the Federal Parliament.
Thus the position of a Government like that of Queensland which
refuses both to resign its claim to _ absolute rights to the Federal
Government above it and to acknowledge the rights of minorities
below it is completely illogical and untenable. Our Government
relies upon force, it can give no possible ethical justification for its
rule at all. The idea of the divine right of Parliaments to govern
wrong is just as obsolete as the divine right of monarchs.
And to talk of the sovereignty of the people while, as in Queens-
land, thousands of adults have not even a vote is sheer nonsense.
Nevertheless in Australia the ruling power must become more and
more public opinion. “ This power ” wrote Spencer “ existed before
Governments arose, Governments were themselves produced by it,
and it ever continues to be that which, disguised more or less com-
pletely, works through them,” But the * tyranny of the multitude ’
is even worse than the tyranny of a despot.” Bryce remarks, “ That
conceit of his own goodness and greatness which intoxicates an
absolute monarch besets a sovereign people also, and the slavishness
with which his ministers approach an oriental despot may appear in
the politicians of Western democracy. The duty, therefore, of a
patriotic statesman in a country where public opinion rules, would
seem to be rather to resist and correct than to encourage the dominant
sentiment.”
It has recently been said of Italy that “ two things are very
sound, the King and the people; between the two stand the
Parliamentary institutions which in Italy have, for want of political
education and moral courage worked very badly.”
And of our Parliamentary institutions the same may be said.
We suffer from over-centralisation and majority rule, and the cure


which our politicians propose for all our evils is more centralisation
and more majority rule.
No one can reasonably object to one adult one vote, for if
Government is to be stable, it must be 1 broad based upon the people’s
will,” everyone, not a criminal or lunatic must give his or her consent
to some extent to government.
But instead of this extension of political power making social
amendment, social progress, more easy it makes it vastly more difficult.
The people, and especially the lowest and most numerous classes,
in the State as they have the most reason for discontent, have simply
a vague idea that social reform is necessary in many matters, but
how to bring it about they do not know. Not realising that every
social fact and institution at any time is part of a coherent system of
things, that forms of land tenure and marriage, and methods of dis-
tributing wealth at any time are always connected and that one cannot
be altered without altering the others, the people generally wish to
remedy any special evil by direct legislation and give a mandate to
their representatives —who perhaps know no more than they do of
social science—to that effect. How difficult social amendment must
be is indicated by the following passage from the Westminister
Review.
«If there be no knowledge of the natural consensus at any time
subsisting in the social organism, there will of course, be impossible
attempts to achieve ends which do not consist with its passing phase
of organisation. Clearly before any effort to regulate the myriad
multiform changes going on throughout society can be rationally made,
there must be an adequate comprehension of how these changes are
really caused, in what way they are related to one another; how this
perplexed web of phenomena hangs together, how it came thus and
what it is becoming. That is to say, there must be an adequate
acquaintance with social science—the science involving all others—the
science standing above all others in subtlety and complexity—the
science which the highest intelligence alone can master.”
As a matter of fact social progress has always been and must
always be the work of minorities.
“No Government by a democracy or a numerous aristocracy”
wrote Stuart Mill “ either in its political acts or in the opinions
qualities and tone of mind which it fosters, ever did or could rise
above mediocrity, except in so far as the sovereign many have let
themselves be guided—which in their best times they have always
done —by the counsels and influence of a more highly gifted and
instructed one or few. The initiation of all wise or noble things,
comes and must come from individuals; generally at first from some
one individual. The honour and glory of the average man is that he is
capable of following that initiative ; that he can respond internally to
wise and noble things and be led to them with his eyes open.”


The Swiss people have their referendum for restraining the
power of their representative bodies, and they have their initiative for
compelling the discussion of any measure and forcing reforms upon
their representatives when they become slothful. But the one
device is too conservative even in tiny Switzerland, and the other
device is too revolutionary tending as it does to undermine
representative Government altogether. The best Swiss Statesmen say
too that these devices are not capable of safe application to countries
where party Government is fully developed.
The Referendum has however been adopted by Australian
politicians for the purposes of constitutional amendment. But they
have rejected entirely the complementary Swiss device of the initiative.
Considering the immense size of Australia, the great population
it is capable of carrying, and considering that even in Switzerland the
referendum tends to make timid Statesmen and to bring about
permanency of office while its conservative tendency is universally
acknowledged, the adoption of the referendum in Australia can only
have one possible effect. The constitution will prove more hide-bound
and inelastic than any Federal constitution in existence, and as
far as social amendment in Australia goes the Federal Parliament
must prove an utterly incompetent body. If this is so the reason
for creating it disappears and we are much better without it. The
constitution is the contrivance of politicians who have already
proved their incompetence in those essential matters of land tenure
and the distribution of wealth, and they have taken good care that
in these fundamental matters the powers of the Federal Parliament
shall be so limited as to make it practically useless.
The draft constitution is not calculated to secure to individuals
their rights to land and the proceeds of their labour, nor is it
calculated to bring to the top, and place in political power, those
few persons of character, of honesty, and wide sympathy who are the
salt of the earth, who are the real amending social elements. It
will give the supreme power in the State to men of wealth, to
lawyers whose business it is to protect vested interests. It will
simply maintain the status quo , The Federation movement, in so
far as it is Federal and not national and democratic, is simply the
dying effort of the middle classes in Australia to maintain an utterly
untenable position, to uphold their own unjust privileges against
what may be called the monarchical elements of society—men and
women who can perceive the truth and are not afraid of speaking out
and taking upon themselves single responsibility—and the democratic
elements. In Australia as in Italy and in almost every other country
these elements of society are sound. It is the middle classes and their
Parliamentary representatives who are more or less corrupt, and
wanting in moral courage, while their intelligence is dulled by self-
interest. “ Paradox it may seem to be but fact it is ” wrote
Gladstone: “ that the immense advantages which leisure and


learning have conferred are largely neutralised, and in some cases
utterly outweighed by the blinding influences of a subtler deeper and
more comprehensive selfishness.”
To bring about social amendment in Australia we must rely not
upon Governments, but upon an educated public opinion and to
educate public opinion, the wise few must organise themselves and
establish connections with one another all over Australia.
An organised body such as this must really rule, let Governments
do and say what they please and its authority must be all the greater
since it must work entirely by persuasion and abandon the barbarous
method of compulsion, which may very well be left to the State Govern-
ments to control those uncivilised persons who cannot guide them-
selves by reason.
Central Queensland has nothing to gain by entering the
Federation which she cannot get in a more perfect degree by
standing out of it and getting control of her own affairs.
Freeman says that ‘ ‘ignorance, carelessness, and corruption among
the electors appear to be the inherent vices of representative Govern-
ment on a large scale.” “It is in vain to hope that the average
standard of the electoral body of a large State will ever stand so high
as the average standard of the popular assembly of a small one. We
must not dream of seeing the everyday Englishman attain the same
political and intellectual position as was held by the everyday
Athenian.”
It can hardly be doubted that the system of small Commonwealths
raises the individual citizen to a pitch utterly unknown elsewhere.
If Federation were destroyed in Australia in accordance with the wish
of many democrats and many Australian natives it would be
disastrous, and yet under the proposed constitution majority rule must
in the end destroy it or destroy liberty altogether.
De Toequeville said: “If ever the free institutions of America
are destroyed that event may be attributed to the unlimited
authority of the majority, which may at some future time urge the
minorities to desperation and oblige them to have recourse to physical
force.” America has abandoned the Munro Doctrine, and is begining
to become an Imperial militant power to the disgust of her wisest
citizens, and De Tocquevilles words are likely to become trne : “It
may be foreseen even now that when the Americans lose their
republican institutions, they will speedily arrive at a despotic Govern-
ment, without a long interval of limited monarchy.”
We in Australia have had a short period during which the
constitutional power of the Crown has mitigated to some extent, by its
power of granting independence, the tyranny of the majority, and if
that power be abolished, as proposed, the power of the majority will
become utterly despotic. There is one chance of preventing
Republicanism degenerating in Australia into Imperial absolutism, as
it has generally hitherto done. And that opportunity is Central


Queensland’s. And if she accepts the constitution it will be gone.
Nothing can save the minorities afterwards, but a revolutionary
movement which is certain to endanger the peace of Australia as well
as the peace of the Empire, for there are oppressed minorities
elsewhere, e.g. Ireland, which might join in any revolutionary move-
ment once it started.
If Representative Government is to continue at all some scheme
for the representation of minorities must be adopted. But although
Stuart Mill said: “The day when a trial (of some such system as
Hare’s) shall be sanctioned by Parliament, will, I believe, inaugurate
a new era of Parliamentary Reform, destined to give to Representative
Government a shape fitted to its mature and triumphant period, when
it shall have passed through the militant stage in which alone the
world has yet seen it.” Our all-wise legislators have not seen fit to
propose any such scheme for the Commonwealth of Australia. ‘ ‘ln
the false democracies” Mill wrote: “which, instead of giving
representation to all, give it only to the local majorities, the voice of
the instructed minority may have no organs at all in the representative
body. It is an admitted fact that in the American democracy, which
is constructed on this faulty model, the highly cultivated members of
the community, except such of them as are willing to sacrifice their
own opinions and modes of judgment and become the servile mouth-
piece of their inferiors in knowledge, seldom offer themselves to
congress or the State Legislatures, so little likelihood have they of
being returned. Had a plan like Mr. Hare’s by good fortune
suggested itself to the enlightened and patriotic founders of the
American Republic, the Federal and State Assemblies would have
contained many of these distinguished men, and democracy would
have been spared its greatest reproach and one of its most formidable
evils.”
But Mill and Hare have evidently written in vain as far as our so-
called Statesmen go. And on this ground alone every wise person
should decline to accept a new representative machine in the
construction of which no attempt has been made to bring it up to
modern requirements. It is planned on the faulty English.
American and Swiss models and is like the constitution of the old
Kingdom of Poland, which Freeman says : “ called itself at once a
Kingdom and a Republic (Federation under the Crown), and in fact
ingeniously united the evils of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy
without the redeeming features of any of the three.” It gives us a
sham Grown, a sham because it will be simply the mouthpiece of a
Parliamentary majority, and because it is entirely disconnected from
the people, a sham senatorial aristocracy because the Senate will
certainly be composed of rich men or lawyers, and a sham Democracy
because it leaves it to the ruling minorities in the States to continue to
disfranchise thousands of electors and the better half of the citizens.
All Federal Constitutions are compromises and therefore necessarily
full of defects but for the multiplicity of faults the draft constitution


offered to Australians takes the palm, and is a most unmistakeable
proof of the utter want of constructive genius amongst Australian
politicians.
With proper representative machinery there should be no
necessity to lay the present undue emphasis on State rights.
Intercolonial free trade would abolish half our difficulties and
could be made a first step towards a satisfactory form of union without
all the proposed cumbrous and obsolete representative machinery.
Sir Thomas MTlwraith advises Queenslanders that it would be
sheer madness to enter the Federation at present on the terms
proposed, and it would be madder still for Central Queenslanders.
Premier Dickson is probably neither “ mad nor wicked,” but he has
simply been “hypnotised” by the member for the King Division in
the South, who wants to see Australia a Consolidated Eepublic with
Sydney as the political centre. Dickson, one of those autocrats
“ unknown to the Constitution ” who at the conference usurped such
extraordinary powers, is a politician without a backbone and without
a policy, a queer mixture of servility and sauce, a mediocrity which
Queensland ought without delay to send back to his proper business
outside the Queensland Assembly altogether.
While he is in power amendment of Queensland affairs is
impossible. But as there are a good many people in Central Queens-
land who are like Dickson “ hypnotised,” who think, with that worthy
lady, that Separation is from the devil while Federation is from
heaven, it is necessary to suggest an amendment of the Constitution
which might enable them to get over the difficulty created by the
123rd and 127th Clauses without endangering the very existence of
Federation by putting the territorial integrity of the States at the
mercy of a majority vote in Parliament.
We are told that our Federation is to be “ under the Crown,”
under the Crown, if it means anything, must mean that the Crown is
to be the “real legislative sovereign” or authority, which is to be
supreme over the Constitution and over all legislative and executive
bodies. Of course if a Constitution under the Crown is accepted it is
a proof that the majority of Australians do not wish for complete
independence. And if so there can be no objection to the Crown
exercising a real influence, or to its handing over to the Governor-
General as its representative the right of granting, independence of
local Parliaments, to any section of the people anywhere
in Australia whom it deems fit for self-government. If
the Governor-General is to represent Australia as a
whole, all interference of the English Crown or English
Parliament will naturally be through him instead of
being direct as at present. Therefore Australians should have the


same right of appeal to the Governor-General which they have at the
present time to the Queen.
Amendment 1 —Nothing in this Act shall be held to deprive
any citizen of the Commonwealth of the right of appeal to
the Governor-General in person as the Crown’s representa-
tive in Australia.
Amendment 2. —A new State may be formed by the Separation
of territory from a State or by the union of two or more
States or part of States but only with the consent of the
Governor-General. And such consent shall not be asked
unless the majority of the electors of the district requiring
Separation, or the districts requiring union petition the
Governor-General. And if the consent of the Governor-
General is obtained the matter of the formation of the new
State may be referred by the Governor-General to the
electors of the Commonwealth for their approval or dis-
approval by the majority of votes.
This would take the matter out of the hands of Parliament
altogether and would not endanger Federalism in the least, as the
Governor-General would not act without considering the matter fully
or without responsible advice. And before he consented a really good
case would have to be made out. That this method of amendment is
fully in accordance with British constitutional practice this passage
from Hare’s “ Election of Eepresentatives ” shows.
“ There are insurmountable objections to an electoral division
founded solely on a geographical or territorial basis, and not corrected
by some balancing movement which answers to the fluctuations of
society. In addition to the difficulty of arriving, even in the outset,
at anything like equality in such a division, it has constantly to be
reconstructed. The shifting centres of population and industry will
every year disarrange and disturb it.
It is through the constant exercise of the authority of the Crown
to the prerogative of which it belongs to confer corporate powers, that
the creation of electoral bodies can most effectually keep pace with
the rapidity of internal changes. It is only in the localities where
such alterations in the face of society, and in the conditions of the
neighbourhood are actually going on, that their extent can be fully
appreciated. It is from the people who are themselves affected by
such alterations that any application for separate or local incoporation
should emanate. It is not the business of a central power to initiate
on their behalf, the proceedings necessary to obtain a new constitu-
tion. It would be moreover, highly inconvenient that the Parliament
should be required to interpose its powers on every occasion. The
principle by which such local divisions are to be constituted, separated
or reconstructed should be settled once for all, and then applied


through the constitution al exercise of the royal prerogative, as the
established laws are administrated through the judicial authority of
the Crown,”
The application of this passage to the Separation problem is
obvious. The objections to electorates, such as the States will be for
Federal representation, founded solely on a Territorial basis are
clearly indicated, also how they can be overcome without the danger
of “ gerrymandering,” i.e. by the balancing movement of the Crown.
To come to the other part of the suggested amendment the
National Referendum. As its use would be discretionary with the
Governor-General this suggestion ought not to frighten even such
advanced Democrats as the editors of Progress and the Sydney Bulletin ,
who think that Federation would be impossible if a National
Referendum was allowed to be decisive for any purpose. The
Referendum used in this way, could not possibly bring about
unification. It would simply be used to remedy the evils of over
centralisation and the unjust incidence of taxation. It would save the
minorities from oppression and thus make the whole union more
stable.
Why even Lord Salisbury is not afraid of the Referendum !
Lord Beauchamp interviewed in Sydney said : “I am of opinion
the Referendum is really a Conservative principle. It has worked in
that way in Switzerland, and Lord Salisbury also takes the view that
the Referendum is in no way antagonistic to Conservative principles.”
However, as progress has usually been for the benefit of the few
at the expense of the many it is perhaps natural to find the editor of
Progress objecting to a National Referendum. And as the Sydney
Bulletin wants unification with New South Wales first, and the rest
of Australia lengths behind, it is perhaps natural to find that clever
paper objecting to a National Referendum also. But the Referendum
is certainly a Republican device and both Lord Salisbury and Earl
Beauchamp and the other Australian Governors are, or ought to be,
believers in the principle of monarchy. When Earl Beauchamp
announces himself as “a strong believer in the principle of
Federation,” and says he believes “no one questions its advisability”
he does not mean that he thinks Federalism ought to be supreme in
Australia, as our Premiers evidently wish it to be. And Lord
Beauchamp can hardly be a believer in a dependent Senate when he
says that he does not agree with the suggestion that Peers should be
able to sit either in the House of Lords or Commons because: “I
look upon the House of Lords as an independent Chamber. There
the members can speak as their conscientious opinions direct them.
They are not compelled to obey the cracks of the party whips.”
The Senate we are told is a very different body from the
House of Lords. However the essential object of both is the same,


viz., to protect the interests of landlords, the interest of the minority,
whether those landlords are called Lords or States, And it seems to
be quite possible under the constitution for the Premiers of States to
be Senators too and to draw a double salary.. The same thing may
apply to the Supreme Court Judges. “ When community rises into
identity,” wrote Freeman, “ Federalism is as inappropriate as when
there is no community at all.” Community in Australia appears
likely to merge into identity. And the Governors of Australia certainly
ought to object to unification for then there would be only one
Governor wanted instead of seven. And though the Governors might
find the Governor-General sometimes a nuisance, just as the Lords
find the Crown a nuisance when it is used against them eg.
Abolition of purchase in the Army, they should remember that but
for the Crown the House of Lords would probably have been abolished
before now.
So in Australia if the Crown has not got an independent repre-
sentative, independent of Parliament and in touch with the people it
is more than probable that the seven Lords of Australia will find
themselves “ compelled to obey the cracks of the party whips ” on
pain of dismissal. And this would be hardly good for minorities or
individuals. Earl Beauchamp evidently hankers after democratic
plaudits as when his interviewer told him that Premier Reid was “at
his best as a political orator when addressing a public meeting
from a balcony,” he replied, “ Ah, that is a very useful quality in
a public man. I often wish I could do it.” Suppose his Lordship
then took up a position on the balcony of the Warrigal Club,
Sydney, which overlooks the domain and explained to the
oemocrats who usually assemble there, when not engaged in
painting the Park railings red, the benefits of country air, .and
the assistance also which crowned heads have at various periods of
English history rendered to the cause of democracy, and impress
upon them the absolute necessity of maintaining the supremacy of
the Crown over the caucus system of party Government, for the
Domain orators are no doubt aware that democratic Federation is just as
much an ‘anomaly’ as Garran says, that Federation under the Crown is.
A Federal legislature governed by “ majority rule ” is
certain to end as in America, where party swallowed
the States, in Parliamentary despotism. And a unified
Australia would make short work of the gentlemen
who frequent the Domain. In a true Federal Australia each
State would provide for its own domainers. In short if we are to
have a true Federation, if Federalism is not to degenerate into party
government the Crown must become an active real part of the system,
and if through the instrumentality of the Governor-General and
Council and the State Governors, the State Parliaments were made to
understand their responsibility to the people of these colonies it is
questionable whether there would be any desire or necessity for that
anomalous amalgam called by the editor of Progress “ Democratic


Federation,” and known as the Federal Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act.
And if the Crown is to become really useful its representatives
must have the approval of the people by a State and National
Referendum, otherwise the Crown will be compelled to obey the
cracks of the party whips and its representatives will be unable to
express their conscientious opinions openly and without respect to
persons “ unknown to the Constitution.”
But will Federalists accept the amendment suggested in this
chapter ? Will the Imperial authorities make any such amendment
if not requested to do so, and if they think that such an amendment is
likely to meet with opposition in Australia ? It is impossible to
answer these questions. The only wise course then is to vote against
the Bill or to abstain from voting altogether. To accept under
protest is absurd. To reject under protest is better, but sometimes
the wisest course is to do nothing and wait.
CHAPTER YI.
MONARCHIC FEDERATION.
“ But the result in my mind from an investigation into the form and spirit of
Republics is that neither England nor France, without infinite detriment to them,
as well in the event as in the experiment, could be brought into a Republican
form; but that everything Republican which can be introduced with safety into
either of them must be built upon a Monarchy, a real not a nominal Monarchy as
its essential basis; that all such institutions, whether aristocratic or democratic,
must originate from the Crown and in all their proceedings refer to it; that by the
energy of that mainspring alone those Republican parts must be set in action, and
from thence must derive their whole legal effect—as amongst us they actually do—
or the whole will fall into confusion. These Republican members have no other
point but the Crown, in which they can possibly unite.”— Edmund Bueke’s Appeal
from the New to the Old Whigs.
THE confusion of thought on the subject of Federation in
Australia is extraordinary. We find Australian Natives in
favour of the Bill though they show by their words that they
desire Nationalism and not Federalism at all. We find Federalists
trying to persuade the electors that the essential clauses of
Federalism can be removed by a majority vote of the electors in the
States not directly affected, and in the Council we find the Hon. W.
Allen, a professed Federalist, quoting Sir Hercules Robinson on the


Border Customs with approval to the effect that the inconvenience
admits of but one effectual cure, viz.: “The blotting out altogether
of the artificial boundary line —in a word Federation.” Now all this
tends to show that these people include all kinds of Q-overnmental
union under the word Federation
Federalism is a more civilised form of Q-overnment than
Nationalism precisely because it allows of greater liberty to the
persons united under it. And Federalism is a later growth of time
simply because while people are uncivilised, the liberty which
Federalism gives would be disastrous to the existence of the State.
Strict discipline, regimentation, are necessary in a militant age and it
is discipline in this case brought about by compulsion. The order
brought about under Federalism is on the other hand a discipline
willingly adopted to a certain extent. All known Federations use a
sort of mixture of the principles of complusion and consent. “A
Federation,” however, Freeman wrote; “is something which is in its
own nature essentially voluntary, complusion of any sort is utterly
repugnant to the first principles of a Federal union.” This was said
of course with respect to the compulsion of States not individuals.
And Federation is essentially a union of nations which for certain
purposes give up their right of independent action, without ceasing
to be sovereign States in all other matters. It naturally follows from
this that the powers of a Federal Government must be restricted
much more than a National Government, but this restriction does not
necessarily mean that the sovereignty of the Federal Government,
shall not be assured over the States for the purpose of realising the
supreme object of the union. To restrict the powers of a Govern-
ment is not necessarily to do away with its final and absolute
supremacy, for this very restriction may establish its supremacy all
the more surely. Thus an athlete by confining his aims comes to
excel in one special feat, had he attempted excellence in many
directions he might have remained a poor performer in all and
undistinguished. And if this special performance is an extra-
ordinarily difficult one he may come to be reckoned the first athlete
of his time and honoured accordingly, Goethe said in this sense that
limitation makes the master. So we may say that a Government
which limited itself absolutely to its true and essential social functions
would be master of the State in a sense in which no Government
has ever been. And this is the sense in which the words
“ Monarchic Federation ” are used. A Federation is a union of
nations. Nations are not by any means equal in worth, in
civilisation, but there might be one nation which surpassed all
others in worth and was willingly allowed the supremacy by the
others. These nations might elect their own rulers and these rulers
might consent to acknowledge the rulers of the nation of most
worth as the final and supreme authority. And these nations
might be united simply and solely through and by means of their


elected heads. This would allow the greatest possible liberty to the
component members of the union consistant with union at all. This
would be a much more civilised form of Federation than any which
exists at present precisely because only very civilised people
capable of great self-restraint and self-discipline could remain an
ordered and harmonious whole under such circumstances. And yet it
is unquestionably the ideal to be striven for if it be true, as Goethe
said, “ That that Government is the best which teaches us to govern
ourselves.” Freeman sketches a Monarchic Federation thus, “ A
Federal Monarchy may be formed by the union of two or more
kingdoms under one king. The kingdoms so joined may form one
State in all their relations with other powers, while they may retain
the most perfect independence in all internal matters, they may keep
their own laws, their own constitutions and a distinct administration
of the ordinary Government.”
“ Though Federal States have commonly been Eepublican, there
is nothing theoretically absurd in the idea of a Federal Monarchy.”
“ It is possible that the powers of the American President, as they
stand, might be vested in an hereditary or elective King and that the
functions of the Governors of the States, as they stand, might be
vested in hereditary or elective Dukes. Such a union would be a true
Monarchic Federation.”
But it will be asked, “ What are the advantages of this form of
Federation over the common Eepublican form of it ?”
Monarchy simply means the rule of one person, but it does not
necessarily mean that one person is to do all the ruling, it does not
necessarily mean that all political power is to be concentrated in the
hands of one person. It may simply mean that the highest and most
important functions of government are to be performed by one person
specially fitted for the task ; that no law shall be valid without the
assent of this person, and no executive act done except in his or her
name.
In ti Monarchy one person is supreme over all legislative and
executive arrangements and over the constitution itself, over even the
judiciary, and the church. Of course this implies a most perfect
trust in individual human nature and yet mutual confidence or trust
is after all the essential basis of representative or popular govern-
ment. In the State there must be laws or rules of co-operation.
If these laws perfectly attained the end sought, viz : the highest
welfare of every individual, no amendment of them would
be necessary and if every individual spontaneously observed
them no Government would be necessary at all. But ir
is impossible to lay down hard and fast rules in this way.
The outward world is constantly changing and human natnre


also is in a constant state of change. Therefore a living personal
Government is necessary in order to adapt law to changing circum-
stances, and to discover new modes of co-operation. It has been
remarked that “ wherever or whenever the individual is forced to
submit to any rules except those which he himself spontaneously
recognises to be worthy of observance there liberty is absent.” If
this is the case there never has been free or popular Government.
And when we consider the immense complexity of modern societies,
we see at once that laws must be made which do not directly concern
many individuals at all, and of the wisdom of which they are not
qualified to express an opinion. The framing of these must be left
to those directly interested or their representatives, but, as society is
one, every law must to some extent be related to every other law,
therefore society as a whole must through its Government have the
right of vetoing or amending any special laws whenever those special
laws conflict with the general welfare. All special legislation must
be, as it were, tested by more general legislation, just as the desires
of individuals must be controlled in order to establish social harmony.
It is therefore necessary to lay down a supreme law to which all
other law r s must conform. And this law should be as simple as
possible for it is one that everyone ought to be able to understand
and agree with. If everyone understands this single law and assents
to it, because recognising it to be worthy of observance, then popular
free or democratic government is possible because everyone can test
any special law, which affects his liberty by this supreme law and if
he can show that the special law he-complaius of conflicts with the
supreme law, then he has only to appeal to the authorities and they
must give way and amend the unjust legislation they seek to impose
If they do not give way he has only to appeal to public
opinion. The absolute necessity of having this law expressed as
simply and in as few words as possible is then evident. As Stuart
Mill said : ‘“lf the State is to be permanent and stable there must be in
the Constitution something settled, something permanent, and not
to be called in question,” something unalterable, or to use a scientific
term a 4 constant.’ If this one thing was settled and universally
agreed to, every other provision of the Constitution should be more or
less easily alterable. Now what should this supreme law be or
express ? Evidently the supreme end or aim of politics, of social life.
As to this every social individual ought to be able to agree. And if
this agreement is arrived at we evidently have a permanent and
unalterable principle of union on which to base the Constitution of
the State.
This principle may be given in Matthew Arnolds words thus :
Now of man in society the capital need is that the whole body of
society {i.e. every individual) should come to live with a life worthy
to be called human , and corresponding to mans true aspirations and
powers. This, the humanisation of man in society, is civilisation.
£


The aim for all of us is to promote it; and to promote it is above all the
aim for the true politician.”
Australians repeat glibly the phrase, “ One people one destiny”
but has anyone ever given a precise meaning to this motto ?
If however we consider the above words of Arnold’s, a definite
meaning may be attached to the phrase. Every Australian must
agree that the one destiny, the one aim, of all Australians ought to be
to raise the life of every individual to its highest possible pitch of
perfection. Many societies have elevated the one or the few till they
have become almost as gods, but they have been elevated at the
expense of the many and the social laws of these societies have been
framed for this express purpose. But what Australians wish for is a
Commonwealth, a State in which the laws, the rules of co-operation,
shall he such that every single individual shall have fair play and
with the assistance of his fellows, be able to exercise his powers fully
and develop himself to the highest possible point. The supreme law
of monarchy is the highest welfare of the one, of aristocracy the
highest welfare of the few, of democracy the highest welfare of the
greatest number, the majority. But the supreme law of a true
Commonwealth is the highest welfare of one and all. This last law
“ the highest welfare of one and all ” ought to be the supreme law of
Australian social life to which all other laws and social institutions
should be made to conform.
To express the matter in other words, the late master of Baillol,
Professor Jowett, said : —“Might there not be a civitas dei upon
earth, a State whose mission it was not to be great in commerce or
conquest, but to produce a noble growth of men P This is not merely
the dream of ancient philosophers, it is an ideal of the future which
a great Statesman would always keep in view.” To translate this
into language intelligible to us —the aim of the Australian States-
man should be to establish a human Commonwealth. How can a
human Commonwealth be best established? Surely if ideal human
nature is the supreme aim of the true politician, the best way is
to find that citizen of the State who best fulfils the ideal in his or
her own person and give him or them the supreme place of
honour, to make this or these persons themselves the final test of
all law, and the ultimate court of appeal. It is impossible to
make a great and lasting State without making the individuals
who compose it great, and if the individuals are highly civilised
the State must be great in true civilisation. The State is simply
the result of the co-operation of individuals. The first duty of
the Statesman then is to secure to individuals the essential con-
ditions of a healthy normal human existence. This once secured,
the individual can develop himself ? He wants guidance and
instruction. And for this he can only look in one direction and


that is to those who best realise the ideal of human nature.
And how can idividual liberty and right be best secured ?
Evidently by putting in the supreme place the individual who best
understands the requirements of individuals. In this sense Smiles
wrote, “ The only true barrier against the despotism of public
opinion whether it be of the many or few is enlightened
individual freedom and purity of personal character.” And
this is really the essential meaning and justification of that
essentially English device of constitutional monarchy. We may
guarantee liberty by as an elaborate a Constitution as we please, but a
constitution is a dead thing which cannot speak and act for itself. A
charter must have a person or persons to maintain it if liberty is not
to perish. Therefore we have Houses of Commons to guard the rights
of democracy that is of the majority ; therefore we have House of
Lords or Upper Chambers to guard the liberties of the few, the
dominant classes. And therefore England has a sovereign to
guard the rights of individuals and minorities against the tyranny
of the few or the tyranny of the many. And therefore every
citizen has the right of personal appeal to this sovereign. If the
rights of individuals are not safe-guarded it cannot be well with
the majority or the few; injustice grows, and the State passes
away. Houses of Commons of Upper Chambers may or may not be
necessary but the sovereign is always necessary as long as Govern-
ment lasts. Monarchy is the oldest and most universal of all
political institutions and must outlive them all if society and civilisa-
tion are to endure. If the best Goverment is that which teaches us
to govern ourselves, then the aim of the true Statesman must be to
make both Houses of Commons and Upper Chambers unnecessary and
finally Monarchy itself, to make all classes self-governing and able to
co-operate harmoniously without external Government or compulsion
of any sort. But why, it will be said, is Monarchy, the rule the
supremacy of a single individual, necessary ? Why not Government
by a body instead ? In the first place it may be said that we cannot
do without it, we have it now. There are Monarchic, and aristocratic,
and democratic factors in every society. In every public meeting
almost, there is the prominent one who leads, the prominent few who
assist, and the great mass which merely approves or disapproves. In
any House of Commons there is a Premier and a Ministry whose
business it is to reconcile the discordant factions and to legislate as
much as possible in accordance with general social requirements.
And the Premier and his Ministry are supposed to be unanimous on
all the great questions of the day. And there is a marked tendency
in Australia now to permanency of office and the obliteration of
party lines of division. But our Premiers are still kept in power by
party and do not rule with unanimous consent. And the very
existence of party proves that in matters dealt with by our Eepre-
sentative Chambers there is a diversity of opinion amongst citizens.
And our Representative Chambers deal with matters which would


often be much better left to those directly concerned, they interfere
unduly with industry. Our Upper Chambers have become more or
less useless. And our Governors, who might be useful, are not
allowed to speak out or exercise any real authority. Thus the only
rule we have is majority rule, and the majority that rules is simply a
Representative majority. Representative Government has become
largely discredited for the simple reason that it has nearly done its
work. The public knows just as much and often more than
its Representatives. Representative institutions must give
place more and more to popular self-government and elective
Monarchy. But why Monarchy ? Simply because numerous
bodies are inefficient and boards only less so. Boards, as Bentham
said are generally “screens.” A divided responsibility and a divided
control is proverbially weak. Boards and Councils are useful to
advise but more or less useless for direction. As Stuart Mill said :
“ The principles applicable to all public trusts are in substance the
same. In the first place each executive officer must be single and
singly responsible for the whole of the duty committed to his charge.”
“ As a general rule every executive function whether superior or
subordinate, should be the appointed duty of some given individual.
It should be apparent to all the world, who did everything, and
through whose default anything was left undone. Responsibility is
nill when nobody knows who is responsible. Nor even when real can
responsibility be divided without being weakened.” Centralisation
of control is, as every scientist knows, a feature of all high organisa-
tion. It is necessary for successful war, and just as necessary for
success in the milder modern war of commerce. Neglect of the
Monarchical principle is the secret of the failure of many co-operative
societies. To the neglect of this principle is due the failure of
municipal government in America. “ The aim has been ” says
Hosmer : “to make a city government where no officer by himself
shall have power to do much harm, and the natural result was to
create a situation where no officer had power to do much good. Men
are coming to see that cities are large corporations, and as such, one
man in them must be given the power of direction and the choice of
his chief assistants ; power and responsibility must go together from
the top to the bottom of every successful business organisation.”
And one man rule is just as necessary for success in national
business. In Australia we have become so accustomed to decid e
everything by majority vote that we come to consider it the fin a]
test of what is socially good. But, says a recent writer: “ This is
merely the recognition of the fact that the majority will get its way,
not because it is the wisest, but because it is the strongest, and of the
fact that it is useless to fight if you know you will be beaten. The
minority has no rights, historically speaking. As a matter of fact the
more numerous party in a battle does not by any means always win."
The party that does win is the best organised party. “Rot only ”


wrote Mill: “is a greater number often kept down by a less, but the
greater numbers may have a preponderance in property and
individually in intelligence, and'may yet be held in subjection, forcibly
or otherwise, by a minority in both respects inferior to it. To make
these various elements of power politically influential they must be
organised ; and the advantage in organisation is necessarily with those
who are in possession of the Government. A much weaker party
may greatly preponderate when the powers of government are thrown
into the scale, though a government so situated is in the condition
called in mechanics unstable equilibrium, life a thing balanced on its
smaller end.”
The party in power in Australia is a ruling minority, and it has
done all it can to persuade the people to adopt a form of Federation
which leaves the State Parliaments, the seven Kings of Australia,
virtually supreme, in order to maintain the supremacy of the capitals,
which, like the ‘ tottering pyramid ’ in New South Wales balanced on
its apex, are in a condition of unstable equilibrium. The conspiracy
of these seven Kings to bind both the people and the Crown is a
dangerous one. But these conspirators have no bond of union, no
principle of organisation, save that of the self-interest of their class,
the political, and the ruling minority which that class chiefly
represents. How is this conspiracy to be overcome ? It can only be
overcome by the popular decision to create a still more powerful
King who shall be able to restrain the seven conspirators and compel
them to do their duty to the people.' And, thanks to the lingering
tradition of the Monarchical principle which haunts the political
chambers of the Anglo-Saxon races, the conspirators have in deference
to popular superstition, —as they call it —provided the means by
which they can be controlled. They have provided for a Governor-
General, as the Crown’s tiepreseutative, who, if a strong man, has
ample power to bring them to their bearings. The conspirators how-
ever, do not dream that this Governor-General can become more than
a mere figure-head, like our present Governors.
Nor can he, unless his hands are enforced by the sovereign
power of the people. And the object of these pages is to try and
convince the people that it is to their interest to use
the sovereign power which our politicians admit is theirs, to give a
real living embodiment to the principle of Constitutional Monarchy
so well represented to-day by Her Majesty Queen Victoria, who is
honoured everywhere throughout the British Empire, as a good and wise
woman though exposed to all the temptations which assail wealth and
high position. And it is especially to the interest of Central Queens-
landers to insist upon a revival of the sovereigns right, for if they do
not do it their case is hopeless and they must remain in political
bondage until the oppression of minorities brings about revolution,
and the fall of the tottering pyramids. And if they win freedom in


the way indicated, if they emphatically and unanimously protest
against a Constitution which ambitiously attempts to bind the Crown,
they will be conferring a lasting benefit upon the people of Australia
and contribute largely to the peace of the Empire. The writer before
quoted says : “ A body of representatives having full and sufficient
power to bind the shires and towns of the land is a formidable
institution. Some day it will awake to the conviction
that it wields the sovereign power of the nation. And though that
conviction will be long in coming, the dawning consciousness of the
fact will slowly strengthen the confidence of the minds in which it
lies dormant, will gradually convert them from the attitude of
trembling hostages to that of haughty plenipotentiaries, masters
alike of the community which send them and of the Monarch to
whom they are sent. The Kings have raised a spectre they cannot
lay.” Evidently the day has come when representatives, no longer,
* trembling hostages ’ but ‘haughty pleni potentearies’ can dictate terms
not to the Kings, for there are none in Australia, but to their
masters the people of Australia. Since the five Premiers have
announced that the people must accept their precious constitution
which entirely ignores that principle of union alluded to
in this chapter which surely must receive the unanimous
approval of the Australian people. Have the people
raised a spectre which they cannot lay? It remains to be seen! The
present writer who has no personal interest to serve has endeavoured
to tell them how to lay it, and believes that it will prove but a
Brocken-spectre after all which must vanish before the sunlike rays
of reason when at the same time the dawning consciousness of the
people awakes to the fact that they and not their representatives
possess the sovereign amending power in the State, that the power if
not the intelligence is theirs. But the power is useless unless it is
concentrated and then as Stuart Mill said “ one person with a belief,
is a social power equal to ninety-nine who have only interests. They
who can succeed in creating a general persuasion that a certain form
of government, deserves to be preferred, have made nearly the most
important step, which can possibly be taken towards ranging the
powers of society as its side ” There is already a general persuasion
in favour of Federation and it surely ought not to be difficult to
to persuade the people that a Monarchie Federation is the
best form of it. This would be no innovation but simply
a revival of the forms of Government under which we actually
live now. The Federalists who seek to throw off the authority of
the Crown are the revolutionists and on them must lie the burden
of proving the necessity of doing so.
The necessity of reviving the authority of the Crown so as to
make Eepresentative bodies responsible to the people ought to be
evident to Separationists at any rate, and Separationists are simply
those who wish to see Goethe’s maxim of Government made a


reality, to see Government established which instead of
trying to centralise everything in its own hands thereby
demoralising itself and the people, shall be ready to grant
an extension of self-government whenever it is possible to do so.
If the Governor-General had the power suggested in the last
chapter it would probably never have to be used for all that is
necessary is to make the existing Parliaments feel their responsibility
to the people under them. And if the people enforce the Governor-
General’s hands in this way the success of the experiment
would certainly lead to the application of the Monarchical
principle throughout Australia, to our various irresponsible
boards and committees whose laxity it is that has led
Australian Governments to pass stringent laws and centralising
measures like the Slaughtering Act and proposed Dairy Act of
Queensland. It is not that the Monarchical elements, i.e. men not
afraid to speak straight and take single responsibility upon them-
selves, are not to be found in the localities but simply that the
Government will not appoint them to office, because they are men of
too independent a nature to stand being dictated to by Parliamentary
despots. This only shows the necessity of having at the head of affairs
someone who loves independence in those beneath him, who knows
that independent men are the men who can be trusted while the other
sort, at present in favour, are ail servility in the presence of their
superiors and all sauce when they are absent. They are humble to
those above them and dictatorial those below them. Herbert
Spencer said that there was “no political alchemy by which you can
get golden conduct out of leaden instincts.” But he quite forgot the
fact that the success of a business depends largely upon the manage-
ment and it very often happens, especially in quiet times when
mediocrities have the power of patronage, that the manager
has not the ability or character of one or more of his subordinates
Find out the capable men and give them authority. Then there is
a rapid change for the better. That is the ‘ political alchemy ’
which has before now changed the face of society. Whenever a
man or woman great in heart and mind has got hold of the reins
of power there has been a great and beneficial change. But
absolute power has generally proved disastrous in the end to the
benevolent despots themselves. The time was not ripe for the
changes they brought about and at their death there was a painful
relapse. But when Representative bodies are so strong as they
are in England or in Australia, the country can stand any strain to
which the rise of great men may expose it. And as Bryce says, “no
form of Government needs great leaders so much as Democracy.”
Perhaps enough has been said to justify the principle of canstitutional
Monarchy, and it seems strange to have to insist upon its value while
we are professedly uniting ‘ under the Grown ’ and while so many of
us hail from the United Kingdom.


But Federalists like Garran tell us that this relation
to the Crown “ cannot be permanent, is an historical accident
which involves many anomalies, is a relation suitable to colonial
infancy but which cannot last. Either one of two solutions may be
ultimately possible an independent Australia or an Australia
forming a State in a great British Federation. We are not yet called
upon to choose between the two.” Some people, however, are much
more explicit. Thus Mr. Drake in his pamphlet says: “ Australia is
calmly pursuing the path that leads to independence. Intercolonial
Federation must and will be embraced by the people of Australia as a
necessary stage of the journey.” But the question treated of in this
chapter is a question of principle, of the form of union, altogether
apart from the question of dependence or independenre of England.
If England was to sink beneath the sea to-morrow it would not in the
least affect the question of the best form of Government. If England
ceases to be the centre of Empire it will be largely because of
unmitigated majority rule, and because of the compulsion Parlia-
ment wishes to use against minorities in favour of the majority. In
the case of the Transvaal, England seems now to wish to crush out
an independent nation. Why ? Simply in order that powerful
syndicates may exploit the country. If England does use force
against those independent Boers —the descendents of the Dutch who
chose rather to sink their land under the sea than yield it to the
Spaniard, the descendents of those dauntless Frenchmen who upheld
the Protestant faith, of those who escaped the massacres of St. Barthol-
mew —if England does use force it may be the beginning of the end.
And Australians who profess to have such an horror of syndicates and
yet permit themselves to be ruled by them, seem rather to sympathise
with England. But of what value is wealth as against liberty and
nationality ? How can there be a noble growth of men without
independence ? Why should not the Boers develop their country in
their own way and why should Englishmen be allowed to swamp the
original inhabitants and change their institutions violently by a
majority vote ? Half the arguments we hear in Australia for
Federation or against it are simply appeals to the peoples pockets.
Have we quite forgotten them that the supreme political end is to
make men and not money ? If there is ever to be a world or even
British Federation it must be a Federation of nations it cannot be a
fiscal Federation merely, or a Federation of which majority rule is the
supreme law. It must be a human Federation the supreme authority
of which respects minorities and individuals, and holds the balance so
that no one can be oppressed.
A union of nations co-operating loyally for their common good
is a much grander idea than a union such as Native Australians seem
to desire which must obliterate all existing distinctions in a
dull leaden uniformity and destroy that variety which is an essential
condition of the maximum of life.,


The Republican Federation offered us can only end in the
despotism of a Parliament situated in another bloated capital in New
South Wales, a more disastrous centralisation than we have hitherto
dreamt of. Freetrade even is not worth having at the cost of liberty.
What freetrade will end in can be seen from the statement of Mr. T.
Morrow, of the firm of Morrow and Rankin, biscuit makers &c., “If
this firm cannot live in Queensland it will go where other firms are
living.” What does capital care ? It can easily shift its business to
Sydney or Melbourne ! If the whole of Australia agrees to Federate
as proposed, let Central Queensland stand firm and oppose itself to
the transient madness which leads the majority of the people to rush
like moths to the lamp which throws its beams far and wide from the
South Head of Sydney Harbour. Only so can we save our liberties
and the liberties of Australia from the despotism of majority rule.
Let Central Queensland uphold the time-honoured principle of
Monarchy, apply it throughout her own territoy, prove practically its
efficiency and economy, and thus lead the way in Australia to a true
Monarchic Federation.
CHAPTER VII.
CONCLUSION.
“ Not as adventitious will the wise man regard the faith which is in him. The
highest truth he sees he will fearlessly utter, knowing that, let what may come
of it, he is thus playing his right part In the world.”— Herbert Spencer’s
First Principles.
ENOUGH has probably been said to make moderate minded men
pause before they accept the Commonwealth Bill.
Central Queensland is paced in a peculiar position when called
upon to accept the constitution without having had a chance of amend-
ing it. People here are pulled two ways, they want union, but they
do not want a union which threatens to destroy all their hopes of
greater liberty. Taking the Commonwealth Bill as a whole it may
be said that the word Commonwealth as applied to it is no more than
a pious aspiration. It well reflects the chaotic state of the public
mind. It is neither truly Federal, or National, or Democratic, or
aristocratic, or Monarchic, but a queer unorganised mixture of all
kinds of governing institutions. But one thing is evident from the
difference of opinion between the experts as to whether the Senate or
the House of Representatives will be the most powerful body &c„ viz:


that no one knows or can foretell where the real sovereign power will
lie. And as the idea of sovereignty is the central, the formative idea,
in politics this uncertainty augurs ill for the stability of the political
edifice. In many ways there must be a conflict between the State and
Federal authorities and it is evident that lawyers will have their hands
full. The Federal Parliament has no power to go to the root of the
evils from which we suffer and especially will it be powerless to save
minorities from the tyranny of majority rule. It ought to be evident
to every wise person that the whole question of Australian union
wants rediscussion in an impartial and unbiassed way by persons of
adequate political knowledge. But a rash enthusiam for union seems
to have seized the majority and the wise few who still listen to the
voice of reason are in a minority, though that minority is made up out
of all classes and all parties. Sir S. W. Griffith said that the
alternatives are Federation under this constitution or no Federation.
But this is entirely incorrect. If the present movement lapses we still
have the Federal council to fall back upon and there are many moderate
persons who think it would be much better to let a constitution
grow gradually from this. Such is the opinion of the present writer.
Sir James Service said that the work of our convention was like
building a house from the roof downwards. To this writer the
Constitution seems like that tower of Babel which men of old raised
when the earth was of one language and one speech. “Go to” they
said “let us build a city and a .tower whose top may reach unto
heaven: and let us make a name for ourselves lest we be scattered
abroad over the whole earth.” But the Lord, knowing the good that
must arise from Separation and the human varieties that must be
occasioned by it, thought good to confound their ambition and scatter
the builders abroad.
The Federal Constitution is an ambitious attempt on the part of
the servants of the highest to make themselves supreme and
irresponsible, to throw off their allegiance to the Crown on the one
hand and make themselves absolute masters of the people on the
other, and if it succeeds the result must be either a disastrous
revolution or a Parliamentary despotism the like of which the world
has never before seen. But when the politicians set their faces
against the desire of the people for unification there can be little
question that they are in the right. The independence of the States
ought to be secured as against majority rule just as mUchas the
rights of individuals ought to be safe guarded against majority rule
of the State Parliaments. Majority rule has its use and proper
sphere of action, but, as Herbert Spencer shows, it must have limits
set to its authority, if slavery and utter political demoralisation are to
be avoided. But no individual rights or corporate Or national rights
ought to be able to maintain themselves, or as a matter of fact can
maintain theniselves, against the power of reason and the influence of
high individual character. There is in the world at the present time
no fully satisfactory or generally accepted political doctrine, and there


cannot be until the question. To whom does the right of ruling
properly belong ?is decided. The old religious theory of the right
divine is utterly discredited in Australia, and political theory must be
reconstructed on rational grounds. And it seems to the present writer
that there is only one possible answer to the question and that is :
The right to rule over society belongs to ideal individual character.
This is the real meaning of all representative government. And this
is the real meaning of Constitutional Monarchy. The English
Constitutional Sovereign rules simply and solely by the influence of
personal character, and if the person of the sovereign embodies a high
human ideal, his or her influence exercised from the throne, the seat
of social honour, is wholly beneficial. And a powerful influence of this
kind from such a place must be the most important amending power
in society. Monarchy implies a great trust in the possible perfection
of human nature but if human nature is not to be trusted then all
representative government is discredited. Constitutional Monarchy
is simply the ultimate outcome and final perfection of representative
or responsible government.
As to distrusting the Sovereign Gladstone wrote : "It seems as
though the genius of the nation would not stain its lips by so much as
the mere utterance of such a word, nor can we put this State of facts
into language more justly than by saying that the Constitution would
regard the default of the Monarch, with his heirs, as the chaos of the
State, and would simply trust to the inherent energies of the several
orders of society for its legal reconstruction.” A Constitution which
seeks to bind the Crown and takes away from it its right of granting
independence and a new Constitution, does express distrust of the
sovereign. This may or may not be justifiable, but it is an evil
thing, certain to produce chaos in the State, to do away with a
legitimate authority without reconstructing a new sovereign power.
And this is what the Federal Constitution does. Under these
circumstances every lover of peace and good government should
oppose the acceptance of the Bill offered to us, until it is amended in
one clauses at least that which says: ‘ ‘ This Act shall bind the
Crown.” Nothing in the Act should bind the Crown. And the
section repealing the Federal Council Act should be struck out. The
present writer sees so much in the Bill to object to that he can
only wish to see the whole measure relagated to the political
lumber room while hoping that at some future time a true
Human Commonwealth may arise, rn which Monarchsand Parliaments
will be superfluous because individuals respect one another and are
capable of self-government. Then character would have its rightful
place and influence without attaching to it all the pomp and circum-
stance of power. But that is clearly an ideal of the future. And
Central Queenslanders whether they wish to accept the Bill or not
ought considering the peciiliar circumstances in which they are placed
to be able to agree on one point at least, and that is to maintain the


supremacy of the Crown over the Federation as the best guarantee for
peace and the best security for individual rights. And to endeavour
to bring about this result is the main purpose of the foregoing pages.
Whether we are for Separation First or Federation First we ought to
be able to agree on this matter.
But if agreement is arrived at steps should be taken
at once by an appeal to the Crown to translate opinion
into practice. If agreement is not possible then the Crown,
at the mercy as it is, of Parliament and majority rule, can
do little to help us, and the only course will be to so
organise the minorities in these colonies whose rights are so
systematically ignored, until they can bring a powerful influence to
bear upon public opinion which must be in the future the real power
in politics. We cannot bring about a revolution by physical force
to-day, but we can bring it about just as surely and much more safely
by denouncing abuses openly in conversation, in the press, and from the
platform. The greatest political controversies have centered round
the right or duty of revolution. “It was the revolutionary resistance,”
wrote Sheldon Amos, to the claims asserted by the Stuart dynastry
to a right divine to govern wrong that called forth the imperisable
arguments of Hobbes and Locke on the basis of all Government and
on the social contract. It was the revolt of the American colonies
which called forth the political propositions broadly formulated in the
declaration of independence. It was the French Revolution which in
1791 originated the declaration of the rights of man and which
suggested Burke’s reflections and the replies of Sir Thomas Paine and
Sir James Mackintosh. It may be that revolution itself will, as
constitutional Government grows, become an anachronism, because
the characteristic of every good constitution is to provide
by anticipation for its own gradual amendment, and to supersede the
necessity for violent and cataclysmic demonstration of the popular
will.” When we consider the resistance which our present
Constitutions present to the popular will and how unmistakeably they
fail in providing for their own gradual amendment it must be
admitted that some higher amending power is necessary. And this
the Federal Constitution does not give us. If some amending power
other than that provided is not created stubborn resistance will be
disastrously overthrown, and we shall have a new declaration of
independence asserting the rights of the individual against the
tyranny of the multitude. Then we may be able to realise De
Tocquevilles conception of Democracy. “I can conceive” he said
“ a society in which all men would profess an equal attachment and
respect for the laws of which they are the common authors ; in which
the authority of the State would be respected as necessary, though
not as divine, and the loyalty of the subject to the chief magistrate
would not be a passion, but a quiet and rational persuasion. Every
individual, being in the possession of rights which he is sure to


retain, a kind of manly reliance and reciprocal courtesy would arise
between ail classes alike removed from pride and meanness.”
But this cannot be until we realise the truth of these words of
Buskins’, or at least until our legislators realise them and endeavour
to carry them into practice.
“ That country is the richest which nourishes the greatest number
of noble and happy human beings; that man is richest who having
perfected the functions of his own life to the utmost, has also the
widest helpful influence, both personal, and by means of his
possessions over the lives of others.”
Had the rich absentees and financial corporations who own
Central Queensland borne these words in mind, that strong labour
agitation which exists here against them, would not have sprung up.
They fear labour with just cause and set their faces against Central
Separation. But in this they are unwise for Federation on the terms
proposed must lead to Australians independence, and if the
Democracy gets uppermost as there is every reason to expect, possibly
to Australian repudiation. Australian independence is likely to be
much worse for them than the independence of Central Queensland.
They had much better take time by the forelock and arrive at some
just settlement with respect to land and the profits of industry while
it is possible to do so. And the best security they can possibly find
for the peaceable adjustment of disputes is the maintenance of the
supremacy of the Crown in at least one portion of Australia. Thus
one link would remain between Australia and England. And for this
end they should be prepared to assist those who rather than enter
into a disastrous union are prepared if necessary to stand alone in
this continent in maintaining the rights of individuals, and therefore
of classes and corporations, to land and the profits of industry,
against the advancing tide of Democratic Socialism.
A little experience of the unworkable nature of the brand-new
constitution, which like a new plaything, so delights the young
Australian at present, will soon sicken him of it.
Gladstone remarked “ Clear and indisputable is the title of the
English race to the great political discovery of Constitutional King-
ship. And a very great discovery it is. Whether it is destined, in
any future day to minister in its integrity to the needs of the new
world, it may be hard to say. In that important branch of its utility
which is negative, it completely serves the purpose of the many
strong and rising colonies of Great Britain, and saves them all
the perils and perplexities attendant upon successions to the
headship of the Executive. It presents to them, as it does to us, the
symbol of unity, and the object of all our political veneration,


which we love to find rather in a person, than in an abstract entity,
like the State. But the old world, at any rate, still is, and may long
continue to constitute, the living centre of civilisation, and to hold
the primacy of the race ; and. of this great society the several members
approximate, in a rapidly extending series, to the practice and idea
of Constitutional Kingship. The chief States of Christendom, with
only two exceptions, have, with more or less distinctness adopted it.
Many of them, both great and small, have thoroughly assimilated it to
their system. The autocracy of Eussia, and the Eepublic of France,
each of them congenial to the present wants of their respective
countries, may yet, hereafter, gravitate towards the principle, which
elsewhere has developed so large an attractive power. Should the
current, that has prevailed through the last half-century, maintain its
direction and its strength, another fifty years may see all Europe
adhering to the theory and practice of this beneficient institution,
and peacably sailing in the wake of England.”
Let Australia form itself into a sort of “ consolidated
Eepublic” with New South Wales as the leading unit, and
let Central Queensland by herself uphold this “ beneficient institu-
tion ” of England, this writer hazards the assertion that before fifty
years are over, Central Queensland will, as far as true prosperity and
civilisation and the power of defending herself against aggression goes,
be found in the lead with the Admirals flag flying, while the other
Australian ships of State will be seen peacably sailing in her wake,
and this simply and solely because her people have the discernment
to recognise the first principle of politics, the Alpha and Omega of
social science viz : “ That Government is the best which teaches us to
govern ourselves.”
THE END.


Printed by E. GOSTELOW,
Central Queensland Printing and Bookbinding Works,
William Street, Rockhampton.
■


