

SERMONS
DELIVERED IN THE
Qreat ® Synagogue,
SYDNEY,
During the Services of Praise and Thanksgiving
IN CELEBRATION OF THE
INAUGURATION
OF THE
COMMONWEALTH of AUSTRALIA
BY THE
Rev. J. H. LANDAU,
On Monday Night, 31st December,
AND
Sunday, 6th January,
Published by
The Board of Management of the Great Synagogue.
Sydney:
Webhdale, Shoobmitu & Co., Printers, 117 Clarence Street.




SERMONS
DEL IVEBED IN THE
Qreai ® Synagogue,
SYDNEY,
During the Services of Praise and Thanksgiving
IN CELEBRATION OK THE
INAUGURATION
OF THE
COMMONWEALTH of AUSTRALIA
BY THE
Rev. J. H. LANDAU,
On Monday Night , 31st December,
AND
Sunday , 6th January , s^j
Published by
The Board of Management of the Great Synagogue.
Sydney:
Wrbsdale, Shoosmitii & Co., Printers, 117 Clarence Street.




SERMON
DELIVERED AT THE
GREAT SYNAGOGUE, SYDNEY,
BY THE
Rev. J. H. CANDAU,
On Monday Night, 31st December, 1900,
On the Occasion oi the Inauguration of
the Australian Commonwealth.
Brethren of the House of Israel and Fellow-
citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia, —The
soul must be very dull and dead, the heart must be
very dry and tough, for whom such an event as this
has no interest aud no significance. For this is a
momentous occasion; one of the most momentous,
surely, in the memory of man. We are met here to
ask the blessing of God on the great Australian
Federation, on the peoples of six self-reliant, self-
dependent, self-governing colonies, now stirred to
passion by the inspiring sense of national unison.
The throb of one heart henceforth beats in us, the
glory and wonder of the Commonwealth to which we
belong now thrills us, the responsibility and meaning
■of Empire now solemnises and gladdens us. We feel
that we are no longer separate provinces, jealous of
each other’s privileges, but that the State boundaries
are lost in the larger line that surrounds the Nation-
ality. Now are we linked together in the golden
yoke and federation of hearts and sympathies, “ One
flag, one land, one heart, one hand, one nation ever-


more.” Hail to thee, Australia Felix! youngest born
of nations; hail, all hail! Spirit of a new birth,
Empire of the South, the mighty voice of a great and
happy people now acclaims thee “from where the
clear surge takes the Leeuwin or the notched
Kaikouras rise.” Blessed be thou at thy coming in;
blessed be thou through all the cycles of the revolving
ages. The good hand of the Lord our God direct
thee to fulfil thy proud task of Empire. Now let
decrepit age and ingenious youth—high and low, rich
and poor —join hands for benediction, and cry, God
save our dear land, God save Australia, God bless the
edifice of our nationhood now completed.” Great Lord
of Lords and King of Kings. Thou who hast gathered
men into communities national life impera-
tive, we seek the sanctuary on this night of happy
significance to ask Thy blessing on our country in the
years to come. Be Thou, Good Lord, the nurse of
this growing people, the inspiration of this young
nation. Make us happy in the beneficent outgrowths
of ancient blessings on the soil of a new dominion.
Let our speech be ever of civil and religious liberty ;
of patriotism and of peace; of the moral improvement
and elevation of the people; of righteousness which
alone exalteth a nation; for, ‘ except the Lord build
the house, they labour in vain that build it; except
the Lord keep the city the watchman watcheth but in
vain.”
On a day like this let our thoughts revert to those
who first took up the cause of the Federation of these
colonies, and whose patient labours and unflagging
perseverance during a long series of years prepared
the way for the triumph which has at last been
achieved. Of these earnest men, one, whose name is
inseparably bound up with this great movement, has
passed to his last account; some live still, and we


must not fail to bear testimony to their exertions.
Let us think gratefully also of the earlier pioneers
and leaders of this land, some of whom were men of
noble purpose, and whose strenuous lives helped their
country onward to the realisation of this great day.
We have stepped into their heritage; let their
memories help us to live in harmony with their great
ideals. Let us remember that with the honour and
power of Empire we must arccept the burden and
responsibility, and by G-od’s help so bear it that in our
turn we bequeath great traditions to those who
follow us.
Our fathers to their graves have gone ;
Their strife is past, their triumph won ;
But sterner trials await the race
Which rises in their honoured place.
So let it be. In God’s own might
We gird us for the coming fight.
We rejoice to think this is a Federation under the
crown of England, that we continue to be related to
the dear old Home as eager, free, all-hoping, and ever-
advancing children to a proud and happy mother.
See, “The Young Queen out of the Southland kneels
down at the Old Queen’s knee, and asks for a mother’s
blessing on the excellent years to be.” And see, to
her the Old Queen answers : “ Daughter no more, but
sister, and doubly daughter so. Mother of many
princes, and child of the child I bore.” This day we
forge one more link in the golden chain of amity
which unites Australia to England, our mother and
our dearest friend. This day
Two Empires by the sea,
Two nations great and free,
One anthem raise.
Tho’ deep the sea, and wide
Twixt realm and realm, its tide
Binds strand and strand.


So be the Gulf between
Grey coasts and islands green
By friendship spanned.
Now, may the God above
Guard the dear lands we love,
Or East or West;
Let love more fervent glow
As peaceful ages go,
And strength yet stronger grow,
Blessing and blest.
God save England, God save Australia. Long may
the flags of the two peoples blend together in the love
of mother and daughter for the peace and progress of
the world. The will of Heaven has been clearly
marked in the union of the two countries. At one
time it seemed as if Australia were to belong to the
proud, sickly blood of decaying Spain, Just at the
end of the 15th century, in the days of the great
navigators, Christopher Columbus, Magellan, Sebastian
Cabot, Vasco da Gama, the Pope had by his famous
Bull divided the undiscovered countries of the world
between the two powers of the Spanish Peninsula, the
same powers that occupied the great new Continent
of America, that opened up Africa and India. That
would have meant the horrible despotism of Alvas
and Philips. It would have meant the thumbscrew
and the bloodhound. It would have meant the Old
World spectres of civil and religious tyranny, the
triumph of an infernal ignorance animated by infernal
zeal. Again, at a later period, Governor King found
it necessary to send out ships to watch the French
explorers and adventurers, who were waiting their
chance to descend on these coasts to make Australia
the appanage of France. That would have meant the
predominance of the principles of Richelieu and
Loyola. But it was written in God’s Book of Destiny
that over Australia should wave neither the golden


lilies of France nor the Tower and Lion, “pale emblems
of Castilian pride,” but first the Standard of England
and then the flag of a free Commonwealth. Yes,
Australia was God’s destined heritage, not for tyranny,
but for liberty.
The hand then of God is pre-eminently manifest in
your history; therefore there rests upon the Australian
nation an immense burden of Heaven-imposed
responsibility. What is that*responsibility ? It is to
combine the Old with the New, the experience of the
East with the daring of the West and the enthusiasm
of the South—the long past of Europe Avith the long
future of the Australias. It is to work out the con-
ception of progress. To see that man’s industry is
safe under your shield ; that peace flourishes under
your sway; that liberty everywhere attends your
Imperial progress; that all that enriches and beautifies
life never fails to spring in the fertile bosom of your
realm. In a word, to be the harbingers of a new era
of progress, and to open a fresh path to the realisation
of Man’s most sacred and cherished dreams. It is,
above all, to show the nations the true ideal of
national righteousness. There is no people but will
try to excel in something; what can we excel in, if
not in holiness ? If we look to numbers we are the
fewest, if to strength we are the weakest. We can-
not, at this stage of our history, excel, nor so much as
equal, other people in these things, and if we come
short in holiness we are the most despicable people
under Heaven. Strive we, therefore, to excel, and
suffer not this crown to be taken from us. You may
say that what constitutes the greatness of Australia
is the sea, which we have turned into a sapphire
marriage-ring of nations, or the great ships which go
to and fro upon our harbours and rivers, or the sun-
kissed climate which makes our fields to blossom, or


“ the cattle upon a thousand hills/’ or our mineral
resources. It is not so. In whatever there be of
nobleness and honour in the bosom of her sons lies
the real glory and the future hope of this land. If
you would see the star of her destiny, look for it in
the hearts of your brethren, look for it in your own.
I call upon the churches of Australia to show to
the world the rare example of religious tolerance. I
call upon our judges to vindicate the righteousness
and the majesty of the law, to make it what it should be,
lex anchora regni. I call upon our merchants to win
the markets of the world by honest industry, and to
beware of dishonourable commerce in the fever of com-
petition. I call upon our statesmen to moor the anchor
of their politics to the of righteousness and not
to the shifting sands of supposed interest. I call
upon the people to realise that for a Government to
show in the slightest way any discrimination amongst
religious denominations is anti-patriotic and anti-social
and destructive of the purposes for which a Govern-
ment exists. Above all, I call upon you by all that is
great in the hope of nations, by all tlaat is holy in the
life of man, by all that is awful in the law of God, to
be on your guard against the three perils that already
threaten Australia —impurity in our streets, gambling,
which has penetrated like an enteric fever the whole
of our social system, and intemperance, that kindles
the fires of hell in countless hearths, that causes an
infant mortality in each single year to which the
Moloch slaughter of Ammon was as nothing.
Watchman, what of the night ? What lies hidden
for Australia in the unknown future ? Is it glory or
shame, national greatness or national dishonour ? Ah,
let us, my brothers, set our faces to the unborn future
of our country with that confidence in an unseen
Helper who never is remiss, nor turns away His eyes


from His charge. Lord, we put our trust in Thee,
and we pray that Thou wilt so direct this nation to
fulfil the perilous task Thy uplifted hand hath now
shown it, that of us it shall he said, both now an in
the long hereafter, “ surely this great nation is a wise
and understanding people.”


SERMON
DELIVERED AT THE
GREAT SYNAGOGUE, SYDNEY,
RY THE
Rev. J. H. LANDAU,
On Commonwealth Sunday, 6th January, 1901
On the Occasion of the Inauguration ox
the Australian Commonwealth.
“And they shall say, Surely this great nation is a wise and
understanding people.”— Deut. iv., 6.
I am called to a great task in addressing you on an
occasion which must be for ever memorable in the
annals of this country and in the civilisation of the
world. When I recall the place which this year must
occupy in the recollection of future generations, when
I remember the new and larger responsibilities which
now descend upon us, and which the pulpit to-day
must voice, I might well shrink from the duty now
imposed upon me. For the hour has struck for the
closer welding together of the Australian people. The
throb of one heart henceforth beats in us, the flow of
all the best blood of the nation’s vitality to and from
the same pulsating source. W r e are commencing a
new civilisation in a land of illimitable hopes a
civilisation destined, perhaps, by the kind hand of
our God upon us, to surpass the old. We are laying
the foundation for a future nation of millions of
people to keep unquenched that torch of freedom
which, across the dusk and darkness of many centuries.


has been handed down to England’s sons as their most
precious possession. Let us dedicate our Common-
wealth on this day to the God of our fathers. May
the fountain of our national life be blessed,, and may
it pour forth its limpid streams of light and law and
truth into the broad main of humanity.
Now pray we for our country
That Australia long may be
The holy and the happy
And the gloriously free.
So peace be in her walls,
And joy in all her palaces,
Her cottages, and halls.
Advance, Australia ! In faith and hope and conse-
cration to the best service of man. A dvance, Australia;
and may the star of thy destiny shine with evei
brighter lustre in the sisterhood of nations. Advance,
Australia; be “ a loftier race than e’er the world hath
known, with flame of freedom in thy soul and light of
knowledge in thine eye.”
It is good for us on an occasion like this, when we
are entering upon our perilous task of Lmpiie, to
reflect on the ideals we should pursue and the dangers
we should avoid. Australia has turned a page in hei
history; what shall she write on the new page ?
Youngest born of the nations, we are preparing to put
our sickle into the ripened harvest of the woilds
experience; what lessons shall we learn from that
revelation ? Ours is “ a birthright yet unsold, a
history yet untold, a future yet unrolled; ” With what
ideals shall we prepare to meet that future ?
ideal of many nations has been delight in war. I hey
have not cared to have any annals which weie not
written in blood. Such a people were the ancient
Egyptians, such a people were the ancient Assyiians,
of whom we read so much in Scripture. I shall
the ideal of this new land be a war ideal? We see


in Europe at tills moment at least millions of
armed men doomed to lives of unproductive menace
amid groaning and tax-burdened populations. We
read of frightful inventions, explosives of unknown
force, guns of infinite destructiveness, the ingenuity
of man exhausted in the elaboration of instruments of
slaughter. God save Australia from becoming a nation
loving war. God save us from rending our brothers
in agonising conflict, from hurling upon one anothei
the °devilish enginery, the rushing implements of
death. Let Australia bind up wounds, not make
them quench the fires of war, not kindle them. Let
not the drums and tramplings, nor the stirring blasts
of the trumpet, nor that poor delusive word, glory,
ever make Australia love-war.
Let us take up the sword only when it is the
nation’s plain duty ; when we can say with a con-
viction as intense as the heroes at Belmont —Dieu le
vieut , God wishes it, God wills it. We in Australia
have just given a noble example to mankind when to
take up and when to lay down the sword. We call to
mind how last year there was some dim menace of
danger to the mother-land. The mere whisper of
peril was enough. At once, and with ardour, the
passionate manhood of the Empire sprang to its feet.
From that old man who went out stricken in his own
heart, and at the age of nearly seventy, to lead the
armies of the Empire to victory, down to the lad who
would bo in the front line of fire, and when one arm
was disabled shifted the bugle to the other hand and
blew till he fell, the soldiers of the Queen in all the
four corners of her dependencies vindicated their
hereditary valour. They proved that they are no
degenerate descendants of the heroes who fought at
Balaclava and Inkermann, who formed that thin red
line which charged up the hills of Alma, who marched


under tlie burning sun of India to Lucknow and
Cawnpore, wbo fought at Yittoria and Waterloo, who
won at Crecy and at Agincourt. But when our work
was done, straightway we laid down the sword. We
gave to the world the noble spectacle of our small
citizen army reabsorbed without a struggle into the
currents of a peaceful life. At a wave of the hand,
like the men of Rhoderick Dim, they sank out of sight.
So may this nation never draw the sword except in the
cause of liberty. So may it lay it aside when that is
won.
But there has been another ideal of nations —not
war, but freedom. For many centuries it has been
the ideal of England —our mother-land. Her strength
has always been in her equal laws; in the fact that
over cottage and palace alike, the asgis of the consti-
tution rests, and that all the machinery of justice is
set in motion to protect the peasant’s home if highborn
wrong assails it, and to guard the beggar’s conscience,
if he but fancy it aggrieved. The great English pro-
consuls have striven to do one thing for every land on
which our flag is raised —to give to the people, from
the prince to the meanest inhabitant, the safety and
rights of liberty, and this is a tremendous testimony
of a nation.
And it is for us to make Australia a centre of civil
and religious liberty. But let us not confuse liberty
with license in this land; Avith demagogism; with the
shout of the noisiest and the worst; with the violent
silencing of the voices of the wise and the reasonable
few. Let the hands of every man and woman in
■God’s sacramental army tear down from its pedestal
the brazen image of such a spurious freedom and
break it into pieces. Let us remember the great
words of Chatham —“ Where law ends, tyranny
beo-ins.” And if we would preserve the liberties of


this country inviolate, we must demand a high
standard in the characters of our public men. We
need men of whom we may speak with genuine
respect. We need men
Whom the lust of office does not fill,
Men whom the spoils of office cannot buy.
Men who possess opinions and the will;
Men who have honour, men who dare not lie
May the Senators of United Australia refer every
question to the law of righteousness, never giving up
to party what was meant for mankind, or to a province
what is the heritage of the Commonwealth ; never
forgetting that each vote of theirs will tend, in its
measure, to make this country a greater and better or
a weaker and poorer land. So shall we realise the
Psalmist’s golden picture of national prosperity —
“ Truth shall flourish out of the earth and righteous-
ness look down from Heaven.”
Again, many nations have cherished as an ideal the
grovelling idea of absolutism, the crawling at the foot
of some royal house. So it was under the cruel
despotism of Asia. So it was under the wicked deified
Cassars. So it was for whole cycles in China. So it
was, until quite recently, in Russia; and so, at one
time, the clergy tried to make it under the Stuarts in
England. We have done for ever with this debased
notion —that nations ought to deliver themselves,
bound hand and foot, to the arbitrary caprice of
autocrats. We have done for ever with Caesarism,
Napoleonism; with the day of servitude without
loyalty. To other nations again, Republicanism has
been the ideal—when men undertake to do their own
kingship, and prove quite conclusively that democracy
has weakness as well as strength ; that government
by bosses and bossism and by the reckless personalities
of the baser portion of the Press, may be as tyrannical


as any form of kingly rule. We choose neither
Despotism nor Republicanism. We choose to blend
our flag with the glorious semper eadem of England,
the banner of the free ; to link our destiny with the
most constitutional of all lands, whose throne is
“ broad-based upon the people’s will.” Sons of the
Austral world—“ From England’s breast we drew
such milk as bids remember whence we came.”
England! What majesty and exaltation there is in
the accents of thy name. England! ’Tis
A land, a dear land, where the rights of the free,
Tho’ firm as the earth, are as wide as the sea !
Where a slave cannot breathe, or invader presume
To ask for more earth than shall cover his tomb.
Sea-land, freeland, fairest, rarest,
Home of brave men and those they adore.
Fearless, peerless, thy land, my land,
tflory be with her and peace evermore.
There should not be one amongst us all that does
not feel his heart burning within him at the thought,
I belong to this great fact, perhaps the greatest fact
of the modern world—the British Empire. We are
brother nations, brothers for the progress and freedom
of the world; brothers to colonise and to civilise until
no wind can sweep the earth that does not bear the
echoes of an English voice. We are the partner of
all her glory and the inheritor of all her traditions.
For us as well as for her Chaucer sang his morning
song and Shakespeare flung wide the gates of
laughter and unlocked the sacred fount of tears, and
Milton trod the azure floor of heaven ; and it is for us
to make Australia, like England, a source of light, a
centre of peace, the mistress of learning and the arts,
the faithful guardian of great memories in the midst
of irreverent and ephemeral visions, and amidst the
cruel and clamorous jealousies of the nations, the
preacher of good will towards men.


Peace, liberty, purity of government, but righteous-
ness above all must be the ideal of Australia, for
unrighteousness is the reproach and must be the
ultimate destruction of any people. On this birthday
of Australia, let us summon before us the whole fleet
of Empires of the past that we may learn what ruins
kingdoms and lays cities low. Teil me what lessons
you have to teach us, oye nations of the past? And
Babylon lifts up her voice and says : “I have to teach
you this, that any nation that puts its foot on the
neck of prostrate humanity seals its death warrant
and hastens its own doom.” And Greece says : “ I
have this to tell you, that no art, no philosophy, no
culture can save from death the nation that is
immoral.” And Rome says :“ I have this to tell you,
that no power of law will make a nation safe and
strong if there be corruption eating out the heart of
it.” And Venice says : “ I have this to say to you,
that no nation is rich, though its fleets sail all seas, if
it be poor in manhood.” And Spain says : “ I have
this to say to you, that pride for the nation, as for the
individual, coraeth before a fall.” And then I wonder,
as I look upon this dear land of ours, whether she will
learn these lessons writ so large in all the history of
the past.
Who has not sometimes, standing on Sydney
Harbour and looking off on the forests of masts, or at
the great warehouses upon one side and the homes
beautiful and happy upon the other—who has not
sometimes called up in his imagination the picture of
Athens or Corinth, where great ships once rode at
anchor, whose old-time harbour is now a great
morass. Who has not wondered whether the time
may not come in some far future age when men shall
come and look on the ruins of this great city and
the harbour filled up with its own filth, and will


regret it, as we regret the forgotten splendour of
Mexico or of Central America.
Let Australia falter in her adhesion to the grand
principles of morality and charity and godliness; let
there come corruption in her high places, the supremacy
of a fell infidelity in the national mind, and her con-
demnation will not slumber, and with her proud
forerunners in Empire, her greatness will be forgotten
as a cloud. Let her hold to. these great principles,
widening through the ages into increasing reverence
for truth and peace, and her greatness shall be
assured till the last fires blot out the sun.
Foremost among those who would benefit their
country, let us hope, will be the children of Israel
who dwell in this land. May we never dissociate our-
selves from the high and holy task of promoting the
welfare of this Commonwealth. Indifference to these
objects is least excusable in the Jew. We are not
cast like dishonoured wreckage on the inhospitable
shores of this land. Here we feel the sacredness of
manhood, the dignity of manhood, the immense capa-
bility of our powers, the illimitable horizon of our
hopes, and here we can honestly worship God as our
heart’s dictate. Be Thou praised, Thou God of our
fathers, Who hast decreed, that in Australia the
Wandering Jew shall be a wanderer no more, but a
man amongst men, a citizen amongst citizens, carving
out a noble career for himself, his children, and his
children’s children.
We Jews have brought a record of loyalty and
patriotism to every land that has permitted us to
make it a home. We have not forgotten it here. Let
us continue to record ourselves ever on the better
side. Ah, if we could win in Australia a something
of the reputation that was enjoyed by our ancestors
in Spain; holding honoured places in the high


councils of the nation, enjoying its confidence, its
golden age and ours. Let us serve Greater Britain
beyond the seas with a devotion born of affection and
the enjoyment of perfect toleration.
And now, into the hands of the God of Gods, let us
submit in prayer the future of the Australias.
PRAYER.
And this is the prayer we pray to Thee, sole con-
troller of the destinies of nations. That Thou wilt
nurse this growing people and mould and consolidate
and inspire this young nation. That Thou wilt hold
over us Thy helping hand, so that under the continu-
ance of Thy special favour our country may grow in
the true prosperity of righteousness. Let there be
no spot of shame to tarnish the escutcheon of this land.
Let Australia not roll back the progress of the
centuries, nor march in the phantom procession of
the dead and dying nations, and only from her urns
to influence the years to come. But as our country
grows older in its new life may it grow in strength
until the cycle of the years bring youth instead of
age, strength instead of weakness and decrepitude.
Be Thou graciously pleased so to breathe Thy
Spirit upon us that man’s industry and woman’s
honour be ever safe under the Australian shield; let
peace flourish under our sway; let liberty everywhere
attend our imperial progress. And this is the prayer
we furthermore pray: that intolerance may never
violate by desecration the rights of conscience; that
oppression and wrong may never entrench themselves
in the citadels of power; that high and low, rich
and poor, the learned and the ignorant, may find
their interests, not antagonistic, but identical; that
our governors may be inspired by righteous ideals.


our business be controlled by righteous principles, our
people enlightened and ennobled by righteous illumi-
nation.
And God save our gracious Queen. Yea, bless her
and make her crown to flourish. In the time of her
old age forsake her not.
Her life has had its sadness,
Its day of darkening grief,
Lord, let its evening gladness
Bring sunshine and relief.
Grant, O God, that the sunset of her long day may
show a brighter and ever brighter lustre, and be
golden to its very close.
Send her victorious,
Happy, and glorious,
Long to reign over us.
God save the Empire. God save the Common-
wealth of Australia. God save the Queen.
7)\ X


SVUNKY
WKBSDALB, SHOOSMITH & Co., PaiNTKRg,
. 117 Clarrnck Strrrt




