

SERMON
PREACHED IN
§Si SHwnms’ Miltouigl%
IN AID OF FUNDS FOR THE
Relief of Sufferers by Floods in the Agricultural Districts
of the Colony,
Ok SUNDAY MOENINO, JULY 10th, 1864,
(And repeated in part in St. Anne's Church, Hyde, on Sunday Morning,
July 24 th,)
BY THE
KEY. W. 43. CUAJRMYE, M3A.
Incumbent of Willoughby.
Feinted at the request of members of the Congregations.
ANY PROFITS BY SALE WILL BE GIVEN TO THE RELIEF FUND.
Sgfctug:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEOROE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
1864.


F S'jn
tne tollowmg pages arc dedicated with gratitude and affection.
B. C.
Special Offertory Collection at St. Thomas’s Church, (a m.) £49 sa. sd. Collection
after the service in the Temporary Chuich, St. Leonard’s, (p.m.) £ll 12s. 7d.,in addition
to various sums contributed to collectors, &c., in Sydney. The Collection at Ryde
■was upwards of £7. Other Collections have been made there both in Church and at
fublic Meetings, and from house to house, swelling the amount to nearly £4O.


SEEMON.
Psalm xxix. 3 & 10.
“ The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory
thundereth : the Lord is upon many waters. The Lord sitteth
upon the flood ; yea, the Lord sitteth King for ever."
Bt a curious coincidence, it is exactly twelve years within a day,
since * I addressed the congregation then assembled in this
Church, on a fearful catastrophe.
That event was the destruction of Gundagai, with the loss of
nearly one hundred persons, by an overflow of the Murrumhidgee
Eiver, during the tempestuous rains of the previous month of
June, —a month long celebrated in the meteorological annals of
this Colony for cyclones and floods.
Having been reminded of the lapse of time by the
recollection of the incident just mentioned, I cannot but express
a sentiment of gratitude to the kind Providence of Him who “ hath
measured the waters in the hollow of his hand" (Isa. xl. 12.) and
“hath gathered the winds in his fists," (Prov. xxx. 4.) by whose good-
ness I have been carried safely through the vicissitudes of so long
an additional period of life, and have been permitted to appeal
again from this place to the sympathy of my brethren (among
whom are some few who will remember the occasion to which I
have alluded) on an event of as striking a character and of as
exactly similar a kind as that which wrought ruin on the banks
of the modern Kishon, our Australian Murrumhidgee.
On the former occasion the scene of distress was at a consi-
derable distance from this locality, and when I spoke of it from
this place I had but a few days returned from exploring the
Alpine sources of the great river which was the immediate agent
in that calamity. On the recent occasion the districts affected were
nearer at hand, and yourselves have all experienced the violence
of the elemental disturbances from which so many have suffered.
* At Willoughby, on 11th July, 1852.—At Eyde, on 25th July, 1852.


It is not necessary at this time to dilate upon those arrange-
ments of nature which produce over New South Wales annual or
other periodical disturbances of the atmosphere. Nor need we
trouble ourselves respecting the theories of those who would
refer such commotions chiefly to the influence of the “ lesser
light that rules the night” to the exclusion of the “ greater light
that rules the day ;” setting aside as well not only the considera-
tion, that He who made the heavens made the earth also, but
likewise the presumption that the organism of this globe and the
conditions of its surface have, probably, a considerable share in
producing and modifying the phenomena of its atmosphere.
It is enough for us as believers in revelation, to refer those
who are always ready to meet a difficulty of the kind by declaring
that the laws of nature are immutable, to our present text and to
other passages of scripture; such as that, for instance, in the
Epistle of St. James, wherein he shows by a vivid example, that
whether the laws of nature are immutable or not, nature is still
under the control of its Creator, whose dominion cannot be
supreme if the universe is not under the dictates of His will.
“ Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he grayed
earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by
the space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and
the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit'' (James
v. 17, 18.)
If we deny this, then of course there is no help for us but to
abide in our unbelief; and such denial of the chief attribute of
Jehovah, whose “ dominion endureth throughout all generations,”
(Ps. cxlv. 13.) carries with it a repudiation of Scripture as the word
of God, contradicting not only miracles of whatever kind, but
the assertion of the Eedeemer that “ all power is given unto
Him in heaven and in earth,” of which He proved the truth
whilst ministering here below, by palpable interferences with the
so-called immutable laws of nature.
This supremacy of the Lord over the physical world is the
burden of the Psalm which has supplied our text, and in it the
holy minstrel disdains all influence of secondary causes, and
represents the Omnipotent Lord of heaven as guiding by His own
majestic hand the works of Providence, ordering all things on
earth and around it after His own designs.


Nineteen times in the eleven verses of this short Psalm is this
fact distinctly declared; and if we look away from it to one of the
“ immutable ” laws of nature, that which causes all things on the
earth to fall to the surface, we are elsewhere met with the solemn
assertion of the Redeemer that, however insignificant it may be,
yet not even a sparrow “ shall fall to the ground , without your
Fatheri.e. without His consent.* (Matt. x. 29.)
It is under the influence of such acknowledgments as these,
that instead of regarding the Lord as the slave of His own con-
trivances, the Scriptures every where represent Him as acting
with controlling sway throughout the universe, limiting,expanding,
checking and directing, sustaining and arranging every atom
of created matter and all the operations of nature for His own
wise ends and for His gracious purposes of mercy and judgment
towards the children of men.
* The popular formulae in this and the following verse are common to the
Old as well as to the New Testament scriptures : and it may be thought that it
is straining a point to treat the words do Tracriirai stt) trjV yyjv, as if they
bore in any way on the doctrine of gravitation which is a principle of such
recent exposition. The objector may say, that all that was intended by our
Loed is that not even a sparrow shall die without His Father’s leave. Be it
so. The argument is not thereby refuted. For physical death is a law of
nature in itself as immutable as that of gravitation ; and if a little bird
cannot die by cold, or starvation, or accident, or violence, without the consent
of its Creator, the supremacy of Jehovah is as much revealed in that fact as
in the regulation of the mighty systems of worlds that compose the universe.
The principle or law by which these worlds are kept in their appointed
operations is none other than the law fixed before the creation, by which the
(TTgvQidv, the lightest, it may be, of all birds that may fly above the earth,
falls, if it falls, stt), to and not from the ground; of which our Loed
declares, it cannot fall without express permission. The laws of nature may
be immutable—but their very immutability is the strongest proof of
constant providential direction by their Author. And that He is not
hound by these immutable laws, is shown in various ways by Him who
claimed to be equal with the Father. The exceptions alluded to are called
miraculous, and men are found who deny their possibility. The whole
question is one, simply, of belief or of unbelief, and is, perhaps, beyond the
necessity of further argument. But it may be asked, which is the greater
miracle, the interference with assumed immutable laws, or the immutability
itself ? Death indeed, so far as man is concerned, though the result of a fixed
law is itself miraculous, inasmuch as it is interference with the once-fixed
law of immortality. If then, in any case, an assumed immutable law may be
miraculous, why may not any other physical law be equally under divine
guidance, and subject to interference or alteration by its Author, whether
that interference be what is called miraculous, or in certain cases necessary
to the designs of the Creator in establishing that law ?
Moreover, we know from the progress of human science, that God allows
man himself to control the laws of matter in the most remarkable way,
employing and overcoming the forces of nature at his will, and yet the Creator
Himself is to be merely a looker on!


There is surely nothing more incomprehensible in the provi-
dential interference of God with the laws which He has established,
than there is in the free agency of man to choose what he wills,
whilst he can only “ will and do ,” according to God’s good
pleasure. (Phil. ii. 13.) If we deny that God does thus act, then
we must also deny the efficacy of prayer, and yet we have seen by
the testimony of St. James confirming the records of history, that
rain which is one of the things formed and employed under the
agency of what are called “ immutable laws of nature ’ was
restrained for three years and a half, and again was poured forth
at the prayer of Elias, “ a man," who, the Apostle is careful to
tell us, was “ subject to like passions as we are."
Erom this example we, surely, infer rightly, that the supply of
rain is ordered by the decree of Jehovah, and whilst our Saviour
says “He sendeih rain on the just and on the unjust ,” (Matt,
v. 45.) He also is able when He willeth to bring a flood of waters
upon the earth to destroy the ungodly.
At this moment there is no science so perfected as to exhibit
a full knowledge of the laws called immutable, which govern any
part of God’s dominion, save that science concerning the
dealings of God with man, which is revealed in the Bible. But
the admirable order which is observed in the world of nature, i.e.,
in the physical works of God, proves, so far as the elements are
concerned, that they must be under especial control; and (as if
in reference to the prejudices of philosophers on such points as
these) the Lord Jesus borrows an illustration of the uncon-
trolled power of the Holy Spirit from ‘ the wind ’ which is heard
but not seen, which cometh and goeth as it listeth i.e., as its
nature is ordained, without man’s knowledge of its origin or its
end. All that we can presume to know for certain respecting
such topics as these is, that the laws which direct the invisible
agencies of nature were devised to minister to the designs of our
Maker for the temporal or spiritual interests of His creatures.
a And, therefore, when a calamity like that which has again
ff spread desolation along the most fertile districts of the colony
comes to be scrutinized, we shall find that, though there may be
in it a ground for lamentation, it may become also an incentive
to reverence and devotion, to human sympathy and Christian
generosity.


Par be it from us, brethren, to indulge the idea, that all things
that bring sorrow and trouble to man are, therefore, in judgment
for his transgressions; for as the rain descends in genial or in
destructive showers alike upon the just and the unjust, so does
the sun shine with healing in his rays “on the evil and on
the good."
All are mutual sharers in a common calamity, and, were it pos-
sible, it would be equally sinful and foolish for those who are
alike exposed to its infliction to sit in judgment on our brethren,
and to call that a visitation of wrath which, perchance, in every
instance may have fallen on those who are better than ourselves.
Even in the days of Noah, when the flood came and took away
the ungodly, the mercy of God was not confined to the eight
righteous who entered into the ark ; but the bow was set in the
cloud to be a witness —and a glorious witness it is—that “ God
will remember His everlasting covenant between Himself and you,
and every living creature of all flesh, and the waters shall no
more become a flood to destroy all flesh. (Gen. ix. 15, 16.) He
gave this promise also, that “ while the earth remaineth seed time
and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and
night shall not cease." (Gen. viii. 22.)
The disputers of this world may tell us, that this is merely in
accordance with the laws —the unchangeable laws —of nature,
and that these things are so, because they cannot be otherwise ;
but the believer in Revelation can turn from such comfort-
less philosophy, which exhibits the Creator shackled and in
bondage to His own decrees, and point to that higher wisdom,
the emanation of the Supreme Reason, which he finds in the
word of God. That word declares that “ what may be known of
God is manifest in His works ; (Rom. i. 19.) that “He hath not
left Himself without witness in that he did good and gave us rain
from heaven, and fruitful seasons filling our hearts with food and
gladness;" (Acts xiv. 17.) or, as David expresses it in our text,
“ The Lord sitteth upon the flood: Yea the Lord sitteth King for*
ever."
In borrowing these illustrations of the care and goodness of
God from passages in the Psalm before us relating to storms and
floods, I am actuated by an endeavour to impress upon your
minds a few reflections which may assist in leading you to look


upon the calamity which has befallen our neighbours as pro-
ductive of sentiments of a different order from that of those
which, at this time, occupy the minds of many.
Believing, as I do, that “ known unto God are all Sis works from
the beginning of the world," (Acts xv. 18.) that “ God is righteous in
all Sis works, (Dan. ix. 14.) that “ the Lord is holy in all Sis
works," (Psalm cxlv. 7.) and that Sis tender mercies are over all
Sis works ; (Psalm cxlv. 9.) I cannot dissociate from meditation
on any of His dispensations the conviction, that in all His dealings
with mankind He being love itself, remembers His covenant of
love ; and that if we could but remove the veil which hangs before
our eyes, we should be led to confess with David, that “ though
clouds and darkness are round about Sim, righteousness and judg-
ment are the habitation of Sis throne" (Psalm xcvii. 2.)
In that dispensation, then, with which our thoughts are associ-
ated to-day, I believe, there is mixed with the physical evil a
physical benefit; and that under the clouds and darkness that
accompanied it there was a providential and judicious intention
of goodness.
Let it be granted, if you will, that the storms which have
wrought such ruin far and near, are strictly the results of the
immutable laws of nature, which some persons think are a fit
substitute for a personal superintending Providence; and that the
floods have merely followed physical necessities which caused them
to accumulate their forces on the hills, and to fill the valleys with
ruin. Let it be understood, that it could not, under the peculiar
circumstances of the time, be otherwise ; that it has been so often
before and will, probably, be so oftentimes again. What then ?
This surely is not all the idea of design, that human reason can
extract from a periodical discharge of superabundant rain in
particular parts of the country and in certain months of the year.
Let it be granted, that the floods have done enormous damage,
and have swept away the soil and all that was upon it from the
flat lands along the river-banks. Yet there is more to be
considered respecting it than this.
Is not the promise to this extent, seed time and harvest, shall
never cease so long as the earth remaineth ?
Can we not, then, behold the so-called immutable laws that
regulate the winds and rains, working future good by the present


devastation ? Look to the Nile. Are its wonderful inundations
of no use to the Egyptian farmers ? Open the Bible or the
writings of ancient and modern travellers, and you will find that
Egypt owed and still owes all its fertility to the inundations from
her river. And does not the very same process attend, in a pro-
portionate degree, the periodical floods of the Hawkesbury and the
Hunter ? What would the cultivators of the soil expect to reap,
if there were no richer deposits than the superficial dehris of the
arid and unsuitable wastes of our barren sandstone hills ? Where
can fitting soils be found in such a country but in the alluvial
flats of the rivers that carry downwards new supplies from beyond
those hills? If the alluvial soil that has been accumulated from the
inundations of past ages be not occasionally renewed and restored
by fresh inundations, how would it fare under the influence of
seasons of heat and drought which are so common in New South
Wales? Do not the floods renovate the cultivated land which
greedy or ignorant farmers wear out without affording it its
proper and necessary nourishment ? Surely, then, some good for
the future comes from a present inundation which, otherwise, does
harm. And if the recurrence of these floods teach the occupants
of the valleys and flats more practical wisdom in the experience
of the renovating as well as of the destructive processes of
Nature: if they learn from the damage done to themselves to
make the floods in due time to become their friends and not
their enemies: if after the shock which they have now again
received, they learn to turn their observation to account,
let us not say there is no blessing even to a sufferer in such a
calamity.
The physical phenomena of this Australian land are beginning
to be understood. But if men, with this knowledge of what is
and has been all along, will take their flocks and herds into regions
as level as the ocean, and but few feet elevated above its level,
where the overflowing rivers can sweep them away by thousands:
if they will plough and sow in flats liable to annual or other
periodical overflows —do not let them, in their haste, lay the cause
of their disappointments altogether upon Providence as if God
were unkind, nor let them blame the immutable laws of nature
which they acknowledge whilst they boldly or blindly defy their
authority.


Man in this respect, is the same in all lands and at all times.
It is want of faith in our own convictions that leads us into incon-
sistencies. The modern Italians, as their fathers have done before
them, build and dwell on the ashes and lava that have often
overwhelmed thousands of their kindred. And whilst the fire or
smoke of Vesuvius is constantly within their sight, on the deposits
of its eruptions that have buried Pompeii and towns upon towns
beneath its ruins,* those people unwarned and uninstructed still
plant their vineyards and cultivate their grain.
So in spite of the warning of 1852, repeated in 1853, Grundagai
partly occupies its former position; and though threatened from
year to year, the inhabitants of the Hunter build dwellings within
reach of even ordinary floods, carelessly awaiting the approach of
those that are extraordinary. Thus too in 1860 was the village
of Terrara on the Shoalhaven river carried away, because it was
built on the sandy deposits from the floods of previous times, f
In short, although one of the most instructive of our Lord’s
parables (Matt. vii. 21 —27.) is illustrated by the difference of sites
on which wise men and foolish build, there are still thousands who
can hear and read this lesson from year to year, who build upon
the sand of the alluvial flats, and who complain that when
the rains descend and the floods come , and the ivinds blow and beat
upon their dwellings or their farm, great is the fall of it!
* I have no published reference to give relating to this extraordinary fact.
It is, therefore, better to give my authority, which is a private letter from the
late Lord de Mauley, who being at Naples at the time gave me an account of
the explorations which were then being conducted below the deposits on which
Pompeii stands. It is well known, than an inscription has been found which
proves that Pompeii was only recovering from a partial ruin when it was finally
destroyed by the eruption of A. D. 79. But the explorations which I have
mentioned have proved that from times long anterior to history such catas-
trophes had occurred, and that other towns had from time to time been covered
by ashes or lava in succession.
t So powerful was the flood of 1852, that the waters rose to the height of
lofty trees and in one of them in the township of Grundagai, the head and fore
legs of a horse might be seen for a long time afterwards, suspended in the top-
most branches, where they had been entangled and held.
At Terrara in December 1859, I remarked to more than one person that
it appeared to me a strange thing that a village should bo built in such
a dangerous position as the sandy brink of the river; and, without any intention
of a prediction, added, that it might, some day, be washed away. In January
1860, when at Melbourne, I was startled by the statements in the papers that
the possibility had been verified, and within less than a month.


Nevertheless, though man is thus reckless, thus improvident,
thus neglectful of forewarnings, the words of our text are true : —•
“ The Lord sitteth upon the flood: The Lord sitteth King for ever —
words written by David during a storm and flood in Palestine of
probably as disastrous a character as those which have driven so
many in this land from their dwelling places and have covered
their fields with slime.
It is unnecessary to occupy your time with a recapitulation of
the individual instances of these calamities —calamities which
have become serious losses of worldly wealth to the richer, and
the source of much wretchedness and misery to the poorer classes
in those districts which have been the scenes of visitation. The
public journals have from day to day reported these disasters as
they occurred, and there can be very few here present who require
a repetition of those statements. On the present occasion it is
satisfactory to know that the actual loss of life has been compa-
ratively small, and here we may, assuredly, discern the hand of
the All-merciful; but, undoubtedly, the loss of property, of flocks
and herds, and of domestic comfort throughout a wide extent of
territory has been great. Measured, as it is the custom to
measure such a state of things in a country where profit and loss
are the only standard of many, the gross amount may probably
be reckoned by hundreds of thousands of pounds, during the last
six months.
To recompense the sufferers to such an extent as this is scarcely
possible, even in a freely-giving community of Australians. Nor
is it expected. Whilst we are called upon by the ties of blood or of
a common faith to “ hear one another's burdens and so fulfil the
law of Christ ,” every man must to a great extent “ hear his own
burden .” (Gralat. vi. 2-5.) We are not called upon to do what
we cannot , but what we can , remembering that the praise of her
who anointed the head of her Redeemer was this : —“ she hath done
what she could.” (Mark xiv. 8.) It will be praise and reward
enough for any of us, brethren, if we in this way only do our part
to-day; for what she did, she did out of affection and gratitude
and honour to Him who hath allowed the poor to be always upon
earth, and who has said of those who feed the hungry and clothe
the naked, “ inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren , ye have done it unto me.” (Matt. xxv. 40.)


The Samaritan who found on the road to Jericho the bleeding
stranger that had fallen into the hands of desert-ranging banditti;
who poured oil and wine into his wounds, and who took out two-
pence and gave them to the keeper of the friendly caravan-serai
with the kindly words, “ Take care of him and whatsoever thou
spendest more when I come again I will repay thee : (Luke x. 35.)
the poor widow who cast into the sacred treasury her two mites,
which make a farthing, all indeed she had for her own provision :
these and such like examples should be the models we should
copy in the spirit of the charitable work we are called upon to
perform. The rule we should follow is already prescribed and
known : “He merciful after thy power. If thou hast much give
plenteously : if thou hast little , do thy diligence to give gladly of that
little. Let every man do according as he is disposed in his heart;
not grudgingly nor of necessity, for God lovefh a cheerful giver.”
In treating of the case before us, my mind recurs to a similar
event in Europe, about nine and thirty years ago ; and the men-
tion of it may not be without its use. In the year 1825 a N.W.
storm of similar character to that experienced here on 11th and
12th of June, visited the coasts of Holland and Belgium, which
then constituted the kingdom of the Netherlands. Many lives
were destroyed and a vast amount of property by the inundations
that overwhelmed the country, which extends far away from the
coast in low, occasionally marshy and sandy tracts of land,
scarcely above the ocean level. The facts having been reported
to his government the King of the Netherlands issued an ordon-
nance from Brussells on the 9th February, four days after the
floods, directing that without delay collections for the sufferers
should be made throughout the kingdom from house to house. This
proposition agrees with a suggestion contained in a letter recently
addressed by the Bishop of Sydney to the Clergy of his Diocese,
that collections should be made either in Church or throughout
the Parish, as soon as may be convenient. We have, therefore,
good authority in the present circumstances for following, if neces-
sary, the example set in the Netherlands : and the suggestion
may be worth the attention of such as have mind and leisure for
the service, if they object to aid us in our present purpose.
The Clergy of the Netherlands were not backward in furtheriug


the royal command. And from a discourse * delivered on the
20th February, in the Chapel Eoyal, Brussells, by M. Merle
d’Aubigne, known to many here as the author of a “ History of the
Eeformation” I would borrow a few sentences, which I purposely
translate, as suitable to my present object. And perhaps, there
is the less impropriety in so doing, when I mention that I have
often, during past years, had the privilege of preaching from that
pulpit in the Chapel Eoyal, Brussells, in which the President of
the Consistory of the French and German Protestant Church
made his appeal.
%
“ Can we imagine,” he asks, “ a spectacle more suitable
to manifest the awful power of that God, who by His word alone
sustains all things, and thus to cast upon the soul a salutary
alarm, than that which has just been afforded by many pro-
vinces of this kingdom; scenes which have changed tracts of
country where industry and prosperity abounded, into a vast
theatre of desolation and mourning ?
“ What human being could find himself in presence of these
dreadful misfortunes, without casting himself in the dust, without
humbling himself under the conviction of the powerlessness of man
before the sovereign majesty of Him “ who maketh the winds His
messengers , and His ministers aflame of fire ,” (Heb. i. 7) and who
occasionally delights to exhibit before the eyes of man the striking
signs of His power, just as he once vouchsafed to plant upon
Golgotha and to lift up for ever upon earth the glorious standard
of His love ? * * * “ The signal of the awful calamity
that has plunged our provinces into mourning was given.
a violent wind from the north and the west was let loose; thun-
der, lightning, snow and rain, increased the horror of the storm
and the darkness; a dreadful tide raising the sea above an
un-heard of level, cast itself with crashing sound upon our
shores, and covered everything with immense masses of water.
* Sermon (sur Saint Mattliieu, xxviii. 1-5) prononce h I’occasion du
premier dimanche de la Passion et des Fleaux qui ont afflige quelques unes
des Provinces du Eoyaume, dans la Chapelle, dite de la Cour, Hue du Musee,
a Bruxelles le 20 Fevrier jour fixe par le Magistral pour annoncer la collecte
generale en favour des victimes de 1 'lnondation ; par J. H. Merle d’Aubigne,
M.D.S.E., Pasteur President du Consistoire de VJSglise Fvangelique Protestante
Francaise et Allemande. Se vend au profit des Inondes. Bruxelles, cliez
Brest van Kempen, 1825.


Ships were cast ashore and dashed to pieces ; feeble fishermen
were swallowed up ; islands were submerged; embankments were
burst asunder; jetties and bridges were carried away; houses
fell down ; ravines were formed in the midst of the streets ; quiet
farms were buried with all their inhabitants ; numerous villages
disappeared, and the angry waves of the sea marched and danced
in solitary triumph over an immense extent of country.
“ Every where a “ voice was heard, lamentation and weeping arid
great mourning—many a Rachel weeping for her children and
would not he comforted, because they were not'' (Matt. ii. 18.)
Some were swallowed up in their sleep, others scarcely saved
themselves by leaping into the boats that, braving the angry
waves, traversed day and night the scenes of disaster and
were carried by the sea to the very roofs of the houses. The
frightened mother brought forth her offspring in the midst of the
alarming spectacle ; the father bore in his arms the body of his
child dead with terror and cold and hunger; at every instant
the waters cast up the carcasses of the slain, and those places
which were spared beheld the arrival of a crowd of men women
and children, who offered to the agonised heart the most lament-
able sight.”
“A'ews of fresh destruction followed: the picture of misery
grew blacker skill; the future was hid by sombre clouds.”
“ Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory and
strength. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of
glory thundereth : the Lord is upon many waters. The Lord sitteth
upon the flood; yea, the Lord sitteth King for ever." (Ps. xxix.,
1,3, 10.)”
Thus then, did this eloquent preacher closing his appeal with
the words of my present text, endeavour to depict the horrors of
that time —a time which I well remember; and although we,
thank God, have not exactly the whole of the features of that
calamity to darken ours —(features in some degree dependent on
the differing character of the coast,) yet in his allusions there is very
much which applies to the late inundations preceded as they were
by similar misfortunes and spread as they have been over so wide
an area.
Many and many a scene referred to by the Belgian preacher
has had its perfect counterpart in this territory and in* that of


Queensland, making the parallel between Old Holland in 1825
and New Holland in 1864 striking, if not complete.
Whether the plan adopted in the former country of collecting
aid from house to house be chosen generally here, this at least, is
within my province to point out. The difficulty is not, in such a
case as this, in gathering contributions. Even now from this
parish, thanks to the energy of my colleague and of those ladies
who have aided in the good work, numerous packages of clothing
have been forwarded to Windsor and Richmond, and have been
already distributed; and I am authorised by a letter from the
Rev. H. T. Stiles of Windsor, to offer the best thanks of himself
and the Committee there “to the kind givers of all these gifts.”*
But there will be a difficulty in distributing our alms aright, if
we do so on personal application from itinerant beggars. It was
a difficulty which I experienced in 1850 when I was employed, at
the request of the Mayor and Corporation of Sydney in selecting
and relieving the sufferers in Cumberland and Camden, whose
homesteads and farms where desolated by the bush fires of that
eventful year.
I found many applicants for relief who attempted to impose on
me, not having suffered loss; and it will be, I doubt not, the
business of many a professional beggar to plead, (even if we do
not) from house to house in his own name and with feigned
statements of distress. I think it right, therefore, to warn all
present of the necessity of full inquiry before they give, lest those
for whom we now justly supplicate assistance suffer a loss of your
beneficence. All such beggars should be referred to the local
committees in the places in which they may pretend to have
suffered loss.
And now having addressed you at what is perhaps, an unusual
length, I must solicit your patience for a few minutes longer,
whilst turning from others I seek to make the subject before us
applicable to ourselves.
The Psalm from which the text is taken was evidently composed
in the midst of tempestuous weather, and it is not surprising, if
such were the case, that the whole of the author’s faculties should
have been absorbed by the grandeur of the occasion.
* At the evening service a similar acknowledgment was made on behalf
of the Richmond Committee.


The whole burthen of his strain is the Lord Jeiiovah. He
calls upon us to “ ascribe unto the Lord the glory due unto His
name ; and to worship Him in the beauty of holiness. In His tem-
ple, he tells us, every man should speak of His glory: the Lord
sitfeth upon the flood: the Lord sitteth a King for ever." And his
conclusion is, “ the Lord will give strength unto His people ; the
Lord will bless His people with peace."
Now, to borrow once more from the discourse I have already-
cited, it may be justly said: “ The holiness and the power of the
Sovereign God are manifested by the voice of a guilty conscience
as well as by the fury of the winds. It is not a storm of
nature, but it is the tempest of the soul which we have now to
contemplate! Oh! if our hearts are stirred by the elements let
loose, how ought they not to be affected by the sight of all that
strength which can be enkindled in the soul —those powers of hell
which combat in a rebel heart!”
With these expressive words to guide me, I would, in conclusion,
merely'desireto ask you in my own more humble language —to what
sight can a sinner so awakened, so alarmed, so conscience-stricken
turn, in thought of the final tempest that is to usher in the
renovation of all things, but to “ the Lord who sitteth King for
ever," to Him whom we are called upon to worship in the beauty
of holiness; who not only invites us to feed the hungry and
to clothe the naked of this world for His sake, who gave even
His life for us and them ; but who has further promised to such
as are spiritually athirst the waters of salvation; to those that
are spiritually hungered the bread of life; to those that are
spiritually naked the garment of His unspotted righteousness;
to those that are weighed down by penitential sorrow the strength
of imparted faith; to those that are tossed and troubled and
overwhelmed by the floods of spiritual trial, that peace which
passeth all understandingP “ The Lord" says the Psalmist, “ will
give strength unto His people: the Lord will bless His people with
peace."
May that strength and that peace be yours for ever: and thus
in His temple may we speak to ourselves and to others and to
Him of His glory.
