

Jlcitman :
Jit of the foundation
(if tk
d{atliedi|iil djlmitdt of §tk\\
Hg the Derg % ityan.
£. fauFs dpimtth. £♦ fag, 1870.
JU)elai&e:
Prmteto bg Oabtt (Sail, 89, Utng ®2Mltam Street.
f t2.bo




pennon
1 Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ .’—l Cor. iii. 11.
The office I have to discharge to-day, I feel to
be a very humble one. It is merely to gather up
and combine into one view, the principal features of
interest in this day’s commemoration. It happens
that we are assembled for this purpose in a
Church which, though dedicated,as all our Churches
are to Almighty God, is especially associated by
its name, with the life and doctrine of S. Paul.
The Cathedral is in the same way connected with
the name of S. Peter; and we are met for this
purpose on S. Peter’s Pay. It was on this day
in last year that the first stone of our Cathedral
was laid; and the day is one which has been
associated not only with some critical points in the
personal history of our Bishop, but with more than
one memorable work undertaken by him for the
good of the diocese. Such associations are
precious things. They appeal to the imagination
and to the heart in a way which connects our divine
service with our human life; and thus are a fit


symbol to us of a faith which rests on that great
mystery wherein it pleased God to show us, in the
person of his Blessed Son, how the human and the
divine may dwell together on terras of closest
union.
Well, my brethren, although I was at the other
end of the world when our foundation stone was
laid, I cannot help observing a certain natural
fitness in the selection of this day for such an act.
Its characteristic and inspiring thought is more
evidently in harmony with the work assigned to it
than any other day in the Christian year, unless it
be that of S. Simon and S. Jude, when in our
prayer we recall the fact that God has built His
Church on the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone. But the doctrine of the one day
cannot be understood without the supplement of
the other; and this supplement has here been
provided for us in the teaching of S. Paul.
1. First let me try to connect our commemoration
with the day on which we observe it. When S.
Peter’s Bay comes round to us, year by year,
our Lord’s words are constantly repeated to us,
‘ Thou art Peter ,’ —that is, thou art one whose
name suggests by its very sound, to those who
hear it, the idea of a rock— ‘ and upon this
rock will I build my church Could any lan-
guage better harmonize with the thoughts of a


day devoted to the foundation of a Christian
Cathedral? We would wish, as our best wish,
for all chief pastors of the Church in this dio-
cese that their nature may be rock-like, as that
of S. Peter was; that as it was given to him
to found the Catholic Church, by opening the
gates of the kingdom of heaven to all believers,
so, they may be inspired with the power of
attracting many who lie outside our fold; and
that as he, with all his impetuosity, and in spite
of his one great fault, was stedfast and strong,
a man of principle and not of expediency, so
all who occupy the chief place in the Cathedral
of S. Peter in this city, may show that they
are worthy to sit in that seat. I speak of
those who shall be living when we are dead.
Whatsoever they may be: at least in the selec-
tion of this day for foundation and commemo-
ration, and in the choice of this name for the
Cathedral, the first Bishop of the diocese has
signified to himself and to those who may come
after him, what manner of men he thinks they
ought to be. 1 dare not pass by such a fact as one
of no significance. I am rather bound to set it
forth as almost the most significant fact of this
day’s celebration.
2. But secondly, we have to observe that it
is only in a subordinate sense that any Apostle
can be said to be either a founder or a foun-
dation on which the Church is built. S. Paul


in this epistle had just described himself as ‘ a
wise masterbuilder/ who had laid the foundation
of the Church of Corinth. But he is careful to
add ‘ Other foundation can no man lay than
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.’ Whether of
a particular Church or the Catholic Church as a
whole, it is undoubtedly true that it is in Him,
our faith in Whom, our adoration of Whom, is
our dearest most sacred bond of union, that ‘ all
the building, fitly framed together, groweth unto
a holy temple in the Lord.’ Holy and venerable
in our estimation are Apostles and Saints, but
only because of the Christ-like spirit that
breathed in them, and the special commission
and calling they received from their Lord.
This their calling the first Bishops of the
Church rightly interpreted when they became
founders of particular churches, in which Jew
and Gentile alike were united in the holy joy
of one life, eating one bread and drinking of
one cup. The name at whose very sound they
bowed the head in loving adoration was the
name of Jesus. It was He who had recalled
the scattered races of men from their anarchy,
and had given them a new centre of union.
It was He in whom they found, at every
joyful and every sorrowful moment of their
life, a meeting place with the unseen Father.
Christ was to them their All—in His incarnate
work, the source of their new born holiness, —
in the Sacrament which He bequeathed to them,


their constant sustenance. They never met
together but to draw near to Him. When
they met they felt that to pray was a blessed
thing, for it was He who had taught them to
pray. To be instructed out of the Holy Gospels,
that was blessed too, for in them their Lord
was speaking to them. But most of all they
felt it blessed, in the breaking of bread, to
realise His actual presence with them, as of
old. Yes, it was true, they wished to make
Him the foundation of all. And we must lay
the same foundation. Christ first, Christ last,
Christ our spring of present goodness, Christ
our hope of glory, this is the lesson which,
above all others, the erection of a Christian
Cathedral reads to us.
3. Finally, a day on which we are commemo-
rating the foundation of a Church meant to be
a spiritual home to all our people, suggests also the
thought of the superstructure. Are we going
to build on that foundation anything that will
last ? I need hardly say that this question refers
not to the mere materials of the building, although
even there we would wish to ofier to God the
best things that we have. But what spiritual
work are we going to build on it ? This question
S. Paul’s mind was busy with when he said—
‘ If anyone build on the foundation, gold, silver,
precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, each one’s
work will be made manifest.’ And we must


picture to ourselves the actual scene which was
present to his imagination as he wrote these
words. In the newly re-built city of Corinth
there still stood the magnificent remains of the
ancient temples, unconsumed by the fire which
had reduced the elder city to ruins. Destruct-
ively as the fire had raged, there still remained
columns of enduring substance which had defied
its power; while all that was meretricious had
utterly disappeared. And so, my brethren, the
progress of time will be to us a fire*licking up
with its destroying tongue all in our Cathedral
work which has not in it the element of im-
mortality. What are we intending to do? Are
we intending only an imposing ceremonial that
will appeal to the senses, and with them will
perish? or are we, through that ceremonial,
seeking to kindle a deeper devotion, to nourish
amongst our people the spirit which will seek
life in living for Christ? Then that will live.
In proportion as the Cathedral we are building
is glorified by this higher spirit, in that pro-
portion only will it be a real blessing to our
Church—a real instrument of advancing God’s
glory in the midst of us. Especially must we,
who belong to the Cathedral body, feel that we
are bound to look beyond the bare require-
ments of parochial care; to seek and to find
that scope for missionary activity in a growing
city which will be the best justification of the
special offices conferred on us. We shall not


have to look very far. For our lot is cast
in a city in which there is no public provision
for spiritual care in behalf of those great
institutions in which are gathered together,
from all parts of the country, the sick, and
the destitute, and the lunatic. A city in which
in spite of our demonstrative religiosity large
numbers are living without any religion worthy
of the name, —in which vice in its rankest,
foulest form, is out of all proportion, even if
judged by the worst examples in olden com-
munities, to the actual population,—and in
which much of the most needful work of the
Church must lie in the courts and lanes
which are out of sight. These are the regions
in which the members of a Cathedral body
are called to special activity. If our Church
has a mission distinguishing it from the sects
around us, it is to the outcasts of society ;
and it will be a shame to us and a scandal
if a Cathedral body in a new country should
show itself simply content to fall back, not on
the best, but on the worst and most indolent
traditions of England. Each returning com-
memoration should at least call us to a higher
conception of the duty we owe to the general
mass of ‘ the human ’ around us.
But independently of all work that may
radiate from the Cathedral as its centre, there
is one thing for which we may especially


rejoice in its erection. Whatever else it may
mean, it means, at the very least, that there
shall be one Church in which the Gospel and
all the rites of the Gospel may be had ‘with-
out money and without price. , We build it
in faith. We look forward to the future
years in which the trader and the worker,
seeking relief from the restless life of the
city, may find a quiet retreat for prayer. For
such a purpose the gates of a Cathedral must
stand always open: and there, too, we thank
God, that all who wish, from week to week,
to feed on Christ in the Sacrament of His
death must needs be satisfied. While the
world is busy with its daily tasks, there will
be there provided constant refreshment for
those who are seeking after God. The very
building where it stands will cry out in
silent entreaty to the passers-by ‘ Come
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy -
laden , and I will give you rest! And I
trust that silent appeal will be contradicted
neither by the coldness of the service within
its walls, nor by narrowness in the range of
work which it may inspire.
GAEL, PBINXEE, ADELAIDE.
