

s ie lEt imi o 3sr
PREACHED AT THE
OPENING OF THE FEDERAL ASSEMBLY ON SEPT. U, 1887,.
BY THE
REY. JAMES NISH, D.D.
" Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule,
let us mind the same thing.”— Phil. in. 16.
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
DELIVERED ON THE SAME OCCASION BY THE
REY. JAMES CAMERON, D.D.,
OF RICHMOND, NEW SOUTH WALES.
3lUU>outn£:
FERGUSSON & MOORE, PRINTERS, 48 FLINDERS LANE EAST.


m
V
v ■ ’
▼


SERMON.
Fathers and Brethren,
This seems to me a fitting motto or watchword for oui Assembly ;
and viewed as such, let us proceed to glance for a little at its import. It is
aptly expressive of our position as linked, though meanwhile but partially
linked, together by the nexus of a common bond; and it sets forth the spirit
in which we should apply ourselves to seek and labour for the securing of a
closer, broader, and more perfect union,—a union the more eagerly to be
desired, and sought after, in that though for the present but imperfectly
allied we can, even as separate Churches, very distinctively claim to have “ one
faith, one hope, one baptism.”
The attainment to which our text refers was the attainment in some
measure on the part of the Christian converts in Philippi, of a definite unity of
conviction and action. It is, however, at the same time implied that the
progress already made, in this respect, by these converts had not been
complete,—not such as they might and should still be aiming and
endeavouring to attain. Well it was, no doubt, that they had attained so
far. This was a step in the right direction —a step, likewise, which if acted
on discreetly might and would lead forward to still greater progress in the
right way. Some there were among them, whom the Apostle was fain to
characterise as perfect. But they had also in their ranks brethren who
were “ otherwise minded.” And care required to be taken that the brethren
thus minded were dealt with considerately. It was not to be made ground of
accusation against them that they were so minded. They were not on this
account to be charged with obliquity of vision, or with perversity of judgment.
Their special need was a need of fuller enlightenment, and if treated kindly—
treated so as not to offend or deepen their prejudices—they might, ere long,
attain to sounder views and perceptions.
Hence, in regard to them, the Apostle commended forbearance, and a
spirit of patient expectancy on the patt of the converts, whom he had
spoken of as “ perfect.” In effect he went on to say : “ However desirable
it may be to find, and show yourselves thoroughly at one, in your beliefs and
your lines of action, be not tempted in any case so to act as that a conscious
diversity of feeling or apprehension may become to you, and operate among
you, as a cause of estrangement or contention. Try to find out to what
extent, and in what respects, you are definitely agreed. These points of
agreement may of themselves form a sound basis of common action
and such action, if properly regulated, will lead you on gradually, and it
may be almost unconsciously, to a still closer oneness of thought and
aspiration.” In short, friendly co-operation in acting on the lines of a
definite agreement with any class of fellow-workers, is the most effective


mode of fostering a spirit of brotherly affection. Mere theoretical dis-
cussions in regard to points of disagreement —no matter what the nature of
these points may be—seldom lead to any satisfactory conclusion. Nothing,
as a rule, is more profitless or resultless than controversial debate on such
matters. Affording but little instruction to the hearers, such debate bas a
wondrous effect in confirming the disputants in the soundness of their
previous beliefs. At the close of the debate both of them invariably claim
to have had the best of the argument.
Difficult, accordingly, is it—might we not even say impracticable, as a
mere exercise of intellectual ingenuity —to frame verbal statements relate e
to any cause or ground of disagreement which will be cordially acquiesced
in by* observers who look at the matter from different standpoints. The dis-
cussion may be friendly, and the questions discussed may be admittedly of
no vital moment; yet, so long as they are looked at simply in their abstract
form or relation, it is more than probable that the prolonging of discussion
in regard to them will but serve to multiply or magnify the occasions of
disagreement. Altogether otherwise, however, is it when some common
work has to be done and is arranged to be done—or when some definite
action has to be taken, and is resolved to be taken, by the parties who so
disagree. Altogether different is the issue attained when obstacles by which
we find ourselves mutually confronted have to be overcome, or when perils
by which we are mutually endangered have to be averted. Ihe earnest
unity of action pressed upon us under such circumstances, will naturally be
determined by the importance or value of the common work which we
require to undertake, or by the seriousness of the dangers against which we
are incited unitedly to guard. The practical issues at stake will heighten
our conception of the necessity for acting in friendly concert; and the more
vividly that this need is realised, the less chance or likelihood will there be,
of our giving way for the time to unseemly wrangling in regard to matteis
of comparatively minor interest or moment.
Nor is this all. The benefit which we consciously derive from each
other’s help, and the kindly feeling evoked through labouring zealously side
by side for the attainment of objects or ends, in which we have been led to
take a warm mutual interest, will of themselves constitute a strong bond of
attachment; and further, the fact that we have been experimentally enabled
to work together without any conscious jar, will needs constrain us to
cherish a more favourable opinion one of another, and through keeping our
minds concentrated on the matters with respect to which we are actuated by
common sympathies, will make us heedless or forgetful of the questions,
concerning which we might otherwise have been tempted to contend.
The more that we live apart, the less inclined are we to make friendly
approaches toward strangers whom we believe to be affected, or whom we
look upon as liable to be affected towards us by some suspected cause or
causes of alienation. But, on the other band, let us be brought into frequent
contact with brethren of whom previously we have known but little, and
especially let us be led to draw near to them with some practical aim, and
have occasion to “ provoke one another to good works,” and how soon in
such a case will we learn “ to esteem each other highly for our works’ sake.”
Insensibly do we become attached to fellow-labourers, with whom we have
consented to associate for the advancement of a common end, especially if
the work, in which we so engage to take part, be such in its magnitude or
urgency as avail? draw forth our energies and engross our thoughts. To


be thus banded together, communicates a potently attractive force to the
common aspirations and aims by which we are influenced. No longer amid
such surroundings can we look on one another as aliens or foes. The
oftener that we meet and begird ourselves to the furtherance of our common
work, the more warmly are we moved to extend one to the other a hand of
brotherly welcome, and the more ardently do our souls become fired with a
spirit of friendly emulation.
The secret cause of such progressively attained oneness of feeling is
unveiled and called out into active operation, not through attempts to frame
a creed which may be subscribed with hearty unanimity of assent by the
friends whom we desire to link hand in hand, or through endeavouring to
formulate a basis of alliance made up of such general principles as may be
readily accepted by all who are asked to receive and adopt it as an avowed
bond of fellowship. The framing of such creeds, and the formulating «f
such bases, are doubtless good and right in their own place; but (need it be
said) they are more properly indicative of a unity of opinion already
attained, or act as means by which open expression may be given to such
unity, rather than as aids to the broadening or educing of a oneness of
apprehension and feeling, meantime imperfectly developed—if developed
at all—or to the leading of brethren who imagine themselves at variance, to
perceive and acknowledge the latent oneness of aim and purpose, which
underlies their apparent diversity of sentiment, and which requires only to he
provided with some suitable outlet for its appropriate unfolding. And, is it
necessary to add, the proper outlet for such concealed unity consists in giving
it a practical embodiment or form. As already hinted, such unity is brought
to light and quickened into active potency, not through verbal discussions,
however wisely and warily conducted, or through skilfully-devised codes of
amicable legislation, but through judiciously-framed lines of common action,
and earnest diligence in acting on the lines so framed. The friendly
intercourse thus maintained, and the practical advantages secured by means
of it, become efficient elements of unification. Prejudices are irresistibly
cleared away, and fresh occasions of mutual respect and confidence are made
to emerge in and through the common work, which brethren, thus banded
together, have been empowered to effect in their associated capacity.
This unifying influence of co-operative effort is aptly illustrated in the
history and practice of diversely constituted associations—associations estab-
lished, it may be, mainly for the promotion of good fellowship—as among
brethren of the mystic tie—or established more directly for purposes of mutual
help in times of sickness and bereavement —as in the lodges of our Foresters,
Oddfellows, and the like ; or established even for the carrying out of some
definite scheme of political and social reform. The members of such associa-
tions may differ, and often do differ widely, in their religious creed, and in
their sentiments on almost every question except the one central design
of their associated connection. They are at one on almost no point,
and in almost no respect, except that they are fellow-Masons, fellow-
Foresters, fellow-Orangemen, or Rechabites. Yet their assembling together
at stated times for the advancement of the one definite aim of their associa-
tion, and their harmonious co-operation in labouring for its attainment,
enwrap them in the bond of a firmly-compacting tie. And, if it be so in
fraternities whose members avowedly differ so much in their tastes, habits,
and views relative to all questions which lie outside the one object for
which they have arranged and stand pledged to act in friendly concert, how
much more should a spirit of true heart-linking love be drawn out and


fostered by wisely-framed unity of action among brethren, essentially one in
the faith and hope which spring from a sincere belief of the all-important
verities of the Gospel !
And does not the attractive force of combination for practical ends, as
exemplified in the working of such associations, unfold a lesson which we do
well to ponder, alike as the separate representatives in our different colonies
of a common creed and polity, and as constituent members of a more closely-
compacted federation ?
Yea, may not a still wider application be made of this foundation prin-
ciple ? For even in our more limited congregational relationships, have we
not sadly failed—are we not sadly failing day by day—to realise the importance
of being knit, and of arranging to be more firmly knit together, not simply
as worshippers who have a common faith and a common ritual, oi who have
been placed under the care of a common pastoral superintendence, but as
active workers for the Lord in the developing of our congiegational
resources, and for the promoting of our congregational extension and
influence ? Are we not too readily content to sit with folded hands and
imagine that we are fulfilling all reasonable expectations, if only we attend
with some fair measure of regularity on the stated services of the sanctuary,
and contribute, though often in ill-proportioned measure, to the different
funds and schemes, which in their appointed course we are solicited to assist ?
How much would it conduce to the quickening of our spiritual life, and
still more directly to the riveting around us of the bonds of a closely com-
pacting brotherliness of soul, did we engage as we might, or according to
our several abilities and opportunities, in earnest service for the Master.
Thus “to walk bv the same rule and mind the same thing is an attainment,
in which, speaking generally, we as congregations lag far behind; and is not
our lagging herein the main cause of the spiritual apathy and leanness which
so widely prevail ?
Yes; let it be reiterated—Willingness to take part in works of faith is
the best evidence of vigorous spiritual vitality. Wisely-associated and
prudently-harmonised energy in faith-quickened labours of love is the
firmest bond of fraternal union, and the surest preservative against dissentient
strife. No congregation will continue to be so fixedly “ established and
settled in the faith,” or be so permanently characterised by love-enkindling
oneness of effort, as the congregation which is noted in kindred degree for
untiring activity in varied walks of usefulness. Is not this a truth which
we, almost above other Evangelical denominations, have been slow to Lain ?
How prone are we to thrust all Christian work into the hands of those who
have been formally set apart among us to labour in word and doctrine, and
to roll over the blame of our congregational shortcomings on the alleged
inertness of our office-bearers. The practical responsibilities of the occu-
pants of our pews are deemed as of no account. And how m< urnful has
been the outcome of a misapprehension so directly at variance alike with
apostolic precept and the example of apostolic days. How emphatically
did Paul lay it upon the Churches of Galatia that every man had his appro-
priate part to sustain—yea, that they were to fulfil the law of Christ, by
bearing not only their own, but one another’s burdens.
On the kindred applicability of this principle to our obligations and
shortcomings as separate Churches, time will not permit me to dwell. But,
in hastening to a close, may I not fearlessly aver, that the federation which


we professedly desire to consolidate, and are now met to consolidate, must
of necessity fail, utterly fail, either to possess or to exert effectively
an appropriate power for good, unless it becomes thoroughly practical in its
aims and actings ? Of little importance will it be to have associated our
selves together, merely that we may hear or speak of what is being done or
aimed at in our separate assemblies and synods ; or that we may frame rules
and enunciate principles illustrative of the oneness in creed and polity,
which, as the progeny of a common parentage, whether ecclesiastically or
nationally, we have a distinctive right to assert. The hearing of such
reports may be incidentally instructive, or may quicken us to imitate the
action of the sister Churches, by which, through means of them, we discover
ourselves to be respectively outdone. Or, further, such concentrated
manifestations of our oneness in belief and practice, may supply a
seasonable and pleasing exhibition of our common discipleship. Well
may it be to make it plain in this manner that our polity is not restricted
or sectional, but unlimitedly cosmopolitan in its range and capability
of adaptation. Yet, if there is to be vital force in our association,
or if this force is to be intensified and made fitly operative by means
of our periodic gatherings, we must needs apply ourselves earnestly to
the devising of common enterprises, and the carrying out of such commou
work as our associated efforts should enable us the more successfully to
achieve. It will be to our irremovable reproach if, when thus associated, we
sink down to the position of a Mutual Admiration Society, or account it
enough, in our successive meetings, to give expression to honied words of
flattery or self-adulating compliment—words which evaporate into airy
nothingness in the act of receiving utterance. If satisfied to remain in any
such molluscous stage of development, it requires no prophet to foretell that
our existence as a federation will be alike ignoble and short-lived. Not
•content, accordingly, with the oneness of sentiment on questions of doctrine
and discipline to which we have attained, let us go on “to walk by the same
rule and mind the same thing.” Let it be made clearly apparent that, having
overpassed the molluscous stage in our historic evolution, we have come to
be possessed of nerve and muscle and backbone; that we have acquired
firmness and steadiness of grip, combined with a resolute capability for
action; that our confederacy has made us strong for work, and that we
mean to make due proof of the energy by which we are permeated —an
energy instinct with elements of enduring permanence and power. Nor is
there any lack of important and urgent enterprises on which, in oiir
federated connection, we are free to enter —might it not be more properly
said, are forcibly called to enter without delay ?
Speaking for myself, I do not hesitate to maintain that all our future
plans and measures for common missionary work should be placed, at the
earliest convenience, in some direct form under the supervision of a Federal
Mission Board. Surely in this, if in any matter, we should be ready to
co-operate without restraint or misgiving. This (as I conceive) is a work
which, from the outset of our federal intercourse, we should be prepared to
carry out in a spirit of healthful rivalry ; a work which that spirit, if rightly
cherished, should potently aid to speed forward.
The proper relation of the Mission Synod in the New Hebrides to this
Assembly opens up, doubtless, wide-reaching questions, which will require to
be maturely weighed—questions on which it would be presumptuous for me to
offer any dogmatic deliverance. But may it not be warrantably assumed,
that the proper Court of Appeal alike for advice or adjudication on any


matters concerning which differences of opinion may arise, or practical
perplexity may he experienced in the Synod will, henceforth, be not
the General Assembly of any individual Colonial Church, or even of the
most influential of the Home Churches, but (under carefully-defined
restrictions) the Representative Court of our Federation—a Court constituted
so as to embrace (if that may be considered necessary for this end) not
only the select representatives of our Federated Churches, but representatives,
in duly-proportioned number, of the Mission Synod, and of all the Churches
in other lands, by which Missionaries are appointed and sustained, to
labour together with our Agents in the insular group ? Our geographical
position will supply us with special facilities for searching out and
determining the merits of all such causes of dispute or difficulty; and
our constitution as a Court will make it natural and seemly that the authority
to frame a final settlement of such questions should be vested in our hands.
By no means do I affirm or maintain that all this can be warrantably
attempted or fitly achieved at this meeting, nor do I mean to insinuate that
it is within the power or province of this Assembly legitimately to frame
such resolutions or give them final effect. I am but endeavouring to plot
out the lines within which and along which all who co-operate with us in
this work should be counselled to walk, and to indicate in general terms the
ultimatum which we should unitedly seek to attain.
With equal naturalness will it devolve on us to exercise some general
superintendence over our Theological Halls and Seminaries, and to direct
the conducting of the Entrance and Exit Examinations of all candidates for
the Ministry in our various Churches. The Reports comprised in our
Business pamphlet happily show that we are already at one on the desirable-
ness of having a Federal Examining Board. But the proper constitution of
the Board ; the powers with which it should be clothed ; the time and mode
in which these powers are to be exercised: these and cognate questions
will have to be carefully considered and determined upon (in the true spirit of
our text) as occasions for their consideration and settlement may progres-
sively emerge.
A third sphere of co-operative effort lies distinctly before us in the giving
of seasonable counsel and assistance relative to the Horae Mission operations
of our several Churches. In this work (as it appears to me) the strong among
us should try to realise the obligation which rests upon them to help the
weak, not only within the borders of their own separate Church, but through-
out the entire bounds of our far-spreading continent, including, of course, our
“tight little sister isle.” Equally proper will it be (in my judgment) that
every Minister and Preacher connected with our federation should account
himself the authorised Agent of the whole Federated Church, and that his
services should be available for any sphere or field of action which our
federation may comprise. In this respect there should be the freest scope
for the principle of mutual eligibility. Prudent caution will doubtless have
to be exercised in giving effect to this principle, and general lines of action
will have to be thoughtfully formulated. Yet the more that in these and
other respects we learn “to walk by the same rule and mind the same
thing” the more healthfully and vigorously will our federation be consoli-
dated.
Nor should it be less practicable, though it may call for more slowly
regulated action, to amalgamate our various benevolent funds, and have
them placed under the administration of a common executive. Nay, lam


sanguine enough to anticipate that if we press on prayerfully, and, under
the guidance of wisdom sought and obtained from above, the day may not
be far distant when all the weaker charges in our entire confederacy may
receive efficient aid from the well-plenished resources of a grand central
sustentation or augmentation fund. The name by which the fund is to be
designated, or the plan according to which it is to be collected and distributed,
I account of little importance, so long as it fulfils its desired end—the end,
viz., of seasonably ministering needed supplies out of a store—furnished in
common by “ all out of their abundance,” and distributed to “ all according
to their wants.” To some this may seem vapouring talk. Yet very firm is my
conviction that, just in proportion as such issues are kept definitely in view,
and such practical measures are framed and wrought out, as will lead to the
progressive attainment of these issues, in this proportion, and in such pro-
portion alone, shall the wisdom of our federation, and the soundness of the
principles on which it is based, be appropriately verified.
The enfeebled state of my health will doubtless be accepted as an adequate
apology for having thus imperfectly sketched out what, in first resolving on
its selection, I had hoped to say on a theme so fruitful of suggestion, and so
specially suited, as I conceive, to the circumstances and prospects, and
conjointly therewith the duties and obligations, of this Venerable Court.
Meanwhile, may God add His blessing to what has been said accordantly
with His revealed will, and so make it “profitable for reproof and correction
and instruction in righteousness.”


INAUGURAL ADDRESS.
Fathers and Brethren,
I need not say that I esteem very highly the honour that
has been conferred on me in being called to occupy the Chair of this
Assembly. It is an honour, however, which I feel entails a grave
responsibility, a responsibility from which I might well have shrunk had I
not felt assured that the same kindly feeling which has prompted you to
place me in this Chair will be extended to me in my endeavour to discharge
its important duties. While gratefully acknowledging the honour that has
been conferred on me personally, I shall not err. I believe, in regarding my
appointment as the manifestation of a generous desire on your part to show
honour, at the same time, to the colony from which I have come, and to
the Church of which lam now one of the oldest ministers. (Applause.)
It is to me a circumstance of no small interest that I follow in this chair
one with whom I sat in the same class in the New College in Edinburgh,
one with whom I had not a little pleasant fellowship in our first ministerial
efforts, one who came to this southern world about the same time as myself,
and one whose life might be said, as in my own case, to have been given
as a contribution toward the evangelisation of this new Australian land.
We must all, I am sure, feel thankful that his health has been so far
restored as to enable him to be with us to-night, speaking the word to us
with such power, and that we may count upon his valuable aid in conducting
the business of this Assembly. We have assembled, Fathers and Brethren,
from different colonies and from far distances, to deliberate on matters of
grave importance—matters that will affect the destinies of our Church, and
the religious future of these colonies to no inconsiderable extent, and for
years not a few; and it is meet that we should bring to the consideration of
them a spirit of earnest thoughtfulness, and a due sense of our dependence
on Him who alone can guide our counsels aright, and bring our labours to
a profitable issue. Our work has been so far shaped out for us by the
proceedings of the former Assembly. Committees were then appointed
on Home missions and on Heathen missions, on Theological Halls, on our
Aged and Infirm Ministers’ Fund, on our Widows and Orphans’ Fund,
and on the Code of rules. The reports of these Committees will have,
in the first instance, to be received and disposed of, and then such
other business as may in conformity with the objects and rules of
this Assembly be brought before us. Our Federal Assembly may be said
to be, as yet, but in its infancy, and the sphere that has been marked out
for its action is a comparatively limited one. It is well, perhaps, that it is
so. The path on which we have entered is, in great measure, a new and
untrodden one, and it is meet we should advance in it with due caution,
feeling our way, and making sure of our ground as we proceed. That the


movement is one in the right direction, and that it has in it vast possibi-
lities of good we cannot doubt. It is a movement that has attracted the
notice, and awakened the interest of others at a distance from us, and it
seems not unlikely that our proceedings may reach farther in their influence
than we have ventured to suppose. Our aim is so far coincident with that
of the “ general alliance of Presbyterian Churches ” throughout the world.
The subjects that have been discussed in the Councils of this alliance are
subjects of vital importance to the Church, in which we cannot fail to feel
a profound interest. They are subjects that serve to indicate to us so far
the line of our own action as a federated body. But in these Councils the
subjects have been simply discussed, and nothing more; and appre-
hensions have begun to be felt that men may get tired of mere talking,
however edifying and elevating it may be. We would be far from alleging
that the talk in these Councils has been barren talk. It has, as all must
admit, been grand talk—magnificent, inspiring, soul-stirring talk, the pulsa-
tions of which have gone forth to the furthest limits of our Presbyterian
Christendom. But, nevertheless, it has been felt that something
more is needful to accomplish all that is aimed at and felt to be
desirable. Our federation movement is intended to go beyond the
alliance in respect of practical effect. The Council of the alliance is simply
a deliberative body, and the only power it can wield is merely that of moral
influence. It claims no jurisdiction, and its utterances are not authoritative.
It may be said that our own Assembly is little more, that it is simply a
court of arbitration and advice, with no power to secure compliance with
its decisions. It is, however, more than that; for if it cannot legislate
directly, it can do so indirectly. It can prepare the way for legislation. It
can even frame measures for general adoption, which, when ratified by the
supreme courts of the different Churches, will become binding upon the
whole body. This is, of itself, sufficient to redeem our Assembly from
the imputation of impotence. There is here ample scope furnished for
practical action. There are many matters of common interest which can
be best dealt with and determined by such an Assembly as this. The
proper function of such a Federal Assembly as ours is obviously not to
occupy itself with the smaller matters of ordinary administrative detail, but
rather with the larger questions of general policy and collective church duty
which demand our careful study, and to indicate the attitude of our Church
and the line of her action in respect of those social problems and public
movements which vitally affect the national well-being. There is much
talk in our day about federation both in Church and State. It seems to be
the dominant idea at this present time. In political circles men talk as if
the permanence of the empire depended on it; and in ecclesiastical circles
federation is spoken of as a possible panacea for all our divisions. In the
Anglican Church in these colonies there have not been wanting indications
of a desire for greater visible unity among those who, in all essential
matters, are so much agreed ; and at home the question is being discussed
of a possible federation between the Church of England and the Church of
Scotland. The day may come when this will be found to be practicable;
but for the present there is an obvious barrier in the way. The Primate of
the Anglican Church, when speaking recently on the subject of P rotestant
union, in Sydney, touched the core of the matter, when he said, “ If there
is to be re-union there must be no arrogation anywhere of an exclusive
superiority.” As regards the great family of Protestant Churches, it is
obvious that so long as any one member of the family claims to be the


only legitimate son in the household, and affirms or insinuates that the
others are bastards and not sons, there can be no such fraternal feeling as
is indispensable to a hearty and fruitful union. If such as claim to be
priests “ after the law of a carnal commandment,” disown and depreciate
such as are manifestly priests “ after the power of an endless life,” it is
evident that a barrier is by this interposed to such a union, on equal terms,
as alone can prove satisfactory. But let this barrier be removed, and that
significant word of Our Lord become the exponent of the prevailing
feeling in the family—“ One is your master, and all ye are brethren,” then
we know of nothing besides that need prove an insuperable obstacle in the
way of a consummation so devoutly to be wished. In any hopeful move-
ment toward such a happy issue, the Presbyterian Church, I feel assured,
would not be found the most backward and unreasonable member of the
family. It does seem much to be regretted that Churches, which, in
respect of their theology and even their soteriology, may be said to be
essentially one, should, in the one matter of their ecclesiology, be so
divided. Each Church has, no doubt, its own distinctive principles and
its own testimony to bear, but it is obvious that there must ever be risk
lest, by emphasising unduly some things, we should lose sight of and
undervalue other things, which may have an equally important bearing
on the proper development of the Church’s powers, and the effectual
forth-putting of her energies. By looking too intently to our own things, we
may miss seeing the good that lies beyond our own borders.
We live in an age of progress. Attention has recently been called to the
marvellous progress which, within the last fifty years, has been made in all
departments of our national life. There is, however, one department in which
it is alleged there is great room for progress, but in which little progress has
been made. Complaints are rife in certain quarters that in our theology at
least, and in our dogmatic beliefs, we are behind the age. The cry is
common that the creeds of Christendom have become antiquated, that our
theology has need to be recast, and to be brought more into harmony with
the spirit of the times. The question is thus raised to what extent progress
in this department is possible and legitimate. That there is room for
progress we may freely admit, and that progress has been made cannot be
denied. Progress there has been in forming juster conceptions of the
nature and purpose of that record which has been given us as the rule of
our faith. Progress has also been made in the interpretation and elucida-
tion of this record. New light has been cast on old problems. There has
been a certain broadening of our dogmatic belief, a certain widening of the
spiritual horizon, and the infusion into our theology of a tenderer tone and
more loving and hopeful spirit. (Applause.) And in such progress as this
we cannot but rejoice. We may well feel thankful for whatever impulse
toward this progress has been received, whatever may be the quarter from
which the impulse has come. There is no need that we should look with
dread, or with suspicion, on the discoveries of science, and the speculative
tendencies of our day ; no need to feel alarm at the criticisms, be they even'
hostile criticisms, to which Christianity is, in all its aspects, being subjected.
We may candidly admit that good has already come out of this evil, and
that even from the camp of the enemy fresh light has been flashed on
jects not a few. Our proper attitude is to watch with keen interest the
growing light in every department, and to study with docile minds the
lesson it is fitted to teach us, not ashamed to own that we have yet much


“ both to learn and to unlearn.” The light is good, and if we are wise we
will endeavour to utilise it for our own high ends, for correcting our mis-
beliefs, and for helping us up to higher conceptions of divine truth and to
a firmer grasp of the imperishable treasure which has been committed to
our trust. The enemies of the faith may rage, but we need feel no fear,
but comfort ourselves with the assurance that it will be in the future as it
has been in the past, that “ the battle guns which one generation has turned
upon the lines of the army of Christ shall be melted into church bells to
summon the next to shrines of worship.” By all means let us endeavour,
even in our theology, to keep pace with the progress of the age, but
there is need for caution lest our progress should involve a severance
from the vital root of all real progress. The world cries “forward,”
but our Lord cries “abide, —abide in Me.” Yet in this “abide” of His
will be found the source and secret of all real progress, not in spiritual
matters only, but in every department of life, to a far greater extent than
the wise ones of this world mignt be willing to admit. He is the Light of
the world, and in Him the divine and human have met and become one.
This, the union of the divine and human, which may be said to be the
goal and aspiration of all religions, is pre-eminently the fundamental idea
of the Christian. Around the theanthropic person of our Lord, all our
beliefs may be said to cluster, as their natural centre, and from this they
derive their significance and their value. This is the central point around
which the conflicts have raged, and at which the matter must be determined.
That the Lord whom she adores is one in whom the perfect personal union
of the divine and human appeared historically, this is the very citadel of
the faith, which must be held at all hazards. No progress is legitimate
that would involve a surrender of this, and no development can have
enduring vitality that proceeds not from this as its living root, —“ the Church’s
one foundation is Jesus Christ her Lord,”—and the progress that rests not
on this can only end in retrogression and go out in darkness. Our great
aim in this federation movement is to combine our forces, to improve
our organisation and our methods, and to render our Church as
effective an instrument as possible for accomplishing the important work
given her to do. If the need of this be felt in old countries and in Churches
of long-standing, how much more must it be felt in a new land like this,
and in the case of Churches which are, as yet, but in a formative condition ?
We claim to be one of the Churches of the Reformation, but it would surely
be a great mistake to suppose that the Reformers so reformed everything
as to leave nothing for us to do, that no further reformation is called for,
and no improvement possible. There is verily room and need for a
continuous work of reformation. It has been said that “ the measure of
the Church’s vitality is her power to readjust her conceptions and to
readapt her institutions to their environment.” This much, it seems to us,
we may safely say, that the Church which is most faithful in searching out
her own defects and her own shortcomings, with a view to amendment,
most diligent in studying the adaptations called for by new and ever-
varying conditions, and most energetic in pushing forward every enterprise
and every appliance that seems most calculated to promote the great end
in view, is the Church which gives best promise both of progress and of
permanence. And while our aim is to perfect the organisation of our
Church, and to increase her power for the fulfilment of her higher mission,
there is one department of the Church’s work on which in an especial
manner our attention and efforts should be concentrated. I refer to the


public worship of God in His house, A revision of our “ directory for
public worship ” has already been prepared, but somehow, at our last
Assembly, the matter was not taken up ; yet no more important subject could
engage our attention. Matters of organisation, of order, and of discipline
are, no doubt, important; but, in our view, this is the most important of
all. To this everything else may be said to point forward. To this every-
thing else leads up. It is the culminating point—the carbon point, so to
speak, from which the electric influence flashes forth. It is by this
especially that the Church touches and takes hold of the multitude. By
this chiefly she is judged of by those who are without. To make, not
merely our sermons eloquent, but our whole worship in the sanctuary elo-
quent—this, if we may so speak, should be the one thing which, above all,
we should seek to aim at and secure. By this, more than aught besides,
we should win favour for ourselves among the people. ‘‘ If, coming to
worship with us, men should be conscious of a sacred presence, if the
atmosphere of our assemblies should be laden with the prayers of saints, if
our fellowship should be fragrant with the spirit of love, if heavenly peace
should brighten every face and holy joy enliven every hymn, if our houses
of worship should thus become the house of God and the gate of heaven,
and every heart should say it is good to be here, then would even our ene-
mies be constrained to say that ‘ God was of a truth in the midst of us.’ ”
And in this endeavour to make our worship as effective and as elevating as
possible, it is, we believe, not only legitimate, but even incumbent, to avail
ourselves of all the aid which the teachings of science and the resources of
art can supply ; and, unhampered by any mere blind idolatry of the past,
to lay under contribution every suitable and serviceable element of power
under a wise subordination for the purpose of enriching our worship
and of making it more effectual for the end in view—the rendering
to God the glory due unto His name, and the purification and elevation
of the soul through communion with those within the veil. In con-
nection with this matter of our worship, reference may be made to the
liturgical question, which may be said to be an open question in the
Presbyterian Church, a question to be determined by considerations of
expediency rather than of legitimacy. In speaking of the revision of the
Prayer Book in the General Synod of the Episcopal Church, recently held
in Sydney, the President said, “ It has for ages been an old familiar discus-
sion, which balances the advantages of a set form of prayer, and of freedom
of extemporary variation along indicated lines of worship. We are coming
now to ask whether we cannot unite them both; not, indeed, to ask this
for the first time, or in this country only, but to ask it now with a new
emphasis, forced upon us by the critical necessities of a stirring age in a
growing Christian community.” It is not a little interesting and instructive
that those who have a liturgy, and are bound to it, appear to be yearning
after the liberty and enlargement of free prayer, while those who have no
prescribed liturgy seem, some of them at least, to be looking in the oppo-
site direction, and to be manifesting a craving for the advantages which
liturgical forms are supposed to yield. The fair inference from this would
appear to be that the advantages do not lie exclusively on the one side or
the other, but that in some via media the path of wisdom may probably be
found. To us Presbyterians liberty is sweet, and on no consideration
would we be likely ever to surrender it. It is, however, a question that
calls for our earnest study—to what extent and in what way acknowledged
defects might be remedied and desiderated advantages secured, without


entangling ourselves again with any yoke of bondage. That our Church
has a high mission assigned to her, and a great work given her to do in this
southern land, we cannot doubt. The genius of Presbyterianism is well suited
to a new land like this, with its young, fresh life, and its love of liberty and of
popular rights ; and a wide and effectual door is here set open for our efforts.
It is well to have fixed in our minds lofty conceptions of our exalted mission,
and to remember that our work has a broader aim than simply to build
up our own particular section of the Church of Christ. To do what in us
lies to carry the light of Divine truth to the furthest limits of the land, and
diffuse among all classes that righteousness which alone exalteth a people,
to contribute our due share to secure for Christianity that position of com-
manding influence which it is entitled to occupy, and impregnate the whole
collective life of the nation with the Spirit of Him whom God has given
to be Head overall things to the Church —this, and nothing less, is the great
purpose of our mission, and this, and nothing less, should be the grand
object to which our efforts are directed. And, in order to the due fulfil-
ment of our mission, it is of the utmost consequence that we should not
overlook the important bearing which theological education, and an
adequate training for the work of the ministry must necessarily have upon
the success of our labours. It must be obvious how much the future
position and influence of our Church in these rising colonies will depend
on the energy with which we prosecute this department of the Church’s
work. The late Dr. Badham well said, that no greater calamity could befall
a land than to be saddled with an illiterate and incompetent ministry. If
Christianity is to hold its own in these lands ; if it is to prove, as it ought
to be, the dominant influence in our national life, then must its professed
teachers be men capable of fighting its battles, and of vindicating its claims
to the allegiance of the highest in the land. By opening the avenues to
theological training for our young men, and by founding theological
chairs and filling them with the most competent men we can get, and by
perfecting our appliances for imparting the best possible equipment for the
work of the ministry, by creating thus a lively interest, yea, an ardent
enthusiasm in this all-important business, we should be taking the surest
plan to extend the influence of our Church, and to place her in a position
for successfully accomplishing the work given her to do. We know how much
in Scotland, in Ireland, in America, and elsewhere the life and energy of the
Church have been influenced by the spirit that has been engendered in well-
equipped theological colleges. We are now on the eve of the-centenary of
the parent colony of our group, and preparations are already being made
to celebrate in a befitting manner this interesting epoch. While the State
seems duly alive to the importance of this event, it would ill become the
Church to be behind in her endeavours to turn the occasion to account for
her own high ends—to evoke and express the gratitude of our people for
the progress that has been made, for the great things God hath done for us,
and for the bright prospects He has opened before us. It will be a fitting
time to direct attention to the true sources of national prosperity, and the
true ground of enduring national greatness; and to turn the hearts of the
people, in fervent aspiration and humble hope, toward Him who has the
destinies of nations as well as the hearts of men in His hands. It will be for the
Assembly to consider in what way our Church, by herself, and in conjunction'
with others, may best give a Christian tone and an enduring religious
effect to the celebrations and proceedings of the centennial season.
(Applause.) The year 1888 may naturally enough carry our thoughts back
15


to 1688, a memorable era in the history of Scottish Presbyterianism, when
the Church, emerging from the fiery ordeal in which she had been well nigh
consumed, rose up, and stood forth instinct with new life and power,
drawn from her living Head, to claim Scotland for herself as her rightful
heritage. The centenary celebration may thus become invested with a
double interest to us Presbyterians, and awaken in us a more than ordinary
gratitude, by reason of the bi-centenary memories it is fitted to call up.
It would be hard to say what may be the condition of these colonies when
the time for celebrating another centenary has come. Confident
prophesyings have been indulged in as to the greatness of the future that
lies before us; and, looking at the elements of growth which our land
contains, and at the progress already made, we may warrantably look for a
measure of development, great, probably, beyond all our thinking. We
know not what may be their religious condition a century hence, what the
state of ecclesiastical parties, what risings and fallings among the Churches,
whether the present divisions will be maintained in like proportions,
or whether there will then be but the one Protestant Church, or, shall
we say, but the one all-embracing Christian Church? But, whatever
may be the ecclesiastical changes which a century will produce, of this
we may be sure, that the religious future of these lands will, to no incon-
siderable extent, depend on the industry and energy we now employ in
casting in the seeds of the kingdom into this virgin soil, and on the
thoroughness with which we in our day perform the all-important work given
us to do. Our hope and prayer is that, in these sunny lands, on which the
Southern Cross looks down, the Cross of Christ, which has exerted such
transforming power and won such victories in the past, may exert a still
mightier influence, and achieve still more glorious triumphs in the years to
come; and that the great river of God, which kisses into life and beauty
whatever it touches, may permeate with its healing waters, not only this
great island-continent, in the length and in the breadth thereof, but reach
forth beyond our shores, in ever-increasing volume, to the isles around,
shedding its benign and vivifying influence abundantly over them also,
Till ’midst the streams of distant lands
The islands sound His praise,
And all combined, with one accord,
Jehovah’s glories raise.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
16
