

It* i*£
|| ■ |s
I I
a jS
Gig
■f| PREACHED AT THE
H s
§ OPENING OF THE SYNOD £
S lE.
48; OF THE Jp
(T# JN^
as uj,
J DIOCESE OF NEWCASTLE,
<Tf%
Jg.
S AT THE Sff
-p
*»Jcg #IS)
S JUNE Bth, 1896, §
its* ’ ’ J££
a s
BY THE
gj¥,
Gtg &P
a REV. W. H. H. YARRINGTON, £
it, 7 J(iS
S M.A., LL.B. {?
i j i
gs %
Printed and Published in the "Maitland Mercury" *»|
4§ %
*A ty Request. &
4 i __ fc
f. / $
Tucker, Thompson, & Eipper, Printers,
11* “ Mercury” Office, Maitland.
5 1896. S’
I I
#!?#SJifs3Plf#EJfE3'#E3l»l3 , «irj(fsl^’E?fEJr#


• -
t
l;- r’. :V. - ; - r ; ... ■.•• . ; ,r ■ .. ... •
:■ ■ ■ y " v / ~
• 1 .,' .. . ■
'


PREACHED AT THE
OPENING OP THE SYNOD
OF THE
DIOCESE OE NEWCASTLE,
AT THE
JUNE Bth, 1896,
THE
REV. W. H. 11. ¥ ARRINGTON,
M.A., LL.B.
Printed and Published in the “Maitland Mercury”
Request.
Tucker, Thompson, & Eipper, Printers,
“ Mercury” Office, Maitland.
1890.


.... - ;


THE SEEMON.
And He said unto them—Go ye into all the
world and preach the Gospel to the
whole creation. He that believeth and
is baptised shall be saved, but he that
believeth not shall be condemned (R.Y.)
—St. Mark, xvi, 15.
It has been, I think wisely, decided that
whenever the Synod of the Diocese of Newcastle
meets in your hospitable city for the purpose of
transacting business in connection chiefly with
the temporal government and well-being of the
Church in this Diocese, advantage should
bo taken of our meeting together to hold such a
service as that in which we are now engaged in
order that some spiritual blessing may be
imparted to all of us : just as St. Paul
looked forward to his going to visit the
Christians at Pome that his presence might
impart some spiritual gift, to the end, as he
writes—“ That you may be established, that I
(Paul) may be comforted together with you by
the mutual faith both of you and me.”
It is with this idea and hope that we are
assembled in this Cathedral Church to-night
that we may unite our hearts and voices in
common prayer and praise at the throne of the
heavenly grace, and that we may together join
in the worship of God, who is a Spirit, in spirit
and in truth, and adore Him in the beauty of
holiness. Praying therefore that His Holy
Spirit may be with us to assist us in our worship
and to guide us into all truth we ask your
attention to the text which we have just read,
hoping that it may conduce to our spiritual
edification.


This command of onr Saviour —“ Go ye into
all the world and preach the Gospel to every
creature”—was given during the forty days
which intervened between His glorious resur-
rection from the dead and His equally glorious
ascension into Heaven. In all probability our
Blessed Lord repeated the command on different
occasions during that interval, and by many it is
thought that the words of our text were spoken
at the same time and are almost identical with
the utterance in the 28th chapter of Matthew’s
Gospel: “ And Jesus came to them and spake
unto them, saying—All authority hath been
given unto Me in heaven and on earth : Go ye
therefore and make disciples of all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I com-
manded you : and 10, I am with you alway (or
all the days), even unto the end of the world.”
This great commission was given by the Captain
of our Salvation on that occasion when the
eleven Apostles, together with the five hundred
brethren, assembled according to direction on the
mountain in Galilee to meet the risen Saviour.
The charge contained in the text is therefore a
word of command—a marching order—given to
the whole Church throughout all time.
In looking more closely at the text let us
notice in the first instance the infinite con-
descension and goodness of God in making use
of man as the instrument for the spread of His
Kingdom upon earth. God does not commission
angelic beings to preach the Gospel, but His
divine plan has ever been to make use of men as
the chosen vessels to bear His name unto the
Gentiles. When Saul of Tarsus on his way to
Damascus asked of the Lord, “ What wilt thou
have me to do ?” the Lord directed him to
Ananias, the man of God, who would tell him
what he must do. Not only is it the chief duty


of those who are ordained and duly and rightly
commissioned by the Holy Spirit and by the
Church to herald the Gospel and preach the
glad tidings of salvation, but all Christians
alike, without exception whether laity or clergy
—who have come to a knowledge of the truth as
it is in Christ Jesus are bound to do what they
can to spread the knowledge of the Gospel,
either by actual teaching, as in the Sunday
School, or in any other department of Church
work—such as singing in the choir, tract
distributing, or visiting the sick—by personally
witnessing for Christ, confessing Him, and
speaking to others on the subject of religion—
by the example of a good and consistent
Christian life, and by practically helping all
religious movements with their earnest sympathy
and liberal support. Thus God has given us,
one and all, the privilege of being co-workers
with Him, and we have this gift in earthen
vessels that the glory may be all His and not
our own.
Again notice that it is not merely to men
individually that this grace and office is given,
but it is to the Church in its collective, cor-
porate capacity that the work of heralding the
Gospel is entrusted, and this doctrine we may
gather from the fact that the command was
given to all, at one time and in one place
assembled, and the general order was “ Go ye”
into all the world.
I am sure that we all of us feel a mighty power
in the sympathy of numbers. And as when we see
an army marching forth to battle and the assem-
bled multitudes experience the force of an over-
powering social and moral influence and
enthusiasm which stirs the heart to its very
depths, so is it with such a gathering as the
present. Surely no right-thinking person can
fail to be impressed with the spectacle of a
number of spiritual men united in one body for


one common purpose, viz,, that of obeying the
command of their Master to go forth and preach
the unsearchable riches which are in Christ
Jesus, to all the world. We then in our
corporate capacity are part of the Church of
Christ—the Holy Catholic Church : —not
clergy alone, but clergy and laity together, for
we are all the body of Christ of which He is the
Head;—while we the clergy are the specially
commissioned ambassadors for Christ—appointed
to preach the Gospel and to be your ministers
for Christ’s sake, beseeching all men to be
reconciled to God through Jesus Christ our
Lord,
And what is the Church ? It is the company
of all faithful people—of all who belong to
Christ and are sincere believers in Him by
whatsoever name we may be distinguished.
But we who are members of the Church of
England not only claim to be a true branch of
the Catholic, Apostolic Church of Christ, but
we are thankful to belong to the historic
Church of our Fatherland, the Church which
existed in England—the ancient British Church
—which was established in the purest time
of the Christian faith and the Church’s history,
before the introduction of false doctrines and
erroneous ceremonies had sullied the pure stream
of the Church’s life ; and one of the chief
glories of our Church has been that there have
ever been those in her midst who consistently
endeavoured to resist the encroachment of error
both in faith, morals and discipline, and she has
consequently never been wholly under the
dominion of any foreign ecclesiastical power,
while at the time of the Reformation she utterly
threw off the errors of the Papacy and the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome which had
been unconstitutionally assumed, and against
which there had always been found in our Church
true men who constantly protested. And may


our beloved Church by ever preaching the truth
protest against those errors of doctrine and
practice which have ever been an hindrance to
the progress of vital Christianity and have been
the cause of positive infidelity in those nations
where they have prevailed. Thus the ancient
British Church still lives in the Church of
England and is represented in this assembly and
congregation to-night. Our Church of England
is historically the Church of the English people ;
and, so far as there is value in the strength
of a hereditary corporate life, so far are we
strengthened in our endeavour to carry out the
command of our Saviour, “ Go ye into all the
world and preach the Gospel to every creature. ’
Let us in the next place consider what it is to
preach the Gospel. What is the ‘ Gospel’ ?
The Gospel ! —what a beautiful word it is !
God’s Spell—an Anglo-Saxon word in which
‘ God’ signifies Christ and ‘ Spell’ means a
story, and so Gospel in its true sense is the
‘ Story of Christ.’
“ Tell me the old, old story
Of Jesus and His love.”
So it is God’s evangel, the good tidings to the
world in the story of Christ.
And how many systems of error and falsehood
have been baptized with the name of ‘ the
Gospel’!
The Gospel then as we understand it, and as
we feel it our duty to preach it, is simply the
fact of man’s individual and collective fall from
that perfect ideal of righteousness which God
had when He created the human race. It is the
story of man’s yielding to sin which is so sadly
evidenced, without exception, by every individual
who lives to know the difference between right
and wrong, good and evil. Not only in the
outward act but in the deep recesses of the heart
there is a departure from holiness and from God.
There lurks a depravity and in some cases a


savage wickedness, showing itself in overt acts
of heartless cruelty or shameful sensuality.
History is the blood-stained scroll which records
the appalling results of sin, and in our own time
the massacre of thousands of our Armenian
fellow Christians by the ruthless Turk is only a
continuation of the atrocious cruelty of un-
christianized and sinful man. From this awful
state of national and individual sinfulness and
crime it is God’s design to save our fallen race !
And how does God seek to accomplish this ?
Briefly we may say that the great plan of
Salvation, as it has been called, consists in two
great facts. The first of these is that great
objective fact which took place in time and
which is summarized in the statement that
“ the Word became flesh and dwelt among us,
and we beheld His glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth” : it is contained in the golden text “ God
so loved the world that He gave His only
begotten Son that whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish but have everlasting life.”
The grand central truth of revelation is the
Incarnation of the Son of God ; uniting Himself
with humanity in order to lift our race from the
depths of sin to the heights of heaven ! In the
thought of the Incarnation are included all the
events of the life history of the Son of Man :
His spotless character —the stainless purity of
the white Christ ; the unsullied brightness of
His fair fame, untouched with any taint of sin ;
the only purest Knight, ‘ sans peur et sans
reproche who could throw down the challenge
to all the world, both friend and foe, “ Which
of you convinceth Me of sin” !
The blameless and perfect character of Jesus
of Nazareth together with the unrivalled
splendour of His moral and religious teaching—
sublime in its divine originality and authority,
and perfectly supreme in its spiritual and


searching power, will remain for ever the
palladium,—the strongest citadel of the Christian
faith, against which all the forces of scepticism,
infidelity and heresy are vainly hurled, and from
which they are beaten back as are the billows of
the Pacific from the rock-bound shores of our
Australian Island Home. And this perfect and
sublime Christ declared Himself to be One with
the Father and constantly claimed equality with
God-—and so if not Divine He is not perfect
and good, ‘ Si non Deus non bonus.’
Our Gospel is then in one word—Christ !
the anointed Saviour of the world. It is not
only the teaching of Christ which we seek to
re-echo in our preaching and reproduce in our
lives, but it is Jesus Himself who is His own
religion—who lived out our redemption. Christ
is not, as Socrates or Plato, merely a
teacher of a system of philosophy or
ethics, but He personally is the essence,
centre, source, and object of His own
religion. The Incarnation was continued in the
perfect life, carried on through the resurrection
from the dead and issues in the glorious ascen-
sion into Heaven. Thus Christ is Himself at
the right Hand of God the object of faith and
the vital source of the Christian life.
In these days we hear much of the Higher
Criticism, and people are needlessly alarmed
about its results. The Higher Criticism, within
certain limitations, may be conducive to good
and may somewhat modify our interpretation
and views on some parts, especially of the Old
Testament Scriptures, but no criticism however
searching can ever‘be prejudicial to the Truth as
it is in Christ Jesus, and most certainly the
Higher Criticism will never touch the character
and teaching of Christ except to enhance its
glory and confirm us in our most holy faith in
Him. This then is the first great truth of the
Gospel—the perfect life and the perfect offering


of that life to God in the atoning sacrifice upon
the cross. The death of Christ was His
voluntary submission to the agony of suffering
because of sin. “ Him who knew no sin was
made to be sin on our behalf that we might
become the righteousness of God in Him”
(2 Cor., v. 21, R.V.)
And this leads us naturally to the second
great truth of the Gospel, namely, the sub-
jective reception of the great historic fact of
Christ and His work as seen in the personal
effect of Christianity in the inner life and
consequent outward conversation of the true
believer. The perfect life and teaching of
Christ would all have been practically in vain
were it not that the Christian receives these
into his heart by faith. It is here that the
work of the Holy Spirit is evidenced. He
convinces of sin, then leads to Christ. It is
idle to speak of the sermon on the Mount as if
it were the whole of Christianity, a merely
external lesson on morality, sublime and unsur-
passed as such though it most assuredly is.
But what power have we to live up to that
lofty and perfect standard ? Certainly none in
ourselves. Here then is seen the great central
truth of applied Christianity ; —that truth which
is a key to the solution of the mystery of the
Atonement —the central truth around which
revolve all other redemptive truths, namely, the
uniox of the soul with christ ; — “ the mystical
union which is betwixt Christ and His Church,
as our Prayer Book calls it : “We are one with
Christ and Christ with us we dwell in Christ
and Christ in us.” “I am the vine, ye are the
branches; as the branch cannot bear fruit
except it abide in the vine no more can ye except
ye abide in Me.” “Abide in Me, and lin
you” : “ Christ in us, the hope of glory’ : “ I am
crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not
I but Christ liveth in Me and the life which I


now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God who loved me and gave Himself for
me,” It is this constant union with Christ and
feeding upon Him as the Bread of Life of which
the Holy Communion is the effectual sign and
symbol—the concrete representation of the
abstract spiritual truth of our living on Christ.
Thus our religion is not a mere outward system
of ethics : it is an inward life derived from the
indwelling of Christ in our heart. “ Thou shalt
call His name Jesus for HE shall save (autos
sosei) His people from their sins.” The
indwelling Christ will overcome the evil
propensity in our hearts and enable us to live up
to the perfect standard—the higher spiritual
life, which is hid with Christ in God. It is this
union with Christ which makes His righteous-
ness ours. It is not any potential or aspirational
righteousness on our part—not even the germ of
goodness in ourselves which makes us acceptable
and not even our faith which is itself a gift, but
which when received at once produces imparted
as distinct from imputed righteousness. For
after all it is not simply the faith itself but it is
Christ working through the faith who makes us
holy ; —faith is the channel merely through
which the living water flows to the soul. Christ
alone and His merits —not our good—is our
justification. (‘We are accounted righteous
before God, only for the merii of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ by Faith and not for our
own works or deservings. 1 Art. xi.) Jehovah
Tzidkenu—the Lord our Righteousness ! This
union of the soul of the Christian with Christ is
effected by the Holy Spirit, and its natural
sequence is the eternal life in Heaven—“forthis
is life eternal that they might know Thee the
only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast
sent.” It is this blessed hope of everlasting life
which can alone strengthen us in our straggle
with sin, sorrow and suffering, and can throw a
ray of light across the shadow of the grave.


Such in briefest words are the chief truths which
we are bidden to go forth and herald to the
world—
“ Salvation, oh. Salvation,
The joyful news proclaim.
Till each remotest nation
Has learned Messiah’s name.”
No marvel that St. Paul exclaims “ I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ for it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believeth.” Yes, to
everyone that believeth—but to those who do
not believe it is the savour of death unto death.
That which saves a man is the splendid vision
of the radiant and loving Christ in all His
matchless beauty and loveliness yearning for
the sinner’s heart and love even unto the
death upon the cross in order to save
him from his degradation, his selfishness,
and the corruption of the flesh. This glorious
vision of the beautiful Christ to the soul inspires
with a new life—with noble and generous
thoughts of Christ-like self denial for the good
of others. It is this vision of Christ which
touches all things with glory and makes life
beautiful and worth living;—which enobles
man with the purest and loftiest thoughts
and inspires him with hopes and aims which
prove the very foretaste of his joy in Heaven,
How noble is the confession of that great and
good Bishop, one of the most learned men of
our time, who, all too soon for us, passed away
to his reward (Bishop Lightfoot), when he says
of tft. John’s Gospel, “ I believe from my heart
that the truth which this Gospel more especially
enshrines—the truth that Jesus is the very
Word incarnate, the manifestation of the Father
to mankind—is the one lesson which duly
apprehended will do more than all our feeble
efforts to purify and elevate human Jlife here, by
imparting to it hope and light and strength—
the one study which can alone fitly prepare us


for a joyful immortality hereafter ?”—(Biblical
Essays, p. 43.)
The next thought which is suggested by the
text is the duty of the Church in respect of
Foreign Missions. The absolutely last recorded
words of Christ were “uttermost part of the
earth so without any cavil about what have
been called the “ white heathen at our door,” it
is absolutely the duty of the Christian Church
to carry the Gospel into heathen lands. We all
know the enthusiasm which is produced when-
ever a missionary visits our parishes and tells
us of the actual work going on in the mission
field. Why should that enthusiasm die out ?
It is the duty of those who have received the
light to hand it on, and there is no surer
evidence of true conversion and real spiritual
life in a Christian or a Christian Church than
the earnest love for souls, which compels us to
take an interest in missionary work, “ Tell it
out among the heathen that the Lord is King.”
Ko Church ever takes an interest in Christian
missions without receiving a reflex blessing.
And now we are led to the next thought, and
that is the duty of the Church towards the
world around us, and the times in which we
live. Let us for a moment contemplate society
as it is at the present day— and what do we see ?
After nineteen centuries of Christianity what is
the state of the world ? Must we not with
sorrow and deep humiliation confess that it is a
lost world : lost in sin, sensuality, selfishness,
worldliness, a greedy desire to become rich at
the expense of honesty and principle, an
insatiable thirst for'gold, an unsatisfied longing
for pleasure, excitement and gaiety, and an
utter want of serious thought : the world is a
vast vanity fair ; thoroughly secularized,
thoroughly materialized. Look for a moment
too at the hand-to-hand struggle between
capital and labour, as evidenced by those strikes,


which are the source of so much wide-spread
misery and commercial disaster. What is the
Church’s duty here ? Not surely to step in
itself as a Church to arbitrate ; for what was
the example of our Lord when appealed to as
an arbitrator ? His answer was “ Man, who
made me a judge or divider over you ?” In-
dividually, indeed, it is our duty to do what we
can to reconcile differences —and all honour to
those who endeavour so to do—“ Blessed are
the peacemakers but as a Church it is rather
our mission to preach the Gospel—the message
of peace upon earth and goodwill toward men :
the Gospel of the universal brotherhood of man-
kind under the Fatherhood of God : the prin-
ciple of bearing one another's burdens, and so
fulfilling the law of Christ: of looking upon the
things of others as well as upon our own ;
mutually forbearing, and giving all men their
honest dues. Thus the principle of reciprocal con-
cession and justice in the distribution of wealth
would prevent those appeals, to force which are
so disastrous to the community at large as well
as calamitous to the individual.
Once more, look at the appalling amount of
social depravity and immorality which shows
itself in the enormous increase in the number of
divorces which are daily recorded. Has the
Church no mission in preaching the Gospel of
purity, social and individual ? Impurity in the
sense of sensuality is one of the greatest curses
of modern society. It shows itself in impure
representations on the boards of the theatre ;
in licentious literature so greedily read by
thousands of our young people ; in impure pic-
tures, shamelessly exhibited for the purpose of
attracting attention. Such unchaste publications
are intended to captivate and defile the
minds of the young, and many of the modern
novels are written “ for a purpose,” viz., to
undermine the holy institution of marriage,


which is the foundation of our family and social
life. Would that there could be some censor
morum —a censorship appointed to prevent the
exhibition of that which is unseemly and in-
decent, and to check the printing and publish-
ing in our newspapers of advertisements and
articles which are unfit for the eyes of the
innocent and undefiled. All honour to those
journals which keep their columns free from
everything which would offend ; would there
were more of such. The Gospel which the
Church has to preach to the world is “ Blessed
are the pure in heart for they shall see God.”
Again, witness the fearful results of
drunkenness, in the ruin and desolation of so
many thousands of homes, which would other-
wise have been the scenes of happiness, peace
and plenty. Is it not a crying evil that in this
young country, numbering only a million and a
quarter of people, over four millions of money
are spent every year upon intoxicating drink
alone. Without saying anything intemperate
on this subject, is it not enough to make one
tremble at the thought of the misery, the ruin,
the crime, the sickness, and the poverty caused
by the intemperate use of alcoholic drink.
Have not our judges told us that nine-tenths of
the crime which fills our fifty-eight gaols in this
colony are traceable to drunkenness alone ?
Unquestionably the greatest curse of our country
is drink ; and has not the Church a mission in
preaching the principles of temperance and
sobriety, and in warning the young against the
danger and temptation of drink, and by moral
suasion and instruction educating them in the
practice of temperance, soberness, and chastity.
Again, one of the monster evils of the present
day which is filling the world with degradation
and misery is the curse of the gambling spirit.
Let the Church denounce this evil in every shape
and form, by proclaiming the principle that no


man, even with his own consent, has a right to
part with the money or property of which God
has permitted him to be the owner and steward,
by any rash speculation or risk, and certainly
ought not recklessly to throw it away without
any adequate consideration in return ; while on
the other hand it is unjust that a man should,
without any desert on his part, be enriched at
the expense, misery, disappointment and suffer-
ing of perhaps thousands of others. The
gambling spirit is demoralizing in every way,
and has been the means of bringing many who
have lost their stake by betting on the horse race
to embezzle money in order to pay their debts of
honour, or rather of disgrace, while hundreds
have lost their character for life, and have been
sent to gaol with ruined reputations and blasted
hopes and lives while their innocent relatives
have had to bear with bitter tears the acutest
agony and suffering in consequence of the sin of
others. Ought not the Church to speak out
with trumpet tones to denounce and warn against
this evil ? And let the Church avoid en-
couraging this spirit by herself abstaining from
anything like lotteries or gambling in any subtle
form for the raising of money for Church pur-
poses, and let her abstain from every questionable
mode of obtaining money, but rather encourage
the true principle of straight-giving for the
cause of God.
And this leads naturally to the important
thought with which I must conclude. How is
the Church to combat the mighty hosts of sin
and misery which fill the world with the
pauperism, vice, and squalor in which we see
thousands of unhappy children growing up ;
how are we to win our young men, on whose
virtuous and religious character the future of
this young nation so much depends ; lioav are we
to bring our young people, whose absence from
the House of God we so much deplore—often
making God’s holy day a day of amusement and


pleasure, and too often a day of sinful frivolity ;
how are we to bring the vast masses of our
population which are living in godless neglect of
the means of grace, and in open rebellion against
God and religion, and breaking the Sabbath ;
desecrating it by reading the Sunday Times or
going on fishing excursions and picnics, wholly
neglecting the Lord’s Day; how are we to win
all these back to God from their indilferentism
and irreligion ? The Church must do it by
preaching the Everlasting Gospel of God s love
to sinners, not only by more earnest pleading
and prayer, but by a fuller self-dedication, con-
secration, and a more holy life in each individual
Christian. The Church sails too much with the
world. If the Church is to he not merely an
ornament but a real, potent force for good, and
really successful in overcoming the world and
destroying the powers of evil, it must be by more
real personal consecration to Christ. We all
want more faith—more prayer—more demon-
stration of the power of the Spirit. We must
each one of us, “ follow the Lord fully !” We
must come out and be separate, and not touch
the unclean thing ; we must avoid even the
appearance of evil. People must not say “ Oh,
you can do what you like and yet be a Christian ;
you can join in the sinful frivolities and sensual
gaities of the world and yet be a communicant
people must not say that of us. Immediately a
professing Christian betrays a worldly spirit and
a want of holiness, so soon does he at once lose
all influence for good. The power of example
for good or evil is immense. If we, as profess-
ing Christians, attend assemblies where the
thought of Christ and religion and prayer is
“an intrusion,” our want of consistency is a
stumbling block to others, and we are doing
positive harm to the cause of Christ. To those
of you who are already Church workers and who
are doing what you can for the cause of Jesus,
and who feel in your hearts the constraining


love of Christ, I would say may God bless you
and help you in your noble work, and may you
be careful to give up everything which your
conscience tells you is inconsistent with your
profession, for “ without Christ ye can do
nothing,” but with Him ye can do all things.
Do nothing and go to no place or amusement
where Christ cannot go with you or approve of
your action. Let the whole of this congregation
to-night say in their hearts “ The world for
Christ,” And may we help on the mighty
work by our own devotion to Him and His
service. Then the mighty Church of Christ
will be “ fair as the moon, bright as the sun,
terrible as an army with banners.” Let us, my
brethren, have some of the old spirit of self-
denial which animated the earliest Christians,
and in the presence of the dark hosts of evil let
us not be pessimistic or despairing, but like our
Master' always hopeful that at length the bright
day may dawn when “ all men shall know the
Lord and when the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of His glory even as the waters
cover the sea !”








