

THE SYDNEY COUNTY COUNCIL
Service and
Installation Rules
FOR SUPPLY OF
ELECTRICITY
Revised and Issued Ist February, 1949,
and subsequently amended.
Reprinted June, 1965


THE SYDNEY COUNTY COUNCIL
Service and
Installation Rules
FOR SUPPLY OF
ELECTRICITY
Revised and Issued Ist February, 1949,
and subsequently amended.
Reprinted June, 1965




These Service Rules, published by The Sydney County
Council, are based on the model Electrical Service
Rules issued by the Electricity Supply Association
of Australia.
Where words which are used in this
publication have been defined in the
S.A.A. Wiring Rules, the words
are used in accordance
with those definitions.




CONTENTS
Page
Advice to Prospective Consumers and Contractors 7
Terms and Conditions of Supply 10
Rates for Supply of Electricity and Hiring of Apparatus 10
System of Supply, Balancing and Installation of Services—
System of Supply 11
Balancing of Load and Limitations on the Loading of appar-
atus 12
Method of Determining Type of Service to be Installed 18
Supply to Large Installations 21
Service Lines and Consumers’ Lines 22
Service Fuses 26
Mounting of Service and Metering Equipment 27
Installation of Temporary Mains or Services 34
Installation of Special or Additional Services 34
Metering —
Provision and Installation of Meters and Time Switches 35
Location of Meters 39
Accessibility of Meters 40
Protection of Meters 42
Grouping of Meters and Provision of Links 42
Meter Connections 45
Multiple Connections at Meters Prohibited 46
Additional or Subsidiary Meters 46
Fixing of Conductors in Service Fuses, Meters, etc 46
Consumers’ Installations—
Compliance with S.A.A. Wiring Rules 47
Notice of Completion 47
Inspection and Testing of New Installations 47
Inspection and Testing of Additions or Alterations 48
Calculation of Maximum Demand 49
Protection and Installation of Consumer’s Mains 50
Labelling of Switchboards and Entrance Doors 50
Medium Voltage Supply Direct From Substation Busbars—
Rupturing Capacity of Main Overload Protective Devices 50


Page
Temporary Wiring—S.A.A. Wiring Rule 361 51
Starting Current of A.C. Motors 51
Power Factor of Apparatus 53
Control of Capacitors 54
Electrode Type Water Heaters —S.A.A. Wiring Rule 433 (a) 54
A.C./D.C. Rectifiers 54
Earthing of Installations 55
Conductors not to be Earthed 57
High Voltage Installations 57
Interference with Supply to Other Consumers 59
Index 60


THE SYDNEY COUNTY COUNCIL
All communications should be addressed to the
General Manager, The Sydney County Council,
P.O. Box 4009, G.P.0., Sydney.
ADVICE TO PROSPECTIVE CONSUMERS
AND CONTRACTORS
Area of Supply. The areas in which electricity is supplied
by the Council directly to the public are:
Ashfield Ku-ring-gai Randwick
Auburn Lane Cove Ryde
Bankstown Leichhardt Strathfield
Botany Marrickville Sutherland
Burwood Mosman
Canterbury North Sydney Waverley
Concord Parramatta (old Willoughby
Drummoyne Ermington and Woollahra
Hornsby Rydalmere only)
Hunter’s Hill
• (The City of Sydney includes the following localities; Alexandria, Darling-
ton, Erskineville, Newtown, Paddington, Redfern, The Glebe and
Waterloo.)
Additional Information. Any additional information on
the matters covered by these Rules, or on the supply of
electricity generally, may be obtained by addressing an inquiry
to the General Manager, or by applying personally at the
Inquiry Counter at the Council’s offices.
Note: Special requirements in respect of earthing of installa-
tions are applicable in the Shires of Hornsby and Sutherland
and the Municipality of Bankstown. (See Rule 36, Page 55.)
Applications. Immediately it is known that supply is
required, an application form should be obtained, carefully
examined as to the conditions under which supply may be given,
filled in with all the required information, signed by the person
who will be responsible for the payment of accounts, and lodged
with the Council. However, where supply is required for new
domestic premises, including multiple dwellings to be supplied
from street mains, the appropriate form may be made out and
signed by an electrical contractor.
Warning Against Premature Expenditure. No expense
should be incurred by the prospective consumer until an applica-
tion form has been lodged with the Council, and advice has been


received that supply will be given and on the conditions under
which it will be given. (For installations supplied from the
Direct Current mains see also Rule 1 (a) (iii).)
When contemplating the connection of electrical welding
apparatus, X-Ray equipment, motors with rapidly fluctuating
loads and the like, particular care should be taken to ascertain
the conditions which must be observed to prevent their inter-
fering with the supply to other consumers.
Necessity for Employing a Licensed Person. The Electricity
Development Act, 1945-1948, requires that all electrical installa-
tion work be carried out by, or under the constant personal
supervision of, a suitably licensed person.
Special and Additional Services. In general, the Council
will instal only one service for any building or for any group of
buildings occupied by one consumer. For the conditions under
which special or additional services may be installed, see Rule
No. 9, page 34.
Point of Attachment for Mains. Before any work on installa-
tion is commenced, the point of attachment for the service line
and the position of the service equipment should be ascertained
from the Council.
Completion Notice. An installation will not be inspected
until a notice of completion has been lodged by the Electrical
Contractor. (See Rules Nos. 20 and 21, page 47.)
The installation must not be connected until it has been
inspected.
Re-Inspection Fee. If the initial inspection or test shows
that the installation is incomplete or does not comply with the
S.A.A. Wiring Rules or these Service Rules, a fee as determined
by the Council, will be charged for every subsequent inspection
necessary. (See Rule 21.)
Damage to Council’s Equipment. Certain penalties are pre-
scribed for damaging or interfering with the Council’s equip-
ment. As a consumer may be held liable for damage to the
Council’s equipment installed on his premises, such equipment
should be covered by insurance.


Compliance with S.A.A. Wiring Rules. An electric installa-
tion will not be approved for connection to the Council’s mains
if it is found not to comply with the Wiring Rules published by
the Standards Association of Australia, which are known as the
S.A.A. Wiring Rules, but as the Council’s inspection is made
after the installation has been completed, and is therefore limited
by the fact that much of the installation is included within the
structure and is inaccessible to the Council’s officers, neither the
inspection nor the subsequent connection of the installation can
be relied upon as in any way giving an assurance of quality in
the installation, or of its compliance with any Specification or
with the Wiring Rules.


TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SUPPLY.
The general conditions under which electricity will be
supplied, for example, those relating to security deposits, pay-
ment of accounts, guarantees of revenue, etc., are published
separately in a document known as the “General Conditions of
Supply.”
A copy of this document may be obtained upon request,
either in writing addressed to the General Manager, or by per-
sonal application at the Inquiry Counter at the Council’s offices.
RATES FOR SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY AND
HIRING OF APPARATUS
Electricity is supplied by the Council at different rates for
different purposes. Details of the rates and of the conditions
attached to them are published in a separate document known
as the “Schedule of Rates.” That document also includes the
rates and terms for the sale and hire of apparatus and motors.
A copy of the document may be obtained upon request,
either in writing addressed to the General Manager, or by per-
sonal application at the Inquiry Counter at the Council’s offices.


SERVICE RULES
SYSTEM OF SUPPLY, INSTALLATION OF SERVICES
AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS REGARDING
LOADING AND BALANCING OF APPARATUS.
(1) SYSTEM OF SUPPLY.
(a) Particulars of Supply.
(i) Alternating Current, 3 Phase, 50 Cycles, 415/240
Volts.
The electricity supplied by the Council is generally
in the form of alternating current from a 415/240
volt, 3-phase, 4-wire, 50-cycle system.
(ii) Alternating Current, 3 Phase, 50 Cycles, High
Voltage.
Where large amounts of power are required, the
Council may supply electricity at high voltage. In
some cases, special rates are available when supply
is taken at high voltage.
(See Rule 38, page 57, for the conditions covering
the installation of high voltage equipment.)
(iii) Direct Current, 3 Wire, 480/240 Volt.
In portions of the central part of the City of Sydney,
electricity is supplied in the form of direct current
from a 3-wire 480/240 volt system. The area in
which the supply may be in the form of direct cur-
rent extends from Dawes Point to Circular Quay on
the north, to Central Railway Station on the south,
and from Darling Harbour on the west, to Mac-
quarie Street, College Street and Wentworth Avenue,
on the east.
The direct current supply system is being replaced
by an alternating current system. This change will
require some years to complete.


In order to obviate inconvenience and expense when
the supply system is changed, installations for direct
current must be arranged in such a manner that they
may be converted for use with alternating current
with as little alteration as possible. The appliances
to be connected should be suitable for use with either
direct or alternating current. Before any other types
of appliances are connected to an installation sup-
plied with direct current, the Council should be
consulted. Unless this is done, the Council will not
accept any responsibility for the conversion of the
appliance to make it suitable for use on alternating
current. If there is any doubt as to the form of
supply in particular premises, inquiry should be
made at the offices of the Council.
(b) Earthing of Supply System.
The neutral conductors of both the D.C. and A.C.
supply systems are earthed at the source of supply. It
follows that the method of control required for installa-
tions connected to the Council’s system is that set out in
S.A.A. Wiring Rule 221. S.A.A. Wiring Rule 222 does
not apply to installations connected to the Council’s
system.
For information regarding the earthing of consumers’
installations, see Rules Nos. 36 and 37, pages 55 and 57
of these Service Rules.
(2) BALANCING OF LOAD AND LIMITATIONS OF THE
LOADING OF APPARATUS.
(a) Balancing of Installations. In an installation or separ-
ately metered portion of an installation supplied from
more than one phase, the loading shall be balanced as
nearly as practicable over the phases, and, in any case,
shall be so balanced that the current in any active con-
ductor shall not normally exceed that in any other
active conductor by more than 25 amperes.
(b) Balancing of Apparatus—General. In an appliance,
sign, or decorative lighting installation supplied from
more than one phase, the loading shall be balanced
as nearly as practicable over the phases, and, in any case,


the current in any phase shall not exceed the current
in any other phase by more than 15 amperes.
Although this Rule sets out the maximum rating ol
equipment which may be connected between one phase
and neutral, no objection will be raised to balancing that
equipment over two phases and neutral where, for other
reasons, two phases of the supply are provided. In the
same way, no objection will be raised to balancing any
piece of equipment over three phases where, for other
reasons, a 3-phase supply is provided. However, two
phases of the supply will not be provided merely for the
connection of apparatus which, in accordance with these
Rules, may be connected to a single phase, nor will three
phases be provided merely for the connection of appara-
tus which, in accordance with these Rules, may be con-
nected to a single phase or two phases of the supply.
NOTE: In these installations connected to the Council’s
Direct Current system, equipment which, in accordance with
this Rule, would otherwise be connected to a 2-wire, 240-volt
A.C. supply, may be connected to a 2-wire 240-volt D.C.
supply. In all other cases, the equipment must be connected
to a 3-wire, 480-volt D.C. supply.
(c) Balancing of Individual Appliances, Signs, and Decora-
tive Lighting Installations. An individual appliance
(other than one of those dealt with specifically in the
following Sub-Clauses of this Rule), a decorative light-
ing installation, or a sign which is designed to operate
at 240 volts:
(i) May, if its rating does not exceed 20 amperes, be
connected between one phase and neutral.
(ii) May, if its rating does not exceed 40 amperes, be
balanced over two phases and neutral.
(iii) Must, if its rating exceeds 40 amperes, be balanced
over three phases and neutral.
(d) Large Single Phase Apparatus (other than Welding
Apparatus), such as X-Ray Apparatus, Single Phase
Furnaces, etc. The Council reserves the right to refuse
to connect, in certain areas, single phase apparatus
having rapidly fluctuating loads.


Single phase apparatus in which, under any conditions,
the maximum current which may be drawn from the
mains exceeds 15 amperes at 240 volts (3.6 kVA) must
not be connected between active and neutral conductors.
Such apparatus must be connected across two phases
(415 volts).
Single phase 415-volt apparatus in which the maximum
loading, under any conditions, exceed 18 kVA, will be
connected only by special arrangement whereby the
consumer may be required to bear the cost of providing
special mains and a separate service.
In laying down the conditions which will apply to any
particular case of single phase 415-volt apparatus with
a loading exceeding 18 kVA, the Council will take into
account the maximum instantaneous rating of the
machine and the characteristics of the load, that is to
say, whether it is a steady load or a fluctuating load.
(e) Welding Apparatus. The Council reserves the right to
refuse to supply electricity from the general supply
mains to any electric welder, and no expense should be
incurred by any consumer or prospective consumer until
application has been lodged with the Council and advice
has been received that the supply will be given and
upon what terms and conditions it will be given.
The Council reserves the right to discontinue the supply
of electricity to any electric welder, the use of which, in
the opinion of the General Manager, may cause or is
causing interference with the supply to any other con-
sumer. (See Rule 39 on page 59 of these Service Rules.)
Welding apparatus in which, under any conditions, the
maximum current which may be drawn from the mains
exceeds 15 amperes at 240 volts must not be connected
between active and neutral conductors.
Single-phase arc welders (for connection to two active
conductors, 415 volts) exceeding a rating of 10 kVA,
and three-phase arc welders exceeding a rating of
30 kVA, in accordance with A.S.S. C 97, and other
types of welding apparatus in which, under any condi-
tions, the maximum momentary current which may be


drawn exceeds 40 amperes per phase (i.e., line current)
may be connected only by special arrangement with the
Council, whereby the consumer may be required to
bear the cost of providing special mains and a separate
service.
In certain circumstances, where premises are supplied
directly from a substation or from a large service, the
General Manager may agree to welding apparatus, draw-
ing currents in excess of those laid down above, being
connected to the general service. Consideration will
be given to such special conditions only upon receipt
of a written request to the General Manager.
Three-phase to single-phase conversion transformers will
not be connected, but single-phase loads may be bal-
anced on a three-phase transformer. The Council, how-
ever, will not make a three-phase supply available
merely to facilitate the use of such a transformer.
(f) Cooking Ranges. A cooking range having a total
rating not exceeding 41.7 amperes (10 kW) may-be con-
nected to one phase and neutral.
Ranges having a rating exceeding 41.7 amperes must be
arranged for connection to three phases and neutral.
(g) Commercial Cooking Equipment. Commercial cooking
equipment used for the cooking and serving of food
and processes incidental thereto, having a rating not
exceeding 25 amperes, may be connected to one phase
and neutral; that having a rating not exceeding 50
amperes may be connected to two phases and neutral.
(h) Water Heaters (Instantaneous Type). The rating of
water heaters of the instantaneous type must not exceed
the following—
(i) For single phase 240 volts A.C., or for 240 volts
D.C., 15 amperes;


(ii) For three phase 415 volts A.C., or for 480 volts D.C.,
18 amperes per phase or per outer.
The current in one phase must not exceed by more
than 10 per cent, the current in any other phase.
(See Rule No. 33, page 54, regarding Electrode Type
Water Heaters.)
(i) Playing Areas. Installations for illuminating a tennis
court, bowling green, or other playing area, the total
ratings of which do not exceed 20 amperes, may be con-
nected to one phase and neutral. Where the total rating
exceeds 20 amperes, but does not exceed 40 amperes,
the installation may be balanced between two phases
and neutral. Where the total rating exceeds 40 amperes,
it must be balanced between three phases and neutral.
Where 2 or 3 phases of the supply are provided, the
requirements of this Clause must apply to each indivi-
dual court, green, or separately switched portion of the
installation.
(j) Motors.
(i) Single Phase Motors. Single phase 240 volts A.C.
motors have full load ratings of not more than
15 amperes may be connected to one active conduc-
tor and neutral. Motors of this type having larger
ratings may not be connected.
(See Rule 30, page 51, for the permissible starting
currents of single phase alternating current motors.)
(ii) Three Phase Motors. No upper limit is placed on
the size of three phase alternating current motors.
The Council, however, will not, without charge,
provide a three phase supply merely to supply small
3-phase motors rated at 1 h.p. or less unless, in any
separately metered portion of an installation, the
total rating of motors is 3 h.p. or more.
(iii) Direct Current Motors. Direct current motors rated
at less than 3 h.p. may be connected to one outer
and the neutral conductor (240 volt circuit). Direct
current motors rated at 3 h.p. or more must be
arranged for connection to two outer conductors
(480 volts).


2-wire
3-wire
4-wirc
Service
Service
Service
Clause
EQUIPMENT
(Amps.)
(Amps.)
(Amperes)
Max.
Max.
Min.
Max.
(c)
General — Individual Pieces
of Equipment
20
40
—
—
(o
Range — Total Rating
41.7
—
over 41.7
(g)
Commercial Cooking Equipment
25
50
—
—
00
Wash Boiler
20
40
—
—
(c)
Individual Off - Peak Water
Heaters
15
30
—
—
0)
Groups of Off - Peak Water
Heaters in one Installation
15
30
—
—
(i)
Tennis Court and other Light-
ing Installations
20
40
—
—
OD
Instantaneous Water Heaters
15
3 phase
18 Amps,
per phase
(d), (e)
X-Ray, Spot Welders, and
similar equipment (Max.
3 phase
inst. input)
15
—
1 phase
415 V.
40
415 V.
40 Amps,
per phase
(e)
Arc Welders (Max. inst. in-
30 kVA
put) (Thermal kVA)
15
50
—
lOkVA
0)
Single Phase Motors
15
—
•—
Ci)
Three Phase Motors
—
—
Above
—
—
1 h.p.
(k) Wash Boilers. Wash boilers rated at not more than 4.8
kilowatts (20 amperes) may be arranged for connection
to one active and neutral conductor (240 volt circuit).
(l) Off-Peak Storage Water Heaters. Individual off-peak
storage water heaters may be connected as set out under
clause (c) of this Rule.
If the aggregate rating of all off-peak storage water
heaters connected to a service does not exceed 15
amperes, all heaters must be connected between one
phase and neutral. If the aggregate rating of all such
heaters connected to a service exceeds 15 amperes, but
does not exceed 30 amperes, they must be balanced
over two phases and neutral.
If the aggregate rating of all such heaters connected to
a service exceeds 30 amperes, they must be balanced
over three phases and neutral.
SEE SPECIAL NOTE TO RULES 2 AND 3 AT END OF
RULE 3.
NOTE: The requirements set out in this Rule are sum-
marised in the table below—
Rating of Equipment which may be connected to
A.C. Services.


(3) METHOD OF DETERMINING TYPE OF SERVICE
AND NUMBER OF METERS TO BE INSTALLED.
(a) General.
The number of phases to which an installation is to be
connected and through which it will be metered shall
be determined in the manner set out in Clauses (b)
and (c) below.
Where a portion of an installation for a particular
customer or for supply at any particular rate is to be
separately metered, it shall be arranged for connection
to the same number of phases or outers as it would if
supplied as a separate installation. However, in the
case of large buildings of three floors or more, where
many separately metered portions of the installation are
supplied from one service and the loading of the
installation as a whole can be balanced in accordance
with Rule 2 (a), and none of the equipment will, in
accordance with Rule 2, require two or three phase
supply, then the Council MAY agree to allow all the
separately metered portions of the installation on each
floor to be connected to one and the same active
conductor.
(b) Determination by Rating of Individual Apparatus.
Notwithstanding the total loading of the installation,
the number of phases to which an installation is to be
connected may depend on the rating of individual
apparatus. Accordingly, if the requirements of Rule 2
make it necessary to instal a 4-wire three phase A.C.
service, the type of service is thus determined and it is
not necessary to consider the requirements of Clause (c)
of this Rule. If, however, the particular apparatus
to be used may, in accordance with Rule 2, be con-
nected to a 3-wire, two phase or 2-wire, single phase
service it will be necessary to calculate the nominal
loading of the service as set out in Clause (c) of this


Rule and the type of service will then be determined
by whichever method requires the greater number of
phases.
(c) Determination by Aggregate Rating of all Equipment—
Calculation of the Nominal Loading of the Service.
The total nominal loading of the service, calculated in
terms of amperes at phase to neutral voltage, shall be
taken to be the sum of the quantities determined under
the following items (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) or the
quantity determined under (vi), whichever is the greater.
(i) Cooking Apparatus in—One-half of the rating,
private residences.
(Single or multiple
premises.)
(ii) Permanently connected —Total rating,
lamps and apparatus
other than cooking ap-
paratus in private resi-
dences and apparatus
restricted to supply at
Stored Heat Rate “off-
peak” hours.
(iii) General purpose out—l 2 amperes per single
lets in premises and por- residence or sub-division,
tions of premises used
solely as private resi-
dences, including those
sub - divided with
separate metering.
(iv) General purpose out —2 amperes for each
lets. In premises used general purpose outlet
for residential purposes supplied through the
other than those men- service, with a minimum
tioned in (iii) above, of 8 amperes.
and in all premises or
portions of premises
used for other than
residential purposes.


(v) Plug sockets other than—7s% of full rating of
general purpose outlets, all outlets.
(vi) Water heaters and ther—When the aggregate rat-
mal storage space heat- ing of the “off-peak”
ers supplied only at apparatus is less than the
Stored Heat (“off-peak” sum of items (i), (ii), (iii),
hours) through the ser- (iv) and (v) above: NIL.
vice. When the aggregate rat-
ing of the “off-peak”
apparatus is greater than
the sum of items (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv) and (v) above:
TOTAL RATING. Un-
der these conditions, the
loading determined for
item (vi) becomes the
nominal loading of the
service and items (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)
may be ignored. (This
must not be taken to
exempt off-peak appara-
tus from Rule 2 (b) or
2 (c).)
When the nominal loading of the service has been calculated
in the foregoing manner, the following schedule will be
applied to determine the type of service to be installed;
Calculated Nominal Loading Type of Service
Not exceeding 55 amperes —2 wire (one active con-
ductor and neutral)
Exceeding 55 amperes but —3 wire (two active con-
not exceeding 110 amperes ductors and neutral)
Exceeding 110 amperes —4 wire (three active con-
ductors and neutral)


SPECIAL NOTE TO RULES 2 AND 3.
The requirements set out in Rules 2 and 3 are those
applicable generally. However, in certain outlying areas, par-
ticularly in the Shires of Sutherland and Hornsby and the
Municipality of Bankstown and in certain other circumstances,
it may be necessary to vary these requirements. Applicants for
supply to large apparatus or for supply in outlying portions
of these areas or where several premises are to be supplied
through a common line should, therefore, make enquiries before
proceeding with any work.
(4) SUPPLY TO LARGE INSTALLATIONS.
In order to supply large installations, it is sometimes neces-
sary for the Council to instal a transformer sub-station
within the consumer’s building or premises. This need
generally arises if the maximum demand of the installation
is likely to exceed 350 amperes per phase (252 kVA).
If it is necessary for the Council to increase the capacity of
its works in order to supply electricity to any building or
premises, and if, in the opinion of the General Manager,
such supply can best be given by installing transformers,
switchgear, and other apparatus on the premises which are
to be supplied, the Council shall not be required or com-
pelled to provide a supply of electricity to that building or
those premises unless and until the consumer has provided,
free of cost to the Council, a suitable space and an approved
enclosure within the building or premises to accommodate
the mains, transformers, switchgear, cut-outs, and other
equipment which, in the opinion of the General Manager,
are necessary to provide the supply to the building or
premises. The Council shall have the right to use all such
equipment installed by it in accordance with the foregoing
paragraph, not only for the supply of electricity to the
building or premises in which it is installed, but also for the
supply to other buildings and premises, subject to the
requirements of the consumer first being met, and the


Council shall also have the right to instal additional equip
ment for the supply to other premises; provided that if the
consumer is put to expense by reason of the Council’s exer-
cising its right to supply electricity to other buildings or
premises from that equipment, or if the consumer is required
to allot a greater space in the building or premises than
would be necessary to provide means to supply that building
or those premises alone, compensation shall be paid by the
Council to the consumer in an amount and in a manner
agreed upon between the parties, or, failing an agreement,
the amount of compensation and the manner of its payment
shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the Arbi-
tration Act, 1902.
(See Rule 5, below, regarding Installation of Service Lines
and Underground Service Cables.)
(5) SERVICE LINES AND CONSUMERS’ LINES
(a) General. The consumer shall bear the cost of installing
and maintaining excess service mains (see Clause (c)
below), the consumer’s line, and the supports on private
land for the service line and consumer’s line.
(b) Point of Attachment. The Council will determine the
route of the service line and consumer’s line and the
position of the point of attachment. A charge may be
made to the consumer if the installation of the service
line to a point of attachment other than that selected by
the Council involves the Council in greater cost. The
Council will not accept responsibility for damage to the
premises resulting from normal tension in the service
line or causes beyond the Council’s control.
(c) Installation of Service Line. Except where the consumer
takes his supply of electricity directly from a substation
within or adjoining his premises, the service line will
be supplied, fixed, and maintained by the Council. A
charge will be made for the work if:
(i) The service line extends more than 25 feet from the
point where it crosses the street alignment in the
case of an underground service, or the length of one


span (not exceeding 75 feet from the point where it
crosses the street alignment) in the case of an over-
head service. Provided that in the case of single
domestic premises the first span shall be installed
without charge;
or
(ii) The service line or consumer’s line is terminated at
some point other than that selected by the Council
and which involves the Council in greater cost in
installing the service;
or
(iii) The service is “temporary” or “additional.” (See
Rules 8 and 9, pages 32 and 34.)
In each of these three cases, the consumer will be
required to pay the additional cost of the service line
and consumer’s line.
In the case of a consumer who takes a supply of elec-
tricity directly from a substation within or adjoining his
premises, the high voltage service line or service cable
will be installed under the conditions set out in (i) and
(ii) above, but the consumer will be required to bear the
whole cost of, or to provide, the low or medium voltage
mains on his land from the substation enclosure to the
consumer’s switchroom, irrespective of the position of
the substation in relation to the street alignment, except
that, where the switchroom immediately adjoins the
substation and the mains are in the form of busbars, a
charge will not be made where the length of these mains
external to the substation does not exceed 3 feet.
(See Clause (e) on page 24 regarding Installation of
Consumers’ Lines.)
(d) Facilities for the Connection of Service Lines and Con-
sumers’ Lines. Where the Council’s service line is to be
connected to a consumer’s line, the consumer shall pro-
vide adequate loops of cable to enable the Council’s
officers to make the connection.
When the Council’s service line is to be connected to
the consumer’s mains at the point of attachment, the
consumer shall provide adequate tails in the consumer’s
mains to enable the Council’s officers to make the con-
nection to the service lines, except that, if the consumer’s
mains commence in an overhead line connector box or
similar device, in which a separate entry port is provided


for each conductor of the service line, and if that con-
nector box is mounted within two feet of every con-
ductor of the service line, the Council will, except in the
cases covered by the paragraph after next, leave tails of
the service wires of sufficient lengths to go directly into
that connector box and will make those connections.
If the overhead line connector box does not provide a
separate entry port for each incoming cable, or if that
box is mounted more than 24 inches from any of the
conductors of the service line, the consumer will be
required to provide rubber insulated weatherproof
cable installed in accordance with the S.A.A. Wiring
Rules and of sufficient length to permit the connections
from the service wires to the connector box to be made
by the Council’s officer, with adequate drip loops.
NOTE that Rule 25, page 50, requires that the overhead
line connector box shall be within three feet (3 ft.) of
each conductor of the service line or consumer’s line.
Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, where new
connections are to be made to existing service lines, on
which adequate tails do not exist, where a service rated
in excess of 200 amperes is to be installed, or where two
sets of consumer’s mains are to be connected to one set
of service wires, the consumer must provide cable for
the necessary connections to the existing conductors.
If the overhead line connector box does not provide a
separate entry port for each cable, the cable shall be
rubber insulated and weatherproofed, but if the over-
head line connector box provides a separate entry port
for each cable, the cable may be rubber insulated
weatherproofed cable, or it may be aerial cable comply-
ing with Part II of the S.A.A. Wiring Rules.
(See Rule 6, page 26, regarding “Facilities for the Con-
nections of Service Fuses.”)
(e) Installation of Consumer’s Line—S.A.A. Wiring Rule
331 (h). The consumer’s line installed by or on behalf
of the consumer must comply with S.A.A. Wiring Rule


Free
Length
of Post
2 x 7/0.044
3 x 7/0.044
4 x 7/0.044
4 x 7/0.064
4 x 7/0.083
4 x 19/0.052
4 x .19/0.064
4 x 19/0.083
4 ft.
5 ft.
6 ft,
9 ft.
12 ft.
15 ft.
18 ft.
21 ft.
3" X 3"
3" x 3"
3" x 3"
4" x 4"
4" x 4" ♦
5" x 5"
6" x 6"
tPole (10"x6")
3" x 3"
3" x 3"
3" x 3" *
4" x 4"
5" x 5"
5" x 5" •
6" x 6"
tPole (10"x6">
3" x 3"
3" x 3" *
4" x 4"
4" x 4" •
5" x 5"
6" x 6"
6" x 6" *
tPole (10"x6">
4" X 4"
4" x 4"
4" x 4" •
5" x 5"
6" x 6"
6" x 6" *
tPole (10"x6")
tPole dl"x6Vi")
4" x 4"
4" x 4" *
5" x 5" ♦
6" x 6"
6" x 6" *
tPole (10"x6")
tPole (I0"x6")
tPole (12"x7")
Posts marked * are to be stayed by means of G.I. Stay Wire,
t Pole (10" x 6") means Pole with butt diameter of 10" and head diameter of 6".
331, and, in addition, must comply with the following
requirements:
(i) Minimum Size of Conductor: The conductors must
not be smaller in cross-sectional area than the con-
ductors of the Council’s service line to which they
are connected; in addition, the drop in voltage along
any conductor of the consumer’s line must not exceed
three volts when it is carrying the maximum current
it will be required to carry.
(ii) Spacing of Conductors: The spacing between aerial
conductors must not be less than 15 inches.
(iii) Supporting Posts and Cross-Arms: Supporting posts
and cross-arms for consumer’s lines must comply
with Clause (f) below if of wood. If of other
material, must be of equivalent strength to that
specified for wood, and shall be specially approved.
(f) Posts and Cross-Arms for Service Lines and Consumer’s
Lines.
(i) Terminal or Angle Posts. Posts erected on con-
sumer’s premises for the termination of or at angles
in a service line or consumer’s line shall be of hard-
wood and shall have cross-sectional dimensions not
less than those shown in the following table for the
appropriate conditions:
(ii) Intermediate Posts. Intermediate posts in a straight
section of the line must be of hardwood and must


Number of Wires
Supported
Free Length of
Post
Cross-Sectional
Dimensions of Post
2 or 3
Up to 6 ft.
3" x 3"
2 or 3
6 ft. to 12 ft.
4" x 4"
2, 3. or 4
Up to 12 ft.
4" x 4"
2, 3, or 4
12 ft. to 18 ft.
5" x 5"
2, 3, or 4
Over 18 ft.
t Pole (10" x 6")
t Pole (10" x 6") ir
cans Pole with butt diameter of 10
' and head diameter of 6".
have cross-sectional dimensions not less than the
following:
(iii) Cross-Arms. Cross-arms to support service lines or
consumer’s lines shall be of hardwood of not less
than Sin. x Sin. section, and shall be securely fastened
to the supporting post by galvanised bolts and
checked or braced.
(iv) Hardware. Hardware used on service posts must be
hot-dipped galvanised.
(6) SERVICE FUSES.
Service fuses will be supplied and fixed by the Council and
shall remain its property. The Council reserves the right
to replace the fuses with links or a circuit breaker or to
dispense with them altogether.
The service fuses will be fixed in a position determined by
the Council. Suitable space must be made available by the
consumer for the fixing of the service fuses in an accessible
position such that work may be readily and safely carried
out on the fuses. The consumer shall ensure that these
conditions are maintained and if they are not so maintained,
the consumer will be required to restore the original con-
ditions or to pay all costs involved in moving the service
fuses to a suitable position.
The consumer must provide adequate loops in the con-
sumer’s mains for the connection of the service fuses, but
such connection shall be made only by officers of the Council.
The Council will instal the service fuses on a floor above or
below the street level only in exceptional circumstances, and,
in the case of a public building or sub-divided premises, such
as flats, where only one service is installed for the whole of
the building, provision must be made for a suitable position
at or near a public entrance where the fuses will be
accessible to the Council’s officers at all times.
The position in which the service fuses are installed is not
necessarily the position in which the meters will be installed.
(See also Rules 10 to 18 (inclusive) for the connection and
location of meters.)


(7) MOUNTING OF SERVICE AND METERING
EQUIPMENT.
(A) GENERAL PRACTICE.
(i) Information on General Practice.
For all installations, other than Single Domestic
installations covered by Section (B) of this rule, the
Council will provide and erect a wooden service and
meter board (or boards) mounted on battens which
have been supplied and securely fastened by the cus-
tomer in the appropriate position. Unless specifically
agreed to by the General Manager, service and meter-
ing equipment will not be mounted upon the customer’s
switchboard or on boards of switchboard panel type
material provided by the customer.
The requirements applicable to this “general” type
of service and meter arrangement are set out in sub-
clause (ii) of this rule.
The Council’s service fuses, neutral link, meters
and other associated metering equipment will be
mounted on the front of the service and meter board
or boards. The size, number and arrangement of boards
will depend upon the number of phases of supply to be
provided, the current rating of the service fuses and
the number of meters, current transformers, time
switches and other equipment necessary to meter and
regulate the supply at the various rates to be applied.
Where meters are mounted on two or more boards
above one another, fillet strip boards (generally 4in.
x 26in.w.) will be fitted between the meter boards to
provide access to the wiring behind the boards.
In each case, when application is made for supply,
an officer of the Council will visit the premises to
determine the metering arrangements and the customer
will be notified of the position selected for the location
of the meters, details of the battens to be fixed, size
of service and meter board (or boards) which will be
installed and the overall space, including clearance
space, which must be provided for the equipment.
The customer will also be supplied with this informa-
tion when, as a result of an application for additional
supply or because of alterations to be made, it will be
necessary to increase the number of phases of supply,
increase the rating of service fuses and/or alter the
metering arrangement.
The service and meter boards to be used for the
general arrangement will be determined by the Council
and will consist of one or more of the following sized
27
Rule 7.


boards, viz. 18in. x 2lin.w., 18in. x 12in.w., 12in. x
21in.w., 12in. x 26in.w., 20in. x 26in.w. and 4in. x
26in.w.
Service Fuses rated at 70 Amperes: For installations
having maximum demands up to approximately 50
amperes per phase the Council’s service fuses will
generally be 70 ampere H.R.C. fuses. However, in the
case of small factory and commercial installations,
inquiries should be made at the Council’s offices before
assuming that 70 ampere service fuses will be installed
as, where expansion is possible, 100 ampere service
fuses may be installed.
The 70 ampere service fuses will be enclosed in
metal boxes which are mounted on the front of the
service board. In some cases, a board other than the
one to which the meters are fixed may be used for
this purpose.
Service Fuses rated at 100 Amperes: 100 ampere
H.R.C. service fuses will be used where these are
justified by the service loading or where the customer
has installed consumer’s mains larger than 19/0.044in.
These fuses will be enclosed in metal boxes and
mounted on the front of a board, other than that to
which the meters are fixed. This “service” board will
be spaced 2in. from the wall where no current trans-
formers are used and the cables from the service fuses
will pass across the face of the “service” board to the
space behind the “meter” board which is generally
mounted below it.
Note: In special cases current transformers may be used
to meter services which have 100 ampere service
fuses. (See Rule 10 (c) (i) and (ii)-)
Service Fuses rated at Over 100 Amperes: Service
fuses which have ratings in excess of 100 amperes will
be housed in a distribution service fuse cabinet (100/
400 amperes) containing up to three service fuses and
a neutral link in the one enclosure. At times, where
expansion is possible, 100 ampere service fuses may be
installed in a distribution service fuse cabinet. The
service fuse cabinet will be mounted on an 18in. x
21in.w. “service” board.
Links: If links are to be installed they must comply
with the Council’s Document on Metering Links and
they must be of a type approved for the location. Links
may be installed between the “service” board and the
“meter” or “current transformer” board, and, if not
arranged for front entry of cable, shall be mounted


a suitable distance from the wall to allow access to the
wiring. (See also Rule 14.) Where it is proposed to
instal links on large services, further details should be
obtained from the Council.
(ii) Requirements Applicable to the “General” Type of
Service and Meter Arrangement.
Space Required for Service and Metering Equipment.
In all cases, including recesses or boxes, space for
the following shall be provided (in the case of recesses
or boxes, the measurements refer to the inside dimen-
sions of the lining of the recess or box): —
(a) For 18in. x 12in.w. boards, if the board is mounted
at the left side of the customer’s switchboard: lin. at
top of board, Sin. at bottom of board, Sin. at left side,
and no space at right side; a total space of 22in. x
15in.w.
For 18in. x 12in.w. boards, if the board is not mounted
at the left side of the customer’s switchboard: lin. at
top of board, Sin. at bottom of board, Sin. at left side
and 2in. at right side; a total space of 22in. x 17in.w.
For boards larger than 18in. x 12in.w., Sin. all round
the Council’s board.
(b) Additional space for the consumer’s equipment, if
any.
(c) In large installations, adequate space for fillet
strips. (See Clause (A).)
(d) 50A. Services. A depth of 9in. from the face of
the battens upon which the board is to be mounted to
the inside of the door of the box or to any other
obstruction.
Larger Services. The Council should be consulted as
to the depth required.
Provision for Battens for Mounting Boards.
The consumer must supply and erect battens upon
which the Council’s “service” boards and “meter”
boards will be mounted. The conditions for the pro-
vision of battens are:
(a) Type of Battens and Method of Fixing.
Two battens shall be erected vertically, one on each
side of the board. The battens shall be so spaced that
their outer edges will be in line with the outer edges
of the board. The battens shall be of suitable softwood,
D.A.R., and shall be securely fixed to the wall by
means of wood or metal thread screws or by bolts.
The fixing of battens to brick or concrete walls by


means of screws driven into wooden wall plugs will
not be acceptable. The fastening method used shall be
of a type which permits easy removal of the battens.
(b) Size of Battens.
2in. x lin. battens mounted flat are required for 18in.
x 12in.w. boards.
Sin. x 2in. battens mounted on edge are required for
18in. x 21in.w. boards for distribution service fuse
cabinets.
2in. x 2in. battens are required for all other boards.
(c) Length of Battens.
In all cases the customer will be advised of the lengths
of battens to be provided and fixed by him.
Note: If conduits, pipes or other obstructions pass be-
hind or are located behind “service” and “meter”
boards, the depth of battens to be provided must
be increased by an amount at least equal to the
distance the conduit pipe or obstruction project
from the wall.
(B) DOMESTIC SERVICE AND METER BOARD.
(i) Information on Domestic Service and Meter Board
Practice.
For single domestic installations requiring one, two
or three phase supply and having demands of up to 55
amperes and where the consumer’s mains conductors
are not in excess of 7/0.064in., a domestic standard
board 12in. by 18in. wide will be used, mounted on
an approved metal surround having overall measure-
ments of 12|in. by 18|in.; the metal surround being
supplied and fixed by the customer.
The domestic standard board will carry the Council’s
meters, service fuses and other equipment and it will
be attached to the metal surround by means of a special
hinging device. The standard board, hinging devices
and other accessories will be supplied and fixed to the
surround by the Council. The Council will also supply
and fix the service fuses, neutral link, meters, time
switches, etc.
Metal surrounds for mounting the Council’s Domes-
tic Standard Service Board must comply with the
Council’s design and must have been approved by the
Council. Approved surrounds will bear an adhesive
identifying label on which will be printed the Council’s
crest and the words “Approved Service Board Mount-
ing”.


Enclosure of Domestic Standard Service and Meter
Board—Approved “Compact” Weatherproof Box.
The Domestic Standard Service and Meter Board
may be enclosed in an approved “Compact” weather-
proof box. “Compact” weatherproof boxes have been
specially designed to incorporate the approved metal
surrounds for the Domestic Standard Service and Meter
Board. The metal surround will be mounted on rails
which are incorporated in the “Compact” box near the
top, and so arranged that it may be slid forward to
bring the back of the service board in line with the
front edges of the box when officers of the Council are
working on the equipment.
“Compact” weatherproof boxes will be 23|in. high
by 19|in. wide by 11 in. deep when closed. (There may
be slight variations to these dimensions according to
the manufacture.) A space of approximately 9in. high
by 19in. wide will be provided in the lower portion
of the box to accommodate the customer’s switch-
board. The lid of the box will be at least deep
and hinged at the top in a manner that permits easy
removal of the lid from a position in front of the box.
An approved “Compact” weatherproof box may be
mounted on, or recessed into exterior walls and no
additional clearance space will be necessary except that
a clearance of at least 3in. between the side of the box
and any return wall will be necessary if the box is
mounted in a corner.
As for surrounds, “Compact” weatherproof boxes
must be approved by the Council and must bear an
adhesive label similar to that described above the
approved metal surrounds.
Space Required for Domestic Standard Service Board
in Confined Spaces or Other Enclosures.
The surrounds for Domestic Standard Service Boards
installed in confined spaces or enclosures, other than
“Compact” weatherproof boxes, must be so located as
to provide clearances for meter adjustments, sealing,
etc., between the surround and any obstructions or
enclosures as laid down in sub-clause (ii) below.
(ii) Requirements Applicable to the Domestic Service and
Meter Board.
Provision and Fixing of Approved Surround.
The approved metal surround shall be supplied and
fixed by the customer in the position selected by the
Council’s officer. The Council will accept, for the


attachment of Domestic Standard Service and Meter
Boards, only surrounds which have been approved by
the Council and which bear an identifying label.
The metal surround shall be fixed directly to the
wall without the use of battens. If the surround is
mounted on a wooden wall or the back of a wooden
box, the wood on which the surround is mounted must
be covered with incombustible material such as sheet
metal or fibro-cement. The surrounds must be securely
fixed to the wall by four wood or metal thread screws
having large heads (or suitable washers) or by bolts.
Such screws or bolts shall be not less than the equivalent
of 10-gauge wood screws. The method used for fasten-
ing the surround shall be such as to permit easy removal
of the surround. The fixing of surrounds to brick or
concrete walls by means of screws driven into wooden
wall plugs will not be acceptable.
No cables may be brought into or through the space
behind the meter board except those cables which are
connected to equipment on the meter board.
Space Around Approved Metal Surround.
A clearance of 1 inch shall be provided between the
top of the surround and any obstruction which does
not project beyond the face of the service board.
A clearance of Sin. must be provided between the
top and between each side of the surround and any
switchgear, fuse or other obstruction which projects
beyond the face of the service board.
Approved “Compact” Weatherproof Box Approved
Label Necessary.
The Council will accept as a “Compact” weather-
proof box for the enclosure of domestic service and
metering equipment, only those boxes which have been
approved by the Council and which bear an adhesive
identifying label similar to that described above for
approved metal surrounds.
Mounting of “Compact” Weatherproof Boxes.
“Compact” weatherproof boxes must be securely
fastened by at least (4) four wood screws, metal thread
screws or bolts having large heads or using suitable
washers. Such screws or bolts shall be not less than the
equivalent of 10-gauge wood screws. Fixing points may
be in the sides or in the back of the box and they shall
be well spaced to provide adequate support. Any other
method of securing a box will be acceptable only if it
has first been submitted to and approved by the General
Manager.


The fixing of “Compact” weatherproof boxes to
brick or concrete walls by means of screws driven into
wooden wall plugs will not be acceptable.
Enclosure of Domestic Standard Service and Meter
Board in Other Than a “Compact” Weatherproof Box.
If the Domestic Standard Service Board is installed
in a box or enclosure other than a “Compact” weather-
proof box, a clearance of not less than Sin. at the top
and Sin. at each side shall be provided between the
surround and the side of the box or any other obstruc-
tion which projects beyond the face of the board.
If a box or other enclosure is fitted with a lid which
is hinged at the top, such lid shall open at least 90°
and a suitable support or device secured to the box
shall be provided to secure it open in this position.
This support must not obstruct access to the hinged
service and meter board or its connections when the
lid of the box is open. If the lid of a box or enclosure
is of metal it shall be readily removable from the box.
(C) ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS TO AN
EXISTING INSTALLATION.
If alterations or additions, which will entail the
provision of additional metering equipment, are made
to an existing installation, sufficient space for the
additional service and meter board must be provided
immediately adjacent to the existing service and meter
board. Where necessary for the mounting of the board,
battens must be supplied and erected by the customer
in accordance with the foregoing conditions, provided
however that, if the existing service and meter board
is replaced by a board of different size, any battens
necessary for the erecting of this board will be supplied
and fixed by the Council.
Similarly, where an alteration or addition entails
the provision of an approved surround for a Domestic
Service and Meter Board, the approved surround and
any box or enclosure required must be supplied and
fixed by the customer, provided that where the new
Domestic Service and Meter Board is to be located in
the same position as the existing board, the surround,
supplied by the customer, will be fixed in position by
the Council.


(8) INSTALLATION OF TEMPORARY MAINS OR
SERVICES.
The cost of installing and dismantling a temporary service
or temporary mains, including the cost of metering, will be
charged to the consumer.
An offer to pay the charges, written in a special form, or a
deposit of the estimated cost of the Council’s work, includ-
ing materials, will be required in all cases before the work
is started.
If it is later found that the whole or part of the Council’s
work becomes part of a permanent service or main, the
charge to the consumer will be adjusted.
(9) INSTALLATION OF SPECIAL OR ADDITIONAL
SERVICES.
In general, the Council will instal only one service to supply
one building or to supply any group of buildings occupied
by one consumer. However, where a special or additional
service is required by the consumer, and the Council agrees
to instal that service, the consumer may be required to pay
the total cost of installing the service, including the cost of
materials and the cost of fixing additional meters. The
consumer may also be required to pay rental for the addi-
tional meters.
Where two or more services are installed to supply any
premises, the wiring shall be so arranged that the limits of
the portions of the installation connected to each service are
clearly defined. Unless the additional service is provided to
supply specific equipment, the whole of the installation in
any defined portion of the premises must be supplied from
the same service.
There shall be no interconnection between any services.
Where a special or additional service is installed, the con-
sumer may be required to label each of the services in the
premises to indicate the presence and positions of the other
services and the specific equipment or defined portion of
the premises supplied through each service.
34
Rule 8.


METERING
(10) PROVISION AND INSTALLATION OF METERS
AND TIME SWITCHES.
(A) General. Meters and, where necessary, maximum de-
mand indicators and other instruments, will be supplied
and fixed by the Council and shall remain its property.
The consumer shall provide facilities for the connection
of meters and other instruments, but such connections
shall be made only by officers of the Council.
The connection facilities required will consist of loops
of cable of length adequate for making the connections
from the service fuses to the meters, and from the meters
to the consumer’s main switches, links, etc., but in no
case shall a meter loop be less than four feet in length.
The particular conductors in which loops must be left,
and other details regarding the meter connections, are
set out in the following paragraphs.
(B) Direct Current Supply. Direct current installations are
metered by ampere hour meters and a loop must be
provided in each active conductor. For certain rates a
maximum demand indicator is connected in each active
conductor, and the metering loop must be long enough
to allow for this connection.
(C) Alternating Current Supply. Alternating current instal-
lations are metered by kilowatt-hour meters. These
instruments require connections to both the active and
neutral conductors. Details of the manner in which
these connections are made are set out in Sub-Clauses
(i) and (ii) below.
(i) Direct Connected Instruments. Installations which,
in the opinion of the Council’s officers, will have a
maximum demand not exceeding 100 amperes per
phase, will be metered by instruments connected
directly to the consumer’s mains or to the sub-
installation mains. Where direct connected in-
struments are used, a loop must be provided in every
active conductor to which a meter is to be connected.
35
Rule 10.


In general, the main neutral conductor will be taken
directly from the neutral service link to the con-
sumer’s neutral link. The consumer must provide
this cable and, in addition, must provide sufficient
stranded cable not smaller than gauge 3/0.036 and
not larger than gauge 7/0.036 to permit the making
of connections from the neutral service link to each
meter, or from the neutral service link to a connector
box and from the connector box to each meter.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, where all
of the following conditions apply:
(a) a 2-wire service is installed,
(b) for any one service only one meter (or one
meter and maximum demand indicator) is to be
installed,
(c) the cables are not larger than 7/0.044, both the
active and neutral conductors will be taken into and
out of the meter, and the consumer must provide
adequate loops on both the conductors.
(ii) Instruments Connected Through Current Trans-
formers. Installations which, in the opinion of the
Council’s officers, will have a maximum demand
exceeding 100 amperes per phase approximately, will
be metered by instruments connected to current
transformers. In such installations the following
facilities must be provided for metering. Where the
current transformers are mounted immediately
below the service fuses, the Council will provide the
means of connection between the service fuses and
the current transformers. In all other cases sufficient
cable must be provided by the consumer for the
connection of each active conductor between the
service fuses and the current transformers. In all
cases, a loop must be left in each active conductor
leading from the installation to provide sufficient
length of cable (or busbar which shall be adequately
supported so that no strain is placed on the current
transformer winding or terminal) for connection to
the current transformers.
A pair of cables having at least 250 volt grade insula-
tion must be run from each current transformer to


the corresponding meter. If the total distance be-
tween the current transformer and the meter, mea-
sured along the run of these cables, is not more than
30 feet, the cables shall be of gauge 7/. 029 or larger,
If the distance exceeds 30 feet but does not exceed
75 feet, the cables shall be of gauge 7 / .036 or larger.
Where the distance exceeds 75 feet or where special
forms of metering are involved, the size and type of
cables, and the manner in which they are to be in-
stalled, shall be as determined by the Council. A
cable known as a “potential wire” of gauge 3/.036
must be run from the line side of the primary wind-
ing of each current transformer to the meter position.
Where the consumer’s installation is protected by an
earth leakage circuit breaker, these “potential wires”
must be doubly insulated (i.e., tough rubber sheathed
or thermoplastic sheathed cable); in other cases they
must have at least 250 volt grade insulation.
Each active “potential wire” must be protected by a
10 ampere fuse which will be supplied, fixed and
sealed by the Council. Where the current trans-
formers are fixed on a meter board, the Council will
fix the fuses on that board. Where the current trans-
formers are not fixed on a meter board, the consumer
must provide a supporting insulated panel, suitable
for fixing the fuses, in an accessible position near
the current transformers. A cable of not less than
gauge 3/.036 and 250 volt grade insulation must be
run from the neutral service link to a connector box,
and from the connector box to each meter. The
Council will supply, fix, and connect the connector
box, which will be fixed on the meter board.
All wiring as required above, between current trans-
formers and meters, shall be enclosed in conduit
which shall not enclose any other conductors.
NOTE: In installations, the maximum demand of
which is expected to approach 100 amperes, the
Contractor will not know whether direct connected
instruments or current transformers will be used.
In all such cases, therefore, the Contractor should
inquire from the Council’s Installation Inspection
Branch as to the method of metering.


(D) Time Control of Installations Supplied During Re-
stricted Hours.
Where, in accordance with the provisions of any rate
published by the Council, electricity is to be supplied
only during certain hours, the Council will provide
time control equipment as specified below so that
electricity to be charged for at the rate may be used
only during the hours specified in respect to that rate.
The Council’s equipment may not be used as the con-
sumer’s main switch; nor may it be used for providing
any special control required by the consumer.
The time control equipment supplied by the Council
will be capable of controlling directly single-phase,
two-phase or three-phase loads up to a rating of 30
amperes per phase. Where the load to be controlled
is in excess of 30 amperes per phase, an approved type
of contactor must be supplied and installed by the
consumer in a position adjacent to the metering
equipment. This contactor will be controlled by the
Council’s time switch or relay and provision must be
made for sealing the contactor. The consumer shall
provide the necessary wiring between the contactor
and the Council’s time switch or relay.
NOTE; In residential premises or in other types of pre-
mises where noise may be objectionable, the contactor
should be of the “noiseless” type.
The space required for the Council’s time control
equipment is as follows. It should be noted, particularly,
that the space set out refers only to the Council’s time
control equipment and is in addition to that required
for the Council’s service and metering equipment and
for any contactor or other equipment provided by the
consumer.
(1) Single phase installations, directly controlled—
6in. wide x lOJin. high x Sin. deep.
(2) Two and three phase installations, directly con-
nected —12in. wide x lOfin. high x Sin. deep.
(3) Large installations for which a contactor is to be
supplied by the consumer—
6in. wide x lOfin. high x Sin. deep.
The space provided must be not less than that set out
above. In all cases, “width” means horizontal line across


the face of the board, “height” means vertical line, while
“depth” means horizontal line at right angles to the
face of the board.
(11) LOCATION OF METERS.
Metering instruments and current transformers will be fixed
in a position approved by the Council, and usually will be
connected between the service fuses and the consumer’s main
control gear.
Where the other conditions of these Rules regarding the
location, accessibility, etc., of meters are fulfilled, the meters
will, whenever possible, be erected on the same board as the
service fuses.
In special cases, the Council may agree to connect the meters
on the load side of the consumer’s main control gear. In such
cases, all the consumer’s switch and fuse gear connected on
the supply side of the meters shall be of the enclosed type
and suitable for sealing, unless, in the case of large installa-
tions supplied through open busbars and an open type
switchboard, permission is given by the Council for the
exposure of unmetered conductors, under specified condi-
tions in an approved location.
NOTE: Spacing Between Meters and Current Carrying
Conductors.
The location of meters, conductors carrying heavy
current, and associated gear, shall be so selected that
the following spacing will be maintained between
the meters and the conductors carrying currents of
the following order:
Up to 100 amperes; no special spacing.
100-200 amperes—minimum spacing of meters
from conductors; 2 feet.
200-500 amperes—minimum spacing of meters
from conductors; 3 feet.
500-1000 amperes —minimum spacing of meters
from conductors: 4 feet.
1000-2000 amperes—minimum spacing of meters
from conductors: 8 feet.
When fixing current transformers and meters in a
new installation, where it is reasonable to assume
that the loading will be increased, the spacing of


meters from conductors should be that correspond-
ing to the ultimate load on the installation.
The spacing set out above does not apply where the
conductors are in the form of a 3-phase cable or
where the conductors are enclosed in a steel or iron
conduit or pipe.
(12) ACCESSIBILITY OF METERS.
(a) Space. Suitable space must be made available for the
Council’s meters in a position readily accessible to its
officers for fixing, reading, testing, adjusting and re-
moving them without difficulty. In any case the space
between any wall on which metering equipment is
mounted and any obstruction shall not be less than
3 feet. However, where the metering equipment is
recessed into a wall, this distance may be less, provided
that all other requirements of this rule are met. Where
metering equipment is enclosed in a box, the clear
space in front of the enclosure shall be sufficient for
the lid or door of the box to be readily opened or
removed as required by Rule 13.
(b) Height. Except as otherwise approved by the General
Manager the metering equipment will be so fixed that:
(i) in single domestic premises the top of any metering
instrument is not more than 6 feet and not less
than 4 feet above ground or floor level.
(ii) in other than single domestic premises the top of any
metering instrument is not more than 8 feet and
not less than 2 feet 6 inches above ground or floor
level.
(c) Access. In general the position of any meter must be
such that the Council’s officers can gain access to it
without having to obtain a key, but objection will not
be raised to the metering equipment being located
within business premises which will always be open
during ordinary business hours.
In private residences, meters will be fixed in such
positions that they will be readily accessible without
the Council’s officers having to enter rooms, enclosed
verandahs or any other structures with doors or gates
which may be locked during the occupier’s absence.
Any elevated floors or platforms used to provide access
to metering equipment shall be substantial and per-
manent and shall be fitted with a railing where con-
sidered necessary. Access to such elevated positions
shall be provided by an approved fixed stairway and
handrail.


The customer shall ensure that access to the metering
equipment as required in the foregoing paragraphs
is not subsequently restricted. If access is so restricted
the customer will be required to pay the cost involved
in moving the meters to an accessible position.
NOTES ON METERING POSITIONS: The following
aspects will be taken into consideration when deter-
mining meter positions: —
The Council will not agree to its metering equipment
being situated in a position which for any reason is
considered to be unsuitable.
In general the following locations are considered to be
unsuitable:
(i) Locations over stairways or ramps, in narrow
passageways or in other confined spaces.
(ii) Vehicle docks, driveways and factory passageways
where the equipment or persons working on the
instruments cannot be effectively protected.
(iii) Positions in close proximity to or over machinery
or open type switchgear.
(iv) Locations where there may be present fumes, gases
or dust of such a nature as would be likely to cause
deterioration of equipment or undue discomfort
to persons working on the instruments.
(v) Hazardous locations as defined by S.A.A. Wiring
Rule 630.
(vi) Rooms or enclosures where the normal ambient
temperature exceeds 90° F.
(vii) Dark locations where there is insufficient natural
or artificial light.
(viii) Locations where the use of a step-ladder would be
hazardous.
For meters enclosed in a box on the outside wall of
a residence, the position selected will generally be on
a side wall which is not adjacent to a passageway pro-
viding the main access to the premises. Any box en-
closing metering equipment which is situated on a wall
alongside which there is a passageway should be recessed
sufficiently into the wall to provide a clear walkway
or driveway, unless the pathway is a suitable distance
from the wall. In single domestic premises the mount-
ing height for a box situated on an outside wall should
generally be such that the distance from the ground to
the top of the metering equipment is 5 feet 6 inches
and, wherever possible, the box should be recessed into
the wall.


(13) PROTECTION OF METERS.
(a) The consumer shall provide adequate protection for the
meters where, in the opinion of the Council’s officers,
they would otherwise be exposed to mechanical injury,
effects of the weather, sea air, corrosion, etc.
(b) Where protection against the effects of the weather is
necessary, and this protection takes the form of a
weatherproof box, the box shall be provided with a
hinged door, glazed or unglazed, and with a catch or
similar device which is readily accessible from the
ground or any permanent platform provided. If the
door of any box enclosing meters is hinged at the top,
a stay fastened to the door or the box, shall be provided
to hold the door in the open position when necessary.
This stay shall be readily accessible from the ground
or any permanent platform provided.
(c) In general, the enclosure within which the meters are
situated may not be locked, but if such protection is
considered essential, the Council will agree to locking
the enclosure only if the consumer agrees to purchase
from the Council a standard lock. The standard locks
are supplied with individual keys, but all the locks can
be opened by master keys held by the Council. Standard
locks may not be used in doors which give access to any
portion of private premises other than a room or cup-
board used solely to house metering and switch equip-
ment.
(14) GROUPING OF METERS AND PROVISION OF
LINKS.
(a) Grouping of Meters. Where one consumer is suppli d
with electricity at different Rates, or where several con-
sumers are supplied from one service, the meters will be
fixed in a group or groups approved by the Council.
(b) Use and Type of Links. Where it is necessary to connect
more than one set of meters to one point of supply, the
connections shall be made by means of connecting or
paralleling links. These links shall be of a type ap-
proved by the Council, shall be fitted with covers which
may be sealed, and shall comply with S.A.A. Wiring
Rules 329 and 245.
(c) Connecting Links. Where there is no likelihood that
a number of portions of an installation arranged for
separate metering will, at any time, have to be metered
42
Rule 13.


in parallel, simple connecting links may be used. These
links must be such that only one connection need be
made to the “load” side of each of the Council’s service
fuses, and such that any separately metered portion of
an installation may be connected and disconnected
without interfering with the supply to other separately
metered portions.
Notwithstanding the foregoing connecting links will
not be required in the following cases:
(i) Where not more than two connections of cables not
larger than 7/0.064 are to be made to a 50 amp.
service fuse.
(ii) Where one cable of 19 strands or larger and one
cable not larger than 7/0.064 are to be connected
to a service fuse.
In such cases, the Council will parallel the two sets of
cables at the “load” terminals of the service fuses. In
case (ii) above, if the connections are made in this
manner, connecting links must be inserted in the smaller
cables.
(d) Paralleling Links. In public buildings and other places
where it is probable that changes in tenancies will result
in one consumer occupying more than one room or suite
of rooms in which the wiring has been arranged for
separate metering, paralleling links must be provided to
allow the wiring in one or a number of rooms to be
connected easily to one meter. The paralleling links in
such cases may function also as the connecting links.
In existing buildings which are divided into rooms and
suites for occupation by different consumers, but have
not been provided with suitable paralleling links, the
paralleling of a separately metered portion of the instal-
lation will be dealt with by the Council in the following
manner:
(i) Where a consumer arranges to take over two or
more rooms or suites which are adjacent to each
other on the same floor, and has major structural
alterations made to the premises which result in the
rooms which were previously separate becoming one
room, he will be required to provide one main con-
trol or suitable links and one set of metering loops
so that the whole of the supply may be metered with
one set of meters.
In this connection, it should be noted that the pro-
vision of a door between two rooms previously not
connected will not be considered a major structural


alteration in the sense used above, because such a
door could at any time be screwed closed and the
rooms let separately as before.
(ii) Where a consumer requires supply in the one name
to more than one installation on the same floor, and
no structural alterations have been made to the
premises, the Council’s officers will parallel the
installations at one meter or one set of meters if
such paralleling is practicable, or parallel at links
which the Council will provide.
As it is essential that all active conductors on the supply
side of the meters shall be protected from interference,
the active metering links must be provided with covers
which can be sealed. (In the case of large installations
supplied through open busbars and an open type switch-
board, the Council may give permission for the exposure
of unmetered conductors, under specified conditions, in
an approved location.)
It is not necessary to provide paralleling links for the
neutral, but it is necessary to provide a sealed cover for
the incoming neutral conductor at the links, and for at
least one other terminal to which the meter neutral
connector box may be connected.
(e) Supplying of Links. In new installations, all the connect-
ing links and/or paralleling links required must be
supplied by the consumer.
In existing installations, any links required must be
supplied by the consumer, except that, where an addi-
tional separately metered portion of an installation is
to be connected to a metering position from which one
or more consumers, other than the consumer installing
the additional portion, are already supplied without
the use of links, the Council will provide and instal links
to connect the existing and additional installations.
In all cases, the Council will supply the meter neutral
connecting boxes unless suitable terminals are, for the
sake of uniformity, provided by the consumer on the
sealed portion of his neutral links.
(f) Position of Links. In general, links shall be mounted
and fixed in an accessible position by the consumer on
his switchboard, or on a separate board which will also
be supplied and fixed by the consumer. The links
should be fixed as close as possible to the metering posi-
tion, and in such a position as to keep the length of
the connecting cable as short as possible and their


arrangement as simple as possible, but not in such a
position as to prevent any additions being made to the
Council’s metering board, the necessity for which can
be reasonably anticipated at the time. In selecting the
position, spacing, etc., of the links, adequate provision
must be made for the easy entry, connection, and dis-
connection of cables.
Notwithstanding the above, where a 50 ampere service
is installed (except in the case of 18in. x 12in. boards),
no objection will be raised to the mounting of connect-
ing links on the Council’s service or metering board,
provided that adequate space is available for the fixing
of the links, and for the making of all the necessary
connections without moving any of the Council’s meter-
ing or service equipment, and without encroaching on
the space that is required for the service and metering
equipment, or on the space that may be reasonably
expected to be required in future for additional or
larger metering or service equipment. Where, in these
circumstances, it is proposed to mount connecting links
on the Council’s services or meter board, the links will
be fixed in position and connected by the Council’s
officers, but all necessary fixing screws must be supplied
by the consumer. In such cases, the links must be
fastened by the consumer in a temporary manner to the
meter board by loosely screwing them to the board, using
the full complement of screws of the correct size.
Certain minimum dimensions and other details of the
Council’s requirements regarding links are published
in a separate document. Copies of this document may
be obtained upon application to the office of the
Council’s Installation Inspection Branch on the second
floor of the Queen Victoria Building, or by writing to
the General Manager. The document is intended merely
as a guide to the manufacturers of links, as the Council
does not insist on any particular form of link, provided
that it complies with the minimum requirements set
out in the document.
(15) METER CONNECTIONS.
The type of meters which will be used, and the method of
connecting them, is determined by the Rate (Tariff) at which
electricity is supplied, and by the nature of the load.
For details of the connection in various cases, see Rule 10,
page 35.


(16) MULTIPLE CONNECTIONS AT METERS
PROHIBITED.
Not more than one cable may be connected to any one ter-
minal of a meter. Therefore, where it is necessary to connect
more than one portion of an installation to a meter, the
consumer shall arrange, by the use of links or by paralleling
the different parts of the installation, that only one cable
need be connected to each meter terminal. Any links
required for this purpose must be mounted on the con-
sumer’s switchboard.
(17) ADDITIONAL OR SUBSIDIARY METERS.
(a) General. Should any additional meters, current trans-
formers or other metering equipment be required above
those necessary for the Council’s purpose, application
should be made for them. The application must
include a written undertaking to pay the cost of fixing
and also to pay a rental of two shillings (2/-) or twenty
(20) cents per month for each additional single phase
instrument, for each element of an additional polyphase
instrument, or for each additional current transformer.
In the case of additional high voltage metering equip-
ment the rental shall be 15% per annum of the capital
value of the equipment as determined by the General
Manager.
Subsidiary meters will not be provided by the Council
in premises supplied at the “Domestic Rate” or the
“Domestic Cooking Rate”.
Except in special circumstances as agreed to by the
General Manager, subsidiary meters may not be con-
nected to the Council’s current transformer metering
circuits.
(b) Charges for Fixing Additional Meters. A charge will
be made for fixing additional meters and other addi-
tional equipment. Where the fixing of additional
meters presents difficulty or where current transformers
are necessary, or where high voltage metering equip-
ment is fixed, the actual cost of the work will be
charged. In all other cases standard charges will be
made as determined from time to time by the General
Manager.
(18) FIXING OF CONDUCTORS IN SERVICE FUSES,
METERS, Etc.
Only an employee of the Council may insert the end of any
conductor in any service fuse, meter, indicator, link, or
other device belonging to the Council, or make any con-
nection to or disconnection from conductors directly con-
nected to the Council’s supply system.
46
Rule 16.


CONSUMERS' INSTALLATIONS
(19) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION—COMPLIANCE
WITH THE S.A.A. WIRING RULES.
(a) Every installation to be connected to the Council’s mams
shall comply with the Wiring Rules published by the
Standards Association of Australia, and known as the
S.A.A. Wiring Rules, and with these Service Rules.
(b) Every installation or addition to an installation pre-
pared for connection to the Council’s mains must be
carried out by a person or firm licensed under the
Electricity Development Act to carry out such work.
(20) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION—NOTICE OF
COMPLETION.
When the consumer’s installation is complete and ready for
inspection and connection, the Electrical Contractor or
Electrician who has carried out the installation must give
the Council written notice that the installation has been
carried out by him and is complete and ready for connection
to the Council’s mains. This notice must be given on a
printed form provided for the purpose by the Council of
which copies may be obtained at the Inquiry Counter at the
Council’s offices, or by written request to the General
Manager.
This formal notice of completion is usually referred to as a
“Ready for Test” Certificate.
The Electrical Contractor or Electrician is also required to
provide on this form information regarding the nature,
extent, and location of the work.
(21) CUSTOMER’S INSTALLATION-INSPECTION AND
TESTING OF INSTALLATIONS.
Upon receipt of the “Ready for Test” Certificate, the
Council will inspect and test the installation. If the inspec-
tion and testing show that the installation does not comply
with the S.A.A. Wiring Rules, or these Service Rules, the
Council may refuse to connect the installation to its mains.
No charge will be made for the first inspection and test,
but a statutory charge will be made for each and every
subsequent test and inspection made by the Council.
(See paragraph headed “Compliance with S.A.A. Wiring
Rules” on page 9, regarding the limits of these inspections.)
47
Rule 19.


(22) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — INSPECTION AND
TESTING OF ADDITIONS OR ALTERATIONS.
No addition or alteration to an existing installation may be
connected until it has been inspected, tested, and approved
for connection by an officer of the Council. Where, however,
a “Ready for Test” Certificate in the form specified under
Rule 20 has been lodged with the Council, no objection will
be raised to the connection of an addition to an existing final
sub-circuit, which itself is already connected and in use,
pending the Council’s inspection, provided the additional
work is complete and complies with the S.A.A. Wiring Rules
and these Service Rules.
In the same way, no objection will be raised to the connec-
tion of additional circuits to the switchboard, of existing
installations, provided the new circuits are complete and
comply with the S.A.A. Wiring Rules and these Rules, and
are isolated from the supply in the following manner:
(i) If the additional circuits are to be protected by fuses,
the fuse carriers shall be removed from the circuit fuses
and shall be labelled with special labels provided by the
Council for the purpose, and tied to the switchboard.
(ii) If the additional circuits are to be protected by overload
circuit breakers, the circuit breakers shall be left in the
“Off” (open) position, and a special label provided by
the Council for the purpose shall be attached to the
operating handle or knob of each circuit breaker in such
a manner that it cannot be closed without detaching or
removing the label. Where this is not possible, the label
shall be attached to the breaker in such a manner that
it cannot be closed without the label being noticed.
The special labels which must be used clearly indicate that
the fuse carriers may not be inserted in the fuses or the cir-
cuit breaker closed until after the additions have been tested
and approved for connection by an officer of the Council.
These labels may be obtained by application at the General
Office of the Council’s Installation Inspection Branch or by
written request addressed to the General Manager.
Electrical Contractors taking advantage of the permission
given in this Rule for the connection of new work should
note particularly the requirements of Rule 19, Clause (a)
and (b).
48
Rule 22.


(23) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — CALCULATION OF
MAXIMUM DEMAND.
(a) General. S.A.A. Wiring Rule 206 sets down methods of
calculating the maximum demand of an installation. That
Rule is qualified by Clauses (b) and (c) below. Further-
more, if at any time the Council has reason to believe
that the provisions of S.A.A. Wiring Rule 206 are inade-
quate with respect to any installation, it may require
the customer to provide for a larger maximum demand.
NOTE: In connection with this Rule, attention is drawn
to S.A.A. Wiring Rule 201 (b) (i), which sets it down
that “Every conductor shall have a current carrying capa-
city ... at least equal to the current to be carried
by it... ”
No method of calculating or assessing maximum demand
can be deemed to invalidate that Rule.
(b) Off-peak Water Heaters. Exercising the authority given
by S.A.A. Wiring Rule 207, the Council has decided that,
in the calculation of the maximum demand of a domestic
installation, the loading of off-peak water heaters may
be ignored if such loading is less than the maximum
demand of the installation calculated in accordance with
S.A.A. Wiring Rule 206.
Where the loading of the off-peak water heating element
is greater than the maximum demand of an installation
or sub-installation (exclusive of the off-peak water
heater) as calculated in accordance with S.A.A Wiring
Rule 206, the loading of the off-peak water heating
element must be taken as the maximum demand for
the installation or sub-installation, and the size of
mains, sub-mains, and associated switchgear determined
accordingly.
For other than domestic installations, allowance shall be
made for off-peak water heaters at least equal to that
specified in S.A.A. Wiring Rule 206 (f) (ii). In certain
commercial premises, such as restaurants which operate
after 9.00 p.m., it may be necessary to take the full load-
ing of the off-peak water heaters, together with the maxi-
mum demand of the rest of the installation, calculated
from S.A.A. Wiring Rule 206.
(c) Factories. In general, the maximum demand of a factory
installation may be assumed to be that calculated from
S.A.A. Wiring Rule 206, Clauses (d), (e), and (f), but
in this connection attention is drawn to Clause (a) above.
49
Rule 23.


(25) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION—PROTECTION AND
INSTALLATION OF CONSUMER’S MAINS.
Consumer’s mains of the types mentioned in S.A.A. Wiring
Rule 213 (b) (ii) and (iii), need not be enclosed in conduit
where they are open to view, or where they are protected by
fuses.
Any bellmouth used to protect consumer’s mains near the
point of attachment of a service line or consumer’s line shall
project beyond that point of attachment, shall be made of
insulating material, and shall have an overall length of at
least three (3) inches. The bellmouth shall be within three
(3) feet of each conductor of the service line or consumer’s
line. Where an overhead line connector box is used near
the point of attachment, it shall be within three (3) feet
of each conductor of the service line or consumer’s line.
(See also Rule 5 (d): “Facilities for the Connection of Service
Lines and Consumer’s Lines,” page 23.)
Mineral-Insulated Metal-Sheathed Cables and Surge
Diverters —Prohibited Use.
Mineral-insulated metal-sheathed cables and/or surge
diverters shall not be connected to overhead service lines or
consumers’ lines unless fuses or over-current circuit breakers
are installed between the service lines and such equipment.
(26) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — LABELLING OF
SWITCHBOARDS AND ENTRANCE DOORS.
In addition to any labelling required by the S.A.A. Wiring
Rules, where a building is subdivided and a separate supply
of electricity is given to occupiers of individual rooms, suites
of rooms, or flats, an identification number must be marked
on the main entrance door of each room, suite or flat, and on
the corresponding switchboard, or some other approved
system of identification must be adopted.
(28) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION—MEDIUM VOLTAGE
SUPPLY TO LARGE INSTALLATIONS—RUPTURING
CAPACITY OF MAIN OVERLOAD PROTECTIVE
DEVICES.
Where the maximum demand of an installation is likely to
exceed 350 amperes per phase, or the supply is provided
directly from a substation, the main overload protective
devices of the consumer’s installation must consist either of
High Rupturing Capacity fuses, as defined in the S.A.A.
Wiring Rules, or of circuit breakers having a breaking
50
Rule 25


capacity of not less than 25,000kVA when tested in accord-
ance with B.S.S. 936-1940.
NOTE: In certain premises which are remote from a sub-
station or supplied from a substation of small capacity, main
overload protective devices need not comply with this Rule,
provided a written request for the waiving of the require-
ment is made to the General Manager and acceded to by
him.
(29) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — TEMPORARY
WIRING — S.A.A. WIRING RULE 361.
The applicant for supply of electricity to temporary wiring
will be required to pay to the Council the whole cost of
providing, metering, and disconnecting the supply, and of
making the necessary inspections.
The connection of the temporary wiring by an officer of the
Council will constitute the Council’s initial permission for
connection of the temporary wiring, as required by S.A.A.
Wiring Rule 361 (a).
If the temporary installation is to remain in use for a period
exceeding that covered by the initial permit, the Council
will make a further inspection before the permit will be
renewed.
If, as a result of any inspection, the Council finds it necessary
to withdraw the permission for the connection of the tem-
porary wiring, it will inform the consumer or his representa-
tive specifically to that effect. In the absence of such notifica-
tion of the contrary, the permit will be deemed to be still
current.
S.A.A. Wiring Rule 361 provides for the Supply Authority’s
laying down methods of wiring for temporary installations
as an alternative to those laid down by the S.A.A. Wiring
Rules for permanent installations. The Council has pub-
lished its requirements in this regard in a document headed
“Temporary Wiring.” Copies of this document may be
obtained by calling at the office of the Council’s Installation
Inspection Branch, or by written request to the General
Manager.
(30) STARTING CURRENT OF A.C. MOTORS.
The current taken by motors under the conditions of start-
ing, i.e. with any current limiting starter in the “start
position, shall not exceed the following values when
measured by the locked-rotor method:—


NOTE: Where it is not practicable to measure the locked
rotor current, an approximate indication of this value is
obtainable by measurement with a suitable pre-set (back
stopped) ammeter when the motor is started in the normal
manner.
(a) Single Phase 240 Volt Motors 40 amperes
(b) Three Phase Motors:
Motors not exceeding 2 H.P 26 amperes
Motors exceeding 2 H.P. but not exceed-
ing 5 H.P (H.P. x 13)
amperes
Motors exceeding 5 H.P 53 + (H.P. x
2.5) amperes
Motors which are not frequently started, whichever of
the following values is greatest; —
(i) 53 + (H.P. x 2.5) amperes.
(ii) Total H.P. of motors installed * x 0.8 amperes.
(iii) The starting current of the largest of the other
motors installed calculated in accordance with (i).
* “Total H.P.” is the aggregate rating of motors con-
nected for the customer to the particular service, in-
cluding the proposed motor.
NOTE: Under sub-clause (b) (ii) motors of one-tenth
of the total H.P. of motors installed may generally be
used starting direct-on-line.
In certain premises which are supplied direct from a
substation, or through a large service, starting currents
in excess of those laid down in this rule may be per-
mitted, provided a written request is made to the
General Manager and acceded to by him.
(c) Motors Supplied from City Underground Network.
Notwithstanding Clause (b) above and Clause (d) below,
in those installations supplied through an underground
cable from the City underground network, the locked
rotor current of any three phase motor need not be
less than 150 amperes, provided that the wiring to such
motor is so arranged that its use will not interfere with
the supply of electricity to other customers.
The area to which this Clause applies extends from a
line between No. 4 Wharf Darling Harbour to Circular
Quay on the north to Central Railway Station on the
south, and from Darling Harbour on the west to
Macquarie Street, College Street and Wentworth
Avenue on the east.


(d) Motors Operating Fire-Fighting Pumps.
Notwithstanding Clause (b) above, in the case of A.C.
motors driving pumps which will be used solely in
emergency for fire-fighting, the locked rotor current
shall not exceed 150% of the starting current for such
motor for the particular service concerned as deter-
mined under Clause (b) above.
(e) Alternating Current Motors Operating Lifts.
Alternating current motors operating lifts will not be
required to comply with Clauses (b) or (c) of this rule,
but every alternating current lift motor shall be so
controlled and operated that the current drawn from
the mains does not at any time exceed 200 amperes
per phase, and also does not exceed 22 amperes per
phase for each 100,000 ft. lbs./min. of lift duty, that is:
Maximum permissible current =
(Lift Duty in ft. lbs./min.)
22 amperes
100,000
per phase, with a limit of 200 amperes.
Lifts operated by motor generator sets must, in general,
comply with this rule, except that, in certain cases
where written application is made to the General Man-
ager, permission may be given for a motor generator
set, which is not started frequently, to operate with a
starting current exceeding 200 amperes.
Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, the starting
current of an alternating current lift motor need never
be less than 20 amperes. Each motor driving a lift
shall be protected by a relay such as a thermal over-
current device in at least two active conductors, which
shall be of such rating that supply to the motor will
be disconnected if at any time a current equal to the
locked rotor current of the motor flows for more than
twenty seconds.
Each lift installation shall be provided with a notice
giving the rated speed of the lift in feet per minute
and the maximum load which may be carried by the
lift in pounds weight, or giving the rated duty of the
lift in ft. lbs./minute. This notice must be fixed either
to the motor or to the control board, or in some other
conspicuous place in the lift motor room.
(31) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — POWER FACTOR
OF APPARATUS.
The power factor of an installation at maximum load shall
not be less than 0.80.


(32) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — CONTROL OF
CAPACITORS.
(a) General. The installation and control of capacitors shall
comply with the relevant Clause of the S.A.A. Wiring
Rules (see particularly S.A.A. Wiring Rule 432), and
the following additional requirements regarding power
factor.
(b) Automatic Control of Power Factor. Unless they are
permanently connected in parallel with an individual
appliance, capacitors shall be controlled by automatic
gear in steps corresponding with variation in inductive
load.
Variation of capacitance with variation of inductive
load shall be made in steps not exceeding 50 kVA,
provided that —
(i) In special cases where written application is made
to the General Manager and is acceded to by him,
banks of capacitors may be controlled in steps of
up to 150 kVA. Approval of such applications will
depend upon the size and arrangement of the instal-
lation and the type of automatic control equipment
being such as to ensure that no dangerous or dele-
terious effects are likely to occur.
(ii) Where capacitors are switched in steps correspond-
ing with the switching of individual appliances or
groups of appliances controlled or operated as one
unit, there shall be no limit to the size of the
capacitors controlled in each step.
(c) Leading Power Factor Not Allowed. No condition of
operation of capacitors or variation of inductive load
shall at any time cause the power factor of the installa-
tion to become “leading.”
(33) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION—ELECTRODE TYPE
WATER HEATERS—S.A.A. WIRING RULE 433 (a).
The Council does not specifically prohibit the use of elect-
rode type water heaters, but reserves the right to place any
restrictions it finds necessary on their design and installation.
(See Rule 2 (h), page 15, re Limitation of Loading and
Balance.)
(35) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — A.C./D.C.
RECTIFIERS.
A.C./D.C. rectifying equipment will be approved for con-
nection only if there is interposed between the rectifier and
54
Rule 32.


the A.C. supply a double-wound transformer. This Rule
will not apply to the following types of rectifiers.
(a) Full wave rectifiers which are clearly marked “Full
Wave Rectifiers.”
(b) Rectifiers used in A.C./D.C. Radio and Television Re-
ceiving Sets designed for domestic use.
(c) Rectifiers used in conjunction with electrical measuring
instruments, and similar applications where the rectified
current does not exceed 100 milliamperes.
(36) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — EARTHING OF
INSTALLATIONS.
(a) General. Electric installations which, in accordance with
the S.A.A. Wiring Rules must be earthed, will be ap-
proved for connection to the mains of the Council only
if each installation is protected against faults to earth
as under:
(i) (A) In the Area Supplied through Overhead Mains and
Overhead Service Lines (Other than in the Shire of
Sutherland and the Municipality of Bankstown) —
By an earth leakage circuit breaker or breakers com-
plying with the Approval and Test Specification No.
C. 110 (issued by the Standards Association of Aus-
tralia), and installed in accordance with the appro-
priate requirements of the S.A.A. Wiring Rules.
(i) (B) In the Shire of Sutherland and the Municipality
of Bankstown—
By the Multiple Earthed Neutral system of earthing,
in accordance with the appropriate requirements of
the S.A.A. Wiring Rules.
(ii) In the Area Supplied through Underground Cables.
(Not including isolated lengths of underground
cable, in which case (i) above applies.) —By bond-
ing the main earthing conductor of the installation
to a special terminal attached to the metallic sheath-
ing of the Council’s underground cable, this connec-
tion being additional to the earthing connection
specified in the S.A.A. Wiring Rules.
The earth leakage circuit breaker and any auxiliary gear
referred to in Sub-Clause (i), together with the necessary
connections, and also additional earthing conductors
necessary to comply with Sub-Clause (ii), must be pro-
vided and installed by the consumer.


The Council will provide the special terminal on the
cable sheath required by Sub-Clause (ii), and its officers
will connect the earthing conductor to the special
terminal.
(b) Installations Including Lifts which may Convey Persons.
To comply with S.A.A. Wiring Rule 229, any electrically
controlled lift or lifts which may convey persons and
which are connected to the Council’s supply system as
part of an installation protected by earth leakage circuit
breakers, must be protected by a completely indepen-
dent earth leakage circuit breaker. The separately
protected lift portion of the installation must be
arranged for completely selective protection, or, alter-
nately, the earth leakage circuit breaker protecting the
lift portion of the installation must be fitted with an
approved time delay mechanism connected in a manner
approved by officers of the Council.
(c) Earthing of Plug Sockets. Notwithstanding S.A.A. Wir-
ing Rule 501 (a) (ii), all plug sockets in installations
protected by earth leakage circuit breakers or relays
must include earthing terminals, which must be earthed
in accordance with the S.A.A. Wiring Rules.
(d) Emergency Lighting. Where an emergency lighting in-
stallation is required, it shall be separately protected by
an independent earth leakage circuit breaker arranged
for completely selective operation, or it shall be doubly
insulated throughout and protected by an independent
switch and fuse or by an over-current circuit breaker.
(e) Scope of this Rule. The requirements of this Rule apply
only to new installations and to new sub-installations
which are to form part of an existing installation or
sub-installation already protected by an earth leakage
circuit breaker. For this purpose an installation shall
mean all the electrical wiring, etc., situated on any
premises to which a separate title is or could be applic-
able. For example, the wiring in each separate part of
a semi-detached cottage, or the wiring in each separate
part of a terrace or row of houses or shops, must
be protected in accordance with this Rule as an “in-
stallation.”
(f) Details of the Use of Earth Leakage Circuit Breakers.
Detailed information regarding the use, installation
and connection of earth leakage circuit breakers is set
out in a pamphlet entitled “Protection of Electric Instal-
lations Against Earth Leakage,” published by the


Council. Copies of this pamphlet may be obtained
without cost by written request to the General Manager,
or by telephone or personal request to the office of the
Installation Inspection Branch (Telephone No. 2 0259,
Extension 5733), on the second floor of the Queen Vic-
toria Building, George Street, Sydney.
(37) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — CONDUCTORS
NOT TO BE EARTHED.
No live conductor in a consumer’s installation shall be
connected to earth unless:
(a) The connection to earth is made by a Radio Interference
Suppressor which complies with the requirements of
and is installed in accordance with the methods set out
in S.A.A. Approval and Test Specification No. C 145 —
Radio Interference Suppression devices for Low and
Medium Voltage Equipment.
or
(b) The General Manager has given written approval for
the connection. Such written approval will always
include the condition that the installation shall comply
with the S.A.A. Wiring Rules covering multiple
earthed neutral systems.
(38) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — HIGH VOLTAGE
INSTALLATIONS.
(a) General. All high voltage equipment which is to be
connected to the Council’s mains must be approved by
the General Manager, both with respect to its design
and construction, and also with respect to its installa-
tion. So that the consumer may purchase satisfactory
equipment, the Council will examine drawings and
specifications of the proposed high voltage gear if such
drawings are submitted to the Council’s officers by the
consumer, and will approve such drawings and specifi-
cations if satisfied that they comply with the Council’s
requirements.
IF THE CONSUMER PURCHASES OR INSTALS
ANY HIGH VOLTAGE EQUIPMENT BEFORE THE
DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION and METHOD OF IN-
STALLATION OF THAT EQUIPMENT HAVE
BEEN FORMALLY APPROVED BY THE GENERAL
MANAGER, THE COUNCIL WILL HOLD ITSELF


FREE TO REFUSE TO CONNECT THE WHOLE
OR ANY PART OF THE EQUIPMENT WHICH,
IN THE OPINION OF THE GENERAL MANAGER,
IS NOT SATISFACTORY.
NOTE: To assist in the preparation of drawings and
specifications for high voltage equipment, the follow-
ing general information is given. It must, however, be
clearly understood that these general requirements are
not binding on the Council, as the circumstances of any
particular case may make it necessary for these require-
ments to be varied.
(i) All high voltage switchgear must comply with the
last published British Standard Specification applic-
able to it. Switchgear for use on 11 kV supply must
have a breaking (rupturing) capacity of at least
150.000 kVA. Switchgear for use of 5 kV supply
should preferably have a breaking capacity of 150,000
kVA; however, subject to a written request being
made to the General Manager, and acceded to by
him, 5kV switchgear having a breaking capacity of
100.000 kVA will be accepted in certain locations.
(ii) Relays, current transformers, and other protective
equipment, must have characteristics to suit the
Council’s existing protective system. The Council
will test the consumer’s equipment for this purpose
and, without cost to the consumer at the time of the
initial installation.
The Council will also make tests of the consumer’s
existing protective apparatus, when such tests are
necessary, but, in those cases, will charge the con-
sumer the cost of making the tests.
(iii) Facilities must be provided for the disconnection
of all high voltage and protection circuits.
(iv) Suitable means of earthing, must be provided by
the consumer.
(b) Maintenance. Every high voltage installation must be
regularly maintained in good order, so that it will
perform the functions for which it was designed. The
installation must be completely overhauled at least once
each year.


NOTE: In cases where the customer is not able to obtain
the services of persons qualified to report on or work on
high voltage installations, the Council may, at the
customer’s request and upon his undertaking to pay the
cost of the work, make regular inspections of any high
voltage installations and may carry out such mainten-
ance work as is found necessary as a result of these
inspections. However, the Council will not, in this
connection, give the customer any specific guarantees
regarding the condition of his installation, or guarantee
the subsequent operation of the equipment.
(39) CONSUMER’S INSTALLATION — INTERFERENCE
WITH SUPPLY TO OTHER CONSUMERS.
(a) Large or Fluctuating Loads. The Council reserves the
right to refuse to connect apparatus, such as electric
arc furnaces, welding machines, X-Ray apparatus, etc.,
having large or fluctuating demands, if it considers that
by so doing the supply to other consumers would be
adversely affected.
When contemplating the connection of electrical weld-
ing apparatus, X-Ray equipment, motors with fluctuat-
ing loads, motor-driven reciprocating pumps, and the
like, the consumer should take particular care to ascer-
tain from the Council what conditions must be observed
to prevent their interfering with the supply to other
consumers.
(b) General. If the consumer should use or deal with the
electricity supplied to him in such a manner as to cause,
in the opinion of the Council, undue interference with
the supply to other consumers, the Council may call
upon him to make such necessary adjustments or altera-
tions, and so to operate the apparatus or equipment as
to ensure that the supply to other consumers will not
be interfered with and, in the event of his failing to do
so, the Council may cut off the supply of electricity to
his premises.
The fact that the Council shall have connected and
have approved the apparatus or equipment shall not
be taken to exempt the consumer from the operation
of this Rule.


INDEX
Page
Accessibility of Meters 40
Additional Services 8, 34
Additions —
Connections of, Prior to Inspection 48
Inspection of 48
Advice to Applicants 7
Apparatus —
Balance of Loading of 12
Hiring of 10
Limitations to the Loading of 12
Power Factor of 53
Small 480 volt D.C. will not be Connected 16
Small 415 volt 3-phase Service will not be Installed 16
Appliance —(See Apparatus)
Applicants—
Advice to 7
Applications for Supply of Electricity 7
Area of Supply —
Alternating Current Area 7, 11
Direct Current Area 7, 11
Balancing of Load —
General 12
Individual Appliances, Signs, and Decorative Lighting
Installations 13
Large Single Phase Apparatus, such as X-Ray and Welding
Apparatus, Single Phase Furnaces, etc 13
Cooking Ranges 15
Off-Peak Water Heaters 17
Ovens for Baking Food 15
Wash Boilers 17
Water Heaters, Instantaneous Type 15
Playing Areas 16
Motors 16
Boards, Service and Metering—
Size of 27
Provisions for Battens for 29
Cabinets and Recesses for 29
Breaking Capacity—
High Voltage Circuit Breakers 57
Medium Voltage Fuses and Circuit Breakers in Special
Cases 50
Cabinets for Service and Meter Boards 29
Calculations of the Nominal Loading of the Service 19
Calculation of Maximum Demand 49


Page
Capacitors, Control of 54
Circuit Breakers, Earth Leakage See “Earth Leakage Circuit
Breakers”, page 65.
Completion Notice 8, 47
Compliance with the S.A.A. Wiring Rules 9, 47
Connection of —
Additions Prior to Inspection 48
Conductors directly connected to the Council’s Supply
System. (See “Fixing of Conductors in Service Fuses,
Meters, etc.”) 46
Consumer’s Lines 22
Meters 35
Service Fuses 26
Service Lines 22
Connecting Links, Provision of, (See also Rule 16, page 46.) 42
Connector Box, Overhead Line —Use for the Termination of
Service Lines and Consumer’s Lines 23
Consumer’s Installation —See "Installations, Consumer’s.”
Consumer’s Line —
Compliance with S.A.A. Wiring Rule 331 24
Facilities for the Connection of 23
Fall in Pressure in. (See “Minimum Size of Conduc-
tors”) 25
Installation of 24
Minimum Size of Conductors 25
Point of Attachment of 22
Posts and Cross-Arms 25
Spacing of Conductors 25
Consumer’s Mains (See "Installation —Consumer’s”).
Contractors, Advice to 7
Control of Capacitors 54
Control of Installations Supplied During Restricted Hours 38
Cooking Ranges —(See “Ranges”).
Cross-Arms, Consumer’s Lines and Service Lines 25
Currents, Starting, of A.C. Motors 51
Current Transformers, Use of, for Metering 36
Cut-Outs —(See “Fuses”).
Damage to Council’s Equipment 8
Decorative Lighting Installations, Balancing of 13
Earth Leakage Circuit Breakers, Details of the Use of 55
Earthing of—
Consumer’s Installations 55
Plug Sockets 56
Supply System 12
Earthing Electrodes for High Voltage Installations-—(See “Instal-
lations —High Voltage”, page 57).
Electricity, Rates for Supply of 10


Page
Electrodes, Earthing for High Voltage Installations 59
Electrode Type Water Heaters 54
Entrance Doors, Labelling of 50
Excess Service Lines —(See “Installation of Service Lines,” page
22).
Excess Starting Currents, Permission for 52
Fee, Re-inspection 8
Fire-Fighting Pumps, Starting Currents of Motors Operating 53
Frequency of Supply —(See “System of Supply,” page 11).
Furnaces, Single Phase, Loading and Balancing 13
Fuses —
High Rupturing Capacity 50
Potential 37
Service —(See “Service Fuses”).
High Voltage —
Installations 57
Installations, Earthing Electrodes for 59
Hiring of Apparatus 10
Information—Additional 7
Installations, Consumers’—
Additional, Inspection and Testing of 48
Calculation of Maximum Demand-
General 49
Off-Peak Water Heaters 49
Factories 49
Conductors not to be Earthed 57
Consumer’s Switchgear Connected on the Supply Side
of the Meters 39
Control of Capacitors 54
Electrode Type Water Heaters 54
High Voltage Installations 57
Interference with Supply to Other Consumers 59
Labelling of Switchboards and Entrance Doors 50
Large, Supply to 21
Inspection and Testing of 47
Protection Against Fault to Earth 55
Protection and Installation of Consumer’s Mains 50
Temporary Wiring 51
Time Control of 38
Instantaneous Water Heaters, Loading and Balancing 15
Interference with Supply to Other Consumers 59
Labelling of Switchboards and Entrance Doors 50


Page
Large Installations, Supply to 21
Licensed Person, Necessity for Employing 8
Lifts —
Rating of 53
Starting Current of Motors Operating 53
Motors, Protection Against Overcurrent 53
Line —
Consumer’s —(See “Consumer’s Line”).
Service —(See “Service Line”).
Links—
Use of in Place of Service fuses 26
Connecting, Provision of 42
Detailed Information Regarding 45
Paralleling, Provision of 43
Locking of Meter Enclosures 42
Locks, Standard, Use of 42
Loops —
For the Connection of Meters 36
For the Connection of Service Fuses 26
For the Connection of Service Lines and Consumer’s Lines 23
Mains—
Connection Box, Use of 23, 50
Consumer’s Protection and Installation of 50
Point of Attachment for 22
Temporary, Installation of 34
Maximum Demand, Calculation of 49
Maximum Demand Indicators, Provision and Installation of 35
Meter Boards—(See “Boards, Meter”).
Meter Enclosures, Locking of 39
Meters —
Accessibility of 38
Additional, Charges for 44
Connection of 34, 43
Connection on Load Side of Main Control Gear 38
Direct Connected Instruments 35
Erection on Service Board 38
Fixing of Conductors into 46
For A.C. Supply 35
For D.C. Supply 35
Grouping of 42
Instruments, Connected through Current Transformers 36
Location of 39
Locking of Enclosures 42
Loops for the Connection of 35
Multiple Connections to, Prohibited 46
Neutral Connection Box for 37, 44


Page
Meters (continued) —
Potential Wire for 37
Position of. Not Necessarily that of Service Fuses 26
Protection of 42
Provision and Installation of 35
Provision of Weatherproofing Boxes for 42
Subsidiary —
Charges for 46
Will Not be Provided in Residence Rate Premises 46
Wiring tor Meters Connected through Current
T ranstormers 36
Method of Determining Types of Service to be Installed 18
Motors—
Hiring of 10
480 volt D.C. under 3 h.p.. Will not be Connected 16
415 volt A.C. 3-phase, 1 h.p. or less, 3-phase Service will
not be Installed 16
A.C., Starting Currents of 51
Single Phase 52
Three Phase 52
Operating Fire-Fighting Pumps 53
Operating Lifts 53
Lift, Protection against Overcurrent 53
Neutral Connector Box for Meters 36, 37, 44
Nominal Loading of the Service, Calculation of 19
Notice of Completion 8, 47
Off-Peak Water Heaters—
Not included in the Nominal Loading of the Service 19
Calculation of Maximum Demand 49
Ovens tor Baking Food, Loading and Balancing 15
Overhead Line Connector Box, Use for the Termination of Service
Lines and Consumer’s Lines 23
Paralleling Links, Provision of 43
Phases, Number to be Installed in a Service 18
Playing Areas, Loading and Balancing of Lighting Installations 16
Point of Attachment —
Consumer’s Lines 8, 22
Service Lines 8, 22
Posts —
For Service Lines and Consumer’s Lines 25
Hardware on 26
Potential Fuses 37
Power Factor-
Consumer’s Installation 53
Automatic Control of 54
Power Points (Plug Sockets), Earthing of 56
Premature Expenditure, Warning Against 7
Protection of Meters 1(2
Pumps, Fire-Fighting, starting Currents of Motor Operating 53


Page
Ranges, Loading and Balancing 15
Rates for Supply of Electricity 10
Ready-for-Test Certificate 8, 47
Recesses for Service and Meter Boards 29
Rectifiers A.C./D.C., Prohibition of Certain Types 54
Relays for the Protection of High Voltage Installations 58
Re-inspection Fee 8
Restricted Hours, Control of Installations Supplied During 38
Rupturing Capacity—(See "Breaking Capacity”).
S.A.A. Wiring Rules, Compliance with 9, 47
Service Boards —(See "Boards, Service and Metering”).
Service Fuses —
Connection Only by Officers of the Council 26
In Public Buildings, Provision of Suitable Position 26
Installation Above or Below Street Level 26
Loops for the Connection of 26
Position Determined by Council 26
Position of, Not Necessarily the Meter Position 26
Use of Links or Circuit Breaker in Place of 26
Service Lines—
Charge for Excess Length 22
Charge for Running to an Alternative Point of Attachment 22
Direct from Substation 23
Facilities for the Connection of 23
Installation of 22
Maintenance of 22
Point of Attachment of 22
Post and Cross-Arms 25. 26
Services —
Special and Additional, Installation of 34
Temporary, Installation of 34
Type to be Installed 18
Signs, Balancing of 13
Sockets, Earthing of 56
Space for the Accommodation of Transformers, Switchgear, etc. 21
Spacing of Conductors of Consumer’s Lines 25
Special Services, Installation of 34
Sports Grounds, Loading and Balancing of Lighting Installations 16
Standard Locks, Use of 42
Stoves—(See "Ranges”).
Starting Currents of A.C. Motors 51


Page
Subsidiary Meters—(See “Meters, Subsidiary”).
Substations Within Consumer's Building or Premises 21
Supply —
Applications for 7
Area of 7
High Voltage 57
Large Installations 21
System of 11
Terms and Conditions of 10
Supply System, Earthing of 12
Switchboards, Labelling of 50
Switchgear—
Connected on Line Side of Meters must be Sealed 39
High Voltage —(See "Installations, High Voltage”).
Tails, For the Connection of Service Lines and Consumer’s Lines 23
Tariffs—(See “Rates”).
Temporary Mains or Services 34
Temporary Wiring 51
Tennis Courts, Loading and Balancing of Lighting Installations 16
Terms and Conditions of Supply 10
Time Control of Installations 38
Time Switches —
Provision and Installation of 38
Use as Consumer’s Main Switch Prohibited 38
T ransformers —
Current Use of for Metering 35
Three Phase to Single Phase 15
Type of Service to be Installed 18
Voltage —(See “System of Supply”).
Wash Boilers, Loading and Balancing 17
Water Heaters —
Electrode Type 54
Instantaneous Type. Loading and Balancing 15
Off-Peak, Loading and Balancing 17
Not Included in the Nominal Loading of the Service 20
Weatherproof Boxes for Meters, Provision of 42
Welding Apparatus. Loading and Balancing 13
Wiring Rules, Compliance with S.A.A 9, 47
Wiring, Temporary 51
X-Ray Apparatus, Loading and Balancing 13
Printed in Australia by North Sydney Printing Pty. Ltd.
