

SERVICES RENDERED
NEW SOUTH WALES
W. BLAND.
SYDNEY I
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY ALEXANDER W. DOUGLAS,
ATLAS OFFICE, 40, HUNTER STREET.




SERVICES
RENDERED TO NEW SOUTH WALES
BY W. BLAND.
The late failure of the friends of W, Bland in the Legislative
Council, —notwithstanding the success of his friends in the Legis-
lative Assembly,—to obtain some recognition of the public services
of W. B., —and the great mass of erroneous and imperfect state-
ments and important omissions, in respect to those services, made by
the friends, as well as opponents, to that measure, —together with
the request of many of his esteemed friends, —call for the following
statement of facts, —which is alike due to his friends, to the public,
and to himself.
To commence. The principal portion of the public services ren-
dered by W. B. to New South Wales, some of the most important
effects of which have long since extended to the entire group of
the Australian Colonies, may be enumerated as follow, viz.: —
IsJ.—By means of letters* addressed by him, in 1819, to Earl
Bathurst, then Minister for the Colonies, exposing to His Lordship
the deplorable state to which the Colony had been reduced during
the administration of His Excellency Governor Macquarie,—more
• These letters were transmitted open, through Governor Macquarie.


particularly from the year 1814 (inclusive) up to the period when
the above letters were written. The primary effects of which Letters
was to obtain for the Colony a Commission of Enquiry, (conducted by
Commissioner Bigge), the first effect of whose enquiries was to confirm
the entire contents of the Letters sent to Earl Bathurst, —and thus lead
to their at once being acted upon.
(a.) By the removal of Governor Macquarie, who was succeeded
in his Government by that highly honorable character, the late Sir
Thomas Brisbane.
(b.) By the appointment, for the first time, of a Legislative and
Executive Council.
(c.) By the re-organization of the Courts of the Colony throughout.
For instance, the substitution of a Sheriff for a Provost-Marshal, —a
(Civil) Jury for Military Assessors, —a Chief Justice (Sir Francis
Forbes) to be assisted by Puisne Judges, in place of a (Military)
Judge Advocate, and a Judge termed the Judge of the Supreme
Court; the former for the Criminal, the latter for the Civil, business.
(d.) By the removal of a mass of ruinous restrictions on Trade
and Commerce, contained, for the most part, in the Port Regulations
of the late Governor.
(e.) By the abolition of a frightful amount of jobbing by the
Governor and the Government, principally in the supplying of the
Military, and the Imperial Penal, Establishments in the Colony with
grain almost wholly from abroad; and in supplying the Government
Stores with animal food partly from abroad, and the remainder almost
wholly from their friends; but, more especially, in glutting the Colony
generally with (foreign) spirits rum from Bengal, and aqua
ardente from Rio. The importation of grain being as far as possible
substituted by Sir Thomas Brisbane’s Government by grain grown
in the Colony, while the jobbing in the supplying of the Stores with
animal food was counteracted by the opening of the Stores for those
supplies from the settlers generally.


Meantime, jobbing in imported spirits was being rapidly got rid
of, by permission being granted to the Colonists, under due regu-
ation, to distil; whence, for the first time, two extensive Distilleries
sprung up, almost at once, —“ The Glenmore,” and soon afterwards
“ The Brisbane.”
The results of the above movement were both highly beneficial
and immediate. The Governor being enabled almost at once to
repeal an act which had only just been passed, bestowing a grant
of One hundred acres of land on any person taking one convict
“ off the Stores,” and that to the extent of any number of convicts
desired by the Assignee—the application for convicts having risen,
in consequence of the rapidly returning prosperity* of the Colony,
to a level with the means of supply,—to the large financial saving
of the Home Government, the extraordinary reform and satisfaction
of the parties so assigned, the universal advancement of the Colony
and the Colonists, and the immediate and considerable increase of
respectable immigration.
The censorship of the Press—there being no law, either Colonial or
otherwise, for its establishment —died, about this time, a natural death.
The Press now, therefore, seemed ample for the protection of the
interests and liberties of the Colonists, and admirably, it may yet
be recollected, they performed their part: and, hence, W. B. had the
satisfaction of being enabled, for a time, to concentrate his entire
attention on his profession. There had been, about this period, a
more and more increasing and urgent want of a General Hospital
for the reception of that rapidly accumulating portion of the operative
classes of the population who were daily becoming free.
• At the time of the arrival of Governor Macquarie, the prosperity of the
Colony—from its commerce, as well as other sources —was, in reference to its
amount of population, fully equal to that of its most palmy days at any period
since. During the administration of this Governor, however, the amount of
Colonial shipping had become reduced to less than one-half, while the Colony
had, in every other respect, whether moral or physical, retrograded to an
infinitely greater extent.


The Benevolent Asylum, to which W. B. had been attached as
Medical Attendant from its commencement, was, therefore, at once
with the zealous concurrence of its philanthropic managers, converted
by him to a due extent —into the General Hospital of the Colony
—and operations, which, up to that period, had never been even
attempted in the Colony, were, from the large portion of the popu-
lation requiring such assistance, of steady and frequent occurrence,
and amongst these, in particular, cases of cataract, (the number of
which had been accumulating during a period of many years), with
some few cases of lithotomy, and operations on the large arteries,
some of which operations had been but lately adopted, and a very
few times performed even at home, on the Continent, or in the United
States, and the success of which operations was fully equal to that of
any that had either then or since been experienced. To the above
must be added his scientific improvements in the reducing of dislocations,
together with his equally important improvements in the treatment of
fractures—the value of which is becoming gradually more and more
highly appreciated—not to mention his successful treatment of snake-
bite, of typhus (gravior ) —when raging in this Colony, as it has done on
three several occasions, as a most fatal epidemic,—and of that extremely
fatal epidemic, influenza, which several times made its destnictive
appearance in the Colony during the period from 1820 to about 1827.
W. B.’s attention to the Asylum absorbed now a large portion of his time,
his visits being seldom fewer than two daily, and hence no doubt the
marked success of his treatment, and the almost enthusiastic attachment
of the patients. This state of things continued uninterruptedly a period
of about twenty-five years, during which the duties performed by
himself, exclusive of operations, were equal at least in amount and
importance to the entire duties that had been performed at the Convict
Hospital in Macquarie Street, by the two medical gentlemen attached
to that institution, with salaries and other allowances between them,
equal to about <£looo a year ; whence it may be justly admitted that
W. B. saved the Benevolent Asylum, or rather the Government, who
had to meet all deficiencies, a total sum of not less than .£25,000.
On the departure of Sir Thomas Brisbane, and the then Colonial
Secretary, Major Goulburn, little occurred —with perhaps one ex-


ception,—that seemed to call for special attention, and that exception
was an attempt to strip the Colony of its free Press, of which we
shall speak by and by. But during the period from the departure
of Sir Ralph Darling, and the arrival of his successor, Sir Richard
Bourke, this quiet and apparently safe state of things was no longer
allowed to exist, and a most formidable attempt was made, not by
the Government, but by certain individuals, part of whom were in
England, part here on the spot, to assist their colleagues at
or rather mutually assist each other, whose combined object it was
to divest the inhabitants of the Colony, both contemporaneous and
future, (saving and excepting themselves and their friends,) of the
whole of the “Waste Lands,” which ought in mere fairness and
justice, as well as sound policy, to be viewed as the birth-right of
millions yet unborn ! To the fee simple of which, the present gene-
ration can, in justice, have —with obviously some comparatively trivial
exceptions,—no more claim or pretence than the whalers of the
present day and their heirs, can have to the fee simple of the whaling
or the fishing grounds and waters in the Arctic or Antarctic regions'.
The objects of the greater part of the individuals engaged in this
scheme were, no doubt, those which might be supposed for the most
part to proceed from an intense amor habendi, and who, viewing the
scheme as certain of success, conceived that they would be culpably
neglectful of their own interests, if they did not partake of the ad-
vantages it offered ; while with others this object was blended with
feudal or serf-like notions of the worst description, involving not merely
the spoliation of present and future generations of their lands, but, at
the same time, as inseparably connected with the possession of those
lands, of their liberty also. The means employed to obtain these
objects were worthy of the objects, viz., the most barefaced mis-
representations. Thus, according to these individuals, the waste lands
of New Holland, (“the lands in the wilderness”) as they were
pleased, on this occasion, to term them, (“from Spencer’s Gulf to
the Gulf of Carpentaria”), “ would have been dear at sixpence (6d.)
an acre.” Such were some of the means by which it was proposed
to blind the Home Government, and thus induce them, —considering
the social respectability of the persons by whom they would be
addressed both here and at home, and their parliamentary in-


fluence, —to confide in their statements, —and, perhaps, in some
hasty moment act upon them. W. B. at once saw all the bearings
of this deep-and-wide-laid scheme, as well as the extreme danger
in which the Colony (in its more extensive sense) while yet in its
infant state was placed, and lost not a moment in endeavouring to
resist the workings of this powerful band of forestalling conspirators,—
met them at their first public Meeting at Parramatta, (their head
quarters) and, assisted by the Editor of the Monitor, whom he had
the good fortune to persuade to join him, both exposed and denounced
their plans here, —while without loss of time, he explained the whole
affair to the Home Government. Under which circumstances, together
with, soon afterwards, the arrival of a new Governor, and that for-
tunately no less a person than Sir Richard Bourke, this notable project
seemed to be abandoned; a scheme which, whatever the motives of
its initiators, must, had it been successful, have led to the practical
and substantial revival of the long since exploded serf-system, enabling
a party, a faction, favoured by mere priority of birth, to forestall the
land of this island-continent, and hence substantially, if not nominally,
to enslave their fellow-men, whose only fault it was to come into
this “ breathing world ” later than themselves ; in fact, to re-establish
on these shores, the oligarchy of the Southern States of the late
American Union, —to revive in these young colonies, a land system,
beginning to be deemed too barbarous even for Russia, —a system
not only bad in itself, but more particularly so, from its offering,
wherever it exists, almost insurmountable obstacles against its removal
or reform.
About this time W. B. commenced his exertions for the founding
of the “ Sydney College,” now known as the “ Grammar School.”
An ample piece of land, highly eligible both for its central and healthy
position, had been given by Sir Thomas Brisbane, while Governor, to
the public for educational purposes, and there was an appearance for
some time, of its being applied to the erection of a school, to be
conducted on Episcopalian principles, when all at once the whole
affair seemed to be lost sight of. W. 8., at length, after waiting
in vain for the revival of the original intention, and making
enquiries, was concerned to find that the original seeming intention


had been utterly abandoned. He now suffered no time to be lost, but
perceiving that the leading members of our young community were
not only indifferent to the founding of any scholastic institution in the
Colony, but that they were decidedly hostile to any such undertaking,
dropped the original comparatively narrow -design, and drew up a
prospectus for the establishment of an institution on what are now
termed “ national principles,” that is, for the admission of students and
masters of every religious denomination. This plan had the good
fortune to obtain the support of a considerable number of persons of
various religious persuasions, and, notwithstanding the dangerous
opposition of the Government of the time, the hostility of the powerful
party before referred to, together with an attempt made by a favoured
individual to obtain the land for himself. Sir Thomas Brisbane’s
letter, by which the land had been given to the public, and which had
been mislaid, having fortunately been found by the kind and honorable
exertions of Sir Thomas Mitchell, the Surveyor General, the Sydney
College was established, —and with a success that was highly grati-
fying,—having the few years it was in active operation turned out
several youths, some of aristocratic pretensions, who went from it
direct to Oxford and Cambridge, and some from the lowliest orders
of our society, who had no means of finishing their studies at home,
but who have since become ornaments to our bar and our political
institutions.
The Sydney College has been since handsomely endowed by the
Government, and converted into the “ Grammar School ” before
mentioned, —as hitherto, for the benefit of all sects of religion,—
affording a classical and mathematical education, and preparing youths
for the immediately active pursuits of life; or, where required, a still
higher degree of education.
An injudicious attempt,—which has just been referred to —made
during the late administration—to revive the censorship of the Press,
and which, but for the firm resistance of the Judges, would have been
successful, shewed at once the precariousness of the tenure by which
the Colonists held such portion of their liberties as they then possessed;
when, some time afterwards, a letter from Sir Henry Lytton Bulwer


was received by the late Sir John Jamison, recommending the
Colonists to form a Political Association without delay, and to appoint
a Parliamentary Advocate for the advocacy of their rights, and never
to relax their exertions until those Constitutional rights, which every
British colony ought to enjoy, had been obtained. This letter, together
with the attempt to revive the censorship, gave rise to the well-known
Patriotic Association, for which Sir Henry most generously undertook
to perform, gratis, the duties of Parliamentary Advocate, —and which
he continued to perform, much to the benefit of the Colony, until
appointed Ambassador to the Turkish Court, when he strongly recom-
mended Charles Buller, Esq., as his successor, —advice which was
immediately adopted.
About this period W. B.’s labours in connection with the Patriotic
Association for the liberties of the Colony, first substantially com-
menced ; —a letter having been just received from Mr. Buller,
omitting all mention of two forms of Government which had been
prepared and sent home by the Association; but enclosing two
several forms of Government—one prepared by direction of the
Imperial Government, —one by himself—the evident result of mis-
information in both instances as to the fitness of this Colony for
a free form of Government. W. B. was at once deeeply impressed
with the danger to be apprehended from these documents, if either
of them should unfortunately be adopted—inasmuch, as it was quite
c | ear — 0 n careful examination, that neither of them possessed any
of the elements of liberty in itself —while neither of them was provided
with the means requisite to enable the colonists to modify or repeal
it; but, on the contrary, had either of them been adopted, it
would have become the germ of an oligarchy of a character fully
as revolting as any of the worst —the most odious of those
analogous forms of government which have so long been the
badge of disgrace to the Continental Nations of Europe; and from
which the enslaved people have so long laboured to relieve them-
selves —but in vain. Reluctant, as fearing to allow his attention
to be abstracted from his professional pursuits, to undertake the task
of writing the political letters of the Association, and from which
it had been stipulated on his consenting to become a member of the


“ Committee of Correspondence ” he should be exempt; and deeply
sensible of the ruinous incompatibility of such duties with those of his
profession, of which he was in the full and almost unlimited practice,
he paused and waited to the last moment, when finding that no reply
was being, or likely to be, prepared, and that it would no longer be
safe to postpone a reply to Mr. Buller’s letter, with its two highly
important enclosures, he was at length induced to take up the pen,—
and notwithstanding the dreadful state to which his health had at
this period been long reduced, and a conviction of the bitter un-
relenting hostility which this additional exertion, on his part for the
attainment of free Institutions for the Colony, would be sure to
excite, and that among some of his most esteemed and valued friends,
—it was never for a moment laid down, until there was good reason
to believe that the effects of the highly dangerous misinformation
imposed upon the Home Government had been removed, and that
the great vital boon of a free Constitution would, with as little delay
as possible, be granted to the Colony; a result which not long after-
wards was realized accordingly ; when, to render this success still
more gratifying, out of the two Constitutions which had been prepared
by the Patriotic Association, the Imperial Government had graciously
conceded that Constitution to the Colonists, for which the Association
had expressed a decided preference, and which perhaps was a large
cause of its success, had received the strong approval of their then
late excellent Governor, Sir Richard Bourke, with that of their late
talented and highly esteemed Chief Justice Sir Francis Forbes.
To W. 8., doubtless, the above was a highly gratifying event —as
the crowning result of his protracted labours —but, unfortunately, at
the same time he was compelled to perceive that this task had not
been thus far completed, without to himself a most painful and ruinous
loss —that of a large circle of esteemed friends, together-with apparently
the utter ruin of his original large share of health, (but which most
unexpectedly has since become perfectly renovated.) Meantime, the
well-known “ monetary confusion ” of the Colony—avowedly the result
of measures which had been exposed and denounced, ab initio —took
place, attended with almost universal insolvency in the Colony; and,
notwithout a heavy pecuniary loss to himself—a loss too greatly


aggravated by the loss of patients, and the universal depression of
the Colony,—matters that formed collectively a complicated mass of
difficulties, with which, more or less, he has had to struggle down to
the present hour.
Early in 1842 the Nominee Legislature, in its last Session, passed
an Act, enabling the Governor (Sir George Gipps) to contract a loan
for immigration, of .£2,000,000, to bear interest .£120,000 per annum,
or 6 per Cent., both Interest and Principal primarily to be secured on
the Land Fund; but, if not paid within the period of three years,
to be then secured on, and eventually paid out of, the ordinary revenue
of the Colony.
W. 8., after having used his best exertions, but in vain, to induce
some of the Members of the Legislature—some of his oldest and most
valued friends—to protest against this unjust and enormous exaction,
addressed and published a letter to His Excellency Sir George Gipps, in
which he expressed the opinion that no Elective Legislature—of which
we had then every reason to expect that we should shortly be pos-
sessed —would ever countenance the payment of either the Interest or
Principal of such a loan; but that, on the contrary, they would in
honor feel it their duty to repudiate such a contract altogether. That
a Nominee Council could, neither in reason nor justice, possess any
power to use the public money in any way, or for any purpose, beyond
that of meeting the current and unavoidable expenses of the Govern-
ment ; and, more especially, when, as in the present instance, the
outlay would not be within the Colony, and for its obvious improve-
ment —but abroad.
The result of the above appeal to our highly talented Governor
was, that, after a powerful speech of His Excellency in Council (fully
reported, as usual at that time), and in which His Excellency was ably
supported by the learned, talented, and excellent Bishop Broughton,
the Bishop of Sydney, it was decided that the Act just passed should
remain in abeyance, and it was never acted upon accordingly.
W. B. in this transaction saved the Colony—while yet its popu-


lation, including the entire immigration brought out already at a
ruinous expense to its shores, did not exceed some 100,000 souls—the
enormous additional debt of ,£2,000,000; while rescuing the Govern-
ment from impending insolvency, from which it narrowly escaped not
long afterwards. Or, as it must be obvious, no reliable provision
having been made for the liquidation of the proposed debt up to the
present time, during a period of about 20 years, at Compound Interest,
the accumulated sum of Six millions four hundred and fourteen
thousand two hundred and seventy pounds (£6,414,270.)
The above services of W. 8., rendered to this Colony, including
(particularly in one highly important instance*) the whole group of
British Colonies in the Australian hemisphere, are now adduced; not,
certainly, with any feeling of ostentation, (or they would have been
paraded before the public long ere this), but in mere justice to his
friends, (and at their urgent request), to the public, and himself; or,
rather, in some important matters, in self-defence.
If any of the above boons were late in being obtained, and if some
of them are yet imperfect, it may perhaps be permitted to refer to the
state of the Colony, when each successive boon was obtained, —the
state of its Government for the most part, or indeed (with one brief
and brilliant period of exception,) always immovably opposed to every
thing like reform, —the state of the inhabitants, the want of information
with some, rendering them incapable of assisting their friends, or, in
fact, of distinguishing their friends from their most dangerous enemies,
while the tory, the class, prejudices of others, their unbridled lust of
lucre and power, their determination not only to resist the gradually
increasing enlightenment of the “ masses,” but to push them back into
the position which they would have held in a long-by-gone age,—
together with their deadly animosity to any thing and every thing
that did not square exactly with their views,—formed collectively a
• In obtaining, (in 1843) for the first time, a free Legislative Institution
for New South Wales, and consequently for every other British Colony In this
hemisphere ; notwithstanding the avowed aversion of the Imperial Government,
as stated by the late Mr. C. Buller, our Parliamentary Advocate, to concede
that measure.


mass of obstacles that seemed to set all individual exertion for their
removal at defiance, at least, within the ordinary term of human
existence.
The conspirative hostilities that had to be encountered were perhaps
of the worst description; silent, but never-ceasing and übiquitous.
It is an old adage, “that kings have long arms;” certainly the arms
of a political faction are scarcely less lengthy; though like the former
seen only by their destructive effects.
However, the boons sought for have been, to a great extent,
obtained for the public. Almost every aim has already been achieved,
or is at length in a fair way of being so.
The first effort made by W. B. through Earl Bathurst was success-
ful, infinitely beyond all expectation, while the acknowledgment of
the importance of that one effort, was an unsolicited grant of land,
worthy of the noble donor, that greatly enhanced, as an acknowledg-
ment, the satisfaction that must have been derived from so splendid a
result. It is only necessary to add on this subject that by this one
effort, a large instalment of liberty was at once and permanently
secured to the public.
The effort in behalf of General Education on the most liberal
principles has been completely successful, that effort having not only
been the means of introducing for the first time, the National system
of Education, but of largely assisting in its permanent establishment
in the Colony. While the introduction of the first general Hospital
into the Colony, accompanied with an extensive saving of the public
money, at a time when such saving was of much importance, proved,
in every respect, no less successful than beneficial. Meantime, the
rescue of our waste lands from the grasp of an insatiable body of
forestalled, has not only preserved to us our Gold Fields and our
other invaluable mineral treasures, which but for that successful
measure might long since have become the property of a self-
constituted aristocracy, but has preserved both those Gold Fields and
the residue of the present waste lands, with the full measure of the


rights aud liberties inseparably attached to them, for the full and
general benefit both of the present and future generations,—a service
assuredly that cannot be overvalued !
The next effort of W. B. for the benefit of the Colony bears date
1842 —a letter addressed to the then governor, Sir George Gipps,
whence the Colony was saved, as before mentioned, from incurring
an extravagant debt for Immigration, and that at a period when
immigrants just arrived were already beginning to a great extent
to be unemployed,—from the utterly beggared state of the Colony,
and who soon afterwards, from the same cause, were compelled to
emigrate from its shores.
Finally, (the last service that will be adduced on the present
occasion,) his obtaining for the Colony, by his correspondence with
our Parliamentary Advocate, the late Mr. C. Buller, a partially
Elective Legislative body—an admirable Institution (even notwith-
standing the wretchedly faulty electoral act attached to it) for
preparing the Colony for its full legitimate amount of liberty, and
that at an early period. As to his letters to Mr. Buller, they are
before the public. In respect to those letters of W. B.’s which were
addressed at different times to the Home Government, and to the
head of the Colonial Government, it is sufficient to say that they
had the good fortune to experience a full acquiescent approval in
each several instance; that the objects sought for and obtained are
also before the public, and that they have obviously worked to the
general benefit of the Colony. It is proper to say, in closing this
statement, that the confidence of W. B. in the Home Government
was unbounded. He believed that no more was required than just
requests founded on correct information to secure to the Colonies
every just and desirable result, while his confidence in'the talent and
honorable principles of Sir George Gipps was, from a variety of circum-
stances, that came within his full cognisance, not less absolute.
15


