

ACCELERATOR
SUPPLEMENT
Service Information
on the
1936 CHEVROLET PASSENGER CARS
Major Improvements
MASTER DE LUXE AND CHEVROLET
Hydraulic Brakes.
Higher Engine Compression.
Full Length Cylinder Water Jackets.
Improved Valve Mechanism.
Revised Valve Timing.
Improved Carburetion.
More Durable Clutch Disc Cushion Springs.
Vibrator Type Voltage Regulator.
New Headlamps with Revised Mounting.
MASTER DE LUXE ONLY
Combination Steel and Cast Iron Brake Drums.
More Rigid Knee-Action Support Arm.
CHEVROLET SERIES ONLY
Increased Wheelbase.
Increased Horse Power.
Entirely New "Box Girder" Frame.
Improved Springs.
Front Spring Bumpers Added.
Screw Type Spring Shackles.
Improved Transmission Shifting Mechanism.
Stronger Rear Axle.
Larger Brake Drums.
Pressed Steel Wheels.
Heavier Steering Gear.
Improved Exhaust System.
Increased Capacity of Petrol Tank.
Larger Radiator.
Roomier Bodies.
Issued by the Parts and Service Department, General Motors-Holden's Limited




Chevrolet Master De Luxe
Chevrolet
Wheelbase
113 in.
109 in.
Engine Type
Valve-in-Head
Valve-in-Head
No. of Cylinders
6
6
Bore and Stroke
3-5/16 in. x 4 in.
3-5/16 in. x 4 in.
Piston Displacement
206.8 cu. in.
206.8 cu. in.
Compression Ratio
6:1
6:1
Actual H.P.
79 at 3200 R.P.M.
79 at 3200 R.P.M.
Rated H.P. (S.A.E. or R.A.C.)
26.3
26.3
Firing Order
1-5-3-6-2-4
1-5-3-6-2-4
Tyre Size
5.50—17 in.
5.25—17 in.
Rear Axle Ratio
4.11 to 1
4.11 to 1
CAPACITIES
Crankcase (Refill)
4 quarts
4 quarts
Transmission
2 pints
Id pints
Rear Axle
4 pints
pints
Petrol Tank
111 gallons
lid gallons
Cooling System
12% quarts
12d quarts
General Specifications
Fig. 1-Engine
ACCELERATOR A SUPPLEMENT


Engine
The 1936 Master De Luxe engine remains
basically the same, although numerous refine-
ments have been made to increase its efficiency
and durability.
The horse power and torque throughout the
lower speed ranges have been increased, to pro-
vide better performance. The maximum horse
power has been decreased very slightly, but this
has no effect on maximum car speed.
All parts of the engine except those specifically
mentioned herein, remain the same as in 1935.
The 1936 Chevrolet Series engine is identical
with the Master, with exception of the air cleaner,
the clutch pressure plate springs and the clutch
housing.
CYLINDER BLOCK
The cylinder block has been changed to incor-
porate full length water jackets. These extend to
the bottom of the cylinder bore as shown in
figure 2.
Fig. 2 —Cylinder Water Jacket
With this construction the engine operating
conditions are improved; the cylinder bores re-
main truly round and straight, and the piston
rings always maintain full contact with the walls.
All moving parts —pistons, rings, connecting rods,
etc., run cooler and the normal life of these parts
is increased.
CYLINDER HEAD
Due to refinements in the design of the com-
bustion chamber, it has been possible to increase
the compression ratio from 5.6 : 1 to 6.0 : 1,
Valve seat cooling has been improved by a
more uniform metal thickness.
VALVES, SPRINGS AND LIFTERS
A counterbore has been added at the bottom
of the exhaust valve guides to prevent possible
sticking of the valves. See "A” figure 3. This
Fig. 3 —Valve Guide Counterbore
eliminates contact between the valve guide and
the carbon-forming portion of the valve stem.
Valves, rocker arms, push rods and lifters re-
main the same.
Slight changes have been made in the valve
springs to reduce the pressure when the valve
is open. The new' spring pressures are as follow:
Valve closed (length 1| in.) ... 42 to 48 lbs.
Valve open (length 1-9/16 in.) 100 to 107 lbs.
Approximate free length —2-7/32 in.
Valve lash remains the same on both models,
namely .006 in. minimum jor inlet and .013 in.
minimum jor exhaust, with the engine at normal
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


road temperature. Average shop conditions do
not permit driving each car on the road to nor-
malize engine temperatures, therefore when an
engine is warmed-up by idling and is not driven
on the road, valves should he set with a clearance
of .008 in. for intake and .015 in. exhaust.
Improvements have been made in the 1936 en-
gine to maintain more constant valve clearance
under all conditions.
The main factors causing variations in valve
clearance are the cylinder block and the push
rods —the cylinder block expands as the cooling
water heats up, and the push rods expand as the
temperature of the oil increases.
In previous engines, the water heated up much
faster than the oil. The colder oil poured over
the push rods tended to retard their expansion,
and since the block expansion was rapid follow-
ing the temperature rise of the water, there was a
tendency for the cylinder head to "lift” away
from the tops of the push rods. As the tempera-
ture of the oil gradually increased, the push rods
expanded until the tappet clearance finally be-
came stabilized.
In the 1936 engines, due to the long water
jackets and the fact that the oil pipe to the rocker
arms is passed through the water jacket (see
figure 7), oil going to the rocker arms and push
rods warms up much more quickly. This serves
to speed up the expansion of the push rods, mini-
mizing the difference between the block and push
rod expansions, thus decreasing the valve lash
variation during the warm-up period. As soon
as the oil becomes hotter than the cooling water,
the oil line to the rocker arms acts as an oil
cooler and tends to reduce the temperature of the
oil. Figure 4 shows a comparison of the actual
oil temperatures, using the 1935 temperatures as
a basis.
On previous models, an oil temperature 100° F.
above the water temperature was possible under
high speed driving. In the 1936 engine, the maxi-
mum temperature difference has been lowered to
60° F. and therefore the tendency for valve lash
to decrease on hard driving has been correspond-
ingly reduced.
Apart from the quieter operation of the valves,
the idling of the 1936 engine when hot, after a
long run, has been noticeably improved by the
above changes.
Fig. 4—Oil Temperature Chart
CAMSHAFT
The ramp of the cams, which is the slight and
gradual increase from the base circle of the cam,
up to the point where the cam begins to open the
valve, has been re-shaped on both intake and
exhaust.
In actual valve timing, this causes the valves to
open later and close sooner than previously and
the resulting smaller overlap between the open-
ing of the intake valve and the closing of the
exhaust, improves the idling performance of the
engine and provides more power in the lower
speed range.
The inlet cams have also been changed by the
adoption of a "round-nose” contour which results
in quieter valve operation and greater valve
spring life. .
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


VALVE TIMING
The timing gears remain the same as in 1935
Master engine.
Valve timing may be checked as follows:
On a cold engine—
1. Remove all lash from No. 1 exhaust valve.
2. With the lifter on the back of the cam, mount
a long stroke dial indicator to bear on the
adjusting screw of the rocker arm and set the
indicator to zero.
3. Crank the engine until No. 1 exhaust valve
opens and then starts to close. Then watch
for the ignition timing mark on the flywheel
and carefully bring it in line with the pointer.
If the valve timing is correct, the indicator
should read .036 in.
ENGINE MOUNTINGS
The design of the engine mountings remains
unchanged for 1936. The same adjustment in-
structions apply.
EXHAUST SYSTEM
Master De Luxe
The exhaust system remains unchanged on
Master models, except for minor improvements
in the mounting.
Chevrolet
The suspension of the exhaust system on Chev-
rolet series has been redesigned. Two rubber
grommets are carried in the upper flange of the
support bracket at the rear of the muffler in place
of the one grommet formerly used at this point.
See figure 5.
The tail pipe is suspended from the rear cross
member by a support which is mounted in a rub-
ber grommet containing approximately twice as
much rubber as formerly. See figure 6.
The exhaust pipe has been shortened and the
tail pipe has been lengthened to bring the muffler
in a more forward position.
The internal design of the muffler has also
been improved.
Fig. 5—Chevrolet Series Muffler Support.
Fig. 6—Chevrolet Series Tail Pipe Support
6


Engine Lubrication
OIL PUMP
The oil pump drive mechanism has been
strengthened throughout. The tongue which con-
nects the distributor and oil pump shafts, is wider
and stronger and is now located on the distributor
shaft. The oil pump shaft has been increased
in diameter from % in. to 9/16 in. and the pin
which connects this shaft to the rotor is enlarged
from 5/32 in. to 3/16 in. The set screw which
holds the entire pump assembly to the crankcase,
has a stronger tapered end and is 3/32 in. larger
in diameter.
The distributor gear pin is now definitely the
weakest point in the drive, so that in case of
seizure or jamming of the oil pump gears, this
pin will shear and prevent operation of the engine
with an inoperative oil pump.
OIL DISTRIBUTOR
The oil distributor body gasket is thicker and
is now made of composition cork to provide a
better seal.
The oil distributor now includes a lighter valve
which eliminates the possibility of periodic vibrat-
ing noises.
RIFLE-DRILLED OIL PASSAGE
The oil pipes which were formerly pressed in
the block to carry oil to the main bearings, have
been replaced by a rifle-drilled passage serving
the same purpose.
OIL TEMPERATURE CONTROL
As previously mentioned under '"Valves,
Springs and Lifters,” the full length water jackets
and the routing of the valve rocker arm oil pipe
through the water jacket serve to quickly raise
oil temperature after starting and to limit the
temperature under hard driving conditions. The
pipe as shown from "A” to "B” (figure 7) is a
single piece of tubing.
CRANKCASE FILLER AND VENTILATOR
A baffle has been added inside the crankcase
to prevent the loss of oil vapour through the
ventilator at high speeds (see figure 8).
As shown in the illustration, a handle has been
welded to the oil filler cap. The new cap may
be used on previous models.
Fig. 7 —Oil Temperature Control
Fig. 8 —Crankcase Ventilator Baffle
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


Cooling System
As previously mentioned, the water jackets now
extend to the bottom of the cylinder bores, pro-
viding uniform cooling throughout their entire
length.
Due to the longer water jackets on both models
and the larger radiator on Chevrolet series, the
cooling system capacity has been increased to 12%
quarts.
The radiator filler cap on Chevrolet series is
now located under the hood, similar to the Master
De Luxe series.
RADIATOR
The radiator core has been re-designed with
a new section which gives more efficient heat dis-
sipation. The same radiator is used on both
models.
DRAINING THE COOLING SYSTEM
In addition to the regular drain cock at the
bottom of the radiator, an additional drain fitting
is provided on the left side of the cylinder block.
Important. —Both drain cocks must he opened for
complete drainage of the cooling system.
Fuel System
PETROL TANK
The petrol tank is of new construction and
consists of two identical stampings which are
seam-welded, face to face. See figure 9- When
welded together, the flanges of the two stampings
form a rigid reinforcement around the entire tank,
preventing longitudinal bending which might
open seams and cause a leak. Further rigidity is
provided by five equally spaced ribs extending
from the front to the rear of each stamping.
The fuel tank for 1936 is the same on both
models , the capacity being 11\ gallons.
Fig. 9 —Petrol Tank
CARBURETTOR
Numerous refinements have been made in the
1936 carburettor.
By means of a passage connecting the float
chamber to the inside of the air horn (see figure
10), the air pressure in the carburettor float
chamber is balanced with that on the inside of
the air horn. With this balanced pressure, the
proportions of air and fuel in the mixture remain
substantially the same at all times, even though
the air flow may be restricted by a dirty air
cleaner.
Fig. 10 —Carburettor Pressure Balance Port
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


Due to the new requirements of the engine, and
the "balanced” feature of the carburettor, calibra-
tions of the metering rod and jet have been
changed. The float chamber vent has been re-
moved and a heavier metering rod washer is now
used to assist in sealing the float chamber. This
part must not be omitted when the carburettor is
being worked on, and for the same reason it is
also very important not to omit the small gasket
between the air horn and the carburettor body.
The air horn is retained to the carburettor body
by three screws instead of two. This provides
a stronger anchorage and prevents any possible
loosening which might cause air leakage in the
passage way between float chamber and air horn.
The choke valve of the carburettor has been
simplified by the removal of the locking
mechanism.
The needle valve and seat have been re-de-
signed to withstand approximately twice as much
pressure.
Two holes at the idle port replace the former
slot which was apt to vary in shape due to the
method of punching. This makes the fuel con-
sumption more uniform at speeds from 15 to 25
miles per hour.
The position of the holes governing the vacuum
spark advance has been changed slightly to in-
crease the effective range.
The float level remains unchanged, namely f in.
This is measured from the surface of the cover
with the gasket removed, to the nearest point on
the float, when the assembly is held in the in-
verted position.
The correct idle adjustment is 1 to 2 turns open.
INLET MANIFOLD
A slightly smaller inlet manifold, incorporat-
ing all the features of the previous manifold, is
used on the 1936 engines. The smaller manifold
increases the velocity of the fuel mixture, improv-
ing the distribution and providing better engine
performance during the warm-up period.
CARBURETTOR HEAT CONTROL
The cover of the heat control thermostat has
been changed to reduce the cut-away portion.
This allows the valve to open more quickly.
Electrical System
GENERATOR
The ventilated-type generator is continued. In
the 1936 generator, however, the third brush is
non-adjustable, this being permanently set at
maximum charging rate.
VOLTAGE CONTROL UNIT
The vibrating type of voltage regulator is used
in place of the step or lock-out type used on the
1935 models. The vibrating type provides more
accurate control of the voltage and thus more
nearly meets the requirements of the battery.
Certain tests, as outlined below, may be made
to establish whether or not a voltage regulator
is functioning properly. Should a regulator prove
defective by these tests, it should be referred to
the Equipment Distributors holding the repre-
sentation for this item for repair or replacement.
Generator Not Charging
1. Be sure the base of the regulator is satisfac-
torily grounded.
2. Ground the field coil terminal (F) of the
regulator with the engine running at a speed
equivalent to 25 miles per hour. If the gen-
erator now charges, the trouble is in the
voltage regulator.
3. If the generator does not charge when the
(F) terminal is grounded, remove the gener-
ator lead and strike it against the engine
block. If no spark occurs, the trouble is in
the generator.
Generator Always Charging too High
This will be indicated by the burning out of
lamp bulbs and the burning of distributor points.
1. Check battery gravity and if all three cells do
not read approximately the same gravity, cor-
rect the trouble in the battery.
2. Run the engine for 15 minutes at a speed
equivalent to 25 miles per hour. At the end
of this time the ammeter should show a charge
between 3 and 8 amperes. If showing more
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


than 10 amperes, a voltmeter reading should
be taken between the ammeter terminal of
regulator and a ground. If this reading is
above 8.0 volts, it indicates that the regulator
requires adjustment.
Generator Always Charging Too Low
1. Check the battery gravity and if less than
1.250 in States of Vic., N.S.W., S.A. and Tas-
mania, or 1.200 in States of Queensland, W.A.
and Northern Territory, install a fully charged
battery.
2. With the centre high tension wire removed
from distributor, put car in gear, apply brakes,
engage clutch, and operate the starter for 10
seconds. This procedure locks the starting
motor and gives a maximum battery discharge
thus dropping the battery voltage below
normal.
3. Place the gear shift in neutral, start engine
and adjust engine speed so that the ammeter
indicates maximum charge. If this is not less
than 14 amperes, the generator is functioning
satisfactorily.
4. If the output is less than 14 amperes, ground
the "F” terminal on the generator. If the
charging rate increases when this is done, it
indicates that the trouble is in the voltage reg-
ulator or in a loose or high resistance con-
nection between the regulator and the battery,
or at the battery terminal. A badly sulphated
battery will also give this effect, but it will
only be temporary since the sulphate will soon
be broken down.. If the charging rate does
not increase when the "F” terminal is ground-
ed, it indicates that the trouble is in the
generator.
AMMETER
Due to the voltage regulator, the ammeter will
indicate a variable charging rate depending on
the condition of the battery. This may be as low
as 3 amperes which would indicate that the bat-
tery is fully charged and that the regulator is
functioning properly to prevent the over-charging
of the battery.
Vibration or rapid fluctuation of the ammeter
needle may also occur, which is also a normal con-
dition with the vibrator type of voltage regulator.
IGNITION TIMING
Due to the new engine characteristics and the
higher compression ratio, the maximum auto-
matic advance has been decreased from 28° to
25°. The vacuum advance has been increased
from 12° to 17° and the range of the vacuum
advance has been broadened so that it is now
effective from 15 to 70 miles per hour.
The distributor points should be adjusted to
.018 in. and the ignition timed to the steel ball
pressed in the flywheel. This ball is positioned
5° before top dead centre.
Final setting of the ignition should be made
on the road by means of the Octane Selector, to
suit the particular grade of fuel being used.
SPARK PLUGS
Pyrox P.Z.14-AX spark plugs are used. The
correct gap is .028 in. to .030 in.
Clutch
The service life of the clutch disc cushioning
springs has been materially increased due to a new
method of processing the wire. The new treat-
ment, known as "shot-blasting,” consists of ex-
posing the wire to a blast of thousands of small
lead pellets, which peen the surface evenly and
cold-work the material so that its fatigue strength
and endurance capacity under repeated stress are
greatly increased.
The arrangement of the cap screws which
attach the clutch cover to the flywheel, is revised.
The nine bolts are spaced in groups of three at
each of the pressure lever supports, instead of
their former location in the flexible part of the
cover between the supports.
As in the case of the 1935 models, two different
types of clutch pressure plate springs are used in
the Chevrolet series. The two outside springs in
each group are alike and are unmarked. The
centre spring is painted to indicate its different
rate. These springs must he installed in their
correct positions.
The clutch lash on both models is 1 \ in.
10


Transmission
Chevrolet
Master De Luxe
The 1936 transmission remains the same with
the exception of the speedometer driven gear
mounting. This is now positioned above the
main shaft instead of below, so that the speedo-
meter cable will clear the brake master cylinder.
This necessitated a change from a left to a right-
hand spiral on the speedometer gears. The speed-
ometer ratio remains the same.
Chevrolet
The design of the Chevrolet series transmission
has been improved to provide smoother and easier
shifting. This has been accomplished by a new
rail-type shifting mechanism, which is similar to
that used on the Master series. Also, an inter-
lock has been added to prevent the possibility of
shifting into two gears at one time.
The speedometer drive remains unchanged on
the Chevrolet series transmission.
A boss with a tapped hole has been added on
the right side of the transmission rear bearing
retainer to provide an attachment for the ground
strap of the battery. The two bosses formerly
on each side of the transmission case for the
mounting of the hand brake lever have been re-
moved as they are no longer necessary. This lever
is now mounted on a bracket attached to the
frame centre cross member.
Master De Luxe
The rear axle remains the same as in 1935,
with exception of minor changes.
The flanges for the brake backing plates have
been reshaped and these are now attached by
means of four | in. rivets instead of eight 5/16 in.
rivets as in 1935.
The inner races of the differential side bear-
ings and the hub of the differential case have
been increased in width to give better support to
the bearings and to prevent the possibility of the
inner races turning on the hubs of the differential
case. See figure 11.
Rear Axle
Fig. 11 —Master
De Luxe Series
Differential
Side Bearing
Fig. 12—Propeller Shaft and Torque Tube Details
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


Chevrolet
The drive from the universal joint to the rear
axle has been redesigned for greater durability.
This has been accomplished by increasing the dia-
meters of the spiral drive pinion and the propel-
ler shafts, by a stronger connection of these two
members and by the addition of a bushing in the
front end of the torque tube to support the rear
yoke of the universal joint. See figure 12. In
addition, the axle has been changed to conform
with new spring centres and the new brake hook-
up. Both the propeller shaft and the torque tube
have been lengthened to compensate for the
longer wheel base and the more forward location
of the engine in the frame.
The double row pinion thrust bearing has been
changed to conform with the larger diameter of
the new pinion shaft.
Hyatt roller bearings of the new "barrel-type”
design support the differential. See figure 13-
These bearings have a unique characteristic, in
that their capacity increases as the load increases.
Figure 14 is an exaggerated view of the "barrel”
rollers in the unloaded and loaded positions.
The adjustment of these new type side bear-
ings is the same as the adjustment of the former
hall bearings.
The brake drums are mounted on the outside
of the shaft flanges, being located by means of a
machined pilot and secured by two cap screws.
Fig. 13 —Standard Series Differencial Side Bearing
Fig. 14 —Barrel Type Roller Deflection
Front Suspension
Master De Luxe
With exception of more rigid wheel support
arms, the front suspension remains unchanged.
Due to the smaller diameter of the brake
drums and backing plates, the 1936 car height
measurement is 4| in. (5| in. on cars with
special heavier springs for rough roads). This
measurement is taken from the bottom of the
king pin boss to the lowest point on the backing
plate.
For 1936, radius rods will be serviced only as
assemblies including the radius rod, the front
bracket and the backing plate stud. Shims for
correcting any slight misalignment between the
front bracket and the unit will be continued.
FRONT WHEEL ALIGNMENT
The specifications for front wheel alignment
are as follows; —
Master De Luxe
Caster (king pin) 0° f l r (both sides to be
even within \ ’)
Camber \ - |° +|' (both sides to
be even within
Toe-in ... ... 1/16 in. to 3/32 in.
Steering geometry (toe-out on turn) 20 ’ and 23°
Chevrolet
Caster ... 2| * |° (both sides to be
even within -| Ci )
Camber ... ... 1° r 4 (both sides to be
even within \ )
Toe-in 1/16 in. to in.
Steering geometry (toe-out on turn) 20‘ and 23°
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


Front Axle
CHEVROLET
The offset in the centre of the front axle "I”
beam is now towards the rear instead of the front.
The life of the king pins and their bushings
is increased by approximately 20% greater bush-
ing area. The bushings are increased 3/16 in. in
length and the steering knuckle bosses have been
increased accordingly. The king pins are | in.
longer than in 1935. See figure 15.
STEERING KNUCKLE ATTACHMENT
The four bolts which hold each steering
knuckle, steering arm and brake flange plate to-
gether, have been increased from | in. to 7/16 in.
in diameter, and these are now located farther
apart, thus providing a stronger mounting.
Fig. 15 —"Chevrolet” Series Steering Knuckle Details
Springs
Chevrolet Series
The riding qualities of the 1936 Chevrolet
series have been greatly improved by an entirely
new spring design. The front springs are softer
and are 3 in. longer therefore their frequency or
vibration rate is reduced and more nearly ap-
proaches the frequency of the rear springs. This
reduces the tendency of the car to pitch and pro-
vides a more evenly balanced ride.
Referring to figure 16, it will be noted that
the two upper spring leaves of each front spring
are rolled at the forward end to form an eye of
double thickness and that the front spring eye
bushing is held in the second leaf whereas the
rear bushing is held in the first leaf. This con-
struction is especially strong in resisting spring
"wind-up” when the brakes are applied.
Fore and aft clearance is provided between the
inner and outer spring eyes at the front of the
spring. This clearance is 3/32 in. at the front
and 5/32 in. at the rear of the eye and is neces-
sary to allow free action of the springs without
noise or interference.
Front springs are equipped with special rubber
bumpers which effectively assist the spring in
absorbing shock on severe bumps. These are
similar to the rubber bumpers used on the rear
of the Master De Luxe series.
The rear springs which are now 5 in, shorter
are mounted 1-9/16 in. farther apart to increase
the car stability.
SHACKLES-CHEVROLET SERIES
Threaded type shackles are used on both front
and rear springs similar to Master De Luxe design.
The front springs are now shackled at the rear
instead of the front. See figure 16. At forward
end, a special threaded bolt and bushing are used.
At the forward end of the rear spring the Mas-
ter type ’Tnlox” rubber bushing has been adopted.
See figure 17.
SHOCK ABSORBERS
The Master De Luxe series shock absorbers
remain unchanged. On the Chevrolet series, the
valving of both front and rear shock absorbers has
been changed slightly to conform with the new
ride characteristics of the car.
13


Fig. 17—"Chevrolet" Series Rear Spring


Brakes
Both models are equipped with entirely new
hydraulic service brakes which have been designed
for lower pedal pressure, minimum pedal fade-out
on consecutive high speed stops, easier adjust-
ment and simplified replacement of parts.
The mechanically operated hand brake is con-
tinued, being connected by means of rods and
cables to the shoes of the rear wheels only.
BRAKE SHOES
The brake shoes have been moved 90° from
their former location, the new position being
selected on account of the necessity of bleeding
the brake lines. See figure 18. This change
necessitated increased friction at the articulated
links and the elimination of the former guides in
favour of tension springs.
In each brake, two shoes, hinging on double
articulated links from a common pivot at the bot-
tom of the brake, provide forward and reverse
braking in the same manner as heretofore. These
shoes are made from "T” section steel in which
the flange and web are rolled from one piece.
This provides a light and rigid construction which
dissipates the heat more quickly from the linings,
thus increasing their life. All shoe assemblies on
each model are interchangeable but Chevrolet
and Master De Luxe assemblies are non-inter-
changeable because of the different types of
lining.
Upon braking, the double joint effect of the
articulating links permits the shoe to be carried
in the direction of the moving brake drum. The
articulation of both shoes and their links is lim-
ited in a manner similar to that of the 1935 re-
verse shoe, but this feature is incorporated in the
forward acting shoe merely from the standpoint
of interchangeability.
Limited articulation on the reverse shoe is for
the purpose of preventing excessive toe wear on
forward brake application. This is accomplished
by the insertion of a pin through the holes in both
links and the heel of the shoe. See figure 19.
The holes in the links are of slightly larger dia-
meter than the pin, and permit some movement
in the joint. A stiff compression spring under the
head of the pin holds the links tightly against the
shoe web.
Fig. 18 —Front Wheel Brake Shoes
15


Fig. 19 —Stages of Lining Wear on Forward Braking
On forward braking, each shoe and its links
pivot at the anchor pin as a unit, due to the com-
pression of the spring. The forward shoe is picked
up by the revolving drum into which it then
adjusts itself.
With the reverse shoe, however, the action is
somewhat different, as it is applied against the
rotation of the drum. This tends to lift the heel
of the shoe which would ordinarily cause exces-
sive wear at the toe. However, the pin in the
heel of the shoe prevents it from lifting, and re-
sults in uniform wear of the lining. The clear-
ance hole around the pin permits just enough
articulation to allow the shoe to adjust itself into
the drum on reverse braking. As soon as suf-
ficient toe wear occurs to permit the shoe to ride
against the pin, further articulation is prevented
and the reverse shoe acts as a fixed shoe in for-
ward braking.
The self-actuation of the forward shoe is greater
on forward braking. Likewise the reverse shoe
has its greater self-actuation when the car is in
reverse. In each case the actuation is designed
to give just the right amount without being exces-
sive. This has been increased, however, in com-
parison with 1935 and the pedal pressure is ma-
terially reduced.
For the rime being at least, brake lining will
not be serviced separately. When replacing brake
shoe assemblies, it is essential that corresponding
shoes on both sides be changed. For example,
should a right forward shoe be changed, the left
forward shoe should also be changed.
BRAKE SHOE GUIDE SPRINGS
At the centre of each brake shoe, a conical coil
spring, which takes the place of the former guide
from the brake shoe anchor plate, is hooked
through the web of the shoe to an anchor welded
to the brake flange plate. This spring holds the
inner edge of the shoe flange rightly against the
three small projections on the backing plate, thus
keeping the shoe in perfect alignment and at the
same time preventing it from rattling or vibrating.
BRAKE DRUMS
Master De Luxe
The brake drums are of composite construction,
each consisting of a cast iron rim of heavy sec-
tion, cast integrally with a pressed steel web. See
figure 20. The outer circumference of the drum
has four deep grooves which form cooling ribs.
Fig. 20 —Brake Drum Construction
ACCELERATOR


The new drum combines the advantages of a cast
iron braking surface with the light weight feature
of a pressed steel drum. Cast iron is an ideal
braking surface on account of the minute par-
ticles of graphite contained in the iron. It pre-
vents the scoring of drums and increases the life
of the linings.
The advantages gained through the use of the
composite drums have permitted a reduction in
drum diameter from 12 in. to 11 in. with still
greater braking efficiency than before.
Chevrolet
The Chevrolet series, being lighter in weight,
are equipped with improved pressed steel drums
which have been increased from 10 in. to 11 in.
in diameter.
BRAKE DRUM DIRT SHIELDS
The brake drum dirt shield is a full ring instead
of a split ring, and is welded at four more places
to the flange plate. This shield forms a gutter
to drain away any water or mud before it can
enter the brake mechanism.
WHEEL CYLINDERS
Each wheel cylinder contains two pistons which
act on the brake shoes in opposite directions. See
figure 18. The piston is an aluminium cup ground
to a fit of .002 in. to .004 in. clearance in the
cylinder bore. The rubber cup at the inner end
of the piston is moulded to fit snugly into the
bore and to act as a seal and thus prevent the
escape of brake fluid past the piston.
The end cover is stamped in two cup-shaped
pieces, which are welded together back to back.
One of these slips over the end of the cylinder
on a machined pilot and the other serves as an
adjustment wheel, notches being cut around its
circumference. The adjustment screw extends to
the brake shoe, a deep notch in its outer end
permitting it to straddle the brake shoe web. At
the centre of the wheel cylinder a light spring
exerts pressure against the two pistons, maintain-
ing contact between the various parts.
Front wheel cylinders are slightly larger than
those on the rear, in order to give the proper dis-
tribution of braking effort. Cylinder sizes are as
follows: —
Front Rear
Chevrolet Master De Luxe 1|- in. 1-3/16 in.
Chevrolet 1-J- in. 1-1/16 in.
MASTER CYLINDER
The pressure developed in the master cylinder
by pedal movement, is distributed equally through
the pipes and hoses to the four wheel cylinders.
At the wheel cylinders, this hydraulic pressure is
converted into movement which expands the shoes
into their drums.
The master cylinder consists of a housing, pis-
ton, compensating valves and ports, and a com-
bined piston and pedal stop. See figure 21. A
Fig. 21 —Master Cylinder
large reservoir for brake fluid is incorporated in
the cast iron housing above the cylinder. It is
filled through a hole at the top which is sealed by
a removable cap. Two drilled ports lead from
the reservoir to the cylinder, the larger one being
called the "breather port” and the smaller one the
"compensating port.”
The piston is a long, spool-like member ground
to a fit of .001 in. to .005 in. clearance in the
bore. It incorporates a rubber seal at the for-
ward end and a rubber "primary” cup at the
rear. This rubber cup is maintained in contact
against the end of the piston by a light spring.
The combined outlet and return valve at the rear
of the cylinder is held against its seat by the same
spring. This valve is made of rubber and is
encased in a steel cage.
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


The combined piston and pedal stop is a steel
disc held in the forward end of the cylinder by
a lock ring. The upset end of the piston rod
contacts with the stop when the brakes are re-
leased. A rubber boot, which works like an ac-
cordion, encloses the rod and seals the end of the
cylinder. The piston rod is adjustable and should
be set to provide 4 in. clearance between the brake
pedal and the underside of the toe board. It is
not necessary to disconnect the rod to perform
this adjustment.
Operation
Movement of the brake pedal pushes the rod
against the piston, forcing the piston and its cup
to move towards the rear. The resultant pressure
opens the rubber valve and allows the fluid to
flow into the lines.
When the brake is released, the main cylinder
return spring forces the piston and its cup for-
ward. The brake shoe retracting springs exert
pressure on the fluid, forcing the cylinder outlet
valve from its seat and allowing the fluid to
return to the cylinder. However, when the pres-
sure drops to 9 lbs., this valve closes, retaining
this pressure in the lines and thus preventing the
possible entry of air into the system.
The return of the piston and its primary cup
to the released position is faster than the return
of the fluid through the lines. On account of
this, a momentary vacuum is created in the master
cylinder which causes additional fluid to be drawn
from the reservoir, thiougn the breather port,
through the drilled holes in the piston end and
past the lip of the primary cup. As the fluid
returns from the lines, this extra fluid flows back
into the reservoir through the compensating port.
Thus, a full cylinder of fluid is assured for every
brake application.
HYDRAULIC BRAKE LINES
The master cylinder is connected to the wheel
cylinder by means of special steel tubing and flex-
ible hoses. Exposed parts of the tubing are pro-
tected from injury by flying stones from the
wheels, by means of an armour which consists of
closely wound heavy steel wire around the tubing.
The ends of all rubes are flared on an angle
of 45°, with the lip of the flare bent inward to
form a double thickness. See figure 22. As the
nut is tightened, the flared end is compressed,
forming a strong leak-proof connection.
Fig. 22 —Hydraulic Brake Line Connection
The special steel tubes are serviced as formed-
assemblies only, no bending being necessary. The
compression nuts are slipped on the tubing before'
the special flared ends are formed. Copper tubing
must not be used to replace the steel tubing.
Each hose is formed of rubber, moulded around
an impregnated fabric core. The copper-plated
steel connectors at each end are pressed onto the
hose and the barrel of each connector is rolled
into the rubber to form a durable joint (see figure
23). All hose assemblies are interchangeable.
Fig. 23 —Hydraulic Brake Wheel Hose
HAND BRAKE
The hand brake operates mechanically on the
brake shoes of the rear wheels. It is designed to
provide 25 per cent, more travel than the service
brake, thus insuring a margin of safety at all
times.
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


Ordinarily the hand brake cable conduits at
the rear wheels should not require lubrication for
the life of the car, as they are packed with lubri-
cant at the time of assembly and sealed with
rubber bellows. If lubrication is required at high
mileages, a non-fluid grease should he used and
the rear wheels should be removed to make sure
that no grease enters the brakes.
On the Master De Luxe series the hand brake
lever is joined to its pull rod through a heavy
coil spring as shown in figure 24. Upon engage-
ment, the spring allows the pawl to engage with
teeth in the sector beyond the necessary travel of
the linkage for brake engagement.
Fig. 24—Hand Brake Ratchet
BLEEDING BRAKES
Whenever a pipe line is removed at one brake,
then only that wheel cylinder need be bled. If
any main pipe lines are disconnected, the com-
plete system must be bled. The long lines, or
those leading to the left wheel cylinders, should
be bled first.
Fill the reservoir with G.M.-H. Hydraulic
Brake Fluid before commencing the bleeding
operation, and keep the reservoir at least half
full of fluid during the bleeding operation. Main
Cylinder Filler f-713 which automatically keeps
the reservoir full, is obtainable from Parts Dept.,
and is strongly recommended as a time-saving
tool.
Remove the screw from the end of the bleeder
connection and attach bleeder drain J-747, also
obtainable from Parts Dept. Immerse the end of
the tube in hydraulic brake fluid contained in a
pint jar or other clean container. Unscrew the
bleeder connection \ to f turns and depress the
foot pedal by hand, allowing the pedal to return
to the "off” position slowly. This gives a pump-
ing action which forces the fluid through the tub-
ing and out at the wheel cylinders, carrying with
it any air that may be present.
Watch the flow of liquid from the hose, the end
of which should be kept below the surface of the
liquid in the jar, and when all air bubbles cease
to appear or when the stream is a solid mass,
dose the bleeder connection.
Fluid withdrawn in the bleeding operation
should not be used again unless it is known to be
clean. If used, it should always be strained
through a flannel cloth, nap side up. If the auto-
matic main cylinder filler J-713 is not used, fluid
should be replenished in the reservoir after each
cylinder is bled. Should the reservoir be drained
during the bleeding operation, air will enter the
system and "re-bleeding” will then be necessary.
After the bleeding operation is completed, the
reservoir should be filled. It is extremely im-
portant that only Genuine G.M.-H. Hydraulic
Brake Fluid he used in the system. If improper
fluid or mineral oil is used, it will be necessary
to drain and flush out the entire system with
alcohol and to replace all rubber parts.
SERVICE BRAKE ADJUSTMENT
The adjustment of the new brakes is extremely
simple, there being only one adjustment at each
shoe. No special tools are required.
On both models, with one exception, access to
the adjustment wheels at each brake is provided
through two holes in the backing plate. On the
Master series front brakes, a hole in the web of
the brake drum which is exposed by removing
the wheel, serves the same purpose. All adjust-
ing holes are provided with covers to prevent the
entry of dirt or water.
When adjusting the service brakes, the hand
brake rods should first be disconnected, then each
ACCELERATOR SUPPLEMENT


shoe should be adjusted individually into the
drum until a light drag is obtained. The adjust-
ing wheel should then be backed o§ four notches.
HAND BRAKE ADJUSTMENT
Hand brakes should be adjusted each time the
service brakes are adjusted and always after the
service brakes are adjusted. Hand brake adjust-
ment should then be made by tightening the rods
until all slack is removed. Hand brakes should
be equalized by loosening the rod of the tight
brake. Do not change shoe adjustment when
making a hand brake setting.
The eccentric adjustment of the lever as shown
at "A” in figure 25 should not require changing
except when new linings are installed. In this
case, the brake rods should be disconnected and
Fig. 25 —Rear Wheel Hand Brake Hook-Up
the eccentric should be adjusted until there is no
play between the lever and the connecting link
as shown at "B.” This operation should likewise
be performed after the service brakes have been
adjusted.
STOP LAMP SWITCH
A new stop lamp switch operated by hydraulic
pressure, is used. See figure 21. The switch con-
sists of two terminals moulded in a block of bake-
lite, a metal diaphragm which contacts with the
points of the terminals, a rubber disc which seals
the diaphragm from the brake fluid, and the
housing in which these parts are encased. The
metal diaphragm is the only moving part of the
switch.
When the brakes are applied, the pressure
causes the diaphragm to contact with the terminal
points, completing the stop light circuit. The
switch requires no adjustment.
HYDRAULIC BRAKE ' DON'TS”
DON’T use anything but Genuine G.M.-H.
Hydraulic Brake Fluid in the system.
DON’T use Brake Fluid over again, unless it
is known to be clean. In any case it should always
be strained through dean flannel with the nap
side up.
DON’T let Hydraulic Brake Fluid stand
around in open containers.
DON’T attempt to bleed brakes or depress the
pedal when the brake drums are removed.
DON’T allow the master cylinder to become
less than half full when bleeding.
DON’T allow the brake pedal to return to its
off position quickly when bleeding.
DON’T allow the end of the bleeder hose to
get above the level of the fluid in the container
during the bleeding operations.
DON’T open the bleeder valve more than \ to
| turns.
DON’T wash any part of the system with any-
thing but clean alcohol.
DON’T handle brake parts with dirty hands.
Don’t wash hands in petrol; use soap and water.
DON’T allow grease, paint, or oil of any kind
to come in contact with the brake linings or brake
drums.
DON’T change one shoe and lining assembly;
change corresponding shoes on both sides of the
car.
DON’T install a new drum without first dress-
ing down the braking surface with fine emery
cloth. The drum on the opposite side of the car
should be treated in the same manner.
20


DON’T bore or grind drums to more than
.020 in. larger in diameter than originally, and
DON’T machine drums at all unless a first class
job can be done.
-\ ex p er | ment w i t h wheel cylinders of
111111111 ill :e t^an A 056 originally installed in
DON’T use copper tubing to repair the hy-
draulic brake lines. It will nor withstand the
pressure.
DON’T over-lubricate front wheel bearings.
DON’T use any lubricant whatever on the
brake mechanism.
Wheels and Tyres
5.50 —17 in. tyres are standard equipment on
Master De Luxe models. These are mounted on
16 in. pressed steel wheels.
5.25 —17 in. tyres are supplied on Chevrolet
models, these being mounted on 17 in. pressed
steel wheels.
The minimum tyre pressures are as follow: —
Master De Luxe —5.50 —17: Front, 30 lbs.;
Rear, 32 lbs.
Chevrolet —5.25 —17: Front and Rear, 32 lbs.
Tyre pressures should be checked at least once
a week and when inflating the tyres, it is advis-
able to inflate them 2 lbs. higher than the above
recommended minimum pressures to allow for the
slight loss of pressure which normally occurs.
CAR JACK
The bumper type jack is supplied with both
Master De Luxe and Chevrolet series for 1936.
Steering Gear
The Master De Luxe steering gear remains un-
changed, with exception of the pitman arm shaft
bushings which are now made of bronze instead
of bi-metal.
The Chevrolet steering gear has been improved
by enlarging the diameter of the pitman shaft to
1 in. See figure 26. The diameter of the bush-
ings has been correspondingly increased and they
have also been lengthened \ in. A cork seal,
encased in a steel retainer, is pressed into the
outer end of the housing to prevent the entrance
of road dirt and also to prevent oil from leaking
out of the housing.
A better balance of steering effort has been
obtained by new steering geometry. The pitman
arm is relocated in relation to the steering worm,
equalizing to a greater extent the pitman arm
Fig. 26—"Chevrolet" Series Steering Gear
21


Fig. 27 —"Chevrolet” Series Frame
travel for right and left turns. Previously, a
greater amount of travel was provided to the
left, which meant that more steering effort was
required when making a right turn. To accom-
plish this result, the lengths of the pitman arm,
the steering arms and the drag link have been
revised, and the steering tie rod has been short-
ened to clear the backing plates of the new brakes.
These changes result in a slight increase in the
overall steering ratio, which further reduces the
steering effort.
FRAME-CHEVROLET
The frame of the 1936 Chevrolet models is of
especially strong and rigid design, entirely differ-
ent in construction from the conventional type
frame. The new frame is called a "box-girder”
frame, because every structural member is of
sturdy, rigid box section. This type of section
resists both torsion and bending to a greater ex-
tent than any other form of section employing
an equal amount of metal.
The side rails each consist of a flanged inverted
"U” section member, the opening of which is
welded to a flat steel plate. See figure 27.
The three structural cross members are of the
full box section and are attached to the side rails
by means of welds and rivets to form an excep-
tionally strong assembly. The fourth cross mem-
ber serves as a forward support for the fuel tank.
The frame is nearly a foot longer to provide
for the increased wheelbase, longer front springs,
and the relocation of the radiator and engine
which have been moved 2|- in. forward.
Step hangers and engine side supports are
made of channel sections and are riveted to the
inner and outer flanges of the side rails. At the
point of attachment of the shock absorbers, re-
inforcements are riveted within the box-section of
the rails. Each reinforcement is in the form of a
steel sheet with its two ends rolled into cylinders.
The construction of the new frame does not
permit the drilling of holes at any ptint, as these
will definitely weaken the section.
22


CHASSIS LUBRICATION
EVERY 1,000 MILES
Only a good grade of water-resistant chassis lub-
ricant should be used at points indicated in the
chassis diagram, except where other lubricants
are specifically mentioned.
<J Front Spring Bolt
Steering Knuckle
£ Tie Rod
g Front Spring Shackle
12 Spring Saddle
13 Rear Spring Shackle
17 Steering Connecting Rod
19 Steering Connecting Rod
ft Generator: Two or three drops of light oil
Mm\t in the cups at both ends of the generator.
9 Starting Motor: Two or three drops of
light oil in oil cup at front end of the
starting motor.
7 Distributor: Fill and turn down the grease
cup.
2 Water Pump: Fill and turn down the
grease cup. Use waterproof grease. Fill
oil cup with engine oil.
Steering Gear: The steering gear should
IO be lubricated with special steering gear
lubricant. This is a light non-flowing grease
having a temperature range from extreme sum-
mer conditions to below zero without affecting
the efficiency of the steering gear. Seasonal
change of this lubricant is unnecessary and the
housing should not be drained. If other lub-
ricants are used, it may be necessary to dilute
in extremely cold weather.
Do not use a pressure fitting in the filler plug
hole when filling the steering gear, as this will
force grease up the steering column.
Parking Brake Linkage: The parking brake link-
age—the clevis pins and rods—may be lubricated
with a good grade of engine oil.
The parking brake cables are packed with grease
at the factory. Should the car owner find it
necessary to repack them, a good grade of water-
resistant chassis lubricant should be used.
IJI Transmission; Check the oil level. It
should be maintained at the filler plug
opening. Add transmission oil, SAE No. 160.
See instructions under “Yearly.”
IJt Rear Axle: Check the oil level. It should
be maintained at the filler plug opening.
Add transmission oil, SAE No. 160. See instruc-
tions under “Yearly.”
LUBRICATION CHART
1936 CHEVROLET PASSENGER CAR MODELS
ENGINE LUBRICATION
The engine oil in the crankcase should be filled
to the proper level with a well-refined oil of the
viscosity recommended. The oil level rod, in
the left side of the crankcase is marked “Full”
and “Low.” These notations have broad arrows
pointing to the level lines. Maintain the oil
level between these two lines, going neither
above the “Full” line nor below the “Low.”
During the First 500 Miles: Use oil placed in the
crankcase at the factory. This is a light oil to
be used in the engine during the breaking-in
period.
After the First 500 Miles: Drain the crankcase
and refill with an oil having a viscosity of S.A.E.
30 for summer and S.A.E. 20 for winter.
At 1500 Miles: Drain and refill with S.A.E. 30
(summer) and S.A.E. 20 (winter).
EVERY 1,000—1,500 MILES
Engine: Drain, flush and refill the crankcase.
■j O Air Cleaner; Remove the cleaner and take
■ O off the cover and felt pad. Wash the
cleaner in petrol. After drying, re-oil it by dip-
ping it in SAE No. 50 oil, draining off the excess.
Keep the felt pad dry.
EVERY 5,000 MILES
C Carburettor Accelerating Pump Shaft:
I■# Remove the dust cover and fill the cover
screw hole with graphite grease.
EVERY 10,000 MILES
5 Front Shock Absorber a Keep the shock
I absorbers filled
nßear Shock Absorber (with genuine
j G.M. - H. shock
absorber fluid. Do not under any circumstances,
use a shock absorber fluid other than that recom-
mended above.
3 Front Wheel Bearings: Remove the
wheels, clean the bearings and pack the
bearing ball retainers with a high melting point
front wheel bearing grease. Do not pack the
hub between the inner and outer bearing assem-
blies nor the hub cap, as this excessive lubrica-
tion will result in grease working out into the
brake drums and on the linings.
YEARLY
Transmission: Drain completely, flush and refill
with transmission oil, SAE No. 160.
Rear Axle: Drain completely, flush and refill with
transmission oil, SAE No. 160.
MISCELLANEOUS
Clutch Release Bearing: The clutch release
• V bearing is of the carbon type lubricated
from a reservoir with an oiler on top. This con-
struction eliminates the necessity for frequent
lubrication.
It is only necessary to refill the clutch throwout
collar when, upon releasing the clutch, a squeak-
ing noise occurs.
To fill the clutch throwout bearing collar with oil,
remove the cover plate on the toe board and the
inspection cover on the clutch housing. The
clutch throwout bearing oiler should be filled with
SAE No. 160 oil.
Universal Joint: The universal joint is directly
connected to, and receives its lubrication from,
the transmission.
Rear Wheels: The rear wheel bearings receive
their lubrication from the rear axle. Additional
lubrication of the bearings is unnecessary.
Hydraulic Brakes: Addition of fluid to the brake
master cylinder should be made by your Chev-
rolet Dealer. Use only genuine G.M.-H. hydrau-
lic brake fluid.
Rear Springs: Should the car owner find ft neces-
sary to have the spring leaves lubricated, a cup
grease to which 8% to 10% of graphite has been
added should be used.


CHASSIS LUBRICATION
EVERY 1,000 MILES
Only a good grade of water-resistant chassis lub-
ricant should be used at points indicated in the
chassis diagram, except where other lubricants
are specifically mentioned.
Front Spring Unit Radius Rod
Front Spring Unit King Pin
Front Wheel Tie Rod
20 Steering Connecting Rod
13 Spring Saddle
14 Spring Shackle
1 Generator: Two or three drops of light
oil in the cups at both ends of the
generator.
Ift Starting Motor: Two or three drops of
IW light oil in the oil cup at the front end of
the starting motor.
9 Distributor: Fill and turn down the grease
cup.
2 Water Pump: Fill and turn down the
grease cup. Use waterproof grease. Fill
the oil cup with engine oil.
't A Steering Gear: The steering gear should
I * be lubricated with special steering gear
lubricant. This is a light non-flowing grease
having a temperature range from extreme sum-
mer conditions to below zero without affecting
the efficiency of the steering gear. Seasonal
change of this lubricant is unnecessary and the
housing should not be drained. If other lubri-
cants are used, it may be necessary to dilute in
extremely cold weather.
Do not use a pressure fitting in the filler plug
hole when filling the steering gear, as this will
force grease up the steering column.
Parking Brake Linkage: The parking brake link-
age—the clevis pins and rods—may be lubricated
with a good grade of engine oil.
The parking brake cables are packed with grease
at the factory. Should the car owner find it
necessary to repack them, a good grade of water-
resistant chassis lubricant should be used.
*| ML Transmission: Check the oil level. It
■" should be maintained at the filler plug
opening. Add transmission oil, S.A.E. No. 110.
1 C Rear Axle: Check the oil level. It should
■ be maintained at the filler plug opening.
Add transmission oil, S.A.E. No. 160.
3 Front Spring Unit: Check the oil level.
Keep the housings filled to the level of
the filler plug with genuine G.M.-H. shock in-
sulation fluid.
Do not, under any circumstances, use a shock
insulation fluid other than that recommended
above. Heavy body fluids are detrimental to the
proper functioning of the unit. Use the same
fluid, summer and winter.
LUBRICATION CHART
1936 CHEVROLET MASTER DE LUXE MODELS
ENGINE LUBRICATION
The engine oil in the crankcase should be filled
to the proper level with a well-refined oil of the
viscosity recommended. The oil level rod, in
the left side of the crankcase is marked “Full”
and “Low.” These notations have broad arrows
pointing to the level lines. Maintain the oil
level between these two lines, going neither
above the “Full” line nor below the “Low.”
During the First 500 Miles: Use oil placed in the
crankcase at the factory. This is a light oil to
be used in the engine during the breaking-in
period.
After the First 500 Miles: Drain the crankcase
and refill with an oil having a viscosity of S.A.E.
30 for summer and S.A.E. 20 for winter.
At 1500 Miles: Drain and refill with S.A.E. 30
(summer) and S.A.E. 20 (winter).
EVERY 1,000-1,500 MILES
Engine: Drain, flush and refill the crankcase.
EVERY 2,000 MILES
>t Air Cleaner: Remove the cleaner and take
I # off the cover and felt pad. Wash the
cleaner in petrol. After drying, re-oil it by dip-
ping it in S.A.E. No. 50 oil, draining off the
excess. Keep the felt pad dry.
EVERY 5,000 MILES
•gO Carburettor Accelerating Pump Shaft:
I O Remove the dust cover and fill the cover
screw hole with graphite grease.
5 Front Spring Unit Spindle Bushing:
Every 5,000 miles, the front spindle bush-
ing should be lubricated. To do this, remove
the plug at the inner end of the spindle and pack
the reservoir with a lubricant such as soft cup
grease or vaseline. Passages from this reser-
voir carry the lubricant through the spindle to
the bearing surface.
The slotted pipe plug is installed at this point to
prevent over-lubrication, generally occasioned by
the use of a pressure gun. Over-lubrication
results in grease working out into the brake
drum and on the linings.
EVERY 10,000 MILES
Rear Shock Absorbers; Keep the shock
IMm absorbers filled with genuine G.M.-H.
shock absorber fluid.
Do not, under any circumstances, use a shock
absorber fluid other than that recommended
above.
5 Front Wheel Bearings: Remove the
wheels, clean the bearings and pack the
bearing ball retainers with a high melting point
froiit wheel bearing grease.
Do not pack the hub between the inner and outer
bearing assemblies nor the hub cap, as this ex-
cessive lubrication will result in grease working
out into the brake drums and on the linings.
YEARLY
Transmission: Drain completely, flush and refill
with transmission oil, S.A.E. No. 110.
Rear Axle: Drain completely, flush and refill with
transmission oil, S.A.E. No. 160.
MISCELLANEOUS
n Clutch Release Bearing: The clutch re-
lease bearing is of the carbon type lub-
ricated from a reservoir with an oiler on top.
This construction eliminates the necessity for
frequent lubrication.
It is only necessary to refill the clutch throwout
collar when, upon releasing the clutch, a squeak-
ing noise occurs.
To fill the clutch throwout bearing collar with
oil, remove the cover plate on the toe board and
the inspection cover on the clutch housing. The
clutch throwout bearing oiler should be filled
with S.A.E. No. 160 oil.
Universal Joint: The universal joint is directly
connected to, and receives its lubrication from,
the transmission.
Rear Wheels: The rear wheel bearings receive
their lubrication from the rear axle. Additional
lubrication of the bearings is unnecessary.
Rubber Spring Bushings: Rubber bushings are
used at the front end of each rear spring. These
bushings must not be lubricated or sprayed with
oil. ,
Hydraulic Brakes; Addition of fluid to the brake
master cylinder should be made by your Chev-
rolet Dealer. Use only genuine G.M.-H. hydraulic
brake fluid.
Rear Springs: Should the car owner find it ne-
cessary to have the spring leaves lubricated, a
medium cup grease, to which 8% to 10% of
graphite has been added, should be used.


G. W. GREEN ft SONS PTY. LTD.
