

Keep in
ELECTROLUX PTY. LIMITED
Service Manual
for
Kerosene- Operated
Refrigerators
o ■C
A.R.D. BJC.
Oct. 1939


SERVICE MANUAL
FOR
ELECTROLUX
KEROSENE-OPERATED
REFRIGERATORS
Models L. 22, L3B, LK.55, L 220, L3BO and LK.550
ELECTROLUX Pty. Ltd.
(Incorporated in New South Wales)
HEAD OFFICE:
415 BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE
Telegrams: Electrolux, Melbourne
Telephone: MU 6293 (3 lines).
WORKS:
ALEXANDRA AVENUE.
SOUTH YARRA, MELBOURNE.
Telephone: Windsor 1019/20
A.R.D. B.K.
Oct., 1939


INDEX.
INTRODUCTION 3
DEFINITIONS 4
THE CYCLE OF OPERATION OF THE ELECTROLUX AIR-COOLED UNITS - - 5
CABINET, UNIT AND KEROSENE EQUIPMENT TYPE DETAILS 9
MODELS L. 22 AND L. 220 Specification - - - -- -- -- -10
MODELS LOS AND L. 380 Specification - - - -- -- -- -11
MODELS LK.55 AND LK.550 Specification - - - -- -..--12
DIAGRAMS OF KEROSENE LAMPS Pages 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17
DESCRIPTION OF KEROSENE LAMPS USED IN ELECTROLUX REFRIGERATORS 18
DESCRIPTION OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF KEROSENE EQUIPMENT - - - 19
INSTRUCTIONS FOR INSTALLING AND STARTING UP 20
Installation of the Cabinet - - - - -- -- -- - 20
Starting the Refrigerator - - - - - -- -- .- -20
Checking the Adjustment of the Equipment - -- -- ---20
Selection of Burner Size - - - - - - 22
CONTROLLING AND OPERATING THE EQUIPMENT 23
Regulation of Temperature - - - - -- -.-..23
Maintenance of the Equipment - - - - -- -....23
Replacing the Wick - - - - - -- -- ...23
ICE MAKING TIMES 24
ICE-CREAM FREEZING 25
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE OF ELECTROLUX AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATORS 26
How the Refrigerator Functions - - - .- .- -- .26
Tracing and Remedying Faults - - - -- -- -- -26
Fault Tracing Chart - - - - - -...-27 and 28
Refrigerator too Cold - - - - - -- -...-29
Refrigerator not Cold Enough - - - - -- .- ..-29
No Refrigeration - - - - - - 30
Food Tainting - -- -- -...--.-31
Ice Tainting - -- -- -....--.-31
Ice Making -----_ ..-.--.-32
To Shut Down Cabinet - - - - .-...---32
REPLACEMENT OF DOOR GASKETS 32
REPLACEMENT OF DOOR HINGES AND LOCKS MODELS L. 220, L. 380 AND
LK.550 33
DIAGNOSING COMPLAINTS AND REMEDY OF SAME 33
REPLACEMENT OF COOLING UNITS 35
Unit 42A in L. 22 and L. 220 ... - -- -- -- - 35
Unit 61A in L. 38 and L. 380 - - - - ..---..36
Unit 80A in LK.55 and LK.550 - - - -- -- -- - 36
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


Introduction
<* j I HIS manual is compiled as an aid to the efficient servicing of ELECTROLUX Kerosene-
operated Refrigerators, and if studied carefully will materially assist the service repre-
sentative in maintaining a comprehensive knowledge of such refrigerators, thereby enabling him
to render satisfactory service to the user.
Sufficient data is contained in this manual to enable the service representative to deal satis-
factorily with work generally required in installation and service, but if additional information
on service or individual local problems is required, please communicate with the distributor
for your State, who will, if necessary, obtain this from:
THE REFRIGERATOR DEPARTMENT,
ELECTROLUX PTY. LTD.,
415 BOURKE STREET.
MELBOURNE, C.l.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


DEFINITIONS
REFRIGERATION is the process of removing
heat from a space or object, thereby producing a
cold condition.
The AIR-COOLED ELECTROLUX RE-
FRIGERATOR is a cabinet refrigerated by
“THE ELECTROLUX AIR-COOLED UNIT.”
The ELECTROLUX UNIT (1) is a self-
contained, continuously operating refrigerating
system of the absorption type, wherein the
motivating force is developed within the unit by
the application of heat.
The CABINET is an insulated box used for
food storage, in which refrigeration is produced
by the action of the Electrolux Llnit.
The FOOD STORAGE SPACE (6) is the
interior of the insulated cabinet which is pro-
vided with shelves for storing food. The LINING
(8), which is of porcelain enamel, forms the
boundary of the food storage space. It is pro-
vided with a WINDOW (2) through which the
radiator of the unit is fitted.
The RADIATOR (3) is that part which
covers the EVAPORATOR. Its function is to
provide adequate radiating surface for cooling
the FOOD STORAGE SPACE and it includes
the ICE FREEZING COMPARTMENT (4).
INSULATION (7) is a wall of heat-resisting
material used to prevent entry of heat from the
outside air to the food compartment.
ICE TRAYS (5), with loose dividers, are pro-
vided to make ice in convenient, usable form.
Fig. 1
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


THE CYCLE OF OPERATION
OF
THE ELECTROLUX AIR-COOLED UNITS
The method of operation employed in the
Electrolux Kerosene Refrigerator is generally
regarded as coming under the classification of
an Absorption System, but such a description is
inadequate in that it overlooks the essential feature
of the Electrolux System which distinguishes it
from both the purely Absorption and the Com-
pression systems that is, the feature which
enables it to eliminate all mechanical moving parts.
The inventors have taken advantage of two
well-known physical laws : —Firstly, that the
evaporation of a liquid at a given temperature
does not depend on the total pressure existent,
but will take place provided that the pressure
exerted on the surface of the liquid by its own
vapour is sufficiently low; and, secondly, that if
there is a mixture of gases in any vessel, the
total pressure will be the sum of the pressures
which would be exerted separately by each of the
gases occupying the same vessel alone.
In the Electrolux apparatus, the total pressure
is practically constant, but in the radiator system
(that part of the apparatus in which the evapora-
tion of the refrigerant takes place and cold pro-
duced) another gas hydrogen is introduced.
This gas produces such a proportion of the total
pressure that the remaining portion which is
supplied by the refrigerant is sufficiently low to
produce evaporation at the low temperatures
required. Thus the need for an expansion valve
and a compressor is eliminated.
The Electrolux Unit is composed of a series
of steel cylinders connected by steel tubes which
are welded together to form a single inter-com-
municating container. A diagrammatic view of
an Electrolux Unit is given in Fig. 2.
A charge consisting of a small quantity of aqua-
ammonia (distilled water and ammonia) and
hydrogen gas is hermetically sealed within the
Electrolux Unit. The charge distributes itself
naturally in the unit, the liquid seeking the lowest
levels and the hydrogen gas filling the remaining
space. The charge is under sufficient pressure to
condense ammonia vapour at ordinary room tem-
peratures. The pressure is always equal through-
out the unit but varies slightly as the room
temperature changes.
The operation of the Electrolux Unit comprises
three simultaneous cycles: the ammonia cycle,
the hydrogen cycle, and the aqua-ammonia cycle.
The rate at which these cycles are performed
governs the amount of refrigeration produced. As
the rates accelerate, refrigeration increases, and
conversely.
With the application of heat to the lower por-
tion of the BOILER, ammonia vapour is driven
off together with a small quantity of water vapour.
These gases pass through the VAPOUR
COOLER to the WATER SEPARATOR. The
baffles in the Water Separator are cooled by fins.
The hot ammonia and water vapour comes into
contact with these cooled baffles. This condenses
the water vapour, which drops back into the
BOILER.
The dry ammonia gas then passes to the lower
portion of the CONDENSER, where it is lique-
fied by cooling. The liquid ammonia then flows
into the LOW-TEMPERATURE RADIATOR.
As the liquid ammonia flows down through the
tubes of the LOW-TEMPERATURE RADIA-
TOR, it absorbs heat, evaporates and produces
refrigeration. This radiator also freezes water
to produce ice cubes.
If all the ammonia vapour is not condensed in
the lower portion of the CONDENSER, the
uncondensed gas will pass upwards to the upper
part of the CONDENSER where, if the existing
pressure is high enough, the ammonia vapour will
be condensed. If the room temperature increases
to such a degree that the pressure within the
Electrolux Unit is insufficient to condense the
ammonia vapour in the CONDENSER, some
ammonia vapour passes into the PRESSURE
EQUALISING VESSEL and pushes therefrom
a quantffv of reserve hydrogen gas into the
ABSORBER and RADIATOR systems, thereby
increasing the pressure within the unit. The
pressure is increased because hydrogen gas is
insoluble in water and the ammonia vapour which
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


displaces the hydrogen gas occupies a greater
volume than the same amount of ammonia when
in the state of ammonia solution.
Ammonia gas condensed in the upper portion
of the CONDENSER passes into the HIGH-
TEMPERATURE RADIATOR. The liquid
ammonia passing into the HIGH-TEMPERA-
TURE RADIATOR evaporates into a mixture
of ammonia and hydrogen gas fed from the
LOW-TEMPERATURE RADIATOR and as-
sists in the cooling of the cabinet.
When the room temperature becomes lower, the
ammonia vapour in the PRESSURE EQUALIS-
ING VESSEL condenses, allowing the reserve
hydrogen to return to the EQUALISING
VESSEL, and the pressure is reduced.
Hydrogen gas enters the LOW-TEMPERA-
TURE RADIATOR from the top, and as it
flows it continually sweeps the surface of the
liquid ammonia, removing the ammonia vapour
and causing continued refrigeration.
The cool, heavy mixture of the hydrogen gas
and ammonia vapour leaves the RADIATOR
SYSTEM and passes through the GAS HEAT
EXCHANGER over the outside of the tubes
containing hydrogen gas from the ABSORBER,
thereby effecting a heat exchange which increases
unit efficiency.
The mixture of hydrogen gas and ammonia
vapour enters the bottom of the ABSORBER. A
flow of weak liquid solution coming from the
BOILER enters the top of the absorber, and on
flowing down through the ABSORBER comes
into contact with the mixture of hydrogen gas
and ammonia vapour passing upward. The weak
liquid absorbs the ammonia vapour, forming a
strong solution which flows downward into the
ABSORBER VESSEL, while the hydrogen con-
tinues upward to the LOW-TEMPERATURE
RADIATOR, thus completing the hydrogen cycle.
It will be seen that the hydrogen circulation is
maintained by the difference in density between
the hydrogen and the mixed gases on the two
sides of the circuit.
From the ABSORBER VESSEL the strong
solution flows through the inner tubes of the
LIQUID HEAT EXCHANGER to the PUMP
COIL. In the LIQUID HEAT EXCHANGER
the strong solution passes through the inner tubes
to the exchanger in the opposite direction to that
of the weak liquid contained in the outer tubes.
An exchange of heat is therefore effected which
materially assists in the efficiency of the unit. The
thermo-syphon pump lifts the strong liquid to the
top of the boiler, thus completing the ammonia
cycle, and also the cycle of the aqua-ammonia.
It should be observed that the hydrogen cycle
is confined between the LOW-TEMPERATURE
RADIATOR and the ABSORBER: the ammonia
cycle is confined between the BOILER,
CONDENSER, RADIATOR and ABSORBER,
while the aqua-ammonia cycle takes place be-
tween the BOILER and the ABSORBER. All
three cycles meet in the ABSORBER.
While passing through the LIQUID HEAT
EXCHANGER a heat exchange is effected
between the cool, strong solution from the
ABSORBER VESSEL and the hot, weak solution
from the ABSORBER.
The heat which is liberated by the absorption
of ammonia vapour by the weak liquid in the
ABSORBER is radiated by the cooling fins of
the ABSORBER.
The feature of automatic pressure change
affords very efficient operation of the unit under
normal room temperature conditions (since the
unit operates more efficiently at lower pressures)
as it is not necessary to charge the unit initially
with a high pressure to enable satisfactory opera-
tion under high room temperature conditions.
The above-given description applies directly to
the 61A and 80A units (see Fig. 2). The 42A
unit (see Fig. 3) in the L. 22 and L. 220 cabinets
is of slightly different construction to the 61A and
80A units, although the cycle of operation within
all the units is the same. The main points where
the construction differs are that the 42A unit has
a different type of evaporator, viz., a vertical
cylinder, with perforated discs inside, in a hori-
zontal position, instead of the coil type of evapora-
tor used in the 61A and 80A units. Also, the
42A unit does not include the Pressure Equalising
Vessel.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR
THE CYCLE OF OPERATION OF THE ELECTROLUX
AIR-COOLED UNITS — continued.


Fig. 2.


Fig. 3


CABINET MODEL.
UNIT TYPE.
KEROSENE EQUIPMENT TYPE.
L.22— Approx. 2(4 cub. ft - Fitted with 3
shelves in food storage space.
42A Unit has fin type condenser and a coil
type absorber. Boiler on the left
side when viewed from the front of
the cabinet. Unit has removable
aluminium-alloy cast radiator.
(See Figure 11.)
42F1 Lever type control 8-line burner,
8-line lamp glass and 8-line wick. The
fuel tank has no mirror device.
L.220—Approx. 2*4 cub. ft. Fitted with 3
shelves in food storage space.
NOTE.—L.22 and L.220 not to be confused
with the earlier type L.2 refrigerator
which is of the same size but has a
flat top and a cooling element cover-
ing the entire back of the refrigerator.
Boiler on right hand side when viewed
from the front of the cabinet.
42A Unit has fin type condenser and a coil
type absorber. Boiler on the left side
when viewed from the front of the
cabinet. Unit has removable aluminium-
alloy cast radiator.
(See Figure 11.)
422FI Roller type control with 8-line burner.
8-line lamp glass and 8-line wick. The
fuel tank is fitted with mirror device.
L.38— Approx. 4 cub. ft. Fitted with 4
shelves in the food storage space.
6lA Unit has fin type condenser and a
coil type absorber. Boiler on the
left side when viewed from the front
of the cabinet.
Unit is fitted with pressure equalising
vessel and has sheet metal radiator
not removable.
(See Figure 14.)
61F2 Models manufactured in 1937 had lever-
type controls and were fitted with 10-linc
burner, 10-line lamp glass and 10-linc
wick. The fuel tank had no mirror
device. Later this was changed to 612F1.
Fo r description, see below.
L.380—Approx. 4 cub. ft. Fitted with 4
shelves in food storage space.
61A Unit has fin type condenser and a
coil type absorber. Boiler on the
left side when viewed from the front
of the cabinet.
Unit is fitted with pressure equalising
vessel and has sheet metal radiator
not removable.
(See Figure 14.)
612F1 Roller type control with 14-line burner.
14-line lamp glass. 14-line wick. Fuel
tank fitted with mirror device.
NOTE.—10-line burner, 10-line lamp glass and
10-line wick can be supplied for 612F1
controls if required.
LK.55—Approx. 5.5 cub. ft. Fitted with 5
shelves in food storage space.
80A Same type of unit as 61A only slightly
larger.
80F2 Models manufactured in 1937 had
type controls and were fitted with 14-line
burner. 14-line lamp glass and 14-line
wick. The fuel tank had no mirror device.
Later this was changed to 802F1. For
description, see below.
LK.550—Approx. 5.5 cub. ft. Fitted with 5
shelves in food storage space.
80A Same type of unit as 61A only slightly
larger.
802FI Roller type with 14-linc burner, 14-linc
lamp glass and 14-line wick. The fuel tank
is fitted with a mirror device.
CABINET, UNIT AND KEROSENE EQUIPMENT DETAILS
EXPLANATION OF PRINCIPAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MODELS
L.22, L.38, LK.55 and L.220. L.380 and LK.550.
The principal difference between these models concerns the cabinet exteriors as in the latter
the doors have a panel effect in the centre running the full length of same. The cabinet legs are edged
in black at the bottom for a depth of approximately U inches. The hinges of the new models are of
an entirely different design, being concealed, and there is no visible strike for the door lock, as the
latter is built into the door with the catch recessed into the left hand facing strip looked at from the
front of the cabinet.
All cabinets are fitted with number plates which —on Models L.22, L.38 and LK.55—are screwed
to the bakelite frame of the door on the side nearest the hinges, and can easily be read by opening the
door to its fullest extent. On the Models L.220, L.380 and LK.550 the cabinet number plate is attached
to the underside of the upper black facing strip in the entrance to the cabinet. The unit number plate
is fitted to the casing of the liquid temperature exchanger, i.e., the lowest part of the unit extending
beneath the cabinet. It may be read from the front underneath the cabinet. It is essential when servic-
ing a refrigerator, always to make a note of the particulars given on these number plates, and to quote
them in connection with reports and orders for replacement parts.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


MODELS L.22 AND L.220
SPECIFICATION.
L. 22.
INSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Storage Capacity 2\ cub. ft.
Shelf Area 4.8 sq. ft.
OUTSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Total Volume ------ ft.
Height (with feet fitted) - - - 3 ft. 6? ins.
Depth (exclusive of door furniture) 2 ft.
Width - -- -.--..1 ft. 9i ins.
Net Weight (approx.) - - - - 218 lbs.
Inland Rail Weight (approx.) - 349 lbs.
L. 220.
INSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Storage Capacity ------ cub. ft.
Shelf Area ------- 4.8 sq. ft.
OUTSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Total Volume ------ 12icub. ft.
Height (with feet fitted) - - - 3 ft. 6J ins.
Depth (exclusive of door furniture) 2 ft.
Width 1 ft. 91 ins.
Net Weight (approx.) - - - - 205 lbs.
Inland Rail Weight (approx.) - 339 lbs.
L. 22 and L. 220.
INTERNAL FINISH.
Lining: Porcelain enamelled steel.
Shelves: Galvanised steel, welded construction.
Cooling Radiator: Aluminium alloy.
ICE CAPACITY.
2 Ice Drawers with metal cube separators each
providing 9 cubes.
EXTERNAL FINISH.
White washable enamelled steel with chromium
plated door furniture.
On the L. 220 portions of the hinges and lock
are bakelite.
KEROSENE CONSUMPTION.
Approximately 1 pint per day.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


MODELS L.38 AND L.380
SPECIFICATION.
L. 38.
INSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Storage Capacity (approx.) - - 4 cub. ft.
Shelf Area ------- 7.5 sq. ft.
OUTSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Total Volume - -- -- --20 cub. ft.
Height (with feet fitted) - - - 4 ft. 3f ins.
Depth (exclusive of door furniture) 2 ft. If ins.
Width - - - - - - - - - 2 ft. 1 in.
Net Weight (approx.) - - - - 338 lbs.
Inland Rail Weight (approx.) - 495 lbs.
L. 380.
INSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Storage Capacity (approx.) - - 4 cub. ft.
Shelf Area - - - - - - - 7.5 sq. ft.
OUTSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Total Volume ------- 20 cub. ft.
Height (with feet fitted) - - - 4 ft. 3| ins.
Depth (exclusive of door furniture) 2 ft. 1| ins.
Width - - - - - - - - - 2 ft. 1 in.
Net Weight (approx.) - - - - 307 lbs.
Inland Rail Weight (approx.) - 462 lbs.
L. 38 and L. 380.
INTERNAL FINISH.
Lining: Porcelain enamelled steel.
Shelves: Galvanised steel shelves (one adjust-
able and one sliding).
Cooling Radiator: Non-removable sheet-metal
radiator, with porcelain enamelled and
aluminium covers.
ICE CAPACITY.
3 Ice Drawers (one with rubber and two with
metal cube separators), each providing 16
cubes.
EXTERNAL FINISH.
White washable enamelled steel with chromium
plated door furniture.
On the L. 380 portions of the hinges and lock
are bakelite.
KEROSENE CONSUMPTION.
Approximately 1.4 pints per day.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


MODELS LK.55 AND LK.550
SPECIFICATION.
LK.55.
INSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Storage Capacity (approx.) - - cub. ft.
Shelf Area - -- -- -- 9 sq. ft.
OUTSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Total Volume ------ cub. ft.
Height (with feet fitted) - - - 4 ft. 9 ins.
Depth (exclusive of door furniture) 2 ft. 4i ins.
Width - -- -- -- -- 2 ft. 3f ins.
Net Weight ------- 404 lbs.
Inland Rail Weight (approx.) - 588 lbs.
LK.550.
INSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Storage Capacity (approx.) - - cub. ft.
Shelf Area - - - - - - - 9 sq. ft.
OUTSIDE DIMENSIONS.
Total Volume -----25 i cüb. ft.
Height (with feet fitted) - - 4 ft. 9 ins.
Depth (exclusive of door furniture) 2 ft. ins.
Width 2 ft. 3* ins.
Net Weight ------ 368 lbs.
Inland Rail Weight (approx.) - 553 lbs.
LK.55 and LK.550.
INTERNAL FINISH.
Lining: Porcelain enamelled steel.
Shelves: 5 galvanised steel shelves (two rever-
sible, sliding).
Cooling Radiator: Non-removable sheet-metal
radiator, with porcelain enamelled and
aluminium covers.
ICE CAPACITY.
4 Ice Drawers, three of one size (two having
metal separators and one having rubber
separator).
EXTERNAL FINISH.
White washable enamelled steel with chromium
plated door furniture.
On the LK.550 portions of the hinges and lock
are bakelite.
KEROSENE CONSUMPTION.
Approximately 1.8 pints per day.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


FIGURE 4.
1. Flue Cover.
2. Flue Pipe.
3. Baffle Support Wire.
4. Baffle.
5. Boiler Tube.
6. Lamp Glass.
9. Burner.
10. Float Indicator.
11. Filling Hole
12. Handle of Fuel Tank.
13. Lever for Burner.
14. Wick-Raising Knob.
16. Flue Brush.
17. Fuel Tank.
18. Wick-raising Spindle.
19. Tank Holder.
20. Shield Plate.
21. Rubber Plug.
22. Cork Plug.
23. Flue Support Bracket.
24. Cabinet Top.


FIGURE 5.
1. Flue Cap.
2. Flue Pipe.
3. Baffle Support Wire.
4. Baffle.
5. Boiler Tube.
6. Lamp Glass.
9. Burner.
10. Float Indicator.
11. Filling Cap.
12. Handle of Fuel Tank.
13. Lever for Burner.
14. Wick-Raising Knob.
16. Flue Brush.
17. Fuel Tank.
18. Wick-Raising Spindle.
19. Tank Holder.
20. Shield Plate.
21. Rubber Plug.
22. Cork Plug.
23. Flue Support Bracket.
24. Cabinet Top.
25. Centralising Ring.


FIGURE 6.
1. Flue Cap.
2. Flue Pipe.
3. Baffle Support Wire.
4. Baffle.
5. Boiler Tube.
6. Centralising Ring.
7. Lamp Glass.
8. Burner.
9. Rollers.
10. Fuel Tank.
11. Rollers.
12. Bent-in Edges of Tank Holder.
13. Handle of Fuel Tank.
14. Wick-Raising Knob.
15. Mirror.
16. Filler Cap.
17. Float Indicator.
18. Tank Holder Bracket.
19. Tank Holder.
20. Guide Bar.
21. Rubber Plug.
22. Cork Plug.
24. Flue Support Bracket.
25. Cabinet Top.
26. Globe Plate.
30. Flue Brush.


FIGURE 7.
1. Flue Cap.
2. Flue Pipe.
3. Baffle Support Wire.
4. Baffle.
5. Boiler Tube.
6. End of Boiler Tube.
7. Lamp Glass.
8. Burner.
9. Rollers.
10. Fuel Tank.
11. Rollers.
12. Bent-in Edges of Tank Holder.
13. Handle of Fuel Tank.
14. Wick-Raising Knob.
15. Mirror.
16. Filling Cap.
17. Float Indicator.
18. Tank Holder Bracket.
19. Tank Holder.
20. Guide Bar.
21. Rubber Plug.
22. Cork Plug.
23. Flue Support Bracket.
24. Cabinet Top.
25. Flue Brush.


FIGURE 8.
1. Flue Cap.
2. Flue Pipe.
3. Asbestos Washer.
4. Baffle Support
5. Thin Baffle.
6. Boiler Tube.
7. Lamp Glass.
8. Burner.
9. Rollers.
10. Distance Ring.
11. Fuel Tank.
12. Rollers.
13. Bent-in Edges of Tank Holder.
14. Handle of Fuel Tank.
15. Wick-Raising Knob.
16. Mirror.
17. Filling Cap.
18. Float Indicator.
19. Tank Holder Bracket.
20. Tank Holder.
21. Guide Bar.
22. Rubber Plug.
23. Cork Plug.
24. Flue Support Bracket.
25. Cabinet Top.
26. Flue Brush.


TYPE.
FITTED TO
MODEL.
GENERAL INFORMATION.
A.
Lever type without
centralising ring.
L.22
The fuel tank rests on the bottom of the tank holder. The lamp glass fits up around the boiler tube. 1 his
eguipment has 8-line burner, 8-line wick and 8-linc lamp glass. The baffle is located 4" from the bottom
of the boiler and the fuel tank has no mirror device. (See Figure 4.)
B.
Lever type with cen-
tralising ring.
L.22
I'hc fuel tank rests oil the bottom of the tank holder. The lamp glass seats in the centrad: ing ring which
is attached to the bottom of the boiler tube. This equipment is fitted with ail 8-line burner. 8-line wick
and 8-line lamp glass. The baffle is located 4" from the bottom of the boiler. The fuel tank has no
mirror device. (See Figure 5.)
NOTE. In some cases with Tvpcs A and B it will be found that an extension piece has been attached to the baffle support wire
allowing the baffle to locate itself 2" lower down in the boiler. This extension piece should be removed as it has been found that
more satisfactory results can be obtained from the refrigerator with the baffle located 4" from the bottom of the boiler tube.
C.
Lever type with cen-
tralising ring, asbestos
washer and with thin
flue baffle introduced
in place of the stan-
dard type baffle.
L.22
The fuel tank rests on the bottom of the tank holder and the lamp glass seats in the centralising ring
which is attached to the bottom of the boiler tube. This equipment is fitted with 8-line burner. 8-line
wick and 8-line lamp glass. The fuel tank has no mirror device. These kerosene controls were originally
the same as Type B, hut the flue baffle has been replaced by a thinner flue baffle and located 4" from
the bottom of the boiler. In addition to this an asbestos washer has heen fitted at the point where the
flue pipe joins the boiler lube.
D.
Roller type lamp fitted
with centralising ring.
L.22
The fuel tank is suspended from the tank holder by means of four rollers. The lamp glass seats in the
centralising ring which is attached to the bottom of the boiler tube. This equipment is fitted with 8-line
burner, 8-line wick and 8-line lamp glass. (See Figure 6.)
E.
Roller type lamp with-
out centralising ring,
with thin flue baffle
and asbestos washer.
Distance ring on
burner.
L.22
&
L.220
On the Model I..22 these kerosene controls were originally the same as Type D, but have been converted
to Type E in accordance with separate instructions. They are therefore fitted with distance ring. Det. No.
66167, asbestos washer, Det. No. 66168 and thin flue baffle. Det. No. 62239/8.
For both the Models L.22 and I..220 the fuel tank is suspended from the tank holder by means of four
rollers. The lamp glass fits up around the boiler. This equipment is fitted with 8-line burner, 8-line
wick and 8-line lamp glass. The fuel tank has a mirror device. (See Figure 8.)
A.
Lever type without
centralising ring.
L.38
The fuel tank, rests on the bottom of the tank holder and the lamp glass fits up around the boiler tube.
This equipment is fitted with 10-line burner, 10-line wick and 10-line lamp glass. The baffle is located
2" from the bottom of the boiler tube. The fuel tank has no mirror device. (See Figure 4.)
B.
Lever type with cen-
tralising ring.
L.38
The fuel tank rests on the bottom of the tank holder and the lamp glass seats in the centralising ring
which is attached to the bottom of the boiler tube. This equipment is fitted with 10-line burner. 10-line
wick and 10-line lamp glass. The baffle is located 2" from the bottom of the boiler tube. The fuel tank
has no mirror device. (See Figure 5.)
C.
Roller type with cen-
tralising ring
L.38
6
L.380
The fuel tank is suspended from the tank holder by means of four rollers. The lamp glass seats in the
centralising ring which is attached to the bottom of the boiler tube. This control is fitted with 14-line
burner. 14-line wick and 14-line lamp glass. The fuel tank has a mirror device. (See Figure 6.)
NOTE.—In some cases with the Type A and B—L.38—it will be found that the 10-line burner. 10-line wick and 10-line lamp glass
have been replaced with 14-line burner. 14-line wick and 14-line lamp glass and that with the Type C —L.38 and L.380—the 14-linc
burner, 14-line wick and 14-line lamp glass have been replaced with 10-line burner. 10-line wick and 10-line lamp glass.
A.
Lever type without
centralising ring.
LK.55
The fuel tank rests on the bottom of the tank holder and the lamp glass fits up around the boiler tube.
This control is fitted with 14-line burner, 14-line wick and 14-line lamp glass. The baffle is located
4" from the bottom of the boiler tube and the fuel tank has; no mirror device. (See Figure 4.)
B.
Lever type with cep
tralising ring.
LK.55
The fuel tank rests on the bottom of the tank holder. The lamp glass seats in the centralising ring which
is attached to the bottom of the boiler tube. The control is fitted with 14-line burner, 14-line wick
and 14-line lamp glass. The baffle is located 4" from the bottom of the boiler, and the fuel tank
has no mirror device. (See Figure 5.)
C.
Roller type with cen
tralising ring.
LK.55
&
LK.550
The fuel tank is suspended from the tank holder by means of four rollers, and the lamp glass .scats in the
centralising ring which is attached to the bottom of the boiler tube. This control is fitted with 14-line burner.
14-line wick and 14-line lamp glass. The baffle is located 4" from the bottom of the boiler. The fuel
tank is fitted with a mirror device. (See Figure 6.)
Burners supplied with roller type kerosene controls, that is the burner without the skirt, cannot be used for lever type controls, but
burners supplied on lever type controls can be used on roller type controls by removing the spring which encircles the lower part
of the burner and fits up under the skirt.
NOTE.—FOR ALL CORRESPONDENCE RELATING TO KEROSENE CONTROLS, STATE TYPE OF CONTROL AND THE
MODEL—FOR INSTANCE L.22 KEROSENE CONTROL TYPE D, L.38 KEROSENE CONTROL TYPE A, OR LK.550
KEROSENE CONTROL TYPE C.
DESCRIPTION OF KEROSENE LAMPS USED IN
ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATORS
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


DESCRIPTION OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF
KEROSENE EQUIPMENT
The kerosene equipment consists of the tank,
burner, wick and lamp glass.
The burner is mainly an ordinary wick burner
and should be cared for in the usual way. To
simplify operation an extension is provided
coupled to the wick screw and furnished with a
knob (14) at the outer end so that the wick may
be easily adjusted from the front of the cabinet.
While fundamentally all the kerosene equip-
ments are the same, slight differences exist accord-
ing to the model and time of manufacture. A
reference to page 18 and also the diagrams on
pages 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 will quickly enable
the serviceman to recognise the type of equip-
ment he may be called upon to deal with.
Briefly, the principal difference between the
tanks originally fitted and those now being fitted
is that with the former the tank rests on the bottom
of the tank holder, whilst with the latter the tank
is suspended on rollers, two on each side being
fitted to brackets attached transversely across the
top of the tank and which run on suitable runways
located on the tank holder. In addition to this
the roller type tanks have a special mirror
attachment in which, when it is withdrawn from
the tank, the flame can be observed.
It is important to see that the correct wick
and lamp glass are fitted in their respective
burners, otherwise satisfactory results cannot be
obtained, with consequent dissatisfaction to the
user.
It can be mentioned here that lamp wicks for
the different models are marked by one, two or
three coloured threads woven into the wick as
follows: —
Models L. 22 and L.22o—for 8-line burner—
has one thread.
Models L. 38 and L.3Bo—for 14-line burner
has three threads.
Models LK.55 and LK.sso—for 14-line bur-
ner—has three threads.
Some Model L. 38 kerosene-operated refrigera-
tors, however, have been fitted with a 10-line
8-line
10-line
burner, lamp glass and wick, the latter having two
threads woven into it, and this fact should be
observed when replacements are being made. It
by chance the wicks are not marked with the
coloured threads as stated above an easy method
of identifying them will be to check the measure-
ments across the bottom of the wick, as illustrated
in the diagrams at the foot of this page.
With regard to lamp glasses, the same pro-
cedure should be observed, for example, where a
10-line burner is fitted, then also a 10-line lamp
glass will be required for replacement purposes.
The lamp glasses have no particular distinguishing
mark, but should be ordered according to the type
of burner fitted, for example, Models L. 22 and
L. 220 8-line lamp glass, Models L. 38 10-line and
14-line lamp glass, Models LK.55, L. 380 and
LK.550 14-line lamp glass.
An easy method of identifying the lamp glasses
is by measuring the diameter of the bottom of the
glass—that is, the part which rests in the per-
forated bowl of the burner. The measurements of
the lamp glasses are as follows:
8-line lamp glass, diameter 1| in.
10-line lamp glass, diameter in.
14-line lamp glass, diameter 2 in.
The flue cap covers the top of the flue pipe,
whilst the flue baffle, which is suspended from it
by means of a support wire in the boiler tube just
above the flame, is slightly twisted in shape with
the object of ensuring a better diffusion of heat
generated. A further point to be observed is the
correct location of the flue baffle, the lower edge
of which should be located above the lower edge
of the boiler tube as follows:
Model L. 22 Model LBS Model LK.55
4 in. 2 in. 4 in.
Model L. 220 Model L. 380 Model LK.550
4 in. 2 in. 4 in.
Fig. 9 illustrates a flue baffle hanging in posi-
tion in the boiler tube, “H” thereon representing
the distances mentioned above.
14-line
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


INSTRUCTIONS FOR INSTALLING AND STARTIN-UP OF
MODELS L. 22, L. 220, L.38, L.380, LK.55 AND LK.550
INSTALLATION OF THE CABINET.
It is very important that the refrigerator should
be located in the most suitable and accessible place
indoors. If possible, avoid installing the refrigera-
tor in a kitchen or under a tin-roofed section of
the house on which the sun beats down for long
periods as such places are unsuitable. Too much
importance cannot be attached to this as it is in
the best interests of every one concerned that the
refrigerator should be installed so that it will
operate under the most favourable conditions ob-
tainable. Also avoid locations subject to heat
from stoves, radiators, direct rays from the sun
or to excessive draughts.
The refrigerator must be supported on a firm
foundation—the rubber buffers attached to the
feet of the cabinet for protection in transit having
first been removed. It is also very essential that
the cabinet be level and this can be checked with
a spirit level used in the following manner: —
Before fitting the cabinet top, place a spirit level
on the top of the cabinet frame which runs from
the front to the rear of the cabinet on either side.
After levelling both sides, the level should be
placed along the cabinet frame in a position
directly above the name plate and a level taken
here. If necessary the legs of the refrigerator can
be packed up to obtain the desired level.
It is essential that a space of at least 6 inches
be allowed at the back of the refrigerator, 12
inches on either side and at least 36 inches above
all models, is left free so that the air circulation
ever the fins at the back of the cabinet is not
obstructed. Also, the space between the feet of
the cabinet should be kept quite clear. Generally
speaking, the more free air space surrounding the
cabinet the better.
The flue pipe (2) should be in position as
shown on the diagram (Fig. 7), i.e., it should be
properly centred on top of the boiler tube (5)
of the cooling unit, and pressed against this by
means of the bracket (23). If the flue pipe is
not securely held in this manner, the bracket (23)
should be bent slightly downwards. For the
correct functioning of the refrigerator it is im-
portant that no air leak is possible between the
lower edge of the flue pipe (2) and where it
seats around the upper end of the central tube
of the boiler. The baffle (4) with its supporting
wire (3) and the flue cap (1) should be placed
in position as shown on the diagram on page 16.
STARTING THE REFRIGERATOR.
Remove the cap of the filling hole (16) and
fill the tank with best quality lighting kerosene.
The tank should be filled so that the float indica-
tor (17) is level with the upper red line on the
scale.
When filling the lamp with kerosene be
particularly careful not to use any bottle, jug or
container of any sort which has been used for
petrol, oil or water. Before lighting the lamp
for the first time, allow the wick to become satu-
rated—we recommend at least half an hour for
this purpose. Then light it and fit the lamp glass.
Turn the flame down low to allow the glass to
gradually become hot.
To avoid any deformation in transit of the
bent-in edges (12) of the tank holder, a slotted
wooden plate is inserted between the edges. Re-
move this plate and place the tank —with the
lamp glass fitted—in the tank-holder.
CHECKING THE ADJUSTMENT OF THE
EQUIPMENT.
Note: All figures quoted refer to diagram of
lamp, Fig. 7, with the exception of (6), which
in Fig. 6 refers to Models L. 22, L. 38, LK.55,
L. 380 and LK.550, and in Fig. 7 refers to Model
L. 220 only. No difficulty should be experienced in
deciding which type of lamp is fitted to an Elec-
trolux kerosene-operated refrigerator.
On page 17 is shown Fig. 8, illustrating roller
type equipment for L. 220 with the following
additions: —
(3) Asbestos Washer, Detail No. 66168.
(10) Distance Ring, Detail No. 66167.
(5) Flue Baffle, Detail No. 62239/8.
The asbestos washer, Detail No. 66168, is
fitted over the top of the boiler tube and the flue
pipe when fitted rests on the asbestos washer.
This ensures that there is no possibility of air
entering the flue pipe where it joins the boiler tube.
The distance ring, Detail No. 66167, which is
intended for use on Models L. 22 and L. 220
roller type equipment only is fitted over the
stem of the burner that is, the part which
fits into the fuel tank guide tube. Its pur-
pose is to compensate for the removal of the
centralising ring. If, when the centralising ring
is removed—that is, when converting L. 22 kero-
sene control type D to L. 22 kerosene control type
E—the distance ring should not be fitted, it will
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


be found that the lamp glass will not fit up around
the boiler tube when the fuel tank is placed in
position in the tank holder.
It has been found that under trying atmospheric
conditions more satisfactory results can be ob-
tained from the Models L. 22 and L. 220 if the thin
flue baffle, Detail No. 62239/8 is fitted. This
baffle should be located 4 in. from the bottom of
the boiler tube.
When inserting the tank into the tank holder
underneath the cabinet, let the first pair of rollers
(9) run on the bent-in edges (12) of the holder
and slide the tank carefully to the rear of the
cabinet as far as it will go, taking care that the
second pair of rollers (11) run on the same edges.
Because of the relevant positions of the two pairs
of rollers, the tank is being inserted in a slanting
position so that the lamp glass will rise towards
the lower end of the boiler tube in the Model
L. 220, Fig. 8, and towards the centralising ring
(6) at the lower end of the boiler tube in Fig. 6,
for the Models L. 380 and LK.550. If the lamp
glass does not locate itself correctly move the
lamp slightly to one side or the other, making
use of the slight play which is available in the
guide. These instructions refer to roller type
equipment.
With the lever type equipment the burner must
be pressed down by means of the lever (13),
Fig. 5, fitted to the fuel tank, before the lamp is
placed in position or withdrawn from the tank
holder. Whilst holding down the burner by means
of the lever the fuel tank is fitted into the tank
holder, and by gently sliding the fuel tank along
on the bottom of the tank holder, a position will
be arrived at where the lamp glass will fit up
around the boiler tube when the lever is eased
upwards or, in cases where a centralising ring is
fitted, the lamp glass will seat correctly in the
centralising ring.
It is very important that the burner (8) is cor-
rectly located. Particular care is taken at the
factory in the assembly of the kerosene equipment
before the refrigerator is packed, but as there
always exists a slight possibility of a knock or a
bump that may be received in transit or when
unpacking, a very careful inspection and adjust-
ment, if necessary, should be effected before start-
ing the refrigerator. When no centralising ring
is fitted it is particularly important to see that
the metal ring on top of the lamp glass is com-
pletely encircling the end of the boiler tube (6)
which protrudes slightly below the bottom of the
boiler insulation. If care is not taken regarding
the foregoing it can happen that the metal rim
will ride on the lower edge of the boiler tube (6),
and by doing so prevent the correct heat input
being obtained with a consequent loss of efficiency
in the cabinet.
If the lamp glass does not locate itself correctly
as mentioned above, readjust the position of the
guide bar (20) by loosening the screws securing
it to the side of the tank holder and moving the
guide bar so as to obtain good centralisation of
the burner in the ring, after which the screws
should be tightened again. The screw holes in
the tank holder being oval, it is quite simple to
make this adjustment. In addition to observing
the location of the lamp glass from the front of
the cabinet—that is, through the window in the
front plate of the tank holder—it can also be
observed from the back of the cabinet through a
small hole approximately | inch in diameter
located in the top left hand corner of the tank
holder, looking at same from the back of the
cabinet. Another advantage of this hole is that
in the event of it being necessary to remove the
centralising ring without removing the tank holder,
a small screw-driver inserted through the hole at
the correct angle will come in contact with the
screw securing the centralising ring.
It is also important that the wick is even all
round and will remain even when turned upwards.
If this is not so the flame will start to smoke before
the maximum flame is reached, and this may result
in too low a heat input being obtained from the
burner. It is therefore of the utmost importance
to observe that the wick is correctly trimmed and
located. The flame has a tendency to rise Im-
mediately after lighting, and consequently it should
be inspected and readjusted once or twice during
the first hour of burning. This is particularly
necessary when operating at high room tempera-
tures.
It may not be necessary with the Model L. 380,
which has the same size burner as the Model
LK.550 or those Models L. 38 which have been
fitted with 14-line burners, to keep the flame as
high as possible when high atmospheric tempera-
tures prevail. If this is done it may result in too
high a heat input, which will have the same effect
as too low. a heat input, with the result that in-
sufficient refrigeration will be obtained in the
cabinet.
Contrary to the Models L. 38 and L. 380 re-
frigerators when atmospheric temperatures are
high the Models L. 22 and L. 220 must have the
maximum heat input that can be obtained from
the 8-line burner.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR INSTALLING AND STARTING-UP OF
MODELS L. 22, L. 220, L. 38, L. 380, LK.55, and LK.sso— continued.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


The flame can easily be inspected by means of
the mirror (15), which can be pulled forward and
set so as to enable a person standing upright
before the cabinet to observe the flame. The float
indicator (17) can also be seen in the mirror.
After starting up the refrigerator the ice
drawers should be filled with water to within
I inch of the top and placed in their usual position
in the radiator. With the door closed the re-
frigerator should be allowed to operate for twenty-
four hours. The door should then be opened, the
ice drawers emptied and the contents thrown
away. The interior of the cabinet should then
be thoroughly wiped out with a clean cloth, the
ice drawers filled with fresh water and again
placed in position in the cabinet. It is advisable
to wait until ice has formed in the drawers before
placing food in the cabinet.
SELECTION OF BURNER SIZE.
Models LK.55, L. 380 and LK.550 have been
fitted with 14-line burners, and in most cases
Models L. 38.
However, in the case of the Models L. 38 and
L. 380, it is sometimes difficult with this burner
under temperate conditions to lower the flame
sufficiently to eliminate risk of freezing tempera-
tures in the cabinet and at the same time avoid
odour from the flue gases. In view of this, it may
be of advantage in certain parts of the country
for the user of these models to have one of each
type of burner, for example, a 10-line and 14-line,
using the former during the cooler months and
the latter during the summer season. Interchange
of burners is simple and can be effected by the
user on referring to page 12 of the instruction
book which is supplied with each cabinet, under
the heading “Replacing the Wick.”
INSTRUCTIONS FOR INSTALLING AND STARTING-UP OF
MODELS L. 22, L. 220, L. 38, L. 380, LK.55, and LK.550 — continued.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


CONTROLLING AND OPERATING THE EQUIPMENT
REGULATION OF TEMPERATURE.
Generally speaking, the higher the burner flame
has been set the colder the cabinet interior will
become, and the height of the flame should be
adjusted in accordance with the atmospheric tem-
perature. On hot days a high flame will be re-
quired, and vice versa. In this respect, please
note what has already been said on page 21,
col. 2, 2nd last para, regarding the disadvantage
of having too high a flame with the 14-line burner
fitted to the Models LOS and L. 380. NEVER
SET THE FLAME SO HIGH THAT IT
SMOKES.
IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT THE VEN-
TILATION OPENING ON TOP OF THE
CABINET SHOULD NOT BE COVERED IN
ANY WAY TO HINDER FREE AIR CIRCU-
LATION. If this should be covered, it is quite
possible that the operation of the cabinet will be
considerably influenced.
MAINTENANCE OF THE EQUIPMENT.
After the flame has been correctly adjusted, it
needs very little attention, and one filling of the
tank will be sufficient for about three or four
days. It is important that the tank is refilled
immediately the level of the kerosene drops so
low that the float indicator (17) is down to the
lower red line on the scale.
THE REASON FOR THIS IS that if the
kerosene level is allowed to drop lower than that,
all the kerosene in the tank may be used, in which
case the wick will char, and as a consequence
will not permit the full amount of kerosene to
flow up the wick capillaries to the burner head.
This will mean that sufficient heat cannot be
developed by the burner, and consequently the
unit will not operate as satisfactorily as it should.
The indicator (17) provided on the tank shows
when refilling is necessary, but the tank need not
be removed from the tank holder to do this. Every
second time the tank needs refilling, it should be
removed. Before doing so, however, the flame
SHOULD BE LOWERED. Then lift the handle
(13) upwards and the fore portion of the fuel
tank with the burner will be lowered until the
glass chimney is free of the boiler tube. The tank
can then be withdrawn. In cases where the kero-
sene equipment is the slide type —that is, where
the fuel tank rests on the bottom of the tank
holder —it is necessary to press down the burner
by means of the lever before removing the fuel
tank from the tank holder.
Advantage should be taken of the fact that the
lamp has been removed to trim the wick, clean
the burner, the flue pipe, the boiler tube,
and also the baffle supporting wire. Remove
the baffle and baffle wire and clean the flue pipe
and boiler tube with the flue brush (25) supplied.
The brush must be vigorously pushed up and
down to clean these parts. The withdrawing
and replacing of the baffle with its supporting
wire and cap will be found much easier if the
supporting wire is rotated slightly as it is either
withdrawn from or replaced in the flue pipe and
the boiler tube.
REPLACING THE WICK.
It is very important that the correct wick is
used for each burner. For example, a 10-line wick
should never be used in a 14-line burner or
an 8-line wick used in either a 10-line or 14-line
burner. Also a 14-line wick should never be
cut down for use in a 10-line or an 8-line burner,
or a 10-line wick cut down for use in an 8-line
burner. To assist you when ordering spare wicks
it can be mentioned here that these are marked
by one, two or three coloured threads woven
into the wick.
Model L. 22 8-line 1 0 , a
Model L. 220 8-line } ° ne thread '
Model L. 38 10-line Two threads.
Model L. 38 14-line
Model L. 380 14-line rp, , ,
Model L.K.55 14-line Three threads '
Model LK.550 14-line
Model L. 380 is fitted with a 14-line burner as
standard equipment, but a 10-line burner can be
used for this model in districts where very high
atmospheric temperatures are not experienced.
To change the wick the following method
should be employed. After removing the tank
from the tank holder in the cabinet the extension
is uncoupled from the wick screw by pulling
gently on the knob (14). The burner is lifted
out of the tank, the old wick removed and
the new wick inserted so that the whole
width of the wick enters the crescent shaped
opening at the bottom of the burner. The wick
should be inserted carefully until it engages with
the wick screw, whereafter the wick is screwed
up until it projects about 1 inch above the upper
edge of the burner. The wick should then be
raised and lowered several times to ascertain that
it is operating evenly. Should, when doing so,
one side of the wick remain lower than the other
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


Cabinet
Model
Number of
Ice Drawers
Ice-Making
Times
L.22 and
L.220
2 drawers
4-5 hours
L.38 and
L.380
3 drawers
(one rubber-lin^d)
3-4 hours
LK.55 and
LK.550
4 drawers
(one rubber-lined)
3-4 hours
side, pull the lower side upwards and again raise
and lower the wick until it is operating evenly.
It may sometimes be necessary to repeat this pro-
cedure before the wick moves correctly in the
burner. In some cases it is advisable to pull the
wick by hand up and down through the burner
without using the wick screw in order to remove
buckles and creases.
After adjusting, pour a few drops of kero-
sene on top of the wick and screw it up
1/16th inch above the burner and light it. The
burner is still left outside the tank. Let the flame
burn until it goes out by itself. Then remove the
carbon crust from the wick with a matchstick
and the wick should be absolutely even around
the top of the burner.
The burner can then be inserted in the tank,
the coupling re-engaged with the wick screw, and
when the new wick is saturated the lamp will
again be ready for use.
We recommend the use of a FIRST GRADE
LIGHTING KEROSENE only for the successful
operation of the Electrolux Refrigerator, as its
high calorific value, high standard of purity and
extremely low sulphur content make it the only
suitable fuel for kerosene refrigeration.
Also we stress the importance of the following;
(1) The container for storage of kerosene
should never be stored in the open as dust and
moisture-laden air are the contaminating agents
responsible for the majority of burning troubles.
Make sure that the funnel or tin used for the
transferring of kerosene to the tank is thoroughly
clean. On no account rinse under the water tap
prior to use.
(2) The wick consists of fibres bound together
in such a way as to produce fine tubes or capil-
laries. If these capillaries become blocked
through moisture or dirt being drawn up from
the kerosene tank, insufficient kerosene will be
supplied, causing a falling flame with a heavy
wick char. This can be remedied by removing
the wick, boiling same in water to which a little
washing soda has been added and then rinsing
in boiling water, after which, dry the wick
thoroughly in an oven and use immediately. At
the end of the season it is essential that the wick
be dried and thoroughly cleansed as outlined above
before storing for the winter, in the event of the
cabinet not being used during that season.
(3) See that the wick guide is thoroughly
cleansed before replacing the wick. Also that the
tank is thoroughly washed out with clean kero-
sene, as, if this is not done, it will collect moisture
from the air and dust from the atmosphere, which
will eventually choke the capillaries. Note:—
To clean the fuel tank remove the burner com-
plete with the wick and lamp glass. The kero-
sene in the fuel tank should be removed by empty-
ing it out through the burner guide tube. This
can be done by holding the fuel tank at either
end, first raising one end then the other, mean-
while holding the burner guide tube over a con-
tainer. The fuel tank should also be revolved a
few times to make certain that no kerosene is
lodged between the baffles. If the kerosene re-
moved from the fuel tank is very dirty or any
trace of water is present, it is advisable to pour
some clean kerosene into the fuel tank and then
proceed with the emptying again. If necessary,
this operation should be repeated.
(4) The level of kerosene in the tank should
be watched very carefully and not allowed to fall
too low, as this would mean that insufficient kero-
sene will be drawn up the wick capillaries,
causing “starving.” There is also the possibility
of the wick becoming dry-burnt, which would
affect the flow of kerosene to the flame. Wicks
which have been “dry-burnt” should be replaced
with new ones.
ICE MAKING TIMES FOR CABINETS.
The times required for making ice cubes in the
ice drawers of the cabinet as stated in the follow-
ing table are for cabinets working under average
conditions of food load and door service and
working in an air temperature of approximately
90° F. It is necessary for the flame to be set as
high as possible without smoking. If the tempera-
ture is lower than 90° F., and where the food
load is less, then the times will be correspond-
ingly less. If the air temperature is higher, or the
food load is greater, the times will be longer. The
temperature of the water placed in the ice drawers
will also affect the ice making times. The tem-
perature of water allowed in the figures given
is approximately 60° F. The ice drawers fitted
with rubber linings will take slightly longer to
make ice.
CONTROLLING AND OPERATING THE EQUIPMENT — continued.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


As the aforementioned facts will influence ice
making times, those given on the previous page
will vary. Note:—A point to be observed in
connection with the double ice drawer in the
Models LK.55 and LK.550 is that the sides of
the drawer should be gently pressed inwards if
these have become distorted after freezing of
the contents. This is to compensate for a slight
increase in the width of the drawer due to ex-
pansion of the contents during the freezing pro-
cess. If the ice drawers are allowed to spread
outwards, it will be found that the sides of th'e
ice drawers will be damaged by the small lugs on
which the special ice drawer release operates.
To accelerate ice making the flame should be
temporarily set at its highest point. When ice
is formed, however, the flame should be turned
to its normal setting, or foodstuffs in the cabinet
may become frozen and any bottles of liquid may
burst. Ice making is also accelerated if the un-
used cubes of ice are replaced in the ice drawers
when refilling them with water. Ice cubes may
be stored for short periods in the glass defrosting
dish under the radiator.
ICE CREAM FREEZING.
It must be realised that ice cream freezing
requires lower temperatures than those required
for freezing water. The precise mixture em-
ployed for the cream has also a considerable
bearing on the freezing temperature, and for this
reason only the recipes recommended in the Com-
pany’s publication, “Simplified Catering,” should
be employed.
The texture of the ice cream after freezing is
dependent on the amount of air contained in the
mixture. In order to incorporate air and keep it
in the mixture until freezing is complete, it is
necessary to use some ingredient which will hold
a large amount of air. Fresh dairy cream,
evaporated milk, whites of eggs, or cream made
with any proprietary brand of cream maker, can
be used for this purpose, as they become stiff
when whipped and triple in bulk.
To obtain the low temperatures required to
freeze the cream, the flame should be temporarily
turned to its highest point for at least an hour
before the cream is ready for placing in the freez-
ing drawers. It should be emphasised that it is
impossible to store ice cream in the food storage
space of the refrigerator. If it is desired to con-
serve a small quantity of purchased ice cream,
the only possible way to do this is to place the
ice cream in the freezing drawers, and then only
if the flame has been turned to its maximum height
for at least two hours.
When operating the cabinet at low tempera-
tures, such as those required for ice cream freez-
ing, care should be taken to see that the other
foodstuffs in the cabinet do not become frozen.
After completion of the ice cream freezing, the
normal setting of the flame should be reverted to.
CONTROLLING AND OPERATING THE EQUIPMENT — continued.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE OF ELECTROLUX
AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATORS
HOW THE REFRIGERATOR FUNCTIONS.
A domestic refrigerator is designed for the
storage of foodstuffs at such temperatures as to
keep the food fresh. Provision is also made for
the making of ice cubes.
The correct storage temperatures for various
foods differ somewhat, but, generally speaking,
if food is stored in a temperature below 50°
F., it can be kept fresh for some days. In prac-
tice it is found that a temperature of about 40° F.
to 45" F. is ideal for storage of the type of food-
stuffs generally kept in the private house.
It will be seen later that the temperature in the
cabinet varies at certain points, but the tempera-
tures stated above are the average and can be
considered as being measured at a point about
central in the food storage space.
The cabinet itself consists of a hygienic porce-
lain lining, with provision for shelves, forming the
food storage space, and an outside casing of steel
the space between the lining and outside casing
being filled with insulating material.
The food storage space is cooled by means of
a cooling unit (a description of which is given
on page 5), which extracts the heat from the
food and the air in the storage space.
When the cabinet is cooled there is a decided
difference in the temperature inside and outside
the cabinet. Insulating material is therefore used
to reduce to a minimum the amount of heat pass-
ing into the refrigerator from the outside air.
Some heat does, however, pass into the cabinet,
and the amount varies with the difference between
the outside and inside temperatures. W4th an
air temperature of 75° F. and a cabinet tem-
perature of 40° F., the difference is 35° F. If
the temperature of the air were increased to 90°
F., then the difference in cabinet and air tempera-
tures would be 50° F., and the amount of heat
load placed on the cabinet would be increased.
It therefore follows that if the cooling unit was
shut off, the temperature in the cabinet would
rise quicker in the high air temperature than in
the low.
The radiator, which protrudes into the food
storage space, is the means of conveying the heat
from the cabinet interior to the point where
evaporation of the refrigerant takes place, and
therefore the temperature of the radiator is con-
siderably below that of the cabinet interior. Ice
drawers are provided in the radiator, where
water may be frozen into cubes of ice. The
average difference between the radiator and
cabinet temperatures is about 25° F., for an air
temperature of 80° F., and increases or decreases
with the rise and fall in air temperature.
The air immediately around the radiator is at
a lower temperature and is therefore heavier and
moves downward to and across the bottom of
the food storage space. As it moves round, the
air temperature rises slightly, due to the extrac-
tion of heat from the food. This causes the air
to become lighter, and in consequence it rise's
upwards, thus producing an air circulation inside
the cabinet. This circulation is shown on page 31.
The amount of cooling obtained from the unit
can be controlled by varying the heat input.
TRACING AND REMEDYING FAULTS.
General Information.
On pages 27 and 28 will be found a Fault-
Tracing Chart. This has been compiled to assist
the service representative in making a rapid
diagnosis of the fault, to suggest what may be the
cause of the trouble, and what steps to take to
apply the remedy.
The amount of labour entailed is small, and the
tools necessary are few. One main essential,
however, is the provision of two reliable and
fairly robust thermometers which can be obtained
from Electrolux Pty. Ltd. Correctly taken tem-
peratures play a very important part in arriving
at a correct diagnosis, and when recorded on a
report, enable a complete picture of the position
to be formed and for the correct advice to be
given where necessary.
When taking temperatures of the air, radiator,
or cabinet interior, allow sufficient time to elapse
for the liquid in the thermometer to become
steady. Temperatures of the radiator and the
cabinet may be considerably below the room
temperature, and unless the temperature is read
off quickly, an entirely wrong figure will be ob-
tained. Avoid holding the bulb of the thermometer
in the fingers when reading off temperatures,
or even breathing directly on to the thermometer,
as these will cause errors to occur.
brief explanation of possible faults that might
arise and the remedies for these are given in the
following pages. They have been dealt with
along the lines given in the Fault-Tracing Chart.
If we examine this chart we find that the nature
of the complaints has been sub-divided into sec-
tions Symptoms, Cause, and Remedy. Some
very helpful information is also given on pages
29, 30 and 31. *
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


COMPLAINT.
SYMPTOM.
CAUSE.
REMEDY.
REFRIGERATOR TOO
COLD
Radiator temperature about correct.
Radiator temperature too low.
Room temperature abnormally low.
The flame is too high.
The flame is too small.
Wrong quality of kerosene.
Flue baffle missing or wrongly
located.
Flue or boiler tube partially choked.
Will correct itself with rise in room
temperature. If when using a 14-!ine
burner difficulties arise in avoiding
heavy frosting of the radiator and at
the same time avoid kerosene odour
from the burner, replace the 14-linc
with a 10-line burner.
Lower the flame.
Increase the flame, but carefully, so that
smoke is avoided. If required, clean
the wick.
Only kerosene of the best quality should
be used. Preferably "150° F. fire
test.”
Install baffle or adjust supporting wire.
Clean flue, boiler tube, baffle and flue
cap.
Radiator temperature too high, poor
ice-freezing.
<
Burner not correctly located. Lamp
glass does not encircle lower end
of boiler tube or fit correctly in
the centralising ring.
Adjust position of guide bar to obtain
good centralisation of burner.
POOR OR IRREGULAR
REFRIGERATION
■<
Radiator temperature correct, i.e.,
normal ice-freezing.
k
r
Flame decreases or goes out.
Air circulation round the cooling
unit is restricted.
Refrigerator is not level.
Extra heavy service load.
Air leakage into the cabinet too high.
The refrigerator shut off at night.
V.
' Air circulation in cabinet restricted.
1 Radiator coated with ice or frost.
No kerosene in tank. Observe the
position of the float indicator.
Wrong quality kerosene.
Correct location of refrigerator. Remove
any temporary restriction.
Level the refrigerator. There must be no
sloping forward.
Temporary condition. Explain to user.
Check door gasket, gaskets on mounting
plates and rubber plugs in the inner
mount plate.
This should not be done. The refrigera-
tor should work continuously day and
night.
Re-arrange food. Instruct user.
Extinguish the flame. Let ice melt and
collect in drip tray, which should be
emptied. Dry cabinet interior and light
flame.
Fill tank until float indicator is level
with upper red line on scale. Instruct
user.
Instruct user that first-class kerosene only
must be used. Kerosene intended for
engines must not be used.
NO REFRIGERATION
The burner has been lit before the
wick was sufficiently soaked in
kerosene.
Extinguish flame and leave burner unlit
for about an hour, also pour a few
drops of kerosene on top of wick.
tU Warm or slightly cool radiator.
Bottom of absorber warm.
°n
Wu
“z
qjO Warm radiator. Cool absorber.
QCJ Cool or slightly warm con-
U denser. Boiler very hot.
Stoppage in gas circulation in the
unit system.
Stoppage in liquid circulation in the
unit system.
Place the cabinet fitted with unit hori-
zontally on the floor for half an hour,
with the door opening facing the floor.
Then turn the cabinet on to its top
(that is with the feet in the air) for a
quarter of an hour. It is necessary to
remove the cabinet top before doing
this.
Replace unit.
ELECTROLUX AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATOR
FAULT-TRACING CHART
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


COMPLAINT.
SYMPTOM.
CAUSE.
REMEDY.
f Kerosene odour.
i
j
Kerosene has been spilt on the tank
in the neighbourhood of the burner.
Clean burner and outer surface of kero-
sene tank. Instruct user.
ODOUR
] Combustion products.
r
i
i
i
With a H-line burner the flue gases
have a bad odour if the flame is
too small.
The flame is too high.
Increase the flame so that the top point
is somewhat above the throttling of the
lamp glass, or fit a 10-linc burner in
the place of the H line.
Extinguish the flame and take out the
lamp. Clean boiler tube, flue, baffle,
and flue cover. A suitable flue brush it
delivered with the cabinet. After clean-
ing, start with a lower flame and inspect
the flame two or three times to see that
it has not risen too high. Explain to
the user.
BURNER SMOKES
<
The lamp glass does not encircle the
lower end of the boiler tube, but
has caught the end of it. or where
a centralising ring is fitted the
lamp glass does not seat correctly
in same.
The lamp glass has been broken.
The baffle touches the flame.
While inserting the lamp ascertain that
the lamp glass is correctly located.
Instruct user.
Replace it with a new one.
Shorten the length of the supporting wire
so that the baffle, when suspended in
position in the boiler tube, is located
in accordance with the measurements
given on page 19.
Soot has accumulated in the flue pipe,
on the baffle or in the flue cover.
Clean flue pipe, etc. Instruct user.
ODOUR IN CABINET
i
i
Cabinet interior dirty.
Foodstuffs with strong odour have
been placed uncovered in cabinet.
To clean the interior enamelled lining of
the cabinet use a lukewarm weak solu-
tion of baking soda. The radiator, ice
drawers and shelves must, however, be
cleaned with warm water only. Never
use strong chemicals or abrasives to
clean these parts, or their protective
surfaces will be spoiled. Instruct user.
Place such foods in covered dishes.
In spite of a clean cabinet there is a
certain odour.
Leakage through the insulation of the
cabinet.
Ice drawers dirty.
Check door gaskets, mount plate gaskets
and rubber plugs in inner mount plate.
Clean with warm water.
Protective finish of ice drawers
spoiled, showing scratches.
Faulty cleaning.
Instruct user. If required, replace ice
drawers.
ICE TAINT
Ice drawers clean, surface undam-
aged, ice nevertheless tainted.
..
Collection of water from defrosting
in ice drawers.
Instruct user to empty and clean ice
drawers after defrosting.
METAL OF ICE
DRAWERS
DISCOLOURED
Surface undamaged.
Limey water.
In this instance the matter should be re-
ferred to the Distributor for your State
who has received special instructions
how to treat same.
ELECTROLUX AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATOR
FAULT-TRACING CHART


REFRIGERATOR TOO COLD.
A complaint under the heading, “Refrigerator
Too Cold,’’ can be produced by two distinct
symptoms. If the radiator temperature is too
low, then the cabinet temperature will also follow
the same line. Generally speaking, this can only
happen when the flame is too high and practic-
ally no service load on the refrigerator. Con-
sequently, the flame should be observed once or
twice during the day.
On the other hand, if the radiator temperature
is correct (that is, if the difference between the
radiator temperature and the average cabinet
temperature is not greater than 25° F. with the
lowest setting of the flame) the trouble in all
probability will be due to extremely low atmos-
pheric temperature.
It will be as well to mention here that the
flame can invariably be turned down at night just
before the family retires if no use is made of
the cabinet between 9 p.m. and 6 a.m. During
this period there will be less work for the unit
to do owing to the door of the cabinet being
kept closed. However, just how low the flame
can be turned down can only be decided by ex-
perience as the height of the flame can always
vary with the atmospheric temperature. Under
very trying atmospheric conditions it may not be
advisable to turn the flame down at all at night
time.
REFRIGERATOR NOT COLD ENOUGH.
If the complaint is one of “Refrigerator not cold
enough,” again the temperature of the radiator
is taken as a symptom. If the radiator tempera-
ture is correct, the high cabinet temperature may
be due to the air circulation being restricted by
a bad arrangement of foodstuffs inside the cabinet.
If food is placed on large dishes that extend
almost completely over the whole surface of the
shelves, air circulation is so restricted that the
space at the bottom of the cabinet hardly gets
cooled at all. An explanation to the user and a
rearrangement of the food is all that is necessary.
Extra heavy service load, that includes a great
number of door openings, may also be the cause
of high cabinet temperatures. The placing of
fairly large quantities of hot liquids or solids in
the cabinet will also cause high temperatures, but
in this case a high radiator temperature also can
be expected.
Air leakage into the cabinet through worn-out
or badly-fitting door gaskets, or the door not
being kept fully closed, will also produce high
temperatures.
If the radiator temperature as well as the
cabinet temperature is too high, a temporary
restriction of the exterior air circulation over the
cooling fins of the unit may be the cause. Such
temporary restrictions may be caused by the
placing of something on top of the cabinet so as
to cover the space above the condenser fins. A
tea-cloth hung over this portion of the cabinet
to dry will cause a restriction. Boxes pushed
into the space below the refrigerator will also
cause trouble.
Too little or incorrectly applied heat to the cod-
ing unit will result in a loss of cooling effect. If
the cooling efficiency of the unit is reduced, the
cabinet interior will not be cooled sufficiently.
Too much heat applied to the unit may have the
same effect as too little or incorrectly applied
heat. This is particularly the case on Models
L. 38 or L. 380 fitted with 14-line burners.
The flue baffle plays an important part in the
correct distribution of heat to the cooling unit,
and it is therefore essential to ensure that the
flue baffle is fitted to the refrigerator. The posi-
tion of the baffle is a point which must be ob-
served in carrying out service, see Fig. 9 on this
page, and page 19, col. 2.
Where the user of the Model L. 22 has diffi-
culty in obtaining refrigeration at high atmos-
pheric temperatures, the heat can be slightly
increased by replacing the existing baffle with
one of thinner material which can be obtained
from the Distributor for the State concerned.
Fig. 9.
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE OF ELECTROLUX
AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATORS — continued.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


When the replacement of the baffle is being
effected advantage should be taken of the fact
to shorten the supporting wire so that the lower
edge of the baffle is now suspended 4 inches
above the lower edge of the boiler tube.
If the radiator is allowed to become heavily
coated with frost or ice, radiation is considerably
reduced, and consequently the unit cannot cool
the cabinet with its usual degree of efficiency.
In humid climates frost is accumulated on the
radiator (around the ice trays, etc.). More suit-
able cabinet temperatures are maintained and more
economical operation will result if this is defrosted
before it becomes excessive. It is a mistake to
assume that more frost on the radiator gives a
colder cabinet. To defrost, turn down the flame
and remove the fuel tank. Remove the foodstuffs
and ice drawers from the cabinet, allow the frost
around the radiator to melt and the resulting water
will be collected in the glass drip tray. To ac-
celerate the melting of the frost the cabinet door
should be left open.
NO REFRIGERATION.
If the complaint falls under the heading of "No
Refrigeration,” the first thing to examine should
be the kerosene equipment. Therefore, a careful
check should be made to see that all instructions
given in this manual referring to the kerosene
equipment are closely adhered to.
If the refrigerator does not give satisfactory
results this will almost invariably be due to lack
of heat input caused by either unsuitable kerosene,
a faulty wick, badly fitting lamp glass or a flue
pipe which is partially or completely choked with
soot or a combination of these faults.
It may not always be possible for you to im-
mediately locate the fault, but it can be ascertained
if either of these are the cause by measuring the
consumption of kerosene with the flame set at
the highest point. Under trying conditions when
the flame is turned to its highest point —without
smoking —the kerosene consumption of the Models
L. 38, L. 380, LK.55 and LK.550 should be between
8/10ths and 9/10ths pint in ten hours; for the
Models L. 22 and L. 220 5/10ths pint in ten hours.
To check the kerosene consumption—turn down
the flame, remove the tank and empty same. Then
carefully measure in the following quantities of
kerosene: —Models L. 22 and L. 220, 3 pints;
Models L. 38, L. 380, LK.55 and LK.550, 5 pints.
Light the lamp, replace the fuel tank in the tank
holder and maintain the flame at its highest point
—without smoking—for a period of ten hours,
this time to be taken from when the tank is re-
placed in the refrigerator. During the ten-hour
period it is very important to occasionally observe
that the flame is maintained at its highest point.
At the end of the ten-hour period turn down
the flame, remove the tank and carefully empty
same of all remaining kerosene into a container
from which the contents can be measured. By
deducting this quantity from the original amount
placed in the tank you will obtain the consumption
of kerosene which has taken place during the ten-
hour period. This should be approximately as
follows: —Models L. 22 and L. 220, 5/10ths pint;
Models L. 38, L. 380, LK.55 and LK.550, between
8/10'ths and 9/10ths pint. If this kerosene con-
sumption cannot be obtained you will know that
the heat input to the refrigerator is affected and
the kerosene equipment should be very carefully
checked. Note: —If a 10-line burner is being used
the kerosene consumption should be approximately
7/10ths pint in ten hours.
It may be found—where no centralising ring is
fitted—that the lamp glass is not fitting correctly
around the bottom of the boiler tube. Alterna-
tively, it may be found that the metal rim of the
lamp glass fouls the lower edge of the boiler tube
when the lamp is placed in position in the tank
holder. Should this be the cause, we recommend
that the lower end of the boiler tube be slightly
chamfered to an angle of approximately 45°.
Thereafter no difficulty should be experienced
when fitting the lamp glass into position.
In cases where an inspection of the kerosene
equipment shows everything to be correct, and
the cabinet is level, then, providing that the
cabinet has been operating for some hours, the
following symptoms should be looked for on the
unit:—
Warm or only slightly cool radiator, cold con-
denser, the bottom of the absorber cool or aery
hot.
If any of these symptoms are present, then the
operation of the unit itself may be affected and
may have to be replaced. Before replacing the
unit proceed to apply the remedy mentioned in
the Fault-Tracing Chart under the heading "No
Refrigeration”—that is, lay the cabinet on its face
for a period of not less than half an hour and
then upside down—that is, on its top —for a
further quarter of an hour. If this remedy is not
effective the unit will have to be replaced.
Before recommending an exchange of the unit,
the service representative should definitely satisfy
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE OF ELECTROLUX
AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATORS — continued.
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


himself that all points pertaining to the kerosene
equipment are correct and that the stipulated con-
ditions as to the position of the cabinet and free
air circulation are complied with.
FOOD TAINTING.
It has occasionally been found that an odour
exists in the cabinet when it is first unpacked. For
want of a better name, this can be termed “manu-
facturing odour,” and to eliminate this we recom-
mend that the ice drawers be filled with water to
within about 4 inch of the top and placed in their
usual position in the radiator. The refrigerator
should then be started up —without foodstuffs in
it —and with the door kept closed be allowed to
operate for approximately 24 hours.
The refrigerator should then be “defrosted,” the
ice drawers emptied and then refilled with fresh
water and the inside of the cabinet thoroughly
wiped out with a clean cloth.
Complaints regarding the tainting of foodstuffs
placed inside the cabinet may be due to a dirty
cabinet interior. Old pieces of meat, fish or butter
may be left in the corners of the cabinet, adhering
to the shelves or radiator, or may have in some
way fallen behind the radiator. The cabinet may
not have been given a periodic washing out. A
good washing out of the cabinet with warm water
should remove this cause of the complaint. Oc-
casionally, food or liquids lodge behind the
radiator cover plates—L.3B and L. 380, LK.55 and
LK.sso—and these should be removed and, if
necessary, cleaned.
Some trouble with food tainting may arise
through the placing of foods with strong odours,
such as butter, cheese or cream, in the cabinet, in
which case the odour of one permeates the other.
Dairy produce, which is particularly susceptible
to tainting, should always be kept covered. An
arrangement of the food in relation to the air
circulation in the cabinet will assist in preventing
this complaint.
ICE TAINTING.
The tainting of ice from the ice drawers may
occur if the ice drawers are dirty or if the anodi-
cally-treated surface of the aluminium has been
destroyed. WASHING WITH STRONG
ALKALIS, SUCH AS SODA, OR SCOURING
WITH ABRASIVE POWDERS WILL DE-
STROY THE PROTECTIVE SURFACE.
If the ice drawers are left full in the radiator
during defrosting, some of the water from the
melted ice or frost may enter the drawers. Since
the collection of ice or frost on the radiator has in
all probability been existent for some little time
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE OF ELECTROLUX
AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATORS —continued
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


and thereby absorbed odours from food in the
cabinet, it may not be pure and, therefore, tainted
ice would result. Ice drawers should always be
emptied and washed in clear warm water only at
each defrosting.
A breakdown in the protective coating of the
ice drawers can be detected by the appearance of
black spots on the surface, and possibly by the
formation of a white powdery substance around
these spots.
These must not be confused with a black or
brownish film which sometimes forms on the ice
drawers due to minerals in the water being used.
This film does not affect the surface of the metal
and can easily be removed by treating in accord-
ance with the special instructions issued to your
Distributor.
ICE MAKING.
Complaints as to the time required for ice
making in the ice drawers need careful investiga-
tion owing to the number of points involved.
Some users have the impression that ice can be
obtained from a refrigerator in large quantity and
in a very short space of time. The normal times
for ice making are given on page 24; these are
average figures and the time must be increased if
the air temperature is higher. The cabinet, which
is continuously working in high temperatures or
under a heavy food load, cannot be expected to
produce ice in the same time as one working under
less arduous conditions.
Ice making is accelerated by leaving the unused
cubes in the ice drawers when same are being
refilled with water.
TO SHUT DOWN THE CABINET.
If the refrigerator is not in operation, it should
be emptied, thoroughly cleaned out and the door
left ajar. THE ICE DRAWERS SHOULD
BE DRIED AND KEPT OUTSIDE THE
CABINET.
REPLACEMENT OF DOOR GASKETS.
Should at any time the inner or outer door
gaskets need replacing instructions for dismantling
and assembling the door are as follows:
First remove the door from the cabinet by un-
screwing the hinges from the cabinet front. With
the Models L. 220, L. 380 and LK.550 it will be
necessary to first remove the chromium plated
hinge clips. These can be removed by inserting
a small screw-driver in the slot on the inside of
the hinge clip and with a little leverage the clip
will spring outwards and can be removed from
the hinge.
When dismantling or ssembling a door the
lock should always be re .oved. This refers to
the Models L. 22, L. 38 and _,K.55. On the Models
L. 220, L. 380 and LK.SSC the door handle only
can be removed as the lock is located inside the
door. For removing the handles of the Models
L. 220, L. 380 and LK.550 see page 33, Fig. 10 and
proceed in the following manner: —First re-
move the small screw (4) in the lower portion
of the door handle (6) and the bakelite push
bar (1) can then be removed by lifting it out
from the lower end of the handle. The small
spring (2) is removed and then the two screws
(3) and (7) holding the handle to the door
can be removed. It is advisable to remove
the bakelite push rod (8) which is fitted into
the socket inside the lock. This will obviate any
danger of it being lost or broken when assembling
the door.
When replacing the door handle, first take the
bakelite push rod and pass it into the hole in the
door with the flat end inwards ensuring that it
enters the socket provided on the lock inside.
Place the metal handle on the door, ensuring that
the opening in the larger end of the handle passes
over the bakelite push rod, and secure by means
of the two screws (3) and (7). Replace the bake-
lite lever inserting the end (1) first and ensure
that the spring (2) is correctly positioned in the
lever as indicated, and that it is also located over
the stud (5) in the handle. The bakelite push bar
(1) can now be secured in position in the handle
(6) by means of the screw (4).
Lay the door on some soft material with the
inside facing upwards. For replacing the inner
door gasket it will only be necessary to remove
the inner door plate screws and the porcelain
inner door plate. The gasket can then be removed
from the bakelite door frame and a new one fitted.
Should the outer door plate gasket—that is, the
one which seals the door—need replacing it will
be necessary to remove the porcelain inner door
plate, bakelite door frame with gasket and also
the door insulation. The door gasket can then be
removed by taking out the small staples which
fasten the door gasket in position. The small
studs which hold the bakelite frame in position
should not be removed. When removing the old
gasket particular note should be taken of the
position of the gasket. On the Models L. 22, L. 38
and LK.55 the door gasket rests on the wooden
frame and also the bent-over edge of the outer
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE OF ELECTROLUX
AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATORS —continued
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


door plate. On the Models L. 220 and L. 380 the
door gasket has a sma'l lip which fits in between
the wooden door Dan • the turned-in edge
of the outer door plat . ~)n the Model LK.550
the door frame is stee and the outer door plate
gasket is held in posii >n by a light steel frame
fitted on the door for tl s purpose. For replacing
outer door plate gaskets on Models L. 22, L. 220,
L. 38, L. 380 and LK.55 small carpet tacks should
be to hold the door gasket in position.
Care should be exercised to see that the holes
in the bakelite door frame fit over the small steel
studs, otherwise the frame will not be in the cor-
rect position, and in most cases the door will not
close properly when refitted to the cabinet.
In the assembly of the doors for the Models
L. 220, L. 380 and LK.550 it is essential to see that
the tongue of the lock is in correct relation to the
bakelite door frame. If the frame is not replaced
in its correct position—that is, on the small steel
studs which stand up through the gasket—it will
interfere with the operation of the lock. The
tongue must not in any way touch the chromium
plated clip fastened around the hole in the bake-
lite door frame. Before refitting the door to the
cabinet, the free operation of the tongue should
be tried by pressing and releasing the black push
bar which is fitted to the lock handle.
Gaskets cut to the correct size for each model
can be obtained from your distributor.
REPLACEMENT OF DOOR HINGES
AND LOCKS.
Should at any time a hinge or lock need re-
placing on the Models L. 220, L. 380 or LK.550,
it will be necessary to remove the door and dis-
mantle same. It will not be necessary to remove
the outer door gasket. This can be eased up
slightly and the hinge or lock removed. A new
hinge or lock can then be fitted and the gasket
allowed to rest in its original position.
TO AID THE SERVICEMAN TO QUICKLY
DIAGNOSE ANY COMPLAINTS WHICH
HE MAY RECEIVE, THE FOLLOWING
ANALYSIS, TAKEN IN CONJUNCTION
WITH THE INFORMATION ALREADY
GIVEN ON PAGES 29. 30 AND 31, SHOULD
BE OF MATERIAL ASSISTANCE TO HIM.
THE FLAME DECREASES OR GOES OUT,
Cause : No kerosene in the tank, which is in-
dicated by the float indicator. Remedy : Fill the
tank with kerosene until the indicator reaches the
upper red mark.
Cause ; The wick cannot be raised or levelled
up. This may be due to a fault in the wick raiser.
Remedy : If the wick raiser cannot be readjusted,
the burner should be replaced immediately.
Cause ; Inferior quality kerosene. Remedy :
Only kerosene of the best quality for lighting pur-
poses should be used—i.e., not kerosene intended
for engines nor kerosene of inferior quality.
Cause : The burner has been lit before the
wick has been sufficiently soaked in kerosene.
Remedy : Lower the flame, remove the fuel tank
and leave the burner unlit for about one hour;
also pour a few drops of kerosene on top of the
wick before relighting.
Cause: THE BURNER HAS BEEN ALIGHT
FOR SO LONG A TIME THAT THE WICK
IS COVERED WITH CARBON CRUST.
Remedy : Remove the tank and clean the wick.
Clean the burner also if required. The perforated
bowl into which the bottom of the lamp glass fits
can be unscrewed for this purpose.
THE BURNER SMOKES.
Note : —lf the burner begins to smoke the flame
should be lowered, the kerosene tank removed
and the flue pipe, baffle and flue cover cleaned
before the actual fault is remedied. A suitable
flue brush is delivered with the cabinet.
Cause : Flame too large. Remedy : After
cleaning, start with a lower flame setting and
inspect the flame two or three times during the
first hour to see that it has not risen too high.
Cause : THE BURNER IS NOT LOCATED
EXACTLY UNDER THE BOILER TUBE OR
IN THE CENTRALISING RING. Remedy:
On putting the tank in position, verify that the
glass chimney is located correctly. If necessary,
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE OF ELECTROLUX
AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATORS —continued
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


adjust the position of the guide (20) so as to
obtain good centralisation of the burner. See
page 21, col. 2, para. 2.
Cause : The location of the refrigerator is quite
often the cause of smoking. If the refrigerator
should at any time be subjected to severe
draughts, the flame will smoke very badly.
Remedy : Remove the refrigerator to a more
favourable position.
Cause ; The glass chimney is broken. Remedy:
Replace the glass chimney with a new one.
Cause : The baffle touches the flame. Remedy ;
Shorten the length of the supporting wire so that
the dimensions given in page 19, col. 2, para. 4.
are maintained.
Cause : Soot has accumulated in the flue pipe,
on the baffle or in the flue cover. Remedy : Clean
the flue pipe, according to page 33. “The Burner
Smokes,” para. 1.
THE FLUE GASES HAVE A BAD ODOUR.
Cause ; Kerosene has been spilt on the tank in
the neighbourhood of the burner. Remedy : Clean
the burner and the outer surface of the kerosene
tank.
Cause : When the L. 38, LK.55, L. 380 or
LK.550 cabinets are operated with a 14-line burner
the flue vapours may have a bad smell if the flame
is TOO SMALL. Remedy : Increase the flame
so that the .top point is somewhat above the neck
of the glass‘d chimney.
IRREGULAR REFRIGERATION.
Cause : The refrigerator is shut off at night.
Remedy; This should not be done. THE
REFRIGERATOR SHOULD WORK CON-
TINUOUSLY DAY AND NIGHT.
Cause : The refrigerator is not level. Remedy :
Level the refrigerator. There must be no sloping
forward, but a slight inclination backward is
permissible.
POOR OR NO REFRIGERATION.
Cause : The flame is too small. Remedy : In-
crease the flame, but carefully, so that smoke is
avoided.
Cause : Heat input is affected. Remedy :
Refer to page 30, under heading, “No Refrigera-
tion. 3
Cause : Baffle wrongly located. Remedy : Ad
just the length of the supporting wire so that th
baffle will be located according to page 19, col. 2,
para. 4.
Cause : Air circulation round the unit restricted.
Remedy ; Correct location of the refrigerator,
the back of the cabinet top is an opening for th
air circulation of the unit. Ascertain that nothin
covers this opening and that the space betwec
the cabinet legs is clear.
Cause : The refrigerator is not level. Remedy .
Level the cabinet so that the sides of the cabinet
are vertical. Refer to page 20, col. 1, para. 2.
Cause : Radiator heavily coated with fro c ‘ or
ice. Remedy : Defrost; see page 30, o 1,
para. 3.
Cause : On the Model L. 22 the olts fi " ( the
radiator have become loose. Remedy : 1 ghten
the radiator bolts.
Cause : Unit operation affected. Remedy : Re-
move the tank from its holder and also all the
foodstuffs, wire shelves and ice drawers. Remove
the cabinet top and flue pipe. Then carefully lay
the cabinet on its face—door underneath—in a
horizontal position for at least half an hour. Then
invert the cabinet so that it rests with its top on
the floor and the four legs in the air and leave it
in this position for a further fifteen minutes. The
cabinet can then be replaced in its original posi-
tion. Relight and replace the lamp and start up
again. (See Fault-Tracing Chart under “Cause,”
stoppage in gas or liquid circulation of unit
system.)
POINTS TO REMEMBER.
THE CABINET MUST BE LEVEL.
THE HEAT INPUT MUST BE CORRECT
FOR THE PREVAILING ATMOSPHERIC
CONDITIONS.
EFFICIENT AIR CIRCULATION OVER
THE UNIT FINS AT THE BACK OF THE
CABINET IS ESSENTIAL.
BAFFLE HEIGHTS :
4 inches for L. 22 and L. 220.
2 inches for LOS and L. 380.
4 inches for LK.55 and LK.550.
SEE THAT THE USER UNDERSTANDS
THE IMPORTANCE OF KEEPING THE
LAMP CLEAN AND REGULARLY DE-
FROSTING THE RADIATOR.
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE OF ELECTROLUX
AIR-COOLED REFRIGERATORS —continue
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


REPLACEMENT OF COOLING UNITS
Electrolux Air-co> Inits differ somewhat in
construction and outward appearance and the size
aries according to the particular cabinet to which
they are fitted.
The replacement of the cooling units will, how-
ever, be found to be a fairly simple operation if
the work is carried out along the lines given in the
fo,lowing instructions, but it must be understood
hat the services of two men are necessary to
nable units to be removed or replaced as other-
wise the insulation on the inside of the unit
vindow or the insulation between the mounting
plates of the unit will be damaged.
REPLACEMENT OF UNIT 42A IN L. 22
TO L. 220 CABINETS.
R<j- .■!' I of O'd Unit.
(1) Remove the kerosene lamp complete and all
loose equipment from the cabinet interior.
Also remove the drip plate from the radiator.
(2) Remove door by unscrewing the hinges from
the cabinet side and also remove the strike
for the lock. For Model L. 220 remove the
chromium plated covers of the hinges and
unscrew the hinges from the cabinet side
and remove the door. Remove the flue cap,
baffle wire and baffle. Remove the cabinet
top by taking out the fixing screws at the
back and lifting off from the back. Remove
the support bracket with the flue pipe. In
the case of the E type controls, remove the
asbestos washer which fits over the top end
of the boiler, and which the flue pipe rests
on.
(3) Remove the shelf hook by easing the lock
nut and then unscrewing the hook. Ease
off the three radiator bolts—located at the
rear of the radiator—and lower the radiator
to its lowest extreme. Then remove the
sealing plugs on the inside and outside of
the cabinet.
(4) Turn the cabinet upside down—so that the
legs are pointing upwards—and remove the
centralising ring, which, if fitted, is secured
with a screw to the bottom of the boiler
tube. Then remove the tank holder.
(5) Lay the cabinet face downwards on some
soft material and remove the two back legs
from the cabinet.
(6) Remove the screws securing the unit to the
angle iron frame of the cabinet. Also the
two screws securing the unit mounting plate
to the top of the cabinet frame.
(7) Lift out the unit in the manner illustrated
in Fig. 12. The lifting out and the replacing
of a unit should be carried out by two
persons, making sure that the unit is re-
moved from or lowered into the cabinet in
a perfectly horizontal position. This
obviates the danger of damaging the cork
mounting of the unit. Now remove the cast
radiator from the old unit by lifting it up-
wards and fit it to the new unit. The bolts
should not be tightened up at this stage.
When fitted to the new unit, the radiator should
be lowered to its fullest extent and should be in
a position facing at right-angles to the unit frame,
so that it can easily be inserted through the unit
window. See Fig. 11.
Fig. 11.
Fitting the New Unit.
See that the bitumen sealing of the cork between
the two mounting plates of the unit is not dam-
aged. If it should be, repair it with melted
bitumen or the special sealing compound obtain-
able from Electrolux Pty. Ltd.
(1) See that the sealing gasket is in position on
the unit outer mounting plate as shown in
Fig. 11, and also that the gasket in the unit
window is correctly placed, Fig. 13. If, in
the Model L. 22, the inner unit window
gasket should be displaced completely, re-
move it, thoroughly clean the channel free
of all bitumen in which the gasket rests.
Also remove all bitumen from the gasket.
If the old gasket is damaged, replace it with
THE ELECTROLUX KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR


a new one. Then carefully replace the
gasket, sealing same in position with melted
bitumen. It is important that the flat portion
of the gasket—which rests in the channel—
is covered with melted bitumen. The bitu-
men should be allowed to set for at least ten
minutes before the new unit is fitted.
The foregoing does not apply to the Model
L. 220 where the inner unit window gasket
is fastened in position with wood strips.
Should this gasket require replacing, the
wood strips can easily be removed, a new
gasket fitted and the strips replaced in their
original positions, first making sure that
they fasten the gasket securely.
(2) Before lowering the unit into the cabinet,
apply a liberal application of French chalk
to both the cork insulation between the
mounting plates of the unit and the insula-
tion around the unit window. Lower the
unit into the cabinet and temporarily secure
it with the fixing screws. At this stage the
screws should not be screwed home, as it is
necessary to observe that the inner mounting
plate is seating correctly against the inner
window gasket. This can be seen by turn-
ing the cabinet on its side. IT IS MOST
IMPORTANT THAT THE UNIT IS
NOT SECURED IN POSITION UN-
LESS THE INNER MOUNTING
PLATE IS LOCATED CORRECTLY.
When the mounting plate is seating correctly
tighten up the fixing screws on mounting
plate and also on the angle iron frame of
the cabinet.
(3) Replace the two back legs on the cabinet.
(4) From the face downwards position turn the
cabinet on to its top so that the legs are
pointing upwards. Then replace the tank
holder in its original position. Also the
centralising ring, where fitted, securing same
in position with the set screw.
(5) Turn the cabinet back on its legs and replace
both the inner and outer sealing plugs.
Note ; —The inner plug is rubber.
(6) Fit on the asbestos washer over the top end
of the boiler tube C and E type controls
only. Refit the flue pipe and secure by
means of the support bracket. Replace the
baffle with its support wire. Replace the
cabinet top and secure with the fixing
screws. Then replace the flue cap.
(7) Re-align the radiator into its correct position
by using the small wire shelf as a guide.
This should be level (horizontal) when the
radiator is in such a position that the shelf
being used as a guide can be easily inserted
in or withdrawn from the cabinet.
When the radiator is in its correct position,
tighten up the securing bolts. The shelf
hook can now be replaced and lock
position with the lock-nut. The r
location for this is when the ce* a'
comfortably rests on the hook.
(8) Replace the cabinet door. When so
make sure that the correct washers are in
position between the hinges/str ke and the
cabinet. This refers to the Model L. 22 only.
In the case of the Model L. 220, replace the
door and fit the chromium plated cover clips
on the hinges.
(9) Replace the loose equipment in the cabinet,
and also the drip plate on the radiator.
(10) Replace the kerosene lamp complete and
check that the lamp is seating correctly.
REPLACEMENT OF UNIT 61A IN L. 38
AND L. 380 CABINETS AND OF UNIT
80A IN LK.55 AND LK.550 CABINETS.
Removal o/ Old Unit.
(1) Remove the kerosene lamp complete and all
loose equipment from the cabinet interior.
Remove door by unscrewing the hinges from
the cabinet side and also remove the strike
for the lock. For Models L. 380 and LK.550,
remove the chromium plated covers of the
hinges and unscrew hinges from the cabinet
side. Then remove the door.
(2) Remove the flue cap, baffle wire and baffle.
Remove the cabinet top by taking out the
fixing screws at the back and lifting off from
the back. Remove the support bracket with
the flue pipe.
(3) Unscrew the fixing screws and carefully re-
move the side and front cover plates of the
radiator. Then remove the two side plate
support brackets complete with screws.
Note :—Please observe the correct location
of these brackets before removing same.
Also remove the two rubber sealing plugs
on the inside and the two cork sealing plugs
on the outside of the cabinet. In the case
of the Models LK.55 and LK.550 the cork
plugs on the outside cannot be removed
until after the rear shield plate is removed,
(4) Remove the two hexagon bolts and nuts
from the upper part of the radiator which
secure it to the bracket inside the cabinet.
Fig. 13.
REPLACEMENT OF COOLING UNITS —continued
THE ELECTROLUX ' "ERATOR


(5) Turn the cabinet upside down -so that the
legs are pointing upwards—and remove the
centralising ring, which, if fitted, is secured
with a screw to the bottom of the boiler
tube. Then remove the tank holder.
(6) Lay the cabinet face downwards on some
soft material. Also remove the shield plate
(if fitted) from the unit, see (20) Fig. 5.
r ' move the screws securing the back legs
'-c cabinet and take off the legs, together
with the flat connecting bar; also remove
the angle iron from the top back of the
cabinet.
(8) Remove die screws securing the unit to the
angle iron frame of the cabinet.
(9) Lift out the unit in the manner shown in
Fig. 12. The lifting out and the replacing
of a unit should be carried out by two per-
sons, making sure that the unit is removed
or lowered in a perfectly horizontal
position. This obviates the danger of
damaging the cork mounting of the unit.
Fig. 12.
Fitting the New Unit.
See that the bitumen sealing of the cork between
the two mounting plates of the unit is not dam-
aged. If it should be. repair it with melted
bitumen or the special sealing compound obtain-
able from Electrolux Pty, Ltd.
(1 ) See that the sealing gasket is in position on
the unit outer mounting plate as shown in
Fig. 14. and also that the gasket in the unit
window is correctly placed, Fig. 13. If, in
the Models L. 38 or LK.55, the inner unit
window gaske' should he displaced, com-
pletely removi ie
channel free u ail hit amen in which die
gasket rests. ai
the gasket. ]i -he gasket is tidinaged it
should be rep] n
carefully replace the gasket, sealing same in
position with melted bitumen. It is impor-
tant that the flat portion of the gasket—
which rests in the channel —is covered with
melted bitumen. This bitumen should be
allowed at least ten minutes to set before
the new unit is fitted.
Fig. 13.
Fig. 14.
THE ELFCTPC TTI X KEROSENE-OPERATED REFRIGERATOR
REPLACEMENT OF COOLING UNITS-c onti rated


The foregoing does not apply to the Models
L. 380 or LK.550 where the inner unit win-
dow gasket is fastened in position with wood
strips. Should the gasket require replacing
on the Models L. 380 or LK.550, the wood
strips can easily be removed, a new gasket
fitted and the strips replaced in their original
positions, first making sure that they fasten
the gasket securely.
(2) Before lowering the unit into the cabinet,
apply a liberal application of French chalk
to both the cork insulation between the
mounting plates of the unit and the insula-
tion around the unit window. Lower the
unit into the cabinet and temporarily secure
with the fixing screws. At this stage the
screws should not be screwed home, as it is
important to see that the inner mounting
plate is seating correctly against the inner
window gasket. This can be seen by turn-
ing the cabinet on its side. IT IS MOST
IMPORTANT THAT THE UNIT IS
NOT SECURED IN POSITION UN-
LESS THE INNER MOUNTING
PLATE IS LOCATED CORRECTLY.
When the mounting plate is seated correctly
the unit screws should be tightened up.
(3) Replace the flat connecting bar with the two
back legs, also replace the angle iron stay
to the top back of the cabinet, making sure
that this stay is fitted correctly so as to
fasten the cabinet top.
(4) From the fahq position turn the
cabinet on' t<s ’its top so that the legs are
pointing upwards. Then replace the tank
holder in its original position. Also the
centralising ring, where fitted, securing same
in position with the set screw.
(5) Turn the cabinet back on its legs and replace
both the two inner and two outer sealing
plugs. Note : —The inner plugs are rubber.
Insert and tighten the two hexagon bolts on
the radiator bracket. Also replace the two
side plate support brackets and then the
side and front cover plates. Replace the
shield plate, if fitted.
(6) Refit the flue pipe and secure by means of
the support bracket. Replace the cabinet
top and secure with the fixing screws. Re-
place the baffle, cap and support wire
complete.
(7) Replace the cabinet door. When doing so
make sure that the correct washers are in
position between the hinges/strike and the
cabinet. This refers to Models L. 38 and
LK.55 only. In the case of the Models
L. 380 and LK.550, replace the door and
then the chromium plated cover clips for
hinges.
(8) Replace the loose equipment in the cabinet.
(9) Replace the kerosene lamp complete and
check that the lamp is seating correctly.
Wholly Set Up and Printed
in Australia by
H. HEARNE & CO. Pty. Ltd.,,
285-7 Latrobe Street, Melbourne.
REPLACEMENT OF COOLING UNlTS^rcontinued
