

NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
SERVICES TO READERS
Interim edition
August 1968
All telephone numbers given in this brochure will
change when a P.A.B.X. is installed at the end of
September. A new brochure will then be issued.




Contents
A. Brief history
B. Functions
C. Collections
I). Services to readers within the National Library
1. Exhibition galleries
2. Print Shop
3. Catalogue - Bibliography Room
4. Reference and Reading Room
5. Newspaper Reading Room
6. Microcopy Reading Room
7. Union Catalogues
8. Map Reading Room
9. Oriental Studies Reading Room
10. Pictorial Reading Room
11. Film Collection and Services
12. Advanced Studies Reading Room
13. Advanced Reference Collection
14. Rare Book and Manuscript Reading Room
15. Photocopying Services
16. Stack passes
17- Readers 1 Lounge
E.' Summary of services given throughout Australia
and overseas
1. Research, reference and information
service
2 . Inter-library loans
3. Location service
4. Card service
5. Publications
6. Canberra Public Library Service




NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
Services to Readers
A. OUTLINE HISTORY
The National Library has grown out of the
Library of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
Australia founded in 1901. The Library moved,
with Parliament, from Melbourne to Canberra in
1927.
In 192.3 the Parliamentary Library Committee
first used the term ’’Commonwealth National Library”
for those collections acquired for purposes beyond
those of the Parliament and for the ultimate benefit
of research and inquiry to scholars of Australian
and overseas affairs. This term was in general use
until i 960.
The National Library of Australia was separated
from the Library of Parliament by the National Library
Act of 1960 and placed under the control of a
National Library Council and a National Librarian.
The Library organised into three major sections,
Development Services, Bibliographical Services and
User Services with three other sections covering
Establishment, Finance and General Services,
Extension Services (Canberra Public Library Service)
and Training and Liaison Services. For many years
the Library was housed in scattered and unsatis-
factory temporary accommodation and only in August
1968 opened for service in its permanent home on
the southern shore of Lake Burley Griffin.
B. FUNCTIONS
The functions of the National Library combine
four concepts of service. The first has some elements
of the pattern set by the Library of Congress: service
to the Parliament and the national government. The
second and the third stem largely from the tradition
of European libraries: to be a recognised repository
for the record of the life and achievement of its own
people and to be a place to which scholars may turn
with confidence for what is most significant in the
literature of other countries. The fourth is the
more modern concept of a centre of national biblio-
graphy and of bibliographical and library co-operation




C. COLLECTIONS
The Library T s collections are particularly
strong in Australian, Pacificana, Asian materials,
Americana, British history, 18th century English
literature, French Revolution and early works on
political economy. Newspapers, periodicals,
serials and government publications are strongly
held while extensive sets of material not avail-
able in original form are held on microfilm. In
non-Western languages, the Library has growing
collections in Chinese, Japanese, Korean and the
Slavic languages.
The Library holds more than a million books,
many thousands of pamphlets, 35,000 current serial
titles, 2,000 manuscript accessions, 170,000 maps
and 400,000 aerial photographs, 25,000 pictures and
prints, 100,000 photographs, 11,000,000 feet of
moving picture films and 20,000 reels of microfilm
as well as other microform copies of printed and
manuscript sources and a substantial collection of
sound recordings.




D. SERVICES TO READERS WITHIN THE NATIONAL LIBRARY
The reading rooms and other public areas are open
at the following times:
Exhibition galleries
Monday - Friday 9*30 a.m. - 10.00 p.m.
Saturday 9•30 a.m. - 4-45 p.m.
Sunday 9*30 a.m. - 12.30 p.m.,
1.30 p.m. - 4-45 p-m.
Catalogue-Bibliography Room
Reference and Reading Room
Monday - Friday 9*30 a.m. - 10.00 p.m.
Saturday 9-30 a.m. - 4*45 p.m.
Sunday 1.30 p.m. - 4-45 p.m. (no
stack service)
Advanced Studies Reading Room
Newspaper Reading Room
Microcopy Reading Room
Monday - Friday 9*30 a.m. - 10.00 p.m.
Saturday 9*30 a.m. - 4-45 p.m.
Map Reading Room
Monday - Saturday 9 30a.m. - 4•45 p.m.
Rare Book and Manuscript Reading Room
Pictorial Reading Room
Oriental Studies Reading Room
Monday - Friday 9*30 a.m. - 4*45 p.m.
On public holidays (other than Christmas Day,
Good Friday and Anzac Day when the Library closes)
services will be those normally given on Saturdays
Where circumstances justify it, prior arrangements
may be made to use material from the special
collections in the general reading rooms during
evenings and week-ends when the special reading
rooms are closed.
Readers 1 tickets are required only for the use of
the Advanced Studies Reading Room, the Advanced
Reference Collection and the Rare Book and
Manuscript Reading Room.




1. The Exhibition Galleries at either side of the front
foyer have on permanent exhibition such Library treasures
as the 1297 issue of Magna Carta and the original manu-
script of Captain Cook’s journal. The Exhibition Gallery
on the first floor balcony contains special exhibitions
which change at fairly frequent intervals.
2. The Print Shop opens off the Exhibition Gallery on the
ground floor. Here modern prints of some of the Library’s
original pictures and maps, views of the Library and the
Library ’s book publications are on sale.
3. The Catalogue-Bibliography Room in front of the main
doors on the ground floor contains the main catalogues
of the Library’s collections. Round this room are
shelved many of the Library’s collection of printed
catalogues and bibliographies. Readers are expected to
fill in call slips from the catalogue for all books and
periodicals they wish to have brought from the book stacks
Reader’s are warned that these catalogues do not contain
entries for all the Library’s holdings. For further
details on the use of the catalogue please see the
Library’s Guide to the Catalogues, copies of which are
available in this room. Please also seek any help
needed from the Librarian on duty.
For telephone enquiries about the Library’s holdings
please ring 72211 extension 434-
4. The Reference and Reading Room opens off the Catalogue-
Bibliography Room. Readers are required to present
completed call slips for material needed from the stacks
at the Issue Desk in this room. They are given a
numbered ticket and when the required books are ready
these numbers will light up on the indicator panel over
the Issue Desk.
A selection of reference books is shelved round the
walls of this room, and over four hundred current
periodicals are displayed.
If readers do not find what they need they should ask
the staff at the Issue Desk. At the end of the Reference
and Reading Room is a typing room where readers may use
their typewriters or tape-recorders in conjunction with
Library material. Readers are permitted to use their
own books in the Reading Room but must have them examined
at the Cloak Room before leaving the Library.




5. The Newspaper Reading: Room is to the left of the lift
on the second floor. In the adjacent stacks a wide
selection of Australian newspapers and at least two
newspapers from most other countries are held. The
Newspaper Reading Room is equipped with published
newspaper indexes, a number of press digests and other
reference books. Many newspapers are held on micro-
film and readers may need to be referred to the
Microcopy Reading Room on the first floor.
For telephone enquiries about newspaper holdings please
ring 72211 extension 276 or 277-
6. The Microcopy Reading Room on the first floor contains
the complete holdings of the Library T s microfilm,
microcard, microfiche and microprint. A variety of
microcopy reading equipment is available and assistance
is given with its use. Photocopies of sections of
microfilm can be made on the reader-printers.
7. The Union Catalogues of the collections of other
Australian libraries are available to readers for
consultation. They are situated on the ground floor
along the corridor opening off the far end of the
Catalogue-Bibliography Room. If the reader wishes
to use books located in these catalogues and not held
by the National Library itself, the National Library
„ will seek to borrow these books for readers on inter-
library loan.
For telephone enquiries involving the union catalogues,
please ring 72211 extension 207> 266 or 268.
8. The Map Reading Room on the second floor contains an
extensive collection of 800 atlases and in the adjacent
stacks over 170,000 maps. While special effort has been
given to the acquisition of Australian maps, which are
supported by some 400,000 aerial photographs, the
objective of the collection is to achieve a world wide
coverage. Depository arrangements for the maps of many
overseas countries have been made.
For telephone enquiries about maps or atlases please
ring 72211 extension 281.




9. Oriental Studies Reading Room on the third floor
contains the Library T s collections (excluding
newspapers and microcopies) in the Chinese,
Japanese, Thai, Korean and Tibetan languages.
The Chinese language collections now number
nearly 50,000 volumes and the Japanese language
over 30,000 volumes. The rapidly growing Thai
collection numbers about 2,000 volumes. Over
2,000 works in Korean and some valuable Tibetan
items are also held.
Telephone enquiries should be directed to 72211
extension 284-
10. Pictorial Reading Room on the second floor provides
a place to study the Library 1 s collection of Australian
historical pictures in the form of paintings, drawings,
prints and photographs. The pictorial records cover
events, changing landscapes, notable people, occasions,
buildings, social life, flora and fauna. The collec-
tion is rich in material on natural history, and also
includes 200 valuable Mogul miniatures. Black and
white photographs can be ordered of pictures in the
Library T s collection, and colour transparencies are
lent.
For telephone enquiries about the pictorial collections
please ring 72211 extension 398 (after hours 72354).
11. Film Collection and Services is on the third floor.
The collection of films has two parts: the first of
over 2,000 titles provides a record of many aspects
of Australian history; the second comprises a
collection of scientific, educational and cultural
films from all countries. These documentary films
are loaned to Commonwealth Government agencies and
organizations in territories under its control
(including the A.C.T.) and to State film libraries
to supplement their resources on request.
National Library films are shown regularly during the
day in the Library Theatre on the Lower Ground Floor,
down the stairs from the front foyer.
For telephone enquiries regarding films please ring
72211 extension 346 (after hours 72217).
12. The Advanced Studies Reading Room on the first floor
is available to holders of a Reader t s Ticket. These
tickets are granted to readers whose needs cannot be
adequately provided for in the Reference and Reading
Room because of the quantity of material and guidance
needed over an extended time. Readers engaged on




projects of the above kind should ask the staff in
tdie Catalogue-Bibliography Room or Reference and
Reading Room to direct them to the Reference
Librarian, with whom they can discuss their work.
Items from the Ferguson Room which houses the
Library f s rare Australiana may be used in the Advanced
Studies Reading Room. A typing room opens off this
room and here readers may use their own typewriters
and tape-recorders.
For telephone enquiries connected with the Advanced
Studies Reading Room please ring 72211 extension 352
(after hours 72211).
13. The Advanced Reference Collection adjacent to the
Advanced Studies Reading Room is also available to
holders of a Reader T s Ticket. Items from this
collection be called for and used in the Reference
and Reading Room. A wide range of encyclopaedias,
dictionaries, statistical publications, government
publications and other source material is included in
this collection. Recently acquired books are shelved
in the same area as the Advanced Reference Collection,
arranged in language groups awaiting cataloguing.
This arrangement allows holders of Readers T Tickets
to see what new material is coming into the National
Library.
14• The Rare Book and Manuscript Reading Room is on the
second floor. A Reader f s Ticket is required for the
use of this room, but special provision is made for
readers wishing to consult a single item in the rare
book or manuscript collections. The manuscripts fall
into three main groups: those concerned with the
exploration and early years of settlement; those
concerned with the federation of the Australian states
and the political history of the Commonwealth; and
those consisting of literary manuscripts.
The rare book collection consists of monographs
published before 1801 and serials which ceased before
1801; books whose irreplaceability or uniqueness
makes them rare; books of aesthetic importance;
special collections containing both rare and non-
rare material which need to be kept together, and
some other similar categories.
For telephone enquiries concerning the manuscript
collections please ring 72211 extension 259 and for
the rare book collection 72211 extension 256.




15. Xeroxing and photocopying of moat material from the Library T s
collections can be arranged. For conditions and charges
please enquire from the Reading Room staff.
16. Stack passes. The Library T s book-stacks are not open
to readers. However, in very rare cases, when a need
has been established, stack passes are granted to
readers to allow them to work in sections of the book
stacks.
17. The Readers ’ Lounge on the fourth floor is for users of
the Library’s reading rooms, only. Readers should ask
for an admittance ticket at the Issue Desk of the
reading room where they are working if they wish to
use this service. Light refreshments are available.
The Readers’ Lounge and the first floor balcony extending
round the outside of the building are the only two public
areas of the Library where smoking is permitted. This
balcony is entered from the first floor Exhibition
Gallery.
E. SERVICES PROVIDED TO READERS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA AND
OVERSEAS
This booklet sets out to give a brief outline of the
services provided by the National Library within its own
reading rooms. The other services of the National Library
are described more fully elsewhere but are briefly set
out below.
Research and reference work is undertaken for people
throughout Australia and overseas, loans of books are
made to other libraries for use on their premises and
the Library is the centre for locating books and the
redistributing of library material. Catalogue cards are
distributed to other libraries. Among the Library’s
regular publications are the Australian National
Bibliography which lists books published in Australia,
written by Australians or on an Australian subject \
and Australian Public Affairs Information Service which
is a subject index of periodical articles and sections
of books, not included in A.N.8., on Australian politi-
cal, economic and cultural affairs. Two other important
publications are Current Australian Serials and
Australian Government Publications.




Because it is a research and reference library, the
National Library does not lend books for home use,
but in the absence of the usual municipal authority,
the Council of the National Library is responsible
for setting up and operation of the Canberra Public
Library Service with its headquarters in Kings Avenue
and branches throughout the city, which cater for the
home reading needs of Canberra citizens.


