

Service
IRemembranee
jftanfclm SDelano IRoosevelt
president of the TUmteO States of Hmcrtca
JLo be belb in
St. Hnbrew’s Catbebral, S\>bne\>
flDonba\>, HprU 16tb, 1945
Go be conbucteb bp
Gbe flDost TReverenb H. m . Ik. fPowll, 2).2).
Brcbbisbop of Spbnev


Order of Service
Hymn 419
tTARK, hark, my soul; Angelic songs are swelling
11 O'er earth's green fields and ocean's wave-beat shore:
How sweet the truth those blessed strains are telling
Of that new life when sin shall be no more.
Angels of Jesus, angels of light,
Singing to welcome the pilgrims of the night.
2 Onward we go, for still we hear them singing,
Come, weary souls, for Jesus bids you come:
And through the dark, its echoes sweetly ringing
The music of the Gospel leads us home.
Angels of Jesus, &c.
3 Far, far away, like bells at evening pealing,
The voice of Jesus sounds o’er land and sea;
And laden souls by thousands meekly stealing,
Kind Shepherd, turn their weary steps to Thee.
Angels of Jesus, &c.
4 Rest comes at length; though life be long and dreary,
The day must dawn, and darksome night be past;
Faith's journey ends in welcome to the weary,
And heaven, the heart's true home, will come at last.
Angels of Jesus, &c.
5 Angels, sing on, your faithful watches keeping,
Sing us sweet fragments of the songs above;
Till morning's joy shall end the night of weeping,
And life's long shadows break In cloudless love.
Angels of Jesus, angels of light,
Singing to welcome the pilgrims of the night. Amen.
St. John XL, 25, 26
T AM the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever liveth and believeth In me shall
never die.
St. John XIV., I, 2
T ET not your heart be troubled: ye believe In God, believe also in me. In
my Father's house are many mansions: If It were not so, I would have told
you. I go to prepare a place for you.
Psalm XXIV.
THHE earth Is the Lord's and all that therein is: the compass of the
world and they that dwell therein.
2 For he hath founded it upon the seas: and prepared It upon the floods.


3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord: or who shall rise up in his
holy place?
4 Even he that hath clean hands and a pure heart: and that hath not lift
up his mind unto vanity nor sworn to deceive his neighbour.
5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord: and righteousness from
the God of his salvation.
6 This Is the generation of them that seek him: even of them that seek
thy face O Jacob.
7 Lift up your heads O ye gates and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors:
and the King of glory shall come in.
8 Who Is the King of glory: it Is the Lord strong and mighty even the
Lord mighty in battle.
9 Lift up your heads O ye gates and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors:
and the King of glory shall come in.
10 Who is the King of glory: even the Lord of hosts he is the King of glory.
Glory be to the Father and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was In the beginning Is now and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.
F HEARD a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, From henceforth
-*■ blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: even so saith the Spirit; for
they rest from their labours.
Prayer for Remembrance
A LMIGHTY GOD, with Whom do live the spirits of them that depart
•OA- Hence in the Lord and with Whom the souls of the faithful, after they
are delivered from the burden of the flesh, are in joy and felicity: we praise
and magnify Thy Holy Name for all Thy servants who have finished their
course in Thy faith and fear; especially for President Franklin Delano
Roosevelt, beseeching Thee to give us grace so to follow their good examples,
that with them we may be partakers of Thy heavenly Kingdom. Grant
this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.
TWO MINUTES' SILENCE
Prayer for Comfort
O HEAVENLY FATHER, Whose Blessed Son Jesus Christ did weep at
the grave of Lazarus, look, we beseech Thee, with compassion upon
the members of the late President's Family now in sorrow and affliction;
comfort them, O Lord, with Thy gracious consolations; make them to know
that all things work together for good to them that love Thee; and grant
them evermore sure trust and confidence In Thy fatherly care; through the
same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PRAYER FOR AMERICA
Let us pray for America and its Leaders;
OLCRD our God, who from thy throne beholdest all the realms of the
earth, have regard unto the People of America In their hour of
national grief and grant that they may remain a people to serve Thee
to the end of time. Guide the governing of the Nation in this solemn
hour for them and for the peoples of the world, and grant that all who


enjoy its freedom may for ever strive and labour for the good of others,
according to the example of him who died in the service of men, Thy Son,
our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
PRAYER FOR PEACE
Let us pray for Peace:
A LMIGHTY GOD, from whom all thoughts of truth and peace proceed,
kindle, we pray Thee, In the hearts of all men, the true love of peace,
and guide with thy pure and peaceable wisdom those who take counsel for the
nations of the earth; that in tranquility thy Kingdom may go forward, till the
whole earth is filled with the knowledge of Thy love; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
Concluding Prayer
HEAVENLY FATHER, who in thy Son Jesus Christ, hast given us a
true faith, and a sure hope; help us, we pray Thee, to live as those who
believe and trust in the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, and the
resurrection to life everlasting, through the love of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.
Lesson I Cor. 15. 20-58
Anthem—Lift thine eyes. —Mendelssohn
Address: The Most Rev. the Archbishop
Hymn 229
T?ATHER, hear the prayer we offer;
Not for ease that prayer shall be,
But for strength that we may ever
Live our lives courageously.
2 Not for ever in green pastures
Do we ask our way to be;
But the steep and rugged pathway
May we tread rejoicingly.
3 Not for ever by still waters
Would we Idly rest and stay;
But would smite the living fountains
From the rocks along our way.
4 Be our strength in hours of weakness,
In our wanderings be our guide;
Through endeavour, failure, danger,
Father, be thou at our side. Amen.
"Dead March" in "Saul
American National Anthem
Benediction
Edgar Bragg & Sons, Printers, Sydney.
