

SEVEN
PROPHETIC SCENES
■ x v
“ THE COMING OF THE LORD DR A W KTII kIGH.” !
!■ 1 i
JAM KS V. -S.
k
i j
MELBOURNE:
FFROST, PRINTER, RUSSELL STREET
b 1863.
REET. (®
sit.ifea








SEVEN
PROPHETIC SCENES
YET TO COME..
WITH
AN ILLUSTRATIVE DIAGRAM.
‘‘’THE COMING OF THE LORD DRAWETH NIGH.” JAMES V. 8. v°-
MELBOURNE:
EFROST, PRINTER, 132, RUSSELL STREET,
MDCCCLXIII.




INTRODUCTION.
Much enquiry has existed, of late 'years, among the children
of God, reipecting the doctrine of the Lord’s Second Coming,
And although, many of them with the prophetic student, enjoy
scriptural views, and definite knowledge, upon that and other
coming events; and are able to trace the order in which they
may transpire; and look with composure on the future, having
their lamps trimmed and oil in their vessels; yet, it cannot be
denied, that there are many sincere Christians that have no
definite knowledge thereof, and who are anxious to know
and understand them.
In order that a knowledge of these prophetic events might
be diffused among them, the little book, called, “ Coming
Events,” was published, and has been extensively read.
But the increased and growing desire of a knowledge of these
things, has caused to jibe felt, the importance of another
treatise, which should contain a more enlarged, and yet a
concise view of them as they will transpire.


To meet this necessity, this book has been printed; and the
aim of its author is to give a plain and scriptural account of
the leading, coming prophetic events; that Christians may no
longer be in doubt, and tossed about by pulpit assertions and
traditional hearsays; but that they may be settled in their
minds. He therefore, submits it to their prayerful perusal.
And if it affords any Christian, but one ray of light upon the
prophetic word, or is the cause of one joyful hope, let the
praise be given to Him, to whom all glory is due.
The author also deems it right to inform his readers that
some portions of the “ Coming Events.” referred to, hav«
been copied into this.
September Ist. 1863


SCENE, I.
THE Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ into the Air,* the Fint
Resurrection, and the Ascent of the Church.
None who read the Scriptures, and really believe the
Bible to be an inspired book, can question for a mo-
ment that the Second Advent of Christ is a subject
prominently brought before us, especially in the New
Testament. And although the testimony of Scripture
on this point is so plain and so express, yet how many
there are who have no definite knowledge of the
Second Advent of the Lord. They know not that
that event is to be personal, and before the Millennium.
Nor is it yet understood by many sincere Christian?,,
that the resurrection of the just is separate and distinct
a thousand years before, the final resurrec-
tion of the wicked.
Some even suppose that, in a certain sense, Christ
came at the destruction of Jerusalem ; some think, and
many teach that he comes at death ; others there are
who speak of his coming to the soul of each believer
• When the Coming of the Lord into the air, and, to the earth,
are spoken of, it is not intended to convey the thought
of two comings; but rather two phases or stages in his appearing,.
The first stage or phase will be his descent from heaven, when
the saints will be caught up to meet him in the air. l Thes. iv.
16, 17. The other or second stage is his coming with the saints,
previously raised, to the earth. Rev. six. 14.


in the power of his spirit, and of his coming to the
church, when at any season, the power of the Spirit is
specially manifested.* Yet, notwithstanding, these
very persons are compelled to believe in, and to look
for a coming of Christ beyond all this, a coming in the
clouds of heaven with power and great glory, a coming
to punish his adversaries and to reward his faithful
servants.
It is of this event, viz., the personal coming of the
Lord into the air, in connexion with the First Resur-
rection and Ascension of the Church, we invite your
patient and thoughtful attention.
It will be seen by any ordinary reader of the scrip-
tures, that the death of any individual, cannot be the
coming of the Lord. To say the least, it is not a
scriptural coming. At the death of a Christian, the
soul of that Christian returns to God who gave it. In
the scriptures we read of individuals dying; but at
their death nothing is said of the Lord’s coming. In
Acts the vii. 55, 5(5, we read, “ But he, (Stephen) being
full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into
Heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing
on the right hand of God. And said, Behold, I see the
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the
right hand of God." At the death of Stephen, a man
full oi the Holy Ghost, the Lord was standing at the
right hand ol God. If, then, there be any truth of the
assertion that the Lord’s coining is at our death, surely
he would not have been standing at the right hand of
This coming at death, to the soul, and the out-pourings of
the Holy Spirit, is called a Spiritual Coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ.


God, at the death of Stephen, the first martyr, and a
man full of the Holy Ghost.
That the Bible is an inspired book has long since
been proved. Admitting this fact we say then, there
can be no confusion of terms there ; neither any mis-
representations, nor unmeaning assertions. When the
second person of the Trinity is spoken of, it nowhere
means the First or Third person of the Trinity ; nor
that the Second is meant when the Third is spoken of;
therefore, when the scriptures speak of the Second
advent of the Lord, they mean, doubtless, the second
coming of the Lord; and it would be unscriptural to
say, that it means the Holy Ghost, the Third person
of the Trinity. Even to speak of the coming of the
Holy Ghost is unscriptural. The Holy Ghost is in
the Church and has ever been since the day of Penti-
cost. To look for, then, or to pray for the Holy Ghost
to come down from Heaven, is unscriptural—the Holy
Spirit is in the heart of every believer. This the
Saviour promised. “If I go, 1 will send the Com-
forter,” which is the Lord’s vice-gerent in his absence-
We read in Matthew, “Watch therefore; for ye
know not what hour your L >rd doth come.” ch. xxiv,
42. See also Mark iii, 35, and Luke xxi, 36. A
careful examination of these texts proves that it is a
personal and not a spiritual coming. In Matt, xxiv,
30, it is written, “ and they shall see the Son of man
coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great
glory,” And after a descripton of the condition of
the world at the period of his coming, and the uncer-
tainty of the time, he exhorts us to “ watch.” The
same words are used in Mark xiii, 26, thus, asserting


plainly and positively, that the Son of man will come
in clouds with great power and glory ; and in conse-
quence warns us to watch, not knowing whether he
would come at even,* or at cockcrowing, or in the
morning, lest he (Christ) should find us sleeping ; and
the same words are also used in the gospel by Luke,
xxi. 27. Ihese passages cannot be misunderstood.
They plainly assert that the Lord will be seen coming
in clouds to this world ; and to give them any other
rendering, is to violate the word of God, and cause it
to say what it was never intended to say. How any
preacher of the gospel dare assert the contrary, I know
not. The very fact that many do explain away the
true meaning of the word of God, is a strong reason
why all people should read the scriptures for them-
selves, and believe them , rather than the traditions, or
assertions of men.
Who would think of disputing what the Bible says
of the First coming of the Lord. How litterally have
the prophecies of his First advent been fulfilled. Moses,-
the Prophets, and the Psalms all spake of the sufferings l
of Christ and of the glory which is to follow. No
believer of the-Bible doubts that his First Coming and
sufferings were personal. If, then, his First coming
was personal, and the predictions of that coming have
been fulfilled, even to the very letter; it is infidelity on
our part to disbelieve the fulfilment of those passages
which refer to his Second Advent and Glory.
* The even of the dispensation, is already past; the midnight,
the dark or middle age is past; the cockcrowing, the awakening
of the Reformation is past; and the morning breaks. Watch,
the day will surely break.


In the following scriptures the personal coming ot
the Lord is unmistakable. “ And his feet shall stand
in that day upon the mount of Olives.” Zechariah
xiv. 4. In the gospel by John, xiv. 2,3, the Lord
himself says, “I go to prepare a place for you,.
I will come again , and receive you unto myself, that
where I am, there ye may be also.” In the Acts i. 11,
these remarkable words are recorded, “ This same
Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into
heaven.” In Luke also it is clearly shown that the
Son of Man will litterally return and be revealed;
“ Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burn-
ing; &c chapters * xii. 35—46.; xvii.
22—37; xviii. 1—8; xix. 11—27; and xxi. 27—36,
The last of these references is the more important, as it
shows the fallacy of those who say that the two follow-
ing passages were fulfilled in the seige of Jerusalem
under Titus. “ And then shall appear the sign of the
Son of man in heaven ; and then shall all the tribes of
the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man
coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great
glory.” Matt. xxiv. 30. “ And then shall they see
the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power
and glory.” Mark xiii. 26.
The past and present misfortunes of the Jews, “until
the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled,” are here fully
described ; “ And when ye shall see Jerusalem com-
passed with armies, then know that the destruction
thereof is nigh. Then let them which are in J udea
* Examine these references.


flee to the mountains ; and let them which are in the
midst of it depart out; and let not them (hat are in the
countries enter thereinto. For these be the days of
vengeance, that all things which are written may be
fulfilled. But woe unto them that are with child, and
to them that give suck, in those days, for there shall
be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this
people. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword,
and shall be led away captive into all nations; and
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until
the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.” Luke xxi 20—
‘24. Then follows distress of nations with perplexity,
and men “ see the Son of man coming in a cloud with
power and great glory,” which appears like the closing
scene of the Gentiles’ day.
Among the numerous passages that might be
examined, I refer you to a few. “ Repent ye therefore
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out
when the times of refreshing shall come from the pre-
sence of the Lord. And he shall send Jesus Christ,
who before was preached unto you.’’ Acts iii. 19—21.
“ But every man in his own order. Christ the first-
fruits ; afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming.”
1 Cor, xv. 23. “So that ye come behind in no gift;
waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 1
Cor. i. 7. “ And to wait for his Son from heaven.”
1 Thess. i. 10. “For what is our hope, or joy, or
crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence
of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? ” 1 Thess. ii
19. “To the end he may stablish your hearts unblame,
able in holiness before God, even our Father, at the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.”


1 Thess. iii. 13. “ And to you who are troubled rest
with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty angels ” “ And then shall
that Wicked (one) be revealed, whom the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of his coming” “ And the Lord
direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the
patient waiting for Christ.” *2 Thess. i 7, ii. 8, iii. 5.
And lest we should grow weary, through hope deferred,
which tends to make the heart faint as well as sick, we
are encouraged by the following precious word, “Yet
a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and
will not carry.” Heb. x. 37,
“ Having as briefly as possible, shown that the
Lord’s Second Advent will be personal, it remains to
be shown that the church will be caught up to meet
Him in the air, at the first stage of his appearing, an
event which constitutes the First Resurrection, and
which takes place at the beginning of “ the day of
vengeance of our God,” and prior to the Millennium.
And in doing this, I wish to be directed only by the
Word of God.
Take as an introductory passage, Luke xiv. 14, where
we have an important, if not humiliating, lesson taught
us, which of all, perhaps the most difficult to receive.
The Lord there teaches his followers, when they make
a feast, to call, “ the poor, the maimed, the lame, the
blind;” and for this benevolent action, they should be
“recompensed at the resurrection of the just.” Here
I would remark, that the resurrection of the just, is


perfectly distinct from the resurrection of the wicked.*
There is an important passage in John v. 28, 29 ;
“ Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming in the
which all that are in the graves shall hear His voice
and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto
the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of damnation.’’J Our Lord here
speaks of two resurrections to transpire in the same
hour. These two resurrections are characterized by the
sources from which they flow; life from one, judgment
from the other. The resurrection of life (the just); and
the resurrection of judgment (the wicked). And al.
though these are to transpire in the same hour ; yet
the time elapsing between the two resurrections, may
be a thousand years, which we learn from another
passage, is the period. See Eev. xx, 5. The expres-
sion, ‘ For the hour is coming,’ in its import, is similar
to the expression, ‘ the day of the Lord,’ * the day of
judgment,’ * the last day,' &c. In all these, the day,
does not mean, simply a period of tweny-four hours ;
hut a lengthened period, as the gospel day means the
whole period in which the gospel is preached; or as
George the Third’s day ; meaning thereby the duration
of his reign. And “ the day of the Lord,’’ may mean
the whole period from the coming of Christ to receive
his saints, to the time when “he shall have delivered
up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he
• To have a part in the First Resurrection is a reward to the
righteous.
I Judgment; this is the simple meaning of the original
irigeot.


shall have put down all rule, and all authority and
power.” Now if you look at the 25 v, you will read,
“Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming,
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live.” This hour
had begun when Jesus spake these words, and has
lasted more than eighteen hundred years : for the period
in which “dead souls ” are quickened, has not yet ter-
minated. So the hour in which all *• that are in the
graves shall hear his voice and come forth,” may include
a long period ; “ the resurrection of life ” taking place
in the beginning of the hour , when the Lord shall
descend in the air to meet his saints —the church ; be-
fore the millennium : and “ the resurrection of judg-
ment ”at the close of the hour —the end of the
thousand years, after the millennium. If you look in
the preceding chapter at the 23 v, you will find another
hour , which means the period of the Gospel, and that
has lasted nearly two thousand years. There is then,
an hour coming, not merely of sixty minutes, in the
which the “resurrection of life,” and “ the resurrection
of judgment” will be accomplished. What this period
actually is, which intervenes between the two resurrec-
tions, we learn from Rev. xx. “ And I saw,” &c.,
and “ they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand
years.” “ This is the first resurrection.” Mark, the
rest of the dead lived not again for a thousand years.
There, in the 11—13 v., we read that the rest of the
dead shall be brought to judgment, which is, doubtless,
the last resurrection ; “ And the sea gave up the dead
which were in it, and death and hell delivered up the
dead which were in them.” Nothing can be more


evident than'that the resurrection of the just will take
place prior to the millennium—at the beginning of the
hour. Nothing can be more simple to the unpreju-
diced mind.
In 1 Cor. xv, the resurrection is the principal sub.
ject of which St. Paul treats. At the 23 v. it is
written, “ Every man in his own order, Christ the first
fruits, afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming.”
There is not a word here of any who are not Christ’s;
“ they that are Christ's.” And the resurrection of
“ they that are Christ’s ” takes place at his coming,
when they will meet him in the air. This is also con-
clusive that the Church will meet the Lord in the air,
prior to the judgments falling upon the earth. The
resurrection of the dead is at another time, and on
another principle,
Again, in 1 Thess. iv. 13—15, you read, “But I
would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as
others which have no hope. For if we believe that
Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we
say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which
are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall
not prevent them which are asleep.” The Thessaloni-
ans, to whom St. Paul addressed these words, appear
to manifest some concern for those of their Brethren
who had died in the Lord, lest they should not share
the joy of the living saints at the coming of the Lord.
The Lord assures them “ that we which are alive and
remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent
them which are asleep.” Here then weh&ve a positive


proof that the dead in Christ shall rise and accompany
the then living saints, and shall meet the Lord in the
air as he descends towards the earth.
Nor is it enough to know that the church will be
caught up to meet the Lord in the air, prior to the
millennium; but that the Church will be taken from
the earth before the judgments which are to fall upon
the wicked, and by which the millennium will be
ushered in.
If you read with carefulness the book of Revelation,
you wilt see that the Church is no more seen on earth,
nor anywhere but in heaven from the end of chapter iii,
till in chapter xix, when Christ comes forth from hea-
ven, and the armies which were in heaven follow in his
train, saying, “Alleluia, as the voice of a great multi-
tude, as the voice of many waters, as the voice of
mighty thunderings.” Rev. xix, 6.
We learn then from the scriptures, that the Lord's
return will be personal, and at the first stage of his
appearing the church* will be caught up to meet him
in the air, which is the First Resurrection. And
that this event will be at the commencement of “ the
day of vengeance of our God, ” and before those fear-
ful judgments recorded in the Revelations from the iii
to the xix chapter will fall upon the inhabitants of the
earth.
This, then, of all the scenes brought before you, is
one thrillingly important, in which you may or may
• That is, those who have died in the Lord, will rise from
their graves, and those Christians or saints who are alive and
remain, will all bo caught up.


not feel interested. A scene you may witness ; for the
“ coining of the Lord draweth nigh.” J If you are a
Christian, your position is that of waiting, looking for,
and loving the appearing of the Lord. Let earnest
prayer be your exercise; and the enjoying of the
cleansing power of the atoning blood, be your privi.
lege. If not a Christian, seek without procrastination,
that salvation, to which you are so constantly invited
to come.
“ Come all the world, come sinner thou;
All things in Christ are ready now."
And may you, dear Reader, participate in the First
Resurrection.
I How soon it mar take place, we know not; it may transpire
at any moment.


SCENE, 11.
THE return, or restoration of a portion of the Jews;
Every thoughtful and serious reader of the Old Testa-
men t Scriptures, must have had his or her attention
directed to the peculiar position of Israel, in relation
to God ; for it is manifest that Israel was dear to him
above all other nations. The following passage, strik-
ingly illustrates and proves that every thing connected
with Israel’s history and hopes, is of great importance.
“When the Most High divided to the nations their
inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he
set the bounds of the people according to the number
of the children of Israel. For the Lord’s portion is hi*
people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. He found
him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilder-
ness ; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept
him as the apple of his eye.” Deut- xxxii, B—lo. In
this appointment of the respective dominions of the
nations, all were settled with reference to Israel, for
the nations were to be both placed and governed in
relation to Israel. Nothing could more emphatically
declare the pre-eminent place which Israel occupied in
divine counsels, as touching this earth, its government,
and its inhabitants.
There is no doubt, but that God designed the nation
of Israel to be a standing testimony against idolatry ;
a testimony to the unity of God, and to hand down to,


posterity, the one. true, and living God ; and to be a
convincing specimen to the other nations, of the happi-
ness, and the prosperity, of a people living under the
immediate government of Jehovah. It is written, “I
am the Lord thy God, who brought you out of the
land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou
shalt have no other Gods before me.” Exod. xx. 2, 3.
“ Hear 0 Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord.”
Dent vi. 4. “Therefore ye are my witnesses, saith
the Lord, that I am God.” Is. xliii. 12, And with
respect to Israel’s blessing, it is written, “ If ye walk
in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do
them ; I will then give you rain in due season,andtheland
shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall
yield their fruit. And your threshing shall reach unto
the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sow-
ing time ; and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and
dwell in your land safely. And I will give peace in
the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make
you afraid ; and I will rid evil beasts out of the land,
neither shall the sword go through your land
For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruit-
ful and multiply you, and establish my covenant with
you And I will set my tabernacle among
you : and my soul shall not abhor you. And I will
walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall
be my people.” Lev xxvi. 3—12. All this blessing,
nevertheless, was conditional, and depended on their
obedience to God.
With what resulted from the reception of all their
continued blessings, and their disobedience, it scarcely
needs a remark. With but little observation, it must


appear to all scripture readers, that a course of disobe-
dience and rebellion characterized them throughout,
although God bore long with their evil ways, and exer-
cised long patience with them. And through their
disobedience, judicial blindness fell upon them, and
utter desolation fell upon Jerusalem, the land and its
inhabitants. And all the visitations of the divine dis-
pleasure which fell upon Israel, were mainly on
account of Idolatry. So it is wiiten ; “ And Samuel
spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do
return unto the Lord with all your hearts, (hen put
away the strange gods and Ashtaroth * from among
you, and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve
him mil',.” 1 Sam, vii. 3. “ For they provoked him
to anger with their high places, and moved him to
jealousy with their graven images.” Ixxviii, 58.
“Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people,
transgressed very much, after all the abominations of
the heathen, and polluted the house of the Lord which
he had hallowed in Jerusalem. And the Lord God of
their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up
betimes and sending; because he had compassion on
his people and on his dwelling place; but they mocked
the messengers of God, and despised his words, and
misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his picple, till there wms no remedy.” 2
Chron. xxxvi. 14—16. Such is the testimony of
scripture to their departure from the Lord. And for their
incorrigible idolatry, God gave them up to judgment
• Ashtaroth, a famed goddess of the Zidonians. By some,
the moon, or queen of heaven, was worshipped under this name.


and desolation, and by which they have been pursued
to the present day. *
The patience of God was indeed long exercised with
the kingdom of Judah, until the wickedness of the
House of David rendered it impossible for him to bear
with it any longer: hence, the scriptures tell us, that
Jerusalem was taken, the temple destroyed, and the
Jews carried away captive. Thus the Jews were bereft
of their power, and the Gentiles received it, and it has
remained with them till now. The dispersion of the
Jews and the times of the Gentiles commenced with
Nebuchadnezzar. But as to the Jews as a nation ; dis-
persion and captivity have been their lot down to the
present time. And so surely as “ God heard their
groaning in the Egyptian bondage,” and remembered
his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob,
will he yet remember the same covenant , on behalf of
the same people, and the far deeper afflictions which
yet await them, and bring them ultimately into blessing.
• The Jews are now a scattered and peeled people, and are
suffering the terrible consequences of their disobedience, and
for having set the Lord Jesus Christ at nought. Yea wrath has
come upon them, for their rejection of the Lord, and for their
hatred to the mercy extended to the Gentiles, which they (the
Gentiles) now enjoy. But they are still a distinct people. And
by the very countenance do we know the Jew, And this recog-
nition of the Jew is almost universal; so much so, that even the
boys in the secluded villages of England, have shouted as they
have seen him approaching, “ Here comes Moses.” And as they
truly are still a distinct people, so grace is yet to triumph in their
full restoration, and in their becoming the seed of universal bles-
sing to the nations of the millennial earth.


One of the most beautiful and faithful descriptions
of Israel’s past and present state, is recorded in the
xxvi. chapter of Leviticus. (Vide.)
Before I proceed to give a condensed view of the
restoration of Israel, allow me to anticipate an objec-
tion which may be raised, viz., That many of the
predictions which may be quoted , were accomplished in
the daps of Cyrus; and to give a few testing marks by
which the prophetic student may distinguish the pre-
dictions which relate to Israel’s future restoration,
from those which were fulfilled in the return from
Babylon, the place of their captivity, in the days of
Cyrus. *
1. All the passages where the restoration of the ten
tribes, as well as the two is foretold, must yet remain
to be fulfilled.
2. Those passages where the conversion of the Jews,
as well as their restoration is foretold, must be a future
event; for they were not converted at the return from
Babylon.
3, Where miraculous events in connection with
Israel’s restoration are predicted, it must be future, for
no such events attended their return from Babylon.
4. Where passages declare, that after Israel as a
nation is restored, they shall not fall into sin, nor see
trouble any jnpre ; it must be a future restoration, for
their greatest sin and heaviest sufferings have been since
their return from Babylon.
* ') he reader is here informed, that but a portion of the tribe*,
viz., Judah and Benjamin * only returned to Jerusalem in the
days of Cyrus, Ezra, and Nehemiah. |
• See Josephu*. Antiq. xi. 1,2, 3. | Antiq xi. v. I—7.


5. When their restoration is connected with the
utter and final overthrow of those who have hated them
and persecuted them. No such an overthrow attended
their return in the days of Cyrus.
6, Where the prophecies themselves were written
after their return from Babylon. Surely it would not
be possible that such predictions could refer to an
event previously taken place.
7. When the predictions of Israel’s return are con-
nected with the Second Coming of the Lord, must
refer to a yet future restoration.
With these marks of testing whether the passages
which may be quoted refer to a future restoration of
Israel, the reader may see that Israel’s restoration is
fully, explicitly, and emphatically declared.
Were there no other passages in the whole of the
scriptures than the following, it would of itself be
sufficient to excite a lively hope of the final restoration
of Israel, though it be only conditionally expressed.
“0 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the pro-
phets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how
otten would I have gathered thy children together, even
as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and
ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you
desolate. For I say unto you, ye shall not see me
henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh
in the name of the Lord ” Matt, xxiii, 37—39. Our
Lord does not say here, “ye shall not see me hence-
forth for ever. No ; “Ye shall not see me henceforth,
till ye shall say , Blessed is he that cometh in the name
of the Lord ” These words, although it is admitted
that they do not positively declare that Israel will say,


“Blessed is he that cometh,” &c., most assuredly imply
that the time will yet come when Israel shall say,
“Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.”
These words are quoted from the Psalm cxviii. where
Israel is represented as using them after the Messiah
has been rejected, This Psalm represents Israel
as now acknowledging the rejected Stone. Surely no
one can resist the conclusion, from these scriptures,
that Israel is yet to be restored. But there are abund-
ance of passages which do absolutely foretel the final
restoration of Israel.
Read the following passages referring to God’s cove-
nant with Abram, Isaac, and Jacob.
1. With Abram. “And the Lord appeared unto
Abram and said, unto thy seed will I give this land.”
Gen. xii. 7. Again when his nephew Lot had separa-
ted from him, the Lord said unto Abram, “ Lift up
now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou
art, northward, and southward, and eastward, and
westward: for all the land which thou seest, to thee
will I give it, and to thy seed for ever Arise,
walk through the land, in the length of it, and in the
breadth of it; fori will give it unto thee.” Gen. xiii.
14 - 17. This promise is made a subject of a cove-
nant; “In the same day the Lord made a covenant
with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this
land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river; the
river Euphrates ; (he Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and
the Kadmonites, and the Hit cites, and the Perizzites,
and the Hephaims, and the Amorites, and the Canaan-
ites, ami the Girgashites, and the Jcbusites.” Gen. xv.
18—21. And when his name was changed into xAbra-


ham, God says to him, “ And I will give unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a
stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting
possesion ; and I will be their God,” Gen, xvii. 8,
2. With Isaac. To him it was said, “ Sojourn in
this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee;
for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these
countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware
■unto Abraham thy father.” Gen. xxvi. 3.
3. With Jacob. To him, when he journeyed through
the land, it was said, “ I am the Lord God of Abraham
thy father, and the God of Isaac ; the land whereon
thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed.”
Gen. xxviii. 13.
These are only samples of the promises made to the
Patriarchs by God, that they and their seed should
possess the land. These promises were never fulfilled
to the Patriarchs themselves in any sense. And if it
be said that they were fulfilled to Israel in Solomon's
day ; it -was but for a short time. But Israel’s posses-
sion of the whole territory for a Utile while under
Solomon’s reign, could not be the complete accomplish-
ment of the promises which declare that it should be
possessed for ever —for an everlasting inheritance.
These promises then to the Patriarchs and their seed
remain to be fulfilled, and in order to their fulfilment,
Israel must be restored.
Many passages predicting their restoration I pass
unnoticed, and bring before you a few positive and
direct testimonies to Israel’s future restoration.
“ Therefore saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the
One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine


adversaries; and I will turn my hand upon thee, and
purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin
a nd I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy
counsellors as at the beginning : afterward thou shaft be
called, the city of righteousness, the faithful city.” Is*
j- 24—26. “ And it shall come to pass in That Day,*
that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time
to recover the remnant of his people,” &c. Is. xi. 11.
This speaks of a second restoration, and is therefore
yet to come.
A future and a litteral restoration of Israel is seen
in the following passages. “ Therefore, behold, the
days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be
said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of
Israel out of the land of Egypt; but the Lord liveth,
that brought up the children of Israel from the land of
the north, and from ail the lands whither he had driven
them: and I will bring them again into their land that
I gave unto their fathers. Behold I will send for many
fishers, saith the Lord* and they shall find them; and
after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt
them from every mountain, and from every hill, and
out of the boles of the rocks.” Jer. xvi. 14—16.
“ Thus speaketh the-Lord God of Israel, saying, Write
thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a
book. For, 10, the days come, saith the Lord, that I
will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and
Judah, saith the Lord ; and I will cause them to return
• What day ? Is it not the millennium; and does not the rem-
nant mean the Ten tribes ?


to the land that 1 gave to their fathers and they shall
possess it. ( Jer xxx, 2,3.) Behold, the days come,
saith the Lord, that I will sow the house of Israel and
the house of Judah, with the seed of man, and with the
seed of beast; And it shall come to pass, that like as
I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break
down, and to throw down, and to destroy and to afflict;
so will 1 watch over them, to build, and to plant, saith
the Lord. (Jer. xxxi. 27, 28. Vide verses 31—34,
and 36, 37.) Thus saith the Lord of Hosts ; Behold
I will save my people from the east country; and I
will bring them, and theji shall dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem ; and they shall be my people, and I will be
their God, in truth and righteousness.” Zech. viii, 7, 8.
Vide also verses 20—23.
It therefore must appear very clearly from these and
other passages that a portion (likely to be a large
number) of the progeny of the two tribes, Benjamin
and Judah, part of which were brought in the day of
Cyrus, will be returned, in unbelief , and the follow-
ing is a strong conclusive proof. “ Because thou hast
forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast not been
mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt
thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it (the land)
with strange slips.” Is. xvii. 10, 11. Here then we
see the Jews already returned to the promised land,
and engaged in the avocations of life,—tilling the
ground. But the issue of their husbandry will bear
marks of God’s displeasure. Their “ harvest shall be
a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow,”
And in their last attempt to accomplish their own de-
liverance, God takes up their cause, See Is. xvii, xviii.


The return of the ten tribes seems to be altogether
in a different manner. Their return will take place, as
will be shown in another Scene, after the descend-
ants of the tribes of Benjamin and Judah have been
restored and passed through their last tribulation, “the
day of vengeance of our God.”
The return then and every thing connected with the
restoration of that portion of the progeny of the two
tribes, will transpire, about the time when the Lord
Jesus descends into the air, and receives the Church to
himself in glory, which event has been shown in the
“First Scene” to take place at the beginning of “The
day of vengeance of our God. *
The condition of the returned Jews is seen in the
following passage. “In the day shalt thou make thy
plant to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy
seed to flourish ; but the harvest shall be a heap in the
day of grief and of desperate sorrow.’’ Is. xvii 11.
In the preceding verse which has been already quoted,
they are seen forgetting the God of their salvation, and
planting pleasant plants ; but here the issue of their
labor is seen; it ends like a useless heap in “ the day
of grief and of desperate sorrow.” The next two
verses of the same chapter intimate the collecting of
the nations, How solemn the thought, that the pro-
geny of the tribes of Benjamin and Judah, who were
returned in the days of Cyrus, Ezra, and Nehemiah
and who rejected and crucified their Messiah, will
suffer the consequence of that rejection to the end of
this age, and throughout the day of vengeance. And
deeply solemn too, is the thought, that those Gentiles
who are then on the Earth will also share their part of


that'great tribulation for having trodden down the Jews,
and rejected the Son of God, and counted the blood of
the covenant, an unholy thing, and having done despite
unto the Spirit of grace.
The conclusion then is—The restoration of a portion
of the Jews, the descendants of Benjamin and Judah
who were returned to Jerusalem from Babylon in the
days of Cyrus, prior to the First Advent, will transpire
before the beginning of “the day of vengeance of our
God and that they will return in unbelief, still reject-
ing Jesus the Son of God. This return of the Jews
may take place ere the Church is taken from the world.
And when the Christian sees this, let him see that his
lamp is trimmed, that he has oil in his vessel, and that
he be prepared to go forth to meet his Lord.
May the reader be numbered among those who have
experienced a new birth in Christ Jesus ; having passed
from death to life, and been made a new creature in
Him.


SCENE 111.
“The Day of Vengeance of our God.”
Let the following passage introduce the subject. “The
Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the
meek ; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted,
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of
the prison to them that are bound ; to proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance
of our God; to comfort all that mourn ” Isaiah Ixi.
1, 2. Here we have “ the day of vengeance” inter-
vening the “acceptable year of the Lord,’’ and, the
period when “all that mourn shall be comforted.” To
every candid mind, it must be seen that the Third
Scene, or day of Vengeance commences immediately
after the ascension of the Church, which takes place
at the Harvest, the separation of the “Wheat and
tares,”* and before the millennium.
The fact then that this “Day of Vengeance,” or
transitional period, takes place before the Millennium,
impresses a thought at once upon our minds, viz.,
that we in our flesh will not see that universal state
of blessedness.
How long this scene —“the day of vengeance,” will
last, is not revealed ; but the events that will tram
Matthew xiii, 37 —43,


spire on the world in that day will be tremendously
awful, and the time must include some years.
To that day we are, evidently, fast hastening Al-
most every thing in the world and the church seems to
betoken its near approach. The church will continue
to apostatize and the world to increase in its hostility
to the Lord of Life and Glory, instead of growing
better and becoming converted, for which many pro-
fessing Christians are looking And who, because
freedom and liberty in China, Russia, and Turkey are
enjoyed, and a reception given to the Bible by so many
nations, and the late revivals, believe that these are so
many signs of its conversion. Thousands of Christians
of the present time believe that the preaching of the
Gospel will effect the conversion of the world, and
many preachers are holding out to the people such an
expectation. Their belief is that all nations will be
brought under the blessed influence of the gospel, and
that the millennium will be introduced by the preach-
ing of the gospel.
No where do we read of such a thought being even
suggested to us in any passage of the scriptures. Every
parable of our Lord shews that it cannot be. The
parable of the net, which gathered fi sh good and bad,
continued up to the lime of separation ; so will evil
with good continue, or sinners with the righteous,
until the separation, which is at the end of the age, or
present dispensation. The parable of the ten virgins,
also, shews the state of the professing world at that
time “All slumbered and slept” until “the midnight
cry’’ aroused them. This marks the aportacy of the


church at the coming of the Bridegroom. The mys-
tery of iniquity was already at work in the times of the
The keen eye of the spirit in them saw that
the small seed cast into the ground, carried with it the
form and character of all that the harvest would yield.
And of the leaven that was then working has lost none
of its characteristics ; for the varied evils in its pro-
gress of corruption are now every where manifested in
these “latter times. ’’ This St. Paul saw, and even
guarded Timothy against the pravitics of the “latter
times” and the “last days as though he (Timothy)
was living in the midst of them. He thus writes to
him ; “For men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemous, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, de-
spisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-
minded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God ;
Having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof.” *2 Tim, iii, 2—5. It is here predicted that
there would be a departure from the word of God
from the truth. And what prediction more literally
fulfilled than this in our day ?
If you will spend a few moments in scanning a map
of the world, and trace on its surface those localities
where protestantism has an existence, you will, on
comparing these spots, with the rest of the habitable
parts, soon see that where the Protestant religion is the
national religion, they form a very small portion.
England, our Father-land of blessed memory,
you believe is one of the most favored portions,


greatly blessed, and has for many generations
been highly favoured with the light of the gospel, and
yet, look at the state of England, Protestant England,
a land of Bibles and religious institutions. Take for
example one of her most gospel-favored towns ; Bir-
mingham if you please, where John Angel James lived,
laboured and died ; a town consisting of 200,000
people ; and yet in that town there were but forty
thousand adults, who were found in a place of worship
at once, on the Lord's day. And then, from that num-
ber deduct the Roman Catholics, Unitarians, and
others who do not hold evangelical principles; and
also, if it be possible, take from the remainder, the
real Christian from the nominal, and you will have but
a faint view of the present moral aspect of England.
And if this be the religious state of Protestant Eng-
land ; what must be the religious condition of the
world! The gospel has been preached more than
Eighteen hundred years ; but where are the signs of
the world’s conversion by the preaching of the gospel ?
Look at the growth of the tares, the diffusion of the
leaven, and the mighty gigantic professional tree, in
the branches of which the fowls* of the air build. And
after you have carefully looked at the various and
multiplied sections of the religious community, and
noted the leaven of sin, worldliness, covetousness, and
the absence of Christian love, and almost every grace
of the spirit, then form your opinion, then think, if the
world is not more ripe for “the day of Vengeance” than
for a state of blessing.
Unclean birds—evil.


Another state of the church in the “latter times,” to
which we are fast hastening, is seen in the following
passage. “Now we beseech you, brethren, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering
unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, nor be
troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter
as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let
no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall
not come, except there come a falling away first, and
that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition ; who
opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sittethin the
temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. Remem-
ber ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you
these things ! And now ye know what withholdeth
that he might be revealed in his time. For the mys-
tery of iniquity doth already work : only he who now
letteth will let until he be taken out of the way. And
then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord
shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of his coming : even him
whose coming is after the working of Satan with all
power and signs and lying wonders, and with all de-
ceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish ;
because they received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved. And for this cause God shall
send them strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie : that they all might be damned who believe not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness,’ 2
Thess. ii, I —l2. Here we have described the state
to which professing Christendom will be brought,


through the church not “continuing in his goodness.’*
From the “mystery of iniquity” will spring the
“strong delusions” of the f man of sin’’;* of “the wick-
ed one”; of “the anli-christ.” And under the power
of this “strong delusion to believe a lie,’’ the nations
under the blinding influence of sin, will gather to.
gether under anti-christ, to “the battle of the great day
of God Almighty.’’
I have endeavoured to shew that the world will con-
tinue to grow worse and worse, instead of being con-
verted through the preaching of the gospel . For if it has
been proved to you in the Frst Scene that Jesus
will come premillennium, the following passages are
conclusive as to the growth of evil, “And as it was
in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of
the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they
married wives, they were given in marriage, until Noe
entered the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed
them all. Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot;
they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they
planted, they builded ; but the same day that Lot went
out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven,
and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the
day when the Son of man is revealed.” Luke xvii,
26—30.
In the preceding chapter we have seen that the re-
turn of a portion of the Jews will be before the com-
mencement of “the Day of Vengeance.” Throughout
this day. the judgments which will fall upon the Jews
and the wicked nations will be terrible in extent as to
* The “man of Sin” is not Homan Catholicism; but rather an
iuvidual person, a human being, a false-christ. Daniel xL


number of those involved in it, and they will be
public, moreover, beyond any thing which has occurred
since the days Noah and Lot. If then such judgments
are impending, it surely is to be desired that neither
saint nor sinner should be unapprized of their ap-
proach. If you read the explanation of the Parable of
the “Tares and'Wheat,’’ as given by the Lord Jesus in
the xiii of Ma'.thew, you will find that he says in verse
S 9, “The harvest is the end of the world, i.e ., at the
end of the age or dispensation, (see Greek*) At the
harvest then the separation of the wheat from the
tares takes place. The saints are then taken from the
world to meet the Lord. Then begins “the Day of
Vengeance,’’ when the judgments will fall upon the
wicked. And for this, surely every thing seems,
wailing.
That the tieing up of the wicked into bundles and
easting them into the fire takes place at the moment
the separation of the tares and wheat transpires, is not
a thought entertained. For in the absence of the
saints from the earth we find that all the fearful events
spoken of in the Apocalypse from the iii to the xix
will fall upon the inhabitants of the world.
I say then that at the harvest or end of the gospel
dispensation, the saints are taken from the earth and
then begins “the Day of vengeance of our God,’ which
is the Third Scene yet to come. To this Scene your
attention is invited.
# 'Jhe scholar will see that the in v. 38 reads.. Ho de
agros estin ho /cosmos y the /cosmos meaning the world on which,
we live. And in v. 39, Ho de therisrnos , suuteleia ton aionos
estiriy the aionos translated world meaning age or dispensation.


When God acknowledges and deals with Israel as
Israel, the church is done with And the moment
the church is no longer on earth, then Israel as a
nation is dealt with.
We have already seen that the Jews, are returned in
unbelief at this period. This being the case, it would
appear by the following passage, that the rulers of
those who return to Jerusalem in unbelief, will enter
into a covenant with the great anti-christian head of the
Gentiles who will then be bearing sway. “Wherefore
hear the word of God the Lord, ye scornful men, that
rule this people which is in Jerusalem. Because ye
have said. We have made a covenant with death, and
with hell are we at agreement ; when the overflowing
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us,
for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood
have we hid ourselves.’’ Isa. xxviii, 14, 15. Having
refused the foundation which God has laid in Zion,
they will seek shelter under him,* to whom Satan will
then have given his seat and his authority, and great
power.
That individual with whom the Jews entered into a
covenant, is assuredly, the Wicked, the Anti-christ,
* In the following passage we see under what power the Jews
took their shelter. “And the beast which I saw was like unto a
leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth
as the mouth of a lion; and the dragon gave him his power, and
his seat, and great authority,” Rev. xiii, 2.
i he beast, I believe denotes the Roman Empire—the Roman
empire, throughout its whole duration, whether in its pagan, its
papal, or its future anti-christian state. It means the same thing
as the “many waters”—the “peoples, and multitudes; and
nations, and tongues.” It means Rome secular, Rome civil and
political.


who will have his existence in this Day. I think I
have before stated that I do not believe Roman Catho-
licism to be the Anti-christ; for Auti-christ is one who
denies Christ (] John ii, 22) ; but Romanists preach
Christ. Of this individual we read in Daniel, “And
the king shall do according to his will; and he shall
exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god,
and shall speak marvellous* things against the God of
gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accom-
plished ; for that that is determined shall be done * * *
And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace be.
tween the seas in the glorious holy mountain ; yet he
shall come to an end and none shall help him.”
Daniel xi, 36, 45. Compare these verses with
2 Thess. ii, 3—12. This king who shall do accord-
ing to his own will, is, without doubt, The Anti-
christ. For in the vii of Daniel it is said, “And
• In that day, the presence of the wicked [one] will be with
all power and signs, and lying-wonders * Compare this with
Acts ii, 22, and you will find that the mission and truth of the
Lord Jesus, proved by miracles (powers) wonders and signs.
With the exception of the abjective lying which qualifies the
word wonders in the case of the wicked, the proofs of the
mission of Christ and the wicked [one] are completely similar.
See another instance. “ And he (the [wicked one] ) doeth great
wonders (signs) so that he maketh fire come down from heaven
on the earth in the sight of men” Rev xiii, 13. If you turn to
1 Kings xviii, you will see that the grand test to show the true
God was fire from heaven upon the sacrifice which the people
saw, and cried, “ Jehovah, he is God.” Here then are seen that
which bore witness to the mission of Christ as Messiah on earth,
and Elijah’s message as coming, and sent by Jehovah; both ac-
crediting the pretensions of the false prophet—the Anti-christ.
This is a frightful picture and testimony to the way in which the
people on earth will then be given up to blindness and all
deceivableness. * 2 Thess. ii.


tfhetten horns out of this kingdom are the ten kings
that shall arise ; and another shall rise after them ;
and he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall sub-
due three kings. And he shall speak great words
against the Most High, and think to change times
and laws ; and they shall be given into his hand until
a time and times, and the dividing of time. But the
judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his do-
minion, to consume and destroy it unto the end. And
the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to
the people of the saints of the most High, whose king-
dom is an ever’asting kingdom, and all dominions shall
serve and obey him.’’ 24—27. There is no doubt
but that this eleventh horn denotes a person, a single
individual, a king, who will be in fact The Anti-christ.
It cannot be Popery, for a variety of reasons ; take
the following. This little horn “prevailed against the
saints till the Ancient of days came, and judgment
was gkven to the saints of the Most High, and the
time came that the saints possessed the kingdom” v, 8,
'9. Now Popery specially presented to us in the sym-
bol of Babylon the great, will not prevail till then-
The ten horns will destroy the woman.* But this
blasphemous horn fell only when the judgment sat
.and the books were opened. Again this horn arose
“after” the ten. Now the ten did not arise till Baby-
lon the great had well nigh finished her long career of
•crime and blood. The horn then that came up after
* Kev. xvii, 3.. Ihe woman, ( religion) supported by the beast
/•state).


them cannot be Babylon. Again this eleventh horn is>
to subdue three of the ten horns ; it is indeed to de-
stroy them, for it is said that “oefore it were three of,
the first-horns plucked up by the roots.’’ v. 8. Now
Babylon was destroyed before this ; for in Rev. xvii,
we find that the ten horns were to destroy her : con-
sequently these three had not fallen. We submit
therefore, that this horn is not Popery, but a political
potentate, of most blasphemous pretensions, and of
Satanic energy—-in fact, THE ANTI-CHRIST.
Dan. ix, 27, seems to refer to this. It says of this
great enemy of God, “he shall confirm the covenant
with many for one week (of years) ; and in the midst
of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the obla-
tion to cease, and upon the battlements shall be (he
idols of the desolation, (see marginal reading), even
until the consummation, and that determined shall be
honoured upon the desolate.’’ This without doubt, is
what our Lord terms, “the abomination of desolation
spoken of by the prophet Daniel; standing in the holy
p'ace.” Matt, xxiv, 15. Do ye not learn from this
passage, that the term of the duration of this indivi-
dual, the Anti-christ, will be seven years ? It would
also appear, that he will be favorable to the ordinances
of the Jew's for half that time, or for time, times, and
half; as in the midst of the week he causes the
sacrifice and oblation to cease. From this then, we
may learn that this individual, whoever he be, may
act as the Messiah to the Jews for three years and half,
and the remainder three years and half, or time, times,,
and half, he will develope himself as the Anti-christ*.


See 2 Thess, ii, 8, 9. And if we look at Rev. xiii, 14,
15, we shall also see that by him an image will be
made, and that the image should have power to speak.
Is not this “the abomination of desolation"!"
The 12 and 13 verses of the xvii of Isa shew us the
activity of the people in accomplishing their purposes.
And Joel iii, 9 —l6 shews us also the multitudes col-
lected in the valley of Jehoshaphat—the valley of de-
cision ; and for what—a great and dreadful slaughter.
This will be a period of unparelleled tribulation.
Roman Catholicism will act its part in that day of
horrors. “The beast that thou sawest, was, and is
not ; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit.”
Rev. xvii, 8 The belief is, that the Roman Empire is
here meant, for that empire “ was,’’ but
now it “is not,” yet it “ shall ascend once more.’’
It was once one powerful whole, but has
been and is still divided. As an empire “it is not,” it
does not exist, still the materials of Romanism exist,
and will apparently be united, and inflamed with
hellish malice in the “ Day of Vengeance but will
be reunited only to be judged at that crisis which is
hastening on.
And yet, although the Church be taken from the
earth and is with the Lord in the air, during this “ Day
of Vengeance,” which by some is called “ The Judg-
ment Day the world will not be without a witness
for the Lord. Such are his love and mercy to the
most rebellious and deeply fallen, that he brings the
two witnesses, supposed to be Enoch and Elijah, to
bear witness for him, and who shall display the mighty


power of God, in shutting up the heavens that they
rain not, and smiting the earth with plagues as often
as they will. Rev. xi. When they have finished their
testimony they are slain, raised again and taken up to
heaven in clouds.
The troubles through which the inhabitants of the
earth will pass, are predicted in the plainest terms by
Daniel. It is said by him, “ And at that time shall
Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth up
for the children of thy people; and there shall be a
time of trouble, such as never was since there was a
nation even to that same time. Dan. xii, 1.
And yet, after all, the people appear astonishingly
depraved. For after the people had passed through
some dreadful woes, we read, “ And the rest of the
men which were not killed by these plagues, yet re-
pented not of the works of their hands, that they
should not worship devils, and idols of gold and silver,
and brass, and stone, and of wood ; which neither can
see, nor hear, nor walk : neither repented they of their
murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornications,
nor of their thefts.” Rev. ix. 20, 21. The Revelation
contains a catalogue of fearfully tragical events, which
will then occur
We quote one more passage which has reference to
the events of This day. “ Behold the day of the Lord
cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of
thee For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem
to battle ; and the city shall be taken and the houses
rifled, and the women ravished ; and half of the city
shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the


people shall not be cut off from the city. Then shall
the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as
when he fought in the day of battle. And his feet
shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which
is before Jerusalem on the east,” &c. Zech. xiv, I—4,
Here then w-e have the closing scene of this awful day,
which ends in the return of the Lord to the earth,
bringing his saints with him.
Should the reader not be among those who meet the
Lord in the air ; may he be preserved, and pass through
the great tribulation of that day to the inheritance of
the just, which is incorruptible, undefiled, and which
fadeth not away.


SCENE IV.
The Lord Jesus coming to the earth bringing with him those
saints who were caught up to meet him in the air, the Millen-
nium and the restoration of the Ten Tribes.
In the First Scene it was shown that the Lord Jesus
Christ would come the Second time and in his descent
to the earth would meet the saints in the air ; when the
First Resurrection would transpire ; this being the first
phase or stage of his appearing. We have now to look
at the second phase* or stage of his coming, ,i.e., his
coming to the earth , the Millennium and the restoration
of the ten tribes.
The first passage of scripture to which your atten-
tion is directed, is the prediction of Enoch, who walked
with God and was not, for God took him. “ And
Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied
these saying. Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thou-
sands of his saints.” Jude 14. Deut xxxiii, 2. Here
we have the prediction of Enoch in that early period
of the world’s history. Enoch looks through the vista
of time and beholds the Lord Jesus Christ coming in
his glory, accompanied with the saints to the earth.
The fact of the Lord coming wdth his saints, shews that
this stage of his coming is after the resurrection ; the
saints must have arisen, and the First resurrection
See Note, Page I.


must have transpired, or they could not have descended
with him. The coming of the Lord and the saints also
tell us that their coming must be from the air (or hea-
ven) where they were caught up to meet the Lord, and
hence the Lord’s approach to the earth.
Another passagebf similar import we lind in Zechariah.
“ And ye shall flee in the valley of the mountains ;
for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal;
yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the earth-
quake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah : and the
Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee ”
ch xiv, 5. In the preceding verses to this we have
quoted, we read that a great gathering of all nations
will be made and brought against Jerusalem, that a
battle will be fought, the city taken, and other vile
things will transpire, (such as frequently accompany
victories). And in consequence of these direful events
which wili happen to the Jews, those who are left will
flee into the valley of the mountains. At that event-
ful period the Lord comes bringing with him all the
saints, even to the earth, for in the 4th verse, it is em-
phatically said, “ And his feet shall stand in that day (
upon the mount of olives, which is before Jerusalem on
the East.”
In the Second of Thessalonians it is said, “Then
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up to
meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with
the Lord.” ch. iv, 17. Here we see the saints caught
up from the earth to be ever with the Lord; and in the
following passage reigning on earth. “ And hast
made us unto our God kings and priests; and we shall


reign on the earth.” Rev. v, 10. From these passages
we are brought to this conclusion, that as the saints
are ever with (he Lord , and made kings and priests and
reign on the earth , that the Lord Jesus Christ and his
saints will descend to the earth and there reign. A-
nolher passage which we here quote confirms this
conclusion. “And Jesus said unto them, Verily]
say unto you, That ye which follow mein the regenera-
tion when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his
glory, ye shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel. Matt, xix, 28. This promise
to the followers of the Lord, will be fulfilled and the
Son of man will sit in the throne of his glory, and the
twelve tribes will be judged by those whom he appoints.
The Angel also testified to Mary that “ The Lord God
shall give unto him the throne of his father David.”
Luke i, 30—33. The throne of David was at Jerusa-
lem, and if Jesus is to occupy that throne, it must be
at Jerusalem.
You are referred to another passage. “ And if I
go and prepare a place for you, 1 will come again, and
receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye
may be also.” John xiv, 3. The Saviour does not say
“If I go, 1 will send for you; but I will come again .
Whither? When the Saviour comforted his sorrowing
disciples with these W'ords he was upon earth; and
therefore we may infer that he meant, that if he went
from the earth he w'ould again come to the earth.
How significant and cheering, as well as seasonable
were the words of the Angels to the apostles immedU
ately afier the departure of the Lord Jesus from the


earth. The narrative, as given to us, is thus velated ;
“ And when he had spoken these things, while they
beheld, he was taken up ; and a cloud received him out
of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly to-
ward heaven, as he went up, behold, two men stood by
them in white apparel ; who also said, Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven ? This
same Jesus who is taken up from you into heaven,
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go
into heaven.” Acts i, 9—i I. Several questions might
here be asked. Whither did the blessed Saviour go ?
To heaven. From what place did he go ? The
Mount of Olives, a place “ which is from Jerusalem a
sabbath day’s journey.” v- “21. When he has made
the preparation in heaven for his people, what follows
next ? He shall come in like manner , as he was seen
to go into heaven. Whither then shall become:'
May we not answer—to the earth, and to the very
place where he left the earth ? See Zech xii, 4. We
observe then, that as he went from the earth in person,
so he will return to the earth in person, as w'e before
stated.
There are many other passages which speak of a
personal return of the Lord to the earth ; which it
will be unnecessary to quote, enough having been said
upon this here and in the First Scene.
f'ome writers have gone so far as to state the year
of the Lord’s return. This I deem nothing less than
presumption on their part. For it is written;
“ But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no not the
angels of heaven, but my father only.” Matt, xxiv,


36. What we learn is, that there is a certain period
of “which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy
prophets since the world began,” (Acts iii. 18) when
the Lord will return and the millennium will be
ushered in. But before that blessed state will arrive
a “great and terrible day’’ will take place, as has been
shown ; not to the saints, hut to the wicked who obey
not the gospel.* ‘2 Thess ii. 8. And it is equally
and delightfully true that “better times are coming. ’’
Ihe general anticipation of a period of universal bless-
edness is not a mere fable. No. The whole Bible is
one vast proof that there shall; be such a day of peace,
rest, and glory.
J had thought that the order of the Scenes would be
sufficient to shew that the Second Advent will be pre-
millennial ; but now deem it important, before giving
some passages referring to the Millennium or the
universal blessedness which will succeed the Second
Advent ; to give a few proofs that the coming of the
Lord to the earth wall be before the millennium.
The first passage of scripture to which I direct your
attention, is, Luke xx. 11—27. In the days of our
Lord, when he was upon earth, the people were ex.
peeling him to commence his reign at once, “ because
they thought that the kingdom of God should im.
mediately appear And he spake a parable unto
them. And this, the parable of “ A certain Noble-
* This the world does not know; this the world does notbtx
lieue. Still it is trug.


man,’’ was to shew them that it would not immedi-
ately take place—that he, the ‘‘Nobleman,” must
first go into a far country to receive for himself a king
dom and to return , before the kingdom of God can
appear. In this parable a detailed representation is
given of what would occur prior to the establishment
of the expected kingdom. It is evident from a careful
perusal of these verses, that the predicted kingdom did
not take place before the nobleman left for a far country ;
that it could not take place during his absence, when
his servants were to occupy their several talents ; “ For
his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him,
saying, We will not have this man to reign over us.”
All the events recorded in this parable, and the issuing
of the mandate, “ But those mine enemies who would
not that I should reign over them, bring hither and
slay them before me,” must all transpire before the
kingdom can appear, in which the faithful servants will
take their share. There can be no doubt but this
parable includes the whole period from the first advent
of our Lord to his second advent And the words
‘‘occupy till I come,” must refer to his second personal
coming. At the close of the millennium he will deliver
up the kingdom, rather than receive for himself a king-
dom ; but it is on his receiving the kingdom that he
returns, “ And it came to pass that when he was
returned, having received the kingdom.” This parable
then, proves decisively, that it is at the commencement,
that Christ’s Second Advent takes place, and not at
the close of the millennium.
In the parable of “ the Tares and Wheat,” Matthew


xiii. 24 —30, there is another strong and convincing
proof, that the Lord’s second coming must be pre-mil-
lennial. Here the present state of things (or the
professing church) is given. The tares are mixed and
growing with the wheat, and these are to grow together
until the harvest. The tares are not to be plucked up.
And so long as the tares are among the wheat, that
period of universal blessedness, before described, can-
not take place. If the tares are to grow with the wheat
until the harvest, and the harvest is the end of the
world, then, I say, no period of universal blessedness
can take place in the world. But if the end of the world
means the end of the age, or dispensation , which the
Greek word (aim') signifies, then such a period will
come And after the separation of the wheat and
tares ; “ then (during the millennium) shall the right-
ous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
Father.” It is evident that the good seed (the gospel)
will be checked by the growth of the tares (the evil)
and will not, consequently, universally spread ; hence
the millennium cannot transpire until the separation
of the wheat from the tares, and therefore the return of
the Lord must necessarily be before the millennium.
The divine explanation given of this parable, also,
demands the attention of all. I have some doubts
whether the tares here mean all mankind, 1 rather
believe the tares represent a distinct class of wicked
men, resembling in their profession the Christian, as the
tares (darnel) resemble the wheat, which are secretly
introduced amongst the people of God, by Satan. It
is the work of the wicked one to catch and carry away


that which was sown ; to introduce evi! where the Son
of man had wrought good ; or to corrupt Christianity,
And once Christianity is corrupted, it must, as matter
of fact, continue corrupted until the harvest. Satan
has succeeded in palming upon mankind a vast system
of fraud and wickedness under the name of Christ.
And if this remains, as it must, until Christ comes at
the end of the Millennium ; what kind of Millennium
must it be ? In such a state of things, how could the
period of universal blessedness exist P Impossible !
Christ’s return, then, must be /ire-millennial.
The parable of the “ grain of mustard seed,’’ Mark
iv. 31 ; and the parable of “ the Leaven,’’ Matt. xiii.
33, both bear a similar meaning. The fowls of the
air, mean, I perceive, Satan and his angels. And the
leaven, means evil —it is no where spoken of as a good;
it is the leaven of sin—the mystery of iniquity, which
was at work in St. Paul’s day. The unleavened lump
] s the church, into which a leaven like mystery of in-
iquity had been already introduced. The woman, the
seducer had done this. How suspicious the hiding of
it looks! Surely this hiding of the leaven cannot
mean the-free, public, and open preaching of the
blessed gospel. The fowls lodging in the branches of
the mustard tree ; and the diffusion of the leaven, till
the whole became leavened, show that there can be no
millennium before the personal return of the Lord,
therefore, the Lord will come before the millennium.
The parable of the Ten Virgins, is also conclusive.
Matthew xxv. 1 —l3. It is distinctly said in the 5. v ,
“ While the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered


and slept.” How solemn the fact, that, shortly after the*
Lord Jesus left the earth, the professing church began
to slumber, and fell asleep. Of this there are abundant
proofs in history. The slumbering church will not be
aroused, but by the [midnight <ry. “ Then,” imme-
diately after the events related in the 29—3 i verses of
the preceding chapter; then shall the kingdom of
heaven be likened unto ten virgins. The only conclu-
sion that can be arrived at from this parable, is, that
the sleeping church will not awake until the “ midnight
cry’ * is heard, which precedes the personal return of
the Bridegroom ; that, w-hile the professing church
remains in worldliness and sin, there can be no millen -
nium prior to the Second Advent of the Lord.
If you read carefully, Matthew xxiv, and xxv., you
will find that the whole interval between Christ’s depar-
ture and return, is filled up with events of such a
character, as to show that it is impossible that a period
of universal blessedness should intervene. One of the
peculiar features of the millennium, is, I believe, ad-
mitted by all students of prophecy, to be the in-bring-
ing of Israel. Now nothing but scattering, tribulation,
and distress are related of that people, from the lime at
which our Lord spake, to the time of his personal return.
Here then, there is another positive proof, deduced
from these chapters, that there can be no millennium
before the coming of the Lord.
* Ihe late and present awakening in almost all parts of the
world where the gospel has been preached, is much like, if not
really, the midnight cry. How long this midnight cry will last,
cannot be told. But whenever that midnight cry takes place, it
will end by the coming of the Bridegroom.


Farther proofs of the pre-millennial Advent could be
adduced from other passages of the inspired word. But
believing what has been said to be enough, your atten-
tion is directed to some passages descriptive of the
Millennium.
From what has already been advanced I need scarce,
ly remark that this solemn and blessed period will be
ushered in by special acts of judgment, and closed by
the judgment before the great white throne of the dead,
who had not been raised at its commencement. Neither is
it necessary to prove that there is to be a universal
state of blessedness; for all Christians believe this.
The xiv chapter of Zechariah contains a beautiful
description of the Millennial reign of Christ, After the
Lord has returned and placed “his feet upon the
mount of Olives, ’’ (v. 4.), we have brought before us
the physical changes which are to take place. “All
the land shall be turned into a plain.” (v. 10.) “And
living waters shall go out from Jerusalem.’’ (v. 8.).
Peace and prosperity will be the lot of the inhabi-
tants, for it is said, “ And men shall dwell in it (the
land) and there shall be no more destruction; but
Jerusalem shall he safely inhabited.” All enemies
will then have been conquered, and there will be “no
more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of Hosts.’’
“ The feasts of tabernacles will then be held, and
all who are left of the nations which went against
Jerusalem, shall go up from year to year to worship
the king, the Lord of hosts.” (v, 16.) The Lord will
then be king over all the earth, and “ HOLINESS
I NTO THE LORD, shall be (written) upon the


bells of the horses, and even every pot (seething) in
Jerusalem, and in Judah shall be holiness unto the
Lord.” What an entire consecration to the Lord ! Is
it so now, are we and .all we have, even our horses’
harness and our pots consecrated to the Lord ? How
then can men say, “ I am already in the millennium—
we are now in the millennium 1”
In Isaiah it is written. “ The word that Isaiah the
son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.
And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the
mountain of the Lord’s house shall be established in
the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above
the hills ; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many
people shall go and say, Come let us go up to tbe
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob : and he will teach us of his ways, and we will
walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the
Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.’’ ii, 1
—3. Here we have Judah and Jerusalem the sub-
ject, not the church and its missions to which this
passage has often been applied. Yea, it is out of Zwn
the law shall go forth, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.
Another aspect of the millennial blessedness is seen,
in the following descriptive language. “In that day
a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of
gold, which they made each one for himself to worship,
to the moles and to the bats ; to go into the clefts of
the rocks and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear
of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty.” How
often have we heard this passage quoted at our Mis-


sionary meetings, holding out to us that the preachin;
of the gospel would accomplish this. But when wil
this be 1 in the millennial day, when the Lord shall
have arisen and shall have shaken terribly the earth.
How significantly and positively clear it is that this
blessed period will not be brought about by the preach-
ing of the gospel; but the Lord terribly shaking the
earth— by judgment, the “day of vengeance of our
God.”
There are other passages of the deepest interest, and
surpassing beauty, respecting the Millennial reign of
Christ. “ Then the moon shall be confounded, and
the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign
in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his
ancients gloriously.” xxiv, 23. “He shall cause them
that come of Jacob to take root: Israel shall blossom
and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit. ’ Isa.
xxvii, 6. “ For behold, 1 create new heavens and a
new earth : and the former shall not be remembered,
nor come into mind. But be ye glad and rejoice for
ever in that which I create ; for behold, I create Jeru-
salem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. And I will
rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the
voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the
voice of crying. There shall be no more thence an in-
fant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his
days ; for the child shall die an hundred years old ; but
the sinner being an hundred years old shall be ac-
cursed. And they shall build houses, and inhabit
them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit
ot them. I hey shall not build, and another inhabit;


they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a
tree are the days of my people, and mine elect ahall long
enjoy the work oftheir hands. They shall not labor in vain,
nor bring forth for trouble ; for they are the seed of
the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them.
And it shall came to pass, that before they call, 1 will
answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.
The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion
shall eat straw like the bullock ; and dust shall be the
serpent’s meat. They shall not hurl nor destroy in all
my holy mountain, saith the Lord.” What can sur-
pass the sublimity of this picture ? We here see the
grandeur of the Lord’s reign during the millennium.
Because of His splendour the moon shall be confounded,
and the sun shall be ashamed, notwithstanding its lustre.
Theblessednessof that day will be commensurate with its
author, the world will feel its effects for “ Israel will
blossom and bud and fill the face of the world with
fruit.” The characteristics of that day, will be long
life, peace and plenty. All this is the Jews by pro-
mise, and its effects will be extended beyond the Jew,
for although the Gentiles are cut off from their enjoy-
ments because of their failure and wicked disobedience,
it is said in the 19th verse of the Ixvi chapter, and
they (the Jews) shall declare my glory among the
Gentiles. And in the 23rd verse of the vii chapter of
Zechariah, it is said, that “ ten men (gentiles) shall
take hold of the skirt of him that is a jew, saying,
We will go with you; for we have heard that God is
with''you.”
Another beautiful description of the mil-


lenial glory is given us by Micab. “ After giving a
negative account from the fourth verse, he says, “But
they shall sit every man under his vine, and under his
fig tree; and none shall make them afraid : for the
mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it *****
In that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that
halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and
her that 1 have afflicted: and I will make her that
halteth, a remnant; and her that was cast far off a
strong nation ; and the Lord shall reign over them in
Mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever. And thou,
0 tower of the flock, the stronghold of the daughter of
Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion :
the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.’’
Here we see that Jerusalem will be the metropolis of
the millennial earth, that Zion will be the place of his
throne; and although, Israel, his favored nation, is
most blessed of all, the whole earth will rest under the
peaceful sway of Jesus, iv, 4—B.
Some of the characteristics and other things per-
taining to the millennium may be found in these
passages. Ps. ci, 5, and 7, 8. cxlv, 10—13. cxlvi, 8
—lO. cxlvii, 2,6, 12, 13. Isa. xi, 4, 5 xxxii, 15—
18.
More scriptures might be quoted on this delightful
subject. But unwilling to weary the reader, I proceed
to give, what is considered, a scriptural view of the
restoration of the ten tribes, to which reference is made
on Page 23, in the Second Scene.
In the Third Scene we have noticed the last tribu-
lation, through which the progeny of those who cruci-


fied the Messiah will pass. The ten tribes have not to
suffer for that sin, nor will they be involved in those
final troubles that await the descendants of Benjamin
and Judah, for they were gone into captivity long be-
fore the First Coming of Christ, and consequently did
not crucify the Lord. The ten tribes, by the hand of
God, will be preparing for their return, during the
time the progeny of the two tribes are suffering the
consequences of their rejection of the Lord and who
returned at the commencement of the Day of Ven-
geance, and will be returned at the close of that day.
Before their return and whilst in captivity, the wicked
will be purged from amongst them. “As I live, saith
the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with
stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, will I
rule over you ; and 1 will bring you out from the peo-
ple, and will gather you out of the countries, wherein
ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a
stretched-out arm, and with fury poured out. And I
will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and
there will I plead with you face to face * * * * * *
And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I
will bring you into the bond of the covenant: and I
will purge out from among you the rebels, and them
that transgress against me ; I will bring them forth out
of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not
enter into the land of Israel ; and ye shall know
that lam the Lord,’’ Ezek xx, 33—3 b.
Amos Writes. “ For, 10, I will command, and I will
sift the House of Israel among all nations, like as com
is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall


upon the earth. All the sinners of my people shall die
by the sword, which say, The evil shall not overtake
nor prevent us.” ix, 9, 10.
To this also Jeremiah refers, “ They shall come
with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them :
I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a
straight way, wherein they shall not stumble: fori am
a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first-born,
xxxi, 8, 9. (see verse 8.)
And in Isaiah we have a most touching picture of
the effect produced by their arrival in the land on the
poor heart-broken remnant, who survive the deso-
lations of “ the day of vengeance of our God.” What
a beautiful exhibition of the out-stretched arm of God
in guiding the return of the ten tribes is given in
chapter xlix, 9—13. “ That thou rnayest say to the
prisoners, Go forth ; to them that are in darkness,
Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and
their pastures shall be in all high places. They shall
not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun
smite them : for he that hath mercy on them shall lead
them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them.
And I will make all my mountains a way, and my
highways shall be exalted. Behold these shall come
from far ; and, 10, these from the north and from the
west; and these from the land of Sinim. Sing, 0
heavens ; and be joyful, 0 earth ; and break forth into
singing, 0 mountains ; for the Lord hath comforted his
people, and will have mercy upon his afficted,” What
language can better shew the blessedness of the millen-
nium? Then is to be no more want, springs, moun.


tains and highways will be subservient to them ; and
such an exhibition of Goa’s love will be shewn them,
that heaven and earth are called on to rejoice in his
mercy to them. The 14 v, leads us back to the time
when Zion said, “ The Lord hath forsaken me, and my
Lord hath forgotten me.’’ And in the 15—17 how
affectionately God addresses Zion. “ Can a woman
forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb ? yea, she may
forget, yet will I not forget thee,” &c. And then at
the 18 v, the attention of Zion is called to something
which she had not noticed, and the Lord says, “ Lift
up thine eyes round about, and behold ; all these gath-
er themselves together, and come to thee. As 1 live
saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them
all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, as a
bride doeth”, &c. And what can exceed the beauty of
the language of the following ? “ The children which
thou shalt have, after thou has lost the other, shall say
again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me : give
place to me that I may dwell. Then shalt thou say in
thine heart. Who hath begotten me these, seeing I
have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and
removing to and fro ? and who hath brought up these?
Behold, 1 was left alone ; these where had they been V
Isa. xlix, 20, 21.
Thus, having previously looked at the return of the
Jews in unbelief, with their sin and judgment; and the
preservation of a remnant of the progeny of the two
tribes who are delivered out of their great and final
tribulation by the coming of the Lord with all his


saints; and having seen this remnant joined by the
multitude of the ten tribes brought back by the hand
of God, we leave you to read at your leisure Isa. Ixvi,
20 ; lx, 4—9 ; lii, 10—12 ; and xlix, 22, 23 ; and con-
clude, expressing a wish that you will consult all the
passages referred to, with thoughtful attention. Your
attention is also especially directed to that magnificent
scene of His Coming as exhibited in the xix of the
Apocalypse. And may you be among the happy
number who shall swell the “Alleluia” which will be
uttered “as the voice of mighty thunderings.’’


SCENE V ,
The Binding of Satan, that old Dragon, which is the Devil.
Tradition and history inform us that the notion of
good and bad angels is very ancient. The heathens
had some conceptions of a superior order of beings,
between God and man ; and whom the learned Greeks
termed demons (knowing ones) ; and the Romans
termed them genii (angels good and bad) Of these
they believed some were good,—kind and benevolent,
and delight in doing good to man and obeying God ;
and others were malicious and cruel and delight in
doing evil to man. But all the accounts which are
handed down to us, either by the sages of the ancients,
or by the more modern of the heathens, are unsatis-
factory, and too foolish and low to be credited by the
weakest minds.
Revelation, however, clearly asserts that there are
both good and evil angels ; and for the existence of
evil angels we have the direct testimony of Scripture.
“ And when he (Jesus) went forth to land, there met
him out of the city, a certain man, which had devils


long time, and ware no clothes, neither abode in any
house, but in the tombs. When he saw Jesus, he
cried out, and fell down before him, and with a loud
voice said, what have T to do with thee, Jesus, thou
son of God most high ? I beseech thee, torment me not.
And Jesus asked him saying, What is thy name ? and
he said Legion : because many devils were entered in-
to him. And they besought him that he would not
command them to go out into the deep. And there
was there an herd of many swine feeding on the moun-
tains : and they besought him that he would suffer
them to enter into them. And he suffered them. Then
went the devils out of the man, and entered into the
swine; and the herd ran violently down a steep place
into the lake, and were choked. Luke viii, 27—33.
Here is a positive assertion that devils really exist, and
that evil is not personified only in the name devil.
Jesus having bound the strong man, cast out the de-
mons, an instance which shows the satanical power ex-
ercised in those who were possessed ; and clearly evinc-
ing that it is not the iniquity of man that is called the
demon, for the legion enters the swine, and the effects
are seen in these animals In the iv chapter, we have
an instance where Satan addresses, or speaks to Jesus,
and shows great subtlety in the temptation.
In Ephesians vi, 12, we read, “ For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against principalities
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world (lon aionos of this age), against spiritual
wickedness in high places,” [in ccelestibus in heaven-
ly places). This passage of Scripture suggests an


order among them, and of these fallen spirits, Satan,
otherwise styled “Lucifer, son of the morning,” is the
head.* We read of him as an implacable enemy to
the honor of God and the true interests of men ; he is
the Devil, and especially the chief of all the fallen
angels, and is so called, because he is a malicious
accuser of God and his people. Rev. xii, 9, 10.
What an amazing change must have been wrought
within, when an angel became a devil! What an
astonishing change from a being of the holiest order, to
become the most unholy ! Instead of being the “bright
and morning star,’’ exalted to the glory of heaven, he
is the *‘ Prince of this world ; the god of this world ;
Satan, the adversary ; the Devil,’’ by way of eminence,
“ Apolyon,’’ the destroyer ; “ the old Serpent,’’ from
his beguiling Eve under that form ; and “ the Angel
of the bottomless pit.’’ This adversary of man ex-
hibits the intelligence of a being highly gifted. He
pursues his diabolical labor with a skill and a deter,
mination worthy of a better cause. He is every thing
and anything to accomplish his malicious purposes. He
appears as one w'ho provokes to the performances of
deeds, and in the performance of which he ensnares the
provoked. “ And Satan stood up against Israel and
provoked David to number Israel,’’ for which God was
displeased, and smote Israel. 1 Chron. xxi. I— 7.
* From the tenor of the word of God it is deemed right to
suppose Satan, to be chief of the wicked angels and one of the
first, if not the first arch-angel; and endowed with wisdom and
strength incomprehensible to man.


In Matt, iv, 8,9, the expression, all the “kingdoms
of this world, and the glory of them,*’ conveys the
thought that Satan and the other fallen angels are in-
deed, so far as God permits, the kosmokratores,
govenors of the world. The power of Satan here ex-
hibited to us is astonishing. In Luke iv, 5, it is said
that the devil taking him up into an high mountain,
shewed him all the kingdoms of this world in a mo-
ment of time.” 1 And in the 6th verse he says, “ for
that (the power and glory of the kingdoms of the world)
is delivered unto me ” The power of Satan and his
angels, who act in subordination to him, must exert a
great and powerful influence over man’s heart in its
fallen and depraved state—a state which requires God’s
miraculous power to extricate and bring him by a new
birth into a state of salvation. All the wickedness of
men, and error, ignorance, and superstition are, doubt-
less, at his command, and all these are used by him to
prevent and hinder individual and combined Christian
effort in the promotion of the kingdom of God, and the
advancement of the kingdom of darkness. St Paul
says, in Ephesians, “ For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood ; but against principalities, against powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this age,
which pros tons kosmokratoras tons skotous tou
aionos, literally translated mean. But all this power
is controlled by an almighty hand, and that power too
will be limited ere long, for a thousand years, and
finally brought to an end.
He is “ the prince and the power of the air,” (Eph.
ii, 2,) and this prince “ever walketh about as a roaring


lion, seeking whom he may devour,’* 1 Peter, v, 8.
How remarkable the conversation between God and
Job ! “ Now there was a day when the sons of God
came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan
came also among them. And the Lord said unto Satan,
Whence comest thou P Then Satan answered the Lord,
and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from
walking up and down in it. And the Lord said unto
Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that
there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an
upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil?
Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, Doth Job
fear God for nought! Hast not thou made an hedge
about him, and about his house, and about all that he
hath on every side ? thou hast blessed the work of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the land. But
put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath,
and he will curse thee to thy face. And the Lord said
unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in thy power ;
only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan
went forth from the presence of the Lord.’ 1 i, 6—12.
Satan is here represented, “ going to and fro in the
earth, and from walking up and down in it, 1 ’ And,
“when the Sons of God came to present themselves
before the Lord, Satan came also among them.” The
result of this conversation was Satan’s permission to
afflict Job, and in this we see that Satan had power to
bring the Sabeans to fall upon his children, to take
them away, and to slay the servants by the edge of the
sword ;to cause fire to fall from heaven to burn up
the sheep and the servants ; to cause the Caldeans to


fall upon the camels, and to carry them away and slay
the servants ;to bring the great wind from the
wilderness, and so smite the house as to cause it to
fall and kill the young men.
With this power over men and the elements, we
need not be surprised to hear of innumerable accidents
occuring to man, through his agency, both by land and
water. And there is little reason to doubt but many
diseases* are either occasioned or increased by Satan’s
diabolical agency. There is no doubt but thousands of
cases might be attributed to that subtle spirit could
they be traced. May not the following be taken as an
instance ? Many years now have elapsed since the
death of Mr. John Bumby, and which was said to be a
mysterious providence. Mr Bumby was sent as a
Missionary to the New Zealanders by the Wesleyan
Missionary Society. When in the prosecution of his
missionary labors he attempted to pass from one part
of the country to another in a canoe rowed by some of
the natives ; but the canoe was upset and after repeat-
ed efforts of the natives to save him he sank down into
the deep water to rise no more. WJio will deny this
to be an instance of one of Satan’s diabolical works 1
How can we for a moment attribute it to God, as a
mysterious providence ? John Bumby was a man of
eminent piety and ability, and useful in bringing many
* If he smote Job with boils from the crown of his head to
the soles of his feet, and possessed men, as we read in the gos-
pels, what reason have we to doubt, ot his having the same
power now ?


souls to Jesus, (whose company was endearing and re-
ligiously profitable to the writer). Here was a man of
God, obeying the command of Jesus, “go and preach
the gospel,” called by God to preach the gospel, and
sent thither for that purpose ; how can we entertain the
thought that God upset the canoe, blew the wind, and
drowned him ? It was indeed a cause of lamentation
and grief, but no mysterious providence.
Who can deny the influence also, which he exerts
upon the wicked ? He instils infidelity, atheism, ill-
will, bitterness, hatred, malice, envy, fear, sorrow,
worldly care, impatience, illnature, resentment, anger,
pride, and every other vice. And having gained in
the fall of man, an ascendency over the entire man, and
consequently the subserviency of his moral, intellec-
tual, and animal faculties, he leads him captive, at his
will—an easy prey to his hellish malice.
Upwards of six thousand years have passed away
since Adam fell from his purity through the subtle
temptation of the Devil ; and during these years he has
tempted men to sin, and to commit horrible deeds,
with unabated zeal and malice. But his day is limit-
ed, the day of his judgment draweth nigh, and the
scene described in the Revelation made to John will
ere long transpire. “ And I saw an angel come down
from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and
a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the
dragon, that old serpent which is the devil, and Satan,
and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the
bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon


him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till
the thousand years should be fulfilled.’’ Rev. xx, I—4,
By the power of him who spoke the world into being,
will an angel lay hold and bind the dragon, that old
Serpent, which is the Devil.” Until this period, “the
whole creation groaneth and travelleth in pain.” And
then, “the creation itself shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
children of God.” Rom. viii. 21, 28.
In the Revelations, some of the transactions in the
world’s drama are related, and which are yet to
come, such as the judgment of Babylon by God,
and the judgment of the beast and false prophet by
Jesus Christ, After these, is seen the judgment falling
upon Satan. He is the spring, the power, and the
strength of all the iniquity in the world. The very
heart of man appears the soil into which Satan sowed
the seeds of evil.
What truth can be more gratifying to the Christian,
than to know that he who is the great cause of all the
wretchedness and misery to which man has been,
and is subjected, will be despoiled of such
power \ The fact that Satan will be bound, and his
power of doing evil will be entirely destroyed, is of the
greatest importance to the world. Our knowledge of
the corruption, subtlety, and wickedness of the heart
of the natural man, and of the power of Satan to do
evil, is so contracted, that we can scarcely form an
idea what will be the extent of the difference produced
in the world by the binding of Satan. Satan being;
bound will be the principal character of the millennial


dispensation. Then there will be no Devil to tempt.
Up to the period of which we read in Rev, xii, 7, it
appears that Satan inhabited heaven, or (as some say)
heavenly places, the created heavefis, not the heaven
where God dwells in ineffable light, and glory. But
he is to deceive the nations no more. The command
is gone forth from the God of all power, and an angel
(perhaps the angel that opened the bottomless pit,
ix, 1,2,) descended from heaven, “ having the key of
the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand/’
Now begins a terrible and yet sublime scene. Satan
has fought hitherto against the Lord of creation, life,
and glory ; by his evil and malicious doings has
marred the whole creation. He tempted Adam to sin,
crucified the Son of God, and seeks to annul the sal-
vation provided for poor sinners. But He, who by his
word of authority could say, Get thee behind me Satan,
is able by his word to paralize the Devil, and bind
him ; yea, and shut him up in hell, and to keep him
there.
“ And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent,
which is the Devil and Satan, and cast him into the
botomless pit and shut him up and set a seal upon
him.’’ Rev. xx. 2, 3. This grand and awful scene
will transpire in the invisible world. What sublime
and mighty power will be then exhibited by Almighty
God. Conceive if you can the exultations of the
hosts of Heaven, and the dismay of the Legions of
evil, fallen angels. The effects of this trascendent
scene will soon be felt on earth, and hallelujahs will be
uttered by restored man. Hail happy period of Satan’s


imprisonment, and the world’s millennium.
Between this and the following Scene the Millennium
s will transpire.


SCENE VI.
“The loosening of Satan for a Season.”
The subject of this scene is of such a nature, as calcu-
lated to produce the most profound and thoughtful
solemnity. It is written, Satan shall be loosed out of
his prison, and shall go out to deceive the nations
which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and
Magog, to gather them together to battle; the number
of whom is as the sand of the sea.' 1 Rev. xx 7, 8.
During the thousand years of the millennium, when
Jesus will no longer be hid ; but will be the Prince of
this world (of which Satan is now the prince), and
shall reign with his saints, all things will be governed
by him, and the subjects of that delightful dispensa-
tion will enjoy such a peaceful happiness and blessing,
as such a reign will ensure. But even this state of
blessedness will come to an end, like all other terres-
trial scenes, and Satan must be loosened for a season.
It is evident that Satan will not loose any of his
maliciousness by his imprisonment; No, he will then go
forth and exert the most baneful and hellish influence


upon the nations, and speedily produce revolt from the
kingdom of Jesus Christ. Having then deceived the
nations, he will make war with the saints at Jerusalem.
“And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and com-
passed the encampment of the saints about, and the
beloved city ; and fire came down out of heaven (from
God) and devoured them. And the devil that deceiv-
ed them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone,
where both the beast and the false prophet are, and
they shall be tormented day and night for ever and
ever.” 9, 10 verses. Satan again, as the Prince and
power of the air, will march all the hellish host under
his command to make war against the saints.
This fact is sufficient to prove that the millennium
cannot be a spiritual millennium. If it were, and those
who are its subjects have the life of Christ in them, it
would be impossible that Satan could be loosed to
seduce them.
The millennium or thousand years reign of Christ
will be a government without temptation ; but the
heart of man, unconverted and unrenewed, and not
kept of God, is capable of anything. And at the end of
Christ's millennial reign, when Satan is loosed and re-
sumes his former position of Prince and power of the
air, he will carry away the nations with him in spite of
the Glory of Jesus.
What should hinder the nations relapsing into all
sin as when Satan was the governor of the world, prior
td the millennium ? The history of the people in all
age» of the world, afford us ample illustration of his
dreadful power of corrupting. Satan deceived our first


parents in Eden; corrupted the world after the flood ;
and -was Israel’s great enemy, nothwithstanding the
purposes of God concerning them. It was he who
sowed tares among the good seed, and all the evils
which are seen in the church, are but the polluted crop
of that seed. As, then, Satan,lwhen governor of the
world prior to the'millennium exerted such diabolical
influence over man, so will he, when loosened from his
prison, go forth to war against the saints at Jerusalem.
The loosening of Satan will soon be followed b) his
final overthrow, and he and his hosts will be brought
to destruction by the Lion of the tribe of Judah,.


SCENE VII.
“ The resurrection of the wicked; the final judgment; the Lord
Jesus Christ delivering up the kingdom to the Father; and
God all in all.
Among the questions which are heard from persons
who are not disposed to believe in two resurrections is
this ; “Do you mean to say, that the Lord will return
to this earth, before He comes to judgment ? The
plain and simple answer is, that the Lord will not re-
turn to the earth, before he comes to judgment; but
when he comes to meet the church in the air, it is at
the beginning of the day of vengeance, which is believ-
ed by prophetic students to be the first judgment or
assize as may be seen in Daniel’s prophecy, and which
will be held in order to the introduction of the mil-
lennium.
Of the resurrection of the wicked; or the Second
resurrection we read, “ And the sea gave up the dead
which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the
dead which were in them ; and they were judged, every
man, according to their works. And death and hell
were cast into the lake of fire.” Rev. xx, 13, 14. The
second resurrection is here minutely described. Then,


all will rise from their graves. There will be seen the
wicked of all classes, of all nations and tongues, who
have lived and died upon the face of this world. At
the bidding of the Eternal God the earth will be
shaken, and the dead shall be brought to judgment.
How terrible the sight! How acceptable to them would
be a hiding place. There, there will be no respect to
persons. No: the kings of the earth, and the great
men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the
mighty men, and every bond man, and every free man,
—all must come forth ; and it will be vain for them to
call upon the mountains and rocks to hide them.
St. John “ And I saw a great white throne,
and him that sat upon it, from whose face, the earth
and the heaven fled away : and there was found no
place for them. And I saw the dead, small and great,
stand before God ;and the books were opened, and an-
other book was opened which is the book of life : and the
dead were judged out of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works.’’ Rev. xx, 11,12.
In the gospel by John,we read, “ The Father judgeth no
man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son.”
In the first quotation we have the final judgment of the
wicked, and the Judge in the latter. The Lord Jesus
Christ, who on earth was a man of sorrows and ac-
quainted with grief, who died on the cross to atone for
the sins of all men, will then preside as judge, robed
in dreadful majesty. Those who onee cried, “ crucify
him, crucify himand all who rejected him, and
would not have him to reign over them must then be
judged by him, and must hear from his lips the fearful


and awfully tremendous sentence, “ Depart ye cursed
into everlasting fire.’’
Can any thing be more severe than such a sentence?
The place of their torment is called ‘‘outer darkness, a
lake of fire, blackness, the mist of darkness, a furnace
of fire.” Their punishment will be inflicted b}' fire,
unquenchable fire ! How dreadful! When any part
of our flesh is but touched by fire, how exquisite is the
torment we feel! It is the most intolerable pain the
body can sustain. What then must be the punish-
ment of the lost when cast into a lake of fire ? The
exquisite sense of that punishment will be manifested
by their “ weeping and gnashing of teeth.’’ And then
the thought of the perpetuity of their punishment,
brought upon them by neglecting their salvation, will
surely give poignancy to their torment. May God
save the reader from such a hell.
At this period the heavens and the earth “ flee
away,” or as St. Peter says, “pass away,*’and are
“ dissolved.”
‘Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered
up the kingdom to God, even the Father ; when he shall
have put down all rule, and all authority and power.
For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his
feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.
For he hath put all things under his feet. But when
he saith all things are put under him, it is manifest
that he is excepted, which did put all things under
him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him,
then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him
that put all things under him, that God may be all in


all.” Here we have the kingdom delivered up to God
even the Father, by Jesus Christ, who received the
kingdom as a man. He who became a man, and made
himself of no reputation, has been highly exalted ; and
as a man he received the kingdom; so as a man he
will deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father.
How infinitely precious to his children, to know, that
as a man Jesus shall reign, and as a man shall sit at
the right hand of God, known to them and loved.
Satan, the great foe of man, and all evil removed
away for ever, and a final overthrow of that which is
sinful, God introduces the eternal state of blessedness.
“ Behold I make all things new.”
“ And I saw a new heaven and a new earth : for the
first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and
there was no more sea. And I John saw the holy city,
new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven,,
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I
heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with
them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and he their God. And God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes : and there shall
be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain : for the former things
are passed away.” Rev. xxi, 1—4., &c. In this pas-
sage, we have a description of the New Jerusalem 0
Christian reader! Does not its description attract thee ?
Is not this the prominent and all absorbing feature of
the revelation. The fact that perfect exemption from
death, from sorrow, from crying, from pain, and: from!


all those “ former things,” which shall have passed
away, will be sweet indeed. But the positive joy,
delight, and satisfaction of being in his presence, “with
whom there is fulness of joy, and pleasures for ever
more,” is the substance of endless glory, and|is thrill,
ingly interesting to the Christian. May the reader have a
share in this eternal rest, which “ remaineth for the
people of God.”
Lastly. When all the saints are happy, there will
be no more intercession. When all the wicked have
disappeared, there will be no more government. When
God has made all things new, perfection willexist. When
all shall be accomplished, and made subject to God,
then there shall be an eternal blessing. Then, all will
be peace, and God will be all in all.


A D I) E N D A..
The annexed Diagram with its explanation, will throw
some light upon the Prophetic Events, or periods of
the world.
The lines I W M S, show the times when the Jews
will take an active part in the world’s affair. Ihe I
represents their past history up to the coming and the
rejection of the Lord Jesus, when through their rejec-
tion of him, they were cut off* and dispersed, as they
As it is said in Hosea, i. 9. "Lo-ammi: ye are not mj
people,”


■still are, and will be a scattered and peeled people
throughout the world, during the dispensation of the
gospel.
The upright line indicated by A, shows the ascension
of our blessed Lord to heaven, at the commencement
of the period represented by
C, which signifies the present gospel day, or day of
grace, in which the earth is full of wickedness, and
during which, the church of God is being gathered out
of the world.
The upright line T which closes this period, shows
the taking up of the church to meet the Lord in the air,
where they, the saints, who are the church, will re-
main with him, so long as the period lasts which is
shown by the line
W, which represents the period of judgment or
“ day of vengeance " that will take place betiveen the
present gospel day and the millennium, when distress
of nations and men’s hearts failing them for fear, as we
read n Luke xxi, 25 26, and when the whole creation
shall mourn and wail in pain and bondage, waiting for
the glorious liberty of the children of God. Rom. viii.
R This line represents the glorious appearing, or
coming of the Lord to this earth.
M signifies the circle which is intended to shew the
period of the millennium.
S This short line is intended to shew, the time
Satan will be let loose after the thousand years of uni-
versal blessedness, and
E The beginning of a circle means the eternal state.
The two circles C M are two distinct periods. If


you turn to Luke xxi, 24, 27, you will read, that
during the period represented by C the gospel period,
the Jews were trodden down of the Gentiles, ie., from
the destruction of Jerusalem right through the period
C. At the close of this period, the church is caught
up to meet the Lord in the air. The first three
chapters of Revelations exhibit to us the present state
of the church during the absence of the Lord and the
gospel dispensation ; at the close of which, and at the
voice, as heard by John, saying, “Come up hither,*’
will the church be removed, and ascend into the air
to meet her Lord, where they will remain until
the judgments have fallen upon the Jews for rejecting
Christ, and the Gentiles for treading down the Jews
and neglecting their salvation.
The beautiful passage in Isaiah Ixi, I, 2, is very in-
structive. “ The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me;
because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek ; he hath sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that are bound ; to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day
of vengeance of our God ; to comfort all that mourn.’
Here the two periods C M are distinctly brought be-
fore us The first (C), the gospel period “ The spirit
of the Lord, &c., to the acceptable year of the Lord,”
Then comes “ the day of vengeance ot our God,”
marked by the line W during which the church is with
the Lord in the air.
How long the day of vengeance will last we know
not. It may last but a few years. However long or


short the whole of the events recorded in Rev. from
iv. to xix. will take place. The antichrist, whoever
he be will take an active part in the world’s drama ;
and his day will be seven years. For the first three
years and half, “ time, times and half,’’ he will be the
Messiah to the Jews, and the other three years and
half, “ time, times, and half,’’ he will develop himself
as the Man of sin, who will set up the image, the
abomination of desolation, the warning to the Jews
the Lord cometh. See Zechariah xiv, which will,
doubtless, be at the close of the day of vengeance. For
the Man of sin will be destroyed by the brightness of
His (Christ’s )coraing.
Immediately after this comes the M period, the mil-
lennium, when the Lord will comfort all that mourn,
“ give beauty for ashes, and joy for mourning ” and to
the end of the same chapter, Isaiah describes the mil-
lennial glory. How remarkable that our Lord should
shut the book when he had read as far as the “ accept-
able year of the Lord." See Luke, iv. 19, : 2t).
Little did the people who heard him read in the temple
think, that before the book of wrath and vengeance
should be opened, when all the judgments recorded in
Revelation from iv. to xix. chapter, should be poured
out upon the wicked, that the long period of more than
one thousand eight hundred years should intervene—
should lie hid in the middle of that sentence.
I will only observe, that although there would seem
to be two separate (appearings of the Lord, yet there
cannot be two comings ; but rather two phases or stages
in His appearing. The first stage or phase will be His


descent from Heaven when the saints will be caught up
to meet Him in the air, 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17. This,
which is the first resurrection, will be, perhaps, similar
in manner as Enoch’s translation, —secret and unob-
served by the world, which will be going on as usual.
How long the church will be with the Lord in the air,
may be gathered, from the fact of the church being
spoken of as in heaven from Rev. iv. to xix. The 14
v. of the xix chapter opens up to us the other phase or
stage, when he will come, bringing his saints with him,
who have been previously raised. This must of neces-
sity be the case, for if the saints be not raised, how
could they descend with him ? How could Wesley
have sung—
“ Lo He comes with clouds descending,
Once for favored sinners slain,
Thousand, thousand saints attending ,
Swell the triumphs of his train.
Hallelujah!
God appears on earth to reign.”?
Ftrost, Printer and Publisher, Kussell Street, Melbourne.






