

SEVENTH WAR LOAN
the HONOR FLAG
"The Honor Flag will be
presented to each district
or area which subscribes
its quota to the loan.
A Certificate from the
Treasurer, in the form of
a window badge, will also
be issued to all subscribers
to the loan,”


Central Loan Committee
of Victoria.
Cr. F. Stapley, Lord Mayor (Chairman).
E. H. Wreford, Esq., Chief-Manager, National
Bank of Australasia (Vice Chairman).
Alfred Bright, Esq., Chairman, Chamber of
Commerce.
James Cuming, Esq., Chairman, Chamber of
Manufactures.
W. A. Gibson, Esq., Amalgamated Pictures.
C, M. Newman, Esq., Managing Director,
Howard Smith Ltd.
D. G. Paterson, Esq., Chairman, Commercial
Travellers' Association.
W. J. Roberts, Esq., Chairman, Melbourne Stock
Exchange,
J. S'. Scott, Esq., Manager, Commonwealth Bank.
A. B. Speeding, Esq., General Manager, Com-
mercial Union Assurance Co. Ltd.
Frank Tate. Esq., Director of Education.
J. T. Thompson, Esq., General Manager, Tem-
perance and General Life Assurance Society
Sir Henry Weedon, K.B.
Chas. Westmacott, Esq., General Manager, J. C.
Williamson Ltd.
W. Williamson, Esq., Managing Director, Beath,
Schicss, and Felstead.


Seventh War Loan.
A loan of £40,000,000 is required by
the Commonwealth Government for the
prosecution of the war.
Victorians are asked to contribute
£13,500,000 as their share.
Every patriotic citizen will regard it as
a pleasure as well as a duty to assist in
making the loan a success. The money
must be raised, and it will redound to the
credit of the people of the State if the
response which they make shows that the
Government can rely upon the co-operation
of the men and women who are at home
as certainly as they are relying upon the
brave men who are abroad.
The terms are liberal. The loan is for
five years, with interest at the rate of 5 per


wait. pel annum hee tit State income tax.
Bonds and transfer of stocks will be free
of Commonwealth and State stamp duty,
and bonds and stock will be accepted at
par in payment of probate and succession
duty to the Commonwealth. Conversion
privileges will be similar to those granted
in the last loan, and if it is desired by
Investors to anticipate future income for the
purpose of investing in the loan, their
bankers will be ready to negotiate an
advance at the low interest rate of 4 per
cent, against the security of the bond
applied for.
Whilst commending the soundness of the
investment, the Central Loan Committee
urges the people most earnestly to regard
the loan as an appeal to their duty.
Failure would be a triumph for our
enemies. Men who hourly throw them-
selves into danger and who every day see
death in most tragic aspects would wonder
what manner of men and women had been


left in Australia if in prosperity and safely
we failed to furnish the means by which
our share in the war is to be carried on.
It is not a question of ‘ ‘ Can I afford to
assist ?’ ’ The question is ‘ ‘ Can 1 afford
to hang back ? ’ ’
To-day the outlook is brighter for the
allies than it has been for many a day.
But through bright days and through dark
days, the war has to be fought till the
great end is achieved, “Carry on” is
the order which every lover of his country
will obey.
This is your chance to help. There is
no use in protesting that the Government
should have done something else or that it
should have done this thing at some other
lime. The only method of prosecuting the
war is through the Government of the
country established by the democratic voice.
Those who wish to help will stand
behind the Government. Every considera-
tion was well weighed before the Treasurer


decided to issue this lean at this time and
on these terms.
Criticism of method is worse than useless
now. It is injurious.
Victorian citizens have had definite
responsibilities placed upon them. After
the loan closes on October 15 it will be
known how well this State compares with
others in the response which it has made
to a call upon its patriotism.
Secure the prospectus from any bank or
post office, stock broker or recognised
war loan agent, and be ready with your
first instalment when
The Loan opens on September 16.
H. J. Green, Acteny
