

Seventy Years
1855 1925
SLATYER
JOHNSON
HILL
WHYTE
COX
BEING AN OUTLINE OF THE
HISTORY
OF THE
Bourke Street
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH
SYDNEY
NEW SOUTH WALES, AUSTRALIA.
SKETCHED BY THE
REV. SYDNEY HERBERT COX,
FIFTH MINISTER
FOR THE
70th ANNIVERSARY
MAY 24 - 26-31 - 1925
PRICE SIXPENCE—Postage One Penny.


THE TRUMPET
Official Organ of the BOURKE STREET CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH.
Editor and Manager: Rev. S. H. COX, to whom all communications should be sent.
VOL. 1. No. 8. MAY, 1925. If posted, 2/6 per annum.
BOURKE STREET CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH.
Near Junction of Bourke, Campbell, Oxford and Flinders Streets, and
Darlinghurst Court House, SYDNEY.
Rev. SYDNEY HERBERT COX,
“Ulleswater,” No. 107 High St., North
Sydney, and Neutral Bay.
In cases of Emergency the Minister may
be reached by ’Phone.
Enquire of the Caretaker.
Hon. Sec. and Treas.:
WM. G. LEWIS, “Ardee,”
69 Darley Rd., Randwick.
Other Deacons.—ALFßED ARMSTRONG,
GARNER WARD, ALBERT CHAPMAN.
Whosoever thou art that worshipest in this Church, enter it not without
the spirit of reverence and leave it not without one prayer to God, for thy-
self, for him who ministers , and for those who worship here.
Australian Cash Orders, Limited.
Phone, City 3252
<sr>
’Phone, City 3252
SEE THE AUSTRALIAN SUN RISE.
351-357 PITT STREET (4 doors below Water Board).
SHOP FOR CASH IN CASH SHOPS.
We Supply the Cash. The Firm the Goods.
WE SUPPLY EVERYTHING YOU REQUIRE ON TERMS.
You giet the order in your own home, and walk straight into any
shop on our list.
We cater for your convenience and comfort, and guarantee you the
independence as if you had the cash in your pocket.
N.B.—You buy at marked CASH PRICES.


Seventieth Jlnniuersaru
OP THE
BOURKE STREET
Congregational Church
Near OXFORD, FLINDERS, BOURKE and CAMPBELL STREETS Junction.
TAYLOR SQUARE, opp. the DARLINGHURST COURT HOUSE, SYDNEY.
PROGRAMME
SUNDAY, MAY 24, 1925.
11 a.m.—Rev. SAMUEL J. HOB AN.
Central Methodist Mission, Melbourne (and Lyceum,
(Sydney).
3 p.m.—Rev. E. DAVIES,
Homebush Congregational Church.
Tea Served at 5 p.m. for Friends from a Distance.
7 p.m.—ORGAN RECITAL & CHORAL PROGRAMME.
Sermon: “The Religion of Sympathy.”
Rev. SYDNEY HERBERT COX, Minister.
Soloists: Announced in the daily papers, May 23 and 30.
Organists:
Mr. HAROLD W. DENNING, Mr. B. H. WHITTARD, and Mrs. E. RISIUS.
Music Committee. —Chairman, Mr. ALBERT CHAPMAN.
Decorations Committee. —Chairman, Mr. ERNEST BRADFORD.
Social and Tea Committee —Chairwomen, Mrs. ALFRED ARMSTRONG,
Mrs. WILL G. LEWIS.
Church Secretary and Treasurer.—Mr. WILL G. LEWIS, 69 Darley Rd., Randwick.
Additional Deacons.—Mr. ALFRED ARMSTRONG, Mr. GARNER WARD,
Mr. ALBERT CHAPMAN.
Church COMMITTEE (including Deacons) .—Mr. ERNEST BRADFORD, Mr. WILL
LLEWELLYN, Mr. ROY ROUSEL, Miss ANNIE LLEWELLYN,
Miss MAY FLOWER.


Seventieth Anniversary
. 'r i i i '•#:* ’ ■ >n n * * * *\c;'v '* ? /*.
“Back to Bourke Street ”
TUESDAY ; VA Y 26, 1925.
At 7.30 p.m. in the Church—(Please Come Early.)
Chairman: Rev. SYDNEY HERBERT COX.
: ; r ‘" SPEAKERS: 1 -
Rev. C. J. LEESE, of Marrickville, Chairman of the Congre-
gational Union of N.S.W.
Rev. A. P. CAMPBELL, 8.A., of Killara Church.
Greetings on behalf of the during the
Ist Pastorate, Rev. WILLIAM SLATYER, 1855-1860. Pre-
sented by Miss Emily Slatyer (daughter) : and on
behalf of the Members during the
2nd Pastorate, Rev. THOMAS JOHNSON, 1861-1883. Pre-
sented by Miss Mary Johnson (daughter) : and on
behalf of the Members during the
3rd Pastorate, Rev. JAMES HILL, M.A., 1883-1900. Presented
by Dr. Goodwin Hill, of Newtown.
4th Pastorate, Rev. CHARLES WHYTE, M.A., 1900 to 1923.
Greetings on behalf of the present Congregation. Presented
by Mr. Will G. Lewis, Secretary and Treasurer.
MUSICAL PROGRAMME BY ENLARGED CHOIR, ASSISTED BY SOLOISTS.
Light Refreshments Served in the Hall at 9.30 p.m.
SUNDAY, MAY 31, 1925.
11 a.m.—Rev. W. J. GRANT, 8.A., Randwick Presbyterian
Church, representing other denominations.
3 p.m.—Rev. L. W. FARR, Supt. Young People's Dept., N.S.
Wales.
7 p.m.—MUSIC-FESTIVAL. Addresses by Rev. SYDNEY
HERBERT COX, and the Rt. Hon. WILLIAM
MORRIS HUGHES, P.C., M.P., etc., former Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth.


AN OUTLINE
HISTORY
' ! OF “THE ; * '*
BOURKE STREET
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, '
SYDNEY.
70 Years 1855 - 1925 70 Years
BY THE PRESENT MINISTER:
REV. SYDNEY HERBERT COX.
The Happy Valley Hotel!
11l these days of 1925, with all the furore across the English-
speaking world as to the rights and wrongs concerning “Prohibition
of the Liquor Traffic,” it comes with something of a shock to
realise that the Bourke Street Congregational Church grew out of
religious services conducted in the Happy Valley Hotel, then
located in Oxford Street, opposite the Court-house.
Why “Happy Valley” it is hard now to say, for that part of
Oxford Street is on a hill, which slopes down to the shores of
Woolloomooloo Bay. Perhaps the original owner thought of some
Happy Valley he had left in the dear Homeland —or possibly he
thought that his hostelry had the effect on certain regular clients
who lingered long after the day’s work, of a cool and pleasant dell
after a hard day’s toil in the heat.
It is pleasant, however, to think that the landlord of the Happy
Valley Hotel in 1855 was of such a character that church services
could be held in his inn. And we do not forget that St. Paul met
his apostolic friends at the “Three Taverns” outside Rome! The
Bourke Street of those days belonged to a different world from
ours.
The Days Before Buses and Trams.
Flinders Street, in its new width and beauty, was a narrow
thoroughfare known as Botany Street, unmade and almost unpaved.
An old resident tells how he used to sit at his window in a store-
house on the south side of Short Street, and with a telescope watch
the flagstaffs near the South Head Lighthouse signalling the arrival
of ships. There was then no such thing as the telegraphf wire, and
any prophecy of “wireless” telegraphy would have been a sign of


insanity. How fast the world moves ! Not only shipping, but other
news, was signalled to Goat Island and the City Flagstaff Hill. Of
course, no steamer had yet been seen. From the vicinity of Bourke
Street Church the North Head and (what are now) Quarantine
Grounds presented an uninterrupted view.
There were no ’buses on Oxford Street until after the church
had been established. For years afterwards these vehicles
frequently were bogged during heavy rains, and at such times the
passengers had to get out and shove the coach along. Two years
before our church was organised the Wesleyan Chapel was built
on what is now Flinders Street. A year or two later the Wesleyan
Parsonage was built at the foot of the Sandhills, which ran in one
direction right up to the barracks, and at right angles ran to what
is now known as Moore Park. At that time Moore Park was
roadless scrub. Where the Captain Cook Hotel now stands marks
the limit in 1855 of any formed roads in that direction. What was
until recent years known as the lakelet in the then Zoological
Gardens was originally and officially recorded on the old survey
map as “Billy Goat Swamp.”
Unimpressive Beginnings.
There was no sign in the early fifties that the junction of
Oxford, Flinders (then Botany), Forbes, Campbell and Bourke
Streets would become as it is to-day, the immense shopping centre
of a huge population. Surry Hills and Paddington (often pro-
nounced Padden-ton) had each a distinct life of their own, and even
an accent as pronounced as a Cockney dialect. The inhabitants
knew each other just like villagers. Sydney was a long way down-
town, and Melbourne in many ways a “foreign country.”
It was a day of small beginnings. A Mrs. Harrison kept a
small grocer's shop at the corner of Bourke and Campbell Streets.
Edward Arnold, destined later to be our church treasurer, began
business in a small wooden building on Oxford Street a few doors
east of Riley Street, on the same side of the street where now
stands the imposing department store of Edward Arnold, Ltd.
Most of the buildings then were either stone or wood, bricks
being very scarce. The bricks for St. James’s Church, King Street,
were imported from Great Britain. The shops on Oxford Street
were lit with oil lamps, or with candles, until the coming of
kerosene in the early seventies.
Under what appear to us to have been somewhat primitive
conditions the Bourke Street Congregational Church came into
existence.
Our Simple Heritage.
The records of the earlier assemblies that led to the formation
of a Church Fellowship are very scanty. Who actually began the
services in the Happy Valley Hotel, and how long they were
carried on before the Bourke Street property was acquired, is now


largely guesswork. The first definite statement of fact is as
follows:—“Minutes of the Church of Christ formed on the 24th of
May, 1855 (Oueen Victoria’s birthday!), and assembling at the
Congregational Chapel, Bourke Street, Surry Hills, Sydney.”
The use of the word “chapel” indicates that services had been
held for a number of months, sufficient to secure land and a
building and a minister, for the minutes continue: “Rev. W. Slatyer,
Eliza Slatyer, Samuel Hancox, James Thornton, Elizabeth Thomp-
son, John Rocke, Grace Rocke. The following also having given in
their testimonials were at the same time added to the number.”
Of these nin& Christians a previous paragraph says: “The following
persons being present, having assented to the Declaration of Faith,
principles of Religion, Church Order, and Discipline, as adopted by
the churches of the Congregational Union of England and Wales,
the Rev. W. Slatyer gave a short address, and it was agreed to hold
a church meeting for the transaction of business on the evening of
Friday, Ist June.” Thus was born, without noise or fuss or the
delusions of ritual and stiff ecclesiasticism, the Bourke Street
infant, destined to become such a lusty personality.
The First Pastorate.
On June Ist the bye-laws of the new church were read and
adopted, the Rev. W. Slatver proposing that “Samuel Ilancox and
J. Thompson take charge of the financial affairs. ’’ The infant
THE IRON CHURCH, 1855-1878.
church was launched on its career with the help of the Colonial
Missionary Society and the Congregational Home Missionary
Society of N.S. Wales, the latter having been organised four year's
previously, in 1851.


For several years Bourke Street Church needed to be sub-
sidised before it was strong enough to stand alone. In 1855, and for
a period covering nearly a quarter of a century, the church did its
work in an iron building, as here shown, which was ultimately taken
apart and removed to Stewart Street, Paddington, where it has
since served less glorious purposes.
That it stood so long for a Congregational house of worship is
a reminder of the fact that the swift development of Sydney did
not bring to the Surry Hills district for any long period that type
of residential population able and willing to build and sustain from
the beginning a “noble temple of divine worship.” Bourke Street
was never the permanent home of wealthy families, though it has
been blessed with generous supporters.
The First Minister.
Possibly the first pastor of the church was not of the type to
create a great popular appeal to the incoming multitude. The Rev.
William Slatyer was essentially of the rugged, independent lineage,
possessing the stern characteristics of a Cromwell without the
poetic fascination of a Milton or a John Bunyan. His preaching
was more forcible than attractive, but it left its mark on the little
band of workers he gathered round him. They were the “first
stones” of a foundation that has endured some tremendous shocks
in the course of seventy years.
Rev. WILLIAM SLATYER,
First Minister, 1855-1860.
The young church began with
vigour and translated its dreams
into action. A Sunday school
was opened before even the
necessary books, etc., could be ob-
tained. For these the church took
a collection at a single service of
£9/2/4. Mr. Fowler became the
first superintendent, and died
while in office.
At the first anniversary of the
church (1856) the morning- ser-
vice was conducted by Rev. Dr.
Ross, of the Pitt Street Church.
At the third anniversary in 1858
one of the preachers was the Rev.
Thomas Binney, of the King’s
Weigh-House Chapel, London,
one of the great preachers of the
19th century, and a giant in Brit-
ish Congregationalism.
The saints of seventy years ago
were not quite as impervious


to “weather conditions” as we imagine, for quite often the records
declare that business meeting had to be “abandoned on account of
the inclemency of the weather.” But we have also to recall that
streets were not then lighted as they are now. Pavements were-
often a mis-nomer, and police were not numerous.
I i , 3 C . -f
The Trials of An Infant.
Congregational babies (as churches) do not very often get the
maternal or fraternal oversight that naturally belongs to more
connexional organisations, such as the Anglican, Presbyterian or
Methodist Churches. In 1855-1860 Congregational people were
more nervously proud of their Independency than spiritually and
socially eager for ecclesiastical fellowship!
The New South Wales “Congregational Union” did not exist un-
til 1866, eleven years after Bourke Street Church was born, and for
years the Union was more or less under suspicion. The autonomy
of the local church became almost a fetish, and in some cases has
remained such.
Consequently new causes had almost entirely to stand on their
own feet and grapple single-handed with purely local conditions.
The over-stressing of “Independency” was fatal to the successful
spread of Congregationalism as a Church throughout Australia,
although its polity had a profound influence on other bodies. This
is the atmosphere in which we must view any discouragements that
came so early in the history of Bourke Street and the ministry of
Mr. Slatyer. Many of our churches to-day would have been
stronger instead of weaker had they felt able to secure the advice
and support of stronger and wiser laymen than they themselves
possessed, or had they been able to wait a longer period before
choosing a new leader or a new location.
On the departure of Mr. Slatyer a young, hare-brained sec-
tarian led ofif a small group to another denominational enterprise,
and it was a weakened “flock of God" that awaited its second
pastor. Meantime Rev. J. E. Vetch and others supplied the pulpit
for about a year.
The Second Pastorate
Early in 1861 the church wrote to the Rev. Thomas Johnson,
then at Maryborough. Victoria. The result of correspondence was
that Mr. Johnson agreed to take the oversight for one year and test
the situation. But so immediate was the response to his efforts
that before the end of the year he was unanimously invited to
remain as permanent pastor, and he continued in this position
until lie retired from the active ministry twenty-two years later.


Rev. THOMAS JOHNSON,
Second Minister, 1861-1883.
Thomas Johnson was a native
of Warwickshire, England, in
which county he had known Mr.
John Fairfax (founder of the
“Sydney Morning Herald’’) and
Mr. Reading, both now citizens
(in 1861) of New South Wales.
Mr. Johnson had come to Vic-
toria partly through the Colonial
Missionary Society, but in 1861
was contemplating a return to
Great Britain. On making known
his intention to John Fairfax the
latter advised him: “Don’t go
home: come to Sydney, where
you are needed.” So Thomas
Johnson came to a weakened
cause in a neighbourhood still un-
certain of its future, and without
enough financial resources to in-
dicate whether even a moderate
stipend could be secured. There
was at this juncture no Lmion
with ability to assist.
Twenty-two years later, on June 21, 1883, a handsome testi-
monial was inscribed in goldleaf, scarlet and blue, bound quarto
size in very heavy leather (morocco), and the covers decorated in
exquisite bronze. The book was prepared by the.well-known firm
of John Sands, Ltd., and the workmanship of the superb colour
decorations and lettering was done by George Brown, a son of Mr.
Simeon Brown, one of the early deacons. By quoting now from this
testimonial we get at once a perspective of Mr. Johnson’s great
ministry. After referring to the unfortunate need through ill-health
for their minister’s retirement, the authors go on to say: “We had
hoped to have your ministrations for many more years
You found us few in numbers and feeble in strength. Others will
enter into your labours and reap the harvest We wish
to testify to your great pastoral care ”
The testimonial is signed by Walter S. Buzacott, Alf. A. Wills,
Thos. Gulley, Edward Arnold, Charles E. Wigzell, and Geo. Laird,
who were deacons at the time of Mr. Johnson’s retirement.
No Leaders Without Followers.
Before further relating- the second pastorate, it is necessary to
stop a moment and recall the names of some of the earliest workers
to whom Bourke Street Church owes a debt it can never repay.
The first deacons were D. L. Welch, J. Fowler, and B. Cocks,
who took office February 2, 1857, having been nominated by Messrs
Goold, Ouaife, Rooke and Hinwood.


On February 5, 1858, Mr. Hinwood became a deacon, and
Samuel Hancox was re-elected Secretary. In 1859 the deacons
were elected “by ballot,’’ Messrs. S. Hancox and B. Cocks being
added to the board. No election took place in 1861, owing to the
pastoral vacancy.
Top.—S. BURRIDGE, S. S. GOOLD, H. B. PAGE, J. G. ORAM.
Middle.—V. W. CARPENTER, Rev. AARON BUZACOTT, J. FOWLER,
W. B. ELLARD.
Bottom—SIMEON BROWN, O. BERNARD, J. STIMPSON.
On January 23, 1862, Rev. T. Johnson having assumed the
helm, Messrs. Samuel S. Goold and George Crispo appear as new
deacons. On January 31, 1863, the well-known missionary of the
London Missionary Society, Rev. Aaron Buzacott, became a deacon.
At the end of 1863 the deacons began to be elected for terms of
three years; a newcomer being S. Burridge. In February 1866, Mr.
W. S. Buzacott was elected to fill a vacancy, and served eighteen
years. In 1868 appear for the first time the names of J. J. Salier and
D. S. Mutton, in 1869 Mr. Gully, in 1873 Messrs. Pomeroy and
A. A. Wills, and in 1875 Messrs. E. Arnold and Sherring.


In 1879 we find Messrs. U. W. Carpenter, C. E. Wigzell, Simeon
Brown and W. Sawyer. In 1881 Mr. G. Laird, and in 1884 Messrs.
W. 1. B. Mote and R. J. Parish, were added to the honourable roll.
In 1887 Messrs. John C. B. Newnbam and Tilley became deacons,
and in 1890 first appear the names of Joseph Clark and O. Barnard.
Top.—S. BURRIDGE, A. A. WILLS, W. SAWYER.
Second.—R. J. PARISH, W. I. B. MOTE, C. E. WIGZELL.
Third.—W. S. BUZACOTT, JOSEPH CLARK, D. S. MUTTON.
Fourth.—J. J. SALIER, G LAIRD, E. ARNOLD.


From 1869 onward for many years, there were seven deacons,
the number being increased to nine during Mr. Hill’s pastorate.
Like true Congregationalists the deacons were modest men, and
in several cases no photograph was furnished to former church
historians. Neither do the records show (on a rapid search) the
exact date of the first election of some of these faithful stewards
of the Gospel, viz., Messrs. H. B. Page, J. G. Oram, W. B. Ellard,
J. Stimpson, whose portraits appear in these pages. There are no
portraits of Messrs. D. L. Welch, B. Cocks, John Hinwood. S.
Hancox, Geo. Crispo, Thos. Gully, Pomeroy and Sherring, in the
groups photographed, which include elections up until December
1890. The portrait of Mr. Newnham (elected 1887) appears in the
third group photographed in 1905 for the Jubilee Sketch prepared
by the fourth pastor. Rev. Charles Whyte, M.A.
Thus from the beginning of 1857 to the end of 1892, a period of
35 years, the Church appointed to its highest office, thirty-one lay-
men. for a period of 208 service-years, showing that in spite of
many changes wrought by death and removal, the deacons aver-
aged a period of nearly seven years each —a very Biblical number.
Among the longest services until 1892, however, are to be
reckoned Mr. Fowler (of the first board) 15 years, Mr. W. S. Buza-
cott (from 1866) 18 years, Mr. Hinwood (of the first board) 10
years, Mr. S. Burridge (from 1863) 9 years, Mr. J. J. Salier (from
1868) 10 years, Mr. D. S. Mutton (from 1868) 10 years, Mr. Thos.
Gully (from 1869) 14 years, Mr. A. A. Wills (from 1873) 21 years,
Mr. Edward Arnold (from 1875) 19 years, Mr. C. E. Wigzell (from
1879) 15 years, and Mr. R. J. Parish (from 1883) 9 years.
Space does not permit the further mention of Church-officers,
at this point, though a few words must be said later of the long and
efficient service of the three deacons elected before the Jubilee of
twenty years ago, and who are still in office, their combined service,
measuring nearly one hundred years! This faithful trio, are Alfred
Armstrong, Will G. Lewis, and Garner Ward.
The Leadership of the Wise.
Xo man in Sydney was more competent to appreciate the
material he had to work with, than was Rev. Thomas Johnson.
Excepting Air. Fowler, who was a deacon six years before Air.
Johnson arrived, he gathered such officers as W. S. Buzacott, S.
Burridge, J. J. Saber, D. S. Mutton, Thos. Gully, A. A. Wills, C E.
Wigzell. and Edward Arnold, to mention only those of longer ser-
vice, and with them, he proceeded to build that “Church Invisible,”
which does not depend on brick or stone, or things material, and
of which. Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone.
Mr. Johnson knew how to manage men, and when occasion
needed, he could be very direct. When lie arrived he found things
in a chaotic condition, and suffered the disabilities of an iron build-
ing. The little group holding on, were led very largelv bv Samuel


Hancox, who was elected secretary soon after the Church was born.
Mr. Hancox was a typical John Bull, was a generous snuff-taker,
and led the singing. Having controlled the uncertain fortunes of
the Church for many months, it was not easy to hand over the
reins to the masterful driving of the new pastor. So eventually
Mr. Johnson asked him point-blank, “Who’s to drive?” Mr. Hancox
thereupon decided to “change coaches”- —and joined up with Pitt
Street Church. Mr. Johnson was very fortunate in his “chapel-
keeper”—Mrs. Ostlund. Mr. Ostlund was a Dane, and died many
years ago. His widow, whose death occurred only three months
ago, lived to be nearly 94. Her son Oscar, who married Clara E.
Jones, a daughter of the late Deacon, Alfred Jones (deceased Nov.
1924), himself passed away as late as January of this year. Mrs.
Ostlund senior, was often referred to by Rev. Thomas Johnson, as
his “curate.” She was the “pew-opener” and knew everybody who
came to the services at all regularly. When they were absent, she
reported the fact. She was more than a caretaker —she took a pride
in the House of God, and polished pulpit and pews and everything
else that needed polishing, including any stray children that needed
it.
Mr. Johnson’s sight was never excellent, and he was therefore
never quite sure who was present or absent from services. On
week-night prayer-meeting occasions, this was a little awkward.
But why worry? Mrs. Ostlund supplied him regularly with a little
list of those present, whom she knew it would be safe to call upon
to pray aloud, or take part.
Blessed Are the Women and Missions.
The mention of Mrs. Ostlund, is a reminder of the fact that
so many records of Churches, are a recapitulation of what a few
men have voted upon —whereas everyone who knows Church-life,
knows that even back in 1860 the Churches, including Bourke St.,
depended tremenduously on the mothers, wives, sisters, sweet-
hearts, and daughters, of the men-folks ! —especially for missionary
causes. Space does not permit the mention of the wonderful women
to whose solid characters and loyal patience, the Bourke Street
Church owed its steady development. The wives of the deacons
enumerated, serve as the mere beginnings of a list that would
glitter with glory, could we but read it, and ponder each name with
its redolent memories.
Nor should we forget the ministers’ wives and families. To
them in part is due the effectiveness of some important phases of
each pastorate.
Mrs. Johnson was a gentle, lovable, reserved soul, whose grace
of bearing and intense spirituality were reproduced in her daughter,
Miss Mary Johnson, of whom recently a friend took a “snap” which
we reproduce. The chair in which Miss Johnson is seated was pre-
sented her by the Burwood ladies on her 70th birthday in 1920. In
it she has" doubtless spent many hours, recalling to mind


that father, who was at once “parent, friend, and chum.”
Miss Johnson, who is now living in retirement at “The
Retreat,” Burwood, after serving some years as a Deaconess
with the Burwood Church, is perhaps one of the best qualified his-
torians of Bourke Street Church now living, and to her kindness
we are indebted for valuable information, our other chief source
being the valuable sketch by Rev. Charles Whyte, M.A., issued
in 1905.
The Inspiration of Missions.
The home conducted by Mrs. and Miss Johnson, became at
once a* rendezvous for missionaries coming from and going to for-
eign fields, for visitors from the Home Land, secretaries, repre-
sentatives of other denominations, etc. Supper after Church on
Sunday nights, became a “conference” of intense friends.
From the beginning, Bourke Street held friendly relations with
all its neighbours. It took an active part in organising the present
N.S.W. Congregational Union in 1866, a previous and similar or-
ganisation having perished after a brief career.
Bourke Street supported the scheme for a “Boys’ College,”
which, if carried through, and duplicated in one or two directions
(as was done by bodies more strongly sectarian) would have saved
to the Congregational denomination, scores, if not hundreds of
strong families, out of which have come since, leaders in Church
and State, whose services we might have retained. Bourke Street
gave its help in starting a denominational paper. But its most
earnest efforts, were those given to the London Missionary Society,
and for a while it was called, “The Missionary Church.”
Among its members it numbered Rev. Aaron Buzacott, Mr.
and Airs. Charles Barff, Mrs. Alex. Irvine (later to be Airs. Pearse),
Mrs. Robert Thomson, Rev. Charles Pitman, Rev. and Airs. David
Darling. Captain and Airs. Turpie, and Captain and Mrs. Runcie.
Among the most distinguished visiting missionaries that Bourke
Street ever heard were Rev. James Chalmers ( “Tamate”) and Rev.
Dr. W. G. Lawes of New Guinea, Chalmers famous for opening up
new districts as fearless pioneer, and Lawes as the great literary
and educational guide in a new country and its literature.
The first “John Williams” having been wrecked on Danger
Island, a second, a very fine clipper-ship, built in Aberdeen, left
England in January 1866 with Chalmers and his wife on board. The
mate was Air. Turpie, who was afterwards Captain of the third
“John Williams.” On the Memorial (brass) Tablet in Bourke
Street Church, the following is recorded: —•
TO THE
MEMORY OF CAPTAIN ROGER TURPIE,
WI IO faithfully served the London Missionary Society for 38 years
on the Missionary Ship.
JOHN WILLIAMS.
He was for 32 years a member of this Church,
Died 17th January, 1901. Aged 67.
“I hope to meet my Pilot face to face, when I have crossed the har,'."


Miss MARY JOHNSON,
Daughter of the Second Minister
On Miss Johnson’s last
visit to England, she was
lying ily in a boarding-
house at Ilfracombe,
where Captain Turpie was
then living in his retire-
ment. It was a great joy
to him to have her re-
moved to his own home,
where he and Mrs. Tur-
pie could again enjoy the
old associations of Bourke
Street.
The Johnson
Pastorate.
Rev. Thomas Johnson
was a man of fine pres-
ence, and strong pulpit
power. He was a cau-
tious thinker, and posses-
sed much common sense.
Outside his own parish,
his help and advice were
continually sought and
freely given. He gath-
ered numbers of people
who had not been habitual Church-goers. At the end of his first
year, the congregations had again become “fair” —and the Sunday
School averaged 140 in the mornings and 180 in the afternoons.
Much visiting and tract distributing were done, and Bourke Street
soon became a hive of activity. Eight years after his arrival, in
1869-1870, Mr. Johnson became Chairman of the Congregational
Union. His church-building faculties were recognised. He was a
great pilot of the young and there grew in Bourke Street one of
the largest Sunday Schools that Xew South Wales has ever known.
The New School Building.
Ever on the move, at the end of his first year, in January 1862
Mr. Johnson caused a Committee to come into being, consisting
of Messrs. Fowler, Crispo, Fry, Buzacott, Welch and Minchell, to
take steps for new accommodation for the schools.
The foundation-stone was laid on August 25, 1862, by Miss
Mary Johnson, the silver trowel (which we have just Seen) being


inscribed: “Presented to Aliss Johnson by the trustees of the
Bourke Street Congregational Sunday School, to lay the foundation-
stone of the Bi-Centenary Memorial School Rooms, Sydney,
August 25, 1862.”
A bottle was deposited under the stone by Rev. Thos. John-
son, containing a copy of the “Sydney Alorning Flerald," and coins
of the Empire; as well as documents relating to the building and
ceremony, and giving a list of the Deacons—John Fowler, John
Himvood, Sam. Goold, George Crispo and Samuel Hancox. The
two trustees were John Fairfax and David Jones! The builder was
Joseph Slade. *
The building stands behind the present stone Church, and is
two tall stories high. Its length runs along Little Bourke Street,
toward Campbell Street, off which are little back streets, and dis-
reputable houses of miserable construction, a disgrace to the unreal
piety of many of the landlords of that day.
Still a Centre for the Young!
The School Buildings cost £1,400 and were opened “free of
debt” owing to the fact, that the Hon. John Fairfax, M.L.C., who
gave the first £lOO, also gave the last £lOO. In 15 months, the
scholars had also raised £lOO by their own gifts. The upper room
makes a very fine hall, with its pointed Gothic roof (unceiled) the
finely-grained wood being used as a huge parlour and library for the
Y.W.C.A. who are our gracious tenants, pending the erection of
their superb new building on Liverpool Street. The lower room
is an attractive Lecture Hall in which a complete stage has re-
cently been built, with perfect electric head and foot-lights, and
spot-light (at the other end), with handsome brown and gold
drop-curtains.
In these premises, the first choir-master of the Church, Mr.
J. J. Saber conducted for years, a “non-vested” public school, prior
to Crown Street Public School being built.
Air. Salier (whose daughters were able to attend the Autumn
Fete on April 30, and expect to be at the 70th Anniversary) was a
music enthusiast, and a great lover of children. After conducting
many anniversaries, he produced the hymn herewith re-printed.
It is peculiarly a Bourke Street reminiscence:—
Keep the heart tender, kindly and true,
Water it freely with love’s gentle dew.
Garner its harvest of rich burnished gold,
Let in the sunshine, and keep out the cold.
Chorus —
Keep the heart tender, kindly and true,
Water it freely with love’s gentle dew.
Keep the heart tender with sweet loving words,
They’ll fill it with music like warble of birds
in the heart of the forest, so joyful and clear,
W hen the birds are awaking in spring of the year.


Keep the heart tender with flowers of kind deeds,
The sweets of their perfume will choke out the weeds,
And the soft beams of pity, mercy and love
Will yield it the glory that beams from above.
Keep the heart tender with holy desires,
They hallow its altars and quench the fierce fires
Of hatred and envy, of sins ever new;
Keep the heart tender, pure, kindly and true.
(The above was received too late to reproduce the music M.SS.)
Giving Birth to an Only Child.
Mr. Johnson’s evangelical character gave him energetic in-
terest in all good works throughout Sydney. He was one of the
company who founded the Sydney City Mission. Within six years
of his arrival at Bourke Street it was evident that the district
(especially Surry Hills), would become crowded with small houses
and large families of children, especially in the streets going down
toward what is now the Central Railway Station.
In 1866 land was purchased in Devonshire Street, and in Janu-
ary 1867 a Building Committee was formed, consisting of Rev. E.
Robinson, Messrs. Mutton, Salier, Ellard, Crispo, Irvine, Cocks
and Welch (most of them Bourke Street deacons) and the trustees
of the land.
For some time in the neighbourhood, a Bible-class had met in
the home of Mr. T. W. Gully, a City Missionary. Owing to various
delays, the Building Committee of 1867 did not operate until August
1872, when the urgency of building a branch of Bourke Street Sun-
day School, was forced upon those concerned by the pressure of
numbers. At this time Bourke Street had attained its maximum
there being nearly six hundred scholars on its roll. £BO were
promised at the August 1872 meeting, and also promises were made
that all the manual labour required would be given to the cause.
In July 1873 Mrs. Johnson laid the foundation-stone. In October
the same year the Bourke Street Church decided to maintain at
Devonshire Street, both morning and afternoon Sunday School.
Sunday evening services, and a week-night service. John-
son, Deacon Hinwood, and the new Superintendent at Devonshire
Street School were put in charge of these matters. Mr. Pomeroy
of Bourke Street, became the Superintendent, the building being
opened in November 1873. In August 1874 the building was en-
larged. Mr. Olley was the preacher the first 18 months and was
succeeded by Mr. R. Allen as Missionary. In 1875 morning ser-
vices were commenced. In November 1876 Mr. G. Preston suc-
ceeded Mr. R. Allen, the Bourke Street deacons having supervised
the work for a year. In August 1878 the Devonshire Street wor-
shippers offered to buy the property at two-thirds of the value
placed on it by a competent valuer. Messrs. Hardie & Gorman
computed the value as £1,570, and Bourke Street surrendered the
property therefore in exchange for £1,046, —doubtless, less any
liability still existing at Devonshire Street. For many years the


Church there had a chequered career, and finally passed under the
care of Pitt Street Church. The present Missionary is Pastor Weir.
Mr. Johnson’s Greatest Achievement.
As early as 1873, in the twelfth year of the second pastorate, a
movement was begun to secure a better Church building', the “Iron
Church” having proved to be unattractive, uncomfortable, and
greatly out of repair. A committee was elected at a meeting pre-
sided over by the Hon. John Fairfax, M.L.C., and £593 were pro-
mised. Delays occurred however, until about July 1877, when the
matter was again mooted. It was not until July 24, 1878, that a
letter was issued, signed by Thomas Johnson, Minister, Walter
■S. Buzacott, Secretary, and Edward Arnold, Treasurer, in which
notice was given that plans for a new building had been submitted
to the Church, and the design by Mr. W. Boles, architect, had been
selected. The estimated cost of erection was £3,854, of which
£1,600 had been given or promised.
The Church measured 74 x 52 feet, and in addition two vestries
10 x 11 feet and two class-rooms 10 x 24 feet, were provided.
The project was deemed of such importance, that a printed
book of the specifications was issued, showing costs of excavations,
•drainage, masonry, and finishing trades. There are ten closely-
printed pages of the actual details specified.
The last meeting in the Iron Church was a Tea and Public
Meeting held on Tuesday, July 2, 1878. The tenders for the re-
moval of the Iron Church required that it be taken apart and dis-
posed of, in not more than 14 days. The building was put up for
auction, at a sale held within the edifice, and Mr. Johnson expressed
his saddened feelings at such a procedure. The Iron Church was
sold for £95. Its cost, in London, including transportation, was
£1,600. Services were held in the new Sunday School building until
the new stone Church was finished. On July 6, Mr. Johnson’s
■evening subject was “The discrepancy between the judgment of
God, and the judgment of men, concerning Jesus Christ.”
The foundation-stone was laid on September 21, 1878, by (Sir)
James R. Fairfax. Memorial stones were also laid by Revs. T. John-
son, W. Slatyer, and C. Pitman.
( —) J. R. Fairfax gave a resume of the history of Bourke Street,
and drew attention to the presence of the “venerable Rev. Wm.
Slatyer,” who had been a chief figure 24 years previous, when on
November 14, 1854, the foundation-stone of the Iron Church had
been laid by the venerable Rev. Dr. Ross. The cost of the im-
portation, erection and completion of the Iron Church was said to
have been £4,500, which seems a misprint, inasmuch as a fellow-
ship of only nine members was formed six months later.
From that time, until the foundation ceremony of September
1878, some 300 members (according to Mr. Johnson), had died or


removed, leaving about 180 on the membership roll, of whom 30
were non-resident. Mr. Slatyer made the other chief address. A
collection of £162 was made. A week later the total sum in sight
was £2,211.
BOURKE STREET CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH,
Opened February 8th, 1880.
The new Church, with its pointed Gothic style of architecture,
was not ready for the opening- until Sunday, February 8, 1880, when
Rev. Wm. Slatyer preached at 11, Rev. Principal J. H. Fletcher of
Newington College at 3, and Rev. J. Jefferis, LL.B. (of Pitt Street)
at 7. A week later the preachers respectively were Rev. J. G.
Fraser, M.A., Rev. T. S. Forsaith, and Rev. Thos. Johnson. The
cost of the building had amounted to about £4,500 of which £2,500


had been raised. The collections at the opening services reached
£3ll. On Thursday, February 12, in spite of inclement weather
over 400 sat down to tea. The new Church seated 750 to 800 per-
sons, and its beautiful appearance was hailed with delight. By the
time the final bills were paid, the new edifice had cost £5,350. Five
years later Mr. Johnson was obliged to retire for health reasons,
and went to Burwood, with a liberal retiring allowance. On
November 19, 1895, he was promoted to “The Better World,” hav-
ing been indeed a diligent servant of God.
The Third Pastorate.
The Rev. James Hill, M.A., who became the third minister,
was in charge of the Congregational Church at Fraserburgh, Scot-
land, when the invitation to Bourke Street was received by him.
He arrived in Sydney on the first Sunday morning in November
1883, was met by Rev. Robert Dey (now Dr. Dey, the well-known
editor and publisher of the “Australian Christian World”) and
proceeded at once to the Bourke Street Church, arriving in time to
share in the Communion Service, which was being conducted by
Rev. J. G. Fraser (afterwards D.D.) of Camden College.
(Exactly forty years later, to the very day, Dr. Dey met the fifth
minister of Bourke Street—the present writer —and shared in the
Communion Service.)
Mr. Hill was formally welcomed a few days later at a special
meeting of the Church, and then at a Tea and Public Meeting. Rev.
Thos. Johnson presided. Among those who took part, were Mr.
A. A. Wills (Secretary), Mr. W. S. Buzacott (then Senior Deacon),
Revs. S. Savage, S. Bryant (still preaching in West Australia),
J. F. Cullen, Geo. Campbell (father of Rev. Alex. P. Campbell now
at Killara), and G. Pratt.
A Character Builder.
Rev. James Hill, M.A., began his ministry under happy aus-
pices. The buildings were all new, the congregations were large,
and the finances adequate. He was in the fortunate position of
being able to concentrate on the spiritual work of the church.
Scores of Sydney’s most promising young men and women passed
through Bourke Street, and their ideals were moulded by his virile
and scholarly preaching. It would be useless and dangerous to try
to mention even a single score. But men of the type of Sir
Arthur Cocks (an old Bourke Street boy) represent in the com-
mercial and political world the influence of James Hill. The late
Rev. X. J. Cocks, M.A., of Pitt Street Church, landed here as a
youth from Adelaide, being met by a Bourke Street youth later
known as Rev. T. E. Peirce. Mr. N. J. Cock’s first public speech in
N.S. Wales was in reading the scripture lesson for Mr. Hill in the
Bourke Street pulpit. He was then a curly-haired, bright-eyed
young fellow, sparkling with genius and friendship. The Johnson
home at Burwood was of course thrown open to him as to other


young students, such as Peirce, M. L. Johnson, Gordon Robertson
(now Chairman-elect of the N.S.W. Union), and others.
Rev. JAMES HILL, M A ,
Third Minister, 1883-1900.
Bourke Street was a training-
ground for varying periods for
many students in the field of
practical religious work. Evan-
gelistic missions were held fre-
quently, and achieved constant
success. Early in Mr. Hill's min-
istry a missionary was engaged to
help cope with the religious needs
of a big population. The propo-
sal for such a helper came from
three earnest sisters, the Misses
Emily C., M.L., and C. F. Baxter,
of “Arthurleigh,” Albion Street,
Surry Hills. These undoubted
“women of God” were a tower of
strength to Mr. Hill, and were
much impressed by his ministry.
His successor, Rev. Charles
Whyte, M.A. (a fellow-Scotsman)
wrote of him : “The Rev. James
Hill was built on a large scale in
every way, physically, intellectu-
ally, and spiritually. His mind was
massive, cultured, and richly stored. His big heart was sensitive
and brotherly, and those who were honoured with his friendship
knew how loyal and true lie was. He was a conspicuous figure
wherever he appeared. His influence reached far, and was due,
above ail other causes, to the conviction that he was a good man.”
It was no wonder that the Misses Baxter, who conducted with
intense Christian zeal a very high-class girls’ school, felt that the
preaching of their minister must be supported to the farthest
extent. In response to their suggestion Mr. Woolnough became
the missionary.
The Ministry of the Misses Baxter.
The entire support of Mr. Woolnough was maintained by
Emily Baxter and her two sisters for nine years. That is to say,
the ministry of the man was also the ministry of the three women.
He was presenting to hundreds of homes their testimony to Christ
as well as his own. In the same fashion the present ministry at
Bourke Street could not be carried on but for the generous. Christ-
like subsidy offered by Alfred Armstrong. Will G. Lewis and Roy
Rousel, who provide nearly half the present stipend.
Mr. Woolnough (says Rev. Chas. Whyte) “was singularly
adapted to his work. Unsurpassed as a visitor, he won the con-


fidence and sympathy of all. He gathered a band of aggressive
workers, and kept them filled with his own enthusiasm.” A year
or two after leaving Bourke Street he died suddenly while busy in
the Master’s service.
Looking After the Ministers.
Bourke Street has a happy reputation for its regard and care
toward the occupants of the pastoral office. No one did more to
accentuate this beautiful phase of church life than the Misses
Baxter, as the following letter (happily preserved) shows: —
Arthurleigh, Albion Street,
July 22nd, 1885.
The Secretary,
Bourke Street Congregational Church.
Dear Sir, —
As a member of the above church, one moved by intense
gratitude to the Head of the Church for the unspeakable benefits
derived from the ministrations of His faithful servant, Rev. J. Hill, I
most respectfully desire to bring the following suggestion under the
notice of yourself and brother-officers that our minister’s stipend
be increased to £SOO per annum from October Ist, 1885.
In order to meet this I propose to present to the church the
first quarter’s increase, namely, £25, for the quarter ending
December 31, 1885, in order that no inconvenience may be caused
in the disposal of the funds. For the two ensuing years my sisters
and myself will give £SO towards the additional £100: in other
words, during 1886 and 1887 we will contribute annually £SO to the
proposed increase if the church will add the remaining £SO.
As an individual member I feel this is but a very slight tribute
of gratitude for teaching, the worth of which can never be realised,
and for benefits which can never be repaid, except by the “well-
done"’ from the Master himself.
I remain,
Respectfully yours,
EMILY C. BAXTER.
P.S. —Please do not allow your decision to be influenced by
any anticipation of a part of the missionary’s salary falling upon
the church in the future. The only alteration that will take place
in the proposal made in my former letter concerning that matter
will be that at the end of his first year of service my sisters and
myself will continue to pay the whole of his salary, instead of a
part, continuing to do so as long as we are able, and shall consider
it a privilege and honour that we shall jealously guard.
E.C.B.
In these very different days, forty years later, it is worth while
to pause and reconsider the atmosphere of this letter. Its dignity,


its courtesy, its business-like care, its humility, its gratitude, all
expressed in a few well-chosen words. The soul of the writer is
unconsciously made bare and the purity of its texture clearly seen.
And what a postcript! What a contrast to the attitude toward
ministers to-day, when, under the cheap teaching of spurious
“Labor”—the minister is regarded as purely a job-holder! and is
often paid less wages than a street-sweeper. Verily the “ministry”
of the Misses Baxter was a type that St. Paul would have grown
eloquent over. But they did more.
The Beautiful Bourke St. Organ.
Only one year later the following letter, with its massive
simplicity, was sent to the church: —-
Arthurleigh, Albion Street,
August 26th, 1886.
The Secretary,
Bourke Street Congregational Church.
Dear Sir, —
The year 1887 will close for us an important period in our
business career, and my sisters and myself are desirous in some
way of expressing our gratitude to Him Who has given us the
health and ability to work, and Who has so signally blessed us
with prosperity in all our undertakings.
We think that the most suitable offering would be an organ
for the above-named church, feeling that as Sunday after Sunday
it pealed forth notes of praise to the Creator those notes would to
us also be notes of gratitude.
If the members of Bourke Street C. Church will honour ns by
accepting the gift, we propose to offer an organ worth about £6OO,
the specifications to be procured by us and submitted for the
approval of those appointed by the Rev. J. Hill and the church
officers for the purpose, the organ to be procured and erected at
our expense and by us, with the sanction and approval of the
church.
Trusting our proposal will meet with favour from yourself
and your fellow officers.
We remain,
Yours respectfully,
Signed on behalf E. C. BAXTER,
of M. L. BAXTER.
By E. C. Baxter. C. F. BAXTER.
The feelings of the minister and his people may well be
imagined. For eight years the beautiful new stone church had
been opened for worship, and in all that time had lacked what
most people consider the divinest instrument (apart from the
human voice) for the expression of praise to God and of the highest
