



Seven Kinds of Inflation




Seven
Kinds of Inflation
—and What to Do About Them
BY
RICHARD DANA SKINNER
Vice-President, Pell, Kip ic Skinner, Inc.
New York WHITTLESEY HOUSE London
McQHAW-HILL BOOK COMPANY, INC.


Copyright, 1937, by the McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be
reproduced in any form without permission of the publishers.
SECOND PBIHTIHG
Printed in the United States of America by The Maple Press Co., York, Pa.
PUBLISHED BY WHITTLESEY HOUSE
A division of the McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.


This Book Is Dedicated
with Profound Gratitude
to
E. CARROLL SKINNER
My Research Assistant




Preface
There should be ample excuse for this
book in the agonies of fear and physical hardship
which recurrent inflations and reactions impose
upon millions of our neighbors.
But if I did not have this excuse for an ever-in-
creasing interest in this profoundly human subject,
two personal experiences would have provided
ample stimulus. The first —that at the crest of the
1919-1920 inflation I was editing the Foreign Trade
Review of the Guaranty Trust Company of New
York and trying to see through the inflationary
mists of those days. The second —that at the acute
phase of the 1932 crisis I was charged with the
responsibility of reviewing and recommending
changes in the bond portfolio of one of the large
New York savings banks. What both experiences
meant in practical urgency is obvious.
Yet the specific excuse for this book is something
different —not the anxieties caused by real crises,
but the senseless turmoil imposed on all of us by
“inflation scares” when there is no inflation!


The purpose of this book—written under the com-
peting pressure of daily professional work on invest-
ment problems—is to help the layman to defend
himself, and his own judgment, against this verbal
assault and battery of the calamity howlers in one
year and of the fatuous optimists in another. The
layman should be able to determine the truth for
himself.
It is my experience that a daily newspaper and
a little simple arithmetic are all he needs for this
purpose. He can then forget the terrifying ghosts
paraded before him by politicians, financial gos-
sipers, university theorists, and far too many
well-intentioned bankers.
I am indebted to so many people for sundry ideas
expressed in this book (as in the case of Joseph M.
Boyd, of the Harvard class of 1935 for his analysis
of money as a “debt that must be spent”) that I
cannot even attempt a list. I do wish, however, to
express my gratitude to my immediate business
associates, John Pell and Ira Kip, Jr., for their con-
stant encouragement in my studies of money and
inflation, and to E. Carroll Skinner who, as my
research assistant, has made many brilliant and
practical discoveries of relationships between bank-
ing figures and various price movements.
Nor can I forget my moral debt to those “good
companions” of frequent lunch-table discussions
who have helped my flagging wits over many an
economic puzzle—among them Alexander Sachs,
Robert Warren, Bill Cumberland, Ralph Robey,
Ragner Naess, Sherwin Badger, and Donald Wood-
PREFACE


ward. Heaven knows they are not responsible for
my views! But they have helped me greatly in
sharpening up what views I had.
This book, however, is not written for those
experts, but for the sorely puzzled layman, and for
those investors, bank officials, politicians, business-
men, and job holders who know from recent hard
experience just how large a stake they have in the
truth about inflation and deflation. Only the last
chapter is addressed alike to my economist friends
and to all the others as an urgent plea for a new
kind of realistic inquiry into our future.
RICHARD DANA SKINNER.
New York, N. Y.,
April 21, 1937.
PREFACE




Contents
Preface vii
CHAPTER I
From Names to Things 3
The layman is the victim of conflicting advice —What he
wants to know about inflations —The several kinds of inflation
—Detecting and measuring them before it is too late—Differ-
ence between measuring today’s facts and trying to “forecast”
tomorrow —The sad “case history” of 1934 —The general
arrangement of this book.
CHAPTER II
The Types of Inflation 16
Inflations are not always “upward” movements of prices—
They can be “absolute,” like a price rise, or “relative”—
Possibility of inflation during price drops. Case histories of
1919-1920; of 1926 to 1929; of 1929 to 1932; of 1932 to 1936.
Four “absolute” inflations —of bond prices, of short-term
interest rates, of equity (stock) prices, of general price level —
Three “relative” inflations —of debt compared to wealth, of
interest payments compared to income, of living costs com-
pared to income.
CHAPTER 111
Concerning Measuring Tools and Methods 25
The nature of convenient yardsticks. Weekly banking reports
as a cross section of what the public is doing about —and with
—its money. The three main reports and what they include.


Why they reveal, when “turned upside down,” just what the
public is doing. How “new” money is created and what this
reveals. Bank loans and investments as sources of “new”
money, and the difference between them. Study of “in-
verted ” bank figures to reveal economic conditions still almost
a new science. Other sources of long-term facts. Measuring
methods in applying the facts. Value and dangers of an “in-
dex” and just what an “index” is. Why every “index” is more
valuable when compared to some other closely related
“index.”
CHAPTER IV
The Meaning or Bond Price Inflation 41
Magnitude of the problem and the millions of people affected.
Extent of price fluctuation and effect on individuals, banks
and insurance companies. By no means merely a “rich man’s
problem.” Simple explanation of bond “price” and bond
“yield” or income. Income changes more violently than price.
History of bond prices for “perspective.” Recent fluctuations
more violent than prior to 1914. The great problem at the
dose of 1936. Wide disagreement among the experts. En-
hanced need for accurate measurement of facts.
CHAPTER V
How to Measure Bond Price Inflation 54
Clue found in motives of borrowers and lenders. What these
motives are. Supply and demand —in various combinations.
Two simple measures from the bank reports and how they
compare with actual bond market history. Common sense of
the measures. Checking one measure against the other.
Examples of 1934, 1933, 1932 and 1931. Different trends in
short and long term interest rates. The arithmetic of the
measures in detail.
CHAPTER VI
Inflation of Short-Term Interest Rates 77
Why treated as a separate problem from bond prices. Again
a measure of demand compared to supply, but with different
and more “sensitive” factors. The bank loan rate, and a
measure for its trend. Reasons behind the measure. Impor-
tance of short term rates to bankers, business men and
CONTENTS


investors. The volatile “acceptance” interest rate and a
measure for its trend. Reasons behind the measure. Domi-
nance of debt (or credit) in all measures. The arithmetic of
the measures in detail.
CHAPTER VII
Inflation op Equity (Stock) Prices 93
Danger of attempts to “forecast” market as against impor-
tance of measuring current economic trends. Influences at
work on stock prices:—earnings —interest rates —monetary
inflation and gold. Illustrations. The danger of over-sim-
plifying and of “chief cause” thinking. Case histories of
“offsetting” influences from 1919 to 1922, from 1927 to 1929,
and from 1930 to 1933—spending activity, money supply
and monetary inflation often at cross purposes. Historical
patterns misleading compared to measurement of actual
facts. The “break” in historical pattern from 1930 to 1932.
When did “the turn” come?
CHAPTER VIII
Measuring Equity Price Inflation. . - 113
How bank figures “correlate” with stock market history.
Further caution against “forecasting” attempts. Importance
of banking figures is to show basic trends not revealed by
industrial reports and output. Measuring the “offsets” of
money supply, velocity (turnover) and monetary inflation.
» A sensitive measure of money supply. Reasons behind the
measure. Two measures of velocity—spending to borrowing
and spending to price level. Reasons behind the measures.
A measure of currency inflation. Reasons behind the measure.
Relative importance of the four “offsetting” measures. The
arithmetic of the measures in detail. Summary.
CHAPTER IX
General Price Level Inflation 144
The economists’ battle royal. Prevalence of the “quantity”
theory (quantity of money times its rate of spending com-
pared to quantity of goods determines price level) and prac-
tical difficulties of proof. Results of open-minded experiment
needed. A tested “experience table” of 36 years, and its
support of “quantity theory” with important modifications.
CONTENTS


Avoiding the fallacy of “other things being equal.” General
principles behind “quantity theory.” Simplicity of “money”
compared to complexity of “money systems.” Why money is
a unique form of “debt” and what gives it its power over
human affairs. Why “velocity” of money becomes quite as
important as its quantity. Our own “ money system ” and the
different kinds of money we create. Three separate ways to
increase money supply —not all equally inflationary. Special
importance of money created by bank loans. A measure of
“velocity.” Reasons behind the measure. A measure of the
inflationary quality of money. Reasons behind the measure.
Case histories of 1934, 1931 and 1919 to 1922. Longer term
influences versus practical short term measures.
CHAPTER X
Measuring Price Level Inflation 166
Source material of the two measures of velocity and of in-
flationary quality of money. Reasons for using rough avail-
able measures rather than accurate measures of facts not
easily obtained. Further explanation of reasons behind the
measures. How they can be used for practical purposes. The
arithmetic of the measures in detail. Summary.
CHAPTER XI
Decades of Debt 179
Turning from “absolute” (or price raising) inflations to
“relative” inflations. The dominating role of debt in our
modern system. Our dual or “divided” capitalism, one half
ownership and one half creditorship. Our recent history in
terms of debt compared to ownership values. Sources of the
facts. The astonishing rise of debt compared to wealth since
1914. The years 1914, 1922, 1929, 1932 and 1936. Owners only
a “minority interest” in 1932. Again a “majority” in 1936.
Social and political consequences of this type of “relative”
inflation. Debt “leverage” and why we are all involved in
total debt figures whether or not, as individuals, we owe
money. Direct and indirect indebtedness and “who pays the
loan.” “Creditor dominance” and “rugged individualism.”
Ownership capitalism in peril in 1932 and still in 1936.
The problem of stabilizing an inherently unstable system. A
crusade for conservatives.
CONTENTS


CHAPTER XII
Decades of Interest Payments 200
With debt goes interest on the debt. A second “relative”
inflation in rising interest payments compared to income.
The years 1914, 1922, 1929, 1932 and 1936 in terms of interest
to income. Sources of the facts and importance of interest
rate. Again 1932 proves a year of great “relative” inflation.
Deflation in progress by 1936, with total interest less than
1932 and income much higher. Practical importance of the
facts compared to popular superstitions.
CHAPTER XIII
The Standard of Living 214
The ultimate “relative” inflation —anything that forces
down the standard of living by driving upward the pressure
against that standard. Per capita income in dollars and in
real purchasing power. Effect of cost of living on real value
of dollar income. Sources for the facts and how to interpret
them. Changes in living standard since 1914. The years
1921, 1932, 1§33 and 1934 as “inflated” years. Importance
of time in estimating social effects. What undermined the
improving living standard of 1922 to 1929? A yardstick of
stability and a guide for the future.
CHAPTER XIV
Owners in Bondage 223
The dominant role of debt in all kinds of inflation, whether
absolute or relative. The “divided house” of modem dual
capitalism and our “economic neurosis.” Further examina-
tion of debt “leverage” as injurious to ownership capitalism
in every stage of the “business cycle.” A progressive society
of “manic depressives.” Failure of our economists to look debt
in the face. Is it necessary, as a system, to economic progress?
Owners in bondage. Is there a sensible “way out?” Present
conflict inescapable and inherent, regardless of “good will.”
Attempts at control of debt (credit) merely palliatives lead-
ing to over-centralization of government. Ample precedents
for large scale financing without debt (i.e. on equity basis) in
industry. Also modem precedents in real estate. Problems of
Government borrowing and insurance. Possibilities of bank-
CONTENTS


mg on an equity basis. Need of thorough study, with the
objective of strengthening and conserving ownership. In-
flations and the extremes of the “business cycle” can only be
eliminated through a new fortifying of ownership and a new
attitude toward and study of the stupendous influence of
debt.
APPENDIX A
The Possible Technique of Nondebt (oh Equity) Banking 245
APPENDIX B
Tbustee Investments undeb Equity Financing 259
Index 266
CONTENTS


Charts
1. Bonds and Stocks during 1934 12
2. A Composite of Banking Factors Compared with Bond Prices
since 1865 49
3. Two Measures Compared with Bond Prices since 1919 ... 60
4a. Suggested Measure Compared with the General Bank Loan
Rate since 1919 80
46. Suggested Measure Compared with the Bankers’ Acceptance
Bate since 1919 81
5. Long- and Short-term Interest Rates since 1870 85
6. Spending Activity, Money Supply and Currency Inflation
1919-1922 100
7. Spending Activity, Money Supply and Currency Inflation
1927-1929 105
8. Spending Activity, Money Supply and Currency Inflation
1930-1933 108
9. A Composite of Banking Factors Compared with Stock Prices
since 1919 114
10. Four Measures Compared with Stock Prices since 1919 . . . 126
11. A Composite of Banking Factors Compared with the General
Price Level since 1900 147
12. General Prices, Stock and Bond Prices during 1934 160
13a. General Prices, Turnover of Loans, and Deposits to Gold
during 1934 161
136. The same during 1931 162
18c. The same during 1919-1922 164
14. Two Measures Compared with General Price Level since
1919 173
15. Three Major “Relative” Inflations since 1914 182
16. Total Debt by Kinds Compared with National Wealth for
Important Years 185




Seven Kinds of Inflation


CHAPTER I
From Names to Things
Writing in the Atlantic Monthly
in July, 1936,1 said that “the unhappy layman, the
lowest person in the financial hierarchy, has every
right to howl his distress at the moon. The professors
and economists, many of the bankers, and most of
the brokers’ customers’ men have scared the wits
out of him. They have told him more things in three
short years about the humble dollars in his pocket
than could possibly be true at one and the same
time about any object under the sun,”
These remarks still hold true —also the ones that
followed: “They have told him his dollars were
being inflated, that inflated dollars would lead to
his financial ruin, that inflated dollars would drive
down the value of bonds held by his insurance
company or his savings bank until his life’s savings
would shrivel before his very eyes. They have hung
before his miserable gaze not only French assignats,
but also post-war German marks, post-war French
francs, pictures of Mississippi Bubbles and horrible


flapping things called greenbacks. As he groaned
responsively, they have piled horror upon horror.
“But they have also confided to him that he
must receive smaller dividends from his insurance
policies and lower dividends from his savings bank
and a lower return on his bond investments because
‘easy money’ was raising bond prices and lowering
the interest rate! Something has obviously gone
wrong with inflation. It seems to be working upside
down. The frightened layman sold his bonds before
they were scheduled to drop through the subcellar.
Now he can hardly find them in the stratosphere.
He rushed to convert his dollars into shoes before
they rose to $25 a pair—but shoe prices are still
clinging to the sidewalks. Yes —he has every right
to howl!”
The rest of the article then suggested a few simple
reasons why so many of the economic crystal-gazers
had failed to be of any help to the layman. It ad-
mitted readily enough that inflation might still come
about, and concluded with these words: “But un-
happily for the puzzled layman, many of his pro-
fessors and bankers and customers’ men will then
call it, not inflation, but ‘widespread business re-
covery.’ In the end, the poor layman will still be
howling his distress at the moon!”
It is superlatively obvious that what the layman
wants to know —what he must know if he is to con-
duct his business or his investments or his daily
family affairs with any reasonable intelligence and
soundness —are these points:
First: Are we having any type of inflation?
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


Second: If so, just what type is it? For example,
what group of prices will it raise—stock prices,
bond prices, or the general cost of living?
Or will it depress the standard of living by
some other method than an actual raising of
prices ?
Third: How can he detect and measure the extent
and course of this inflation while it is actually
going on so as to steer his own course of action
accordingly? What published figures must he
look for, and how can he use them as measuring
sticks ?
Unfortunately, there has been so much fuzzy
thinking and writing about inflation that the lay-
man is hardly aware of the primary fact that there
actually are several different types of inflation. He
thinks of inflation as one single green-eyed monster
spouting ruination. Inflation always —so he thinks- —
chokes down bond prices, always shoots stock prices
to dizzy heights, and always raises commodity prices
and the cost of living much faster than any increase
in his dollar income or wages, thus reducing all but
a few lucky speculators to rank misery. Conversely,
he thinks that “deflation” helps bond prices and
hurts all other prices.
To freshen the air on this first and primary point,
suppose we glance over recent history. If “inflation ”
always injures bond prices, how do we explain that
best grade 4 per cent bonds were still selling in the
“inflated” period of 1928 at par but dropped to only
76 cents on the dollar in the supposedly “deflated”
days of 1932?
PROM NAMES TO THINGS


Again —if we believe, as so many have told us,
that we were “deflated” in 1932 and grossly “in-
flated” by 1936 —how does it happen that best
grade bonds jumped back during this very “infla-
tion” period from 76 cents on the dollar to 120 cents
on the dollar? In 1932, one of the best secured rail-
road bonds in this or any other country, namely,
Norfolk & Western Consolidated 4’s of 1996, actu-
ally sold as low as 76. In 1936 it had risen to over
120. Is it possible that we were actually more
“inflated” in 1932 than in 1936 —in spite of all the
clamor and fuss? Or is there, perhaps, a special
type of inflation that does raise bond prices, and
another and separate type that lowers them?
Once more, what of the supposed “inflation” of
1926 to 1929, when common stocks were trying to
reach the sun ? Best grade bond prices rose steadily
during the first two of these four years, and never
sank to anything approaching a panic level even at
the stock market peak of 1929. But the strangest
phenomenon of all was the fact that commodity
prices never rose at all during the entire four-year
period. Nor was there anything remotely resembling
a currency inflation. Many of our financial pundits
at the time pointed to these two facts as proof posi-
tive that we could not possibly be inflated. Yet we
were inflated. The trouble was that the conditions
happened to be different from those of the previous
inflation of 1920. In short, we were in another
“type” of inflation.
But instead of admitting this, what is the popular
superstition? Usually, to take refuge in “psychol-
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


ogy”—to say that inflation, in any type, or in
contradictory types, is nothing but a mysterious
lack of confidence in this or that. If this kind of
“psychological” explanation makes sense, then it
is high time to place astrologers in charge of all
business and all government.
No; the layman instinctively wants explanations
that explain, reasons that have at least the clean
odor of facts and common sense. Once he recognizes
that there are several distinct types of inflation, or
combinations of types, he wants to know the why
and the wherefore. He wants to know how the symp-
toms of these differing types of inflation could have
been recognized and at least roughly measured
while the inflations were gathering momentum. To
take a specific instance, he might note that rising
bond prices in late 1920 and during 1921 actually
heralded the emergence from the 1921 depression,
whereas rising bond prices from October, 1929, to
June, 1931, instead of heralding prosperity around
the very next corner, simply preceded the final
catastrophe of late 1931 and early 1932. Was there
any measurable warning of this difference of
conditions in figures and facts available at the
time?
This book does not set out to be a discussion of
fine-spun economic theories. It is no attempt to
discover ultimate causes of the business cycle. It is
merely an honest effort to put into plain, everday
terms a few practical ways of detecting and measur-
ing different types of inflation and deflation while
we are in the midst of them.
FROM NAMES TO THINGS


The measures discussed —the facts and figures we
can use in making a common-sense appraisal of
current conditions —have not been born in a
vacuum. They have been used, and are still being
used, in rigidly practical investment work and in
arriving at decisions and policies affecting very
large investment totals, not only for individuals
but for banks and institutions. Economic theorizing
has its proper and important place. Toward the
end of this book, I have taken the liberty of indulg-
ing in just such theorizing in connection with the
causes of inflation to be found in the constant con-
flict between property owners and financial creditors.
It is hard to resist, in any discussion of inflation,
some such treatment as this of the broader question
of why we should tolerate inflation and deflation
at all. But that discussion is purely a by-product of
the main objective of the book —a practical method
of judging just where we stand at any given time
in the ever-moving tides of inflation and deflation.
Those who want a periscope to glimpse over the
horizon of the future will find little satisfaction in
the detection and measuring methods discussed in
the following pages. They are not “forecasting” de-
vices, in spite of the fact that a major change in the
price level of stocks, bonds, or living costs —as the
case may be —is often preceded by warning signals
in measurable facts. I have known instances, for
example, when a definite inflation, or increase in the
total money supply available for investment, has
shown up clearly in the published banking figures
a month or two in advance of a recovery in bond
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


prices. But that has about the same relation to
“forecasting” in the usual sense as have the dark
clouds overhead just before a rainstorm. The
weather prophet who waited until those heavy
clouds were visible to “forecast” rain would have
little honor in his own or any other country! The
most that can be said for the inflation measuring
methods discussed in this book is that they corre-
spond to barometer and temperature readings and
a glance at the sky before setting out on a picnic.
They present facts on which common-sense con-
clusions can be based.
Nor does this ready admission minimize in the
slightest the vast importance of arming ourselves
with just such measured facts. As I pointed out in
the quotations from the Atlantic Monthly article,
the layman has suffered unbelievably—not only
materially but mentally as well, in hours and days
of needless anxiety and fear —from a constant dis-
tortion of the plainest and most visible of facts. In
the inflation scare of 1934, the layman was not the
only victim. Several of the country’s largest banks
were so convinced that inflation (meaning a bad
time for bonds) was just around the classic corner
that they placed huge proportions of their own funds
in nothing but the shortest-term bonds at, very low
income yields. They thereby lost millions annually
in income, and tens of millions in increased market
value of long-term bonds in the subsequent bond
“bull market” of 1934 and 1935. Other large banks
were wiser, and received the double advantage of
high income and later market appreciation from
PROM NAMES TO THINGS


longer term bonds. But when the experts were in
this sort of dramatic disagreement, what was the
layman to do? What were the directors of smaller
banks to do?
Yet during all this period a simple measure of
facts, 1 drawn from the published weekly banking
figures in the newspapers, showed that a tidal wave
of increased investment funds was upon us —showed
clearly that whatever kind of inflation we were
having, it was certainly not of the type to depress
high-grade bond prices. This phenomenon, and
certain horse-sense ways of measuring it at the
time it was going on, are discussed in Chapters IV
and V on Bond Price Inflation. The point is that
these measures were actually applied at the time
and made the basis for recommendations to retain
existing long-term bondholdings and to add to such
holdings. Did this necessitate “forecasting” or
financial crystal gazing? Certainly not. It meant
nothing more than accepting current facts and fig-
ures as showing that for the time being there was
no inflation of a type that could do anything but
support or raise bond prices.
In other words, the measures described in this
book are not intended to answer the question
“Where do we go from here?” but only the very
important question “Where are we now?” After all,
it may be most important to us to know that we are
not living in an inflationary period of a given type
when four-fifths of our friends insist that we are.
And it may be equally imperative for us to know
1 See page 60.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


that we actually are living through a given type of
inflation when the same four-fifths of our friends
insist that it is “only normal prosperity” or a mirac-
ulous New Era.
If an intelligent man feels hot or feverish, but
can’t be sure whether it is due to the room tempera-
ture or to his own condition, he puts a clinical ther-
mometer into his mouth and settles the question
at once. If he has a fever, he probably goes to bed.
If he has no fever, he opens the windows and airs
out the hot room. If he has a fever, and finds it is
still higher two hours later, he knows that his condi-
tion is getting worse and probably needs a doctor.
Nor does he have to be an inspired “forecaster”
to know that today’s rising fever may easily go still
higher tomorrow. Past experience plus present facts
give him a common-sense guide. Today’s facts can-
not foretell tomorrow’s facts, but they can certainly
improve our guesswork about tomorrow.
Those who were persuaded or beguiled or cajoled
into selling their long-term high-grade bonds in
early 1934 know full well what the knowledge of a
few homely facts might have saved them. And so,
too, those who were bludgeoned into exchanging
their bonds for common stocks in the same period
know just what the succeeding long months of de-
clining stock prices involved for their nervous sys-
stems. The bonds they had sold went up; the stocks
they had bought on “inflation” hopes went down.
Yet the facts to measure the true conditions were
right there, available in every important newspaper
of the land. We were deflating in those combined
FROM NAMES TO THINGS


factors which affect stock prices and inflating in the
factors which would raise bond prices.
As to those who bought “commodities” as an
inflation “hedge,” they soon discovered what the
banking figures alone would have told them, that
the forces then at work could produce only the
CHART 1. —The rising high-grade bond prices and falling stock prices
of 1934 —using December, 1933, prices as 100.
mildest kind of rise, if any, in the prices of any com-
modities in which there was not an acute physical
shortage. We were simply not inflating—in the
ordinary, horrific implication of the word —and the
facts and figures were there to prove it.
In my discussion later on of seven major types of
inflation, some of my economist friends and a good
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


many business and banking friends may discover
overhastily that I am using the word “inflation”
in several unorthodox senses. I shall try to avoid
this misunderstanding by resorting to the almost
extinct art of defining words in advance, that is,
saying just what I mean by this or that type of
“inflation.” I am sure the layman who must plan
his business, or his investments, or his choice of a
j’ob, or his methods of selling or working, on a basis
of hard facts will be far more interested in “things”
than in the customary and confusing “names for
things.” We have had quite enough scares over the
last few years as a result of name calling. The time
has come to look for the reality behind the name.
That is the sole purpose of this book —to provide the
layman in finance and economics with a means of
separating realities from names, and from slogans
and high blood pressure emotions.
To illustrate my point—it would probably horrify
many robust conservatives to hear public free com-
pulsory education and the services of the post office
called by the name “socialistic.” Yet in the sense
that they are both social enterprises, owned and
operated by government, and subsidized by public
funds, they are most inescapably “socialistic.” It
simply happens that very few people have persist-
ently and loudly called them by that name for
many long years. The same idea applies to many
literal and exact cases of inflation. As I shall show
from figures later on, the year 1932 was, in at least
two or three aspects, the most dangerously “in-
flated” year of this century to date! It was these
FROM NAMES TO THINGS


special forms of inflation, quite as much as shattered
panic nerves, that logically brought the low stock
and bond prices and the tragic unemployment of
that year. Yet, because no one has “persistently
and loudly” called those conditions by the name of
inflation for many long years, the facts are apt to
shock many conservatives quite as much as the
“socialistic” fact involved in public free education.
In other words, facts, figures, and realities dis-
close the simple truth that we cannot protect our-
selves in our daily lives and business pursuits unless
we are ready, mentally, to think of “inflations”
rather than “inflation,” to think of any given form
of inflation in terms of just what it inflates, instead
of in terms of some general vague monstrosity. We
must even be ready to accept certain forms of price
inflation as being desirable —just as the staunchest
conservative accepts the compulsory, regimented,
and “socialistic” public school system —and to re-
ject others as distinctly harmful. The measure of
the “good” or the “bad” in any given form of
inflation —like the measure of the fact of the par-
ticular inflation itself —must be first of all a keen
sense of realities. Added to this we need a healthy
desire for the long run good. Every form of price
inflation injures someone; so does every form of de-
flation. That is one of the penalties of the general
debt (or “credit”) system under which we live. But
in many instances there is a broader good or evil
to be offset against the specific injury or benefit.
Moreover, there are periods of reasonable equilib-
rium in which no great harm is done to any group.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


That sort of equilibrium ought to be our general
objective as active and intelligent citizens.
The general arrangement of the book follows this
plan: first, a defining of the seven types of inflation
to be examined; second, a general description of
measuring tools to be used by the layman; third,
a discussion of the history and meaning of each
type of inflation, followed immediately by a chapter,
or section, on concrete and simple ways of measuring
this particular type. This permits the reader who
has little taste for arithmetic (no “higher mathe-
matics” are even mentioned!) to skip quickly over
the more technical chapters and to center his interest
on those dealing chiefly with broad ideas and facts.
The four concluding chapters, for example, may
be read by themselves for their general importance
to the “state of the Nation” and to the kind of
inflationary “system” in which we attempt to live
and work.
If this book helps the nontechnical citizen in any
way to measure for himself the realities of our situa-
tion from month to month and year to year, and
so to take a more effective part in directing our
efforts toward sane and balanced national values,
then the slight energy spent in writing it, and the
many years spent in trying to make facts and figures
tell an understandable story, will have been most
thankfully spent.
FROM NAMES TO THINGS


CHAPTER II
The Types of Inflation
We might as well clear the ground
at the outset by saying that nearly everyone recog-
nizes a general “upward” inflation once it is in full
swing. Thus, whenever the cost of living rises we
know that we are in the midst of a specific price
inflation. But inflations can be either absolute —
like a price rise—or relative —like a rise in living
costs compared with income. A relative inflation of
this sort may even occur in times of falling prices.
The years 1919 and 1920 were years of both rela-
tive and absolute inflation in this sense. A scarcity
of housing accommodation, owing to the restric-
tion of housebuilding during the war, shot rentals
skyward. Food costs were high, too, and the costs
of clothing were exorbitant. Thus nearly every
major item in the average man’s budget conspired
to make a total high cost of living. Wages had risen
—but not as rapidly as living costs. Dividends from
stocks had risen. But interest payments on bonds
had, of course, remained at a fixed dollar amount.


Those who had retired to live on annuities or on
savings invested in bonds suffered acutely. Roughly
speaking, each dollar of 1920 income would buy
only 70 per cent of the living values it bought in
1917. The whole country was moaning about the
high cost of living. Some groups, of course, were
specially favored —those who were making huge
speculative profits. But by and large the
country suffered. In spite of being on the gold
redemption standard during this entire period,
America was undoubtedly in the grip of a general
inflation, and everyone knew it. The monthly rent
and grocery and meat bills, compared with wages
and income, were the only measuring sticks needed.
But general upward inflations of this sort are
comparatively rare. In America we have had only
two of major importance in the last seventy-five
years, the first coming right after the Civil War and
the second right after the World War. In the other
periods our “upward” inflations have been of
specialized types. The reactions from them have
often resulted in panics and “hard times.” But they
failed in one way or another to achieve the unmis-
takable character of general upward inflation. Peo-
ple living through them were apt to think of these
special inflations merely as business booms. They
were more damaging in their after-effects than in
their current effects.
It takes only a quick backward glance for most
of us to see that the special inflation of 1926 to
1929 misled 90 per cent of the population into think-
ing we were merely enjoying a New Era of limitless
THE TYPES OF INFLATION


prosperity. The cost of living did not rise appreci-
ably, In fact, house and apartment rents declined
and quantity production methods brought down
the prices of a great many important items, con-
spicuously of automobiles. It seemed to many that
the magic moment in economic history had arrived
when we might expect a constantly improved stand-
ard of living —which is the polar opposite of a
general upward inflation. Presidents and presidential
candidates saw the ultimate abolition of poverty
just beyond the horizon. The famous chicken boiled
in every pot, radios blared in every parlor, bedroom,
and bath, and single-car garages were rapidly going
as much out of fashion as single bathroom apart-
ments. Here and there one could detect weak spots.
Income was unevenly distributed. Certain indus-
tries, like textiles, were having a hard time, and
farmers were steadily losing ground in their ability
to buy industrial products. But these warnings had
nothing to do with inflation as we had known it in
1920 —so everyone clamored for full steam ahead.
Yet we were actually having a special and disas-
trous type of inflation, subtle beyond the ken of a
Yankee President who intimated that “brokers’
loans are not too high” and dangerous beyond the
imagination of his immediate successor. The catas-
trophic reaction proved the point —but only after
the event, and when it was too late.
Curiously enough, in the cruel years from 1929
to 1932, instead of deflating in the full and complete
sense of that word, we entered another and equally
subtle type of special “downward” inflation. It
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


put fifteen million able-bodied workers on the bread
line. Living costs dropped for those favored with
steady incomes—but for the country as a whole
living costs dropped much less rapidly than total
income, with the result that for the people as a
whole the standard of living was even more cur-
tailed than in the inflation of 1920. In other words,
we had a “relative inflation,” a rise in living costs
compared with incomes and wages. So far as the
average citizen was concerned, the results were
quite as disastrous as those from any popularly
recognized form of general upward inflation.
Moreover, as I shall try to show later on, we were
having a special type of inflation that could have
been measured from published facts and figures, as
well as from bread lines and bankruptcies. One
familiar symptom of it was the panic level of bond
prices in the first half of 1932 —not merely of bonds
that had become “bad credit risks” because of
impaired earnings, but also of bonds of unimpaired
credit and unquestioned worth.
By 1936 —contrary to most popular opinion—
we had more nearly achieved a trend of general de-
flation than at any time since the World War. In-
come from all sources was gaining on living costs.
The value of all tangible property was gaining on
total debt. The standard of living was rising accord-
ingly. Yet even in the four years from 1932 to 1936
there was one special type of inflation at work —the
kind that inflates the market value of bonds. The
bond market of 1936 was almost a replica of
the stock market of 1928 and 1929. Moreover, with
THE TYPES OF INFLATION


constant reductions being made in bond interest
rates (through refundings of so-called “callable”
bonds) and in dividends from savings banks and
insurance companies, anyone depending for an
income on bond investments or dividends from
savings banks was compelled to lower his or her
standard of living. The man who had distributed
$50,000 among several savings banks formerly re-
ceived an income of 4 per cent or $2,000 a year.
In 1936 this income had been reduced to 2 per cent,
or only SI,OOO a year. For this particular group,
then, the special type of inflation of 1936 meant
acute distress.
My purpose in reviewing briefly these contrasting
periods is to emphasize in the strongest possible
terms the need of studying and of being able to
measure not only that rare phenomenon, a “general
upward inflation,” but, even more, the several types
of special inflation which accompany nearly every
fluctuation in business. As long as we live under a
private ownership system complicated by debt
(or “credit,” if you prefer a more engaging word)
there will be a constant series of tides of special
inflations, each producing harmful effects on special
groups in the community.
If we could have private ownership without
organized debt, 1 matters might be very different.
But the hard fact is that we are living in a debt
world, and that as long as we maintain this debt
system we shall have alternating forms of inflation
to contend with. Every so often we shall be engulfed
1 See Chapter XIV.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


by several forms at once and go through a true
“general” inflation. But for the year-in and year-
out management of our affairs, it is the special
types we should study with the greatest care. The
job seeker, looking for stability, should avoid jobs
in those industries or occupations which are pros-
perous only because of the special current type of
inflation. The investor should be willing to change
the emphasis on various types of investments ac-
cording to the special type of inflation in progress.
The man running a particular type of business
should know when to expand with confidence, be-
cause some particular inflation tide is favoring him,
or when to contract in anticipation of a reaction.
This leads us_ directly to the concrete matter of
defining the special types of inflation. Later on we
shall look into the ways and means by which the
layman can measure them. But the first task is one
of common-sense definition and grouping.
The most natural method seems to be this: to
consider the special and “absolute” inflation types
from the point of view of the thing they inflate.
We have just seen, for example, that bond prices
were gradually inflated from their low estate in
1932 to their rather dizzy height in 1936. Something
was at work to produce this price inflation. What
was it? Perhaps several forces were at work. What
were they?
At other periods—such as 1917 to 1920, and 1924 to
1929—special forces were at work to raise or inflate
short-term interest rates, forces somewhat different
from those affecting bond prices. What were they?
THE TYPES OP INFLATION


Similarly, we know that the special inflation of
1926 to 1929 brought an enormous rise in common
stock prices, leaving living costs and commodity
prices relatively stable. What were the forces at
work which thus singled out common stocks for
inflationary effect? Common stocks, of course,
merely represent ownership of land, factories, and
going businesses. On the average, it took two and
a quarter times as many dollars to purchase the
going businesses of the country in 1929 as in 1926.
In most cases the individual owner of a business,
whose stock was not listed on any exchange, ex-
perienced a similar rise in the appraisal value of his
business. That is, he could have sold out his business
to another individual in 1929 for two to three times
as much as in 1926. Thus the whole matter was
much broader than the stock market. That particu-
lar inflation was a boost in the dollar value of busi-
nesses owned. WTiat brought it about?
Then, as a fourth special inflation group, we have
the forces that directly stimulate the price of items
entering into the cost of living. W T hat were the
special inflationary forces at work, in such periods
as 1917 to 1920, which made general prices rise?
Here, then, we have four distinct groups of “ab-
solute” inflationary forces:
First, those that increase the market value of
creditor obligations—bonds and notes.
Second, those that raise short-term interest rates.
Third, those that increase the market value of
ownership claims —common stocks and titles
to land or private businesses.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


Fourth, those that raise general prices and living
costs.
At times two or more of these groups are working
at the same instant. At other times there may be
a deflation going on in one group, a flat trend in
another, and an inflationary trend in the others.
The combinations, in the light of history, have al-
most infinite variety. But they can, I believe, be
reduced to sufficiently simple terms to make it pos-
sible to measure them with definite yardsticks ac-
cessible to everyone.
In other words, it is possible at any given time to
take soundings and to report whether or not forces
are at work to raise bond prices or short-term
interest rates, stock prices or living costs, or any
two or three in combination. As I shall explain
in detail later on, the year 1935, for example, com-
bined forces that would normally raise bond prices
with other forces that would normally raise stock
prices, but did not show forces likely to raise living
costs with any violence. It was a combination
superlatively calculated to inspire confidence and
returning hope —regardless of whether or not one
approved, for the long run, all the methods applied
to bring about this result.
Aside from these “absolute” types of inflation,
we have the still more important types (humanly
speaking) of relative inflations. In this book, I am
discussing only three:
First, a growth in total debt compared with wealth.
Second, a growth in interest charges compared
with income.
THE TYPES OF INFLATION


Third, and most important of all, a growth in
living costs compared with income.
All three, of course, are interrelated. Thus we
have, in all, seven kinds of inflation to examine—
four absolute and three relative —and the common-
sense ways of measuring or appraising their extent
and trend. They should provide the layman
with strong defenses against perpetual “calamity
howlers!”
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHAPTER III
Concerning Measuring Tools and
Methods
In speaking of measuring sticks for
the various forms of inflation, a few more words of
advance explanation are demanded. It is in this
very practical matter of measurement that the lay-
man has been pestered by the greatest amount of
fuzzy thinking. What is the nature of the yardsticks
we can use to get practical results ?
As to the actual figures to be used, and their
sources, I have established to my own satisfaction,
at least, and after a long process of trial and error,
that no sets of figures are more significant, nor more
easily available to the layman, than the series of
weekly reports issued by the Federal Reserve Board
in Washington covering banking figures for the
country. They are published in most of the leading
newspapers.
Three main reports of this character are published
weekly. The first is the report of the member banks
of the Federal Reserve System in 101 leading cities.


This by no means includes all the banks of the
country, nor even the total of banks with member-
ship in the Reserve System. But it is a highly rep-
resentative cross section, and a very influential
section, of the country’s banks. This report is issued
every Monday from Washington and is published
in the Tuesday morning newspapers every week.
It gives in detail the condition of these banks as of
the close of business the preceding Wednesday. Thus
the delay between Wednesday evening’s facts and
Tuesday morning’s information on those facts is very
slight. As to why these reports are so revealing of
general conditions, I shall have a great deal more
to say later on.
The second major report (issued on Saturday and
published in the Sunday papers) gives the total
value of checks drawn (or “debits”) against deposit
accounts during the week ending the preceding
Wednesday evening. It covers an ever-increasing
number of cities, but includes, as a continuing series
since 1919, the total for 141 leading cities. These
“bank debits” give us the rate at which bank de-
positors are spending their available funds every
week. In this way we can compare the spending
activity from week to week, from month to month,
or from year to year. In 1929, for example, depositors
in these 141 cities were spending at the rate of
nearly $lB billion a week. In 1932 the weekly spend-
ing rate had dropped to about $6 billion!
The third major report (issued on Thursday and
published in the Friday papers) covers the condition
of each of the twelve Federal Reserve banks, and
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


of the twelve banks combined, and also gives im-
portant related facts, such as the monetary gold
stock of the entire country and the total of currency
in actual circulation. Like the other two reports,
this one also gives the state of affairs as of the pre-
ceding Wednesday evening.
Thus, starting with Friday each week, and ending
Tuesday morning of the following week, we have
full information on the major banks of the country,
on the spending (or “debit”) activity of a large
cross section of the people, and on the operations
of the Federal Reserve System, all as of the same
date —namely, closing time Wednesday. By the
morning of Nov. 10, 1936 (a Tuesday), we knew all
these facts as of the close of business on Wednesday,
Nov. 4.
But what of it? Is there any special reason, ex-
cept during a bank panic, why the average citizen
should be interested in these apparently involved
and technical reports about banks? Isn’t the “psy-
chology” of the people at large much more im-
portant? Don’t the earnings reports of the large
corporations tell a much more practical and vital
story? Unless we believe that money controls every-
thing, why should the layman have more than a
passing acquaintance with the intricate doings of
Federal Reserve and member banks? Or are the
banks supposed to be “the villains in the piece,”
as several lamented agitators of the depression
maintained ?
In general, the answer to all these questions may
be quite emphatic. The banks of the country are
MEASURING TOOLS AND METHODS


the most intimate and accurate registers we have
of the economic condition of the American people
themselves, of the “psychology” of the people, of
the probable trend of business (to appear months
later in corporation reports), of the actions of men
with their money rather than of money upon men.
And far from being the “villains of the piece”
(granting that the banks are only a part of our
much wider “debt system”), the banks are quite
as often the victims of what people do with their
money as the controllers of popular destiny. They
do what they have to do under our present debt
system. Their officers make the same mistakes as
other investors and lenders of money, and have a
somewhat larger responsibility in case their mis-
takes are serious.
Admittedly, the layman in ordinary times has no
very keen interest in the “condition statement” of
our banks as far as that statement concerns the
banks themselves. But every major hank “asset” rep-
resents a public liability. Every bond held in the
investment portfolio of a bank is “owed” by some-
one or some group to that bank —perhaps by the
United States government, on behalf of all the
people, or by a state or city government, on behalf
of all its people, or by a railroad or public utility
or by some industrial concern. Every note held by
the bank represents what some merchant or cor-
poration or individual owes that bank, payable
perhaps on demand or perhaps in three or six
months. The note may be secured by Stock Ex-
change “collateral,” or by a mortgage on a home
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


or a farm, or it may be secured only by the good
faith and high standing of the particular borrower.
But it still represents a debt, and all these debts
put together represent liabilities of the general
public, and show us whether or not the public is
increasing or decreasing its debts at the banks.
In similar fashion, the banks’ major “liability” —
their total of deposits —represents an asset of the
general public. The banks as a group owe to all their
depositors as a group the entire total of their de-
posits. The depositors are the banks’ own creditors.
Thus banking figures take on a fresh and alluring
aspect when we “invert” or turn them “upside down,”
so to speak, and read them as the story of what the
American public is doing—the story of what the
public owes as against what it owns, of what it
spends as against what it accumulates in the banks,
of how much cash currency it uses in daily business
as against the amount of checks used, of how much
gold metal stands back of currency money and
bank deposit money at any given time.
One might ask, of course, how the banks could
tell the story of the millions of people who have no
bank deposit accounts. But the answer is quite
simple, and wholly obvious on second thought. Let
us take the case of a man on “relief.” On a certain
day each week he receives a “relief check.” The
amount of that check is included in the weekly
“debits” report. That is the first way the “reliefer”
figures in the banking story. Then he cashes his
check at some bank, receiving currency and small
change. That transaction appears in the total of
MEASURING TOOLS AND METHODS


currency in circulation for the week. After that he
pays for meat and groceries at a corner store and
puts a quarter in the gas meter to get gas for cook-
ing. The comer store deposits the money received
in its own bank, and the gas company does the same.
Thus from the time the government draws the relief
check on its own deposit account at some bank up
to the time the “reliefer” spends his last nickel for
the week, what he does, in accepting and spending,
appears faithfully in the aggregate banking story
for that week.
Moreover, any change in the amount of money that
the public is using to conduct its business shows up
instantly in these bank reports. This is so important
—as we shall see later on —that it deserves a special
illustration.
Suppose a man has $500,000 on deposit in his bank
and he decides to use this to build a factory. He
plans the factory to cost $450,000, but before it is
finished he finds that it will require his entire $500,-
000. He pays his contractors’ and architect’s and
machinery supply house bills with checks on his bank.
When that is done, his deposits are exhausted —
but the money has not disappeared. It has merely
been transferred to the deposit accounts of the con-
tractors and architect and supply houses. Therefore ,
the total amount of money in use has not changed.
But the factory owner now finds himself in need
of working cash capital in order to start his factory
going. He gives a mortgage to his bank for $200,000
on his completed factory. That gives him a new
deposit credit at his bank of just $200,000. Where
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


did this new money come from? Certainly not from
the other depositors of the bank —because the bank’s
obligations to them remain unchanged. Their depos-
its are not reduced by the amount loaned to the
factory owner. No; the new money is simply an
additional debt owed by the bank to the factory
owner, given in exchange for his mortgage debt to
the bank. An exact total of $200,000 of new bank
deposit money has been created by the transaction.
Put another way, the total money supply of the
country has been increased by $200,000. But what
happens when the factory owner begins to draw
checks on this new deposit? Does the new money
disappear as fast as he draws down on his bank
balance? Certainly not. It is simply transferred to
the deposit accounts of factory workers, raw mate-
rial furnishers, and others.
The “new” money does not disappear until the
day when the factory owner decides to pay off his
mortgage. On that day, let us say, he has $250,000
on deposit, having made and “banked” certain
profits on his operations. He tells the bank to
“charge his deposit account” with the $200,000
necessary to pay off the mortgage. Does the bank
receive the money? No. The bank simply ceases to
owe this man, on its deposit books, $250,000, and
instead simply owes him $50,000. It also cancels his
mortgage debt to the bank. The $200,000 of “new”
money created by the original mortgage loan has
now disappeared. It has been canceled out —and the
total money supply of the country drops back again
by the amount of $200,000.
MEASURING TOOLS AND METHODS


A clear understanding of this method by which
deposit money is increased or curtailed is imperative
to any efforts to measure various kinds of inflation.
Loans by banks increase the total deposit money of
the country, whereas loans by individuals or corpo-
rations do not. If our factory owner had borrowed
the $200,000 from a friend, that friend’s bank de-
posits would have declined by $200,000 and the
factory owner’s deposit would have increased by
exactly the same amount, making no change in the
aggregate of all bank deposits. There would simply
have been a transfer of deposits from one person to
another. Thus, when we study the weekly aggregate
banking reports, and see that bank loans have in-
creased and deposit money has increased by the
same amount, we know just what change there has
been in the total money in use by the public as a
whole, and why. No private loans or transactions
would make any change in that total. The entire
change, if any, is due to the “creation” of deposit
money by the making of loans at the commercial
banks.
In the large sense, of course, we must include in-
vestments by the banks (mostly in bonds) as
“loans.” When a bank buys an outstanding railroad
or government bond, for example, the total money
supply is increased in exactly the same fashion as if
the bank had made a fresh loan to an individual —
because the bank “pays” for the bond by giving its
former owner a new deposit credit equal to the value
of the bond. The bank raises its debts to depositors
by that amount, accepting in exchange the bonded
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


debt of the railroad or government. Whenever the
railroad or government pays off that bond now
owned by the bank, the “new” money created by
its purchase disappears, exactly as when an indi-
vidual loan is paid off. The essential difference be-
tween a bank loan and a bank investment is this —
that a loan means a dollar of new debt for every
dollar of new money created, whereas an investment
in a bond already outstanding creates new money
without adding to the existing total of debt.
Thus the story told by the weekly banking figures
not only reflects most of the economic transactions
of the entire country, of people with bank accounts
as well as of those with no bank accounts, but also
reveals any change in the quantity of money being used
to carry on the country’s business, and whether that
change is due to bank loans or investments, or,
perhaps, to money coming in from abroad.
Because of the great detail of these banking re-
ports, and their subdivision into all types of deposits
and loans and investments, we can tell from the
various combinations of figures just what are the
great changes taking place in our economic life. We
can tell when a shortage of money is developing
compared with the current volume and rate of busi-
ness transactions. We can tell when the country as a
whole is going into debt or out of debt compared
with its total money supply. We can tell how
rapidly money is passing from hand to hand as an
indication of the rate of business activity.
Of all the tools for measuring the forces at work
to inflate this or that group of prices—of bonds, of
MEASURING TOOLS AND METHODS


stocks, or of general cost of living—nothing is com-
parable with the weekly bank reports described
above. Yet the study of them in simple common-
sense terms, for the purpose of revealing these
particular facts, is almost a new science.
It has been said that the sewing machine was
made possible by the simple act of placing the eye
of a needle near the point instead of at the opposite
end. Yet until that “turning upside down” of the
needle was actually made, few people, if any, ever
thought of the possibility. Something of this same
idea applies to the turning upside down of the bank-
ing figures, to make them tell the story of a people.
As we have used them for many decades, they merely
tell the condition of the banks themselves. But
inverted they tell of the condition, the activity, the
sound or false hopes, the confidence or the fear, of
an entire nation. They do not tell the detail of the
millions of daily transactions between people; but
they do tell of the final or net result of those trans-
actions as it affects the people as a whole. Above
all, they tell the “inside” story, so to speak, of the
course of various kinds of inflation and deflation
as they affect the intimate lives of millions.
There are, of course, other measuring tools besides
the weekly bank reports. But most of them, like the
excellent studies and estimates of the National In-
dustrial Conference Board on costs of government,
costs of living, national income, and private debt,
appear rather too long after the events to make them
of great current value. They are helpful chiefly in
attempts to gain a long perspective of the years, or
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


as scientific estimates of many factors on which we
still have little current information. Many such
reports and estimates are mentioned or used in the
following chapters, but only where a long backward
look seems worth while. For current, up-to-the-
minute appraisals of what is going on, and for ap-
praisals which any layman can make for himself
from week to week or month to month, the banking
figures must remain the unexcelled tools for practical
measurement.
As to measuring “methods,” we have what is
called an “index.” The name alone seems to
frighten many people—but for no good reason.
Most of us, whether we know it or not, think in
index terms. The housewife who says that a loaf
of bread costs a cent more this year than last is
perilously close to talking in index terms. That is,
she is comparing a price of today with a price of
yesterday. If, instead of saying that bread is now
eleven cents compared with ten cents last year, she
were to say that bread is now 10 per cent higher than
last year, she would actually be talking and thinking
in index terms.
Thus the formidable weapon of the economists —
the “index” —reduces itself to a simple statement of
the percentage change between one date and some
other date. It may be a change in price (as for a loaf
of bread), or a change in rate of activity (as in the
number of daily round trips made by a delivery
truck), or a change in quantity (as in number of
bushels of wheat). The important point is that an
index simply registers percentage change as com-
MEASURING TOOLS AND METHODS


pared with some given date. The date used for
comparison is said to represent 100. If the next date
on which measurements are taken shows a 10 per
cent rise, then the index for this new date is said to
be 110; if a drop of 10 per cent occurs, then the
index for the new date is said to be 90; and so on.
An index is thus a useful measuring stick when-
ever we want to compare such things as price
changes or quantity changes over a long period of
years. Thus, if we say that the index of best grade
bond prices, compared with 1926 as 100, now stands
at 130, we simply mean that the average price of
high-grade bonds today is 30 per cent higher than
it was in 1926. But there are several points which
everyone should understand clearly about “in-
dexes.” Otherwise they can be very misleading.
The first point to remember is this: an index has
nothing to do with the idea of “normal” or “ab-
normal.” Many people, when they see that some
index uses 1926 as 100, assume at once that 1926
must have been considered a “normal” year.
Nothing could be more misleading. It makes no
difference what year is used as 100. It might be the
most abnormal year of the century, but it would
still serve as a perfectly good measure of percentage
change over following years. Because of the im-
portance of this point, and the gross misunder-
standings concerning it, let me give an example,
using three different years.
Suppose that wheat was $2 a bushel in 1920, $1 a
bushel in 1926, and 50 cents a bushel in 1932. If we
were taking 1926 as the “hundred year” for an
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


index, we would then say that the index figure for
1920 was 200, the figure for 1926 just 100, and the
figure for 1932 exactly 50.
But suppose we took 1920 as the “hundred year.”
Then the new index figures would be 100 for 1920,
50 for 1926, 25 for 1932. Now, in the second index,
25 for 1932 is just one-quarter of 100 for 1920. But
the first index showed exactly the same relationship.
In other words, 50 for 1932 was also just one-quarter
of the 200 figure for 1920. In both cases, the figure
for 1926 is one-half the figure for 1920 and twice the
figure for 1932. Thus, no matter what year we
select as 100, the relationship between all the other
years remains unchanged. The year we select as
100 is, of course, our “norm” or standard of meas-
urement, but that is very different from considering
it as “normal” in the sense of usual or average or
unexceptional.
The next point to remember about an index is
this: it enables us to compare, so to speak, apples
and peanuts and dollars. If, for example, we take
1926 as our “hundred year” for both population
and bank deposits, we can directly compare the
percentage growth in bank deposits without having
to measure separately each year the dollars of bank
deposits per person. Suppose that bank deposits
remain at 100 for several years while the index of
population rises to 110. Then we know that for
every dollar per person in the banks in 1926 there
are now only 91 cents per person. 1 This process is
1 We divide the index of bank deposits (100) by the index of popula-
tion (110) and by simple arithmetic get the answer —91.
MEASURING TOOLS AND METHODS


called “taking the ratio” (or percentage com-
parison) between two indexes. It is particularly
useful when we want to compare changes as between
articles measured in different ways —such as the in-
crease in bushels of wheat and the increase in quarts
of milk. If it sounds at all complicated in theory, it
at least becomes simple and helpful in practice.
But the most important point of all to remember
about an index is that, standing alone and by itself,
it can lead to any number of absurd and misleading
conclusions. The very purpose of an index, for
intelligent people, is to make possible comparisons
with other related factors —as I have shown above
in the case of bank: deposits and population. Here
is a man, for example, who owed debts of $5,000
when he was thirty years old and debts of SIO,OOO
when he was forty. If we take his thirtieth year as
100, then his index of debt at forty has risen to 200.
The simple conclusion seems to be that he is twice
as much in debt. But is that in any sense the prac-
tical conclusion? Certainly not. We need as a
practical yardstick another index —the index of his
wealth in both those years.. It now turns out that in
his thirtieth year (100) he owned property valued at
SIO,OOO, whereas in his fortieth year he owned
property valued at $40,000. In other words, his
index of wealth rose to 400 —or four times what it
was ten years earlier. At thirty, his debts equaled
one-half his property wealth, but at forty his debts
were only one-quarter of his property wealth. He
was less in debt at forty, compared with his wealth,
than he was at thirty.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


How would we express this in a ratio or com-
parison of his debt index to his wealth index? At
thirty, with both index figures standing at 100, the
index of his “debt to wealth ratio” would also
stand at 100. But at forty, with his debt index at 200
and his wealth index at 400, the result of dividing
200 by 400 would give us an index figure of 50. In
other words, his debts were 50 per cent smaller com-
pared with his wealth than when he was thirty years
old. It amounts to exactly the same thing as saying
that his debts at thirty were half his wealth whereas
at forty they were only a quarter of his wealth.
In discussing the common-sense measures of the
various types of inflation in the following chapters,
I have avoided the use of index figures wherever
possible, because I realize that in spite of their
actual simplicity they are likely to prove puzzling
to the layman who is not used to them. I have much
preferred to make direct comparisons in figures—as,
for example, to say that combined ascertainable
debt of this country dropped $3.6 billion between
1930 and 1936, instead of saying that the index of
this combined debt dropped from 100 to 97.6.
Nevertheless, when making comparisons over long
series of years, or when comparing one depression
or inflation with another, the index method is useful
and illuminating and I have not hesitated to use it,
whenever it helps to clarify rather than cloud an
important point.
The main thing to remember is that whenever
we are measuring economic conditions for practical
reasons—because they affect our lives and our plans
MEASURING TOOLS AND METHODS


intimately—we can never afford to draw any con-
clusions from simple comparisons with a given year.
That is one of the great fallacies in much of the
popular economic writing, and one reason why
the layman is forced so often to “howl his distress at
the moon.” Every single economic fact is always
related to some other equally important fact —and
the practical man’s job is to measure the relation-
ship between the two!
We can never use a fixed yardstick—such as the
state of some one fact in a given year —without
running the risk of reaching the most absurd and
often damaging conclusions. Thus, if we are afraid
of currency inflation, we might be greatly alarmed
by a rise of several hundred millions in outstanding
currency. But if we compare the currency with the
gold stock back of that currency, we may find that
gold has increased by even more millions than the
currency itself —that today’s larger total of paper
money has a greater gold backing per dollar than
yesterday’s smaller total. This is only one isolated
example of the layman’s measuring methods pre-
sented in the following chapters. They are all
methods of relating one significant fact to another,
or to a whole group of other facts. From these
methods the layman can hope to make sense out of
the welter of opinions of which he is usually the
victim.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHAPTER IV
The Meaning of Bond Price Inflation
There are some $l3O billion of
bonds and equivalent notes outstanding in the
United States. In 1936 the Federal debt accounted
for $34 billion, the debts of states, counties, cities,
and towns accounted for another $19.6 billion, with
the balance made up of so-called private long-term
debt, that is, bonds of railroads, public utilities,
manufacturing concerns, real estate enterprises, and
mortgages owed to banks and institutions.
Not all of these bonds represent so-called “good
credit risks.” The total includes many million
dollars’ worth of bonds of debtors who are extremely
hard pressed, even in the best of times, to meet the
annual interest charges. But there are also in the
total many billions representing almost “riskless”
investments. The owners of them are never seriously
in doubt about receiving the interest payments
regularly, nor about receiving the original principal
back at the due date or maturity. Yet both classes
of bonds, good and poor, go up and down in market


Low 1932
High 1936
Per cent
increase
76
122
+60.5
+54.5
75
116
value, and because their market price range is so
wide, these price movements are of the utmost
concern to all bondholders, and to all depositors or
policyholders in institutions which are heavy in-
vestors in bonds.
To give a clear idea of the importance of bond
prices to many millions of people—to small in-
vestors, large estates, depositors in commercial and
savings banks, and owners of insurance policies—
suppose we take the changes in market value over a
short period of two very highly regarded railroad
bonds, the Norfolk & Western Consolidated 4 per
cent bonds, due in 1996, and the Atchison, Topeka
& Santa Fe General Mortgage 4 per cent bonds, due
in 1995. The earnings of both railroads for many
long years, and right through the recent depression,
have been ample to assure regular payment of
interest on these particular bonds. For those
interested in finer points, the Norfolk & Western
bonds were and are superior in grade to the Atchi-
sons. But in a general way both receive the highest
grade “rating” and are in great favor with expert
investing institutions. They are so-called “triple A”
bonds. Yet what price fluctuation did they show
between the low points of 1932 and the high points
of 1936? Here is the record, in round figures:
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


In other words, if we suppose that a savings bank
in 1932, with $100,000,000 of deposits, and assets of
$110,000,000 (giving a surplus of $10,000,000), had
invested 20 per cent of its assets at that time in
Norfolk & Western bonds, that investment by
1936 would have shown a 60.5 per cent profit. What
would this have meant in dollars and in improve-
ment of surplus for the protection of depositors?
The original investment (20 per cent of sllO
million) would have been $22 million. The profit in
market value within four years would have been
approximately sl3 million. Thus, if we assume no
increase in deposits, the bank by 1936 would have
had a surplus at market value, over and above the
SIOO million owed depositors, of $23 million instead
of the $lO million of 1932. This is an increase of
130 per cent in the size of the surplus, and represents
an enormous increase in the safety of every deposit
made in the bank. The bank in 1936 would have had
assets of $123 for every SIOO owed depositors, com-
pared with only sllO in 1932.
The same idea would have applied to an insurance
company and its surplus. Yet this represents the
effect of an investment in highest grade bonds only;
in other words, in the type of long-term bonds with
the narrowest range of price change.
Bonds of medium grades (but still of the type
considered suitable for savings bank and trust in-
vestments) had a much greater price rise in this
four-year period. Some of the General Mortgage
bonds of the Pennsylvania Railroad, for example,
showed price increases of 120 per cent —that is, a
THE MEANING OP BOND PRICE INFLATION


rise from about 50 to 110. It is safe to say that the
“mixed” bond portfolios of savings banks in the
SIOO million deposit class showed average increases
of over 70 per cent in the four-year period. That is,
total investments at market value in 1932 of about
S3O million showed increases of between S2O million
and $22 million, thus adding incredibly to the
strength of those institutions and the confidence of
their millions of depositors.
The question of bond prices, and of forces that
increase or inflate those prices, is thus of paramount
importance to everyone who has a bank deposit, an
insurance policy, personal bond investments, or an
interest in a trust estate. It is not a rich man’s prob-
lem alone, hut a problem intimately affecting twenty
to thirty million individuals and nearly every family
in the country.
But, unfortunately, the bond problem is not a
simple one of market price only. It is complicated
somewhat by the question of income received. As
this is a sore puzzle to many people, it is well worth
explaining in simple terms, without the many minor
refinements that simply confuse the main points.
The whole reason for the change in market price
of “riskless” bonds depends on the current interest
rates: in other words, on the income which investors
expect or want from a given investment of principal.
Unless we understand this quite plainly, the market
prices of bonds would remain a perpetual mystery —
in spite of their vast importance to all of us. Sup-
pose, then, we illustrate the matter by discussing an
imaginary highest grade bond —a bond with a 4 per
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


cent coupon rate, due in twenty years from the date
of purchase. We shall simply call this “the Bond.”
What happens to us in the matter of income if we
buy that bond at a market price of 80 ? The following
statement shows the facts in detail:
1. We pay for the Bond $ 800
2. We plan to hold it until it is paid off at “maturity” in 20
years. At that time we shall receive in cash 1,000
3. Thus we receive, as part of our income, the difference
between what we paid and what we receive 20 years later,
or $ 200
4. We also receive each year for 20 years interest at the rate
of 4 per cent on the SI,OOO face value of the bond, or S4O
a year, making a total in 20 years of 800
5. This makes our total income over the 20 year period the
sum of (3) and (4) above, or SI,OOO
6. If we divide this total income of SI,OOO by 20 years, we
find that our average income per year has been 50
7. But since we paid only SBOO for the Bond, an average
income of SSO a year represents an income return on an
investment of SBOO (figured in percentage) of 6.25%
In contrast to this highly favorable picture for
the investor, suppose that when we buy our twenty-
year bond, it is selling not at 80 (as it might have
sold in 1932) but at 110 (as it would probably have
sold in 1936). Then what would our income be,
both in dollars and in percentage, or rate, on our
original investment? Again, we can show the facts
in a simple table of events, as shown on page 46.
Thus, the identical bond, always with highest
possible security, selling at 80 would show us an
average real income of 6.25 per cent, whereas if
selling at 110, it would show us an income of only
THE MEANING OF BOND PRICE INFLATION


3.18 per cent, in both cases figured in percentage of
the actual dollars paid for the Bond. In dollars re-
ceived per year, there would be the difference be-
tween SSO and $35. But suppose that, in both cases,
we had the exact sum of SIIO,OOO to invest. Then,
with the bond selling at 80, we could buy 137
bonds, with a little cash left over, and at SSO a year
1. We pay for the Bond $l,lOO
2. We plan to hold it until it is paid off at “maturity” in 20
years. At that time we shall receive in cash 1,000
3. Thus we must deduct from our total income received the
difference between what we paid and what we receive 20
years later, or a loss of $ 100
4. We receive in cash, however, for 20 years, interest at the
rate of 4 per cent on the SI,OOO face value of the bond, or
S4O a year, totaling in 20 years 800
5. This makes our real income over the 20 year period the
difference between (4) and (3) above, or only $ 700
6. If we divide this actual income of S7OO by 20 years, we
find that our average income per year would be 0n1y.... 35
7. And since we paid $l,lOO for the Bond, an average income
of only $35 a year represents an income return on an in-
vestment of-$l,lOO (figured in percentage) of only 3.18%
on each bond, our average annual income would be
$6,850; whereas with the Bond selling at sllO, we
could buy only 100 bonds, and our average annual
income would be only $3,500 —or nearly 49 per cent
less. In round figures, on a given sum of money to
invest, we could get only about half the income from
a twenty-year bond selling at 110 that we could get
from the same bond selling at 80.
This is a reasonable and fair illustration of what
happens to the income opportunities of individuals
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


and institutions when the market price of bonds
is shoved upward or “inflated.” It is quite unneces-
sary to remember all the details of these two exam-
ples. But in all discussions of what inflates or deflates
the prices of bonds, we can keep in mind the general
point that high bond prices mean a lower percentage
rate of return to the investor, and that low bond
prices mean a higher rate of return; that as prices
go up, the income rate goes down. The point of the
illustration chosen above is simply to show that the
rate of income on a given sum to be invested changes
even more violently than the market 'price of the bonds.
In this case, a rise of slightly over 37 per cent in
market price means approximately a 49 per cent
cut in income on a given sum to be invested. Like-
wise, we might add, a drop of slightly over 27 per
cent in price (from 110 back to 80) would mean
almost a doubling of the income to be obtained on a
given investment sum. 1
Thus when investors as a whole are insistent on
getting a high rate of return on their bond invest-
ments they refuse to pay high prices for even the
best grade bonds, and also whenever the investors
are willing to accept a low rate of return they are
willing to pay a high price for bonds. The practiced
investor uses what is called a “yield” table or book,
which shows him at a glance just what percentage
1 It seems quite unnecessary to complicate this general statement
of bond income and bond prices by showing the differences involved
in longer and shorter maturity periods, or by discussing income in
terms of “net yield,” etc. The intricate problems of bond portfolio
management would only confuse the main issue, which, by itself, is
fairly simple.
THE MEANING OF BOND PRICE INFLATION


return he will get on a given bond at a given price.
But this is not the concern of the layman. What he
wants to know is simply the broad principle that
the general level of bond prices depends directly on
the percentage rate of income which investors in the
mass insist on getting at any given time.
If, for any combination of reasons, investors in-
sist on getting 6 per cent or better, then bond prices
will be low, and the price of the very best bonds will
be affected as well as the price of medium- or low-
grade bonds. If, for a different combination of rea-
sons, the investors are willing or glad to get as low
as 3.5 per cent on their money, then bond prices
will be high. This means that, if we are to attempt
to measure those factors that increase or inflate
bond prices, we must look to those factors that
would make investors willing to take a low income
return. If we can measure those factors from easily
available figures, then we are on the road to a
common-sense understanding of what makes a
“bond inflation.”
Before we take up the layman’s ways and means
of measuring the factors beneath bond inflations
and deflations, a quick glance at the history of bond
prices would help to give a sound perspective. Chart
2 shows the course of high-grade bond prices since
the Civil War. Even a casual glance at it reveals
this notable fact: that since the introduction of
our Federal Reserve System, and the wide use of
that system for the financing of the World War, the
movements of bond prices have been much more
abrupt than in the earlier decades. From the low
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHART 2.— A composite o f factors derived from bank reports (adjusted for long-term trend), compared with 70 years o f bond
price fluctuations. (Reproduced by Permission of Pell, Kip and Skinner, Inc.)


bond prices immediately after the Civil War to the
very high bond prices of 1899, the rise was a gradual
and orderly affair. Even the panics of 1884 and
1893 hardly interrupted the main trend. Moreover,
in broad perspective, the decline of bond prices
from 1900 to 1916 was barely perceptible to those
living in the period. But from 1916 on, right up to
1936, we had twenty years of more or less violent
fluctuation.
In the four short years from 1916 to 1920, bond
prices lost all the ground built up in the thirteen
years from 1874 to 1887.
From 1920 to the first quarter of 1928, there was
a reasonably sustained rise, followed by a mild de-
cline to the date of the 1929 stock market crash.
But even in 1929, bond prices remained well above
the level of the nine-year period from 1917 to 1926.
In other words, 1929 was in no sense a year of bond
panic, and by midyear of 1931 bonds had risen to
the highest prices since our entry into the World
War.
Then came an abrupt crash. It carried the very
highest grade bonds back to the levels of 1922 —a
price drop of nearly 20 per cent in less than a year.
Bonds of companies whose earnings had been shat-
tered by the depression went to new low ground for
the twentieth century.
After this came the most astonishing spectacle of
the whole seventy years since the Civil War —a
four-year rise bringing all high-grade bond prices
back to the dizzy heights of 1899. In our earlier
history it had taken twenty years to bring about
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


such a phenomenal rise. Under present conditions,
it took only one-fifth of that time.
Naturally, everyone began to ask the same ques-
tion at the same time: if bonds could rise nearly
60 per cent in four short years, wasn’t it possible
that they could fall in an equally short period under
the new conditions? In other words, if the gradual
decline from 1900 to 1920 took twenty years to
work itself out under former conditions, might not a
similar decline take only four or five years under
conditions of 1936?
This question, of course, is unanswerable. But it
does point to the imperative need for methods of
carefully measuring conditions as they develop.
Now that we seem to be in a period of abrupt
changes in bond trends, wholly unlike the more
sedate earlier decades, the need of being guided by
facts rather than guesswork is three to four times as
great as before —not only for individuals but also
for institutions, and especially those that are re-
sponsible for the accumulated savings of millions
of people.
The year 1936 closed with general nervousness
among important investors as to the future of
bond prices. They recognized that the bond prices
of 1936 could properly be compared to the stock
prices of 1929 as representing an inflated position.
Should they sell high-priced bonds, consolidate the
spectacular paper profits made since 1932, and await
a more reasonable price level for permanent long-
term investment? Or were conditions such as to
justify high bond prices for a long period to come?
THE MEANING OF BOND PRICE INFLATION


Institutions were plagued with the problem of what
investment to make of new funds —of new savings
deposits, and new insurance premiums.
The professional prophets and seers were in sharp
disagreement. One well-known university economist
was predicting rising interest rates and lowering
bond prices because of the probable rise in com-
modity prices. He professed to see a close relation-
ship between commodity prices and interest rates.
Another economist was predicting a long plateau
ahead of low investment interest rates and continued
high bond prices. With the experts in disagreement,
what were the investors to do? Perhaps the institu-
tions were remembering the conflicting advice of
early 1934 which led many of them to forsake the
high-grade long-term bond market just before it
began its most spectacular rise. At all events, con-
fusion prevailed in high quarters and in low.
Now, as I have said before, the accurate measure-
ment of current conditions, like a look at the barom-
eter, the thermometer, and the sky overhead, does
not enable anyone to be a long-term forecaster. But
it does permit one to follow his nose intelligently
and to know what is going on here and now. The
measurements suggested in the next chapters for
analyzing the current forces at work on bond prices
are necessarily rough. They do not compare in
sensitivity and accuracy, for example, with the
“Measure of Money Supply” shown on the chart
on page 49 (Chart 2). But that measure is one re-
quiring the most careful and precise handling of
complex statistics, and is hardly suitable for use by
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


the inquiring and interested layman. It is quite
as common sense in principle as are the broader
measurements we are now going to discuss, but it
demands many intricate calculations far beyond
the scope and purpose of this book. What we are
chiefly interested in, for present purposes, is a way
of using facts published in every important news-
paper to determine in a broad way whether or not
we are in a period of bond price inflation.
One more word of explanation. Since rising bond
prices are the opposite of declining interest rates,
we can describe a period of bond price inflation with
equal accuracy by calling it a period of investment
interest rate deflation. They are merely opposite
aspects of the same thing.
THE MEANING OF BOND PRICE INFLATION


CHAPTER V
How to Measure Bond Price Inflation
The best way to approach any eco-
nomic measuring system is usually somewhat like
the work of a detective. In other words, we are
dealing with the actions of human beings and our
search is for the logical motives for those actions.
If we can discover the motive that might determine
an investor to pay higher and higher prices for
bonds, and to accept a lower and lower rate of re-
turn on his money, we are well on our way toward
finding how we can measure the forces behind his
motive.
For example, the man who just manages in a
given year to save SI,OOO for investment has a
strong motive to make that SI,OOO earn for him the
highest possible safe return. He is accustomed, let
us say, to living on $4,000 a year. Over a period of
years he would like to save and invest enough money
to give him a retirement income of $2,000. If he
can get SSO (or 5 per cent) on every SI,OOO he saves
and invests, he will have his $2,000 of income as


soon as he has saved and invested $40,000. But if
he can get only S4O (or 4 per cent), then he must
save and invest $50,000. That would mean fifty
years of saving and investing. Having comparatively
little money, he wants it to work for him to his best
possible advantage.
But let us suppose that he suddenly becomes quite
successful in business, so that he can save $5,000
a year. To be sure, he now wants $4,000 a year as
retirement income. But, even so, he could save
enough, invested at 4 per cent, to bring him the
desired income by only twenty years of saving and
investing. This is a big improvement over fifty
years. For this reason, he is less urgent in seeking
a 5 per cent investment rate. In brief, the more
money he has, the less pressure he is under to look
for high return. The bond salesman who once had
great difficulty in making him buy anything less
than a 5 per cent bond now finds him quite affable
at the prospect of 4 per cent. In one case, the scar-
city of his investment money gave him the motive for
insisting on a high return. In the other case, ample
investment money gave him a motive for accepting a
lower return. Translated into larger terms, whenever
there is a rising tide of money seeking investment,
the motive for accepting a general lowering of in-
terest rates is on the increase.
But this is only one side of the picture —the
lender’s. How about the borrower? A borrower is
usually motivated by one of two contrasting reasons.
Either he sees a chance in business to make more on
a given sum of money than the interest he must pay
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


to borrow that money, or else he is in dire need of
money to keep his business going at all and is
willing and eager to pay in interest even the entire
amount the new money will make for him. He is
fearful of only one thing —of being forced out of
business by lack of current funds. “Keeping going,”
in hope of a better future, is more important than
making a profit here and now.
But unless he hopes to make money on “other
people’s money” or must have more money to keep
going at all, the average man simply does not borrow
money, and prefers to work with his own capital.
Again translating this into larger terms, when busi-
ness in general is earning high profits, the motive
for borrowing increases. When business in general is
threatened with bankruptcy for lack of current
funds, the motive for paying high interest increases.
When general business is earning only modest profits,
borrowing demand slackens.
Thus the interest rate, as we can readily see, is
not determined by one factor alone —such as the
amount of money seeking investment —but by two
factors, the motives of the borrowers and the motives
of the lenders at any given time. There may be a
rising tide of money to invest and, at the same time,
a rising demand from borrowers for the use of “other
people’s money.” If the supply and demand just
about keep pace with each other, it is common sense
to assume that the prevailing interest rate will not
change violently and that bond prices will remain
fairly stable.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


On the other hand, there may be a sudden curtail-
ment of money seeking investment at the very time
that bad business conditions make it imperative for
business concerns to borrow, at any price, in order
to keep going. In this case the lenders have a motive
to make every available investment dollar earn the
maximum interest for them, and the borrowers have
every incentive to pay whatever interest is asked
in order merely to keep above water. In such periods
it would take no wizard to see that interest rates
would rise rapidly and bring about a heavy fall in
bond prices.
In still another period we might have business at
large making modest profits —but not enough to
make large further borrowing a profitable operation
—and coincident with this a formidable rise in the
amount of money seeking investment. With this
increased supply in lenders’ hands and this curtailed
demand from borrowers, the natural conclusion
would be a marked lowering of interest rates and a
sharp rise in bond prices.
Here then we have three distinct combinations of
supply and demand:
The first more or less typical of the period from
1922 to 1928 (large business profits and increasing
investment funds).
The second typical of 1931 and 1932 (necessitous
borrowing coming at a time of diminishing invest-
ment funds).
The third typical of the period from 1934 to
1936.
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


The first showed fairly stable bond prices, at an
investment rate running from 4 to 4.5 per cent. The
second showed an investment rate sharply rising
to between 5 and 6 per cent. The third period showed
steeply rising bond prices, with the investment rate
dropping from 5 to about 3.25 per cent and even
lower. We know this from the delightful advantage
of hindsight. But how could we have diagnosed the
conditions while they were actually developing?
For example, when bond prices began an almost
vertical drop in July and August of 1931, how could
we have told, from current facts, that they were
likely to continue dropping until basic conditions
altered? Or, when bond prices had begun to rise
gently in early 1934, how could we have told
that they were likely to continue their rise until
basic conditions gave some warning signal of a re-
versal of motives of either lenders or borrowers or
both?
These are not academic questions. Even the most
experienced investors made serious mistakes in
those very periods. The mistakes of the second half
of 1931 helped eventually to bring on the Bank
Holiday. The mistakes of 1934 helped to exaggerate
the reductions in dividends by banks and insurance
companies. These mistakes were repeated in thou-
sands of individual cases of investors from one end
of the country to the other. How can the individual
measure the underlying facts for himself?
This brings us to the concrete problems of how
to use the banking figures to tell us exactly what is
going on. How, for example, can we determine
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


when the money available for investment is rising,
and how can we determine whether or not the de-
mand for the use of money is mounting as rapidly
as the supply of money?
I am going to describe first of all a very simple
broad measure of supply compared to demand —
namely, total bank deposits (considered as supply),
compared with total hank loans plus total Federal
government securities held by the banks (considered
as demand).
The accompanying chart (3) shows on the upper
line an index (see pages 35 to 39) of high-grade
bond prices since 1919, and on the second line an
index of the supply-demand ratio of total deposits
to combined loans and government securities held
by the reporting banks.
Even the most casual glance at the two indexes
shows, in a broad way, how bond prices have moved
up as the supply-demand ratio has moved up, and
how bond prices have declined as the supply of
money grew less compared with the demand for
its use. In these indexes the average price for bonds
in 1926 is considered as 100, and the ratio of sup-
ply to demand in 1926 (actually 119.3 per cent)
is also considered as 100.
As I have explained before (see page 36), this
does not mean that 1926 was necessarily a “normal”
year in the sense of usual. It merely means that
1926 is used as a base year, or measuring year, for
both indexes, so that the percentage changes in
both of them as between 1926 and any other year
can be directly compared. In the language of school-
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


CHART 3.—Suggested measures compared with bond prices since 1919.


book arithmetic, the year 1926 is used as the “com-
mon denominator.”
It is quite evident from the chart that some close
relationship exists between any marked increase in
this supply-demand measurement and an increase
or inflation in bond prices. But it is worth while
asking just why this particular measure should give
as close a comparison as it does to bond price trends.
Suppose we examine the factors used. What do
they mean, either in terms of mass psychology or in
terms of men and money as we know them?
First of all, the total bank deposits obviously rep-
resent the major money resources of the entire
people. Practically the only way they can pay for
bonds they may want to buy is by drawing a check
on their bank deposits. On the other hand, they
must reserve some of their money to pay off their
bank loans in case of necessity. These bank loans
represent money which they have needed in the
past or may still need, and the deposit money
created by those loans (see pages 30-32) is the
necessary offset to the borrowed money if the public
is to remain solvent.
To a large extent, the same is true of government
securities. The government borrows money from
the banks by selling its bonds to the banks only
when the entire public, represented by the govern-
ment, has need of more money. The entire public,
collectively, owes the total of the government debt
to the banks, and the entire public, as a group of
individuals, also owes the sum total of direct loans
granted by the banks.
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


But if the sum total of all business and interna-
tional transactions results in deposits climbing
faster in proportion than the combined public and
private demand for bank credit, then the public is,
of course, gaining in bank resources faster than it
is going into debt, and has left over a greater margin
of free and clear money to put out at interest. For
the moment we do not have to be concerned with
how this comes about. It is quite enough, for prac-
tical purposes of measurement, that it does come
about at certain periods, and that when it comes
about there is a marked tendency for investment
interest rates to go lower, and for bond prices to go
higher, or inflate.
It is important to remember that for the time
being we are discussing measures of conditions af-
fecting not all kinds of interest rates, but primarily
that one kind called the “investment interest rate.”
It is the investment rate that affects bond prices.
There are certain other types of lending on which
the interest rate can rise violently without seriously
affecting the investment rate or bond prices. Let
me illustrate this with a few historical examples.
In the panic of 1893 the interest rate on short-
term bank loans, and especially on demand or “call ”
loans backed by security collateral, shot to unbe-
lievable heights. As early as 1890 “call money”
topped 40 per cent. The year 1893 itself brought
full panic, with gold reserves precariously low, many
bank failures, the use of clearing-house certificates
as currency, and more than 140 railroad receiver-
ships. But what happened to high-grade bond
prices? They did decline slightly from the middle
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


of 1889 to the final crisis in August, 1893. But even
during the latter month they remained considerably
higher than, let us say, the bond prices of 1926!
For only three short periods from 1914 to 1931
did high-grade bond prices touch a higher point than
at the height of the panic of 1893!
Something of the same sort happened in the
panic of 1884, with phenomenal rates being paid
for short-term loans while bond prices remained
reasonably stable. Neither in 1884 nor in 1893 did
the investment interest rate rise to anything ap-
proaching its figure for 1920 and 1921, nor for the
summer of 1932.
Obviously, then, different factors are often at
work as between investment rates and the rates on
short-term loans. For the moment, we are discuss-
ing only those factors measuring forces which pri-
marily raise or lower the interest rate on long-term
investment bonds.
The first measure, described above (namely, the
ratio of total deposits to bank loans plus govern-
ment securities held by the banks), shows a fairly
close correspondence in the last two decades with
the movement of long-term bond prices—not so
close as the much more complicated measure shown
on Chart 2, but quite close enough to help the lay-
man in appraising current conditions for himself,
and to prevent his being misled by every wave of
hysteria, such as the one which gripped so many
investors in early 1934.
This measure (as shown in the chart) was rising
steadily uphill throughout 1934, indicating that
the public’s supply of funds for investment was
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


rapidly gaining ground compared with credit de-
mands on the banks, including even the borrowing
demands of the Federal government.
But there is a second measure, equally simple,
which the layman can make up from his daily news-
paper, to serve as a check on the first. This one is
taken from the weekly report on the condition of
the twelve Federal Reserve banks combined. It is
the ratio, or comparison, between the money de-
posited in the Federal Reserve by the member banks
of the system, and the total credit being extended by
the Federal Reserve banks.
The leading banks of the country are members of
the Federal Reserve System. In fact, they are the
main stockholders and owners of the Federal Re-
serve. Under the law they must carry deposits of
their own with the Federal Reserve banks, forming
a sort of central pool as a reserve fund against their
own liability to their own depositors. The amount
of that obligatory reserve fund varies from time to
time, and has lately been increased. But for many
years, the member banks were required, on the
average, to maintain deposits with the Federal equal
to about 8 per cent of the public’s deposits with the
member banks themselves. In emergencies, the
Federal can turn around and lend funds to the mem-
ber banks, and at all times can, under law, provide
them with their currency needs. 1
When the member bank deposits at the Federal
are high, and when the Federal is not making many
1 This is obviously a loose and inaccurate description of the Federal
Reserve System, but quite adequate for present purposes of the
financial layman.
64


loans to individual member banks, it is obvious
that quite a margin of funds piles up which the
Federal can use for investments of its own. These
investments usually take the form of Federal gov-
ernment bonds or notes or other evidences of in-
debtness. In short, the Federal is a banker’s bank,
and makes loans and investments like any other
bank, but only recently and on a small scale has it
come in touch with the public at large. Yet because
of its key position, what it does in the way of making
loans or investments has considerable influence on
interest rates.
As in the case of the member banks, when de-
posits at the Federal rise faster than the use of those
deposits in various lending or investing operations,
we can say that the supply of funds at the Federal
is gaining on demands for credit.
How do these two measures compare or “check”
on each other —the first taken from the member
bank report and the second from the Federal Re-
serve report?
Both the member bank measure and the Federal
Reserve measure are shown on Chart 3 on page 60,
with the course of bond prices charted directly
above them. 1 With two such measures as a guide,
what would the layman have determined for himself,
let us say, in early 1934? Would he have shared
the panicky feeling of some of the big banks as to
the future of high-grade bond prices? Or would he
have said to himself that with both measures of
l As the movements in the Federal measure are much more vio-
lent in extent than the other, it is plotted on the chart in a different
scale.
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


supply to demand rising sharply, the chances
favored higher rather than lower bond prices—at
least until some reversal of basic conditions ap-
peared in the weekly reports?
And what would he have said during the period
of declining bond prices from July to September of
1934? At this time, the Director of the Federal
Budget had come to a sharp disagreement with the
administration over continued deficits. In due
course he resigned. Again some of the banks and
large investing institutions showed signs of jitters.
Was government credit about to decline? Had high
bond prices passed their peak?
During these two critical months, a high-grade
bond, such as an Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Gen-
eral 4of 1995, fell from 105 to about 98 —a drop of
nearly 7 per cent. But what did the layman’s two
supply-demand measures show? Both had been ris-
ing and continued to rise right during this two
months’ baby crisis. Common sense, then, pointed
to the purely temporary character of the bond
decline—a decline based on rumors and vague fears
rather than measurable facts.
Subsequent events, of course, fully justified this
common-sense conclusion. Bond prices resumed
their rise after September, and the Atchison bonds,
to take only one example, eventually reached a
price of over 115. Any institution that had sold its
Atchisons in a fit of nerves in September would
have lost an ultimate gain of over 17 per cent —that
is, a gain of $17,000 for each hundred bonds. Since
many institutions hold blocks of a thousand or more
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


bonds of the Atchison type ($1,000,000 at par
value) the ultimate losses from failure to measure
basic facts would have amounted to $170,000 from
each such block sold. We might well ask, therefore,
what is the price of guesswork and volatile opinion
as against simple measurement of facts and some
confidence in the old-fashioned law of supply and
demand ?
Of course, no measures are perfect. That is why
I have placed both the suggested measures in direct
comparison on Chart 3 with the high-grade bond
market itself — to show the imperfections as well as
the helpful indications.
Even a casual glance at this comparison will show
that between 1932 and 1933 the member bank and
Federal Reserve measures moved in opposite direc-
tions. The relative shortage of funds increased at
the Federal, but diminished in the member bank
System. What would the layman conclude in such
an event? He would probably (and quite properly)
say to himself that bond prices might hover some-
where between the two extremes.
And, of course, that is just what happened. For a
year there were sharp up and down movements in
bond prices. The real “bull” market in bonds did
not get fully started until 1934, after both supply-
demand measures had begun to move upward and
no longer showed opposing trends. Moreover, the
layman would have remembered that the member
bank measure deals in totals far larger (and there-
fore more like tidal waves) than those involved at
the Federal. In any disagreement of trend, he would
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


probably give more importance to the member bank
tides than to the Federal Reserve waves.
Another interesting period of comparison between
the two measures, as shown on Chart 3, was in the
months just before the heavy crash in bond prices
from July of 1931 to the middle of 1932.
In the member bank measure, supply continued
to gain on demand until May or June of 1931, and
then declined only mildly. But the Federal Reserve
measure began an almost vertical drop in July. Yet
the highest grade bond prices remained reasonably
firm until the end of July, and did not begin their
vertical drop until the month of August. Thus, be-
fore the acute crisis set in, both measures confirmed
a lessening of supply compared with demand, but
the Federal Reserve measure was the first to show
drastic weakness. What conclusion would the lay-
man have reached?
He would have gathered a growing sense of cau-
tion from the flatness of the Federal Reserve meas-
ure up to, let us say, the end of June. Then he
would have seen an abrupt decline at the Federal,
accompanied by a distinct reversal in the member
bank measure. Before the end of July, both meas-
ures would have told the same story —demand
gaining heavily on supply, leading to only one com-
mon-sense decision, namely, to dispose of bonds
unless he was willing to ride out a possible severe
crisis. And this decision, of course, would have
been entirely correct.
But would not this involve an attempt to use
the banking measures as a “forecasting” device?
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


Only, as I have suggested before, if “forecasting”
is to be confused with an intelligent appraisal of
what is actually happening here and now. It is one
thing to forecast next summer’s weather in a
farmer’s almanac, and quite another thing to decide
from this morning’s barometer and thermometer
and cloud conditions whether or not it is likely to
rain today. All we can say is that the banking figures
are extremely sensitive to broad changes actually
talcing place —more sensitive, on most occasions,
than public opinion—and that changes in actual
conditions frequently occur, and can be measured
from banking reports, shortly before the public
at large becomes fully aware of them.
This merely amounts to saying that most of us,
as “the public,” are unobservant of minor warning
signals and do not suspect that it is going to rain
until the skies begin to dump water on our heads.
Most of us go to the office in the morning without
looking at a barometer. If the sun is shining, we
take along no raincoat. Then by lunchtime the sky
is purple with heavy clouds. When we return from
lunch we get drenched. Public opinion often acts
just that way—including the opinion of many im-
portant institutional investors. It waits for the
storm to break instead of preparing while the storm
is plainly brewing.
Another word of caution is in order, however,
concerning these two broadly helpful measures of
money supply. Both of them have a slight tendency
to correspond more with the short-term interest
rate than with the rate on long-term investments.
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


A further glance at Chart 3, for example, will
show that both measures would have indicated
slightly lower bond prices toward the end of 1927
than in 1924. Actually, the bond market rose during
this four-year period—rose, in fact, until about
March of 1928. This means, of course, that the
investment interest rate was declining, in spite of a
rise in short-term interest rates on bank loans.
The only measure of money supply of which I
have knowledge that actually indicated the reason
for the rising bond prices of 1924 to 1928 is the one
shown on Chart 2. This is the measure that is some-
what too complex to be of service to the layman
from facts in his daily newspaper. In principle it is
quite as simple as the others, but it involves calcula-
tions and adjustments as to the long-term trend
between bond interest rates and the public’s use of
banking facilities that are beyond the scope of this
book. It does, however, illustrate the principle that
accurate measurement can be of substantial assist-
ance in forming investment judgments, and its
close correspondence with bond prices ever since
the Civil War at least suggests that it is one valid
way of measuring supply and demand. 1 Its clear
1 In compiling this measure, no adjustments were made for the
violent upheavals and changes that occurred during the seventy-year
period —for the resumption of specie payment in 1879, for instance,
nor for the introduction of the Federal Reserve System in 1914, nor for
the abandonment of the gold redemption standard in 1934. It was com-
piled in the conviction that regardless of these changes in “form,”
nothing would change the basic operation of the law of supply and
demand.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


downtrend during most of 1936 gave definite warn-
ing of the drastic declines in the highest grade bond
market in early 1937.
The businessman and the bank borrower, how-
ever, are interested not only in what inflates bond
prices (by deflating investment interest rates), but
in what inflates short-term interest rates as well.
The man who buys stocks or commodities on bor-
rowed money is intensely concerned in anything
that may increase the interest he must pay on his
borrowed funds. The homeowner faces the same
problem in renewing a short-term mortgage. The
businessman needs to know the conditions affecting
the rate on his commercial loans at the bank.
For these reasons we need a simple measure of the
facts likely to inflate short-term money rates. In an
obvious sense, this is the reverse of the kind of
forces that inflate bond prices. Because of this
difference in viewpoint, and because the factors
affecting investment rates are rather different from
those affecting short-term money, a separate dis-
cussion is in order. The next chapter takes up the
problem of how to measure the forces making for
inflation of short-term money rates.
The Arithmetic of the Measures
A. The Ratio of Deposits to Total Bank Loans plus Government
Securities.
Like all other measures made from member bank reports, the figures
for this ratio can be found every Tuesday morning in leading news-
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


papers, as of the close of business the preceding Wednesday. For most
purposes, however, monthly comparisons are sufficient. This means
looking in the Tuesday newspaper just following the Wednesday
nearest to the end of any given month. Taking October, 1936, figures
for purposes of illustration: Wednesday, Oct. 28, was the last Wednes-
day of the month, and the report tor that date appeared in the news-
papers of Tuesday, Nov. 3.
This report, as issued by the Federal Reserve Board, appeared in the
form on page 73 (except for the left-hand numbers). 1
To get our figure for total deposits, we simply add up items 14 to 17
inclusive (under the heading of “liabilities”) which gives us a figure
of $27,617 billion. We can jot this down in a notebook under the heading
of “Supply.”
For the “demand” side of the comparison, we simply subtract from
item 1, “Total Loans and Investments,” the “Other Securities” listed
under item 10, which gives us a total of $19,252 billion.
To get the “ratio” of our supply figure to our demand figure, we
divide the former by the latter, as follows:
October, 1936, “supply” $27.617 _
Divided by October, 1936, “demand” 19.252
In other words, supply exceeds demand by 43.4 per cent —or, as
we would express it in a ratio, supply is 143.4 per cent of demand.
Now —if we want to make a useful “index” of this ratio, so as to
compare it readily with other months and years, we can again divide
our October, 1936, ratio of 143.4 per cent by the actual average ratio
for the year 1926, which was 119.3 per cent. Thus:
Ratio for October, 1936 1.434
~ , , ... .... = 1.202 or 120.2 per cent
Divided by ratio for year 1926 1.193
In this way we arrive, by simple arithmetic, at an “index” of deposits
to loans plus governments of 120.2 compared to 1926 as 100.
If we want to see what change there has been during the year, we
can find from the bank report the corresponding figures for Wednesday,
Oct. 30, 1935, on the right-hand column of the report. The figures for a
year back are given only as plus or minus changes in this year’s report
compared with last year’s; but all we have to do is to add or subtract
the changes to get our corresponding totals for 1935. This shows us
1 For recent changes in the report form, see page 143.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CONDITION OF WEEKLY REPORTING MEMBER
IN 101 LEADING CITIES 1
(In millions of dollars)
BANKS
Increase or
Oct. 28
decrease since
1936
Oct. 21
1936
Oct. 30
1935
ASSETS
1. Loans and investments — total
2. Loans to brokers and dealers:
22,517
— 54
+2,139
(a) In New York City
933
- 32
+ 154
(i b ) Outside New York City
8. Loans on securities to others (except
220
+ 7
+ 68
banks)
2,026
+ 12
- 49
4. Acceptances and commercial paper
bought
313
- 3
- 16
5. Loans on real estate
1,143
- 3
6. Loans to banks
53
- 3
- 28
7. Other loans
4,033
- 11
+ 693
8. TJ. S. government direct obligations....
9. Obligations fully guaranteed by U. S.
9,274
- 12
+1,097
government
1,257
+ 3
+ 124
10. Other securities
3,265
- 15
+ 99
11. Reserve with Federal Reserve banks. ..
5,390
+ 40
+ 758
12. Cash in vault
405
+ 12
+ 55
13. Balances with domestic banks
2,371
- 18
+ 152
LIABILITIES
14. Demand deposits — adjusted
15,340
+112
+1,742
15. Time deposits
5,065
- 7
+ 166
16. U. S. government deposits
17. Interbank deposits:
704
- 68
+ 157
(a) Domestic banks
6,041
- 43
+ 817
(b) Foreign banks
18. Borrowings
467
+ 1
+ 94
1 For recent changes in report form, see page 143.
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


that in October, 1935, “supply” totaled $24,641 billion and “demand”
$17,212 billion. So our ratio for 1935 was:
Supply _ 1431 gr i per cent
Demand 17.212
As we can see at a glance, this October, 1935, ratio is only fractionally
below the October, 1936, figure. But to bring it to 1926 “index” form,
we again divide, as follows:
October, 1935, ratio D 431 = Lm Qr n 99 per cent
Divided by ratio for year 1926 1.193
Thus we find that our index of supply to demand has risen only from
119.9 to 120.2 in a whole year. If we compare this with the course of
the same index (as shown on Chart 3, page 60) for 1934 and 1935, our
natural conclusion would be that the rate of rise in this factor had
greatly diminished during 1936, making much higher bond prices for
the immediate future far from likely.
By keeping up this index at the end of every month, the newspaper
reader can gain a good approximate idea for himself of whether (as so
many told him in early 1934) we are headed, at any given time, for
an immediate “bond price crash” or not.
B. The Ratio of Member Bank Deposits at the Federal Reserve to Federal
Reserve Credit in Use.
The figures for this ratio are to be found in Friday newspapers, as of
the close of business the preceding Wednesday. Once more, we want
the monthly comparisons, and therefore take the report for the Wednes-
day nearest to the end of the month. For illustration, we again take
a report for Wednesday, Oct. 28, 1936, which appeared in the news-
papers of Friday, Oct. 30.
The first part of this report, as issued by the Federal Reserve Board,
appeared in the form on page 75 (except for the left-hand numbers).
Fortunately, the two items we need for our supply-demand com-
parison are both given in this report as separate items, requiring no
additions.
The first, representing “supply,” is item 10, “Member Bank Re-
serve Balances,” which, in this case, is $6,732 billion.
The second, representing “demand,” is item 6, “Total Reserve
Bank Credit” —or, in this case, $2,462 billion.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CONDITION OP FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS
(In millions of dollars)
Increase or
decrease since
Oct. 28
1936
Oct. 21
Oct. 30
1936
1935
1. Bills discounted
6
2. Bills bought
3
- 2
S. U. S. government securities
2,430
4. Industrial advances (not including $23
million commitments —Oct. 28)
26
- 7
5. Other Reserve bank credit
-3
- 3
6. TOTAL RESERVE BANK CREDIT..
2,462
- 1
- 12
7. Monetary gold stock
11,031
+23
+1,345
8. Treasury currency
2,514
+ 113
9. Money in circulation
6,302
- 9
+ 616
10. Member bank reserve balances
6,732
+39
+1,079
11. Treasury cash and deposits with Federal
Reserve banks
2,490
- 1
- 175
12. Nonmember deposits and other Federal
Reserve accounts
483
- 8
- 73
(This item is the total of items 1 to 5 inclusive —and in 1936 con-
sisted chiefly of United States government securities in the investment
portfolio of the Federal Reserve banks.)
From these figures we get our ratio as follows:
October, 1986, “supply” $6,732
tv -j j u i u = 2.784 or 273.4 per cent
Divided by October, 1936, demand 2.462
In other words, supply in this case is 173.4 per cent greater than
demand—or, expressed as a ratio, supply is 273.4 per cent of demand.
To reduce this ratio to an index figure with 1926 as 100, we do just as
in the case of the member bank ratio above, and divide the October,
HOW TO MEASURE BOND PRICE INFLATION


1936, ratio by the average ratio for the year 1926, which was 175.7 per
cent. Thus:
Ratio for October, 1936 2.734 , , ... „ .
„ .. , , . : , ——- = 1.556 or 155.6 per cent
Divided by ratio for year 1926 1.757
Thus our “index” for this ratio stands 55.6 per cent higher than in
1926.
As in the case of the member bank ratio, we can alto find the change
from October, 1935, by looking in the right-hand column. During the
year, we find that item 10 (supply) has increased $1,079 billion, so we
subtract this from the 1936 total and get $5,653 billion as our “supply”
figure for October, 1935.
But during the same year item 6 (demand) has decreased by $0,012
billion, so we add this to the 1936 total and get $2,474 as our “demand”
figure for October, 1935.
Thus our 1935 ratio becomes:
“ Supply ” October, 1935 $A653 = m cent
Divided by “demand, October, 1935 2.474
To reduce this, too, to an index, we again divide as follows:
Ratio for October, 1935 2.285 ....
~ , , ’ = 1.301 or 130.1 per cent
Divided by ratio for year 1926 1.757
Thus, during the year (and unlike the almost stationary member
bank ratio) this Federal Reserve supply and demand ratio has risen
from an index (1926 = 100) of 130.1 to 155.6.
Since we use these two ratios as a check, each on the other, and find
that one has maintained itself almost unchanged while the other has
risen sharply, we might have expected high-grade bond prices for the
immediate future to remain firm to rising. (As a matter of record, bond
prices did rise mildly after October, 1935. But early in 1937, also as
a matter of record, the member bank ratio began to decline, indicating,
for the time being at least, a change of trend.)
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHAPTER VI
Inflation of Short-term Interest Rates
Except for what is technically
known as a “discount operation,” the question of
“price” does not enter into matters involving short-
term money rates. In other words, we borrow SI,OOO
from the bank or from a friend for a given number
of months at a given annual rate of interest. But
for all practical purposes the price of the note we
give as borrower remains fixed at SI,OOO. It does
not fluctuate, like the price of a bond. When we
“discount” a note, we apparently sell it at a price
lower than its face value, but even that price dif-
ference reflects in fact the going interest rate.
At all events, just as it is more convenient to
speak of bond prices than of bond “yields,” so it
is more convenient and practical to speak of the
interest “rate” on short-term money than of the
price (or discount) at which a short-term note can
be sold. For this reason it is far simpler to discuss
short-term money rates in terms of what makes
them go up —or inflate —just as we discussed


bonds in terms of what made their price go up, or
inflate.
Of course, as we have seen, a deflation of the
investment interest rate is the same thing as an
inflation of bond prices. The word we prefer to
use depends on our viewpoint. But it has been
agreed that we could discuss various kinds of “ab-
solute” inflation, for convenience and simplicity,
as a “raising process,” In this chapter, then, we
shall look at the ways and means of measuring
those forces that raise short-term interest rates.
Once more we must look to the old-fashioned law
of supply and demand. If the demand for the use
of money rises faster than the supply of money to
lend, then we would expect interest rates to rise.
So far, this is just turning the measures for bond
price inflation upside down —dividing “demand”
by “supply” instead of “supply” by “demand.”
But there is more to the problem than that. We
know, from experience, that short-term interest
rates, unlike bond prices, fluctuate within wide and
violent extremes.
In a period when the bond interest rate (or the
inverse of its price) may vary from 6 to 3 per cent,
certain short-term money rates may vary from 20 to
less than 1 per cent. We also know that at certain
times (like the four years from 1924 to 1928), the
interest rate on bonds and the interest rate on short-
term loans may go in opposite directions.
To measure the influences on short-term loans,
therefore, we need to do more than simply turn our
bond price measures upside down. We need to use
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


different factors, more sensitive ones, and ones that
show a much wider percentage variation. What are
these factors, and how do we use them ?
In the first place, we must remember that there
are several distinct kinds of short-term money —
ranging from that prime form known as “bankers’
acceptances ” through all categories of general bank
loans and “call” money to very short-term bonds
and notes. For our present purposes, however, it is
probably enough if we consider, first, the interest
rate charged on general bank loans and, second,
the highly volatile and sensitive rate on “bankers’
acceptances.”
For the general bank loan rate, the weekly re-
porting member bank statements again form our
best source of figures; and, fortunately, both the
needed factors are simple.
For “demand” we can look to total bank loans;
and for “supply” we can take almost the same
figure of total deposits used in the member bank
measure for bond prices described in the last
chapter.
To see how closely its movements compare with
the interest rates charged on short-term loans, a
glance at Chart 4 a will be sufficient.
This chart carries, on the top line, the average
prevailing interest rate charged borrowers by the
leading banks of the country. This is a figure re-
ported regularly every month by the Federal Re-
serve Board at Washington. It gives separately the
rate charged in New York, in eight other northern
and eastern cities and in twenty-seven cities of the
INFLATION OF SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES


CHART 4 a. —Suggested measure compared with the general bank loan rate.


CHART 4b. —Suggested measure compared with the shortest term money rates.
81


South, and West. The chart shows the average of
all three rates.
On the second line the chart shows the actual
ratio of total loans to total deposits in the weekly
reporting member banks. The closeness of corre-
spondence between the two trends is ample evidence
of the value of this simple demand-supply measure-
ment in determining what the immediate trend of
short-term bank loan rates should be. 1
The reasons behind this measure are both simple
and logical. If loans rise faster (in percentage) than
total deposits, then the current use of bank money
is increasing faster than its available supply, and
the banks can ask, and get, a higher interest rate.
But if deposits are rising faster (in percentage) than
borrowings, then supply is gaining on use (or de-
mand) and the banks, in order to keep their credit
in active use, must lower the charge or interest rate.
It will be noticed at once that the main difference
between this measure and the one used for bond
prices (aside from turning supply and demand up-
side down) is the omission of government securities
from the “demand” total. In the case of bonds,
government securities must be included in “de-
mand” for the simple reason that in many periods
(such as acute depression) government borrowing
l lf “required reserves” at the Federal Reserve banks are sub-
tracted from deposits (as being money not available for general lending
purposes) then every increase in “reserve requirements” will cause
this measure to rise, indicating firmer rates in prospect. To calculate
required reserves for reporting member banks only, however, is a
fairly complicated process, and is recommended only to the trained
statistician.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


largely takes the place of private harrowing, and so
competes with other possible investment uses of
bank credit. But —in practice —this competition
does not seem to affect the rate on bank loans.
In other words, if it were not for the investment
demand created by government borrowings in re-
cent years, the prices for all other high-grade bonds
(railroads, utilities, etc.) might easily have gone
much higher than they did. But the “new” money
created by these government borrowings soon found
its way, through relief and other payments, into
private hands. The government did the borrowing,
but the public had the use of the funds, placed them
back on deposit, and so created a still larger total
of deposits compared with private borrowing demands.
In 1917 to 1920, on the other hand, both the
government and the public were borrowing heavily
at the banks, so that loans rose even more rapidly
than total deposits. This was particularly due to
the fact that the proceeds of part of the government
borrowings, instead of being paid solely to Ameri-
cans and remaining on deposit in American banks
(as during the recent depression), were being re-
loaned and transferred abroad. American banks
held the loans and investments which had “created ”
the money, but part of the money itself disappeared
into foreign bank deposits.
For this combination of reasons (simultaneous
government and private borrowing, plus the ship-
ment of newly created money abroad) loans in that
period rose much faster than deposits, and both
long- and short-term money rates rose spectacularly.
INFLATION OF SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES


In recent times, both long- and short-term rates
have declined together, but the greatest decline was
in short-term rates, because government borrowings
were replacing private borrowings, and thus keeping
investment rates fairly high compared with short-
term private loan rates.
This accounts in large measure for one of the
outstanding phenomena of the depression period—
a much more rapid and drastic decline in short-
term interest rates than in investment rates. Not
many people realize it, but this is an entirely new
situation in our economic history since the Civil
War. Long- and short-term rates have often moved
in opposite directions, but short-term rates have
never before (up to 1930) remained persistently
and consistently far below investment rates for a
period of several successive years.
Hitherto it was always possible for the investor
who did not wish to “tie up” his money in long-
term bonds, to shift his investment to bonds and
notes due in a few months or years without loss of
income. In 1899, for example, when the rate on high-
grade bonds had dropped to about 3.25 per cent, the
investor could have sold his bonds, realized his
profits, and placed his funds at short-term use at
an average of over 4 per cent. He would actually
have increased his income on the operation (see
Chart 5, page 85).
But in 1936, with bonds again yielding only
3.25 per cent, a similar investor wanting to sell his
bonds and realize his profits would have had to ac-
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


1870 '72 '74 '7 6 '78 1860 '82 '84 '86 '88 1890 '9 2 '9 4 '9 6 '98 1900 ‘02 '04 '06 '08 1910 '12 'l 4 'l 6 '18 1920 '22 '2 4 '2 6 '28 1930 '32 '34 1936
CHART 5.— A 65-year comparison between short-term interest rates and bond yields, showing the unprecedented low
relative level of short-term rates since 1931.


cept less than 1 per cent on short-term investments
due in a year or less.
Hence the ability of the investor to measure the
influences affecting short-term interest rates is
highly important to any investment plans he may
want to make.
But this is only one reason for using such a meas-
ure. As we shall see later on, short-term rates also
affect the market price of equities (common stocks)
and the ability of business concerns to finance ex-
pansion profitably. Needless to say, the interest of
bankers in the short-term rate is paramount. It is the
“price” they receive for one of their most important
“commodities” —namely, commerical credit.
This leads us to the interest rate on that prime
grade of short-term money known as bankers’ ac-
ceptances. This rate fluctuates much more violently
than does the general bank loan rate. Whereas, for
instance, the bank loan rate (as charted on page 80
—Chart 4a) varied from a high of 7 per cent in
1920 to a low of about 3.40 per cent in 1936, the
bankers’ acceptance rate declined from 6.25 per
cent in 1920 to only % of 1 per cent in 1936. Short-
term bonds in recent years have followed this ac-
ceptance rate more nearly than the comparatively
high general loan rate.
As an effective measure of influences on the
bankers’ acceptance rate, we must turn from mem-
ber bank figures to the figures of the Federal Re-
serve banks themselves. As “bankers’ banks,”
largely controlling marginal operations, the Reserve
banks show many sensitive and extreme fluctua-
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


tions that do not appear in the large “mass move-
ments” of member bank funds.
Chart 4 b, on page 81, shows the comparison
between the bankers’ acceptance rate and a fairly
simple demand-supply measure drawn solely from
Federal Reserve figures. The degree of close cor-
respondence speaks for itself. But just what is this
measure —and what is the logic behind it?
This measure uses for “demand” the commercial
and other “bills” (i.e., short-term loan “paper”)
held by the Federal Reserve banks. These “bills”
are acquired either by purchase in the open “bill
market” or through “rediscount” (relending) for
the benefit of member banks themselves.
On the “supply” side, this measure uses total
deposits at the Federal Reserve plus the added
liabilities of the Reserve in the form of Federal Re-
serve notes outstanding.
The logic behind this is simple. Both the deposits
and the notes (on the “supply” side) represent
credit resources in the hands of the member banks
and the public lumped together. The notes are the
equivalent of added deposits in negotiable form. If
returned to the Federal, they would increase its
deposits, dollar for dollar, as returned.
The “bills” held (on the “demand” side) rep-
resent the use being made of Federal Reserve lend-
ing facilities and also show the percentage of total
Federal Reserve deposits which have been “cre-
ated” by Reserve loans, directly or indirectly.
Thus the balance between supply and demand
largely determines the rate of interest it is possible
INFLATION OF SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES


to charge on “bills ” —of which bankers’ acceptances
are the highest grade used by the public and com-
merce at large.
When Federal Reserve deposits are swelled by
some other means than “bills” bought or rediscounted
(e.g., by the Federal’s purchase of government
bonds and notes), then supply mounts much more
rapidly than demand, and sensitive interest rates
are apt to decline. The reverse happens (as in 1919
and 1920) when a large proportion of Reserve de-
posits are created by “bill” loans.
In ordinary times this second measure is perhaps
more important to the banker than to the general
public—but since, in recent times, the going rate
on short-term bonds, and especially on short-term
United States government notes, has so closely
followed the “disappearing” bankers’ acceptance
rate, this measure has acquired a wholly new im-
portance for the general investor. His dilemma —
arising from inability to shift into short-term invest-
ments without heavy income loss —shows up graphi-
cally in this very demand-supply measure. 1
This brings us to the end of our general discussion
of bond prices and interest rates and of ways to
1 Unfortunately when —as happened in 1936—“ bills held” by the
Federal almost disappear, this measure may show no sign of rising
until long after member banks have increased their “loan to deposit”
ratio. At such rare times the layman should look to the member bank
measure for first hints of rising short-term rates. For a brief discussion
of some of the effects of “increased reserve requirements,” see
the closing paragraph of this chapter under The Arithmetic of the
Measures.
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


measure the forces at work to inflate or deflate
one or the other. But I do not want to leave this
subject without making one point abundantly clear:
namely, that the banking figures merely serve to
measure immediate conditions which often have
their ultimate cause in far more profound under-
currents and trends. Some of these are discussed
in later chapters on “relative” inflations and espe-
cially on general debt inflation—the simple state of
being “overextended” as a nation in relation to
our resources. Others have to do with the whole
nature of debt in a State that is supposed to rest
on ownership or “equity” capitalism, and are also
discussed briefly in the final chapter.
But the average person discovers his keenest
interest in those facts and trends which concern
his immediate daily life and plans —how he shall
conduct his business, or how he shall invest his
money, or whether or not we are entering that type
of inflation which might prove harmful to the in-
vestments of institutions in which he has a stake.
For these day-to-day purposes, the story revealed
by the weekly banking figures is incomparably
better than the conflicting guesses and opinions of
experts that have plagued us of recent years. The
banking story substitutes fact for fancy, measure-
ment for guesswork, logic for emotion. As I have
said before, the science of interpreting bank figures
to measure the economic condition of the country
is comparatively new —as new as the change in
the needle that first made the sewing machine pos-
INFLATION OF SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES


sible —but the principles back of this new science,
like the law of supply and demand, date back to
the earliest common sense of the race.
The Arithmetic of the Measures
A, The Ratio of Total Loans to Deposits.
For convenience of illustration, we can use the same member bank
report (as of Oct. 28, 1936, —reproduced on page 73) which we used
tor the bond price measure. 1
For “demand,” we subtract from item 1 the total of securities in
items 8,9, and 10, leaving $8,721 billion.
For “supply,” we add up items 14, 15, 17a, and 176 (thus omitting
United States government deposits), which gives us a total of $26,913
billion.
To get our ratio, we divide “demand” by “supply” as follows:
October, 1936, demand $8,721 „„ .
Divided by October, 1936, supply 26.913 ’ ° T ' * >el 060
To measure the change in trend since October, 1935, we simply
subtract from 1936 figures all the gains for the year shown in the right-
hand column and add all the losses. This gives us demand for October,
1935, as $7,902 billion, and supply as $24,094 billion. Then our ratio
becomes:
October, 1935, demand $7,902
Divided by October, 1935, supply 24.094 ’ ° T ' * >er 0611
In short, the trend over a year had declined slightly from 32.8 to
32.4 per cent, thus giving no indication of an immediate basis for
rising bank loan rates —in spite of a considerable increase in loans over
the year. (In later months, however, this trend changed.)
B. The Ratio of Federal Reserve Bills Held to Federal Reserve Deposits
Plus Notes.
To get these figures we have to turn to the second part of the Reserve
bank report instead of to the introductory summary reproduced on
page 75. For illustration, however, we can still use the report as of
Oct. 28, 1936. Part two of this report appeared in Friday newspapers
of Oct. 30 as follows (except for left-hand numbers);
1 For recent changes in report form, see page 143.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF THE TWELVE FEDERAL
RESERVE BANKS COMBINED
{In thousands of dollars)
Oct. 28
1936
Oct. 21
1936
Oct. 30
1935
ASSETS
1. Gold certificates on hand and due from U. S.
8,635,831
12,273
265,825
8,609,328
12,471
253,547
7,026,623
19,727
238,953
2. Redemption fund —Federal Reserve notes.. .
4. Total Reserves. .
5. Bills discounted:
(а) Secured by U. S. government obligations,
direct or fully guaranteed
(б) Other bills discounted
6. Total bills discounted
7. Bills bought in open market
8. Industrial advances......
9. U. S. government securities:
8,913,929
3,421
2,686
8,875,346
3,103
3,067
7,285,303
2,999
3,129
6,107
3,087
26,299
378,077
1,443,363
608,787
6,170
3,089
26,427
378,077
1,443,363
608,787
6,128
4,676
32,719
238,923
1,635,087
556,162
(6) Treasury notes
(c) Treasury bills
10. Total U. S. government securities
2,430,227
2,430,227
2,430,172
181
12. Total bills and securities
IS. Due from foreign banks
14. Federal Reserve notes of other banks
15. Uncollected items
2,465,720
220
24,720
573,806
48,062
39,116
2,465,913
218
24,797
654,301
48,062
38,307
2,473,876
641
21,447
507,936
50,169
41,932
12,065,573
4,086,242
6,732,003
99,903
65,479
154,170
12,106,944
4,091,064
6,693,447
88,337
63,782
163,492
10,381,304
3,511,319
5,652,989
60,279
25,402
270,744
LIABILITIES
18. Federal Reserve notes in actual circulation. .
19. Deposits:
(а) Member bank — reserve account
(б) U. S. Treasurer — general account
(c) Foreign bank
(d) Other deposits.
7,051,555
577,408
130,241
145,501
27,088
34,236
13,802
7,009,058
657,033
130,243
145,501
27,088
34,236
12,721
6,009,414
508,913
130,356
144,893
23,457
30,698
22,254
21. Deferred availability items
28. Surplus (Section 7)
24. Surplus (Section 186)..
25. Reserve for contingencies
26. All other liabilities
Total liabilities
27. Ratio of total reserves to deposit and Federal
Reserve note liabilities combined
28. Commitments to make industrial advances..
12,065,573
80.0%
22,790
12,106,944
80.0%
22,774
10,381,304
76.5%
27,057
INFLATION OF SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES


In this case, we select for “demand” the almost negligible items 6
and 7 under “assets” totaling only $0,009 billion. (In many years of
active business the total of these two items has been very substantial.)
For “supply” we select the total of items 18 and 20 under “Liabili-
ties.” In this case, they aggregate $11,137 billion. Then our ratio
works out:
October, 1936, demand $0,009 „
Divided by October, 1936, supply TTT37 = - 0008 or °’ oB ** CeDt
For all practical purposes, this ratio is almost nil —but so was the
bankers’ acceptance rate at that time; namely, of 1 per cent!
A glance at the right-hand column (figures for Oct. 30, 1935) will
show that “bills” were only $1 million higher in 1935, but that deposits
plus notes aggregated $9,520 billion. Thus:
October, 1935, demand $O,OlO ,
, —-~r- = .00105 or 0.105 per cent
Divided by October, 1935, supply 9.520
Thus (if possible!) the October, 1936, ratio called for even easier
bankers’ acceptance rates than did the ratio for October, 1935. But,
as explained in the footnote on page 88, at times when the Federal
holds practically no “bills” and member banks are not resorting to
rediscount, forces may be at work to raise short-term rates (even on
bankers’ acceptances) without being reflected in Federal Reserve
figures. At such times, and until the Federal again becomes active in
the bill market or in rediscounting, the member bank measure of loans
to deposits is the best guide to an underlying change of trend. This was
the case in the closing months of 1936 and the early weeks of 1937.
At this time, also, the announced changes in “reserve requirements”
obviously brought much closer the day when member banks would be
forced to borrow at the Federal in order to maintain minimum reserve
balances. That, in itself, would tighten short-term money rates in
anticipation; and, by “immobilizing” part of the deposit funds of
member banks, increased reserves would also effect higher rates even
before “rediscounts” were necessary.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHAPTER VII
Inflation of Equity (Stock) Prices
M ore zeal and energy, more fanati-
cal hope and more intense anguish have been ex-
pended over the past century in efforts to “forecast”
the stock market than in almost any other single
line of human action. I must repeat at the outset,
therefore, that this part of our discussion of in-
flationary forces makes no effort whatsoever to pro-
vide a “forecasting” formula for stock movements.
As in the case of our discussion of bonds, we are
seeking one thing only—a method of determining
from the measurement of published facts whether
the combined events of today are of a nature to in-
flate or deflate stock prices, and with them the
dollar value of all ownership claims, whether rep-
resented in corporate stocks traded on some market
or merely in the ownership rights of individuals or
partnerships.
The stock markets may or may not respond to
economic facts, A dozen unexpected events may
intervene between underlying conditions and the


price people are willing to pay for certificates of
ownership, and thus make “forecasting” both futile
and tragic. But it is still a matter of great conse-
quence to know in which direction the major eco-
nomic forces are working. That is the sole objective
of the present part of this book.
In the broadest sense, there is little mystery to
rising or falling prices for stocks. 1 A stock that is
“earning” $5 a share is likely to sell for a much
higher price than a stock earning only $1 per share.
So, too, if we expect a stock that has been earning
only $1 per share to earn $5 next year, we are
willing to pay much more for it than if we expected
it to earn no more than $1 per share for an
indefinite period. In similar fashion, the prospect
of declining earnings usually brings about a fall
in the price of any stock. But there is another im-
portant influence at work in addition to prospective
earnings, and that is the “going interest rate.”
This is where stock markets and bond markets are
invisibly tied together. The point—and it is a much
more important one than many people realize —
can be illustrated as follows;
Suppose the stock of the B Company is currently
earning $5 a share, and paying an annual dividend
of $4. The expectations are that next year this stock
will earn slightly over $6 a share and pay a dividend
of $5. How much is the stock worth to an investor?
1 Hereafter the word “stock” is taken to include the value of all
ownership claims. The trend of the stock market roughly represents
the trend of all ownership values; hence, “stock” and “stock market”
are convenient short expressions for a much broader economic concept.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


To make the matter simpler, suppose we omit all
question of the stability of the company and the
excellence of its management, and merely assume
all these factors to be of the highest investment
quality. In that case the price which the investor
is willing to pay for the stock will depend on what
percentage income he is anxious to get on his
investment.
If he pays SIOO a share, then the present dividend
of $4 will mean a 4 per cent return on his investment.
But if he is considering next year’s dividend rather
than this year’s, then he might be willing to pay
$125 a share —because a dividend of $5 next year
would mean a return of the desired 4 per cent on
$125.
In other words, if the investor is satisfied with a
4 per cent return on his money, either now or in the
near future, he is willing to pay twenty-five times
the present or anticipated dividend. (If he is buying
the stock only to hold it for an expected “market
profit,” he may figure somewhat differently. He
might buy a stock which showed no promise of any
dividend at all this year or next, but expect to get
the equivalent of a dividend in his market profit
at a near-by later date. But the majority of people
buy stocks for investment income, present or future,
and it is astonishing, in the long perspective, how
closely any given stock will remain within a price
range governed by the income it is producing or
likely to produce for the straight investor.)
This is where the “going interest rate” looms
largely in stock market prices. Suppose for a
INFLATION OF EQUITY (STOCK) PRICES


moment that a 4 per cent return seems too low to the
average investor, that he can buy highest grade
bonds at a return of 5 per cent or better, and that
owing to a developing shortage in investment money
supply (similar to that discussed in the chapters on
bond prices) he wants every investment dollar to
work for him to the greatest possible income ad-
vantage. In that case he would probably refuse to
pay more than SIOO a share for a stock about to
pay a $5 dividend. He would want 5 per cent on his
money.
Or, if we assume a reverse set of conditions, when
money invested in best grade bonds would bring a
return of only 3 per cent, then the investor might
be satisfied with a 3J£ per cent return on his stock.
In that event he might be willing to pay over $142
a share for a stock expected to pay a $5 dividend —
because $5 would be per cent of $142.86.
Thus, there are times when stocks might fluctuate
in price for exactly the same reason that bonds do,
without any prospective change in earnings or divi-
dends, and simply because changing conditions of
money supply force the investor to seek a higher
or accept a lower return on his investment dollars.
Then there is a third major influence at work on
the general level of stock prices: the purchasing
power of money in both domestic and foreign mark-
ets. In other words, far back in the investor’s head
is always the question: “What would the dollar
value of my stocks buy for me if I were to ex-
change them for wheat or corn or shoes, or for the
purchase of ownership in foreign companies, or of
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


the currency of some foreign country?” We do not
live in splendid economic isolation. We trade with
other countries and buy and sell their securities
and commodities. Perhaps very few individual in-
vestors think in these terms, but the shrewdest and
largest investors often do, and it is their buying
and selling that often throws the balance toward
higher or lower stock prices.
Hence the value of the domestic dollar in the
world markets and in terms of foreign currencies, as
well as in the home market, plays a distinct part
in influencing stock prices—that is, the current
value of ownership. It is really a case of water seek-
ing its own level, a subtle process of barter and ex-
change, by which the value of a factory (represented
in the stock of the company owning the factory)
tends to adjust itself up or down to the value of
wheat or German real estate or the British pound
or a great group of aggregate commodities. In other
words, the “inflation” or “deflation” of the Ameri-
can dollar itself —its changing purchasing power
in terms of a multitude of things other than stocks
themselves (often reflected in its gold backing)—
may tend to raise or lower American stock prices
even with no visible change in earning power and
no visible change in the going rate of investment
return. 1
The trouble is that most of us are always seeking
an exaggerated simplicity in our explanations of
stock market action —as in our explanations of many
1 For further discussion of gold and monetary “inflation” see
Chapter IX, pages 157-159.
INFLATION OF EQUITY (STOCK) PRICES


other things. We are always looking for “the chief
cause” for this or that spectacular happening. If
it is an astonishing election result, we are never
satisfied until we have discovered some one reason
for it —that it was a “bought election,” or a “revolt
of the masses,” or a “world-wide sweep toward
dictatorship,” or the “amazing personal popularity”
of the candidate, or something equally absurd. We
are unwilling to go through the mild discipline of
trying to analyze a group of major forces and their
interaction.
We find stock market experts who tell us that
“earnings are everything,” others who tell us that
even earnings will not count “if we have runaway
inflation of the dollar,” and still others (somewhat
fewer in number, be it said) who tell us that stocks
go up “when money supply is plentiful” and go
down “when money grows scarce.” We find amaz-
ingly few who are willing and anxious to weigh all
these considerations in the balance and to admit,
for example, that a violent increase in earnings might
wholly offset both a growing shortage of money and
a declining price level, or that an actual decrease
in earnings might be offset entirely by a combined
rise in money supply and an inflation of the mone-
tary unit. Yet the whole history of the stock market
is nothing if not a history of just such surprising
“offsets” and a complete refutation of the “chief
cause” thinkers.
Without going too far back for convenient
memory, it is highly useful, before discussing meas-
uring methods, to take a look at the stock market
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


record since 1919 in terms of these “offsetting”
forces which we have discussed. Suppose we take
first the period from October, 1919, to August, 1921,
and see how our three major forces were interacting
or “offsetting” each other. In this period the stock
market was in a heavy “bear” trend after a sus-
tained postwar rise. The “break” occurred in Oc-
tober, 1919, and except for minor rallies did not
come to a final turning point until August, 1921.
In that period, what was happening to “inflation,”
to “money supply,” and to “earnings”?
As to “inflation” —commodity prices continued
to rise steeply from October, 1919, right through to
June, 1920. Currency in circulation rose rapidly
compared with national gold reserves backing that
currency. By September, 1920, there was less than
49 cents in gold back of every dollar of currency.
But stock prices continued down, right in the face
of both these evidences of growing “inflation.” In
other words, anyone who had bought stocks in
late 1919 as an “inflation hedge” would have been
grimly disappointed. His stocks would have dropped
almost as fast as the prices of all commodities rose.
Clearly something was heavily “offsetting” the
theoretical influence of a price inflation on stocks.
(A mild historical warning, incidentally, to those
who bought stocks on the inflation theory early in
1934, only to have stocks decline for nearly a year!)
What of “money supply” in this period? A glance
at Chart 66 will show that money supply, compared
with demand, declined during the entire period to
October, 1920, reaching record low ground. Meas-
INFLATION OF EQUITY (STOCK) PRICES


CHART 6. —Offsetting trends of spending activity, money supply and
currency inflation in the postwar period of 1919-1922.


ured in the simple ways already discussed, anyone
could have seen at the time that forces were at
work to lower bond prices and raise interest rates.
This, in turn, would have given investors every
motive to seek a higher income return on their
stock investments; in other words, to be willing to
buy stocks only at lower and lower prices. Clearly,
then, from October, 1919, to the latter part of 1920
disappearing money supply was a powerful offsetting
influence to the continuing general price and cur-
rency inflation.
And what of “earnings”? The rising costs of raw
materials were making it more and more difficult
for industrial concerns to continue their postwar
margins of profit. Added to this, the public was
beginning to rebel at a rising cost of living, and to
go on a so-called “buyers’ strike.” All in all, there
was no reasonable prospect of largely increased
earnings under such conditions. If anything, the
outlook was for smaller earnings. Thus, the man
who was willing to pay SIOO a share for a $4 divi-
dend stock in 1919 had good reason to be unwilling
to pay the same price when the chances favored
no increase and a possible decrease in the dividend,
and when rising interest rates were compelling him
to seek a 5 per cent instead of a 4 per cent return.
Thus a palpable “inflation” trend was heavily
enough offset, in late 1919 and the first half of 1920,
by uncertain earnings outlook and lowering money
supply to bring about a disastrous decline in stock
prices. During the balance of the period—up to
August, 1921 —what was happening?
INFLATION OF EQUITY (STOCK) PRICES


First of all, a general and violent price “deflation ”
set in. Commodity prices dropped about 40 per
cent in less than a year. Not only that, but they
continued to decline long after the major upturn
in the stock market in August, 1921. Commodities
continued their decline right into the middle of
1922. Thus, all those “single cause” thinkers who
buy stocks on rising commodity prices, and sell them
on lowering commodity prices, would have had no
cause to suspect an approaching upturn in the
summer of 1921. But since stocks did turn up on a
permanent trend in August, what were the offset-
ting influences?
Another glance at the chart on page 100 will show
at once that the money shortage of 1920 began to
correct itself in the late fall of 1920. By midsummer
of 1921, the improvement was almost sensational.
Some bond prices were lower in 1921 than in 1920,
but several important groups of bonds had been
improving in price during the whole first half of
1921, and certainly short-term interest rates had
declined violently. Therefore, the investor had be-
gun to have a motive for buying stocks on a lower
income return than in 1920. Enlarging money sup-
ply in this case was just as clear an offset to the
continuing price deflation as shrinking money sup-
ply was to the continuing price inflation of 1920.
The earnings trend of major industrial concerns
was still highly doubtful in the summer of 1921.
But at least the obstacle of high-cost raw mate-
rials had been largely removed, and the rate of
public spending activity (which will be fully dis-
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


cussed later on) had begun to increase. This was at
least a reasonable forerunner of improved state of
the public mind. Probably the best that could be
said at the time was that any further decrease in
earnings seemed unlikely. The depression had been
sharp but short, and such items as the postwar
housing shortage, and improved foreign outlook,
gave substantial hope against further declines in
activity.
Of the three major forces at work, then, just prior
to August, 1921, the dominant force to raise the
investment price of stocks was plainly the recovery
from an acute money shortage and the restoration
of a normal supply. The earnings trend was at best
neutral; and the trend of commodity prices was
still deflationary. But the money supply increase
proved sufficient to turn the tide. It was the all-
powerful offset in the summer of 1921.
Unfortunately for our common sense in a later
crisis, the important role played by increasing
money supply in 1921 led many of the “single
cause” thinkers to expect an exact repetition of these
events in 1930 and 1931. They forgot—as we are all
apt to forget—that whenever three or more major
forces are constantly at work, the possible combina-
tions are almost innumerable, that what might be a
most effective offset under one combination would
be wholly ineffective under another. The rising
money supply and bond prices of 1921 did herald a
general business recovery; but the rising bond prices
of 1930 and early 1931 did not. As we shall see later
on, the facts were available to account for the fail-
INFLATION OF EQUITY (STOCK) PRICES


ure —available and easy to measure. But the “single
cause” experts simply ignored them.
The second good period for illustrating the effects
of offsets on stock prices was the culmination of the
stock market boom in 1927 to 1929.
Taking first the year 1927, during which stock
prices rose steadily, we find (a) a well-sustained and
rising money supply, ( b) a strong surge of public
spending activity, in spite of a decline in actual
manufacturing output, and (c) a neutral position
in monetary inflation, with level commodity prices.
The public buying activity presaged reasonable
earnings. Rising money supply and rising bond
prices tended to lower the income return demanded
by stock investors, and therefore to raise stock
prices.
In 1928 we find (a) a visibly declining money sup-
ply, accompanied by mildly declining bond prices,
but ( b ) a terrific upsurge in public spending activity
with a renewed uptrend in manufacturing output,
indicating far better earnings ahead, and (c) a rising
inflation of our monetary system, unaccompanied,
however, by any marked increase in commodity
prices.
In this year, the declining money supply was a
warning signal that all was not right. Nevertheless,
it was completely offset by the tidal wave of public
spending and increased industrial activity, both
indicating higher and higher corporate earnings.
The growing monetary inflation (a large increase of
bank deposits and also of circulating currency com-
pared to our national gold reserves) was also a
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHART 7. —Offsetting trends of spending activity, money supply and
currency inflation during the boom years of 1927-1929.


warning, but served as a temporary stimulant to
stock prices and business activity.
In 1929 —up to March —the trends of 1928 con-
tinued. Then several things happened at once. First,
the rate of decrease of money supply began to ac-
celerate and, naturally enough, the decline in bond
prices became more abrupt, also the rise in short-
term interest rates. This gave the stock investor
a motive to seek a higher income return. His only
hope of this lay in increased earnings and larger
dividends. But from March to June an abrupt and
unseasonal decline in public spending activity set
in. The intricate causes for this do not concern us.
We are interested only in the fact. The simple fact
was that public spending, on which corporate earn-
ings depended, was not continuing its upsurge of
1927 and 1928. Instead, it was declining in rather
spectacular fashion. Then a third reversal of form
took shape. Our monetary structure began to “de-
flate,” accompanied by signs of weakening in the
commodity price structure.
In the third quarter of 1929, spending activity
turned upward again; but most of the upturn was
in financial operations, as shown by the fact that
New York spending rose more rapidly than spending
elsewhere. The offsets to this spending recovery be-
came more and more violent in declining money
supply and bond prices and in further deflation of
our monetary system. Taking all things into ac-
count, we never again reached anything approaching
the peak of upward forces at work in March
of 1929 —and we had had the warning of the
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


terrific slump of combined forces from March to
June.
By September of 1929 the investor, watching
the combined influences at work, knew (a) that he
should be receiving a higher income return on stocks,
( b) that the erratic course of spending activity
outside of New York made increased dividends un-
likely, and (c) that we were threatened with de-
flationary forces in the commodity price structure.
Did this combination of events enter directly into
his thinking? No one knows. The “psychology” of
the 1929 catastrophe is relatively unimportant.
What does concern us is that measurable economic
facts fully justified the market declines of the late
fall. What is perhaps the most interesting point of
all is this: all the salient facts could have been meas-
ured solely by the use of the weekly banking figures
published in every important newspaper of the land.
What, then, of the closing months of 1929 and the
spring of 1930? Hope was swinging high in the spring
of 1930 —hope that the market crash of 1929 was
nothing more than a violent correction of wild
speculation; hope that a program of spending and
construction by large industrial groups, sponsored
by the government authorities, would offset the
sudden curtailment of activity inspired by the
withering stock market; hope that a new rising trend
in equity values (stock prices) accompanied by ris-
ing bond prices would usher in a “constructive”
period.
Ever since the Civil War the correction of a
money shortage had been followed within a few
INFLATION OF EQUITY (STOCK) PRICES


Chart 8. —Offsetting trends of spending activity, money supply and
currency inflation over the turning point of the depression.


months either by gradual stabilization or by actual
business improvement. With that fact in mind, the
public, the administration and businessmen at large
had good grounds for thinking that 1930, or at the
latest 1931, would bring a resumption of normal
activity. But, as we know, these hopes were soon
lacerated and then torn to bits by successive waves
of deeper and deeper decline right into 1932. What
was it that was offsetting the classic and benign
influence of improving money supply?
It was —and very pointedly—the unexpected con-
tinued decline in national spending activity, as
shown in the weekly “debits” reports (totals of
weekly checks drawn) and later confirmed in the
earnings and production reports of corporations. 1
At the very time that the stock market was rally-
ing briskly in the spring of 1930, weekly spending
activity was plunging headlong to new depths. Nor
was the plunge arrested, except for brief and in-
effective periods, until well on in 1932. For the first
time since the Civil War, spending refused to re-
spond to improved conditions of money supply.
With all the advantages of hindsight, we can esti-
mate some of the causes for this unexpected phe-
nomenon —such as the curtailment of new buying
due to the crushing load of installment payments on
former purchases, the backfire of world-wide condi-
1 It was not until the latter half of 1930 that I became fully aware
of the ‘possibility that spending activity could continue down indefi-
nitely (and contrary to all historical “patterns” since the Civil War)
long after money supply had corrected a condition of acute shortage.
Having no desire to sail under false colors through benefit of hindsight,
I wish to put this clearly on record.
INFLATION OF EQUITY (STOCK) PRICES


tions on our domestic affairs, and the exceptionally
high total of debt compared to our tangible national
wealth, 1 all more or less “new” conditions not pres-
ent in the same degree in our earlier economic
experience.
But hindsight thinking has no place in the aver-
age man’s problem in the midst of a crisis. It may
help him in planning for a wiser future, but it does
him no good today. The point to be emphasized
again is this: the weekly banking figures faithfully
told the current story of what was happening, re-
gardless of remote causes and conflicting theories
of “why.”
They said, in effect: “Never mind the whys and
wherefores, but simply accept the facts! Month by
month, except for little futile spurts, the people are
spending less and less —and more and more of the
little they do spend is spent in paying off old loans.
How can business and earnings possibly improve
under such conditions? What difference does it
make how large the money supply may be if the
people refuse to use it ? Forget your theories of what
they ought to do, and swallow the facts of what
they are actually doing!”
Not until 1932 did the downsweep in spending
activity begin to halt its pace. Even in 1932 the
low ebb of spending was not reached until Novem-
ber; but something approaching a flat trend began
to develop about March. At about the same time
money supply, which again had been sharply cur-
tailed by the British crisis in late 1931, began a
1 See Chapter XI, “Decades of Debt.”
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


vigorous uptrend, and continued hoarding began
to bring a distinct inflation of the American cur-
rency. The leveling off of the spending decline, com-
bined with improved money resources and an
inflationary trend in the currency, gave some hope
that “bottom” might have been reached at last.
By midsummer of 1932 the facts revealed in the
banking figures since March had begun to work
like a leaven on public opinion. From June to Sep-
tember of that year the public behaved as if an
“armistice” had been declared. The stock market
had its wildest rise (figured in percentage) in many
long decades. But without a real upturn in public
spending as a base for better business earnings this
armistice enthusiasm was bound to peter out. It
did. The vague terrors of the approaching bank
holiday added their force. By March of 1933 most
of the market gains of the summer of 1932 had been
wiped out.
Yet the basic spending activity of the public
had at last turned upward after November, 1932;
and after March, 1933, both spending activity and
money supply began to follow the same upward
course —an irregular and at times uncertain course,
but one that the weekly banking figures reported
steadily and convincingly for the benefit of every-
one who could read and write and do a little simple
arithmetic. The basic trend in two major forces had
changed!
Once more let me emphasize, and with all pos-
sible seriousness, that I have simply used the stock
market’s course as a symbol or sign of much broader
INFLATION OF EQUITY (STOCK) PRICES


conditions. For months on end the stock market
may move in response to a complex of so-called
“technical” conditions and of public “psychology”
which the banking figures would not justify. But
in the broadest possible sense, and as representing
the state of hundreds of small private businesses,
the long-term trend of the stock market does appear
to be a faithful barometer. It does seem to register—
given enough time —the combined or offsetting
effects of spending and earnings trends, of infla-
tionary stimuli, and of basic money supply. These
are simple broad factors which the weekly banking
figures can and do tell us about. The next chapter
will show how.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHAPTER VIII
Measuring Equity Price Inflation
This chapter were much better never
written if it will lead even one person to think
that he can “forecast” the next move of the stock
market from a simple use of the weekly banking
figures.
To make this statement all the more emphatic
and graphic, special attention is called to Chart 9,
which shows the result of years of intensive study
in combining or “correlating” various forces meas-
ured by banking figures. Right above the so-called
banking composite, there is a chart of the stock
market itself. At first glance, the charts of the
banking composite and of the stock market look
very much alike. Even more striking is the fact that
the banking composite frequently shows important
changes of trend several months ahead of the
changes in the stock market itself —notably in the
summer of 1921, in March of 1929, and again in
March of 1932. But to dissuade anyone from at-
tempting to compile or use such a composite as a


CHART 9. — A composite of factors derived from bank reports, compared with equity prices.


market “forecaster,” let me point out some of the
glaring discrepancies.
Note, for example, that the banking composite
declined during the latter half of 1926. The stock
market had no such decline, either in the second
half of 1926 or later in the spring of 1927. Anyone
who sold his stocks in view of this decline in the
banking composite would have been forced to buy
them back at much higher prices.
Or note, again, the sharp rise in the banking
composite during the summer of 1934, followed by
an equally sharp decline in the fall. The stock
market, instead of responding to this rise and fall,
either immediately or within a few months, simply
continued an irregular decline to the end of Feb-
ruary, 1935. The stock market just ignored wholly
and entirely both the up and the down movement
in basic conditions indicated by the banking com-
posite. It was not until the spring of 1935 that the
stock market began its important rise. The chances
are that anyone who bought stocks in midsummer
of 1934 on the hope inspired by improving bank re-
ports would have lost that hope entirely by early
1935, would have sold his stocks in utter discourage-
ment and at a loss, and would have missed com-
pletely the improving price trends of 1935 and 1936.
Nevertheless, the banking figures did tell the
truth about basic economic conditions —about the
conditions affecting the plans of hundreds of small
businesses in no way connected with the stock
market. There was a decided improvement in earn-
ings of many businesses in the summer of 1934,
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


quite enough to justify any man in believing that
we were still in an improving business trend, no
matter how the stock market acted.
This, then, is the real purpose of using the bank-
ing figures. They can not pretend to measure the
many complex forces at work in the stock market —
the so-called “technical” position of stocks, the
fears and prejudices and wild enthusiasms of leading
and powerful speculators, nor the reaction to politi-
cal trends and uncertainties. But they can tell us,
to a surprising degree, what is happening to business
at large, from the corner shopkeeper to the great
distributing and manufacturing corporations.
Thus, only to the extent that the stock market
may sooner or later take cognizance of what is actu-
ally happening can we say that there is any connec-
tion between the story told by the banks and that
told by the stock market. In a broad sense —utterly
useless to the stock market speculator—both the
banking figures and the market are barometers of
one and the same thing: the combined effect on
equity or ownership values of the crisscross trends
of activity, money supply, and inflationary influ-
ences in the money structure.
In brief, owners —whether of land, houses, small
businesses, or stocks of large enterprises —are rea-
sonably entitled to expect rising values for what they
own when the banking figures reveal a combined
improving trend. In a depression they are entitled
to expect no serious betterment of their ownership
values unless or until the banking figures show a dis-
tinct reversal of downward trends. Beyond this.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


any attempt to use the banking figures as a specula-
tive guide is both futile and dangerously misleading.
With this renewed caution, suppose we consider
concrete ways and means of measuring the three
main forces at work in determining equity values.
The force of changing money supply has already
been covered in our examination of bond price and
interest rate inflation. The reason why money supply
and interest rates exert a powerful influence on
equity prices has been fully discussed in the preced-
ing chapter. In general, the best measure to use is
a ratio of “net” deposit balances in the member
banks compared with total loans. “Net” balances
show the amount depositors would have left if they
paid off all their bank loans. Thus, if the banks
showed sls billion in deposits (as they did in 1920)
and bank loans of sl4 billion, then, after paying off
the loans, the depositors would have found them-
selves with only $1 billion of net balances as their
equity, free and clear. (This ratio is analogous to
figuring the “margin” in a brokerage account. It is
the “margin” of American business.)
The use of this measure, for example, in 1919 and
1920, would have shown a money supply rapidly
declining to the vanishing point. At the climax —in
October, 1920 —we would have had to divide the
net balances of only $1 billion by the loans of sl4
billion, giving a ratio of about .07 —whereas in Oc-
tober, 1936, after dividing net balances of $18,192
billion by total loans of only $8,721 billion, we would
have had an answer of over 2.08 —an increase of
some 2,714 per cent. Obviously, there is nothing
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


like this per cent increase in stock prices over the
period. But anyone using this measure as a rule of
thumb could see for himself that high money supply
in 1936 was quite as potent a factor in supporting
high equity prices as the low money supply of late
1920 was in depressing equity prices.
Moreover, anyone during the period from Janu-
ary, 1928, to September, 1929, who saw this meas-
ure dropping heavily would have sensed that one
of the important “supports” of the bull market
(plentiful net funds) was being withdrawn at an
alarming rate. A slight change in trend need not
cause much alarm, especially if offset by greatly
improved spending activity. But if, let us say, there
should be a decline from the general level of 1936
(that is, from about 2.08) to something like 1.25
in a short period of a year or two, and with no great
increase in spending activity as an offset, then the
sensible thing to do would be to accept this as a
strong cautionary signal.
This brings us to the second and all-important
force of spending activity itself. How do we meas-
ure it? And in relation to what?
As we know, the Federal Reserve Board issues
its bank debits report every week in time to be
published in the Sunday morning papers. The re-
port is divided into two sections. The first gives
total debits (that is, the value of all checks debited
or charged against deposit accounts during the
week ending the previous Wednesday) for a con-
stantly changing number of cities. For convenience,
these are divided into groups, according to the
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


Federal Reserve districts in which various cities
happen to be. The second section of the report gives
the total weekly debits in 141 “key” cities —and
this series, fortunately, is continuous since 1919,
so that direct comparisons can be made from year
to year. 1
But there are certain difficulties in drawing con-
clusions from weekly spending which the layman
cannot avoid taking into account. For instance,
holidays, when banks are closed, may fall in the
forty-fifth calendar week one year and in the forty-
sixth calender week the following year. A week
with only five business days will nearly always show
a much lower total than a week with six business
days. The Federal Reserve Board usually mentions
the number of business days in each week reported.
But the reader must watch closely for this point.
Otherwise, he may get unduly alarmed or elated.
A second difficulty in reading weekly debits re-
ports correctly is this: the weeks that include the
first or the fifteenth of any month nearly always
1 The newspapers also carry every week reports on “bank clearings.”
These are somewhat similar to debits, but not so reliable nor so
inclusive. For example, when a manufacturer draws a check on his own
bank and has it cashed there to meet his payroll, that check does not
appear in “bank clearings.” It would only appear in “bank clearings”
if he drew it on one bank but had it cashed at another bank. But payroll
checks, cashed at the banks on which they are drawn, do appear in
“bank debits,” because they are added to the debits total the minute
they are charged against the manufacturers’ deposit account. Since
payroll increases are an important indication of improving business
trends, the “debits” are thus a much more inclusive and helpful figure
than “clearings.” In a general way, however, when someone says that
bank clearings are improving, the chances are that bank debits are also
improving.
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


show much higher debit totals than the in-between
weeks. The reason for this is because so many busi-
ness firms pay bills and parts of their payroll on
the first and fifteenth of the month. There is often
a difference of as much as a billion dollars between
weeks that include the first and fifteenth and those
that do not.
Because of these two points, the layman is on
far safer ground, and subject to fewer heart at-
tacks, if he waits for the monthly report of the
Federal Reserve Board. This usually appears in
the newspapers on the second Wednesday of every
month for 141 cities. Since major holidays always
fall in the same month each year, and since the
totals for a month iron out the difference between
weeks and weekly “settlement” habits of business,
the direct comparison of a given month this year
with the same month in any other year gives the
true answer about the increase or decrease in spend-
ing activity.
The next question is this: are the figures for
spending activity—by themselves —sufficient as a
rough guide to those forces which make for better
business earnings? Unfortunately, they are not. It
is a great mistake —-and the source of most of the
confusion of “single cause” thinkers and writers —
to imagine that there is any real short cut in apprais-
ing anything as complex as modern society. By
this I do not mean that every man has to be his
own statistician or has to follow all the intricate
figures of every kind of business. The whole pur-
pose of this book is to show to what an encouraging
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


extent the banks tell the final result of all these
thousands of obscure transactions. But oversimpli-
fying a problem is just as misleading as making it
too complicated and mystifying.
It just happens to be a fact, tested by careful
analysis over a long period of years, that spending
activity alone is not always a sound guide to the
general state of business health. It has been my
experience that spending activity should be care-
fully compared with at least two other current facts
before too many conclusions are drawn from it.
What are those other facts? And how should they
be measured as compared with spending?
One of the facts springs from the homely habit
of business —and recently of consumers —known as
borrowing. A businessman borrows money from his
bank at certain seasons in order to pay for needed
raw materials or to tide over the period between
manufacture and ultimate sale. A consumer nowa-
days often borrows to buy something before he has
saved up the entire purchase price. Manufacturers
and farmers and consumers between them borrow
in order to “keep things going” and to maintain
the level of trade in general.
But what happens if trade (spending) does not
keep pace with the increased borrowings? What
happens, for instance, if a manufacturer borrows
to increase his output, only to find that public
spending has slowed down or fails to increase
enough to take the goods off his shelves? In the
language of business, he is simply “left holding the
bag,” He must repay his loan, but he has failed to
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


sell enough goods to realize the needed cash. Much
the same thing is true if consumers borrow to buy,
only to find that payroll cuts or lowered earnings
make it difficult to pay the installments on the
debt. Thus, nothing could be more logical and
practical than to compare the total spending with
the total general borrowing in order to find out
whether increased spending is “keeping pace”
with increased borrowing. How can this be done?
The simple way is to use the direct ratio or com-
parison between spending and all bank loans includ-
ing those made on security collateral. By and large,
security loans do not generally represent commercial
transactions but are closely related to financial
operations and sheer “necessity” loans of individuals.
The proceeds are “spent.”
Let us suppose, then, that in October of a given
year total dollars spent in the month equal four
times the amount of general loans, whereas in the
previous month the comparison was only three and a
half times. In this case, then, spending has risen
much faster than borrowing. From this we can reach
the common-sense conclusion that no one is likely
to be caught “holding the bag” in the very near
future. Whatever loans have been made have been
justified by increased business or profits.
But suppose we find that, while spending has
increased, general loans have increased even more
in percentage. This presents quite a different
picture. Spending has actually declined —when com-
pared with borrowing. This is a distinctly unhealthy
sign for business at large. As a matter of historical
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


interest, this is precisely what happened in the late
fall of 1922 and the early months of 1923, just be-
fore the “baby depression” of 1923-1924 set in.
All other business figures were cheerful. Freight
carloadings were doing well; electric power output
was rising brilliantly. So-called indexes of “indus-
trial production” were rising. But borrowing was
increasing faster than spending—and within a few
months business at large received a considerable
setback.
In all common sense, then, we must modify our
ideas on spending activity “in the raw” by com-
paring it with the rate at which the country is
going into bank debt or out of it. A merely “flat”
trend of spending activity might be very encourag-
ing if it were accompanied by declining aggregate
loans; or a steady rise in spending activity might
be wholly nullified (as an indicator of growing busi-
ness earnings) by a still sharper rise in aggregate
loans.
But what of the second comparison needed to
modify “raw” spending activity? Here again it is
a comparison suggested by common-sense experi-
ence; namely, the trend in spending compared with
the trend in the general price level, that is, in the
price of all those items which, taken together, form
the final objective of all spending.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York makes
up a close monthly estimate of the general price
level, giving due weight or importance to all items;
raw materials, manufactured goods, food, rent, city
and farm land values, etc. As money is spent, it is
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


spent approximately in the proportions allowed for
in this price level estimate. It is only natural, then,
to conclude that if general prices rise 10 per cent
in a year, dollar spending would also have to rise
10 per cent merely to keep pace with increased
dollar costs of everything. If the percentage rise
in spending is less than the percentage rise in general
prices, then there is actually less volume of business
being transacted —fewer automobiles being bought,
fewer bushels of wheat, fewer real-estate transac-
tions, fewer of all of these transactions taken in
total, even if here and there we know of a specific
exception.
Thus one way, at least, of detecting a creeping
decline in total business, even when the figures on
particular lines are highly optimistic, is to compare
spending with price level from month to month.
The leading newspapers carry the New York Re-
serve Bank’s figures on price level every month, and
nearly every large statistical service either publishes
these particular figures or its own equivalent
estimates.
In any case, it is important to compare spending
activity with a general price level estimate rather
than with commodity prices or raw material prices
only. The business of the country, on which money
is spent, is far too inclusive to be judged only by
commodity prices. In manufacture, for instance,
rising raw material prices might be entirely offset
by new machinery, so that the price of finished goods
to the consumer could actually be reduced. Or, real
estate in large cities may still be at low ebb, in price
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


terms, when other prices are rising. Yet part of
the money being spent is in rents and real-estate
transactions. Thus a general 'price level index is the
one to use as a modifier of the trends in spending
activity.
We now come to a third influence constantly at
work on stock prices, that is, on all equity values.
This is the effect of gold supply in a world still using
gold as the settlement medium for international
transactions, and the effect of our own gold supply
on the inherent value of our currency and our bank
deposit money. The theory of this subject is highly
controversial, but the broad idea back of it can be
stated quite simply.
Suppose we have outstanding $5 billion of cash
currency. Suppose, also, that we have a metallic
(gold) reserve back of that currency of only $4 bil-
lion. If we decided to “redeem” all the circulating
currency in gold, we would have enough gold to
redeem only 80 cents on each dollar of currency.
(Even when we are “off” the gold redemption
standard, the fact that we maintain a gold reserve
at all indicates the general feeling that redemption
should always be possible, even if not actually
practiced at the moment.) On the other hand, if we
have $6 billion of currency in circulation, but have
$7 billion in gold reserve, then we have more than
enough to make 100 per cent redemption of every
currency dollar.
Thus, in a broad way, we can say that our cur-
rency is “inflated” (i.e., worth less in terms of gold
redemption possibilities) when our gold stock is less
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


CHART 10. —Suggested measures compared with equity prices.


than our circulating currency, and “deflated” when
we have 100 per cent gold backing or better. Some
economists may object to this use of the words
“inflated” and “deflated,” but I am sure that most
of them would at least admit that in one case our
currency is “overextended” in relation to gold re-
serves and in the other case not overextended at all.
Chart 10 shows the course of currency inflation and
other measures since 1919.
Another important measure of monetary infla-
tion (in the technical sense of money compared
with gold reserves) is the total of currency plus all
bank deposits, compared with monetary gold stock.
If figures for all the banks in the country were pub-
lished at regular and frequent intervals, the lay-
man could make this computation quite as easily as
for currency. But, unfortunately, the figures for all
commercial banks are published only in the reports
of the Comptroller of the Currency, and at infrequent
intervals.
As a matter of record, however, the table shown
on page 128 shows the number of cents of gold (always
at “old” value 1 ) back of the combined deposits and
currency of the country since 1919.
It will be noted that our two periods of greatest
“overextension” —or periods with the smallest
gold reserves compared with total money —were in
1920 and again in 1928. In a broad way, our total
money has been deflating—or gaining strength in
terms of gold backing —ever since 1928, and reached
1 Since a “revaluation” does not mean that we have any more
ounces of gold, comparisons should always be with the “old” value.
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


As of
June 30
Bank deposits
plus currency (in
billions of dollars)
Gold (in billions
of dollars)*
Cents of gold per
dollar of total
money*
1919
$36,350
$2,882
7.93
1920
40.330
2.567
6.86
1921
37.280
2.967
7.96
1922
38.070
3.489
9.16
1923
40.810
3.753
9.20
1924
43.790
4.184
9.55
1925
47.400
4.073
8.59
1926
49.030
4.151
8.47
1927
61.520
4.319
8.38
1928
52.610
8.832
7.28
1929
51.840
4.024
7.76
1930
53.430
4.241
7.94
1931
60.080
4.578
9.14
1932
39.600
3.669
9.27
1933
36.470
4.030
11.05
1934
41.400
4.610
11.14
1935
46.340
5.325
11.49
1936
52.120
6.205
11.91
its largest gold backing for the entire period in
1936.
♦ At old gold value.
In so far as a currency inflation is a stimulant
to the dollar values of equities, and therefore a
partial offset to flat or downward trends in spending
activity or in money supply, the currency inflation
of 1932, coming at a time of recovery in money
supply, was one of those forces which probably
counteracted the slow decline in spending activity
in that year. It is at all times a basic factor which
the layman should watch—especially if, for some
reason, gold should again begin to flow out of the
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


country, thereby reducing the potential metallic
reserve back of our money.
In conclusion, then, any person interested in
equity values (common stocks, privately owned
businesses or income-producing real estate, etc.)
should watch for the following:
1. A marked decline, continuing for several
months, in total spending activity, as modified
by comparison with (a) aggregate bank loans
and (b) with the general price level.
2. A marked decline, continuing for several
months, in money supply as measured by the
comparison of “net” deposits to total bank
loans.
3. A pronounced decline (particularly after a
period of overextension or inflation) in circu-
lating currency compared to monetary gold
stock at “old” value.
Of the three sets of measures, the first is by all
odds the most important in ordinary periods, since
the volume of business and the rate of spending com-
pared with borrowing largely determine the earn-
ing possibilities of business. But any extreme trend
in money supply is also important because of its
effect on the “going” interest rate, and the income
basis on which people are willing to buy and hold
equities.
Inflation or deflation of the currency is likely to
move in a direction contrary to money supply; that
is, a growing shortage of “net” deposits tends to
increase the demands for “cash” money, and to
accelerate the forces leading to a loss of national
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


gold stocks. But this is not always true. The main
point is that the layman does not have to be con-
cerned —for strictly practical purposes —with the
remote economic causes for changes in these various
factors. “What” they are doing is more important
to him than “why” they are doing it.
If earnings trends are favorable (as indicated by
the spending activity measures) and if no acute
shortage in money is developing, the equity outlook
in a broad sense is reasonably sound. But even a
rising money supply (as after 1929) can only with
great difficulty counteract a persistent and deadly
decline in spending activity. Without joining the
ranks of the “single causers,” we must always and
diligently keep our eye on factors affecting earnings
if we hope to appraise our equities soundly.
The Arithmetic of the Measures
A. The Ratio of Spending Activity to Total Loans.
For this ratio we need the two figures of dollar spending for a given
month compared with aggregate loans as of the Wednesday report
nearest to the end of the same month.
For spending, we look at the “Monthly Statement of Debits to
Individual Accounts by Banks in Beporting Centers.” This report
usually appears in the newspapers on the second Wednesday of each
month, giving the figures for the entire preceding month for 141 cities,
a series that has been kept since 1919.
Thus, for illustration (and for comparison with Oct. 28, 1936, bank
reports on loans), the October, 1936, spending figures appeared in the
form shown on page 131.
The figure we are interested in for present purposes is the one on the
bottom line in the third column from the right; namely, $37,312 billion
for October, 1936.
Our first bit of arithmetic is to “adjust” this figure for so-called
“seasonal variation.” This simply means that we know from experience
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


SUMMARY FOR BANKS IN 141 CENTERS
(Jn thousands of dollars)
Num-
Federal Reserve
her of
October
September
October
Districts
cen-
ters
1936
1936
1935
No. 1. Boston
ii
2,147,642
1,665,928
1,808,261
2. New York
7
17,889,618
16,327,569
16,362,100
8. Philadelphia. ..
10
1,741,378
1,607,257
1,597,689
4. Cleveland
13
2,058,796
1,791,549
1,676,418
5. Richmond
7
791,022
663,222
663,909
6. Atlanta
15
943,252
831,491
796,024
7. Chicago
21
5,260,441
4,622,424
4,146,359
8. St. Louis
5
1,078,273
921,558
918,211
9. Minneapolis. . .
9
680,623
586,712
628,615
10. Kansas City. ..
15
1,117,105
1,004,695
978,836
11. Dallas
10
729,184
649,620
590,388
12. San Francisco..
18
2,875,194
2,569,537
2,409,917
Total
141
37,312,528
33,241,562
82,576,677
that spending usually rises in certain months and declines in others as
compared with the average for all twelve months of the year —and
that we ought to make allowance for this before concluding that spend-
ing is really increasing.
Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System
Nov. 10, 1936
MONTHLY STATEMENT OF DEBITS TO INDIVIDUAL
ACCOUNTS BY BANKS IN REPORTING CENTERS
(Monthly figures are derived from weekly reports, the figures for weeks
that do not tall entirely within a single calendar month being prorated)
Thus, October spending is usually 3 per cent above the average;
November, 4 per cent below the average; December, 8 per cent above
the average. Unless we were making this “seasonal allowance” we
might be alarmed by a November drop in spending —whereas the actual
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


Month
Seasonal Factor
106
99
106
101
100
102
97
90
92
103
96
108
1.200 - 100
12 “ 100
drop might be less than usual for that month, and therefore quite
encouraging.
In order to adjust a monthly debits total for seasonal expectation
(i.e., to determine whether the rise or fall is greater or less than normally
expected), we simply divide the total dollars shown in the report by the
seasonal factor for that month. There are many ways of computing
seasonal factors, but the series listed below will be adequate tor present
purposes:
It will be noted that these factors total 1,200, which, divided by the
twelve months of the year, brings the average to 100.
Now —to adjust our October, 1936, total of $37,312 billion for
seasonal expectancy, we simply divide as follows:
October, 1936, “raw” spending 37.312
Divided by October seasonal factor 103
In other words, the “adjusted” spending figure for October, 1936
(after allowing for an expected 3 per cent over the average month), was
$36,225 billion.
We now want to compare this with aggregate loans. Referring
to the Oct. 28, 1936, member bank report on page 73, we simply do
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


as before (page 90) and subtract all securities from the item “loans
and investments.”
Thus the ratio of October, 1936, adjusted spending to October, 1936,
total loans works out:
Spending 3|225 _ flr 41fi>4 cenl
Loans 8.721
If we want to make an index of this ratio, we then divide it by the
average ratio for the year 1926 (or 3.54) as follows:
Ratio for October, 1936 4.154
tv -j j , v o = 1.173 or 117.3 per cent
Divided by 1926 ratio 3.540
This shows us that spending compared to borrowing for October,
1936, was 17.3 per cent higher than for the year 1926.
Applying this same operation to the adjusted spending and borrowing
figures for October, 1935 (as shown in the “raw” on the right-hand
column of both reports), we would find that the index then stood at
113.1 per cent —or 13.1 per cent above 1926. Thus, over this one-year
period the gain in the spending to borrowing comparison is slight—
about 3.71 per cent.
B. The Ratio of Spending Activity to General Price Level.
As the general price level is always expressed in an index, this meas-
urement involves making an index of spending activity and then divid-
ing this index by the index of prices, making certain that both indexes
use the same year as 100.
I suggest using for general prices the General Price Level Index
compiled and published monthly by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York. It is one of the best —and worth waiting for, even though it often
appears a full month after the banking figures for the same month.
(Price level moves so slowly that, if we are in a hurry, we can simply
guess at a slight up or down trend from the last figure published. Our
guess can be based on reported trends in commodity prices in the
newspapers.)
This price level index uses the year 1913 as a base. But since 1926
is a more convenient year to use for banking figures, we can “convert”
the Reserve index into a 1926 index by simply dividing each month’s
figures by 171 —that being the price level tor 1926 in terms of a 1913
index base.
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


Thus we find that the index of general prices for October, 1936, was
156. If we divide this by 171, we get or 91.3 as our price level index
with 1926 as 100.
Similarly, for October, 1935, we would get a 1926 index figure of 86.5.
Thus the price level rose in one year from a 1926 index of 86.5 to an
index of 91.3 —a rise of roughly 5.5 per cent.
To compare spending with price level, we must also make a 1926
index out of our adjusted spending figures (see above, under A) . To do
this, we divide the adjusted spending figure for the month by the
average monthly spending figure for 1926 —which was $50,660 billion.
Thus, for October, 1936:
October adjusted spending 36.225 „ _
_. •, j. = 0.716 or 71.5 per cent
Divided by 1926 average 60.660
And for October, 1935;
October adjusted spending 31.627 . ,
_. .. - --- ■ = 0.624 or 62.4 per cent
Divided by 1926 average 50.660
We can now compare the rise in spending with the rise in price level
for the year by simply dividing, for each year, the index of spending
by the index of price, as follows:
For October, 1935:
Index of spending 62.4 __,
•j j . • • j = °- 721 or 72 -l P® r cent
Divided by price index 86.5
For October, 1936:
Index of spending 71.6 .
TV -J J a • ■ J KTS = °- 783 Of 78 - 3 per cent
Divided by price index 91.3
Thus, over one year we find a marked gain in the comparison of
spending with price level, showing that the actual volume of goods and
services changing hands was increasing. This, combined with the slight
uptrend in spending to borrowing (see A above), gives a picture dis-
tinctly favorable to earnings trends in business at large.
C. The Ratio of “Net” Balances to Total Bank Loans.
We need only two figures to determine this sensitive ratio of money
supply, the first being total loans and the second total deposits minus
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


1936
1935
26.913
8.721
24.094
7.902
18.192
16.192
loans, or “net” deposit balances. We use, of course, end-of-month
figures.
For illustration, the member bank report for Oct. 28, 1936, repro-
duced on page 73 will again serve. For loans (demand) we subtract
all securities from the item, “loans and investments.” This gives us
$8,721 for October, 1936, and (after adjusting for changes during the
year shown in the right-hand column) $7,902 for October, 1935.
For gross deposits, we take the sum of items 14, 15, 17a, and 176
(thus excluding government deposits) and get $26,913 for 1936 and
$24,094 for 1935.
To find “net” deposit balances (supply), we then subtract loans
from deposits, as follows;
Our next work of arithmetic is to divide supply by demand:
For 1936:
Supply .192 _ g Qgg or 208.6 per cent
Divided by demand 8.721
For 1935:
Supply ond = 2-049 or 204-9 P 6l cent
Divided by demand 7.902
We thus find that this sensitive money supply ratio has risen some
1.8 per cent during the year, adding to the stimulus for higher equity
prices already established by measures A and B above.
To make a 1926 index of this ratio, we simply divide the current
ratio by the actual average ratio for 1926, which was 39.1 per cent.
Thus:
For 1936:
October ratio 2.086
_. ~ . , .. . = 5.335 or 633.5 per cent
Divided by 1926 ratio 0.391
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


For 1935:
October ratio 2.049
_. -j j u mac *• fTohi' = 0.240 or 624.0 per cent
Divided by 1926 ratio 0.391
Since the index shows us that this ratio was about five times as high
in 1936 as in 1926, it is only common sense to realize that as a trend
indicator it must be used with great caution. We should give it cer-
tainly not more than one-quarter of its actual strength, compared with
full strength for each of the velocity measures (A and B above).
That is, if each of the velocity figures rises 10 per cent over a year
(or a total of 20 per cent), this is four times as important to stock prices
as a rise of 20 per cent in the “net balance to loans” ratio, and vice
versa in the case of a drop in both measures.
In the case of an opposite trend (velocity rising and money supply
falling) the same principle would roughly hold true, allowing, of course,
for the obvious fact that a drop of 50 per cent is the opposite (in
percentage) of a 100 per cent rise and a drop of 75 per cent is the
opposite of a 300 per cent rise etc.
As this matter is always puzzling to those who are not constantly
working in percentage figures, the table on page 137 may be helpful.
D. The Ratio of Circulating Currency to Monetary Oold Stock.
This measure of the quality of our circulating currency, which reflects
the results both of our international transactions (in the gold move-
ments) and of our domestic use of currency for normal activity or for
hoarding (as in 1931 to 1933), can easily be figured from the “related
items” included in the first part of the Federal Reserve Statement
reproduced on page 75. It is, broadly, a measure of currency inflation
or deflation.
First we take from the above Federal Reserve Statement item 9,
marked “Money in Circulation.” On Oct. 28, 1936, this was $6,302
billion. The right-hand column shows us that this item increased
$616 million during the year, so that the figure for October, 1935, was
only $5,686 billion.
Next we take item 7, marked “ Monetary Gold Stock.” On Oct. 28,
1936, this was $11,031 billion and on Oct. 30, 1936, only $9,686 billion
—both figures being at the “new” price for gold since the 1934 “de-
valuation” of the gold dollar.
Now —to make comparison possible with other years on an index
basis, we must reduce the gold figure at “new” value to what it would
have been worth at “old” value in years such as 1926. We do this
simply by multiplying the present figures by 59.1 per cent —since the
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION
A TABLE OF PLUS AND MINUS PERCENTAGE
EQUIVALENTS
— 1 offsets + 1.0
-34 offsets +51.5
—67 offsets + 203.0
- 2
+ 2.0
-35
+ 53.8
-68
+ 212.5
- 3
+ 8.1
-36
+ 56.8
-69
+ 222.6
- 4
+ 4.2
-37
+ 58.7
-70
+ 233.3
- 5
+ 5.3
-38
+ 61.3
-71
+ 244.8
- 6
+ 6.4
-39
+ 63.9
-72
+ 257.1
- 7
+ 7.5
-40
+ 66.7
-73
+ 270.4
- 8
+ 8.7
-41
+ 69.5
-74
+ 284.6
- 9
+ 9.9
-42
+ 72.4
-75
+ 300.0
-10
+11.1
-43
+ 75.4
-76
+ 316.7
-11
+12.4
-44
+ 78.6
-77
+ 334.8
-12
+13.6
-45
+ 81.8
-78
+ 354.5
-13
+14.9
-46
+ 85.2
-79
+ 376.2
— 14
+16.3
-47
+ 88.7
-80
+ 400.0
-15
+17.6
-48
+ 92.3
-81
+ 426.3
-16
+19.0
-49
+ 96.1
-82
+ 455.6
-17
+20.5
-50
+100.0
-83
+ 488.2
-18
+22.0
-51
+104.1
-84
+ 525.0
-19
+23.5
-52
+108.3
-85
+ 566.7
-20
+25.0
-58
+112.8
-86
+ 614.3
-21
+26.6
-54
+117.4
-87
+ 669.2
-22
+28.2
-55
+122.2
-88
+ 733.3
-23
+29.9
-56
+127.3
-89
+ 809.1
-24
+31.6
-57
+132.6
-90
+ 900.0
-25
+33.3
-58
+138.1
-91
+1011.1
-26
+35.1
-59
+143.9
-92
+1150.0
-27
+37.0
-60
+150.0
-93
+1328.6
-28
+38.9
-61
+156.4
-94
+1566.7
-29
+40.8
-62
+163.2
-95
+1900.0
-SO
+42.9
-63
+170.3
-96
+2400.0
-31
+44.9
-64
+177.8
-97
+3233.3
-32
+47.1
-65
+185.7
-98
+4900.0
-33
+49.3
-66
+194.1
-99
+9900.0
(Note: intermediate points can be easily approximated.)
“new” gold dollar is worth (approximately) 59.1 per cent of what the
“old” dollar was worth. 1
1 If the government should make further changes in the price of
gold, the newspapers at the time would always give the comparison


Thus the October, 1936, figure of $11,031 billion multiplied by .591
gives us a new figure of $6,519 billion. Similarly, the October, 1935,
figure of $9,686 billion multiplied by .591 gives us a new figure of
$5,724 billion. These new figures are what the gold stocks of the above
dates would have been worth at the “old” dollar value of 1926.
We are now ready to make a ratio of currency to gold which we can
compare with 1926 for index purposes. All we do is to divide in each
case the figures for currency by the figures tor gold at “old” value, as
follows:
For 1936;
Currency 6.302 „„ _
Divided by gold = °‘ 967 W 96 ' 7 06111
For 1935:
Currency 5.686
tv -j a u u i -.iV = 0.993 or 99.3 per cent
Divided by gold 5.724
This shows us that currency in circulation was much less in 1936
when compared with gold than in 1935. In other words, our currency
“deflated” during the year by some 2.7 per cent. This would tend to
give the dollar greater purchasing power in international trade and
generally to act as an economic of set to other price raising forces.
The ratio of currency to gold for the average of the year 1926 was
111.5 per cent (i.e., currency exceeded gold by 11.5 per cent). To make
a 1926 index, then, of our currency to gold ratio, we divide our present
ratios by the 1926 ratio as follows:
For 1936:
October ratio 0.967 „
tv -j a u moo . • q-rvr ■= 0.867 or 86.7 per cent
Divided by 1926 ratio 1.115
For 1935:
October ratio 0.993 „„ , .
TV AA u moo V " °- 891 or 891 P® r
Divided by 1926 ratio 1.115
Thus we find currency in both 1935 and 1936 greatly “deflated”
compared with 1926 and still (in October, 1936) in a deflationary trend.
with the “old” value prior to 1934. Moreover, any banker could fur-
nish the needed information.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


Measure
1935
1936
Per cent change
A. Spending to borrowing
113.1
117.3
+3.71
B. Spending to price level
72.1
78.3
+8.60
C. Money supply
524.0
533.5
+1.81
D. Currency inflation
89.1
86.7
-2.70
SUMMARY
We now come to the question of how to make a rough mental esti-
mate from these four measures of whether or not (as of October, 1936)
we are still in an economic uptrend favorable to equity prices.
We must remember that we are dealing in “offsets”; and since we
shall be dealing with the same kind of offset problem in a later chapter
on price level inflation, the methods now suggested will cover both
cases.
First of all, we have two ways of measuring gains and losses; (a) the
year-to-year trend, comparing a given month of this year with the
same month last year and (6) the trend from 1926 as our “index”
base year which we call 100. In each case, the rough method of figuring
offsets is the same.
The year-to-year comparison, however, is safer for ordinary pur-
poses, since the movements of any one factor over a single year are
not often great enough to cause wide error because of the rough meth-
ods we must use. The problem is a bit like shooting at a near-by target
as compared with a distant one. A slight error in aiming at a target
twelve feet away will not prevent our hitting the target; but an error
of the same angle in aiming at a target one hundred twenty feet away
would mean missing the target entirely.
Suppose, then, we take our four measures in index figures for October,
1936, and October, 1935, and see how we might use them. They tabu-
late as follows:
Now —to estimate roughly the offsetting value of these four measures,
we should always follow a regular procedure:
(1) Add up all the percentage gains, using, however, only one-quarter
of the gain in money supply (if it happens, as in this case, to be
a gain) as against full strength for all other gains. Thus:
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


A - + 3.71
B = + 8.60
C = l|i + , 45
Total gains = +12.76
(2) Add up the plus equivalents of all measures showing a loss. (For
table of plus and minus equivalents see page 137.) In the present
case, there is only one loss to consider. Thus:
D = —2.70, of which the plus equivalent is +2.77
(3) Then, if the gains are greater than the plus equivalents of the
losses (as in the present case), subtract the latter from the
former. Thus;
Gains +12.76
Less plus equivalents of losses 2.77
Net gain +9.99
This figure (+9.99) would then represent the net gain in conditions
favorable to equity prices, after allowing for the offsetting decline in
measure D.
(4) But if, as happens many times, the plus equivalents of the losses
exceed the total gains, we have an extra process to go through.
To illustrate, suppose measure D were down to say —l5. The
plus equivalent (see table, page 137) would then he +17.60, or
a figure greater than our total gains of +12.76. We would then
subtract the latter from the former. Thus:
Plus equivalents of losses 17.60
Less gains 12.76
Net difference 4.84
But since this difference is in favor of the down side, we would have to
take for our final offset figure the minus equivalent of +4.84 or a net
loss of —4.62.
(5) To the above we need add only this further caution; if we are
using less than full strength of any one measure (in this case,
only one-quarter of money supply) and that measure happens
to be showing a loss, we must first take the plus equivalent of
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


Measure
1926
1936
Per cent
change
A.
Spending to borrowing
100.0
117.3
+17.3
B.
Spending to price level
100.0
78.3
-21.7
C.
Money supply
100.0
533.5
+433.5
D. Currency inflation
100.0
86.7
- 13.8
that measure at full strength and then divide the plus equivalent
by four in order to calculate our reduced strength. It would give
an entirely wrong result to start by taking only one-quarter of
the actual minus figure. To illustrate, let us suppose a money
supply drop to —5O. Then:
(а) Plus equivalent of —SO = +lOO
(б) Divide +lOO by 4 = + 25
(c) Then the true minus figure would become
the minus equivalent of +25 = 20
The point is that if we took first one-quarter of —5O, we would have a
minus figure of only —12.6 and a plus equivalent of only +14.2
instead of +25.
We must remind ourselves again that although these measures, when
offset as suggested above by simple arithmetic, do help the newspaper
reader to estimate a basic up or down trend, they do not tell
much about the actual price level at which equities should stand; nor
can anyone hope to “play the market” on such rough estimates.
To estimate price level, even approximately, demands several
additional and more complicated measures, and very careful mathe-
matical “weightings” of each, as illustrated in the banking composite
shown on Chart 9 on page 114. Even then, as pointed out before, im-
portant discrepancies crop up, also changes of “lag” between basic
conditions and market response to them, all of which make attempts
at market “forecasting” highly dangerous—although the erratic up
and down movements during 1936 on Chart 9 did suggest caution
in the stock market of early 1937.
Thus, the figures above showing a net gain of some 9.99 per cent
between October, 1935, and October, 1936, would indicate that a real
economic uptrend was beneath the stock market gains of the period,
although the fact that stocks had risen some 33 per cent would also
suggest that stock prices had somewhat “outpaced” the actual
economic improvement.
To show the danger of assuming proper stock price levels (as against
year-to-year trends), suppose we examine the total changes from 1926
to 1936 as follows:
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


To estimate these offsets we would follow the procedure suggested
above and first add up all the plus changes:
A = + 17.8
C strength) = +108.4
Total gains +125.7
Then we would add up the plus equivalents (see table, page 137) of all
minus factors:
B = —21.7 = plus equivalent of 27.7
D = —13.8 = plus equivalent of 15.3
Total plus equivalents 43.0
Our third step would be to subtract from our total plus gains (125.7)
the total of our plus equivalents of losses (43.0). Thus;
Total of % gains +125.7
Less plus equivalents of losses 43.0
Net gain + 82.7
From this we might assume (if we were misled into trying to establish
levels compared with 1926) that stocks toward the end of 1936 would be
80 to 85 per cent above 1926. But in point of fact Standard Statistic’s
index of 419 stocks reached a level only 28 per cent above 1926 at the
high point of November, 1936.
The dangerous factor is obviously measure C of money supply, even
when we give it only one-quarter of its strength. The point is (and this
can be estimated only by methods more complicated than ordinary
arithmetic) that this measure has less and less importance as it rises to
extreme highs. It does tend to boost stock prices through lowering the
investment return demanded by stock buyers. But even an enormous
money supply could not justify high prices for stocks with (let us
suppose) deficit instead of earnings prospects. When money supply
reaches an index of over 200 compared with 1926, added increments
should be given mentally even less weight than one-quarter.
The chart on page 126 shows the course of the stock market since 1919
(Standard Statistic’s 419 stocks) with the four measures suggested in
this chapter plotted underneath. The money supply measure, C, is
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


plotted so as to give it visually only about one-quarter of its actual
strength. l
Note particularly the declining trends in money supply and currency
inflation during 1929 —and the rise in both these measures in 1932. In
both cases they helped to offset contrary movements of both the
velocity measures. But from October, 1929, to late 1931 heavy declines
in velocity and in currency inflation combined to offset the improve-
ment in money supply. In 1921 velocity recovered soon after money
supply.
1 For those who remember their arithmetic particularly well (or
who can use a “slide rule”), an excellent way of modifying the
“strength” of this money supply measure is to take the square root of
the actual index figure. Thus the square root of the index 533.5 for
October, 1936, is 230.9 —showing a gain over 1926 as 100 of only
+130.9 instead of 433.5. It is the square root of the money supply index
that is plotted on Chart 10.
New Reporting Forms
Just as this book is going to press, the Federal Reserve
Board in Washington announces a new form tor reporting
bank loans in the weekly reports of member banks.
The new form is meant to show the “purpose” for
which a loan has been made, e.g., for speculative or
business purposes, rather than to show on what kind
of collateral the loan has been made.
However, total loans, which formerly had to be
obtained by subtracting “securities” from total loans
and investments, are now listed under a separate item
as “Total Loans.” Thus no addition or subtraction is
now required for the only “loans” item used in the
measures suggested in this book.
MEASURING EQUITY PRICE INFLATION


CHAPTER IX
General Price Level Inflation
To start a battle royal among econ-
omists, simply ask this question: What raises the
general price level ?
The disagreement is more over details, however,
than over the general principles involved. In the
broadest sense, the classical theory still prevails,
that the average of all prices moves upward when
there is a marked increase in the quantity of money
compared with the quantity of tangible goods, and
when the velocity of that larger quantity of money
at least keeps pace with the velocity of the older
and smaller total.
In other words, if the total quantity of goods and
services that goes to make up trade increases 10 per
cent, but if the quantity of money increases 20 per
cent in the same period, and if each dollar of the
new total passes from hand to hand as rapidly as
each dollar of the former total, then (according to
the classical theory) general prices should rise. The
general idea back of this theory is that if tokens


(money) in actual use increase faster than the physi-
cal volume of goods, more butter is being spread
over each slice of bread. Money becomes relatively
more plentiful and therefore less valuable, while
goods become relatively less plentiful and therefore
more valuable in terms of money itself.
In this broad view, the classical theory has a good
deal of common sense to recommend it. But there
are practical difficulties involved. First, just what
items should we include in figuring total “money”?
Second, just how can we determine at any given
time the actual quantity of goods and services mak-
ing up the physical basis for trade ? It is around these
two points, but especially around the first of them,
that the battle of the economists rages.
In such cases it has always seemed to me that
the sensible thing is to keep an open mind, to ex-
periment boldly with known facts and figures, and
to arrive if possible through trial and error at some
conclusion that corresponds with the historical
facts about prices. We know what prices have done
from year to year. We know where to get the facts
about the quantity of different kinds of money dur-
ing those same years —the quantity of gold, for
example, of circulating notes, and of the various
kinds of bank deposits. We also know where to get
the facts about the rate of spending as an aid in
determining velocity of money. And we know how
to get an approximation, at least, of the volume of
physical goods from year to year, and ways by
which we can guess at the trend in volume for inter-
mediate periods. From all this mass of data we
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


ought surely to be able to test the classical theory
of prices by comparing known facts about money
and goods with known facts about prices.
In this connection, and as a matter of record and
tested experience, Chart 11 shows a comparison of
the general price level (as estimated monthly by
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York) with a
composite of various money and banking figures
from 1900 to 1936. This composite takes into ac-
count the rate of spending outside of New York
City, the velocity of the money created through
bank borrowings; also the total volume of bank de-
posits and currency, the basic gold supply of the
country, and a few other related factors all adjusted
to allow for long-term trends in the public’s use of
banking facilities, etc.
This is not the kind of composite that the layman
could construct easily from published newspaper
figures. Nearly every factor in it has to be carefully
adjusted for seasonal movements, and each factor
must be accurately weighted (in accordance with
trial and error experience) in proportion to all other
factors. But granting that it is an honest piece of
statistical work, in which weights or proportions
are constant throughout (for all of which I can
vouch), this composite does serve to indicate that
the price trend moves broadly in the same direction
as the combined forces of the quantity and velocity
of certain types of money, in comparison with bank
debt as representing one kind of credit and also
(very roughly) the volume of goods. In other words,
it does help to prove the validity of the classical
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHART 11. — A composite of factors derived from bank reports (adjusted for long-term trend), compared with the general price level.


“quantity theory,” at least for the thirty-six-year
period used.
The trouble with most price theory discussions
is that they do not anchor themselves to facts. They
nearly always provide one enormous loophole; the
statement that this or that theory would prove out
if other things remained equal. But “other things”
never do remain equal! Velocity is always changing.
The quantity of each type of money is always
changing. And the volume of goods is always chang-
ing. One feels a bit like a juggler in trying to keep
track of all three “other things” at once. Now, the
chart on page 147 is just such a juggler’s effort,
and no more. But simply because it does anchor it-
self to historical price facts, and without any arbi-
trary changes of weight or influence to “force” a
correspondence, it avoids all necessity of the futile
appeal to the “other things being equal” argument.
It has served to give me what small assurance I can
summon in discussing price inflation from the view-
point of a modified quantity theory. Moreover, al-
though the layman could not readily construct a
composite of this sort, he can, as I shall try to show
later, measure enough of the facts involved to pro-
vide himself with a good rough guide to the basis
for current price movements.
Since the quantity theory seems to have some
provable validity, it is well worth while to examine
the principles back of it a little more closely —
especially the reasons for believing that the quantity
and velocity of certain types of money are more im-
portant to prices than the quantity and velocity of
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


all sorts and kinds of money lumped together. This
involves a little attention to the question of money
itself.
Much of the supposed dark mystery surrounding
money is due simply to the multitudinous money
“systems” in actual use in the modern world, and
not to the basic idea of money itself, which is really
quite simple.
What money should be —and what any honest
money system should try to make it —is just this:
a debt owed by the community in exchange for
actual goods or services delivered to the community,
and exchangeable at some later date for an equivalent
value of goods or services.
We can illustrate it this way. John Olsen raises
1,000 bushels of wheat, keeps 100 bushels for his
own use, and delivers (sells) the other 900 to the
“community,” that is, to others who need wheat.
At the time he delivers this wheat it has a worth to
the community equal to that of an automobile selling
at S9OO. But John Olsen already has an automobile.
He is not ready to make an immediate exchange of
his wheat either for an automobile or for any other
article. So he accepts a receipt issued by the com-
munity, either in the form of cash currency or of a
bank deposit credit, the receipt being officially
marked with the present exchange value of his
wheat —$900.
That receipt actually represents a debt of the
community to him. The debt can be discharged only
when he finally agrees to exchange his receipt for
goods valued at that time at S9OO, Thus, money,
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


in the truly sound sense, gets its real value from
actual goods and services delivered and from the
real goods and services for which this money (negoti-
able receipt) can later be exchanged.
The trouble (i.e., the mystery) all begins when
time begins to do its work. As time progresses, the
relative values of all sorts of goods and services
change. New production methods enable automo-
bile makers to sell for SBOO the same quality of car
that used to sell at S9OO. A drought kills huge herds
of cattle and the scarcity of meat shoots its price
per pound skyward. A wave of caution sweeps over
the business world, and demand for goods falls so
rapidly that it forces a hurried liquidation of manu-
factured goods at bargain sale prices. But as time
records all these changing circumstances, John Olsen
still holds his receipt for S9OO. He is not yet ready
to let the community discharge its debt to him.
After a year, let us say, he finds that he can now
exchange his receipt not only for an automobile,
but also for a radio (now selling at SSO instead of
$75) and for a comfortable new bed and mattress.
Time has thus worked most favorably for John
Olsen. Without producing a single extra bushel of
wheat, he finds that his last year’s receipt for 900
bushels will now exchange for more goods than be-
fore. By holding the community in debt to him at
his own. pleasure, he has increased the value of the
debt when measured by its exchange value into
goods.
Thus the mystery of the power of money is not
really a mystery at all. It is simply the fact that
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


money, during an indefinite period of time, acquires
a value quite distinct from the value of the goods
it originally represented. It has the original ex-
change value of those goods plus (or minus ) the
changing price of other goods over a period of time
which John Olsen alone (and not the debtor com-
munity) has the right to determine.
In other words (and this is a point seldom given
proper emphasis in money discussions) money claims
differ from all other debt claims in this very special
sense, that a money claim has no time limit unthin
which it must be collected, and that it cannot be
paid off until the individual creditor is willing to have
it paid!
Consider the nearest approach to a money claim,
namely, a “demand loan.” Like a money claim, it
must be paid on demand. But the lender cannot force
the borrower to continue in debt. If the borrower must
pay on demand, he can also settle whenever it suits
his convenience. But not so with a money claim.
It is all one-sided. The lender can demand payment
in goods whenever he pleases, but he can also refuse
to have the debt discharged for as long as he pleases.
Money is a supreme and unique form of creditor
claim that is both a demand obligation and, at the
will of the creditor, a perpetual debt.
Once this point is clear, much of the mystery of
the unique influence of money on human affairs
disappears. We see then why the “quantity of
money” (i.e., the quantity of indefinite debt claims
against the community) looms so important in all
discussions of price level. It is not merely a matter
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


of the “number of tokens” used to cover a given
volume of goods or trade, but something more than
that. It is the added (or intimately related) fact
that the only way the debt claims of money can
be satisfied is through exchange for goods. If, there-
fore, the quantity of money claims increases faster
than the totality of goods available to satisfy those
claims, then it is only natural that the “prices” of
goods should rise. Goods have become scarce com-
pared with accumulated claims against those goods.
This looks simple—and it is. But we also have a
clue, in the time element involved in money, to
the importance of velocity as well as quantity in
determining prices. Here is the point. If the money
creditors are very slow about turning their money
claims into goods, then there is ample time for the
community to increase the production of goods
and thus meet all claims as they are presented. No
scarcity of goods to satisfy money claims ever actu-
ally develops—because the discharge of the money
debts is spread over a relatively long time. The
money claims may “overhang” the community,
so to speak, but as long as the creditors are lenient
(i.e., as long as the “velocity” of money remains
low) there is no dislocation of supply (goods) and
demand (volume of money claims “cashed in” for
goods); hence no reason for a change in the general
price level.
So it follows quite naturally that an undue in-
crease in the quantity of money claims compared
with goods may be offset, as a price-raising influ-
ence, by a slowing up of the owners of money in
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


cashing in their claims. Also, an undue decline in
money compared with goods may be offset, as a
price-depressing influence, by an increasing speed
of owners in converting their money claims.
Thus spending activity —or the rapidity with
which owners of money cash in their claims —be-
comes quite as important for prices as the mere
volume of money compared with goods. A period of
rapid spending is a period of rapid “calling” of
money claims, tending to increase the relative
scarcity of goods within any given time period.
The opposite is a period of low spending and
“hoarding” of money claims.
If we disregard for the moment the different
types of money, we can say that SSO billion of money
claims being spent once a month mean a rate of
conversion into goods of S6OO billion a year. But
we can also say that S4O billion of money claims
being spent one and a quarter times a month likewise
mean an annual rate of conversion of S6OO billion;
or that only S3O billion of money claims being spent
two and a half times a month mean an annual rate
of conversion of S9OO billion. In this latter case the
volume of goods available over the year would have
to increase nearly 25 per cent in order to prevent
a price rise, in spite of the fact that the volume of
money, by itself, was lower.
All this would be simple to figure from published
facts if we could disregard the various kinds of
money under our particular money “system.” But
here is just where we run into one of those complica-
tions which too many theories ignore. We have one
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


kind of money —gold (and, to some extent, silver) —
which is more than an exchangeable receipt. It is also
a valuable commodity in its own right. It is not
simply a measure, like a yardstick. To a very special
degree, anyone who accepts gold in exchange for
his wheat or other goods has already “cashed in”
his money claim. He has directly exchanged one
valuable commodity for another. The official stamp-
ing of a piece of gold by the government auto-
matically makes it “money,” but it would have
approximately the same “commodity” value
whether it were stamped or not. This is obviously
not true of paper money nor of a bank deposit
credit.
Then we have two major kinds of bank deposit
money. One, as explained in Chapter 111, is “cre-
ated” every time a bank makes a loan. The other
is “created” every time a bank makes an invest-
ment. There is a marked difference between the
two kinds of created money. When the bank makes
a direct loan, the amount of that loan is at once
added to the debt total of the country. We can in-
crease bank money in this way only by going more
into debt. But in most cases when the bank buys
an investment (such as a railroad bond) there is an
increase in bank money without any increase in
total debt. The debt, represented by the bond, al-
ready existed. It is now owed to the bank instead
of to the individual who sold it to the bank. It has
changed hands. But it is not a new debt.
Thus, broadly speaking, we can have an increase
in money supply in three ways: first, through new
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


gold mined from the earth or imported from abroad
and involving no increase in debt; second, through
bank loans, involving increased dollar debt for
every dollar “created”; and third, through bank
investments in securities already outstanding, 1 in-
volving no increase in total debt.
' It takes no great imagination to see that these
different kinds of money might have quite different
effects on the economic system and on prices. Bank
loan money is created for a specific purpose, per-
haps for a self-liquidating business transaction or
for a speculative operation. It is canceled out auto-
matically upon the completion of that operation
or transaction. Bank investment money remains
outstanding just as long as the bank wants to hold
its investment total at a given figure. Gold and
silver, being both money and valuable commodities,
remain outstanding permanently unless exported
or melted down for use in the arts.
From this we can see that bank loan money comes
the nearest to being the type of money that rep-
resents a receipt for goods delivered to the com-
munity. We would naturally suspect, then, that
it is the velocity or “turnover” of money created
by bank loans that would have the greatest effect
on prices, rather than the velocity of all kinds of
money lumped together. (As we have seen in Chap-
ter VIII the velocity of borrowed funds also has a
special significance in showing whether spending is
1 Of course, when a bank invests in a “new issue” of government or
corporate bonds there is an increase in total debt, but accurately
speaking, the debt is created independently of the bank’s investment.
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


rising as fast as borrowing and therefore justifying
the borrowers’ hopes.)
As to whether this suspicion is justified or not,
I can only say that the velocity of bank loan money
is one of the major factors used in the composite
charted on page 147, and that as a help to measuring
price influences it has “proved out” far more ac-
curately than has the velocity of total money. The
purpose of this book is not to “settle” questions
of high dispute among economists, but merely to
supply the layman with rough measuring tools that
seem to work. In this instance, common-sense intui-
tion about the special price importance of bank
loan money seems to be reasonably substantiated
by historical facts.
As rough-and-ready guides for the layman, then,
we might accept the following measures of the in-
teracting forces affecting the general price level. 1
First, a comparison of the rate of increase or de-
crease in spending activity outside of the largely
financial New York area with the total bank loans
of the country. Second, a comparison of total hank
deposit money with the monetary gold stock responsible
for creating a part of that total money. What would
these two measures show us?
The rate of spending activity outside of New York
would give us the rough trend of purely business
activity, as distinct from the large financial opera-
tions which so heavily dominate the New York
1 Following the plan of this book, the detailed sources of the figures
and the ways of using them are described in the next chapter.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


figures. The comparison of this “mercantile” spend-
ing activity with total bank loans would show us
whether we were turning over our newly created
money as rapidly as our older total. Moreover, under
our credit system the volume of bank loans from
decade to decade is a rough measure of the growing
volume of goods and services.
There are no available monthly estimates of goods
and services, and even yearly totals estimated from
tangible wealth and from the yearly income derived
from “services” are at best hazy. Thus, lacking all
accurate clues, we can at least say that sharply de-
clining bank loans indicate a cessation of rapid
production of new goods and that rapidly rising
bank loans indicate an increasing production rate
for new goods. Over longer periods we can also say
that the growing volume of bank loans has a rea-
sonable and rough relationship to the productive
growth of the country. Thus, when we take the
turnover of bank loans, the bank loan item does
double duty, as measuring one significant part of
our money supply and as a denominator of volume
of goods. (Any good statistician could tear this
argument to shreds as unsound theory—and I could
even do so myself, very easily. Fortunately, how-
ever, and for purely practical short-term periods,
it seems to work!)
Our second suggested measure —comparing total
bank deposits with gold stock —is simply one easy
way of discounting the effect on prices of the special
form of money created by gold and of recognizing
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


some effect on general prices of all other forms of
money, whether derived from bank loans or bank
investments.
In other words, if total deposits rise $2 billion
in a year, but if gold stocks have also increased $2
billion, then none of the increase in money is due
to increased borrowing or investment and all of it
is due to the increase in gold. But if total deposits
rise $2 billion while gold reserves are falling off
$1 billion, then the whole money structure is be-
coming inflated, in the sense that the entire increase
in deposits is due to bank loans and investments
plus the billion necessary to offset the decrease in
gold. We would expect total deposits, let us say,
of SSO billion out of which only $5 billion is due to
gold to have a more direct inflationary effect on
prices than a similar total of SSO billion out of
which $lO billion is due to gold. The historical facts
seem to bear out this view.
Of course, a steady and long-continued increase
in gold supply compared with deposits may easily
lead to subsequent increase in bank borrowings and
investments —to a temptation to use our greater
primary resources in gold to the full limit, to over-
expand both borrowing and investment, and hence
to an ultimate inflationary influence. In this sense,
gold increases may be a source of future inflation,
but they do not seem to be inflationary for the mo-
ment (in spite of much opinion to the contrary)
unless other forms of money, created by borrowing
or bank investment, rise even faster than gold.
When other forms do not rise proportionately, we
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


are, in effect, “sterilizing” the gold for the time
being.
Nor am I forgetting that in older days, when
precious metals were the chief form of money in
current business use, a sudden increase in gold was
undoubtedly inflationary, making money (gold)
plentiful and cheap compared with goods. But to-
day, when nearly 90 per cent of our money is created
by bank credit operations, a gold inflow may actu-
ally prove a deflationary influence for the time
being. At the very least, the evidence from trial
and error experiment indicates that deposits largely
made up by gold are less inflationary than deposits
made up largely by bank credit. For this reason,
a constant comparison of total deposits to gold
stock is a useful and practical way for the layman
to determine the inflationary quality of the total
money on deposit at any given time.
We have several “case histories” in recent years
which help to demonstrate the practical utility of
the measures suggested above. Starting with recent
times, we have the year 1934 as a particularly good
example. This was a year when many of the self-
appointed crystal-gazers were predicting sharp
inflationary price rises. Hectic warnings were issued
to be ready for high shoe prices, high food prices,
and high everything else —except, of course, high
bond prices. These, presumably, would tumble
in a general price inflation. But what actually
happened? The chart on page 160 shows what
happened to stock, bond, and general prices in
1934.
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


In brief, the general price level rose only gently,
stocks fell, and bond prices soared! In this confused
period, what happened to the suggested measures
for general price inflation?
The turnover of loans (spending activity compared
with total bank loans) rose for a few months, and
CHART 12. —General prices, stock prices, and bond prices during 1934,
with December, 1933, as 100.
then went “flat” to November. But total bank de-
posits failed to rise sharply when compared with
increasing gold stocks. The increased and irregular
turnover was greatly modified by the continued
deflated quality of total deposits. We might note
here that both these measures, when combined or
offset, move about twice as violently as does the
general price level. Thus, mentally, we should esti-
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


mate their combined movement at about half
strength. This is how the two trends compared:
CHART 13a. —General prices, turnover of loans, and deposits to gold
during 1934, with December, 1933, as 100.
As a result of all this, the general price level was
only 6 per cent higher in December, 1934, than in
December, 1933; no runaway inflation, such as the
crystal-gazers had fretted about —nothing more
than the common-sense response to a greater
activity.
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


As the second case history we might take the
price drops of 1931. During this period the turnover
of loans declined sharply, and so did bank deposits
compared with gold supply. Thus both the sug-
gested measures showed rapid disintegration at
work —and prices dropped 11 per cent, as shown
below:
CHART 13b. —General prices, turnover of loans, and deposits to gold
during 1931 with December, 1930, as 100.
Small wonder, then, that with a drop in both
quantity and velocity of borrowed funds, the cry of
the moment was to curtail surpluses of goods —and
that within a short time President Hoover’s admin-
istration recommended “plowing under” every
third row of cotton!
But the main point of this case history is that
the layman—who might have been deceived by
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


the midsummer optimism of the foreign “mora-
torium” period—could have measured the depres-
sing facts for himself. From May, 1931, just before
the “moratorium,” to August the turnover of
borrowed funds failed to increase. Gold began to
flow out of the country, but deposits fell even faster
than the gold stock. Inexorable forces were at
work —and their nature was plain in the published
figures, available to everyone, and needing only
simple arithmetic to tell their story to the layman
as well as to heads of government.
Going back for a third important case history
to 1919-1922, we find in the second half of 1920 and
in early 1921 the most spectacular general price de-
cline since the Civil War. From a high point of post-
war price inflation in June of 1920, prices dropped no
less than 30 per cent in twelve months, bringing
enormous injury to every business requiring large
inventories of goods and a most painful situation
for debtors —their debts in dollars remaining fixed
while the value of their assets slid and crashed. Did
the layman have any warning of the collapse ?
In this period (from December, 1919) spending
activity, which had risen 25 per cent during 1919,
suddenly went flat. It did not decline at once, but
it ceased to rise in spite of a continued sharp rise
in loans. Thus the turnover of loans did drop, and
very sharply. Bank deposits continued to rise for a
few months, especially compared with a marked
decline in gold stocks. But this rise was by no means
enough to offset the almost vertical decline in
turnover —as shown on the chart on page 164.
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


By July, as the chart shows, hoik the turnover of
loans and the comparisons of deposits with gold
were declining together. Both forces were now
sharply deflationary, giving no hope to the harassed
holders of inventory. It was not until the second
quarter of 1921 that these forces, starting with
turnover, began to steady themselves and give
CHART 13c. —General prices, turnover of loans, and deposits to gold
during 1919-1922, with December, 1918, as 100.
support for the price movements in later 1921 and
1922.
Neither these case histories nor the composite
of similar forces charted on page 147 would satisfy
the exacting theoretical economist. They are not
intended to. The economist can argue —and soundly
—that there are very long-term trends or cycles
in prices whose contributing causes we cannot
easily detect from merely current banking figures.
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


Historically, for instance, there have been periods
when sharp and spectacular increases in the world’s
gold supplies have exerted a universal stimulus on
price levels and on the prosperity of whole sections
of the globe—also periods of new forces released
by science and invention, wars and new alignments
of monetary supremacy as between leading na-
tions, and slow changes in the proportion of business
conducted through banks.
But for the relatively short-term requirements
of the average businessman, seeking some logic
for his plans for the next few months, the banking
measurements outlined above seem to be aston-
ishingly helpful (except, possibly, in war periods 1 ),
both as a positive guide and as a negative antidote
to the conflicting opinions which beset the layman
from every page of his newspaper in moments of
real or imaginary crisis.
The next chapter will show in practical detail
just what figures the layman should look for and
how he should use them to estimate for himself
the probable near-term trend of general prices.
1 In war periods, when the government may act as purchasing agent
for allied powers, etc., bank debits no longer fully reflect actual trade.
GENERAL PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


CHAPTER X
Measuring Price Level Inflation
In the preceding chapter we looked
into some of the broad influences constantly at work
to raise or lower the general price level. We have
considered the special quality of “money” as a
one-sided debt that can be settled only with the
consent of the creditor, and why this special quality
makes its rate of spending quite as important as its
total quantity. We have also examined the different
hinds of money: primary money (chiefly gold),
which, being a valuable commodity itself, involves
no borrowing; money created by bank investments,
which involves no new debt for its creation; money
created by bank loans, which does involve a new
dollar of debt for each new dollar of deposit money
created.
This brought us to the suggestion of two practical
measures for determining —at least over short
periods—whether the forces at work at any given
time should tend to raise or lower general prices.
These measures were:


First: A comparison of spending activity outside
of the New York area with the bank loans for
the entire country.
Second: A comparison of total deposit money
with the total monetary gold stock of the
country.
I want to make it doubly clear that a trained
statistician, with available sources for complete
figures of all sorts, could use far more sensitive and
accurate measures than these. But our main pur-
pose always is to find measurements for which the
layman can find the necessary figures in his news-
paper. Newspapers rarely carry the full figures for
the weekly bank reports, so that to attempt meas-
urements other than those suggested would require
getting the original reports from the Federal Reserve
Board, and having on hand the similar reports for
earlier years. For the past eighteen years or so, the
measures suggested have been sufficient to indicate
a trend comparable with that in general prices. But
just how do we select and use the needed figures?
Our first item to establish is the rate of spending
activity outside of the New York area. We get this,
of course, from the weekly or monthly “bank deb-
its” reports, as explained in the chapter on equity
price inflation. But how can we separate the New
York spending figures from those of the rest of the
country ?
In the Federal Reserve Bulletin, and in the
mimeograph reports sent to newspapers and others
by the Reserve Board, the separation of New York
City figures is complete. But the newspapers do not
MEASURING PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


carry the complete reports. They merely give the
total for the country and then the separate totals
for the twelve Federal Reserve districts. One of
these is the New York District, which, of course,
includes many cities and areas outside of New York
City itself. Nevertheless, for all practical purposes
the trends for the New York District and for New
York City are so very similar (the city making
up about 95 per cent of the total for the district)
that we shall never be far wrong if we simply sub-
tract from the total for the country the separate
total for the New York Reserve District.
For present purposes the report to use is the
monthly report (usually published on the second
Wednesday of each month) which gives the total
spending for the 141 cities which have been carried
as a continuous series since 1919. This report gives
the monthly total for the entire group of cities, and
also the total for the same cities separated into
Federal Reserve districts. Furthermore, it gives the
same sets of figures for the corresponding month a
year earlier.
Our next important measuring figure —the one
we must compare with the mercantile rate of spend-
ing—is that for bank loans, representing the part
of our total bank deposits created by new debts.
In theory we should compare spending outside of
New York with bank loans outside of New York.
But the newspapers do not carry the year-to-year
comparisons on the figures for loans outside of New
York. Moreover, loans made for purely financial
purposes in New York do, in a sense, draw money
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


away from trade channels, so that there is some
benefit in including them in any comparison with
mercantile spending. For practical purposes, then
(and also to satisfy the more fine-spun type of
theory which it is unnecessary to go into for present
purposes), we can simply take from the weekly
member bank report the figure for total loans.
When loans begin to rise more rapidly than spend-
ing, it is a pretty good indication that industrial
output is being increased in anticipation of sales
that never materialize; that is, that the volume of
goods is rising faster than the rate of consumption
of those goods. Or, at least, if a large part of the
increased loans is financial in character, we have an
indication that money which might stimulate gen-
eral prices is being withdrawn from commercial
trade and used to a greater extent than formerly in
purely financial operations. On the first assumption,
money claims are not being “called” as rapidly as
new goods are being created, which would tend to
depress prices. On the second assumption, not
enough of the new money created by borrowing is
being used in commerce to stimulate general prices.
We also know that borrowing for speculative pur-
poses, or for excessive inventories, means with-
holding goods from circulation and consumption,
and that this must, in the end, slow down relative
trade activity. Whatever way we look at it, borrowed
funds are not being used to advantage for main-
taining the general price level of goods and services.
From the wholly theoretical view (based on the
quantity theory of money with certain modifica-
MEASURING PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


tions) we could say that, although the quantity of
money had been increased or sustained by borrow-
ing, the velocity of the new total was not so great
per dollar as the velocity of the former total. Thus,
whether we prefer the practical or the theoretical
explanation, the fact seems to remain that this
measurement does, in practice, give us a helpful
guide to one of the current forces tending to raise
or lower general prices. We cannot take it alone;
we must always compare it with the second measure
we are about to consider. But by itself it has great
importance, is readily available to the layman in
his newspaper, and demands only a few minutes of
his time once a month to reduce to a definite figure.
We now come to the second measure of major
influence on general prices; the comparison of total
deposit money with the total monetary gold stock
of the country. The purpose of the comparison, it
will be recalled, is to show what proportion of a
given total of deposit money is due to the receipt
or accumulation of gold, and what proportion to
bank borrowings or to bank investments. Thus, in
effect, we are allowing for the different quality from
month to month of a given total of bank deposit
money, for the proportion based on debt as distinct
from the proportion based on gold as an inherently
valuable commodity.
To arrive properly at this figure we ought to use
not merely the deposits of weekly reporting banks,
but also deposits of all other commercial banks. The
weekly reporting banks in 1936 held only about
56 per cent of the total deposits of the country.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


But a few years ago they held an even smaller pro-
portion. It is obviously inaccurate to compare total
gold stock with only 56 per cent of total deposits. But,
unfortunately, the figures for all commercial banks
are published only once a year by the Comptroller
of the Currency. This makes them difficult for the
layman to follow. Hence, for practical rough-and-
ready purposes, the best figure for the layman to
follow from his newspaper is the comparison of de-
posits in the weekly reporting banks with total gold
stock. The trend, at least, will not be far different
for short periods from the figure for total bank de-
posits to gold. Only the proportion will be radically
different. 1
How, then, could we arrive at some reasonable
conclusion as to inflationary or deflationary forces
at work on general prices? We might have, let us
say, by October of a given year a declining trend
in our measure of spending compared with borrow-
ing. We might also have a declining trend in our
measure of deposits to gold. Both factors, then,
would be working toward declining price levels.
But let us assume that by December we have re-
sumed a sharply rising trend in our measure of
spending to borrowing, whereas our measure of de-
posits to gold continues unchanged, or shows only a
1 Obviously, for the trained statistician, if reporting banks today
hold 66 per cent of deposits, it is simple to compare this with 56 per cent
of our present gold stock to get correct proportions. But a year from
now, reporting banks may hold 60 per cent of total deposits. Unless the
layman could follow the Comptroller’s infrequent reports, he would
have no way of knowing about this change in proportions and making
proper allowance for it.
MEASURING PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


slight drop. In that case we would be justified in
assuming that the rising velocity was sufficient
to offset the continued deflationary quality of our
money, and that general prices might remain firm
or even advance fractionally.
Let me emphasize once more that we are not dis-
cussing commodity prices only, but also the entire
range of general prices entering into the business
and living transactions of the nation. A shortage
in certain crops, labor disturbances causing a tem-
porary shortage in certain lines of goods, buying
demand from foreign countries for raw materials
for war purposes —all these and many more similar
conditions might at any time bring a price rise in
several important commodities without seriously
affecting the general price level and the average
cost of living.
What the average citizen wants to know concern-
ing general prices is simply whether or not the signs
point to a “runaway” price inflation or a “slide-
away” price deflation. For this purpose a compari-
son of the two measures just described should prove
highly useful and practical (see Chart 14, page 173).
But there are other and broader conditions —the
relative inflations referred to in the introduction to
this book —which are also of the deepest concern to
every intelligent citizen. The remaining chapters of
this book deal with these more generalized condi-
tions—debt compared with wealth, interest charges
compared with income, and above all, cost of living
compared with income. Ultimately, the changes in
these basic relationships account for most of the
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHART 14. —Suggested measures compared with the general price level.


1935
1936
Per cent
change
32 576
37.312
+14.6
+ 9.3
16.362
17.889
3. Ex-New York District
16.214
19.423
+19.8
alternating hope and despair in our civilization. We
must all know how to measure these changes if we
are to understand the deeper problems of our fu-
ture. If what we understand as civilization is to
survive, the next generation must be equipped to
meet these changes and to strike at the conditions
underlying them with the utmost candor, conserva-
tism, and rugged good sense.
The Arithmetic of the Measures
A. The Ratio of Spending (outside of New York) to Bank Loans.
As explained above in this chapter, mercantile spending outside of
New York City can be easily approximated by subtracting from the
total monthly spending for the country the separately reported spend-
ing for the New York Federal Reserve District. The way these items
are separated can be seen by a glance at the sample debits report for
the month of October, 1936, reproduced on page 131.
Using this sample report again for illustration, we find:
October debits total $37,312 billion
Less N. Y. District debits (No. 2) 17.889
Debits “ex-New York” $19,423
For October, 1935, we find in the same report (right-hand column):
October debits total $32.676 billion
Less N. Y. District (No. 2) 16.862
Debits “ex-New York” $16,214
From this illustration we will note at once that the percentage gains
over the year vary as follows:
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


Month
Seasonal factor
106
90
102
101
100
102
July
100
9$
94
107
96
109
1200
—= 100 average
It is because of these frequently wide variations between the mer-
cantile spending changes outside of New York, compared with the
changes in the primarily financial spending within New York, that the
so-called ex-New York figures have so much significance for purely
business trends.
These ex-New York debits should be further adjusted by a seasonal
factor, as explained on page 131 for total debits —that is, dividing each
month’s total by the seasonal factor for that month. A table of approxi-
mate seasonal factors for ex-New York debits follows:
Thus, we get seasonally adjusted totals for ex-New York debits for
October, 1936 and 1936, as follows:
For 1935:
Ex-New York debits, “raw” 16.214 _
Divided by October factor 107
For 1936:
Ex-New York debits, “raw” 19.423 _
Divided by October factor 107
To get our figure tor total bank loans (including New York) we go
through the same process outlined on page 90, and subtract all
MEASURING PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


securities from total loans and investments of the member bank
report, obtaining (for October, 1985 and 1936) totals of $7,902 billion
and $8,721 billion, respectively.
We are now ready to take the ratio of adjusted ex-New York debits
to total loans for both years, as follows:
For 1935;
Debits 15.153
, ■ _ - - = 1.918 or 191.8 per cent
Divided by loans 7.902
For 1936:
Debits 18.152
= 2.081 or 208.1 per cent
Divided by loans 8.721
In this case we have an increase in the ratio (velocity) of 8.5 per cent
in one year, which, by itself, would indicate a velocity stimulant to
prices, for reasons explained in this and the previous chapter.
This velocity ratio for 1926 was 1.509 {or 15.09 per cent) so that we
can make an index of our current ratios by dividing them by this 1926
ratio. Thus:
For 1935;
October ratio 1.918 , ___ ,
tv -j jr, mac f 1,-ao = !- 27 l ° r 127 -I Per cent
Divided by 1926 ratio 1.509
For 1936:
October ratio 2.081
n- -j j . = 1-379 0T 137 - 9 P er cent
Divided by 1926 ratio 1.509
Obviously, 1936 price levels were not 37.9 per cent above 1926. This
makes it quite evident that another factor of deflationary character was
at work, and this, in a rough way, will be found in our next suggested
measurement.
B. The Ratio of Total Deposits to Monetary Gold Stock.
As explained previously, a still more satisfactory measure for this
purpose would be total bank deposits (for all banks in the country)
plus total currency in circulation compared to gold stock. But since
this is unobtainable in ordinary newspaper reports, we must be satis-
fied for the present purposes with total weekly reporting member bank
deposits to total gold.
In the “arithmetic notes” to Chapter VIII, page 136, the method was
explained for finding gold stock figures and converting them into
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


1926
1936
Per cent
change
100.0
137.9
+37.9
-12.2
2. Measure B (monetary inflation)....
100.0
87.8
dollars of the “old” gold price. The sample figures obtained for
October, 1935 and 1936, were $5,724 billion and $6,619 billion,
respectively.
Similarly, in measuring the inflation of bond prices on pages 72-74
of Chapter V, we found that October, 1936 and 1936, figures for gross
deposits were $24,641 billion and $27,617 billion, respectively.
These are the only figures we need to make our ratio, thus:
For 1935:
Gross deposits $24,641
, . f ~ . ■ = 4.305 or 430.5 per cent
Divided by gold 6.724
For 1936:
Gross deposits $27.617
Divided by gold 6.519 ° T '** cent
So we find that this ratio had declined about 1.6 per cent during the
year, as a mild offset to the 8.5 per cent rise in velocity (measure A).
To reduce the deposit to gold ratio to a 1926 index, we merely divide
the current ratios by the 1926 ratio, which was 4.824. Thus:
Ratio for October, 1935 4.305
_. ~ , , 7- = 0.892 or 89.2 per cent
Divided by 1926 ratio 4.824
Ratio for October, 1936 4.236
_. ~ j i 7= 0.878 or 87.8 per cent
Divided by 1926 ratio 4.824
SUMMARY
On an index basis, we find the following changes between 1926 and
1936;
Now —since a drop of 12.2 per cent is the opposite (or offset) of a rise
of approximately 13.9 per cent (see table on page 137), we would sub-
tract 13.9 per cent from the 37.9 per cent gain in velocity and arrive at a
MEASURING PRICE LEVEL INFLATION


net gain of 24.0 per cent. Then we would cut this final figure in half —
making it 4-12-0 p er cent. 1
This, of course, is still too high, since general prices have not yet
returned to 1926 levels. If, however, instead of the above inflation
measure, we used the ratio of total deposits in all banks plus currency
to gold (see page 128), we would find an offset to velocity of —26.2, and
would subtract from the 37.9 per cent gain in velocity an offset figure
of 35.5 (the opposite of —26.2) and arrive at a net figure of 4-2.4 per
cent, or, when cut in half, 4-1.2 per cent —which would be much more
nearly correct.
This difference is explained by the fact that deposits in weekly
reporting banks have risen much more rapidly than deposits in all
banks. Our total bank money was much more deflated in October, 1936,
than the part of it represented by reporting banks only.
In spite of this difficulty, the two “newspaper measures” suggested
are most helpful in estimating the basic up or down trend in general
prices—leaving long-term levels to be measured more accurately by
other methods not easily available to newspaper readers. The important
thing to remember is to cut the final offset figure in half.
If the newspaper reader keeps track of these figures monthly, it will
be wise to “smooth out” the debits to loans ratio (A) by keeping it in
the form of a four months’ average. This simply means adding together
the index figure for the current month and the figures for the three
previous months and dividing the total by four. Thus, if a December
index of the ratio is 145, we add that to a November figure of (say)
141.5, an October figure of 132.9, and a September figure of 140, making
a total of 559.4. Dividing this by four gives us 139.8 as the “moving
average” figure for that December.
1 The general method of roughly estimating offsets is described in
detail on pages 139 to 141.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHAPTER XI
Decades of Debt
From all the discussion of “abso-
lute ” inflations in our preceding chapters, it is hard
to escape one major conclusion —that debt, in all
its forms and expressions, plays a stupendous role
in affecting the material values men live by and
work for.
Yet most of the discussions of our modern system
and of its supposed moral benefits to the “rugged
individual” direct the chief emphasis toward owner-
ship. It is “good for a man” to own his own home.
It is good for a man to own his own business, or at
least a stockholder’s share in some business. It is
natural and desirable for men to accumulate owner-
ship of the tangible goods of this world —of land and
of the means of creative production. This is the
theme of modern society’s defense of its system
against communism. The stress is wholly upon the
human importance of private ownership of goods
and of the means of producing more goods.


Yet, when we come to examine the things that
affect ownership most intimately, we find that debt
rules the roost —that the comparison between this
or that kind of ownership and this or that kind of
debtorship seems to affect with inexorable logic the
price or current exchange value of ownership. The
money owned by bank depositors, for instance, when
compared with the amount owed, affects the interest
rate and with it the price of ownership shares in
industry. The rate of public spending activity as-
sumes its most helpful aspect only when compared
with what the public owes. If spending increases
faster than borrowing, the earnings and the price
values of ownership shares tend to increase. If bor-
rowings rise faster than the rate of spending, then
earnings and values tend to decline. Even money
itself, as we have seen, being a demand claim on
goods, exerts an almost unique influence as a form
of debt upon the market price of goods and services.
Whether we like to admit it or not, we seem to live
in an economic world built on debt, by debt, and
for debt quite as much as in a world built on private
ownership of goods and its strong moral corollaries
of accepted risk and accepted responsibility.
In other words, we live in a dual or divided sys-
tem of ownership, the ownership of goods being at
all times poised against the ownership of claims on
money, or debt. We have owners of debts (including
money) and owners of goods. At certain times, as
we have seen, the comparison of ownership with
creditorship sets at work forces favorable to owners
of goods. At other times the comparison starts forces
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


destructive of ownership. At still other times (as
in 1931 and 1932) the comparison reveals, like some
mysterious retribution, forces that engulf both
debtors and creditors, so great is the interdepend-
ence of one upon the other. But we cannot say that
our modern system is “based on private ownership.”
That is pure fable and myth. The modern capitalist
world is only one-half ownership; the other half
is creditorship.
It ought to be possible, then, to tell the story of
the modem world largely in terms of ownership
wealth and creditorship claims on wealth. It ought
to be possible —and I think it is. At least we can
tell that part of the story which concerns the passing
from many decades of “rugged individualism” to
a decade of increasing ownership timidity and a
growing desire to make ownership “safe” by placing
it under the strong protection of government. In
other words, we can trace the outlines of growing
“creditor dominance” in our national affairs, and
the instinctive appeal of the masses of ordinary
individuals to government for protection against
that dominance. This is one major form of “rela-
tive” inflation. 1
To start the story in practical terms, we can begin
by taking inventory of the tangible things we owned
just prior to the World War in 1914. The National
Industrial Conference Board (which I shall call
simply the Conference Board hereafter) is an excel-
lent organization, largely supported by industry it-
self and entirely nonpolitical, which makes many
1 For chart of all three relative inflations see Chart 15, page 182.
DECADES OF DEBT


CHART 15. —Three major “relative” inflations.


extremely valuable studies of long-term conditions
affecting business. Not all statisticians and econo-
mists will agree with all their methods of study and
estimate in detail. But for the practical purposes
of the layman that is far less important than the
fact that the Conference Board has been making
these studies continuously for years, has acquired
expertness in its technique, and has made the results
of its studies easily available in book form and in
comparable figures. Among its major studies is one
on national wealth —a sort of national annual ap-
praisal in which only tangible wealth is taken into
account. The figure each year is simply its combined
appraisal at present prices of farm and city land
and buildings, of factories, mines, quarries, rail-
roads, utilities, of inventories of finished and
unfinished goods on hand, and all other tangible
items that can reasonably be estimated at all. The
Conference Board’s appraisal of national wealth in
1914 was $180.6 billion.
This figure represents what the people of the
United States, individually and collectively, then
owned. But what claims did the creditors own?
What proportion did all the debt claims of 1914 bear
to the current value of all goods and property
owned? In brief, what was the creditor dominance
in the United States in 1914?
Again the Conference Board comes to our rescue
with a careful estimate of all private long-term debt
on record in that year; an estimate, that is, of bonds
and mortgage notes and all debt in general that was
not due and payable in less than five years. The
DECADES OF DEBT


figure arrived at is $33.3 billion. That, at least, was
one large part of the debt total.
Then we had, in all banks, loans outstanding
(exclusive of mortgages already included) to the
extent of approximately sll.l billion. We also had
a small Federal government debt of approximately
$l.O billion. Our cities, states, and counties had
incurred a total indebtedness of about $4.5 billion.
Those are the only items on which we can be rea-
sonably certain. We have no record of the probably
huge volume of unrecorded private debts, notes
given from private borrower to private lender, cur-
rent account debts at stores or sources of factory
supply, and installment purchase debts. We can
keep this vague total in mind as increasing the real
size of any debt total we fix. But for practical pur-
poses we can sum up the totals for private long-term
debt, for government debt, both national and local,
and known bank loan debt. In this case the total
comes to $49.9 billion.
Thus, if we divide our 1914 debt total of $49.9
billion by our 1914 wealth appraisal of $180.6 billion,
we find that the dollar value of our debt claims then
equaled roundly 27.6 per cent of the dollar value
of our national wealth. If the creditors had wanted
to, and had been able to “cash in” on the value of
their debt claims, they could have purchased or
“taken over” considerably less than a third of our
tangible property. As this might be stated in broker-
age house terms, we were operating, as owners, on
a fairly substantial “margin.” (See Chart 16 on
page 185.)
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHART 16. — A comparison between total debt by kinds, and national wealth for important years.


Jumping from 1914 to the effective conclusion of
the war period in 1920, after we had had our en-
thusiastic boom and borrowed additional funds here
to help out Europe, what change do we find in credi-
tor dominance ?
By this time our wealth in current dollar values
had risen enormously. In terms of volume of goods,
factories, railroads, etc., there was a substantial
increase, no doubt; probably as high as 130 per
cent over 1914. But in the inflated dollars of that
day the Conference Board estimates the total wealth
at no less than $463.1 billion.
In the meantime, what had happened to debt
claims? The Conference Board’s private
long-term debt was now $46.2 billion. Federal debt
had risen to $24.0 billion. Local debt had increased
to $7.3 billion, and total bank loans (always ex-
cluding mortgages) stood at $24.6 billion. This
all added up to $102.1 billion —an increase over
1914 of 104.6 per cent. But the dollar value of
our national wealth had risen even faster, so that
total debt claims now constituted only 22.0 per
cent of our wealth. Creditor dominance, thanks to a
wild price rise in ownership items, had fallen off
since 1914.
But the price rise of the postwar period turned
into one of the most spectacular price drops in our
history in 1921 and even into 1922. Dollar values
disappeared from week to week and month to
month. By 1922 the Conference Board could esti-
mate our wealth in the new low prices at only
$301.3 billion.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


But debts did not decrease. Private long-term
debt continued to climb and in 1922 stood at $50.7
billion. The Federal debt declined to $22.7 billion.
State and local debt increased to nearly $8.6
billion, and bank loans remained quite high at
$20.9 billion. The grand total stood at $102.9 billion,
showing a fractional increase over 1920.
Thus, by 1922 debt claims had risen to more than
a third (or 34.2 per cent) of the value of our na-
tional wealth, an important increase not only over
1920 but also over 1914. Our “margin” was
thinning!
Then what happened? Our natural expectancy
would be that with stable prices, rising industrial
production, increased earnings and the higher ap-
praisal values which those earnings justified, creditor
dominance would again decline. All the outward
circumstances favored a gain in the position of
owners. From 1922 to 1929 national wealth rose
from $301.3 to $340 billion wholly without benefit
of any rise in commodity prices. Owners should
have been able to consolidate their position. But
they did no such thing. Debt claims greatly out-
paced ownership values!
By 1929 private long-term debt had risen to
$84.2 billion —a gain of more than 66 per cent over
1922. State and local debt had risen to about $16.7
billion. Bank loan debt had increased to $25.5 bil-
lion. Only the Federal government debt showed a
decline, having dropped to $16.6 billion. The grand
total for 1929 stood at $143 billion, showing an in-
crease over 1922 of 39 per cent. The value of 1929
DECADES OP DEBT


debt claims amounted roundly to 42.1 per cent of
the value of national wealth! Nothing could illus-
trate more clearly the unsound nature of the boom
period from 1922 to 1929 than this gradually in-
creasing creditor dominance throughout the entire
period.
To put the whole picture another way, suppose
we give for these various years the percentage of
national wealth which remained as true equity for
owners after deducting the value of all outstanding
debt claims against that ownership. Then the story
would tabulate as follows:
In 1914, out of total wealth of $180.6 billion, the
true equity of owners was 72.4%
In 1920, out of total wealth of $463.1 billion, the
true equity of owners was 78.0%
In 1922, out of total wealth of $301.3 billion, the
true equity of owners was 65.8%
In 1929, out of total wealth of $340 billion, the
true equity of owners was 57.9%
Thus the net result of sixteen years of war activity,
of postwar boom and collapse, and of subsequent
loudly heralded prosperity was to cut the equity of
owners in our national wealth from over 72 per cent
of the total to less than 58 per cent —a “squeezing
out” of almost 20 per cent of the ownership equity
of 1914. Considering the shortness of the time in
comparison with our national history, this was an
astounding blow at ownership, “the basis of our
modern system.” As the inverse of this picture,
creditorship had increased its dominance over our
national life from less than 28 per cent of our wealth
to more than 42 per cent.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


But despite the spectacular nature of this creeping
victory of creditorship (the “other half” of the
divided house of modern capitalism), it was only a
mild and unobtrusive victory compared with the
results of the smashing advance of the next three
years. How did owners stand in 1932?
With the combined drop in prices, activity and
earnings in this catastrophic period, the Conference
Board appraisal of national wealth dropped to
$230.6 billion. The physical assets were still there,
but the price values had shrunk some 28 per cent
since 1929.
But the face value of debts had shrunk only a bit
more than 4 per cent! Private long term debt had
declined slightly to stand at SBI.B billion. But state
and local debt had risen to about $19.6 billion, and
Federal debt had risen to $19.2 billion. Bank loan
debt aggregated $16.5 billion. The grand total
stood at $137.1 billion —or more than 59 per cent
of the value of our entire ownership wealth!
In less than two decades the equity of rugged indi-
vidual owners had dropped from over 72 per cent
of their gross wealth to only 40.5 per cent! The stal-
wart average individual of 1914 who owned SIOO
worth of goods and considered himself the very spine
of modern capitalism had a solid and comforting
equity of $72.40 in those goods. The major claims
on physical wealth were ownership claims. The
owner not only thought he was the spine of the
system —he was! But by 1932, only nineteen years
later, for every SIOO worth of goods he still owned
he now had an equity of only $40.80. Creditorship
DECADES OF DEBT


now dominated the scene. Its claims on physical
wealth now constituted “the majority.” Is it any
wonder that the former spine of the system now
ran to the doctor —the State —to get braces for his
spine ?
We cannot pass lightly over this 1932 picture.
It has a profound significance. First of all, we must
remember that this astonishing growth in creditor
dominance was achieved while more than half the
farm lands of the country remained unmortgaged,
and while a great majority of our large industrial
concerns had a very low proportion of bonded or
funded debt. Thus the average position of the entire
nation of owners barely hints at the truly perilous
position of the large body of individual owners
who were directly in debt.
Then, as a second aspect, we must understand
clearly just how the average position actually ap-
plied to every owner in the land, whether he was
directly in debt or not.
Most of us live in a proud and splendid isolation
in our ideas about personal indebtedness. We reckon
only with our personal debts—like the owner of many
shares of New York Central stock who proclaimed
in 1932 that he did not have a debt in the world!
He forgot that as part owner of the New York Cen-
tral Railroad he owed his share of the S6O million
of annual interest and his share of the $1.2 billion
of principal debt of that road. He forgot that, were
it not for his share of that debt and interest, he
would have been receiving dividends on his Central
stock, even in 1932. He was paying interest —but did
not know it!
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


But the general involvement in debt goes further
than that. It is literally and exactly true that every
one of us must pay and does pay his proportionate
share of the entire aggregate indebtedness of the
country. Consider the manufacturer who borrows
money at certain seasons of the year to buy raw
materials or to tide over the period between manu-
facture and ultimate sale of his goods. Where does
he get the money to pay back the principal of the
loan and the interest? From the buying public, of
course. The manufacturer puts down interest paid
as one of his manufacturing costs, and sets a price
on his goods that will include this cost. Every time
we buy a chair or an automobile, or a radio or a can
of tomatoes or a pair of shoes, we are helping some
manufacturer or raw material supplier, or jobber or
distributor, to cover the interest costs incurred at
some stage of production and sale.
Every time we buy a share of stock on the stock
exchange, we are helping someone along the line
to meet an interest charge on money borrowed
against securities. Even if the previous owner sells
at a loss, this remains true. Loss or no loss, he must
deduct his interest payments due before receiving
his final net payment. Part of the money we pay
him goes to meet interest. And if the stress of meet-
ing interest and principal payments becomes too
heavy, there is pressure on the prices of stocks all
along the list, so that we pay the bill in the reduced
market value of our own holdings even when we
indulge in no transactions of our own.
The same principle applies even to installment
purchase debts incurred by people of modest salaries.
DECADES OF DEBT


Who provides —through purchase of goods or serv-
ices—the money with which that person’s salary
is paid? We, the public. If we did not, his salary
would cease and he would be unable to incur his
installment loans.
In the case of national, state, and local debt, the
public’s share in the total is more obvious. It comes
in direct and indirect, or “hidden,” taxation. It
comes in income and property taxes. It comes when
the “tax-exempt” rent payer sends his monthly
check to a landlord who, in turn, uses part of that
check to meet local real-estate taxes and perhaps
part of his own income tax.
It is no trick of figure juggling to make a total
of all ascertainable debt, and to balance that against
total tangible wealth. The purpose is not merely to
strike a theoretical “average,” but to arrive at a
true estimate of each and every man’s actual share
in the total obligations to creditors.
Nor does it make any difference that many thou-
sands of people are hath owners and creditors in the
direct sense, that many people own a house and
land and at the same time hold the mortgage notes
or bonds of someone else. A savings bank depositor
may “own” his own house on a conservative mort-
gage held by the very same bank in which he de-
posits. As a depositor, his own mortgage becomes
part of his security. In some degree or other, he
is literally paying interest to himself! But all this
inner complexity does not alter the simple fact
that increasing creditorship claims diminish the
equity of ownership claims, and so change the whole
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


weight and proportion of our divided house of
“ownership capitalism” on one side and “creditor-
ship capitalism” on the other.
With these points well in mind, we can begin to
understand the true enormity of the creditor domi-
nance of 1932 in its combined effects on the basic
position of all owners. In that year a wide majority
of the tangible wealth of the country was 'potentially
in the hands of creditors. The equity of owners, as
a class, in our national wealth was far less than half
the total. The continuity of ownership, as a basic
idea of our system and state, was in dire jeopardy.
The social and political consequences of this are
easy to imagine. In plain language, owners as a class
had become so “overextended” or inflated that their
very existence was threatened. To be sure, the
owners themselves were probably to blame for their
low estate. People borrow money to make money.
They borrow at 6 per cent in the hope of earning
8 or 10 per cent on the borrowed funds. Or, they
borrow SI,OOO to buy land or goods in the hope that
they will later sell the property for much more
than the borrowed amount. The real tragedy of the
divided house of the modern system lies in the fact
that both owners and creditors are incited to in-
creased greed at one stage or another of the ebb
and flow tides.
Creditor dominance grows in times of falling
prices and falling activity. Ownership profits and
advantages rise in times of rising activity and
values. A true balance is never reached in a world
of affairs that never stands still. Creditor dominance
DECADES OF DEBT


grew from 1922 to 1929 only because owners were
greedy to borrow more and more money. Had they
added nothing to their borrowings in this period,
prosperity would have worked to their advantage.
But their own greed “sold them out.” After that,
from 1929 to 1932, it was falling prices and activity
that gave creditors their ultimate and full majority
dominance.
But distributing the “blame” does not alter the
social consequences. The overextended, wildly in-
flated owners of 1932 sought protection. They felt
that their kind of capitalism—the whole principle
of continuous private ownership—was doomed.
Against the totality of creditorship, owners needed
a champion—and, of course, the only champion of
sufficient size and strength on the horizon seemed
to be the Federal government.
Thus a factual study of creditor dominance since
1914 goes far to explain the state of mind of the
owning class, of farmers and homeowners and of
businesses small and large, in 1932. It explains, as
nothing else could, the resort to the strong central-
ized Federal government as a champion of the
ownership system against the creditor system. It
explains why the rugged individualists of 1914, then
operating on a comfortably wide margin and with
ample equity, suddenly lost in 1932 all signs of
ruggedness and most of the feelings of individualists.
They instinctively felt their peril as a collective
danger. They were willing and eager to pool re-
sources with government help to bolster up the
entire ownership idea. Owners, after being a ma-
jority throughout our history, had become almost
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


overnight a pitiful minority. It was owners and
businessmen who cheered to the echo, in 1933, the
strict Federal business props of a National Recovery
Act.
Then why did the cheering subside so rapidly
after 1933? Why did the same groups of owners
begin to raise once more the hue and cry of rugged-
ness and individuality?
The answer to those questions can also be read —
at least, in large part —from the creditor dominance
story of the ensuing years. How did owners stand,
as against creditors, by 1936?
From preliminary estimates, based on Conference
Board work of 1934 and 1935, national wealth by
1936 probably stood at $305 billion, thanks to
greater activity and mildly rising prices since 1932.
In contrast, the debt total, even including the in-
creased Federal debt, failed to rise correspondingly.
Private long-term debt stood at about $77 billion.
State and local debt amounted to about $19.6 bil-
lion. Federal debt had risen to $33.0 billion, 1 but
bank loan debt had declined to only $10.5 billion.
The grand total of debt was approximately $140.1
billion —a rise of about 2 per cent since 1932. (See
Chart 16, page 185.)
Thus, by 1936, debt claims had sunk back to only
45.9 per cent of national wealth. The equity of
owners had again risen to a “majority” position
at 54.1 per cent of total wealth. Is it surprising that,
1 This does not include the indirect “guaranteed” obligations of the
government, such as the Home Owners Loan Corporation bonds, which
are already included in the Conference Board estimate of private long-
term debt.
DECADES OF DEBT


with this reversal in their favor, owners should have
gathered courage again, recovered some of their
ruggedness, and begun to seek emancipation from
the very champion —central government —they had
sought out in 1932?
In other words, the “emergency” of 1932 and
1933 was more than a mere decline in earnings and
prices and employment. It was more than a mere
clogging of trade channels, domestic and interna-
tional, far more than just an ordinary “depression”
among many successive waves of prosperity. It was
more than all these things, not simply in extent and
severity, but in a far deeper sense. It was a struggle
of gigantic proportions between the two conflicting
principles of ownership capitalism and creditorship
capitalism.
It was a rather ghastly exhibition of what can
happen to a divided house when the group that has
hitherto dominated —in this case, owner capital-
ists —suddenly finds itself a weak minority, domi-
nated in turn by the forces it had once used for its
own profit and advantage.
In similar terms, the emergence from 1933 to
1936 was more than an ordinary “recovery.” It
was a violent reassertion of ownership supremacy —
not a trite struggle between the “haves” and the
“have-nots,” but a struggle between those whose
stake was thrown with owners, and the productive
capitalism of ownership, against those whose stakes
were with creditorship.
In this light, many of the extraordinary cross-
currents of opinion during the “recovery” years
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


become more understandable —the grouping of labor
and small owners and businessmen on the produc-
tion side, and of finance capitalists on the other.
This was no “class war” in the ordinary under-
standing of those words. It was an instinctive mas-
sing of great groups according to their function in
our economic divided house. It was a portent, per-
haps, of future economic earthquakes.
But it was not a struggle between the “many”
and the “few” in the hackneyed meaning of the
demagogues. It was a struggle of owners who had
borrowed disastrously, against lenders who had lent
unwisely —with thousands of individuals in the im-
possible position of being both owners and lenders,
and throwing their lot with one side or the other
according to the side in which their stakes were
heaviest.
As long as we continue a system —by whatever
name we call it —in which one side is encouraged to
debauch itself by going into debt and risking its
ownership birthright, and in which the other side,
even with the most benevolent intentions in the
world, finds itself attaining a dominance that
threatens the very existence of ownership; as long
as we maintain this dual system and this economic
divided house we shall certainly find the spectacle
of 1932 and 1933 repeated over and over again, until
the system can no longer stand it and disintegrates
into something else.
Owners’ becoming overextended is one of the
real and deepest meanings of “inflation.” Compared
with the growth of creditor dominance and the de-
DECADES OF DEBT


dine of ownership equity in the past two decades,
all forms of “absolute” inflation are mere surface
ripples. It is in this sense that we reached what was
probably the greatest inflation in our history in
1932. And it is in this same major sense that from
1932 to early 1937 we were in the course of a deflation
that perhaps rescued the whole principle of private
ownership from imminent collapse.
But the basic problem of modern “dual” capi-
talism has not been solved. It cannot, I believe, be
solved until we find some way (other than mere
governmental policing), of protecting ownership
against its own greedy borrowing, and of financing
the use of privately owned means of production by
some other method than the creation of more and
more debt.
Our problem is not one of steering some precarious
“middle course” between capitalism and com-
munism. That would be economic tight-rope walk-
ing with a vengeance! What we must do is find a
way in which the basis of ownership capitalism can
be strengthened, brought to a far higher sense of
integrity, and held to the full exercise of the moral
responsibility that is an integral part of the very
idea of ownership.
The solution of this problem is in every sense a
summons to the true conservative spirit of the
Western world —to those who wish actually to con-
serve the whole principle of private ownership and
individual responsibility.
This may involve far-reaching changes. It will
almost certainly involve the substitution, on a wider
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


and wider scale over the years, of partnership or
“equity” financing for the creditor financing on
which we have depended so heavily in the past.
It may even involve a gradual change in banking
from a strictly creditor operation to one in which
banks become equity partners in the operations
they finance.
Some of these possibilities are discussed in Chap-
ter XIV, and the more technical aspects of them
in Appendix A. But whether future changes come
along the lines discussed or in some other way
similar to them, the conservation of the ownership
principle has clearly become the major economic
problem of modern life.
Two decades ago, in 1914, it was little more than
an academic problem. Owners then ruled. But with
the steady and accelerating rise of creditor domi-
nance from 1922 to the most recent climax of 1932,
the whole scope of the problem changed. It became
the most challenging reality of the century. It grew,
almost unperceived. Even today its nature is hardly
understood. Most of us are still thinking in terms
of the actual ownership security of 1914.
The facts are almost too startling to comprehend
at a glance. But if, since 1933, ownership has been
given one more chance to survive, it must seize on
that chance to build a new kind of economic house,
no longer divided, no longer shifting dominance from
one side to the other, but so constructed as to con-
serve every fine meaning that can spring from the
words “to own”!
DECADES OF DEBT


CHAPTER XII
Decades of Interest Payments
Wxth debt goes interest on the
debt. If we can compare the face value of debt
claims with the value of our tangible wealth —as
we have done in the last chapter, since 1914 —it
would seem at first glance that we ought to be able
to compare interest charges with national income
in almost parallel terms. Unfortunately, the matter
is not so simple as that. Debt claims themselves are
not a part of the national wealth; but interest pay-
ments are themselves a part of the national income.
That is where the difference lies.
To be sure, much of our national wealth has been
created by the use of borrowed money. In that sense
there is a close relationship between the process of
going into debt and the process of creating new
tangible wealth. But when we take stock at any
given moment of wealth, and of debt claims against
that wealth, the two items can be separated. They
are distinct “balance sheet” items.


But in estimating national income it is almost
impossible to separate interest payments received
from other sources of income. Even wages paid to
factory or railroad workers may be in part the re-
sult of interest payments. For example, one rail-
road has bond investments in some other railroads.
Part of its income, out of which it pays wages to
train workers and office forces, comes from the
interest received on those bonds. In other words,
income merges into one large stream and cannot,
for practical purposes, be separated at any given
time into its many complicated sources.
What we can do is to estimate with fair accuracy
the total of interest actually paid in any one year,
and compare it with the total national income re-
ceived from all sources in the same year.
We cannot make the bald statement that “out
of each dollar of production income this year so
much had to go to interest payments.” But we can
say, “for each dollar of total income this year so
much was paid in interest.” In other words, we can
compare the two items, but we cannot charge one
against the other as we could in the case of debt
claims and national wealth.
In broad perspective, this distinction is not
highly important. For we know thoroughly well
that money paid in interest is added to the cost of
all goods and services on which we spend our income.
If our income is swelled by interest received,
so is the total of our expenditures, whether in
taxes or in increased cost of goods and services
purchased.
DECADES OF INTEREST PAYMENTS


In this sense we are “inflated” when interest
payments are high compared with national income,
and we are “deflated” when the interest payments
are relatively low. We may receive interest with one
hand and spend it with the other, but in so doing
we are swelling or inflating both receipts and ex-
penditures by sums that do not represent the barter
and exchange of real goods and services.
Interest is an inflationary surcharge on expendi-
tures, and an inflationary surcredit to income re-
ceived. It may swell or inflate both sides of the
picture by an equal amount, but in no case does it
increase the total physical volume of trade trans-
acted as between all the people of the country. We
might suppose that the clerical work of keeping
track of interest —salaries paid to bank clerks and
others —would add to total services rendered; but,
since the interest payments must be added to the
cost of all other goods bought and sold, there is no
net gain to the community. The added bank clerk
income is merely an offset to the added cost of all
goods produced and exchanged.
With this point clearly in mind, what is the story
of interest payments compared with national in-
come for the same period over which we have just
traced the growth of creditor dominance —that is,
from 1914 to 1936? (See Chart 15, page 182.)
In 1914 the national income was about $31.6
billion and interest payments on the forms of
debt included in the previous chapter amounted
roughly to $2.43 billion. How do we arrive at these
figures ?
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


There are many and varying estimates of national
income. The one I have selected for present com-
parisons is that of the National Industrial Con-
ference Board. The Conference Board’s methods of
computing income seem to have varied somewhat
as between the period prior to 1929 and the period
since, but by a simple statistical adjustment the
two series of figures can be linked together suffi-
ciently well to make a general comparison possible.
Furthermore, I have had to use my own estimates
for 1935 and 1936, based on Department of Com-
merce figures and related confirming data. In any
event, the very best figures obtainable are simply
estimates, whether for earlier or for later years.
But in the broad sense of showing a trend, they are
probably quite accurate enough for our present
purposes.
In estimating interest payments I have used the
Conference Board figures on interest actually paid
on private long-term debt, and added to that the
following items: (a) approximate interest paid on
the Federal debt; ( b ) interest at 4.5 per cent on state
and local debt estimates from 1914 to 1931, and
thereafter at a slightly declining rate ending with
4.15 per cent in 1936, thus allowing for new debt
issues at low rates since 1931 and for refunding of
old debt at lower interest rates; (c) interest on total
bank loan debt at the average rate charged cus-
tomers by leading banks of the country.
As in the case of the debt claim estimates, I have
made no effort to include the great volume of unre-
corded private loans and installment debt. Those
DECADES OF INTEREST PAYMENTS


must be added mentally to gain the full perspective,
but any concrete estimates would be far too wild
to be of any practical use.
Thus, in 1914 we have the Conference Board
estimate of $1.7 billion for interest paid on private
long-term debt, plus a figure of $22.8 million paid
on Federal debt and $202.5 million at 4.5 per cent
on an estimated state and local debt of $4.5 bil-
lion. We have also a total of bank loans (exclusive of
mortgages) of $11,120 billion on which we can esti-
mate interest at 4.5 per cent, that being the average
estimated rate charged customers in 1914 by leading
banks. This particular interest item would thus
amount to SSOO million. By adding these various
estimates, we get our total interest payments of
$2,430 billion for 1914.
Thus, in 1914, with income at $31.6 billion, for
every hundred dollars of income received, $7.69 was
paid in interest —that is, interest payments were
7.7 per cent of national income. In that year, it
will be recalled, creditor claims amounted to 27.6
per cent of our national wealth.
What was the change by 1920? In that year,
creditor claims had fallen to 22 per cent of national
wealth. We find that with a national income for
1920 of $73.4 billion, interest payments had risen
to $5.57 billion —or some 7.59 per cent of income.
In spite of a falling proportion of debt claims to
wealth, and in spite of a large rise in income, inter-
est payments still constituted a large proportion
of income—a payment of $7.59 on every SIOO of
income received. What was the reason for the failure
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


of interest payments to drop proportionately as
fast as debt claims?
The division of interest payments into separate
items shows that interest on the Federal debt had
risen from $22.8 million to $1.02 billion; that interest
on private long-term debt had risen from $1.7 bil-
lion to $2.6 billion; that interest on state and local
debt had risen from $203 million to $329 million,
and that bank loans had not only more than doubled
in total, but also the rate of interest on them had
risen from 4.5 per cent to an average of 6.62 per
cent, thus increasing the total bank loan interest
from SSOO million to $1,625 billion.
This latter figure is an excellent illustration of the
important part played in our national scheme by the
fluctuation of the bank loan interest rate. (See
Chapter VI for a full discussion of this factor.) The
principal amount of bank loan debt rose only 121
per cent in the period—from $11.12 billion to $24.55
billion. But with the rising bank loan interest rate,
the actual interest payments on the debt rose 225
per cent!
Too many people not only fail to add up various
debt totals —forgetting that all of us have a share
in the total aggregate debt —but also fail to con-
sider the effect of rising and lowering bank rates on
the total of interest payments. Bank loans (always ex-
cluding mortgages, which are already included in the
Conference Board estimates of private long-term
debt) constitute at all times a formidable propor-
tion of both debt totals and interest totals. Thus,
as we shall see later, a rise in Federal debt may, at
DECADES OF INTEREST PAYMENTS


certain times, be wholly offset by a decline in bank
loans, and the decline in bank loan interest may
still further offset the increasing interest on Federal
debt. It is the combined picture that tells the story
of growing nation-wide inflation or deflation in debt
and interest.
Reverting again to the progress of interest as com-
pared with income, we find that by 1922 (when debt
claims had risen to 34.2 per cent of national wealth)
interest payments had increased to 8.9 per cent of
national income. The income figure for that year
was s6l billion, and the interest payments were
almost as high as in 1920 and stood at $5.43 billion.
Bank loan interest and Federal debt interest had
both declined somewhat, but interest on private
long-term debt and interest on state and local debt
had both risen. For every SIOO of 1922 income, pay-
ments of $8.90 were made in interest.
By 1929 (when debt claims had risen to 42.1 per
cent of national wealth) the proportionate interest
payments had also risen further. In this year of
supposedly culminating prosperity, no less than
$9.71 was paid out in interest for every SIOO of
income received. Private long-term debt interest
had continued to expand, and so had interest on
the growing total of state and local debt. Moreover,
the bank loan total had continued to rise and the
average rate of interest at 6.04 per cent was again
high. The total of interest payments amounted to
$7.77 billion out of a national income of SBO billion.
Thus the “progress” over a sixteen-year period can
be stated as follows (in billions of dollars):
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


1914
1929
$49.90
$143.00
7.77
2.43
31.60
80.00
Dollars of interest to dollars of national income. . .
7.69
9.71
On $81.8 billion of private long-term debt. . . . $4,600
On 16.5 billion of bank loans at 5.12% 0.845
On 19.1 billion of Federal debt 0.599
On 19.6 billion of state and local debt at 4.4%. 0.862
Grand total $6,906
But just as in the case of growing creditor domi-
nance in debt claims compared with national wealth,
we were not to reach the climax of this form of in-
flation (or overextension) until the fatal year of
1932. In that year, with a national income cut
drastically to only $46.9 billion, and with total in-
terest payments only slightly cut to $6.91 billion,
we were paying not a cent less than $14.73 in inter-
est for every $lOO of national income!
The interest payments for this historic year tabu-
late as follows (in billions of dollars) :
Thus, in comparisons of both debt claims with
wealth, and interest payments with national in-
come, the year 1932 was by all odds our most over-
extended or inflated year in the entire period from
1914 onward!
Not only was there a principal debt claim against
59.5 per cent of our national wealth, but interest
payments amounted to very nearly 15 per cent of
our national income. The very existence of con-
DECADES OF INTEREST PAYMENTS


tinuous private ownership was in peril from the
acute creditor dominance, and also from the pres-
sure of interest payments extending to every stratum
of our society.
We are all too accustomed to think of 1932 as a
year of maximum “deflation.” But in all common
sense, and if there is any meaning at all left to the
word “overextended,” then we must think of it
as a year of acute “inflation” —a year of maximum
strain on the credit structure (i.e., debt structure),
on the integrity of ownership, and on the propor-
tion of income not represented by interest received
or paid out.
Real deflation is not accomplished until, after a
period of boom, debts are paid off and interest re-
duced in reasonable proportion to reduction in
ownership values and income from production and
exchange of goods. But in 1932 debts had risen in
proportion to ownership values, and interest had
risen in proportion to income from production and
trade. By no manner of common sense, then, can
we call 1932 in the broad aspect anything but a year
of extreme inflation.
What happened, then, during the next four years ?
From the press, from bankers and businessmen and
economists and from a thousand soap boxes, the
years of 1933 to 1936 have been proclaimed years
of growing inflation. We know from earlier discus-
sions in this book that they have been years of
bond price inflation, of rising equity values and of
mildly rising general price level. But what have they
been in the broader sense we are now discussing?
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


On $77.00 billion of private long-term debt $4.100
On
10.51 billion of bank loans at 3.45 %
.363
On
33.00 billion of Federal debt
.800
On
19.60 billion of state and local debt at 4.15 %
.813
Grand total
$6,076
We already know that they have been years of
declining creditor dominance—that debt claims, in-
stead of being 59.5 per cent of our national wealth,
had dropped by 1936 to only 45.9 per cent of wealth.
But what of interest charges compared to national
income ?
A figure of $6O billion seems eminently reasonable
for national income in 1936 —an increase of 17.9
per cent in two years over the last official estimate
of the Conference Board for 1934. Against this we
must set a similar estimate of interest payments as
follows (in billions of dollars):
Thus, in spite of the enormous increase in Federal
debt, we find that the progressively lower interest
rate on this debt, combined with a lower total of
and lower interest rate on bank loans, and minor
declines in private long-term debt and interest, the
total interest payments for 1936 were smaller by
several hundred millions than the total for 1932!
In other words, as against $14.73 of interest for
every $lOO of income in 1932, the comparison for
1936 shows only $10.13 interest for every $lOO of
income—a lower proportion than in any year since
1929. To make a complete perspective possible, the
year-to-year changes in this proportion are shown
on Chart 15 on page 182.
DECADES OF INTEEEST PAYMENTS


The plain facts are that in the aggregate we were
in a period of genuine deflation from 1932 to 1936 —
of declining debt claims compared with wealth, and
of declining interest charges compared with na-
tional income.
To be sure, the Federal debt, taken hy itself, was
being constantly inflated or extended, and with it
taxation. But taxation is only one form in which,
as a nation, we help to pay interest charges. The
invisible interest charge which we pay with the
cost of goods and services we buy is of precisely
equal importance to us in the full economic sense —
less painful, of course, and more sweetly narcotic,
but nonetheless real.
Had we not had a stupendous decline in bank
loans as an offset to rising Federal debt, or had we
had a simultaneous rise in both bank loans and
Federal debt as we did in the World War period,
we should undoubtedly have had rising instead of
falling interest rates and a real trend of continued
inflation.
But bank loans (excluding mortgages) did fall (a
decline of some $18.2 billion between 1930 and 1936)
and more than offset the entire rise in direct
deficit-financing Federal debt. Private long-term
debt and interest charges declined too. With a lower
total of interest charges in 1936 than in 1932, we
can say that the entire gain in national income in
those four years represented a net gain compared
with interest payments and thus a very real,
tangible, and practical process of slow relative
deflation.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


It is well within the power of the layman to keep
track for himself of what these comparisons will
show from year to year in the future. The Con-
ference Board figures on wealth, private long-term
debt, national income, and related items are released
at regular intervals for publication in the news-
papers. The Comptroller’s reports on all banks of
the country can always, with a little effort, be ob-
tained from the Treasury Department, or similar
data can be found in the Federal Reserve Bulletins.
The major items to watch for are (a) increases in
total bank loans and (6) increases or decreases in
Federal debt, and the approximate rates of interest
applying to both classes of debt. These are the items
that are likely to change most rapidly and, under
many circumstances, to offset each other to im-
portant degrees.
The very gains in business activity, for instance,
which would tend to increase bank loan debt would
also tend to reduce the emergency and relief ex-
penditures of the Federal government and permit
a reduction in the government debt. Thus a rise of
$2 billion in bank debt might conceivably be offset
by a reduction of $2 billion in Federal debt, and so
prevent an inflationary trend in the comparison of
debt with wealth. On the other hand, if both Federal
debt and bank debt should rise sharply together,
their combined rise might be enough to offset any
increased appraisal value of national wealth. So,
too, a sharp rise in interest rates, both long and
short term, applied to a mounting total of combined
debt might show a gain in total interest charges
DECADES OF INTEREST PAYMENTS


compared with national income, and thus renew this
particular inflationary trend of the twenties.
The other items —private long-term debt and
state and local debt —are, of course, equally im-
portant in arriving at final totals, but they change
much less abruptly than do bank debt and Federal
debt. It is quite enough for all practical purposes to
note the official estimates of private and “munici-
pal” debt once a year.
The main point is always served if we keep clearly
in mind the principle involved: namely, that we
cannot judge inflationary or deflationary trends in
our national affairs from single forms of debt but
must always add up totals for both principal and
interest before we can make significant comparisons
with national wealth or national income.
This ought to be obvious, but much of the care-
less discussion of the last few years proves that it is
not; we think of interest charges chiefly in terms of
visible taxation, we think of national indebtedness
chiefly in terms of official Federal debt, and we look
at both debt figures and interest figures in a vacuum
and seldom compare them with either wealth or
income.
The practical results of our limited and one-sided
thinking have been to lead us so far from common-
sense conclusions that we have gone into panics
over inflation while we were actually deflating,
talked growing prosperity while we were actually
inflating, have sought to borrow ourselves out of
“deflation” when we were actually wildly inflated
already, and have made our commitments generally.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


whether for business or investment, on totally
wrong assumptions!
If we are ever to reach a sensible control of our
business and financial operations, and above all,
if we are ever to make a frontal attack on the prob-
lem of why we should continue to suffer at all from
alternating and increasing booms and depressions,
hope and despair, we must learn how to think in
aggregate terms and in terms of the relation of
each major factor of our economic life to some other
closely connected factor.
“Other things” never do “remain equal.” Wealth
and debt, income and interest, under our general
debt system are bound to each other inexorably.
The moment we try to separate them we are getting
away from practical realities and entering a one-
sided dream world.
It is one of the great paradoxes of recent times
that so many of our allegedly practical leaders in
finance and business should have been the very
ones to shun realities and base their decisions on
fragmentary views of only half the essential facts.
DECADES OF INTEREST PAYMENTS


CHAPTER XIII
The Standard of Living'
When all figures are added, sub-
tracted, or divided, when we have reached our
rough conclusions concerning the inflating of bond
prices, or stock prices, or the general price level, or
the inflating of debt against wealth, or of interest
charges against income, the one final form of general
inflation upon which we center our hopes or fears
is that combination of all forces which raises or
lowers our standard of living.
We could be content with any form of money, we
could look complacently at any price rise or at any
reduction in dollar income if only we felt certain
that it would not affect the ultimate material goal
of all our work —a steady to rising standard of liv-
ing values.
There may often be important spiritual values to
be drawn from material adversity. Moreover, there
has been more than one St. Francis of Assisi to
find enormous consolation in voluntary poverty.
Whole nations and civilizations have grown soft


and corrupt in long-continued prosperity. But all
this does not alter the intensity of the human quest
for at least a meager stability in the material stand-
ards of daily life, nor the paramount dread of any
gigantic events which imperil that stability or the
hope of gradual improvement.
The ultimate inflation, then, from the economic
standard is any combination of forces which drives
down the standard of living by driving upward the
pressure against that standard.
Perhaps we can best illustrate how such forces
work by pointing out that, in spite of family dollar
income in the United States being 16 per cent
greater in 1932 than in 1914, the average standard
of living was about 8 per cent lower; or by noting
that the family standard of living in 1928 was actu-
ally a bit lower than in 1917.
I use the word “average” in this connection with
great reluctance because it is so grossly misleading.
Those who like to think of themselves as being
somewhere near the average would be indignant at
the very notion that there was no improvement in
their living standard in 1928 over 1917 —and they
would be quite right. Whole great classes of a
country may show an improvement while the cold-
blooded average shows a decline. Those who were
employed at all in 1932 were probably better off
than most of those employed in 1914. Yet, if we are
to consider the country as a whole, we simply must
offset the misery of the 1932 unemployed against
the improved state of the employed. The average
does tell its own story, and a most important
THE STANDARD OF LIVING


one, even if it seems to apply to few individual
cases.
One way of arriving at this story of the average
standard of living is to compare family income in
dollars with the cost of living—that is, dollars re-
ceived with what those dollars will buy in a properly
weighted family budget. To do this correctly, several
simple operations are necessary.
First—as to family income. A reasonable way of
estimating this figure is to take the National Indus-
trial Conference Board appraisal of national income
in any one year, and divide it by the population of
the United States in that year. The result gives us
income per person—or per capita income. Then, if
we want to base our measurements on a family of
four, all we have to do is to multiply the per capita
income by four.
Thus, in 1914, the national income was $31.6 bil-
lion and the population was 97.9 million. Dividing
one by the other gives us $323 as the per capita
income for that year, and four times that, or $1,292,
as the average income for a family of four persons.
Second —as to cost of living on a family budget
basis. Once more the Conference Board studies are
highly valuable. The budget costs of the average
family have been worked out in great detail, giving
due weight or importance to rent, clothing, heat and
light, incidentals such as carfare, and food costs.
All these vary slightly as between sections of the
country, but the final figure is a reasonably fair
average showing how changes in price of this or
that item affect the total cost of living on a given
budget or standard of expenses.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


The Conference Board makes an index of this
cost of living, using the prices of 1923 as the meas-
uring standard or “100” point. As I explained in
the first part of this book, any year can be used as
a “100 point” or base year, without in the least
altering the percentage changes from any one year
to another. Since so many of our comparisons in the
last two chapters have been with 1914,1 have taken
the Conference Board index of living costs and con-
verted it into an index in which 1914 (instead of
1923) stands as 100. Except for this particular pur-
pose, the layman can always use the Conference
Board’s index just as it stands to detect the change
from year to year or month to month in cost of
living. The Conference Board’s reports on this index
are published monthly in leading newspapers.
Third —as to standard of living. It is obvious that
if the cost of living rises 20 per cent while family
income is rising only 10 per cent, the standard of
living for that family (including ability to save
money) must come down. The way this is handled
in statistics is simply to divide the dollar income per
family in any one year by the index of living costs
for that year. In other words, if in a given year
family income is $2,000 and the index of living
stands at 100 per cent, then dividing $2,000 by
100 per cent still leaves us with $2,000. If, as in the
present case, the index figure of 100 represents liv-
ing costs in the year 1914, then we can say that
family income now stands at $2,000 in terms of the
buying power of 1914 dollars.
But the next year —let us say —family income
rises to $2,100 and the 1914 index of living costs
THE STANDARD OF LIVING


rises to 120. Dividing $2,100 by 120 per cent gives
us a figure of $1,750. We can then say that in terms
of what 1914 dollars would buy, the family income
has been reduced from $2,000 to $1,750.
To illustrate further by actual figures, we find
that the average income for a family of four in 1914
was $1,292, and that figure divided by the 1914 in-
dex of 100 for cost of living gives us, of course, just
$1,292 as our standard for future comparison. By
1916 average family income had risen to $1,736, but
the index of living costs had also risen to 106.6. In
this case the actual 1916 income, in terms of 1914
dollar buying power, had risen only to $1,591 —or
the result of dividing $1,696 by 106.6 per cent.
Using this method to arrive at equivalent income
figures for the decades since 1914, what do we
find?
We find, first of all, that the highest figure reached
in the period for family income (in terms always of
what 1914 dollars would buy in a family budget)
was in 1916. In that year family income reached
$1,629 (in 1914 dollars), showing an increase in
standard of living over 1914 of 26.1 per cent.
The nearest approach to this figure was in 1928,
with income at $1,617, or 25.1 per cent above 1914.
Only two other years even faintly approached
1928 and 1916 for high living standard as compared
with 1914. Those two years were 1929, with stand-
ard 24.5 per cent above 1914, and 1917, which was
very close to 1916. The highest gains over 1914 in
any other years were 1925 and 1918, which stood at
21.3 and 20.2 per cent above 1914, respectively.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


In all the twenty-three years of this period, from
1914 to 1936 inclusive, the only years that fell be-
low the 1914 standard were 1921 (down 10.6 per
cent) and the years of 1932, 1933, 1934, and 1935,
with declines of 8.3, 10, 3.6, and 2 per cent respec-
tively, below 1914.
In brief, these were the only years in which “ab-
solute” inflationary forces, driving against the
buying power of family income, produced a real
inflation of living costs compared with family in-
come. Our greatest single year of inflation in these
terms was 1921. But our greatest protracted period
of this basic kind of inflation was in the successive
years of 1932, 1933, 1934, and 1935, with 1933 as
the climax, and a distinct lessening of the pressure
by 1934. By 1936 family income in 1914 buying
power again stood 2.8 per cent above 1914.
This distinction between a single year and a
protracted period is of enormous importance if we
are trying to estimate the social and economic effects
of this kind of inflation. Savings and other resources
can be mobilized to meet a short emergency of re-
duced family buying power. But long successive
years, at a rapid rate of inflation (reduced buying
power), not only exhaust savings but accelerate
unemployment and the entire downward spiral of
reduced living standards.
For example, if we take the four-year average
following the crest of the 1919 boom and a similar
four-year average following 1929, we find that family
buying power was some 3 per cent higher in the
earlier period than in the later one. Not only this.
THE STANDARD OF LIVING


but the enforced change in the standard of living
was less after the 1919 boom.
Average income for the three years preceding the
1920 collapse (in 1914 dollars) was $1,565, and
dropped to an average for the next four years of
$1,382 —a decline from an “accustomed” standard
of about 11.6 per cent. Against this, the decline of
the thirties from the three-year average of 1927-
1929 was over 18 per cent! It is these protracted
enforced changes from a living standard to which a
people has become accustomed that raise threats to
the entire stability of our society and force read-
justments of acutely painful and often tragic
character.
Thus, in every reasonable sense, the inflation of
the thirties was far worse than the inflation of the
twenties. It may be merely coincidence that the
inflation of debt to wealth and of interest payments
to national income was also much worse in the
thirties —but some sort of connection between these
circumstances seems almost inescapable.
To be sure, the standard of living (see Chart 15
on page 182) showed a steady increase (i.e., relative
cost of living decreased ) in the same period (from
1922 to 1929) during which debt was gaining steadily
on wealth and interest payments on income. But
was this anything more than the prelude to a cli-
max of forces that inevitably exaggerated the impact
of the ultimate inflation of the thirties? Ownership
was losing ground. Income was becoming more and
more the servant of interest charges. When owner-
ship values fell and debts remained fixed, when
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


income fell and interest payments remained high,
were not these the very phenomena to throw us into
a worse turmoil of basic inflation than we had
ever known in the century, if not in our entire
history ?
At all events, we have the plain facts that from
1929 to 1933 the family standard of living fell (in
1914 dollars) from $1,610 to $1,162 —a drop of more
than 27 per cent; whereas from 1933 to 1936, the
standard of living rose once more from $1,162 to
$1,330 —a rise of more than 14 per cent. Moreover,
the rise coincided with a period in which wealth
again gained rapidly on debt and income on interest
charges.
If it is possible —which I believe it is—to draw
sensible conclusions from the chain of events de-
scribed in this and the two previous chapters, we
might well say that periods of sound improvement
in living standard should be accompanied by no
rise in the ratio of debt to wealth, and by no rise
in the ratio of interest payments to income. If we
do not have these conditions —if debt gains on
wealth and interest on income—then in the very
midst of an apparently improving living standard
we are laying the groundwork for a real ulti-
mate inflation that will destroy all the benefit
gained.
The living standard of the twenties improved
temporarily against a rising tide of debt and
interest inflation, and then collapsed with protracted
tragedy. In contrast, the rising living standard of the
war period saw for several years a decline in debt and
THE STANDARD OF LIVING


interest inflation. A collapse ensued. But it was
sharp and short. By 1922 we already showed a net
gain over 1914. There was human mercy in the
brevity of the disaster. Possibly in this contrast we
can see something of what our future efforts should
seek to attain.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


CHAPTER XIV
Owners in Bondage
The inescapable conclusion of any
factual study of the major kinds of inflation is that
debt, in its many forms, moves restlessly and relent-
lessly beneath all of them.
This conclusion is equally forced upon us whether
we are discussing the “absolute” types of inflation —
the -price raising of bonds, equities, or goods and
services, or the raising of the short-term interest
rate —or the more fundamental “relative” types of
inflation in terms of debt to wealth, interest charges
to income, or cost of living to income. In the four
absolute types and in the three relative types —in
seven major types in all—we find that changes in
some part of the debt structure are chiefly respon-
sible for the intensity, height, and depth of the
great waves that carry our whole civilization from
boom to panic and back to boom again.
We find an inflation of bond prices when debt
in the unique form of money piles up at a faster


rate than the outstanding credit (loans and invest-
ments) of the commercial banking system.
We find an inflation of the short-term interest
rate when certain forms of bank credit rise faster
than debt in the form of money.
We find an inflation of equity values when the
velocity of money is rising as compared with the
volume of commercial bank loan debt, particularly
when the volume of money is also rising as compared
with certain forms of banking debt and with pri-
mary metallic money.
We find an inflation of the general price level when
the velocity of money debt rises as compared with
the physical volume of goods and services being
traded.
In all four cases of specific price raising we find
debt relationships paramount. The processes con-
nected with ownership of goods —production and
consumption—are constantly being twisted and
distorted or thrown out of balance by the interac-
tion upon them of various forms of debt.
But we have found the same phenomenon appear-
ing when we analyze the purely “relative” forms
of inflation.
We have found the whole essence and structure
of ownership capitalism imperiled by an undue
growth of debt claims against ownership—and that
such a crisis coincides with those periods of highest
stress when the very foundations of the social order
quake.
At similar stages we have found the undue growth
of interest charges compared with income expressing
another form of social stress and inflation.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


We have found that when the earning power of
ownership rises, creating greater income, the bene-
ficial effect can be entirely wiped out by the effects
of debt upon the price level and the cost of living.
Thus, no matter where we turn in our analysis of
various types of inflation we find the size and pro-
portion of debt controlling the course of events,
determining whether ownership shall be secure or
not, whether it shall or shall not yield proper living
values, whether it shall be what it is supposed to
be, the “spine” of the capitalist system, or little
more than the fodder to satisfy the appetite of debt.
Nor, strangely enough, do we find owners, as a
class, the unwilling victims of debt. Quite to the
contrary, we find owners for long periods of years
eager to get into debt, eager to use “other people’s
money” for their own greater profit, zealous to
borrow money at 4 per cent on which they can earn
(for a time!) 6 per cent or higher.
In short, we find no “case against creditors, ” as a
class, that is not completely counterbalanced by an
equally strong case against the greed of owners.
But what we do find —or what we would find if
only we could clear our minds of centuries of debt-
ridden thinking—is a clear case against the simul-
taneous existence within one economic system of the
two antagonistic principles of “ownership capital-
ism” and “creditorship capitalism.”
The two principles merely succeed in making
modern capitalism an inherently divided house!
They merely succeed in creating a sort of “eco-
nomic neurosis” —a pulling apart of interests —an
economic state of mind analogous to that of the
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


manic depressive who soars one instant to the
heights of optimism and sinks the next instant to
despair.
It is possible to say, with more than figurative
truth, therefore, that our appalling cycles of boom
and depression, with all they entail of false hopes
and realistic agony, are neurotic symptoms on a huge
mass scale, with the perpetual conflict of owners and
creditors as the root of the neurosis.
I do not wish to be an alarmist. The business of
scaring up ghosts is too easy to start and far too hard
to stop. But I do feel that we have reached a time
when only clarity of analysis and realistic acceptance
of facts can hope to conserve the essential values
derived from the capitalism of private ownership of
productive property.
The attempt to maintain an inherently divided
house is a far subtler enemy to the future of private
ownership than any of the open preachments of
state capitalism or communism. If we do not under-
stand this, clearly and forthrightly, then we simply
do not understand ourselves or the inescapable
antagonism of the processes by which we are trying
to continue our “system,” In that case, the real
danger is from within —and not from outside!
The real question facing us, as true conservatives,
is this: do we or do we not wish to conserve the basic
idea of private ownership of goods and of the means
of producing goods?
If we do, then our task is very different from the
task of believers in ownership prior to the World
War. If owners held an equity in our national wealth
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


of about 72 per cent in 1914, their problem was
vastly different in degree and urgency from the
owners of 1932, who held less than a 41 per cent
equity in national wealth, and even from the some-
what strengthened owners of 1936 who held a 54.1
per cent equity. To put it in the plainest language of
business, owners were “well heeled” in 1914 and
entitled to some feeling of security, whereas in 1932
(and even in 1936) owners were far out on a limb
with a gale blowing and hurricane signals set.
To understand this fully, all we have to do is set
up a few simple illustrations of the so-called “lever-
age” of debt upon the position of owners. Let us
take first a case that will illustrate in round figures
the position of 1914:
The appraisal of tangible wealth at cur-
rent prices was SIBO billion
The dollar value of major debts was 50
Leaving an equity to owners of $l3O
or, in percentage of wealth 72 per cent
Now, starting from this point, what would hap-
pen to owners if general prices dropped 30 per cent
while debts remained fixed ?
The new value of national wealth would
drop to $126 billion
The dollar value of debts would remain at 50
Still leaving owners a substantial equity of $ 76
or, in percentage of wealth, over 60 per cent
Thus the inherent strength of ownership was rela-
tively great in 1914, making it possible to go through
a drastic price drop without putting creditor claims
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


into a position of majority dominance. But how is
this inherent strength of owners altered when their
position, at the start, is only that of a 54.1 per cent
equity, as in 1936?
The current appraisal of wealth is $305 billion
The dollar value of debts is 140
Leaving an equity to owners of $165
or, in percentage of wealth 54.1 per cent
With this as the starting point, what would hap-
pen to owners if general prices again dropped 30 per
cent while debts remained fixed?
The new value of national wealth would be $214 billion
The dollar value of debts would remain at 140
Leaving owners an equity of only $ 74
or, in percentage of wealth, less than. . 35 per cent
The brutal fact emerging from this comparison
is that, in spite of all the increase in wealth since
1914, a 30 per cent price drop from the 1936 posi-
tion would leave owners with $2 billion less wealth
than they would have had after a similar price drop
from their 1914 position!
In these twenty-two years wealth increased about
69 per cent. In the same period, owing to rising debt
proportions, owners’ actual dollar equity in the
rising wealth increased only 27 per cent!
In the first instance, an unforeseen price drop
would have left them with a dollar equity of $76
billion. In the second case, a similar price drop would
have left them with only $74 billion!
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


This is the concrete meaning of the leverage of debt
against ownership security. It is the hard and rig-
orous statement, in terms any businessman will
recognize, of just why and to what extent the
ownership problem of today is different from that
of earlier decades, and of why the complacent state-
ment that “we have always come out of similar
troubles before ” is nothing but a fatuous absurdity.
In the meantime, practically all the current busi-
ness discussions, most of the economic writings, and
all the world political programs are directed either
toward averting communism or toward some vague
forms of “controlling credit” —that is, in more
honest language, toward controlling debt. Nowhere,
to the best of my knowledge, do we find the funda-
mental question being asked of whether or not we
wish to continue the debt system at all!
We must remember, of course, that financing
through indebtedness has been in constantly in-
creasing favor ever since Calvin wrote his famous
defense of usury. Moreover, debt financing has been
the accepted practice during the entire existence of
the machine age and the growth of industrialism.
The economic world, for this reason, is supposed to
revolve around debt financing with that same in-
evitable certainty with which the sun and stars
were once supposed to revolve around the earth.
It is not in the least surprising that our conscious-
ness is debt-ridden, that our economists take debt
financing wholly for granted, that the passing of
ownership security in the last two decades has been
almost unnoticed, that we stop short at analyzing
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


inflations without asking why they must continue,
and that we always fail to discuss debt realistically
because we take it so solemnly as something ap-
proaching a law of nature.
Nevertheless, debt financing is not a law of nature;
inflations (of the kind that really disrupt the social
order) are not inevitable; ownership security is, in
plain fact and figures, a thing of the past; and the
time has come when we must at least study the
phenomenon of debt in as scientific and practical
a way as Galileo studied the misleading solar system
of Ptolemy.
The owners of today are in heavy bondage to the
debt system. Is this necessary? Is it desirable? Is
there any other method by which the capitalism of
private ownership can be conserved and strength-
ened —to the probable benefit of every social group ?
We must ask these questions. We must try to
answer them. And in doing so we must exert the
same courage with which Galileo asked and an-
swered questions about the sacrosanct solar system
in which the world of his day believed so intently.
Obviously, a complete survey of the debt system
is far beyond the scope of this book. But on behalf
of the nontechnical man in finance, and by way of
suggestion to perplexed students of our modern
system, whether professional or amateur, a few of
the leading questions and possible partial answers
to them can be put down here to some effect.
First: Why is the inner conflict between owner-
ship capitalism and creditorship capitalism “in-
herent'” and “inescapable”?
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


A backward glance at the effect of debt leverage
on ownership equities provides one answer to this
question. That leverage can work in two directions.
In times of rising prices it can increase the owners’
equity faster than the rate of price rise itself. The
debts remain fixed while owners’ values rise. It is
only in times of falling prices (or of falling earnings
owing to diminished activity or “velocity”) that
the debt leverage is against the owners’ interests.
But this means that the debt system augments
the greed of owners at one stage, largely debauching
the moral integrity supposed to inhere in ownership.
In the “down” stages, the debt system then turns
around and serves to disintegrate ownership.
But the inherent nature of the conflict does not
stop here. The creditor himself suffers if prices rise.
He lends SI,OOO when wheat is worth $1 a bushel,
but collects his debt when wheat is worth $2 a
bushel. He loaned the equivalent of 1,000 bushels
of wheat and receives back the equivalent of only
500 bushels.
On the other hand, the creditor’s greed is stimu-
lated by falling prices. He lends the equivalent of
1.000 bushels and receives back the equivalent of
2.000 bushels—and this quite aside from the interest
rate. Creditors and owners can never benefit at
one and the same time. What helps one injures the
other. That is why we must face the fact of the
conflict between them (not as persons, but as eco-
nomic forces) being inherent and inescapable.
Second: In spite of the inherent nature of the
conflict between ownership and creditorship, is it
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


not possible to continue the traditions of centuries
and to balance or control the relationship between
them so as to produce general stability?
This question really demands an entire book for
adequate answer. But several brief comments sug-
gest themselves at once. We face the historic fact
that in recent decades creditor dominance has in-
creased enormously, and is therefore vastly more
difficult to control without resort to central govern-
ment regulation than ever before in our history.
Strong central regulation implies at least a great
lessening of individual responsibility and a large
increase in arbitrary methods of control as distinct
from natural adjustments brought about through
honest competition. In the end it implies central
control of functions as distinct from mere policing
or regulation of individual effort.
We must admit that balancing the innate opposi-
tion of interests between owners and creditors is
very much like trying to balance a man’s life by
administering first stimulants and then opiates. We
have to assume that “a little debt” is a good
thing. We also have to assume that some agency,
government or private, is endowed with enough
wisdom and omniscience to know just when “a
little debt” turns into “too much debt” —and that,
possessing such wisdom and knowledge, it will be
permitted, in a political world, to exert the necessary
controls and brakes. In other words, we have to
assume an absolutism both in idea and practice
and a complete willingness of huge owner and credi-
tor interests to submit without struggle to controls
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


that cut off impending advantages to one or the
other.
In general, every effort to create a balance be-
tween owners and creditors is commendable in pur-
pose, but it can never amount to more than the
day-to-day treatment of a sickness —of an economic
neurosis—based on a conflict, which should, if
possible, be cured by removing the inner source of
the conflict.
Our present system is a pathological case —and
not a mere case of unbalanced diet.
Third: If we were to abandon the debt system,
how could we finance new enterprise and stimulate
further material progress?
The answer to this is simple. We have already
financed many huge new enterprises entirely without
recourse to debt!
Practically the entire aviation industry (al-
though something new, untried, and freighted with
high capital risks) was financed through common
stock sales. It is superlatively worth noting that
whereas our railroads, which were financed largely
through bonds, went through one bankruptcy after
another in early “ depressions,” the aviation industry
at large came through the worst depression in our
history without a major receivership. It was financed
by equity partners —not by creditors!
But the aviation industry is far from being a lone
instance of progress financed without debt. The
greater part of British industry has always raised
money through shares —that is, by securing addi-
tional equity partners —rather than by borrowing
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


from creditors. Most of our great American indus-
tries (aside from railroads and public utilities) have
either financed themselves in major part or entirely
by stock, or have shown the wisdom of the serpent
in reducing indebtedness to bond creditors as rapidly
as possible. Thousands of small businesses are
financed every year either by partnership agree-
ments or by stock issues.
In other words, ownership over the decades has
already foregone in great part the added prof-
its realized on borrowed money and has pro-
gressed amazingly on strict partnership (or equity)
financing.
Thus, the question of “how to have progress
without debt” largely answers itself from actual
large-scale precedent. Nevertheless, in spite of all
the debt-free enterprise, we cannot forget that in
1936 the owner equity in American wealth was only
54.1 per cent. Our economic system as a whole has
put ownership in bondage, in spite of all the wisdom
of great individual debt-free units!
Fourth: How far could the gradual elimination
of the debt system and the substitution of an owner-
ship financing system be carried?
The answers to this question divide themselves
into several distinct fields of present debt-financing
activity.
In long-term financing, outstanding bond issues
over a period of years could either be paid off out
of earnings reserves or could be “refunded” at
maturity by the sale of additional stock. In this, as
in all major economic transitions, the importance of
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


the process would lie in the conscious public recogni-
tion and approval of the final objective rather than
in the length of time required or in the specific ad-
justment of the countless details involved.
In this same field an investment medium for
conservative trust funds could be provided by the
present instrument of “preferred stock,” giving
the preferred owner a prior claim on earnings up to
a certain maximum sum. The preferred owner of
today sacrifices the chance for indefinitely rising
profits in exchange for greater stability of modest
return. But this prior interest in equities has nothing
in common with the existence of a debt claim. It is
simply a recognition of senior as against junior
ownership rights. 1
In the field of mortgage financing of real estate
and farms a “certificate of senior interest” (similar
in principle to a preferred stock) could readily be
substituted over the years for present bond and
mortgage instruments. In practice, in recent years,
mortgage lenders, such as savings banks and in-
surance companies, have not been resorting to
“foreclosure” except in extreme cases. Instead, they
have accepted “assignments of rent” which, in
effect, give them the same first claim on earnings of
income-producing properties that they would have
from a preferred interest certificate.
In the case of owner-occupied homes, similar
adjustments in practice have been made on a large
scale —all of which recognize the principle that
ownership should not be disturbed and uprooted,
1 See Appendix B.
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


where the default in full payment is beyond the
individual power of the owner to correct.
Therefore, the transition from the debt system
to an equity basis in mortgage financing would
have ample precedent in the spirit of what is already
being done today. Lending institutions would simply
become joint senior owners of real estate, with
prior claims on earnings and on the proceeds of sale.
The field of governmental borrowings presents
fewer real difficulties than one would imagine, and
for the simple reason that the essence of partner-
ship already exists. The citizen and his government
are virtually one. Certainly no group of New York
City bondholders (literally holders of “corporate
stock”) has any practical expectation of foreclosing
on the city government in case of default. Nor does
a Federal treasury bondholder confidently expect to
foreclose on the Speaker’s desk and chair in Con-
gress in case of a national default.
Aside from this aspect, it would still be possible
(granted a sufficient public endorsement of the
principle of avoiding debt) to have advances to the
government returnable in 'purchasing power equiva-
lent to the amount advanced and to have interest (or
national dividends) figured on the same basis.
I am not saying that any such idea could or
should be put into effect overnight. I am merely
suggesting a possibility that would have in it many
elements of fairness, including the impossibility of
speculating in obligations representing the emer-
gency requirements of an entire nation of one’s
fellow citizens and neighbors.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


Without going into the minor adjustments in
other fields, such as rental agreements with op-
tional purchase prices in place of installment debt
contracts, we might pass at once, in our suggestions,
to insurance companies and banks. After all, they
constitute an enormous part of the aggregate debt
system.
Insurance companies—and particularly the life
companies—now base their rates and payments on
the basis of investment in fixed debt at a minimum
rate of interest compounded over the years. At
first glance, they would have a hard time in meeting
payments due if they had to depend on fluctuating
stocks and dividends.
We must remember, however, that many pre-
ferred stocks, with no bonded debt working against
them, would, under a general nondebt system,
be quite as secure a source of fixed income as
many bonds of today. Bonds do default —and so
would some preferred stocks. But in view of the
fact that a nondebt system would probably result
in longer periods of stable earnings, fewer inflation-
ary tendencies, and fewer depressed reactions, a
wise investment selection of preferred stocks under
such conditions would probably match anything
to be obtained today from diversified bonds, both
as to market price stability and as to regularity of
dividend payment.
Furthermore, a growing consciousness on the
part of the public that the common objective was a
standard of living, rather than the maintenance of
fixed dollar obligations, would probably make it
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


possible to issue new forms of insurance and annuity-
policies, under which the beneficiary would be as-
sured the equivalent in “standard of living returns”
to the value of what he had paid in premiums.
One of the greatest causes for fearing price infla-
tion today is the effect on annuitants and policy-
holders of receiving dollars worth far less in
purchasing power than the dollars they have paid in
premiums. It is not wholly fantastic to assume that
insurance (in a strictly ownership economy) might
represent standard of living values rather than fixed
dollar amounts.
I can think of a dozen objections to this idea —
but few of them are any more powerful than present-
day objections to policies being paid off in depreci-
ated dollars!
The banking field, of course, presents a far more
difficult problem; so difficult, in fact, that we might
well say that by far the greatest benefits to owner-
ship would be obtained through long-term and
mortgage financing changes without attempting to
alter the banking system at all.
Moreover, it can be pointed out that most bank
loans are made for short periods, during which
major changes in price level are unlikely, and that
the interest rate is flexible and can be altered drasti-
cally from month to month and year to year.
Nevertheless, since we are merely searching for
ideas which others can take the time to develop, it
might be worth while to point out what a nondebt
or “equity” banking system would probably be
like.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


In the first place, I believe that it would auto-
matically tend to discourage the hoarding of money
by making the demand deposit and checking priv-
ileges strictly service functions. The only banks with
demand deposit liabilities would be Deposit Service
banks, which would charge a fee for all services
rendered, make their operating expenses and profits
from those fees, and maintain at all times 100 per
cent reserves against those deposits. Thus, the in-
dividual who wished to hold large amounts of cash
would have to pay (in service fees) a 'premium for
that liquidity.
The financing of trade and commerce would then
devolve upon a second type of bank, which would
be virtually a short-term equity investment trust,
with short-term shareholders rather than demand
depositors in the present sense. They might be
called, for example, Equity Finance banks. They
would “go partners” with a businessman on his
current transactions, instead of making a loan to
him, and would share in his profits.
To cover the risk involved, they might, for ex-
ample, purchase a 50 per cent interest in a given
transaction for something less than 50 per cent of
the probable value of the transaction. The owner of
SIOO,OOO worth of cotton, at current market prices,
might sell a 50 per cent interest in that cotton to
an Equity bank for $45,000. If he then sold his
cotton for $120,000, the bank would get 50 per cent
of that, or $60,000. But if he sold it for only $90,-
000, the bank would still get 50 per cent, or $45,000,
and thus suffer no loss. On the other hand, if cotton
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


dropped 50 per cent in value in a few months (as
actually happened in 1920), then the bank would
get back only $25,000 —and the owner would get
the same amount.
An Equity bank of this sort could afford the
chance of such losses, not only because they would
be matched against many large profits, but also be-
cause the bank would have no depositors able to de-
mand back dollar for dollar what they had deposited.
Corporations with idle funds and other large
groups would provide the equivalent of deposits
in the form of three or six months’ “ shares,” draw-
ing out at the end of the period their prorata share
of the bank’s “book value” at that time. The
“depositors” would thus be short-term equity in-
vestors under the bank’s skilled management. The
bank would put out their funds for them on a
profit-sharing basis. Such a system would put a
premium on the skill and business acumen of the
bank’s officers—-but only to the same extent that
any investment trust of today presupposes experi-
enced management.
Since, under a nondebt, or equity banking
system, demand deposits would become merely a
service function and equity financing a use of share-
holders’ money, there would remain the question of
providing increasing “money” to meet demands of
growing population and trade.
This would have to become the function of a
Reserve bank system not wholly unlike our present
Federal Reserve. When shareholders’ funds in the
Equity banks did not provide enough money for
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


current needs, the Equity banks would then resell
(instead of rediscount) their shares in certain trans-
actions to the Reserve banks, receiving new cur-
rency or Reserve bank deposit credits in exchange.
The Reserve banks would be the only ones allowed
to issue new currency or new deposit credits.
The somewhat technical detail of this possible
system of equity banking (which, I again emphasize,
is suggested merely to indicate a possibility and
not as an immediate practical measure) is described
more fully in Appendix A, as it is far beyond the
scope of the body of this book. But there is one im-
portant point to note concerning the automatic
working of such a system. When and if the Reserve
banks realized a profit on a repurchase transaction,
the amount of money involved in that profit would
automatically he retired from circulation.
On the other hand, when the Reserve banks real-
ized a loss, it would mean that the money repre-
sented by the loss would automatically remain in
circulation as a more or less permanent addition to
the total money supply.
An equity banking system would, thus, exactly
reverse the fatal spiral of our present debt hanking, by
which the cancellation of loans in times of declining
business results in reducing money supply when it
is most needed, and by which the making of new
loans in prosperous or inflationary periods increases
the money supply at the very time when it helps to
augment the inflationary trend.
As anyone who has read the chapters on price
level inflation will readily see, this change would,
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


without the intervention of arbitrary “supreme
courts” of money, provide an automatic stabilizing
influence in both rising and falling cycles of business
activity and prices.
As I explained at the outset, this survey of the
possibilities of setting up an economy of ownership
without the conflicting element of debt suffers from
far too great brevity. It is properly the subject of a
long, exacting and highly technical study. But I
have felt that it would not be fair to readers inti-
mately concerned in the ever-recurrent waves of
inflation and disaster not to point out the possi-
bilities of change.
There is far too much talk today of “capitalism”
versus “communism,” and far too much doom pre-
dicted for capitalism, without once taking into ac-
count the fact that we do not have a capitalism
of private ownership at all, but rather that “divided
house” of creditors and owners which provokes the
very crises the communists enjoy watching.
There is also far too much talk of looking for
“middle roads” between capitalism and com-
munism. The purpose of this chapter, then, is
simply to provoke discussion of a totally different pos-
sibility—a genuine turning back to full-fledged
ownership. The modern world has never yet tried a
true equity capitalism. Perhaps it is worth trying!
Ownership involves both risks and responsibilities.
Creditorship avoids every possible risk and every
responsibility of equity ownership. It is an accident
of bad judgment when a creditor finds himself an
owner through foreclosure —when he finds himself
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


paying taxes on land or factories or railroads and
taking his chances with his owner-neighbors on
good years and bad, bumper crops or drought, wars
and rumors of wars.
An ownership, or equity, economy would have to
accept all these risks willingly, and with a large in-
crease in that very sense of “rugged individualism”
which has become almost an obsolete sham under
growing creditor dominance.
But, with the added risks and responsibilities,
there is some hope of a compensating greater stabil-
ity, a larger freedom from dire extremes, a better
state of normal economic health instead of our pres-
ent chronic neurosis; above all, of a growth and
strengthening of that peculiar liberty which comes
only to those peoples whose interests are united.
If we cannot live “half slave and half free,” it is
at least worth asking if we can hope for economic
freedom when we are half owners and half creditors.
Our problems are not those of even two decades
ago. It is more than an ocean of “new ideas” that
has swept the world; it is an ocean of new facts and
new relationships.
Threats to security that were only potential and
still far off in the first decades of this century have
now become actual and of this very hour. One of
them is the threat to private ownership—not from
communism, which is a counsel of ownership de-
spair, but from that very finance capitalism, or
creditorship, which has been grafted onto the tree
of private ownership and is now beginning to choke
out its life.
OWNERS IN BONDAGE


By every sane and practical analysis, by every
factual and hardheaded measurement, and by every
common-sense observation, this debt capitalism is
the very core of inflations and their agonizing after-
maths. Whether or not we must continue to foster
and nourish it —until it erupts in some ultimate
crisis—is probably the most important single prac-
tical problem facing our social, political, and eco-
nomic world today.
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


APPENDIX A
The Possible Technique of Non-Debt
Banking
In spite of the inherently drastic
character of any proposed change to a nondebt
(or equity) banking system, the disturbance in-
volved to economic functioning might be very slight.
On the other hand, equity banking, as a profession,
would take on aspects at once broader and more
constructive than that of any other form of eco-
nomic or industrial leadership.
Bankers would become active and responsible
partners in enterprise—not by accident, as today,
when bad loans force them into a liquidating busi-
ness —but always and with direct intention. An
equity banker would have to be a keen judge of
markets and marketing, of industrial processes, of
agriculture and mining. The large scale “pawn-
broker” aspect of much of today’s banking would
disappear automatically in favor of business risks,
carefully calculated and assumed, and the respon-
sibility of stewardship.


To compensate for this added burden, the equity-
banker would no longer live under the terror of
“demand deposit liability.” He, himself, would no
longer be a debtor to his own depositors, but merely
the expert manager of their pooled funds.
The technique of such an equity banking system
would probably require—as hinted in brief in Chap-
ter XIV —three major banking functions.
First
A place would be needed for deposit of money
held for its convenience or liquidity value, where it
could be checked out or converted into legal tender
currency on demand. For convenience, we might
call such depositories, “Deposit Service Banks.”
These banks would have no lending or investing
function. They would maintain 100 per cent reserves
at all times against deposits, either in the form of
currency received on deposit, or in the form of re-
deposit credits with the Reserve Bank of Issue
(described later).
By providing merely a convenience, storage and
bookkeeping service, these Deposit Banks would
have to support themselves and make their profit
by charging service fees commensurate with each
depositor’s average balance and activity in transac-
tions. The aggregate of these service fees would
amount, in effect, to a “liquidity premium” on
demand money, and thus discourage hoarding and
promote active use of funds in investment, trade,
or living expenses.
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


Thus a quite possible scale of charges might be
Y2of 1 per cent monthly on average balances main-
tained (6 per cent a year) plus a flat charge of a few
cents per individual deposit or check transaction.
Deposit Banks would need no “surplus” and only
enough subscribed or earned capital to initiate and
maintain the necessary service facilities, including
clearinghouse arrangements with other similar
banks and with the Reserve Bank and the Equity
Banks.
Second
A place would also be needed for the deposit of
money to be invested under good management, but
at the collective risk of all depositors, in various
short-term commercial transactions or (in permitted
proportions) in general equity investments.
The depositors would be, in effect, members of a
syndicate or investment trust managed by the
officers and directors of the bank. These banks we
might call “Equity Finance Banks,” Their own
capital funds (unless they were mutual institutions)
would be “at risk” with those of their depositors—
but not as a guaranty fund against loss by depositors.
All uninvested funds would be deposited tem-
porarily in Deposit Banks. The technique of short-
term financing with depositors’ funds would be to
“purchase” percentage interests in specific com-
mercial or speculative transactions. The purchase
price would be such as to compensate (a) for esti-
mated risk plus (b) a reasonable profit; in other
words, all purchases would be made at a “risk-
APPENDIX A


profit” rate, similar to “discount” in a present-day
lending operation.
Thus, if the estimated value of a transaction to
be completed in three months is SIOO,OOO, and if the
risk is considered small, the “risk-profit” rate might
be 1 per cent per month —half of this representing
risk insurance and half profit to the bank. In such
a case the bank might advance or invest $48,500
($50,000 less 3 per cent) in exchange for a 50 per cent
interest in a SIOO,OOO three months’ transaction.
The following tables illustrate the effect on the
bank’s earnings of three different assumptions: (a)
that the transaction is completed at $105,000 (a
greater profit than expected), ( b) at $99,000 (a slight
loss, as covered by “risk” estimates), and (c) at
$90,000 (a much heavier loss than covered by an-
ticipated risk charges).
A. I. Bank has advanced $48,500
2 Transaction completed @ $105,000
8. Of which bank receives SO per cent, or 52,500
4. Giving the bank a net profit in 3 mouths of $ 4,000
6. Or, in annual percentage rate on $48,500 32.99%
B. 1. Bank has advanced $48,500
2. Transaction completed @ $99,000
8. Of which bank receives 50 per cent, or 49,500
4. Giving the bank a net profit in 3 months of $ 1,000
5. Or, in annual percentage rate of $48,500 8.25%
C. 1. Bank has advanced $48,500
2. Transaction completed @ $90,000
3. Of which bank receives 50 per cent, or 45,000
4. Giving the bank a net loss in 3 months of $ 8,500
5. Or, in annual percentage rate on $48,600 —28.86%
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


The various effects of these same assumptions
on the merchant applying for the equity financing
can then be illustrated by these additional tables —
in which his own “cost” is estimated at $95,000.
A. 1. Merchant’s cost $ 95,000
2. Received from bank $ 48,500
3. Received from transaction 105,000
4. Making total receipts 153,500
5. Less return payment to bank 52,500
6. And net receipts to merchant 101,000
7. Net profit to merchant in 3 months $ 6,000
8. Or, in annual percentage rate on $95,000 25.26%
B. 1. Merchant’s cost $ 95,000
2. Received from bank $ 48,500
3. Received from transaction 99,000
4. Making total receipts $147,500
5. Less return payment to bank 49,500
6. And net receipts to merchant 98,000
7. Net profit to merchant in 3 months $ 3,000
8. Or, in annual percentage rate on $95,000 12.63%
C. 1. Merchant’s cost $ 95,000
2. Received from bank $ 48,500
3. Received from transaction 90,000
4. Making total receipts $138,500
6. Less return payment to bank 45,000
6. And net receipts to merchant 98,500
7. Net loss to merchant in 3 months $ 1,500
8. Or, in annual percentage rate on $95,000 —6.32%
APPENDIX A


Assuming each of these three transactions to have
taken place in one year, the aggregate profit and
loss statements of the bank and the merchant re-
spectively would be:
1. To bank, net dollar profit in 9 months of $1,500
2. To merchant, net dollar profit in 9 months of 7,500
S. Annual rate of return to bank on $48,500 4.12%
4. Annual rate of return to merchant on $95,000 10.53%
To show the contrast between these results of
equity banking as compared with present loan and /
or discount methods, we can follow through the
same three transactions as loan operations except
for the assumption that in each case the bank “dis-
counts” the transaction at Y per cent per month,
that is, advances (in round figures) $49,250 and is
paid back an even $50,000.
I. Bank:
In each case advances $49,250 and receives back
$50,000, making a total profit in 9 months of. .. . $ 2,250
Or, in annual percentage of $49,250 6.09%
11. Merchant:
A. 1. Merchant’s cost $ 95,000
2. Received from bank $ 49,250
3. Received from transaction 105,000
4. Total receipts $154,250
6. Less return payment to bank 50,000
6. Net receipts to merchant 104,250
7. Net profit to merchant in 3 months $ 9,250
8. In annual percentage of $95,000 38.85%
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


B. 1. Merchant’s cost $ 95,000
2. Received from bank $ 49,250
8. Received from transaction 99,000
4. Total receipts $148,250
5. Less return payment to bank 50,000
6. Net receipts to merchant 98,250
7. Net profit to merchant in 3 months $ 3,250
8. In annual percentage of $95,000 13.68%
C. 1. Merchant’s cost $ 95,000
2. Received from bank $ 49,250
3. Received from transaction 90,000
4. Total receipts $139,250
5. Less return payment to bank. .. . 50,000
6. Net receipts to merchant 89,250
7. Net loss to merchant in 3 months $ 5,750
8. In annual percentage of $95,000 —24.21%
Thus, a comparison of results to bank and mer-
chant respectively under the two systems (assuming
each transaction taking place once in a given year)
would be:
1. Bank:
1. Profit in 9 months under equity banking $1,500
2. Annual rate of return on $48,500 4.12%
3. Profit in 9 months under discount lending 2,250
4. Annual rate of return on $49,250 6.09%
11. Merchant:
1. Profit in 9 mouths under equity banking $7,500
2. Annual rate of return on $95,000 10.53%
3. Profit in 9 months under discount borrowing. .. . 6,750
4. Annual rate of return on $95,000 9,47%
APPENDIX A


Thus, in summary, on profitable transactions,
under equity banking, the banker’s profits would
be much higher and the merchant’s profits some-
what less than under the present system.
On minor loss transactions (loss as against ex-
pectancy) under equity banking the bank’s profit
would still be greater and the merchant’s profit less
than under the present system.
On major loss transactions (loss compared to
merchant’s actual cost) the bank would show a loss,
and the merchant’s loss would be much less under
equity banking than under the present system.
On an average of profits and losses throughout the
year, the bank would, in this case, come out with a
smaller dollar and percentage profit under equity
than under the present system, and the merchant’s
profit under equity would be higher. (If the bank had
used good judgment in the “C” transaction by in-
creasing the risk charge, its profits under Equity
Banking need not have shown a loss as compared
with the present system.)
In no case, however, under equity banking, could
the merchant be entirely wiped out (as is always
possible under the present system), because the bank
would always be his financial partner, with merely a
certain risk premium as a seniority protection.
The Equity Bank’s purchases of business risks,
other than specific transactions (corresponding to
unsecured or “clean” credit lines under the present
system) would also be made on a percentage basis.
That is, advances would represent a certain “book
value” at the time they were made, would be made
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


at a risk-profit discount from that book value, and
would be repayable in a prorata book value at a
later date. In effect, such open advances would be
like temporary common stock purchases, bought at
slightly under book value and redeemed at actual
book value.
In the case of corporations the advance could
actually take the form of a temporary stock pur-
chase under a redemption agreement, for a certain
date and as of book value at that date.
Thus the Equity Banks would be in every sense
short-term commercial investment trusts in equities
of current business. They would be providing, on an
equity basis, short-term working capital require-
ments of business and speculation. They would be
reducing the profits of business due solely to the
“leverage” of fixed loans, but would also be reduc-
ing the excessive ownership losses of business often
resulting from the same “leverage.” Needless to say,
small short-term personal advances could still be
handled as under the present system.
Third
We now come to the requirement of increased
money supply under certain conditions of expanding
trade. For it is clear that Equity Banks would have
available for advances only their own subscribed
capital plus depositors’ funds. Their advances
would not be a lending of their own credit (as under
the present system), but the equivalent of “loans
for account of others,” that is, of depositors, after
the manner of savings banks today.
APPENDIX A


Depositors would leave their funds with the
Equity Banks for certain stated periods, and would
not have the use of those funds while the Equity
Banks were making advances with them. Deposits
and withdrawals would both be made at prorata
“book value” of the Equity Bank at the times of
deposit and withdrawal respectively. Thus, owing
to depositor withdrawals, there might be frequent
occasions when depositors’ funds would be insuffi-
cient for current business needs.
To meet this requirement there would have to be
a Reserve Bank (or Banks) of Issue, similar in many
respects to the present Federal Reserve Banks, but
operated as a public convenience and not for profit
(or loss) in the present understanding of those terms.
The Reserve Bank would have power to receive
currency deposits from the Deposit Service Banks,
to pay out those deposits on demand for a fee pro-
portionately smaller than that charged customers
of the Deposit Service Banks, and to issue further
currency, or deposit credits redeemable in currency,
to the Equity Banks when repurchasing from those
hanks equities already purchased by them from their
customers.
In other words, the currency issue power (or its
equivalent in redeemable deposits) would be auto-
matically limited by the volume of equities requiring
resale (equivalent of rediscount under present
methods).
The technique of the Reserve Bank would prob-
ably be somewhat as follows;
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


The Equity Bank (or Banks), having advanced
the greater part of depositors’ funds, would buy a
given commercial equity at the usual “risk-profit”
rate, and then resell the equity to the Reserve
Bank at a lesser “risk-profit” rate, receiving
new currency or redeemable deposit credits in
exchange.
On completion of the equity transaction, the
merchant would pay his agreed percentage to the
Equity Bank, and the latter, in turn, would pay
back the Reserve Bank its percentage. Thus, in
general principle, the volume of money would be
increased pending the completion of a “resold”
equity transaction, and retired at its completion.
But the possibilities of profit or loss to the Re-
serve Bank provide this very important qualifica-
tion: namely, that profits would result in retiring more
currency than was issued , and losses would result in
leaving additional currency (or deposit credits) in
circulation.
This would reverse the “vicious spiral” of the
present system under which increasing (and profit-
able) loans in good times increase the circulating
medium and tend to accelerate price inflation,
whereas losses and panicky curtailment of loans in
bad times reduce the circulating medium and so tend
to accelerate price deflation.
The operations of the Reserve Bank in relation
to an Equity Bank can be illustrated from the
transactions A and C already outlined above in
describing Equity Bank operations.
APPENDIX A


A. 1. The Equity Bank advances S4B,AGO
2. Then resells the purchased equity to the Reserve Bank
for S months, in exchange for $48,500 in new currency
(or deposit credits) plus or minus of the Equity
Bank’s eventual profit or loss. (The actual differential
could, of course, be varied according to conditions.)
8. The Equity Bank receives back from the merchant... 52,500
4. Ora gross profit of $ 4,000
6. And then clears its account with the Reserve Bank by
returning the amount of the advance ($48,500),
plus the gross realized profit ($2,000) or $50,500
6. This reduces the Equity Bank’s net profit to 2,000
7. But enables the Reserve Bank to decrease circulation by 50,500
8. Or a net reduction in circulation as compared to original
condition of 2,000
C. 1. The Equity Bank advances $48,500
2. Then resells the purchased equity to the Reserve Bank
for $48,500 in new currency (or deposits), plus or minus
% of the Equity Bank’s eventual profit or loss. (The
raising of the resale differential under conditions of
greater risk reduces the hazard of the Equity Bank.)
8. The Equity Bank receives back from the merchant
only 45,000
4. Sustaining a loss of $ 3,500
5. And then clears its account with the Reserve Bank by
returning the amount of the advance ($48,500), less %
of the gross loss (or $2,625) or 45,875
6. This reduces the Equity Bank’s net loss to ($3,500
$2,625) 875
7. But compels the Reserve Bank to decrease circulation
by only 45,875
8. Leaving a net increase in circulation as compared with
the original condition of ($48,500 $45,875) 2,625
Thus, the Reserve Bank operations would supply
new funds during the life of “ resold” equity transac-
tions, but would produce a net increase or decrease
in ultimate circulating medium in direct proportion
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


to the preponderance of profits or losses arising
from the current conditions of trade —forcing new
money into circulation when most needed to offset
declining prices or velocity, and retiring money
from circulation when least desired because of rising
prices or velocity.
This not only reverses (as noted above) the pres-
ent “vicious spiral,” but also provides positive mo-
tives for the Equity Bankers to cooperate.
The fact that the Equity Banks can “hedge”
(or reduce) their possible losses in bad times by
“reselling” to the Reserve gives them a motive to
“resell” as much as possible and so help to increase
circulation when that increase is needed.
Then there is the fact that “reselling” in good
times, although reducing the profit on the individual
Equity Bank purchase, still increases the aggre-
gate profits on the bank’s own funds (both capital
and depositors’ funds) and thus provides a motive
for helping to curtail circulation and thus check an
unhealthy boom or inflation.
Thus, aside from the Reserve Bank’s discretionary
power to raise or lower the “resale differential”—
that is, the H or %, etc., of the Equity Bank’s profit
or loss — the combined operations of the Equity and
Reserve Banks would achieve a wide measure of
automatic money control, and avoid many of the
purely arbitrary measures inherently demanded by
the present system.
Instead of an all-powerful Federal Reserve dic-
tatorship or a much-discussed “Supreme Court of
Money,” attempting to allocate the amount of
APPENDIX A


money (credit) required to check a boom or offset
a business deflation, we would have, under a com-
plete equity banking system, a close approach to
that automatic adjustment which prevents too great
a centralization of power and too great risks of
mistaken judgment by that central power.
I realize fully that these suggestions concerning
a possible nondebt banking system would require
the most careful study before any attempt were
made to put them into effect, whether piecemeal or
otherwise. They are not offered in the spirit of a
“cure-all,” but merely as a subject for earnest and
painstaking research by open-minded students, and
in the larger perspective of an attempt to conceive
or visualize just what a nondebt economy of straight
capitalistic private ownership might be like.
They are suggested merely as an important part
of one ■possible way out of the inflation dilemma of our
present divided form of capitalism, and of the
rapidly rising danger to equity capitalism evidenced
in the astonishing rise in “creditor dominance”
over the last two decades (see Chapter XI, “Dec-
ades of Debt”).
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


APPENDIX B
Trustee Investments under Equity
Financing
We can group under “trustee in-
vestments” all those investments now made by
savings banks, life insurance companies, and trustees
(individual and corporate) of estates and also the
individual investments made by or for “widows
and orphans” —all those investments, in short,
which seek relative stability of limited income and
of principal.
Under prevailing practice, funds of this sort flow
into bonds and mortgages of superior grade and
minimum risk —and since they are accumulating
rapidly, through death of trustors, they are slowly
removing a large part of what was once enterprising
equity capital and transferring it to creditor capital.
In a nondebt economy these funds would have to
have a safe lodgment—and for this purpose well-
secured preferred stocks (under the changed con-
ditions) would offer practically every advantage
now offered by bonds.


This fact, however, needs further explanation.
The provisions governing preferred stocks vary
widely. The kind suitable for trustee investments
would have to include the following provisions:
A. The stock would represent a prior or senior
claim on all net earnings up to the amount of
the fixed dividend rate.
B. This claim would be cumulative —so that
any omitted dividend payment would have
to be paid up in full before junior stockholders
could receive any share of current earnings.
C. The stock would also be a first claim on
assets of the company up to par value of the
preferred in case of sale or liquidation of the
company.
D. The preferred stockholders should have voting
representation in the management of the
company’s business, thus insuring responsi-
bility and also full access to current informa-
tion. As long as dividends were maintained
this voting power might represent a minority,
but should always insure proportional repre-
sentation on the board of directors. In the
case of one or more defaults in agreed dividend
payments (the exact number to be specified)
the majority voting interest should auto-
matically pass to the preferred holders and
remain with them until full payment of all
arrears plus current dividends.
This latter provision would give preferred
holders that essential control which is the
sole 'practical advantage today of a mortgage
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


bondholder. But since this control would
come about automatically and without legal
complications, it would actually have certain
marked advantages over the position of
mortgage bondholders today, who, as we
know from experience, suffer from uncon-
scionable delays and legal entanglements
in trying to enforce their theoretical contract
rights.
The difference, however, between a bond-
holder’s foreclosure and a preferred stock-
holder’s assumption of control would be this:
foreclosure (after all legal delays) means a
'permanent transfer of ownership, whereas
assumption of control by preferred holders
would be a temporary measure of self-protec-
tion only, and permit a return to original
control as soon as justified by improved
operations and earnings.
With these provisions (not all of which are in-
cluded in many preferred stocks of today) and
remembering that there would be no prior claim of
funded debt, a preferred stock in a company with a
stable earnings record would offer every practical
advantage of today’s first mortgage bonds, plus
the avoidance of serious legal complications.
As to price stability, we already have certain ex-
amples of preferred stocks without prior funded debt
whose market record challenges that of the very
highest grade bond. Eastman Kodak Company
6 per cent cumulative preferred stock (whose divi-
dend was “covered” better than sixteen times in
APPENDIX B


Low
High
Per cent
gain
Eastman Kodak 6 % Pfd
99
175
+76.7
Chesapeake & Ohio Gen. 4+J’s, 1992
70^
128 %
+83.1
Norfolk & Western Cons. 4’s, 1996. .
78 H
124
+57.5
Union Pacific 1st & Ref. 4’s, 2008. . .
68J4
niH
+61.8
the worst year of the depression!) serves to illustrate
the point. The table below gives the depression
“low” and the recovery “high” (up to Jan. 15,
1936) for Eastman Kodak, Preferred, compared to
several highest grade long-term bonds of “trustee”
caliber:
Presumably, in any slow transition to an equity
finance basis, different “grades” of preferred stock
would have to be used to refund or replace the
“senior” and “junior” bonds in our complicated
railroad and public utility capital structures. But
it could not possibly be more complex than any
attempt to “unscramble” priorities of bond position
in a present-day reorganization. Once the new
“hierarchy” of preferred stock claims was estab-
lished, the procedure from then on would become
automatic, and be simplicity itself compared with
present-day reorganization procedure.
The same principle of a preferred claim on earn-
ings and on assets in sale or liquidation, with auto-
matic control provisions in case of dividend default,
and with retirement or “amortization” provisions,
would apply to the equity instrument replacing
present real-estate mortgages. On income-producing
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


properties, the investor would have all the protec-
tion he now enjoys in practice (i.e., under “assign-
ment of rent” or “mortgagee in possession”),
minus the legal complications. On owner-occupied
houses, he would have the same control advantages
he now enjoys (right to sell the property after a
given period or to rent it to some third party), but
could not deprive the owner through foreclosure of
all possible future equity in the property.
In general, then, under equity financing, trustees
would have excellent vehicles for “limited return”
investments, with effective controls to insure sound
management, and without the necessity of resort
to complicated legal procedure. On the other hand,
permanent dislocations of ownership through fore-
closure would cease, and with them the chance for
creditors to make eventual profits from distressed
property taken over under foreclosure. This greater
stability for the entire private ownership basis of
capitalism should so fortify the whole economic
structure as to improve the earnings stability of all
investments and thus make trusteed capital doubly
safe.
APPENDIX B




Index
A
Annuities, in general “upward”
inflation, 17
Arithmetic of the Measures, ratio
of circulating currency to
monetary gold stock, 136-
138
ratio of deposits to total bank
loans plus government se-
curities, 71-74
ratio of Federal Reserve bills
held to Federal Reserve
deposits plus notes, 90-92
ratio of member bank deposits
at the Federal Reserve to
Federal Reserve credit in
use, 74-76
ratio of “net” balances to total
bank loans, 134-136, 142-
143
ratio of spending activity to
general price level, 183-
134
ratio of spending activity to
total loans, 130-133
ratio of spending (outside of
New York) to bank loans,
174-176
ratio of total deposits to mone-
tary gold stock, 176-177
ratio of total loans to deposits,
90
Arithmetic of the Measures,
summary, equity price
inflation, 139-143
measuring price-level infla-
tion, 177-178
Atlantic Monthly, 3, 9
Aviation industry, financing of,
through common-stock sales,
233
B
Bank clearings, 119 n.
Bank credit, for government bor-
rowing, 64, 82-83
inflation of, 159
Bank debits, indicator of public
spending activity, 26-27, 109
reports of, where found, 26,
118-120,130-133, 174-176
value of, to layman, 26
Bank deposits, 29
as money, different effects when
created through loans and
investments, 154-155
total, compared with total bank
loans, 69-63, 87-88
under equity banking system,
246-248
(See also Arithmetic of the
Measures)
Bank loans, compared with de-
posits as measure of supply
and demand, 59-63, 87—88


Bank loans, compared with spend-
ing activity outside New
York, 156-165, 167-170
decline, 1930-1936, 210
increase in, need to watch, 211
interest rate on, fluctuations of,
77-90, 205
new way of reporting, 143
short-term, 62-63, 70, 78-86
total deposit money increased
by, 32
(See also Arithmetic of the
Measures)
Bank reports, as measuring tools,
33-35
Bankers’ acceptances, 79, 86-88
Banking composites related to
equity (stock) prices, 113-
116, 141
related to general price level,
146-148
Banking figures, assets and liabili-
ties of 12 Federal Reserve
Banks combined, 91
barometer of economic condi-
tions, 115-116
debits, monthly statement of,
in 141 centers, 131
Federal Reserve Banks, condi-
tion of, 1935-1936, 75
General Price Level Index, 133-
134
interest rates affected by, 79-82
“investing,” importance of, 28-
39, 34
Monthly Statement of Debits,
131, 174-176
New York Federal Reserve
Bank, 123-124, 133-134,
146
Banking figures, reports of, where
found, 25-27
(See also Federal Reserve
Board)
value, as economic measuring
tools, 25-34, 58-59
as revealing investment sup-
ply and demand, 59-76
weekly reporting member banks
in 101 cities, 73
(See also Banking ratios)
Banking ratios, circulating cur-
rency to monetary gold
stock, 136-138
Federal Reserve Bills held to
Federal Reserve Deposits
plus notes, 90-92
member-bank deposits at Fed-
eral Reserve to Federal
Reserve credit in use, 74-
76
“net” deposit balances in
member banks compared
with total loans, 117-118,
134-136
“spending to all bank loans,”
122, 129-133
“total bank deposits to total
bank loans plus U. S. govt,
securities,”
general description, 59
meaning of, 61-64
“total of currency plus all bank
deposits, compared with
monetary gold stock,”
127-130
total deposits to monetary gold
stock, 176-177
total loans to deposits, 90-92
Banking system, “equity,” or
nondebt, 238-242, 245-258
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


Banks, as economic registers, 27-
28
Bond prices, affected by bor-
rowers’ motives, 48, 54-56
affected by lenders’ motives, 55
affected by supply and demand,
50-61
conflicting views concerning, in
1934, 12, 52
in 1936, 51-52
effect of, on bank investment
policy, 52
on bank surpluses, 43-44
on income return, 45-47
on “yield,” 45-47
governed by interest rates, 44-
48, 62-63, 70
history of, by important pe-
riods, 48-52, 70, 101-104
inflation of, 19, 21, 41-53, 64-
76, 177, 223-224
market action of, 42-43
national problem created by, 44
during panic of 1893, 62-63
practical meaning of, 41-44
rate of change of, accelerating,
50-51
relation of, to investment
“yield,” 45-48
Bonds, bank investments in, 32-
33
in 1928-1932, 5-6, 13-14
in 1934, 12
Booms, business, inflation mis-
taken tor, 17
and depressions, cycles of, 213-
226
Borrowing, compared with spend-
ing, 118-123, 129-130, 133,
139
Borrowing, government and pri-
vate, 82-83
Businesses, private, value of, 22
C
Capitalism, “creditorship,” 225-
226, 230-233
debt system in, 14, 20
“dual,” or “divided,” 180-199
finance, 243
ownership, 224-226, 230-233
Commodity prices, 6, 19-20, 99,
102-107
Comptroller of the Currency, re-
ports, 127, 171, 211
Cost of living, compared with
income, 24
Conference Board index of,
216-222
high, in 1919 and 1920, 16-17
index of, 216-222
inflation of, 23
Credit, bank (see Bank credit)
“Creditor dominance,” 181-199
control of, 232-233
in 1914, 183-186
in 1920-1929, 186-188
in 1932,189-190,194,199, 207-
208
in 1933-1936, 209
Creditorship, finance capitalism,
243
(See also Debt)
Currency, deflation of, 106, 127-
128, 138
inflation of, 125-126, 128, 136-
139
(See also Arithmetic of the
Measures)
Cycles of boom and depression,
213, 226
INDEX


D
Debits (see Bank debits)
Debt, face value of, 189
Federal, 41, 184, 186-187, 196
increase in, need to watch
for, 211
interest on, 203, 206-206,
209-210
financing without recourse to,
233-244
installment purchase, 191-192
“leverage” of, 227-231
in 1914, 183-185
in 1920-1929, 186-188
in 1932, 189-190
in 1936, 195
ownership of, opposed to owner-
ship of goods, 179-199
private long-term, 41,183,186-
187, 189, 195 n.
interest on, 203-206, 210
state and local, 41, 203, 205
system of, in modern capital-
ism, 14, 20, 28, 230-234
total, growth in, compared with
wealth, 23
Deflation, currency, 127-128
measure of, 136-138
defined, 208
of investment interest rate, 63,
78
monetary, in 1929, 106
1932-1937, 6-7,19-20,198, 210
price, 1919-1921, 102-103
years 1933-1936 as illustrating,
19-20
Demand loans, 151
Deposit balances, “net” (see
Banking ratios)
Deposit money, compared with
total monetary gold stock,
156-165, 166-178
reports of, value to layman,
171, 178
how increased or curtailed, 30-
33
“Deposit Service Banks,” 246-
247
E
Eastman Kodak Company, sta-
bility of 6% preferred stock
as compared with bond
prices, 261-262
Equilibrium, desirability of, 14-
15
Equity, of owners, in national
wealth, 188-189, 192, 227-
228, 231, 234
“Equity Finance Banks,” 247-
258
“Equity” financing, 199, 245-263
in aviation, 233-234
trustee investments under, 259-
263
Equity (stock) prices, inflation of,
22, 93-112
measuring, 113-143
levels of, 141-143
short-term interest rates, effect
on, 86
(See also Arithmetic of the
Measures)
Equity values, measures of, 117-
143
F
Family income (see Income)
Federal debt (see Debt)
SEVEN KINDS OP INFLATION


Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, estimate of general
price level, 123-124
General Price Level Index, 133-
134
Federal Reserve Board, Bank
Debit reports, 26, 118-120,
130-133, 174-176
member bank reports, 25-27,
64, 71-76, 79, 86-92, 143,
176
new reporting forms, 143
reports issued by, 25-27, 74-76,
79, 131, 136-138, 168-169,
174-177
Reserve Bank reports, 26-27,
74-76, 90-92, 168
Federal Reserve Bulletin, bank
data in, 211
New York City spending fig-
ures in, 167
Federal Beserve System, intro-
duction of, 70n.
member banks of, 25-26, 69,
61-64
Beserve Banks in, 26-27
Financing, long-term on an
ownership basis, 234-236
Forecasting, dangers of, 9, 94,
113-115, 141
difference between forecasting
and analysis, 10-12, 69
Foreclosures, avoided by “assign-
ments of rent,” 235, 263
G
Gains and losses in banking
measures, measuring, 139
General price level (see Price
level, general)
Gold, “commodity” value of, 154
inflation through, 169
redemption standard, 17
stock, ratio of, to currency,
136-137
supply, effect of, on equity
values, 125-127
(See also Arithmetic of the
Measures)
Government securities held by
banks, 69, 61, 71-74, 88
H
Home Owners Loan Corporation
bonds, included in private
long-term debt estimates,
195
I
Income, compared with cost of
living, 24
distribution of, 18
family, affected by inflation,
219
compared with cost of living,
216-222
Index, bond price inflation, 59
cost of living, 216-222
currency to gold, 136-138
dangers of, 36
debt to wealth, 38-39
deposits to loans plus govern-
ment securities, 71-74
general price level, 125, 133-
134
as a measuring method, 35-40
member-bank reserve deposits
to Federal Beserve credit,
74-76
INDEX


Index, misleading conclusions
from, 38
nature of, 35-37
of price changes, 35-36
of price level, general, 125
ratio of, to another index, 37-38
relation to “norm” and “nor-
mal,” 36-37
spending to borrowing, 133
Inflation, action required by indi-
viduals to offset, 21
of bank credit, 159
bond price, 41-53, 54-76, 177
interest-rate deflation dur-
ing, 53
in 1932-1936, 19
cost of living, 22
currency, 125-126, 139
in 1932, 128
definitions of, 13-16, 21-24
“downward” types, 18-19
in 1932, 13
effect of, 21-22
on standard of living, 214-
222
of equity (stock) prices, 93-
112, 224
measuring, 113-143
false ideas concerning, 4-6
general price level, 144-165,
166-178, 224
from gold deposits, 159
history of, by years, 16-20
1919-1920, 16-17
1926-1929, 17
1932-1935, 207, 219-221
index method of comparison, 39
of interest charges, 224
measuring methods, 9-10, 15,
20, 41-53, 54-76
Inflation, monetary, importance
to layman, 128-130
measures of, 125-127, 139,
177
1928-1929, 104, 106
of prices, 14, 22, 225
of short-term interest rates, 21-
22, 77-92, 223-224
types of, 15, 21-22
“absolute,” 4-5, 16, 21-23,
78, 219-224
“relative,” 4-5, 16, 19, 23-
24, 172, 181-182, 224
“upward,” 16-17, 20
Insurance companies under a
general nondebt system, 237-
238
Interest, on bank loans, 204-206
on bonds, 16, 20
charges, rise in, compared with
wealth, 23
compared with total national
income, 1914-1936, 201-
210
payments, 200-213
part of national income, 200
Interest rates, affected by Federal
Reserve action, 64-65
on bankers’ acceptances, 86
on bonds, 78-79
on “call” loans, 62-63
deflation, during bond-price
inflation, 53
effect on bond prices, 44-46
factors determining, 56-57, 70-
71
Federal Reserve Board reports
of, 79
“going,” stock, 94-96
investment, measures of, 62-70
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


Interest rates, on short-term
loans, 62-63, 70, 78-79
fluctuation of, 78, 86
inflation of, 21-22, 71, 77-92,
223-224
L
Living cost (see Cost of living)
Living standard, effect of inflation
upon, 16
Loans, bank {see Bank loans)
demand, 151
M
Measures, of bond-price inflation,
41-76
of currency inflation, 136-138
of equity values, 117-143
of inflation, 9-10, 15, 20, 41-
53, 54-76
of money supply, 58-71, 117
of money supply and demand,
59-63, 87-88, 117-118
of price-level inflation, 156-178
of short-term loans, 77-88
of spending, 118-121
(See also Arithmetic of the
Measures)
Measuring tools, bank reports as,
33-35
for use of layman, 15, 40
Money, bank deposit, 30-32,154-
157
definition of, 149-151
deposit, how increased or cur-
tailed, 30-33
investment by bank, as source
of, 33, 154
kinds of, 153-156, 166
Money, loans by banks as source
of, 30-32, 154
purchasing power of, 96
quantity of, 30-33, 144-148,
151-152
supply of, under equity bank-
ing system, 253-258
equity prices affected by,
118, 125-130
for investment, 10
measures, 58-71, 117
ratio, 134-136, 139
stock prices affected by, 98-
112
three ways of increasing,
154-155
velocity of, 144-148, 152, 224
volume of, 224
N
National Industrial Conference
Board, appraisal of national
wealth, 183-186, 189, 195,
211
estimate of national income,
203-205, 209, 216
index of cost of living, 216
studies of, as economic meas-
uring tools, 34
National Recovery Act, 195
Nondebt (equity) banking, 238-
242
technique of, 245-258
O
Offsets, 136-142
estimating, 139-141, 178
plus and minus percentage
equivalents, table of, 137
stock prices affected by, 98-112
INDEX


Owners, benefited by rising
values, 116
leverage of debt against, 227-
231
Ownership, capitalism, vs.
“ creditorship capitalism,”
225-226, 230-233
divided system of, 179-199
financing system, possible, 234-
244
imperiled by debt, 224
principle recognized, 235-236
threat to, 243
P
Panic of 1893, 62
Partnership financing (see Equity
financing)
Price changes, index of, 35-36
Price level, estimating, 141-142
general, affected by quantity of
money, 144-145
compared with spending,
123-125, 139
index of, 125
inflation of, 144-165, 186
measures of, 156-165,166-178
warning of changes in, 8
(See also Arithmetic of the
Measures)
Prices, bond (see Bond prices)
commodity (see Commodity
prices)
inflation of (see Inflation)
stock (see Stocks)
Q
Quantity of money, changes in,
revealed by bank reports,
80-33
Quantity of money, effect on
general price level, 144-148,
151-152
“Quantity theory,” 146-148,151,
169
R
Ratios (see Banking ratios; Index)
Relief checks, 29-30
Reserve Bank, under equity
system, 254-258
S
Securities, government held by
banks, 59, 61, 71-74, 88
Short-term interest rates (see
Interest rates)
Short-term loans, measures of
factors affecting, 78-86
Spending activity, compared with
borrowing, 118-123, 129-
130, 139
course of from 1927 to 1933,
104, 106, 107-111
effect on prices, 153
effect on values, 130
how measured, 118-121
outside New York, compared
with bank loans for entire
country, 156-165, 167-170
trend in, compared with trend
in price level, 123-124,
129, 139
Standard of living, 18-20, 182,
214-222
Standard Statistic’s 419 stocks,
142
Stock market, boom, 1927-1929,
104-106
SEVEN KINDS OF INFLATION


Stock market, changes in, com-
pared with banking com-
posite, 113-117
1929 and after, 107-111
recent history, 99-112
symbol of broader conditions,
112
Stocks, “earnings” of, 94-95,
101-103
prices of, 13-14, 22, 86, 98-112,
141
(See also Equity values)
Supply and demand, bond prices,
effect on, 59-61
interest rate, effect on, 78-82
investment, revealed by bank-
ing figures, 59-76
Supply and demand, measures of,
related to bond prices, 59-71
three combinations of, 57-58
T
Taxation and national debt, 192
extension of, 1932-1936, 210
Trustee investments, in nondebt
economy, 259-263
V
Velocity, of bank loan money,
155-166
measures of, 130-134,136,176-
177
of money, 144-148, 152, 224
Volume of money, 224
INDEX
