

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA4UkAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA44AAAAAi^
I
SEWAGE MATTERS: ;
- ” m •*-■•»■ -w- -r-v m . > rn -■ r 1-1 T m 1 T "W v 1 T\ T\ r TT /~'i I flA f / V \ T v
• *
yfvfvyyfvvTf?? ff yvffTffff f f v »'
THEIR TREATMENT AND APPLICATION.
J, FIELDING HIGGINS,
CIVIL ENGINEER.
PRICE ONE SHILLIN.G.
Hklixounic ;
H. G. DE GEUCHY & CO., ELIZABETH STREET.
MDCCCLXVIII.




Egg Jim (
ill M |
r .xri~ 1.
S. |.y,,
-R -I- -6 +4- f- e-F- W Y — S
n \ 3 tf
-1 rr 1 N ' h i H—--I- 1 — ~
*""i AS " ES * "I
I " !
J |i
I I Y A R D : . §1
N l ’
i
*1 1
puj
I i
S i N
l Mfl ■■■■:■
* i i
(o 50 ?•;;
a . s*
I I i
M ?I .
:{ij k
X * :v.v-
I 5 $
•2 $1 % 1
K 1 t; n
If * I
e ws .*?:
vs ® m
8 1 sS;
® ' g
P : ':
1 . i
Jjoco/n otif'o S cave ny er
Steam Roller.
J*larv and Eievatiorv of ASH B / N and CLOSET.


SEWAGE MATTERS;
THEIR TREATMENT AND APPLICATION.
J. FIELDING- HIGGINS,
CIVIL ENGINEER.
JJU(bournt:
H. G. DE GRUCHY & CO., ELIZABETH STREET.
MDCCCLXVIII.




SEWAGE MATTERS.
We must presume that all mankind living in communities are fully
impressed with the conviction that good drainage is essential to their
health and well-being, and to the keeping, by removing from their neigh-
bourhood the source of pestilence and disease, of vital energy amongst
them, and that healthy tone of body and mind characteristic of the man
who resides and moves in a pure and wholesome atmosphere. We hardly
need touch upon the mass of evidence adduced by medical men, of the
experience of past ages, and the sciences which have traced the causes of
disease and pestilence, not so much to the visitation of God, as was the
verdict in olden times, as to the presence amongst us of the germ of
disease, fostered and nourished, propagated and spread by our own want of
carefulness in removing and applying to its proper function all that refuse
matter cast off and rejected by human nature. The Scripture points out
what is to be done with it; for we find that great lawgiver, Moses, direct-
ing that each man shall bury it in the earth with an instrument on the
reverse end of his weapon.
Man from all ages, according as he has progressed in civilization and the
arts of peace, has turned his attention to this subject; consequently it is no
new question, but has been considered by enlightened men of every age.
We find the Romans grasping it with a mighty hand, paying no regard
to expense or trouble. They, from time to time, collected, as the
city grew, large quantities of water, which was. conducted, by means of
aqueducts crossing valleys and rounding hills, for miles from distant
sources for the purpose of washing, cleansing, and dispersing that refuse—
or in other words, sewage matter —which is created in cities and populous
places; and as the copious supply of water increased the bulk of refuse
it was desirable to remove, they constructed immense underground ways
or sewers communicating with and emptying into the River Tiber. The
charge of efficiency of these subterranean means of cleanliness was an office
of great distinction conferred only on eminent men, curatores cloacarum.
The experience of ages since the time of the Romans, B.C. 331, has
convinced the most sceptical that the Romans were right, and moderns
have decided, upon the most convincing evidence, unnecessary to enu-
merate here, that good and efficient drainage of towns cannot be


effected without a large and constant water supply; in fact the water
supply is an integral part of a good system of sewage, therefore the first
care of the city authorities should be to secure it by all means. There are
three ways of obtaining it —First, and most ancient, from wells or shafts
sunk into the earth to tap those subterranean reservoirs provided by nature,
raising same by steam or other motive power ; second, from rivers, which
may be intercepted and their waters stored above the town, and if not at
a sufficiently high level, pumped by steam or water power; third, by springs
at high levels, or the drainage water from the superior lands, conducted by
aqueducts or races to a reservoir commanding the town.
The refuse matters to be removed from towns and buildings, consisting
of storm-water, washing of streets, roads, and yards, garbage, excremen-
titious matters solid and liquid, of the waste products of combustion, of the
refuse of animal and vegetable substances, besides the various waste matters
used in manufactures, require various appliances for their removal. The
speedy and effectual removal, at the least cost, with the least possible
inconvenience to the public, and the least offensive, without permitting
the escape of any foul noxious offensive gases, is the perfection of any
sewage system. By this standard we will judge of the various modes
adopted from time to time by different communities, all having the same
object in view.
First, then, is the system of open drains in paved and unpaved streets,
into which all the refuse is thrown of a liquid nature save nightsoil, which
is stored in mere holes dug in the earth, where it is allowed to pollute the
surrounding air and saturate the earth, from which emanations of the most
deadly character are rapidly generated, especially under a burning sun such
as we have in summer, and only removed by the rain that fails or the sun
or hot winds that dry it up, A great deal might be said against such a
system, but it will suffice to call to the minds of the colonists the history
of the plagues of their fatherland, which have been clearly and distinctly
traced to this system as their source. A mass of evidence on this point
really appalling could be produced in the old country, and this our new
country is not without its examples, though but a few years old.
I may mention, as one exceedingly striking instance, the town of
Sale, in Gipps Land, for which I was called upon to lay down a
system of permanent levels, with a view to ultimate main drainage, in the
year 1865. Sale, standing at the edge of a plain, and consequently practi-
cally level, required great care and careful consideration so to lay
down the permanent levels of the streets as to remove the surface water,
let alone anything else. I urgently pointed out to the Council the
extreme necessity for sanitary measures, and stated my conviction that
Sale, unless such measures were taken, would soon become one of the
unhealthiest towns in Victoria, The Mayor and some of the Council
replied they had never lived in a healthier place; still my opinion was
awfully confirmed the following winter, for I can safely affirm that scarce
one single family in the town of Sale escaped a death by zymotic disease.
Again, examine the tables of mortality in Collingwood, Richmond,
Prahran, and Melbourne, all of which are well situated as far as ventila-
tion and a ready means of drainage are concerned, and you will find that


the records of death from the same cause in the old country, taking all
things into consideration, are not so great as in Victoria. Does not this
fact say volumes to a young and energetic community 1 It ought to
suffice to induce them to use every effort, and give every facility for the
carrying out of all or any sanitary measure that may from time to time be
brought forward. I am sorry to say the above system is gradually establish-
ing itself in every town in this country, without exception. All seem to
be of the same opinion of the people of Sale, “ that their town is too
young for sanitary measuresbut I say as I said to them, the wisest, most
just, safest, and most economical plan, is to begin with the birth of the
town, when there are no obstructions, and people will soon begin to look
upon sanitary works as they look upon police protection, roads, and streets,
that it is with them necessary not only to their well-being, but to their
very existence as communities. In fact if these measures grow with their
growth they will never be felt in a money point of view, but the effects will
be visible to the outside observer by the amount of vital energy and active
tone of mind so manifest in healthy communities.
The next system we will consider is the one that has been practised for
a number of years back in London and other cities and large towns in
England and on the Continent, until in 1841 the public mind became
thoroughly aroused by the strong earnestness and foresight of a few leading
minds. Although this system had been practised by the Romans three
hundred years before Christ, yet the first intimation of anything of the
kind we find in 23 Henry VIII. —“ An act to provide for the drainage of
surface water in the city of London.” This system proposes and includes
the paving of streets and water channels, the collection of all surface water
and refuse of a liquid character that can be conveniently turned into the
streets, and thence carried through subterranean drains or passages under
ground into the nearest stream, thereby converting the brooks, creeks, and
rivers into immense moving cesspools, destroying the fish and contami-
nating the air of the neighbourhood through which it passed. The construc-
tion of the subterranean drains or sewers were made of such materials, and of
such shapes and levels, as to retard the flow of the refuse; to allow of burrow-
ing of rats, and saturation of the ground, owing to the permeable character of
many of the large drains, and invariably the whole of the smaller ones,
thereby converting them into elongated cesspools, which oftentimes became
so choked up as to require that they should be cleansed out by hand
labour—a most disgusting and dangerous employment. The system of
cesspools in connection with this era were little better than the primitive
ones used in this country, being only in some instances lined with brick,
not at all impervious to leakage. Though the streets were kept cleaner, and
in well-regulated towns the solid refuse was regularly carted away into the
country to be applied to agricultural purposes, yet we find that our im-
munity from plagues was little better than our ancestors’. Witness the
cholera. An immense amount of evidence has been produced, showing that
the exhalations from the sewers escaping through the gratings on the
streets and troughs of the yards, together with the saturation of the ground
from cesspools and permeable drains causing the contamination of drinking
water, played a fearful part in finding victims for that dread scourge.


Next come the systems created by the inquiry, and consequently more
difficult to deal with, as they bear some show of efficiency, and were pro-
jected by men of talent. The first great example is the main drainage of
the city of London, having a population of three millions. The whole of
the drainage had been immediately discharged into the River Thames, and
had become an intolerable nuisance, so much so that the British Legisla-
ture took the matter in hand, and appointed commissioners for the pur-
pose of devising and carrying out the best method of freeing London and
the Thames from the sewage of her population. After a length of time
spent in taking the opinions of engineers and others upon the subject, it
was decided to carry out the plan proposed by the city engineer, Bazel-
gette, namely, a system that would intercept the sewage on its way into
the Thames, and carry it down on each side thereof in enormous tunnels or
sewers to the outskirts of London, where it was to be pumped from a low
level to the surface, and to run its course in an open canal of colossal
dimensions for a number of miles, and empty itself into the Thames.
These works were erected at a cost of millions, and yet no provision was
made for the fixing of noxious gases or utilising the sewage; but the
whole of this river of filth, so valuable as a fertiliser, and, according to
Liebig and other eminent chemists, of the annual value of one and a half
millions, was cast into the sea, leaving out of the question the amount of
injury caused in the districts through which it passes. This is not all. The
noxious gases so rapidly formed by decomposing fcecal matters are so
great, and being driven along the miles of sewers from the low levels to
the high levels, formerly so healthy, have become so unmanageable, that
the gully traps so ingeniously formed to prevent their escape are found
inadequate, and several propositions have been seriously entertained of
ventilating the sewers, either by erecting large chimneys and furnaces at
a fabulous cost, or running cast-iron pipes to the tops of the houses com-
municating with the sewers, so as to let the gas escape. In fact, the
treating of the noxious gases generated has become a greater difficulty
than the sewerage was in 1856. The escape of these deadly gases, which
chemists tell us if fixed become valuable manures, together with the loss
of the sewage itself, is a consequence of this erroneous and extravagant
system.
The Liverpool people, with Bateman as engineer, have taken warning
from the failure of the metropolitan experiment, and in the system proposed
to be carried out at Liverpool have come to the following conclusions, upon
which they base their utilisation scheme;—
“ First. —A system which disposes of the refuse of our large towns, by
removing it in a dry or rather moist state and solid condition from middens
and cesspools, is unhealthy and difficult.
“ Second.—That it is inconsistent with the established value of sewage
as a fertilizer to cast it into the sea, which is elsewhere done as an alterna-
tive to avoid the pollution of rivers and destruction of fish.
“ Third.—That it is inexpedient to import fertilising matters at an
enormous cost, when we can, to a large extent, produce them at home.
“ Fourth, —Great care will be necessary in effecting the change from the
dry to the wet system, for it has been shown beyond a doubt that the


larger the amount of foecal matters discharged into the sewers, the greater
will be the difficulty in preventing the escape of noxious gases; and it was
recently shown, that an imperfect construction of the water closet, or of its
connexion with the sewers, might even lead to the pollution of the drinking
water supplied to families through the suction or passage of gases from
one set of pipes to the other. To obviate these difficulties, two conditions
are necessary—carefully constructed appliances for receiving, carrying away,
and storing, when not required for immediate use, the sewage to be utilized,
and a large and constant water supply,”
This scheme is virtually a copy of the London drainage, with this excep-
tion, that the Corporation of Liverpool permit a company to intercept the
sewage on the quays, and carry it to the north end of the town (the sewers
empty themselves into the docks at present), near the mouth of the river,
where it is proposed to erect pumping machinery, receiving wells, and
storage reservoirs; and to distribute it in a liquid state through cast-iron
pipes along and over the land lying along the north shore from
Liverpool to Southport, this being a flat sandy district, similar
to Brighton, Caulfield, and Moorabbin. The Liverpool Corporation have
taken 500 shares in this Utilisation Company, at £lO per share, and the
outside public have up to latest dates taken 1700, making a subscription
of £22,000. The first section of work reaching to Crosby will cost
£20,000. The company propose to treat a sample block of sandy land
2000 acres in extent, in order that farmers may see for themselves the
effects produced by its application. At present there are few water-closets
in Liverpool, the great majority being the antiquated ash-pit and cesspool
combined, the contents of which are removed by farmers and nightmen.
I conceive the same enormous inconvenience will arise here from the
effects of' the pent-up gases, if no provision is made for fixing them,
which has not been, so far as the scheme is known. No doubt Bateman
sees the difficulty (which in this country would be enormously increased
by the heat), as the fourth conclusion fully indicates, where he says, “ It
has been shown beyond a doubt that the larger the amount of foecal
matters discharged into the sewers, the greater will be the difficulty in
preventing the escape of noxious gases.”
Another system, emanating from the General Board of Health, has been
established in most of the smaller towns, and with much better effect.
Instead of the large and costly brick sewers in the other systems, the
board’s engineers, having in view the greatest amount of economy
consistent with efficiency, employed glazed stoneware pipes of sizes
calculated for the area to be drained, having smooth surfaces and close
impermeable joints and rapid falls, thereby permitting of no deposits or
accumulations, consequently preventing a large amount of noxious gases
being formed therein. This system, as far as construction is concerned, is
perfect, but, like the others, provides for the carrying away of foecal matters
by means of water carriage through the sewers, and either casts this
sewage into the sea, or utilises it by precipitation or distribution in a
liquid state for agricultural purposes.
Some of the continental cities do the same. Paris is an exception,
where the foecal matters are collected apd manufactured into “ poudrette,”


in the following manner : —The law provides that watertight cesspools be
provided, having openings or man-holes for emptying. The Board of
Health officer examines these receptacles, and they cannot be used until
after inspection. When the cesspool requires cleaning, notice is given
to the Board of Health, which authorises and directs the operation. The
contents are in some cases pumped up, a three-inch hose being attached
to an iron cart and dropped into the cesspool; in other cases the cart
is filled by pneumatic pressure ; a vacuum having been formed in the
cylindrical cart, a hose is let into the cesspool, a valve opened, and the
contents of cesspool forced into cylinder, and carted away to laystals
outside the city, where it is emptied into reservoirs, the liquid parts
allowed to run off, and the solid contents spread out on adjoining land, and
dried by the sun, powdered, and packed in bags for sale. “ Fosses
mobiles" are superseding cesspools, and consist of a tub with a broad base,
placed in a vault rendered as airtight as possible, which receives the end
of the soil pipe. These tubs are removed at intervals by the same
authority, and are considered to do away with the terrible infection of the
old cesspool. Private companies are allowed to clean these cesspools, and
remove the “ fosses mobile ,” for which they make a charge, according to
circumstances, upon the occupier of the house.
An improvement on this system is practised at the Mauritius. Instead of
having the tub in a vault it is placed just below the seat, and a
disinfecting powder is applied by hand every time the closet is used ;
when full it is removed and treated in the same way as at Paris, and sold
to the sugar-planters, who prefer it to any other manure.
The latest improvement on the Paris system is a very ingenious one, but
expensive and impracticable. It is as follows ; —Closets, having the appear-
ance of water-closets without water, are attached by means of iron pipes to
iron receivers, placed under the lamp-posts in the streets ; a portable steam-
engine, working an air-pump with iron cylindrical cart attached, is drawn
by horses along the streets every night, and upon the air-pump being
attached to the lamp-post, a vacuum is caused in the receiver beneath, the
house valve which is in the street is opened and shut by the nightman
attending, and the nightsoil lodging in the iron pipes is consequently
sucked up into the receiver. The iron cylindrical cart is then exhausted of
air by the same process, and the contents of the receiver drawn into the
cart, and carried away to some station outside the town. The difference
between this system and the French one is that Capt. Liernur proposes to
empty the iron cesspools every night, without disturbing the inhabitants,
instead of at longer periods. Again, another difference is proposed in
utilising this foecal matter. When taken to the station it is to be decanted
into barrels, bunged up and sent by rail, or other conveyance, to the farmer,
who is to have a plough made on purpose, which must be provided with a
suitable frame, and wheels to support the barrel, which discharges the
manure from the bung-hole into a drill spout behind the mould-board as
the plough moves. It would be impossible to store manure of this kind in
a country like this. The heat would cause it to ferment and explode in
less than twenty-four hours. Another thing, it could not be applied to the
land in summer, in the semi-liquid state he proposes. It may do well


enough for the cold damp climate of the Hague, where it is being tried,
but could not possibly work in this climate.
An attempt has been made in England to mitigate the nuisance so
palpably caused by the foecal matters from water-closets passing into the
sewers, especially in London, since the great drainage scheme, by
substituting a closet in which the foecal matters can be deodorised by
means of earth, and carried away in a dry state instead of being washed
into the sewers. Certainly this is a step in the right direction, but
unfortunately it is attended with an amount of trouble and expense very
difficult to induce a population to submit to. The principle is good,
but careless people will find it too much trouble to supply themselves with
suitable earth, and apply it by hand. Then, if you have seats self-acting,
and earth supplied by a company, the expense is so great that few can
have the luxury, and even those few are unwilling to be so taxed. Again,
although earth is a disinfectant to a certain extent, yet the quantity required
is so great in comparison to the foecal matters deodorised, that the removal
of the mass becomes a serious objection, let alone the labour and expense of
obtaining so large a quantity of suitable earth. Again, its value as a manure
is very much diminished by the large admixture of earth, although the
same earth may be used over again several times after being dried and
pulverised ; and if used until the earth becomes only a percentage in the
manure, still it would not be equal in value to the simple foeces, and
agriculturists would have no means of detecting the amount of earthy
adulteration, consequently its demand as a manure would be limited, and
a company dealing in it a failure.
As the evils attendant upon the various systems of sewage above
described would be increased in a climate like ours, the deductions are
that a perfect system of sewage for this country requires—
Ist. That no foecal matters be permitted to enter the sewers, but be
disinfected, and the noxious gases fixed the moment they are created,
and periodically removed and disposed of for agricultural use in a dry
state.
2nd. Such a system of sewers as will collect all the liquid refuse of the
inhabitants and manufactories, and convey it as rapidly as possible to a
receptacle outside the town, where it can be treated, or distributed in a
liquid state for agricultural purposes.
3rd. As some amount of noxious gases will be generated from vegetable
solutions, urine, Ac., in the sewers, the sewage should be disinfected at
its source, or as near it as possible, so as to prevent the generation and
accumulation of these gases.
The first deduction, which is the most important , can be carried out by
the compulsory use of disinfectants, applied either by hand or by self-acting
closets. The compulsory use of ashbins with proper coverings, and the
removal of the foecal matters once a week under a penalty by a contractor,
at the expense of the Corporation, who might lay on a small tax of two
shillings per head per annum for the purpose for a period of five or six
years, in order the better to establish so necessary a sanitary measure by
encouraging individuals or companies to exert themselves in carrying it out
with profit ; after which the probability is that the contractors will be


willing to give a sum which will soon repay the Corporation’s original outlay
for the privilege of taking away the manurial matters, as in Paris and
other places. In order the better to carry out this system, it is desirable
that a cheap disinfectant of very much smaller bulk than earth be procurable,
and applied to foecal matters by means of cheap self-acting closets, that
will not get out of order by any kind of carelessness.
The author having spent a number of years in considering this subject,
and having instituted a number of experiments with a view to solving
this difficulty and to meet this requirement, flatters himself that he has
succeeded in accomplishing so desirable an object. He finds that a
disinfecting medium, requiring a much smaller quantity to deodorise foecal
matters (in comparison with loam as 1 is to 14) can be compounded at a
nominal cost, in fact at such a cost as enables him to supply it at 2d. per lb.
As the use of disinfectants by hand could not by any means be strictly
enforced, and would not be practised by the majority of people, who
would consider it too much trouble, not only to obtain it, but even to apply
it if it was placed by the side of them, it becomes incumbent to provide
some self-acting .means of distributing or applying it without their concur-
rence, in fact so that they cannot prevent its application ; therefore a self-
acting disinfecting closet must be provided; and as we have before shown
that the earth-closet is not only expensive and complicated, but the pro-
viding of the suitable earth in so large a quantity, and the removal of the
combined and disinfected mass, become a serious item of expense (common
earth-closets, £3 10s.; providing earth and cleansing closets once a week,
425. per annum). Although the earth-closet is said to have proved a
success in India, and the Government of that country has shown its
appreciation of the same by presenting the inventor with a handsome gift
of money, yet the very thing which makes it a success in India makes it
a failure here. In India coolie labour is employed to provide earth and
to empty the closets at a price that would not in this country pro-
vide loam, let alone pay for emptying. It is the expense of
providing the loam and removing the mass that is the difficulty here.
Even a company undertaking it at the above prices could not make it
remunerative, even if with the object of manufacturing it into guano ;
for what with the expense of providing loam, and then collecting, drying,
pulverising, and sifting, and returning it to the closet to be used again,
and again drying, pulverising, and sifting, and again returning it to be
used again in the closets, before it can be at all offered for sale, and then
it will barely realise £3 10s. per ton—in fact, its actual value can be
judged by the fact that in every 14 lbs. of the guano just described there
is 10 lbs. of loam pure and simple. Its demand in consequence must
ultimately die away, therefore the adoption of the earth-closet would be
a continual source of expense, and the town adopting it could never
hope to obtain anything for the foecal matters created therein. We must
therefore turn our attention towards a cheaper and more profitable
arrangement.
The author has, after much study and patient trial, perfected a very
simple self-acting closet, to which he has applied his disinfecting medium,
and owing to the smallness and simplicity of the machinery consequent on


so small a quantity of disinfectant to be applied, is enabled to supply
them at 40s. each. He proposes also to provide the disinfecting powder,
and remove the contents of the closets once a week for 20s. a year. The
collecting would be done as follows, namely:—The town being divided
into districts, one man, with horse and cylindrical iron cart, having a
funnel at top to receive the manure, and a valve-tap at end to discharge
same, and likewise a lid made to fit every closet bucket, proceeds to each
house, opens the front of seat, draws out bucket, puts on the lid as if it
was a slop-pail, and carries it out into the street, where he empties it
into the cart by means of the funnel, replaces the lid on bucket, and
returns it to its place under the seat, at same time seeing that a
sufficient quantity of disinfecting medium is in the chamber. The
earth-closet buckets require two men to remove them, as they accumu-
late two-thirds more material in the same length of time, and are very
unsightly, without lid, as they are removed. Having at length filled the
cart, it is removed to the manure works, where it is emptied into a large
tank covered over, and from thence run off into filtering beds, where the
‘liquid portion is treated with muriatic acid, and the solid portion dried
and pulverized, sifted, and bagged for sale.
As the author’s disinfectant only increases the bulk to be removed in the
proportion of one to seven (the earth-closet being fourteen to seven),
the fcecal matters would be not only unadulterated with inert matter, but
would actually be increased in value by the addition of the disinfectant, on
account of its property of destroying aphides, entozoa, and other small
insects, and supplying that lime, sulphur, &c., &c., in which our soils are so
deficient, therefore rendering the products of our closets most valuable as
a manure, and which, no doubt, would be in constant demand at a good
price.
This system can be carried out at present at a cost not greater than the
abominable, poison-producing, unhealthy system of water-closets, cesspools,
and open privies, and ultimately at a handsome profit to the burgesses,
saying nothing for the value of the manure returned to the earth, the
saving- of our rivers from pollution, and the extra expense in the
construction of sewers and staff of men to clear away deposits.
Every English emigrant, lately arrived, must be struck with the mode
of collecting ashes in Melbourne; and if he be curious, as most new arrivals
are, he will see to his astonishment placarded all through the outskirts of
the city notices ordering all householders to have their ashes ready in
boxes on stated days for the obsolete “ Dusto” of the old country to carry
away. A more absurd and inconvenient mode of removing ashes could
not possibly be invented, especially where there is no scarcity of land for
ashbins, and a prevalence of high winds. Just imagine yourself passing
“Dusto” at the moment he is emptying your neighbour’s ashes into the
cart on a north-wind day. If this system has so long since gone to “ limbo ”
in cities so much crowded for want of space, and ashbins instituted instead,
why should we adopt a thing so glaringly absurd, and make ourselves the
laughingstock of travellers and be put down as a lot of old grandmothers,
instead of being up to the march of intellect in sanitary wm-ks as we are in
other things of less importance Look at the inconvenience housekeepers


are put to. They must keep their ashes in a portable box or other receptacle
handy for the dustman to carry; they must place it outside for the
mischievous boys to kick about, instead of having a receptacle attached to
the closet and covered over, where a sufficient quantity could be stored to
fill a cart, and removed at once every six or twelve months. There could
be no fear of any noxious gases generating in the bins, as the ashes would
effectually prevent that, no matter what amount of garbage is thrown in,
providing the rain-water and sewage are kept out. It appears to me, and
from long experience, that the housewife would much prefer to throw her
dust and garbage into a receptacle or ashbin, where, as far as she and her
house are concerned, she would have done with it, than to have it stuck in a
corner in a small box or number of boxes, eye-sores to clean people, waiting
for “ Dusto ” to call —in the meantime the lighter portion blowing all over
her yard or garden, and in through her bedroom and parlour windows,
which she has raised for ventilation.
No objection on the score of expense can be made to the erection of ash-
bins, as they are but a tithe added to the indispensable closet, and can be
so constructed as to have a small manhole next the right-of-way, through
which the public scavenger can empty them at once, without the slightest
inconvenience to the inhabitants and even without their knowledge.
Before saying anything on the sweeping of the streets, and removal of
the debris, horse droppings, &c., I should like to say a word on the con-
struction of our streets. In the first place, the streets and roadways want
laying to their permanent level and true section, all water-channels made
up to within six inches of the footpaths, the metal carefully broken to a
small gauge, and laid down some eighteen inches in thickness, and com-
pressed by means of a steam roller of some thirty tons weight. It
would be found that roads and streets compressed in this manner would
be completely consolidated and equal to one mass of stone, and there can
be no doubt that the wear would be not only considerably less but
more equal, for at present, from the irregular manner in which the mac-
adamising is done, we never get a perfect surface, but one always in a state
of transition, causing the traffic to follow in tracks, thereby making ruts,
and the metal, for want of sufficient compression, remains loose and rolls
about, to the danger and annoyance of the horses ; whereas by the con-
solidation system the streets or roads would be rendered traffickable at once
and smooth at every point, consequently no tracks could be formed nor
any stones roll about; the curvature of the streets could be brought to a
minimum, and owing to the smoothness left after the roller, the storm-water
could not lodge on the surface, but immediately run to the sides and into
the storm-water drains. Although this is a divergence from my subject, yet
it is an essential preliminary to the proper sweeping of the streets, which
I propose to do by means of Whitworth’s sweeping machine or locomotive
scavenger. This machine has been in use in Manchester, winter and
summer, for years, to the waiter’s personal knowledge, and its effects are
remarkable, not only sweeping the streets clean, but carting away the mud
or dust as it passes along, without manual labour, and without causing
the slightest dust in summer or dirt in winter. Its saving in expense is
also a recommendation, for, from evidence given in 1843 before the


Superintending Inspector of the General Board of Health, we find that the
sweeping and carting away of one thousand yards in Manchester cost four
shillings and sixpence by hand labour, which no doubt would be three
times that amount here, whilst the same work was done by Whitworth’s
machine for one shilling and twopence. The principle of his invention
consists in the employment of the rotary motion of wheels, moved by horse
power, to raise the loose soil from the surface of the ground and deposit it
in a vehicle attached. The apparatus for this purpose consists of a series of
brooms or brushes of whalebone, suspended from a light frame of wrought
iron, hung behind a common cart, the body of which is placed near the
ground for greater facility of loading. As the cart wheels revolve, the
brooms successively sweep the surface of the ground, and carry the soil up
an incline or carrier plate, at the top of which it falls into the body of the
cart. The apparatus is extremely simple in construction, and has no
tendency to get out of order, nor is it liable to material injury from
accident. The average rate of effectual scavengering by hand is from one
thousand to fifteen hundred square yards per day. When the machine is
in operation, the horse going 2|- miles per hour, it sweeps during that time
four thousand square yards, thus performing a man’s day’s work in about
a quarter of an hour. The average number of yards swept and carried
away daily, by a machine drawn by one horse, is from 10,000 to 24,000.
It is plain then that a great annual saving of expense, besides the
comfort to passengers, would be the result of adopting this mode of
cleaning the streets; for who can witness the scavengers’ performances on a
windy day without expecting to be covered with dust thereby. Another
advantage accruing from the use of this machine would be that the streets
could be swept daily in summer as well as winter, thereby preventing those
clouds of dust which are the dread of every pedestrian and every shopman.
The annual losses by this collecting of dust in the streets alone would
suffice to pay for its daily removal. Even equestrians would rejoice at
the change, and gladly see that horrid staff of mangle-grinders consigned
to that oblivion from whence they have been dragged by some equally
antiquated official, a fitting companion for the resuscitated “ Dusto .”
The system created by the English Board of Health, and found to work
so harmoniously since 1850, is admirably adapted to fulfil the second
requirement, namely : —Glazed stoneware pipes of four inches diameter,
laid from every house and yard into a submain six inches in diameter, run-
ning along the backs of the houses, and gradually expanding to nine, twelve,
and so on up to eighteen inches, as the length of the submains and number
of branches increase, which again run into a main of from 2 feet to 3
feet, thence into one or more intercepting sewers, which lead into a
receptacle or reservoir, where it can subside, and the liquid portion run
off into the river or sea, or can be distributed without subsidence
for irrigating light sandy lands. Such drains are self-scouring; the
run of water through them is so rapid and concentrated that it
keeps them clear of deposits. For utilising the drainage of Melbourne
cheaply (and no doubt the majority of towns are somewhat similarly
situated) a very good opportunity offers in the piece of land lying
between Sandridge and the Yarra; although at particular times it is


subject to inundation, yet it is admirably adapted for the purpose, and
would no doubt yield a very handsome return for the money laid out in
preparing it and laying down with rye-grass, and distributing the sewage
thereon. The land probably at some future day may be required for docks,
but in the meantime it would serve as a sample block to show agricul-
turists and market-gardeners the value of liquid sewage, and be a means
of inducing the extension of the system. The Government might give a
lease of the land for the purpose at a nominal rent, which would induce
capitalists or a small company to undertake the application of the sewage
to so useful and healthy a purpose, saying nothing of the benefit Melbourne
would receive from it in the way of fresh green fodder all the summer, and
cheap hay of the old stamp, as well as the salubrity of the town, which
would be raised many degrees thereby. The Corporation would probably
follow the example of the Liverpool Corporation, and subscribe handsomely.
If the sewage is not utilised in a liquid state, it should pass into depositing
basins or reservoirs, presupposing it to be disinfected, and the liquid portion
when clear passed into the mouth of the Yarra. By a system of alternate
deposition the deposit can be emptied periodically, and carted away by
market-gardeners and farmers for manurial purposes.
Storm-water under no consideration should be allowed to enter the
sewers; first, because they would have to be considerably enlarged in conse-
quence, in fact to four times the size necessary for sewage; the flow of
sewage would be much slower and more liable to deposit during dry
weather, as it would not be so concentrated as if the sewers were just
sufficient to secure a constant flow ; secondly, gratings, which at least are
dangerous to horses, would have to be placed in the water channels, and
deep communications made to them, entailing a heavy expenditure. I
would therefore recommend that the storm-water be carried in separate
drains immediately under the flags at the edge of the footways, thereby
rendering those unsightly, dangerous, antiquated, and expensive deep water-
channels and crossings, and those excrescences called footbridges at corners
of streets, useless and unnecessary, and enabling the public to use the road-
way up to the kerbstone without danger or inconvenience. This may be
thought an expensive convenience ; but if the cost of the present channels
together with the loss of traffickable way be compared with the cost of the
proposed drains, there will be found a balance in their favour, allowing
nothing for the advantages attached to their adoption, such as the ease and
safety with which the streets may be crossed, particularly in wet weather;
the facilities afforded for traffic up to the very kerbstones, therefore adding
at least half a chain to the available width of our principal thoroughfares; as
well as the saving in wear and tear of the surface, consequent on the necessary
removal of their extreme convexity, an advantage also alike to vehicles and
horses. Pedestrians also would appreciate the change, particularly at the
intersections of streets, where the flagged footways would be carried across
without any alteration of level, or in any way interfering with drainage or
traffic. The storm-waters, having thus been carried along their natural and
least expensive courses, would be discharged immediately into the river, at
as many available points as possible.
The exact size of drains required, depth of sewers, and their exact course


and cost, is a matter of detail which does not affect the question, and cannot
be given without an amount of data not in my possession—such as a
correct plan of the town under consideration, showing the streets, courts,
alleys, houses and yards, the levels of the streets, existing drains if any,
and the floors of the houses and yards, swamps and morasses, taking the sea
as the datum line ; geological and natural features, population and probable
future density of same, and probable future extension to be provided for.
The fulfilling of the third condition is held by those scientific men
who have considered the subject in Europe to be of the highest im-
portance, and we do not wonder at this when we consider that chemical
analysis has proved that the gases arising from sewers and drains, and those
from bogs, putrid matter, and graveyards, are pretty nearly alike, and that
these gases are so opposed to health that Dr. Angus Smith says : “ I hope I
do not go too far when I suppose a class of diseases caused —first, by gases
not putrid but injurious, easily diffused into the air, and more or less soluble
in water; secondly, by vapours, heavy and capable of falling and being taken
up by fogs; and thirdly, by decomposing substances and ferments.” Although
it is held by some that they are incapable of originating disease, yet all
acknowledge that they are the food of cholera and plague, and a certain
and positive medium by which these fell slayers spread their virus and
decimate mankind. We have but to refer to the accounts but a short time
back from Italy and South America, climates similar to our own, to comprehend
what our case would be if once the virus of cholera was imported into this
colony. Compare the state of our towns with Albano and the towns of
the Argentine Republic, and in what do they differ 1 Certainly not in the
matter of these noxious gases. Particular attention is therefore required
in the treatment in order to secure the fixing of these gases, so persistently
neglected hitherto in all systems of sewage; for although some engineers
have used disinfecting materials for the treatment of sewage after it has
left the town, yet they have relied entirely upon water as a means of
preventing the gases from forming on its way through —certainly a
very unscientific remedy, and one that only wanted to be investigated to
show the fallacy of the expectation ; for although water is a valuable agent
of purification by its mechanical action in removing deleterious substances,
yet it is also an agent to the contrary, causing a very rapid and effervescing
decomposition of organic matters, sending forth carbonic acid, and along
with it many vapours into the atmosphere of an impure and deleterious
character, the more so if the water is in enormous-quantities, owing to its
great activity. No doubt a great number of impurities are carried to the
earth by Avater in the shape of rain from the atmosphere; yet we find it
absorbing and carrying in the same way impurities and infection to distant
places, for it is authoritatively stated that the cholera virus was deposited
from a thundercloud by rain on the town of Albano.
A disinfectant having a colytic action or property must therefore be
employed in order to prevent or preserve the sewage from decomposition
or ferment from the moment it enters the sewers or drains, by that means
giving the inhabitants the benefit of the disinfection, fixing the noxious
gases, and thereby preserving all the manurial properties intact, besides
freeing the inhabitants of so subtle and insidious an enemy. It may be


accomplished at a trifling cost by attaching to the head of every submain
by means of a one-inch service pipe a disinfecting chamber, which for
facility of inspection might be formed in the lower part of the nearest lamp-
post, having a small door and key for the use of the officer whose duty it
would be to examine and fill it with disinfecting medium once a week.
Such a disinfecting chamber could be connected with the hydrants, and
would be a great boon, at a trifling cost removing that exceedingly offensive
and sickening effluvia given off with the moisture after watering the streets,
and instead making the air refreshing and wholesome. It should also be
applied to every public urinal, and companies and public bodies neglecting
its use should be severely dealt with.
H. G. DE GRUCHY AND CO., PRINTERS, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.




♦
