

Sexton Blake in Aus[?]
THE UNION JACK 1D,
Vol. V. No. 119 New Series.]
[Every Friday.
THE BUSH OH FIRE! Scorched and choking, Sexton
Blake and Tinker tore madly along through the
burning forest. (See the grand tale inside .)


This Gold-Cased I.ever
Watch, guaranteed cor-
rect timekeeper, free for
feiiiiip FIVE articles.
m
This Real Oak Draw-
ing-room Clock, free for
selling FIVE articles.
WE GIVE YOU FREE
A s a huge advertisement your choice of either of these handsome
presents for selling FIVE useful articles of Jewellery at
la. fid. each.
NO MONEY REQUIRED.
Just send a postcard with your Fall Name and Address,
promising to return the Jewellery within four weeks if you do
not sell it. On receipt of your postcard, we will at once send
the FIVE articles, which you can sell in a few ininutts among your
friends. When sold, you will send us the 7s. 6d. received for
same, and we will at once despatch absolutely free
THE PRESENT YOU CHOOSE.
Together with the Jewellery will be sent a Catalogue of other
Presents which you may choose from, including Gramophones,
Musical Chests, Real Silver Watches, Real Cold and Diamond
Rings, etc., etc. And even though you only sell two of the
articles, we will present you with one of our Renowned ‘Globe*
Timekeepers, Guaranteed for Three Years. We want you to
see cur Jewellery, and judge as to the value yourself.
You will receive the goods to-morrow if you send a postcard
to-Jay. Address as follows— -
Scottish c Jewellery Emporium (Dept. 10),
205, BUCHANAN STREKT, GLASGOW.
This strong Melodeon, double
bellows, two sets reeds, free
for selling FIVE articles.
3
Packet, containing' *-dozen
each Knives, Forks, & Spoons,
Free for selling FIVE articles.
GREAT SALE OF BANKRUPT STOCK.
16/- MELODEONS FOR V/6,
Wc send this Melodeon to
any address on receipt of
60. DEPOSIT
and upon payment of the
Inst of 18 weekly instal-
.. -,. -■ - i ments of fid.each, making
a total of 8/6 in all. A
‘ * ‘ Booh of Music Is given
Free. Novc,our cash with
order price is only 7/6.
I These Mflodoons have
(fair//S3 Hi Hi 111 Sid HI U w/j/GW Organ * Celestial Stops,
Double. Bellows with
fiK'yy.Srs'gagVr.yr/ metal corners, and are
~ strongly and beautifully
I >**l finished. Bend at once il
•Sw . yon wish to secure one.
THE BRITISH MUSIC EMPORIUM,
Dept. (dO) 17, OSWALD STREET, GLASGOW.
M 0
WORK FOR ALL.
We give a Nickel-Silver Timekeeper and Mexican
SSlyerine Watch Chain, with guarantee to keep correct
time for three years, or a Lady’s or Gent's Itolled-
Gold Ring, free to any person selling 48 Penny
Pictorial Postcards within 21 days. You can sell
them in an hour. Send name and address (Postcard
will do)
BRITISH FINE ART CO., (15, STRAND. LONDON. W.C.
6 D - DEPOSIT
Real Silver C/C
Watch- - - 0/0
Government Stamped Case,
( hree-quarfenr plate jewelled
tilled, avid seven years
guarantee.
For advertisement only
We send this watch to any-
one on receipt of
6°- DEPOSIT
and upon payment of the
last of 14 weekly instal-
ments of 6d. each, makiiiK a
total of 7/6 in all. We give
a Handsome Chain Free.
To ensure getting correct
article, send to Head Office;
he Kings way Watch Co.
(Dept.i.4 107, Fernda'c Rd..
CLAPHAM, LONDON.
WHY PAY BIG PRICES
to shopkeeper*, when yon can buy oirect at
Half Pi ioe. ThUspleudid Phonograph,which
.will reproduce B«nd, hong, or Speech, with
It so Old complete in Case, wi l.be sent to
any address on receipt of -•
(gd. DEPOSIT
and upon the pay-
ment of (ha
last of It
weekly in-
talmcnts
of 6 i. each
makih
tot a 1
Of Si-
tu all
An extra special Record is glvzn Free. Note cur cash
with ordoi price is only 7'-. send at once to
J. & T. WILSON. Dept, i do ), 17. Oswald St., Glasgow.
INCREASE YOUR INCOME.
.Send us yonr name and address, and yon will m«dve Free on approval *24 of
our Silver Alnmfnmm 19015 Novelty Thimjdes. Koch one is prettily embossed with
the inscription " Kemember Me,*’ •‘Forget-mo-nni.” They are lighter and tougher
linn silver, never tarimh. mid will last, a lifetime. Three Million sold
already. WE TRUST YOU. NO MONEY ACQUIRES-
.SeII the thimbles at 2d- each, making 4s. altogether, which forw:ird to ami we
will send you at once the Oiiaranfcred Timekeeper or other Prerentn of H!|{h-clas«
Jewellery you have earned, and which you tan select from «*ir list sent with the
“ Bell-at-Sight ” Thimbles, and wc will also tell yon how yow can make a regular
liieome of SC 2 10s. per week. Write to-flay ;nid we send to-morrow,
m GOLD & CO., No. 11, The Watch House, Delamere Crescent, London, W.
w , 1.. M—1 .F3*aa— BgBB—W- .Wi.L'4. V.-'L,V«AJI iHPIHnM»Un Cllsilfc.W.ilH 1 lIWC* *
Collectors will be Amazed at the Extraordinary Bargains
contained in our Beautifully Illustrated Catalogue for 1906.
GIVEN AAV AY ABSOLUTELY FREE to every applicant for the under-
mentioned packet. No. <il Packet contains 10"> Foreign and Colonial
Stamps, including .JAMAICA (Waterfall), Canada, Australia, VENEZUELA
(a cents unused), India, Victoria, U.S.A. (Columbus), CAPE OF GOOD
HOPE, Chili, Argentine. COSTA RICA (20 cents unused), Xew Zealand,
()nceiHlalid, GREECE, TASMANIA (Mount Wellington), */<■., W<\ This
splendid packet we are Pit actually Grvrxo Away at the Rimcrunsi.v Low
Prick of ONE PENNY, postage Id. extra (Abroad 4d.), in order to circu-
late our Ili,i;htratki) Cataloock for I!MRi. Don't ilelay. Send at once anil
secure this Wonderful Bargain.— HENßY ABEL & CO.. BILSTON.
EVERY UP-TO-DATE STATIONER & NEWSAGENT
KEEPS
WRENCH
PICTURE
POSTCARDS.


u
BEFORE
using
OH! MY COLD FEET
ONLY
ed.
A PAIR.
BUT WHY SUFFER?
“LOOFITE”
When
DEDICATED
SOCK,
which Is IMPREGNATED witli
BORACIC ACID. PINE Oil., &c,
Keeps the feet warm, heals the Tender uml Inflamed Foot, absorbs the shock
when miming, waking, or playing football, and keeps the ft*et at an even tempera-
ture, while the combination of the-Boraele Arid. Pine Oil, <fce., drawn by the
warmth of the feet Into the system CURES RHEUMATISM and SCIATIC PAINS,
offensive, Teiuler and Inflamed Feet, L‘:>rns, chilblains, Rheumatism, and
Sciatica are provented and cured hy wearing tlie '' Looflte " Medicated Sock.
Get a pair at once and enjoy a good walk. H will only cost you 6d.
When ordering say what size l>oot or shoe worn (whether ladles’ or gents’/, ami send x>o.stal order for 6d. } and
■ • * fur |**tugo (Foreign and Colonial ordc.M Is. e&traj to
J. MORTON & MORTON, 150, Ilya Lane, London, S.E.
ONLY
6d.
A PAIR
TO INTRODUCE
our Rival Watches we
send a lady’s or gent.’s Beal
Silver Watch, with jewelled
movement, guaranteed for
seven years, to any address
on receipt of
DEPOSIT,
and upon the payment of the
last 14 Weekly Instalments
at 6d. each making a total
of 7/6 in all. A Handsome Chain is
given FREE. Note.—Our cash with order
price is only 6/6. Send at once to
J. & T. WILSON (Dept. 0 ),
l7. Oswald Street/Glnsgow.
READ THE TRUTH.
Me give you a Nickel Silver WATCH, or a real Silver-
mounted Umbrella, suitable for Lady or Cent, or other
present as per list, for selling SEVENTY-TWO up-to-date
Penny Postcards (assorted), in ten beautiful colours (works
of art). We allow five weeks for selling. Send name
and address—postcard will do.
NATIONAL POSTCARD EXCHANGE, 86, Rosebery Avenue,
LONDON, E.C.
7s
mi
' DEPOSIT"!
Tliis splendid Phonograph, which will re
produce Hand, Song, or Speech, with Record
complete in Case, will be sent to any address
on receipt of
6d. DEPOSIT
and upon the payment
of the last of 10 weekly
instalments of Cd. each,
making a total of Bs. in
all. Ax Kxtua SrKCiAi.
Ukcoiui is Given FKKE.
Jsgte our cash with
order price is only 7s.
'Send at onec to KING SWAY T’HONOGRAFHCO.I
l(Dept. 14), 107, Ferndale Road, Clapham, London, S.W. I
CASH
“MOUSTA” Moustache Producer.
To obtain handsome, manly Moustache in a few days, use “MOFSTA,” the new
delicately perfumed hair-forcing pomade. Buys iK'comt* men. Age no object. Success
guaranteed. Also produces hair, preventing Imldnes*. Send 6d. stamps fur aMn>x (plain
cover) to J. DIXON. 13, Annesley Road. Holloway; Londoa, N. (Mention this paper.)
Applications with regard to advertisement spaces in
“ Union Jack,’* “Pluck,” and “Marvel ’’should be
addressed to the Advertisement Manager, 2, Carmelite
House, Carmelite Street, H.C.
A HANDSOME FOUNTAIN PEN. COMPLETE IN BOX.
With G/nss and Rubber Filler, with Full Directions of How to Use.
This beautiful Fountain Pen is made of best vulcanite, exquisitely chased, handsome headed joints, witli 14-Ct. GOLD NIB, iridium-pointed,
and tilted with special twin-feed.
Price onEy 2/6. A few GOOD points about this GOOD Fountain Pen:
Makes Writing a Pleasure. Writes Perfectly. Glides over the Paper. Indispensable to the Busy Man.
Worth Double the Price. ’ Marvellous Value. Flows Easily. Will Last a Lifetime.
THE ‘ UNKIN JACK NOVELTY DIPT, 12 & 13, Broadway, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C.
How to Become a Captain
in the Merchant Service.
An instructive article on the subject , with unique
photographs , appears in this week's issue of the
PICTORIAL MAGAZINE
The Most Entertaining Magazine of the. Day,
ON SALE EVERYWHERE. PRICE ONE PENNY.


The ‘Union Jack Library.’ 1 D.
A WEEKLY STORY-BOOK FOR ALL.
OUR POWERFUL LONG. COMPLETE NOVEL.
*•* to Southampton on
| business. Back to-morrow
evening.
. “ (Signed) Geeenfield.”
~ So ran the telegram
which Arnold Grice held between his
long, beautifully white fingers. Secre-
tary to Aylmer Greenfield, the great
financier, and a millionaire twice
over," Arnold Grice looked his part.
He was a youngish man; tall and well
built, and evidently possessed of con-
siderable personal -strength.
His. exquisitely cut frock-coat fitted
him to perfection, and he wore a gar-
denia in his buttonhole. Altogether
he was as smart and well-groomed as
the best tailor and valet in London
could make him, and, with his brains
and cleverness into the bargain, he
was the envy of most of his acquaint-
ances. f '
It was odd, then, that there were
lines of evident anxiety on his face,
while a deep frown contracted his
forehead.
“I sha’n’t get a better chance,” he
muttered, with a gleam in his deep-set
eyes, as he glanced I'ound the large,
handsomely furnished room which was
the private office of Mr. Greenfield.
He got up, and went to one of the
doors, two of which opened out of the
room. This one looked out upon a
landing and a private staircase lead-
ing to the street.
There were a score or more of clerks
on the lower floor, but few of these
ever set eyes on the face of the mil-
lionaire, who preferred to come and
go alone and unnoticed.
SEXTON BLAKE
IN
AUSTRALIA
A Stirring Tale of Thrilling
Adventure.
THE FIRST
CHAPTER.
The Ruse of Ar-
nold Grice.
• “Coast’s clear, anyhow,” muttered Grice to himself.
And with that he turned and went straight towards
a small safe, which was let into the wall at the opposite
end of the room. From his pocket he took a peculiarly
Tinker took two desperate strokes which carried him exactly opposite
to Blake. Next moment the latter had grasped him in his powerful hands,
and, with one tremendous effort, lifted him clean out of the water.
EVERY ISSUE OF THIS BOOK CONTAINS A 3/8 NOVEL,


shaped key, and slipped it into the lock. It turned
without trouble, and the massive steel door opened noise-
lessly.
Grice dropped on his knees, and his fingers worked
like lightning as he ran through bundle after bundle
of papers.
“ Ah, here they are !” he exclaimed, in a low tone of
intense relief, as he came suddenly upon a fat bundle
of banknotes.
He slipped them bodily into his breast-pocket, and half
rose.
“ No, I’d better have some cash as well. Less likely
to cause suspicion, and handy for travelling expenses,”
he continued, and turned to the safe again.
On the bottom shelf were several washleather bags,
each neatly tied up and sealed with red wax. He tore
them open. Some were full of gold, some of silver, and
one, much larger than the others, of copper ooins.
This latter he emptied, tumbling the coppers in . a heap
in the bottom of the safe, and then quickly stuffed into
it as many of the smaller bags as it would hold.
The whole business had not taken him more than three
minutes. He was in the act of closing the safe again/
when a slight sound behind him made him pause. '
sprang to his feet, and confronted a tall, stout, elderly
gentleman, who had entered unobserved, and whose feet
had made no sound upon the richly carpeted floor. .
There was a moment of deathly silence. On the face
of the elder man anger and amazement struggled for
utterance. The veins stood put purple" on his forehead.
He seemed to be choking.
Ihen, with a tremendous effort, he mastered him-
self.
“"You blackguard!” he said, in a deep, quiet
tone.
Ihey were his last words. With one bound, Grice was
upon him, and, swinging up the heavy bag of coin,
brought it down with fearful force upon his employer’s
head. Mr. Greenfield flung up his hands, staggered,
and, without so much as a groan, fell over sideways, the
back of his skull striking with terrible force full upon
the corner of the marble curb of the fireplace.
For a moment Grice stood like a figure of stone, his
face frozen into a hideous mask. Then he flung himself
on his knees beside the other’s body, and, with fingers
which shook in spite of himself, felt the heart of the
prostrate man.
A few seconds were enough. ,
“Dead!” he muttered. *
He rose, and stared rbund wildly. Then, with an
effort of his iron will, he collected himself, and made for
the door.
His fingers were on the handle, when he suddenly
started back, listening intensely. His florid face, palo .
already, went a sickly grey. Someone was coming
rapidly up the stairs, springing lightly two steps at a
stride. Grice turned again, and fled like a hare across
the room, bolted through the other door, and closed it
noiselessly behind him.
Next instant the door at the head of the stairs was
flung open, and there entered a young fellow of about
nineteen. Finding the room apparently empty, he
paused and looked round. Then suddenly his glance fell
upon the body. .
His cheery, fresh-coloured face assumed a startled
expression.
“ W-what’s happened?” he muttered, horrified; and,
limning across to the fireplace, he bent over the quiet,
motionless figure. “ Uncle,” he cried—“ Uncle Aylmer,
v,hat is it? Are you badly hurt? Good heavens, look
at his head!”
With horror dawning on his face, he made an effort
to lift his uncle, so as to get his head off the marble
which bad wounded it so terribly. As he was doing
so a voice suddenly broke upon his ears—a voice as
startled as his own:
W-why, Hammond, what is it? What’s the matter?”
There, at the staircase door, stood Arnold Grice, his .
face no longer grey, but bearing an expression of cleverly
simulated amazement and dismay. ,
Bob Hammond turned.
"I don’t know. I found him like this. He’s badlv
hurt. Quick, ring the bell! Send for help !” J
But Grice did not move, except to carefully close the
door behind him.
“Is it wise?” was his strange question.
“Wise! What do you mean? For Heaven’s sake
don’t wait! He may be dying!”
Grice came nearer, and stood over the living boy and
the dead man.
“I mean what I say. Is it wi&e?”
“ I don’t understand you.”
“ Must I explain? Your uncle is dead.” ,
“ Dead!” cried Bob, in tones of horror.
“ Plainly. But don’t speak so loud; someone may
hear.
Bob stared up in blank amazement. Grice resumed
coolly.
“I am your friend,” he said, in tones meant to be
reassuring.
But the words seemed to have an opposite effect.
Fear succeeded amazement on the other’s face.
“ W-what do you mean? Speak out!” he mut-
tered.
Must I? It’s plain on the face of it. Everyone
knows what terms you and your uncle were on. This is
a hanging matter.”
Bob flared up.
“You suspect me?”
“ Personally, I don’t,” returned Grice coolly. “ But
you must know what others will think.”
“ Think—that I killed him?”
“ My dear Hammond, consider for yourself,” answered
Grice, with a clever pretence of real feeling in his voice.
“ You and your uncle have been having constant quarrels
during the past yeah over your profession. Everyone
knows how keen you are to-go in for farming and country
life, and how anxious he was to have you in the office —
especially since your brother Maurice disappointed him.
You and he were alone here together* this after-
noon ”
“ I tell you he was lying like this when I came in!”
interrupted Bob fiercely.
“Yes; and I know you and believe you. But who
else will?”
Bob’s face expressed his utter dismay.
“ W-what am I to do?” he stammered.
“Cut it,” returned Grice forcibly. “Clear out until
the matter is cleared up one way or the other. Give me
an address to find you, and I’ll keep you posted. If
the real murderer is discovered, well and good. You
can come back. If not ” —he*paused significantly
“ the further you go the better. But, whatever happens,
I tell you you’re dead certain to be arrested if you stay
here, and the more I try to shield you the worse you’ll
be suspected.”
Bob passed his hand over his face in a confused
fashion. Terror of the disgrace of arrest, and fear of
the consequences, was robbing him of self-possession.
Grice saw his advantage, and pushed it home.
“ The sooner you’re off, the better,” he urged. “ I’ll
do all I can for you. Have you money?”
“ No,” answered Bob vaguely.
“Here’s twenty pounds—all I can spare.” And he
pushed four notes into the boy’s hand. “ Take the next
train at Caunon Street. Change two or three times;
and if I were you, I’d make for Spain. Mind you write.
You know my address.”
He almost pushed his victim out of the room, led
him down the stairs, and bundled him into a cab.
Then, in the coolest way in the world, he sauntered
into the main offices, and through them into the
manager’s room, where he entered upon a discussion as
to some business which he said that Mr. Greenfield
wanted carried through at once.
That evening at seven, as Grice strolled out from his
well-appointed apartments in King Street, on his way to
dine at his club, a newsboy rushed up.
“ Horful murder in the City! Millionaire found dv>ad
in ’is private hoffice! Flight hof ’is nevew!”
Grice bought a paper, aud a cynical smile showed the
real ugliness of his mouth,
“ He’s got those notes, too! Wflat an ass!”
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL'S Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY, now nDDearingr In “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


m
“SEXTON BLAKE,
BEEF-EATER.”
By HERBERT MAXWELL.
A Fine Modern
Tale of the
Tower of London.
NEXT WEEK!
“ One of the best of the series.”
m
THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Sexton Blake Loses his Money and Makes
Up His Mind to Help to Chase the
Thieves.
f 'V 'y MONTH or two after the death of Mr. Greenfield,
/I a man of middle height, with a clean-shaven,
resolute face, stood in front of the one news-
paper office in the small seaport town of Narra-
goola, in Queensland, Australia, and studied a
poster displayed in the window:
/ “ THE GLYDE GANG AGAIN.
OUTRAGEOUS STATE OF AFFAIRS IN THE GARRI-
SON DOWNS DISTRICT.
WHOLE COUNTRY TERRORISED.”
“ Garrison Downs —eh? Just where I want to go,”
muttered the reader to himself thoughtfully. “By Jove,
I thought the reign of bushrangers was over! H’m!
One lives and learns. Now, Pedro ’’—turning to pat the
splendid bloodhound which was his companion—“we
must pay a call at the bank;
and then, hey! for the hotel
and a good night’s rest. We
need it, after knocking about
for forty-eight hours on that
smelly little coast steamer!”
So saying, Sexton Blake
walked on up thg wide, hot,
dusty street, and entered the
one substantial-looking build-
ing in the place. Here he
transacted certain business
with the manager, a hard,
smart-looking Queenslander, and
then strolled leisurely back to
the hotel.
A young fellow, hardly more
than a boy, met him in the
hall.
“ I’ve got rooms, Mr. Blake;
and dinner’ll be ready in a few
minutes.”
“ Good business. Tinker!
I’m hungry.”
“ Ought to be, after the toss-
ing we had last night, sir.
How long do we stay here?”
“ Not sure, lad. I’m not
certain yet where to start
looking for our man. The
trail petered out in Sydney;
and, as you know, it was a very slight clue that took us
up here.”
“He was very fond of farming, wasn’t he?” inquired
Tinker reflectively.*
“Yes; and he certainly came to Australia with that
idea.”
“ Did you ever hear which he preferred, sir—sheen or
cattle?”
“ Cattle, I fancy.”
“ Then he’d have come here for a certainty,” replied
Tinker quickly. “ I’ve been making inquiries, and they
say the country inland from here on the ranges is the
finest cattle-ground in Australia. What’s more, the
cattle : men have the habit of bringing their beasts down
to the coast here for about six weeks every year to give
them a change to the salt grass. Seems to me we might
very likely pick up the trail here.”
“That’s a good point. Tinker. We’ll stop a day or
two and make inquiries. Hallo, here’s dinner going in!
Come on!” °
While the two are enjoying their food, and Pedro sits
his master’s side awaiting the bones which he knows
will come his way at the end of the meal, a word of
explanation as to what has brought the famous detective
so far out of his usual beat.
At the death of Mr. Greenfield no will was to be
found. Consequently, his whole enormous property,
valued roughly a, t two millions sterling, went to the dead
man’s next-of-kin, his two nephews, Maurice and Robert
Hammond.
The latter was a hunted fugitive, for he was strongly
suspected of his uncle’s murder, and a warrant had been
issued for his arrest. So far, however, he had eluded
all attempts to find him. He had disappeared as utterly
as though he had vanished off the face of the earth.
But it was not to hunt Bob Hammond down that Blake
had come so far from home. His task was to find the
elder brother, Maurice.
The latter was four years older than Bob, and five
years before our story begins had quarrelled with his
wealthy uncle, and, having a few hundreds of his own,
had left England, intending to start life for himself in
some new land.
Having suddenly become heir to a million of money, he
had assumed an importance in the eyes of the financial
world, which he himself had probably been the last to
expect, and Mr. Greenfield’s solicitors, Messrs. Simonds
& Clarke, had at once advertised for him. But these
advertisements, though inserted in almost every paper of
any importance in the Empire, as well as in the United
States, had brought no result, and month by month the
embarrassment of the lawyers
grew greater.
There were more distant
heirs, who were clamouring fer
their rights, and there was
danger of the whole immense
property being flung into
Chancery. It was to avoid this
disaster that Messrs. Simonds
& Clarke had at last com-
missioned Sexton Blake to start
bn the search, giving him ah
absolutely free hand, and bid-
ding him spar? no reasonable
expense to attain their object.
There is no need to detail the
way in which Blake set to work
—how he traced Maurice Ham-
mond first to the Cape, then to
Ceylon, and finally to Australia.
At Sydney, however, all real
clues had failed. It w T as only
the fact that a man vaguely
answering Maurice Hammond’s
description had been in Sydney
twelve months before, and had
gone by ship up the coast, which
brought Blake and his faithful
attendant to Queensland. It
was, indeed, the remembrance
of that fact which Tinker had
i'ust given voice to—namely, that Maurice was extremely
;een on cattle—which had resolved Blake to land at
Narragoola.
Strangers, were a rarity in the little seaport town, and
in the evening a number of men foregathered in the
smoking-room of the little hotel. But Blake easily
avoided suspicion by giving out that he thought of going
in for cattle, and was on his way up-country to look at
some ranges he had heard of.
“They say Garrison Downs is good grass, don’t they?’’
he inquired carelessly.
Someone laughed.
“My word, yes! Good grazing. Are ye thinking of
going there, mister?’’ '
“ Well, I don’t know,” answered Blake, with that inno-
cent air he could assume so well.
“ Take my tip, and keep away,” returned the other.
“ Or if ye go, hump your own swag, an’ let on you’re a
sundowner*.”
“ Why so?” inquired Blake.
“ Anyone can see you’re a new chum, my friend,” was
the reply. “If you weren’t, you’d know the country
ain’t safe for anyone up that way. Cap’n Glyde and
his gang rule the roost. Every station’s a fort. My
word, he’s a wonner, that chap! I tell you, if ye’ve got
the value of a tickyf about you, he’ll find it. He’ll clean
you finer than a new-plucked chicken!”
* Tramp,
t Threepenny-bit.
“SEXTON BLAKE, BEEF-EATER.” AStlr g; K H S lßgEßT h m T Axw^Lt ondon - NEXT WEEK!


''Good gracious, what a terrible state of affairs!” ex*
claimed Sexton Blake, apparently horrified. “ Who is
this dreadful man?”
If Blake wanted information he got it. Every soul in
the place began talking at once. Everyone wanted to
make out that he knew a little more about the infamous
Glyde than his neighbour did.
Blake listened quietly, sifting out the truth from the
lies and exaggerations, and storing away a whole fund of
information in that wonderful brain of his, which never
forgot anything that he wished to remember. Now and
then he threw in an apparently innocent question which
kept the ball rolling. At last he said:
“I suppose there’s no danger of this dreadful man
coming down this way, is there?”
The result of this remark was a horrified silence. Evi-
dently Narragoola folk had hardly imagined such a con-
tingency. Then a quiet man, long, lean, and sun-dried,
a typical “ cornstalk,” answered in a quiet drawl;
“ I don’t reckon so. All the same, he’s got the cheek
of Old Nick. If he could once git the police out o’ the
town I b’lieve he’d think nothing of it.”
Soon afterwards the party broke up, and Blake went
up to his room. He was tired after two bad nights in a
stuffy cabin on a rolling coastwise steamer, and though
he could do without sleep for nights together if neces-
sary, yet he always made up for lost time when he had
the chance. No man understood better that if the brain
was to be in first-class working order the body must be
kept in good training. With Pedro lying on the mat by
the door, he felt himself absolutely safe, and made up
his mind to take a good ten hours’ repose.
Yet the habit of years made him wake at any unusual
sound, and all of a sudden he found himself sitting bolt
upright in bed, listening with all his ears.
“Surely I didn’t dream it?” he muttered. "That was
a gun!” •
He waited a while, but heard nothing more. Pedro
had not stirred. He got up and looked out of the win-
dow. There was no moon, and it was very dark. He
could see nothing, nor hear anything unusual. So, feel-
ing still very sleepy, he returned to bed, and was off
again in a very few minutes.
When he next woke it was broad daylight. Tinker
was shaking him by the shoulder. “ Wake up!” ex-
claimed the boy eagerly.
Sexton Blake was out of bed like a flash. He saw by
the other’s face something serious had happened. He
heard the tramp of horses’ feet in the street outside.
“ Glyde’s gang have robbed the bank,” continued
Tinker. “They’re gathering a posse to chase them.”
Blake smiled rather grimly.
“ Bad luck. Tinker! I deposited nearly all my cash
there yesterday.”
Tinker’s face fell. He knew how important money was
in a search like theirs, and that it would take some days
to get more from England, for Blake would have to write
to his agent in Sydney, and get him to cable to Simonds
& Clarke.
“What are we going to do?” he inquired.
“ Baise a couple of horses and join the posse,” was the
quick reply. “ I’m interested in this bushranging busi-
ness, and it will be a good way to pass the time, even if
we fail to get our cash back.”
Tinker laughed, and ran off to look for horses. By
the time he got them, Blake was ready dressed, and with
all his preparations made. In another minute the two
were riding hard after the pursuers, who had already
started on the chase.
THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Blake Backs His own Opinion, and Proves
that Pedro’s Nose is Better than Wallaby
Jack’s Eyes.
" H J Y word, it was the coolest job you ever saw in
£l|l your life ! First they nobbled the two police
11 I on the beat; then they set a guard over the
w » JL police-station, so as to keep the rest of ’em
quiet. After that, ftmr of ’em went straight
to the bank. The manager woke up, to find a pistol tight
up against his head, and had to listen while the rest
cleaned out the show below. Not a shot was fired.”
Sexton Blake interrupted the speaker, who was thg
same long, weather-beaten cornstalk who had suggested
the possibility of a visit from Glyde on the previous
evening. “ But I heard a shot,” he said.
“ ’Twarn’t no shot, mister. ’Twas the plug o’ gun-
cotton Glyde used for busting the safe open.”
Blake murmured softly to himself. “ Why didn’t I get
up?”
The other laughed.
“ Ay, and be bored fuller of holes than a hair sieve !’*■
he returned. “ You’d better thank your stars, mister,
that you stayed where you was!”
Blake only smiled. He remembered that he was a
new chum in the eyes of these men. He would have to
act accordingly.
All the morning they rode sharply on the track of the
bushrangers. The road led straight inland, and by mid-
day they had crossed the flat country, and were among
thickly-wooded hills. They stopped for a brief rest and a
meal under a great clump of pines, and then pushed on
again. „
This tracking business was no novelty to Blalft, who
had followed criminals over every kind of country in
Europe. He was gifted not only with extraordinary
powers of sight and hearing, but also with that far more
exceptional ability of noticing everything. Nothing
escaped him, not even a broken twig or a bent blade of
grass. Where his own senses failed, he was accustomed
to rely on those of his wonderful hound Pedro, and he
had never yet known the animal fail.
Not one of the Narragoola men had ever seen a blood-
hound work before, and, angry as they were at the im-
pudent robbery of their bank, they were inclined to be
facetious at the expense of the new chums and their big
dog. But Blake took their chaff with perfect good-
humour, and they soon got tired of making fun.
Across the plains it had been child’s play to follow the
bushrangers. Indeed, they had made no attempt to
cover their tracks. Here in the thick forests the tracks
were less easy to see.
After a time they came to rocky ground, where eveA
the ironshod feet of horses left np mark. Progress be-
came gradually slower and slower.
“ Wish to goodness we’d got Warralong Billy along
with us !” exclaimed the tall man, whose name Blake had
found to be Jack Warley, better known as “Wallaby
Jack,” as he got off his horse for the fifth or sixth time
to examine the rocky ground.
“Who’s he?” inquired Blake.
“ The black tracker,” was the answer. " Worse luck,
he’s off with Sergeant Tracy, of the police.”
A mile further on the trail forked, and here the native-
born men were entirely at fault. The ground was like
iron, and no tracks were to be seen, even with the closest
scrutiny. The whole party dismounted, and there was
a long and anxious discussion. Blake said nothing, but
looked on in his usual quiet fashion.
“ I vote for the left-hand one,” said Wallaby Jack, at
last. “ Stands to reason they’ve took to the hills. That
’ere right-hand path runs down to the plain again.”
“ Don’t you think they may have gone that way just
to put you off the scent?”- suggested Blake mildly.
“ ’Tain’t likely,” returned one of the others shortly.
“ Pedro!” called Blake. The dog came to him. The
detective took something from his pocket—a parcel
wrapped in paper—and unrolled it. Inside was a horse-
shoe, which, unnoticed by the others, Blake had picked
up some time previously. “ Smell it, boy !”
The bloodhound snuffed the piece of iron, and began
casting round.
By this time the other men were all on their horses
again.
“ Ain’t you coming, mister?” cried Wallaby Jack.
"What, up that way?” inquired Blake, as he watched
the dog. “ No, I don’t think so. My idea is that Glyde’s
fellows have gone to the right.”
The idea of a new chum presuming to have an opinion
of his own on such a matter seemed to tickle the Aus-
tralians. Some laughed, others were openly con-
temptuous.
“ I reckon you’ll have to play a lone hand, then,” re-
marked ona.
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELLS Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY.” now appearing- in “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday


“HI, Callendar, stop!” roared
Blake. But Callendar paid no atten-
tion. Not so Glyde. He turned in
his saddle, and, whipping out a
heavy revolver, fired at Blake, who
raised his carbine to his shoulder
and rapidly returned the shot.
“ Silly ass, lie’ll get bushed for a certainty!” sneered
another.
And Blake heard one whisper, “ He’s sick of it. Going
to wait till we’re out of sight, and then turn back and
go home.”
Tinker heard these remarks and flushed angrily, but
Blake remained as imperturbable as ever.
“Well, gentlemen. I’ll stick to my own opinion, if
you’ve no objection, Won’t any of you come?”
"We ain’t got no time to waste, fooling like this!”
cried Wallaby Jack impatiently. And, putting spurs to
his horse, he led the way along the left-hand path. Next
minute Blake, Tinker, and Pedro found themselves alone
in the wilderness.
“ Silly fools !” growled Tinker. “ Think they know
everything! What are we to do now, Mr. Blake?”
“ Follow Pedro,” was the cool reply. “ Seek ’em, boy!”
And as the great hound put his nose to the ground, and,
giving vent to one deep, resonant bay, hurried along the
right-hand path, Blake mounted again, and, followed bv
Tinker, took the trail. v
THE FOURTH CHAPTER.
Tinker Tries a Ford, and Comes Badly to
Grief.
THE heat was tremendous, for it was now the end
of October, and the Australian summer had
begun. They were forced to go slowly, and
nurse their horses. Later, clouds covered the
sun, but it grew no cooler. Not a breath of air
stirred, not a leaf rustled. A stillness that was almost
supernatural held the forest. But Pedro never faltered.
Nose down, he followed the trail at a steady pace.
Thicker and thicker grew the clouds. Sweat was
streaming from the horses, and the flies bit and stung till
men and horses alike were near distracted with the
maddening irritation.
“ Storm brewing, I fancy,” remarked Tinker, after a
long silence.
The words were hardly out of his mouth before a vivid
flash of lightning streaked the gloom, and a few seconds
later a long, heavy roll ’of thunder boomed overhead.
“ We’re in for a ducking. Tinker,” returned Blake.
“ But we must stick to it, for once there’s water over the
ground Pedro won’t be able to follow,”
They were now riding along a distinct path—only a
bridle-path, certainly, and rough to a degree, but still
plainly in regular use. It wound in long curves down
the hillside, and though the trees were too thick to
allow any view to right or left, Blake felt sure that they
were rapidly approaching the plain again.
A second flash of lightning was followed by a far louder
peal of thunder. The gloom thickened until it was almost
as dark as night. There came a puff of cold wind from
the south, and without further warning down poured
the rain in a perfect deluge. Then followed the wind,
and in a minute or two the travellers were in the midst
of such a storm as neither had ever seen before. Through
the pounding, lashing rain the lightning flashed and
twisted in every direction, sometimes blue, sometimes
orange, and, again, with the pure white blaze of an
incandescent lamp. The flashes followed one another at
the rate of fifty or sixty a minute, and no doubt the
thunder was continuous, only it could not be heard at all
above the tremendous din of wind and rain.
Great boughs, torn from the trees, whirled like feathers
across the path, and every now and then a gigantic
monarch of the forest would heel over and drop to the
ground, either broken short off or torn up by the roots.
The horses, terrified, refused to move, and Pedro, whose
sense was almost human, came straight back to his
master.
Blake signed to Tinker to dismount. The din of the
storm made words useless. They led their horses behind
the shelter of a rocky bank, and stood there, drenched
and waiting, till the weather should clear.
When at last the darkness lifted, and the rain began to
moderate, it was little more than an hour to sunset.
Everything was running with water, and the air, by com-
parison, seemed quite cold. Tinker looked interro-
gatively at Blake.
“SEXTON BLAKE, BEEF-EATER , M A StiP By*HE°RBERT VaXWBLU^ 011, NEXT WEEK!


“ Push on,” said the latter. “ This path must lead
somewhere; and, anyhow, we can’t get back to Narra-
goola to-night.”
“ There’s too much water for Pedro,” remarked Tinker.
“Yes; I’m afraid we’ve lost the bushrangers for the
present; but never mind. We’re nearer to them than our
Narragcola friends are, anyhow.”
It was slow travelling, for the path was now T cum-
bered with branches and fallen logs, and the torrents of
rain had cut deep gullies, into which the horses slipped
and scrambled. Just as evening began to close in, a
roaring sound came to their ears, and presently they
emerged from the trees, to find themselves cut off from
further progress by a flooded river.
No doubt it was a mere brook at ordinary times, but
now it was coming down fifty feet wide, red with clay,
and raging like an angry bull. All the centre was small
waves, thick with clotted foam, and under the banks
swirled eddies full of logs and fence-posts, carried down
from above. Just as they reached the bank of the
torrent, by a curious chance the last of the storm-cloud
passed away, and the low rays of the setting sun shone
on a small bark-roofed house about half a mile away on
the other side. Some horses grazed near it, and a curl
of blue smoke rose hospitably from the chimney..
Blake looked at Tinker.
“I call that the irony of Fate, lad,” he said, with a
smile. “ Here we are, soaking and starving, and cut off
from the promised land by this miserable river.”
But Tinker was beyond grinning.
“ I’m precious hungry, sir,” he answered, between
chattering teeth. “ Don’t you think we might try to
cross?”
Sexton Blake looked doubtfully at the muddy flood
which swirled in front of them. Then he glanced up
and down the river. A little further down the stream
was wider, and appeared to be shallower.
■ 4 ‘ That’s the place to try, then, Tinker,” he said.
“ But it’ll be no easy job to ford it.”
Tinker, however, had no relish for spending a night
supperless in the dripping woods.
“ Let’s try it, anyway!” he exclaimed. “If it’s too
deep, we’ll turn back.”
So saying, he rode to the place which Blake had in-
dicated, and forced his unwilling horse into the water.
“Come on, sir, it’s quite shallow!” he cried exultingly,
for he was half way across, and the water no higher than
his saddle-girths. The words had hardly passed his lips
when his horse put both feet into a deep hole, floundered
forward, and next instant was being carried away down
the swift current at a tremendous pace.
As the animal lost its footing. Tinker, who knew what
he was about, flung himself out of the saddle, and, keep-
ing hold of the mane, floated down alongside his steed.
Blake, horrified at the turn things had taken, trotted
sharply down the bank, hoping to find some shallow
where he might ride in and give assistance.
But the channel narrowed, and the water, becoming
deeper, raged along at a fearful rate. What was worse,
a regular rapid was ahead, where the waves of red-brown
water flung their foam-tipped crests over great rocks,
which barely showed their heads above the roaring
stream.
Tinker turned a despairing face up to Blake. He saw
the danger, but was too proud to cry out. In an instant
the detective had taken his resolution. Flinging him-
self from the saddle, he took a short run, and, with a
magnificent bound, landed on the top of a rock quite
ten feet out from the bank. The impetus of his spring
nearly sent him into the water beyond, but, collecting
himself with a violent effort, he jumped again, alight-
ing on a’second great stone almost in mid-stream.
Here he crouched, every muscle taughtened, and
waited for the other. The din of the pent torrent was
deafening; spray almost blinded him. The water sluic-
ing past seemed to be leaping over the top of his refuge,
threatening to snatch him aw r ay.
Ah, here came Tinker, still clinging like grim death
to his horse, of which only the head now show-ed above
the brown foam !
“Let go of the horse!” shouted Blake, at the top of
his voice, ■
Tinker heard and obeyed. He took two desperate
strokes, which carried him exactly opposite to Blake.
Next moment the latter had grasped him in his powerful
hands, and, with one tremendous effort, lifted him clean
out of the water on to the top of the rock. The horse
swept helplessly by, and next moment was crushed by
the current against a rock, and disappeared beneath the
surface.
Tinker, gasping for breath, shuddered.
" That’s what would have happened to me,” he re-
marked quietly.
“ Well, it didn’t,” answered Blake cheerfully. “ And
now, with your permission, we’ll clear out of this
extremely uncomfortable position.”
Tinker glanced towards the shore they had left.
“ I can’t jump that,” he remarked, in dismay.
“No, more can I, I’m afraid,” replied Blake. “It’s
good-bye to my horse, too, for the present. But there
are rocks enough to make stepping-stones to the other
side. I’ll lead the way. Mind you don’t slip.”
Presently, breathless and soaking, they climbed the
opposite bank, and through the now fast falling dusk
made rapidly for the house which was visible in the dis-
tance. As they came nearer they noticed that the place
had a dreary, tumbledown appearance.
“ I say, I hope there’s someone at home!” exclaimed
Tinker, in dismay.
“No doubt about that,” answered Blake. “ Look at
the smoke.”
“ Thank goodness! Then there’s a chance of supjfer,”
returned the youngster, whose mind wjrs running on
mutton-chops and damper. " I’m hungry enough to eat
a horse, hide and all.”
THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
The Bush Inn—A Curious Discovery—In the
Hands of the Enemy.
THE door of the shanty was open, and inside, to the
astonishment of both men, was a small and
shelves covered with bottles.
“ Why, it’s a public-house!” exclaimed
Tinker. “ Funny place for a pub !”
“ It’s what they call a bush pub,” answered Blake, in a
low voice. “ Keep your eyes open, lad.” So saying, he
walked straight in.
A young fellow of about twenty jumped up from a
chair behind the bar and stared doubtfully at the new-
comers. He was thin and roughly dressed, and Blake,
taking him in in one lightning glance, thought he had
never seen a more unhappy face.
“ Can you give us some supper, and put us rip for the
night?” he inquired.
The young fellow hesitated.
“ Er—l don’t know,” he stammered. “ Wait, and I'll
ask.” He went out through a door at the back of the
bar.
“What’s the matter with him?” muttered Tinker.
“You’d think, they would be glad of custom in a for-
saken place like this.”
But Blake made a motion for silence, and next moment
a tall, powerfully-built man, with a heavy black beard
and moustache, came into the room.
“Want to put up for the night?” he said genially.
“ "Why, of course, if you can stick rough quarters. My
word, you’re wet through! We must have a fire!”
Blake briefly explained that they were on their way
up-country to look at a cattle range; that they had
been caught in the storm, bushed, and lost their horses.
To hear him speak, anyone would have taken him for
the newest of new chums, but all the time he was watch-
ing their big, brawny host with the utmost keenness.
There was something about the man that roused every
detective instinct in his nature.
And yet there was nothing whatever to take exception
at in the fellow’s manner as he led them out into the
kitchen to dry themselves at the stove, and made the
boy brew hot tea and cook mutton-chops for their
supper.
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELLS Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY,” now appearing; in “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


“ Rough fare, gentlemen !” he said, as the food was
put on a bare table at one end of the kitchen. “But I
dare say you’re hungry. After supper I’ll send out Tom
to see if he can find the horse you left across the
river, and maybe I can lend you another in the morning.
Now, I’ll leave you to finish your supper. I must go and
look after the bar.”
Tinker finished his second chop, and leant back with
a deep sigh.
“Feel better?’* inquired Blake drily.
“ Much,” was the reply.
Blake took a cigar from his case, but paused before
lighting it. 1
“Do you notice anything, Tinker?” he whispered.
“A very odd smell,” replied the other quickly. “It’s
been bothering me ever since we came into this room.”
Blake took a cautious glance round. They could hear
glasses and bottles being moved in the front room. The
boy Tom had already gone out to look for the horse.
He got up and went quietly over to the stove. The
damper was closed and the fire banked down. Very
cautiously he lifted one of the iron rings from the top
of the fire, and, taking the poker, stirred the smouldering
wood ashes. Tinker watched him with deep interest.
Apparently Blake found nothing, for he laid the poker
down and.replaced the ring. Tinker slipped across to
him.
“ Try the oven,” he suggested, in an excited whisper.
“ Exactly what I was about to do. But get back to
your chair.”
Oddly enough, the oven door refused to open easily.
But Blake had a way of his own with such things, and
in a very few seconds he had forced it.
A cloud of ill-smelling vapour poured out into the
room. Covering his nose and mouth with one hand, the
detective thrust the other into the oven, and quickly
scraped out a handful of scorched fragments, which he
hastily crammed into his pocket. He had hardly closed
the oven door and got back to his chair before the door
giving into the front room was opened, and the host
entered again.
“ Eaten all you want, gentlemen?” he exclaimed, in the
most cheerful manner imaginable. But Blake had caught
a queer, suspicious expression which had flashed in the
man’s eyes as he opened the door.
“ Yes, thanks; we’ve done excellently. But, I say,” he
continued innocently, “ what a queer smell there is in
the room ! I was just trying to open the window.”
“ It’s grease spilt on the stove,” responded the other
readily. “ That window won’t open. You’d better come
out of the room. Would vou like to sit in the bar, or
shall I show you your lied-room? There’s only one
beside the room which Tom Field and I share. How-
ever, I dare say you won’t mind dossing together.”
All this was said with an air of such geniality as
would have have humbugged anyone less keen-brained
than Blake. Even Tinker began to think that certain
vague suspicions which he had formed were unfounded.
“ I think we’ll go to our room,” answered Blake
pleasantly. “ We’re both dog-tired, and must be off
early.”
There were two upstair rooms, both dirty and untidy,
like all the rest of the place. The landlord ushered them
into one where two truckle-beds stood side by side.
These, with one broken chair, a table, and a water-jug,
were the whole furniture which the place boasted. As
soon as ever the door was closed, Blake, motioning to
Tinker to keep silence, knelt down and put his ear to
the keyhole. He remained quite still in that position
for fully five minutes; then at last got gently up, and,
sitting on the edge of the bed, began emptying his
pocket of the queer-looking cinders which he had rescued
from the oven. Tinker came and turned them over
curiously.
“Leather?” he questioned, in a whisper.
“Ay; buckskin or washleather. Does it tell you any-
thing?”
In the candlelight Tinker’s eyes gleamed.
“ Money-bags?” he whispered eagerly.
“ Exactly; and, look, here is a bij of scorched tape
which once tied the top of a bag.”
“ Then you think ”
Tinker stopped, and gazed at his companion.
A look of quiet satisfaction dawned on Blake’s face.
“ I think we’re on the track of the Narragoola Bank
robbers,” he said, in the lowest of whispers. “ And I
think something else, too.”
He paused. Tinker waited expectantly.
“ I think our friend the host suspects* us. Tinker, and
that one of us had better stand guard all night.”
Tinker agreed, and there was a little friendly squabble
as to which »should take first watch, which ended in
Tinker lyinj* down, while Blake took the chair and sat by
the open window, listening to the hum of crickets, the
croaking of frogs, and the myriad other sounds of the
hot, still, tropical night.
The detective had not been sitting there five minutes
before an almost overpowering drowsiness began to steal
over him. He tried to fight it away, but it increased
rapidly, until it required all the determination of his
will to keep himself awake.
“ One might be drugged,” he muttered. “ And yet
I’ve tasted nothing since supper.” •
He got up, and, taking a flask from his pocket, filled
the metal cup belonging to it with water from the jug,
added a few drops of spirit, and dashed it off.
A puzzled look came over his face.
“ H’m ! That tasted rather odd,” he muttered again.
He rinsed out the cup, filled it again from the jug, sniffed
and tasted it. “ The cunning brute !” he hissed. “ Why,
this is poisoned! What a fool I have been!”
His head was spinning. He felt as though a heavy
weight was pressing on top of his skull. Grey stars whirl-
ing against a black background appeared before his eyes.
It was not the first time by many that the great detec-
tive had been drugged. He knew the symptoms of most
sleeping-draughts well, and nowadays invariably carried
an antidote about him. Summoning all his remaining
powers, he thrust his hand into the inner pocket, where
he kept the little airtight metal case which contained
this medicine. A groan burst from his lips. The case
was gone. The whole lining of the pocket had been torn
open, doubtless during his rescue of Tinker from the river.
He could now hardly see or hear. His feet and hands
were turning cold, and he had hardly any command left
over his limbs. Yet, even so, he would not give up. By
an almost superhuman effort, he staggered across the
room towards Tinker’s bed, and flung himself upon it.
“Wake up. Tinker!” he groaned. Alas! Tinker, too,
was in that deep stupor which only drugs can cause.
Blake could not rouse him. “ Done !” he muttered.
And with that his senses left him, and he lay, breathing
heavily, across his faithful assistant’s body.
THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
In the Hands of the Enemy—An Unexpected
Ally—How BlaKe and Tinker Escaped.
IT was a feeling of something cold upon his face
which roused Blake. He tried to open his eyes,
but they felt as if they were glued together. He
made a tremendous effort to stir, but could not
move an inch.
Swish! A dash of icy water in his face, and a voice
hissed in his ear:
“ Wake up! For Heaven’s sake, wake!”
Again he exerted every nerve to move, and this time
succeeded in opening his eyes. The first grey dawn-light
was filtering into the room, and over him and Tinker, who
lay beneath him, a dim figure stooped.
“ More water —to drink,” Blake managed to mutter.
A cup was put to his mouth. Oh, the joy of the cool
fluid to his parched and dried-up throat! He tried to
move, but could not. He was tied hand and foot. With-
out a word, the figure produced a knife and cut the cords.
Blake, gradually regaining his senses, became aware that
it was the boy Tom Field whom he had seen in the bar
the night before.
“ Can you move?” inquired the latter, in tones which
shook with nervous terror.
For answer, Blake struggled to his feet. His head
ached frightfully, and he was so dizzy that he could
“SEXTOH BLAKE, BEEF-EATER.’ A stip^^S^yo^e r Towep of London. NEXT WEEK!


hardly stand; but he summoned all his will power to his
assistance.
“ Quick, help me to wake the other!” continued Tom
Field, his teeth chattering. “ There’s not a minute to
waste!” . •
Blake wasted no time in questions. He began working
rapidly on Tinker, and the latter, not having imbibed so
much of the drug—which had no doubt been administered
in the tea at supper—as Blake had taken, soon sat up.
“ What’s up?” he muttered drowsily. Then, seeing
Tom Field; “ What are you doing?”
“ Trying to save your life,” answered Field, in a curt
whisper. “You’ll both have your throats cut if you’re
not clear of this jolly quick !”
Tinker was about to question him again; but Field
muttered:
“ S-sh !” An expression of terror appeared on his face.
“ It’s too late!” he muttered. “ They’re here now!”
Sure enough, both Blake and Tinker heard the outer
door downstairs open, and then the sound of people talk-
ing in the room below.
“ Who are they?” inquired an unknown voice.
It was the host who answered.
“ A ’tec of some sort,” he remarked, in contemptuous
tones, which came plainly up through the thin board
flooring. “ Great Scott, such a juggins ! Played up be
was a new chum; but I caught on to him before he was
half an hour in the house. He’d been scooping the ashes
of those burnt money-bagsout of the oven. I could have
laughed ! Neither of. the chaps had the least notion that
they’d already drunk up enough laudanum in their tea
to make them sleep for a week!”
“ And what are we to do with ’em, Griffith? Take ’em
up to the ranges, and see how much their employers ’ll
pay for ’em?”
“Not much!” was the curt reply. “They’re danger-
ous. Alligator Pool’s the place for them!”
Blake, listening with all his ears, saw Tom Field shiver
at these words. The young fellow seemed on the verge
of collapse.
“ I say, we’d better be shifting, hadn’t we?” he sug-
gested coolly. “ I don’t know where Alligator Pool is,
but it don’t sound nice.”
“ There’s no way of getting out,” replied Field, in
desperate terror. “ Heavens, isn’t it bad enough already
without more murders?” he continued, half to himself.
“ My dear fellow, there’s the window,” returned Blake
cheerily. “It’s not twelve feet to the ground. Come
along!”
“ You don’t understand,” muttered Field, in despera-
tion. “ They’ll see you and catch you.” '
“ Oh, no, they won’t!” answered Blake encouragingly,
“ Now, come on. This is no place for you !”
“ I can’t,” replied the other wildly. “ You go. Get
away if you can. Your horse is in the stable.”
At that moment steps were heard in the room below.
Field tore himself away, and, flitting silently out of the
door, crossed the passage and darted into the other bed-
room.
“ Well, if he won’t come, he won’t,” said Blake, with
his usual coolness. “ But now. Tinker, if we’re going
to escape this unpleasant place—Alligator Pool, wherever
that may be —I think the sooner we make ourselves scarce
the better!”
So saying, he walked on tiptoe to the window, which
was fortunately wide open, slipped through, and, letting
himself down, hung by his fingers from the sill. Then,
with a little kick off from the wall, he dropped, and
landed safely on the ground below.
Next moment Tinker had followed the same example.
“ They were coming up the stairs,” he muttered, in
Blake’s ear, as, keeping close under the wall of the house,
the two darted away side by side through the cool, dim
morning.
Blake led the way to the railed-in paddock at the back
of the house. It was useless, of course, to think of catch-
ing horses in the open in the few moments that were all
they had before their flight must be discovered, but Blake
hoped they might find two animals in the little stable
which lay at the near side of the large enclosure. They
were out of luck, for there was only one there—the horse
which Blake had ridden the day before.
“ We’ll have to ride double, that’s all!” exclaimed
Blake, flinging on the saddle while Tinker bridled the
animal.
They led it out. Blake sprang to the saddle. Tinker
leaped lightly up behind, and they galloped away just
as a volley of furious oaths sounded from behind them,
and were followed by the sharp cracking of two or three
revolvers.
Blake spurred sharply until they were out of range,
and then, to Tinker’s surprise, slackened to a canter.
“ It’s all right,” he said reassuringly. “ It’ll take them
all of ten minutes to catch their horses, and we must save
ours all we can.”
Blake rode straight for the river, judging that by this
time the flood would have run down. He was right, and
they had little difficulty in fording the stream. Then he
turned up the path down which they had come the
evening before. Pedro, who had been an interested
spectator of their proceedings, followed close at heel.
Though so far they had come off safe, Blake had no
delusions about the seriousness of his and Tinker’s posi-
tion. That they had stumbled into one of the Glyde
gang’s resorts there was, of course, no doubt, and he
knew the desperate character of these men well enough
to realise that they would strain every nerve to run him
down.
Had he and Tinker had a horse apiece, they might have
reasonably hoped to escape; but as it was, it could be
only a matter of time before Griffiths and the other bush-
rangers rode them down. To make matters worse, neither
of them knew the country, so they were obliged to stick
to the track.
As the horse pluckily cantered on with its double
burden, Blake’s brains were active. The fresh morning
air was rapidly clearing away the effects of the drug, and
he was planning some method of outwitting his pursuers.
Near the river the soil was wet and swampy, but a mile
or so up the path the horse’s hoofs rang on hard ground,
where they left little trace. Instantly Blake pulled up.
“Off you get. Tinker!” he ordered; and then he him-
self dismounted. At once he proceeded to muffle the
horses’ feet with handkerchiefs and both their soft felt
hats, tying these on firmly with string. Then, choosing
a suitable spot, he led the animal off the path to the
right, and up a steep slope into a thicket of tea-tree
scrub.
Tinker saw the force of the manoeuvre and chuckled
gently. “ Cover for a regiment here,” he muttered.
At that moment Pedro uttered a low, warning growl,
and next moment, through the stillness of the sleeping
woods, came the distant thud of horses’ feet. They came
at a fierce gallop up the hill.
Presently they came into sight. There were four of
them, including the innkeeper, and a more murderous
set of ruffians one would not wish .to see. Each carried a
rifle, and there were pistols in their holsters. Peering
through the thick, wet, leafy screen, the fugitives
watched the fellows come pounding up the path, evi-
dently never suspecting the trick that had been played
on them.
They were level, they had passed. Tinker turned to
Blake with a boy’s delight in his bright eyes, when there
came one of those unlucky chances which at times defeat
the best-laid plans. Blake’s horse, rcognising, no doubt,
his stable companions of the night before, suddenly gave
a shrill whinny.
THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
The Hunters are Hunted —A Hungry March.
I, NSTANTLY the bushrangers pulled up short. Blake
had just time to spring into the saddle, and Tinker
to leap up behind, when a savage yell told them
they were viewed.
Now it w r as neck or nothing. Cut off from the
path, Blake could only force his beast straight ahead
throught the forest. He was a magnificent horseman,
and had ere now held his own in the first flight of an
English hunt. More, he had ridden at full gallop in the
front rank of a charging squadron of Hussars. But this
was a far more desperate task. The ground was fearful,
and the going practically blind. To ask a doubly
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY," now appearing In “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


SEXTON BLAKE
ON THE RAILWAY.
A Fine New Serial by
HERBERT MAXWELL,
is now stafting in
“The Boys’ Friend,”
' Id. EVERY TUESDAY.
weighted horse to travel at full speed across such country
was little short of suicide.
Yet for a time he held his own. There was a crash
behind.
“ One of them’s down!” cried Tinker exultantly.
“ Loosen my pistol!” gasped Blake, as he put the horse
at a small gully which yawned before them. Over they
went, and he turned the animal in among a perfect net-
work of tree-trunks. Overhead the foliage was so thick
that near the ground it was almost dark. Long, whippy
branches switched their faces. It was impossible to see
ten yards ahead. In an instant their pursuers were out
of sight among the foliage, but they could hear them
crashing along behind.
The trees opened out a little, the undergrowth became
less thick. Blake gave a sigh of relief, as it seemed they
had left the worst behind. Suddenly the horse put both
forefeet into a hidden hole and came down with a* crash,
sending both his riders flying, Blake falling on his head.
Tinker was on his feet again at once. The horse was
up, too, apparently unhurt, but, to the boy’s horror,
Blake never stirred. And in the thicket behind the
crashing came momentarily nearer.
For a moment Tinker was at his wits’ end. All
seemed lost. Then suddenly an
inspiration, born of the urgency
of the case, came to him.
Picking up a handy stick, he
gave the unfortunate horse a
sharp cut on the flank, which
sent him galloping off again at
full sneed. Then he seized
Blake, and, exerting all his
strength, lifted him and swung
him into a dark corner behind
the enormous trunk of a
gigantic black gum. There he
crouched, breathless and silent
as a hare in its forme.
He had not long to wait.
Almost instantly, with a crash
and a rattle, out came two of
the bushrangers from the scrub.
A third followed close. Tinker’s
fingers clutched convulsively on
the butt of Blake’s revolver.
The three swept by him
almost close enough to touch,
and presently there came the
fourth, spurring in hot pursuit.
But he, too, passed without
noticing the two fugitives [
cowering close in the shadow,
and galloped away in the wake :
of the others.
Tinker turned to Blake, He was well aware that the
respite would be precious short. These fellows were all
well mounted, and would run down the riderless horse
in no time. Finding how they had been tricked, they
would come back on their tracks, and this time with their
eyes well open. If he and Blake were not mighty closely
hidden there was not the ghost of a chance of their
escaping.
To his intense relief, Blake’s eyes were open.
“How do you feel?” inquired the boy, in deep anxiety.
Blake sat up. •
“ Not much wrong. Only knocked silly.” He got
slowly to his feet. “ Thank goodness nothing broken !”
“Quick, then!” cried Tinker. “They’ll be back in a
minute!”
Blake took in the situation in a second.
“ We must hide in the scrub,” he said; and led the way
back through the thick forest they had just ridden
through. Before they were through it, distant shouting
warned them that the bushrangers had run down the
riderless horse, and next moment a pounding of hoofs
and crashing of branches came loudly to their ears.
Scrambling and dodging and running hard, they at
last reached the scrub, and, plunging ihto it like a couple
of bolting rabbits, threw themselves flat on the ground
and waited what would happen.
Australian forests are famous for their scrubs, and
among the many sorts of growth which go to make them
there is nothing thicker than the * tea-tree bush. The
stuff was like an English quick-set hedge, so close that
you couldn’t see a yard one way or another, and Tinker’s
spirits rose a little when he noticed how difficult it would
be for their pursuers to find them. Then he remembered
stories he had heard of the cleverness of these Australians
at tracking, and began to feel less happy.
In a very few minutes the bushrangers came back
through the thick trees next the scrub, and pulled up
so close to the edge that the fugitives could hear their
voices, though they could not distinguish words. Then
they, began riding up and down, evidently searching for
tracks.
Presently one of them actually came up within twenty
yards of where they lay. Tinker stole a glance at Blake.
The detective was his usual cool, everyday self. Except for
a little tightening of the strong mouth, no one, to look
at him, would have supposed there was any danger within
miles. Pedro, trained to perfection, lay quite still beside
his master, but all . his white teeth were showing in
silent snarl.
The bushranger was evidently trying to force his horse
into the scrub, but just here the stuff was so thick that
he could not get the beast to
face it. After wasting two or
three minutes they heard him
utter a savage oath and move on
a few yards to find an easier
entrance. Blake signed to
Tinker, and started off into the
hot, prickly depths of the
tangled growth.
The next half-hour was full of
about as desperate excitement
as either Blake or his faithful
follower had ever known. Over
and over again the bushrangers
nearly rode over them, and
more than once a shot was fired
by one of the men, who fancied
he saw or heard something
moving in the scrub. But in
each case it was only a wallaby
or a snake. So cleverly did
Blake dodge that his enemies
never once laid eyes on him or
his followers.
At last, with many muttered
threats, the gang gave it up, and
the sound of their horses’ feet
died slowly away. Tinker
wanted to start off at once, but
Blake would not let him do so.
“ They’ll be waiting for us
somewhere,” he said. “We must give them plenty of
time.”
So they stayed where they were for nearly two hours,
and then at last, after a cautious look all round, Blake
gave the order to proceed.
It was now ten o’clock in the morning, and blazing
hot. All three, including the dog, were fearfully thirsty,
and between the heat, the effects of the drug, and lack
of breakfast, both Blake and Tinker were feeling rather
done up.‘ Their situation, too, was enough to make any
less seasoned pair extremely uneasy. They were quite
forty miles from Narragoola, in a practically unknown
and almost uninhabited country; they had no horses, no
food, and their only weapon was Blake’s revolver. Worst
of all, they did not dare return by the track along which
they had come the day before, for, as Blake said, the bush-
rangers were dead certain to be in waiting for them some-
where or other.
" You see. Tinker,” he explained, “ they daren’t let us
get away, for if we do it’s all TJ P with that snug little
refuge of theirs down by the river. And, for another
thing, they know we both of us could swear to that fellow
Griffiths’ identity, and to the fact that he had something
to do with the Narragoola business.”
“ How are we going to get back to Narragoola, then?”
demanded Tinker.
The detective produced a small pocket compass.
“SEXTON BLAKE, BEEF-EATER t’ A StiP By S MAXWELL, 0 " 11011 NEXT WEEK!


- Make a tee-ha 3, V he answered. “That’s cur direc-
tion-^ —south-east.
It was precious hard going for two tired and hungry
men, but they stuck to it, aud tramped steadily for the
next three hours through pathless forest. By that time
they reckoned that they had covered eight miles, and
they had seen nothing fxirther of the bushrangers. They
took an hour’s rest m a shady spot near a brook, anti-
then, after a .good drink of the clear, cool water, pushed
on again. r
Towards three they suddenly hit upon a road which
seemed to run in the direction they were travelling, and
alter some discussion, they decided to take it. This road’
though it was evidently a made one, bore signs of loiiA
neglect. It was full of deep mud-holes, and scrub and
weeds grew far out over its edges. Here and there a
lallen tree lay across it, and though it was all rioffit for
SeledSc'iL SebaCk ' “ W " S l >laiu, y for
Presently it began to run uphill, with a thick forest
ot huge, gloomy iron barks on either side, and for the
next two miles or so it was all against the collar,
linker was beginning to feel awfully done, but the boy
would have gone till he dropped rather than confess it.'
iwen Beciro was slouching along with his tongue hanging
out. Next they came to a regular defile, with the road
limning at the bottom, and great slopes of tremendously
steep, slaty rock on either side. ‘Small iron barks,
h/nS ian i^T 6 ’ ?i“ d tlllck scrub £ rew thick upon .the
spot A together ’ a graud but extremely gloomy
_ , Tbey several small caves along the side of the
pas,, and Tinker vaguely wished that he could crawl into '
the cool depths of one of them and sleep the clock round.
SuddenJy Pedro growled. Blake pulled up instantlv,
and sprang behind a rock which jutted out from the side
ot the path, linker instinctively did the same. Lucky
/° n tbe n ? xt s ®c° nd two rifles cracked at once,
v 4.1. T + °u bU l B l Splashed iuto the road the very spot
had been standing the moment before. * P
cTT,nl a i C 1 e ; alWa^ eqUal toany emergency, spotted that the ,
° n S a“ e 6lde T of the gorge as that on which
‘An. "ere standing. He seized Tinker by the arm.
rlnuhlfL C t Ve he exc . lainred; and darted back, bending,
bank he ran ’ a “ d k ® eping close under lee of the steep
THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.
The Man from Garrison Downs.
THE run finished Tinker. He dropped panting, and
unable to speak, just inside the mouth of the
cave. Blake pulled him well under cover, and
then, with Iris usual coolness, took up his own
stand near the mouth of the cave, and awaited
further developments.
He had not long to wait. A man crept cautiously out
of the cover of some rocks some way further up the road,
with the evident object of crossing it, climbing the
opposite hill, and thence, from cover, potting into the
cave.
Ho reckoned without his host. If there was one accom-
plishment in which Blake excelled above any other, it
was as a shot. It was said he could kill a running rabbit
at fifty yards with a revolver. He stuck his head out
just far enough to see, there was a sharp crack, and t-e
bushranger, with a hideous yell, dropped squirming in
the road.
“All of eighty yards,’' muttered Blake to himself, with
pardonable pride. “Now, I wonder what they’ll do.’’
i^ e a flush cartridge into the empty chamber,
blew the smoke out of the barrel, and waited again.
Minutes passed, aud no signs of the bushrangers. It
was a very still afternoon, aud down in the gorge not a
breath stirred. Not a leaf moved. The silence was
intense.
“ Foxy beggars, they mean me to think they’ve hooked
rA su PP°v e ! Well, I wasn’t born vesterday !” said Blake
softly to himself.
h lyss ya.t then that titers came to Blsks’a ears throng
“b 0 8 -. 1l i l n ®®. a £ound puaalcd him. It reminded
him of the distant tramp of a squadron of cavalry But
he kneiy.very well that it could be no such thing and
so he dismissed it from his mind, and kept ail his faculties
intent on a good look-out for his enemies.
Ha another sound! This was horses' feet, and no
mistake.
“By Jove, they mean business this time ! Thev’ve been
reinforced, too!” he muttered: for here came no fewer
than six men, with the big innkeeper at their head, gal-
loping like fury down the pass. 6
Blake saw what they were after. It was an attack in
force. 1 hey knew he could not hope to shoot more than
one or two of them at most before the rest reached the
mouth ot the cave and mowed him down.
Another man would have lost his head, fired wildly
perhaps have emptied a saddle or two, and then have been
filled up with lead. Not so Blake. Years of danger,
acting on an exceptionally strong nature, had made him
resourceful beyond the common lot. He took a quick
glance round. The little cave was not deep enough to
give any shelter at its inner end. But its floor was
strewn with loose blocks, which had fallen from the roof.
Most of these were smallish, but there was one huge slab
leaning agaiust the wall.
sprang to it, and, exerting all his great strength,
turned it over. It fell with a crash, making a two-foot
barrier- big enough to shelter more than one man from
any number of bullets. There was just time to fling him-
self down behind it, and for Tinker to crawl up beside
him, when the bushrangers came tearing up, and as they
passed they poured a regular volley into the little, dark
mouth of the cave.
~ one the shots touched Blake or Tinker. But the
bushrangers did not get off scot-free. As the last man
came by Blake took a snapshot at him. The bullet missed
the man, but hit the horse just behind the saddle, break-
ing its spine and killing it on the spot. Its rider was
pitched a good way over its head, and it was only the
tact that he fell on the inner side of the road, so that ho
was out of Blake’s range, that saved him.
Tinker was reviving a little.
“If I’d only got anything to shoot with, we might
t . em ° muttered, between dry lips,
v* V , low >” replied Blake warningly. “ They’re cominw
back! • °
' ( 1 hat’s not horses’ feet!’’ exclaimed Tinker.
“No; I’ll swear it isn’t,” replied Blake, with a first
approach to excitement.
It was the sound he had mentally compared to a
squadron*of dragoons. It was quite near now, and cornin'*
closer every moment. &
‘‘ * wi fk 1 could get a squint out,” whispered Tinker,
lou 11 get a bullet through your head if vou do,” was
the reply.
At that moment a furious shout came from down the
mil.
« ?£ e y°' l about? Turn those brutes back!”
Ihat s Griffiths!” exclaimed Tinker, in a voice that
fairly shook with excitement.
“Turn ’em back! Shoot them!” roared the other
robbers.
Two shots sounded, and then followed at once a deep
bellow of fear and pain. Next instant the drumming
noise increased. There were loud shouts from up the
pass, aud the sharp cracking of whips. Then, charging
wildly past the mouth of the cave, and filling the narrow
pass from wall to wall, came a great herd of long-horned
savage-looking cattle. ’
They were half crazy with fright, and galloping like
mad things, tossing their huge, shaggy crests, while foam
flew from their nostrils. Behind them the shouts and
pistol-like reports of whips resounded fiercely.
What the deuce is up? muttered Blake, for once in
his life surprised. “ Lie low. Tinker. Wait till the pro-
cession’s past.”
Down came the caitle, scores of them. There must have
been two hundred or more in all. At last they were all
past ; and then, close at their heels, rode three men, all
in moleskins, flannel shirts, and wide-brimmed hats.
The first, mounted on a splendid bay, was an uncommonly
good-looking fellow, tall and finely built, with fair hair,
You HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled ‘‘SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
KAILWAY. now anaearlngr In “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


and a crisp, golden beard. His face
was full of rage, and so were those of
his companions. . '
'“The low-down brutes! If I could
only -get at ’em!” Blake heard him
exclaim fiercely.
“ The bushrangers T 1 have to ride
like blue blazes if they’re going to get
clear of the cattle,” returned one of
the others. -
Then they were gone, and Blake
ventured to look out. This is what he
saw. Far in the distance, five bush-
rangers galloped down the hill as hard
as their horses could lay legs to the
ground. Close behind them poured the
cattle, in a regular living avalanche,
and after the cattle rode the three
stockmen. Just outside the cave lay
tAvo dead bullocks and a dead horse, all
mangled horribly with the plunging
hoofs of 'the herd. - •
It was plain what had happened.
The charge of the bushrangers had
stampeded the herd, which was no
doubt on its way down to the coast
pastures. The robbers, seeing their
danger, had then tried to stop the rush
by firing into the beasts, and had killed
two. The only result had been to so
infuriate the owner—the golden-
bearded man—that he and his men had
forced the cattle in pursuit of the bush-
rangers, who, being unable to get their
horses up the cliff-like banks of the
pass, had been forced to ride for their
lives. ' ' • ■
Blake, if alone, would have followed
but Tinker was too exhausted to go
any further at present, and he could
not ’leave him. Bo the only thing was
to wait in the cave for a while. Blake
judged that the owner of the dead
cattle would come or send back for
their hides. In any case, he and
Tinker would not starve now, for there
was now plenty of fresjh beef. As for
the bushrangers, they would not be
likely to give any more trouble for the
present; and,.in any case, when Tinker
felt a little better, there were first-class
hiding-places higher up the cliff. '»
Sure enough, in about an hour’s time, back came one
of golden beard’s men, riding up the pass with his iMfle
across the cantle of his saddle. When Blake hailed
him, he flung up the weapon pretty quickly, evidently
under the impression that the former was one of the
bushrangers. HoAvever, the detective soon explained
matters, and the' man Avas delighted to see him. •
“ You’re right, boss,” he said. " Those chaps are
some o’ Clyde’s gang, and Ave’ll hev trouble with them
yet. They’re mad as hornets to hev had to let you
fellows go. Noav, the best thing you kin do is to come
along and camp Avith us. We’ll need every man Aye can
git if the road-agents tackle us to-night and try to drive
off the bullocks.”
Blake helped to skin the beasts, and, laden. with the
hides and some of the meat, they accompanied their
guide back doAvn the hill. Just outside the pass they
found the cattle-OAvner camped a bit off the road, on a
big, open, grassy plot, where there was an old stockade,
or pen, into Avhich he had managed to driA r e his fright-
ened cattle.
He himself came to meet his unexpected guests. Blake
introduced himself and Tinker, but, naturally, did not
say a word as to his real identity.
“My name’s Callendar—Dick Callendar,” said tho
other pleasantly. “ Jolly glad to see you! You must
be pretty Avell played out. be ready soon, and
I dare say you won’t be sorry!”
“ That we sha’n’t,” ansAvered Blake, Avith a smile.
“ But Avhat’s become of the bushrangers?”
At last they reached the summit of the ridge, some hundreds of feet above
the plain. “We’re quite close now,” muttered Tom Field.
“Haven’t a notion,” answered Callendar. “Tell you
the truth, I think they’re full up for the present. “OF
course, they may come back and tackle us after dark; but
they’ll know we’re ready for them, and, unless they’re re-
inforced, it will be five to five—not the sort of odds tho: a
gentry care about!”
Callendar proved to be quite right. No one disturbed
them during the night, and next morning it Avas settled
that Blake and Tinker should accompany Callendar down
to the coast. He was taking his cattle to a range quite
near Narragoola, and meant to leave them there in
charge of his men while he himself returned to his own
place up at Garrison Downs.
“ Why, that’s where I hear Clyde’s gang are so trouble-
some !” exclaimed Blake.
Callendar frowned.
“They are. But’’—with some contempt—“bless you,
they’re too scared to tackle a station! They’re only a
gang of low-doAvn horse-thieves —poor imitations of the
old-style road-agents!”
Blake found Callendar a very pleasant fellow, and
when they parted the latter asked the detective and
Tinker to come and visit him at his Station Taroomba if
they Avere ever up that way.
So they parted, little knowing under Avhat tragic cir-
cumstances they would meet again.
“SEXTON BLAKE, BEEF-EATER A °'’ il Ry S HERBER^ e iV?AXWELL oado ”' NEXT WEEK 1


THE NINTH CHAPTER.
Blake Gets a Mysterious Letter.
BLAKE sat at a table in his room at the Narra-
goola Hotel. A photograph lay before him
which he had just been studying.
“ Tinker,” he said at last, and there was an
unusual trace of depression in his tones, “ I’m
very much afraid we have been wasting time.”
Tinker listened, but said nothing.
“ We have been here three weeks,” continued Blake,
“ and I’m free to admit that I have not yet found any
clue worth following up. The worst of it is that I have
so precious little to work on. This photograph of Maurice
Hammond was taken nearly five years ago. He was then
only twenty. Five years at such an age makes an
immense difference. He probably looks totally different
now'from what he did then; and, besides, it is almost
certain that he has changed his name.”
He picked up the photograph and studied it. It repre-
sented a tall, rather slight young fellow, with very fair,
rather curly hair, and a face smooth except for a mere
trace of moustache. He was very smartly dressed, and
the card bore the name of a well-known Bond Street
photographer.
“We haven’t been up to Garrison Downs yet,” re-
marked Tinker.
“ That’s true. But X doubt whether it’s worth while,
for I’ve got the name and description of every settler in
the district. None of them answer to the man we want.”
At that moment they were interrupted by a knock at
the door, and the maid brought in the post, consisting of
one letter, enclosed in a dirty white envelope, and
addressed to “ Mr. Baker,” which was the name that
Blake had registered under.
The detective opened it, and drew out a crumpled half-
sheet, written in pencil, and a photograph. At sight of
the latter a slight exclamation escaped his lips. He
handed it to Tinker. The boy positively jumped.
“ Why, it’s the same !” he cried.
So it was. The newly-arrived photograph was identical
with the one of Maurice Hammond which they had just
been examining. Blake hastily perused the letter, which
ran as follows:
“ Dere Mister Blake, —I’m glad you got orf all rite.
They didn’t ketch on to wat I’d done. I heer yo’re look-
ing for a man called Hammond. He lives at a plaice
called Taroomba, eighteen myles from Garrison Downs.
It’s orl safe for you to go, for the rode agents—you know
who—are orl away.—Yores truly, Tom Field.”
“ P.S.—I enclos fotograf to show I’m not humbugging
you.”
Blake threw the letter across to Tinker, and the lad’s
sharp face became a study in amazement.
“ The chap who saved us at the bush inn ! But how
on earth did he come to know anything about what we
were after?”
“ Just so,” said Blake drily. “He knows too much.
I wonder if that’s genuine?”
“ There’s no address,” said Tinker. “ What’s the
postmark ?”
“ Narragoola only,” replied Blake. “It was posted
here.”
"Well, I’m glad the chap got off all right,” exclaimed
Tinker. "If that big blackguard Griffith had found
out about his turning us loose that morning he’d have
murdered him.”
Blake only grunted. He was evidently thinking hard.
" How on earth did he get hold of that photo?”
muttered* Tinker. “ I suppose you’ll go up to
Taroomba?” he continued.
Blake looked up.
“It may be a trap,’’ he said quietly. “ Griffith &
Co. haven’t forgiven us, you may bet on that. And
they’ll be all the sorer since we laid the police on that
haunt of theirs by the river.” **
“ But Tom Field wouldn’t be likely to betray us,”
suggested Tinker.
“Yes; but did he write the letter at all?”
Tinker shrugged his shoulders. This was beyond hin U
He began to study the letter again.
Presently Blake got up. “ Come on. Tinker!” he said*
And, putting on his hat, he left the hotel.
It was scorching hot outside. There had been no
rain since the thunderstorm three weeks ago, and the
temperature was hovering about the hundred point.
The sun glared red through a curious dry mist. There
was news of bush fires up in the ranges.
Blake led the way straight to the police-station and
inquired for Sergeant Tracy.
“I want a few minutes’ private talk with you, ser-
geant,” he said. And the sergeant, a powerfully built,
determined looking man of* about forty, took him and
Tinker into his private office. He knew Blake already,
but only as Baker.
Imagine, then, his surprise when the world-famous
detective calmly announced his real identity, and at
once proceeded to explain his mission in Australia, and
to show the sergeant the letter and photograph which
he had just received!
When Sergeant Tracy had recovered a little from his
surprise he began to ask Blake what his plans were.
“I want to go to Taroomba,” was the answer.
“I can give you an escort in a few days’ time,” re- 1
plied Tracy. “ Glyde’s gang are up in the hills, I hear,
to the north of Garrison Downs, no doubt planning some
new mischief. The Garrison Downs police have wired
me to be ready.”
“ I don’t want an escort,” answered Blake promptly.
“ This is what I’m going to ask you.” And he pro-
ceeded to unfold his plan.
When he had finished speaking the sergeant laughed.
“All right, Mr. Blake. I fancy we can fix it up.
But, mind you, your disguise will have to be pretty
good.”
It was Blake’s turn to laugh.
“ You needn’t fret about that,”he answeredand,
after a few words more, left the barracks and returned
to his hotel.
That evening he and Tinker packed up part of their
kit, leaving their trunks at the hotel, and, after pur-
chasing a couple of good horses, rode away, telling the
innkeeper that they were going up the coast to look at
some land, and that they hoped to be back in ten days
or a fortnight.
THE TENTH CHAPTER.
Alone in a Forest Fire.
TWO evenings later Sergeant Tracy was sitting
in the private room of the sergeant-in-charge
of the Mounted Police Barracks at Garrison,
Downs when there came the hammer of a
horse's feet up the street.
“ Someone’s in the mischief of a hurry,” he exclaimed,
jumping up and going to the window. Next moment a
man reined up in the light of the lamp over the door,
jumped off his horse, which was white all over with foam,
and hammered at the door.
“ They’ve stuck up Taroomba!” Tracy heard him gasp
out. “ Quick, if you want to save any of ’em!”
In an incredibly short time a small trumpeter had
sounded “ Boot and saddle!” and in less than ten
minutes a body of police, sixteen men strong, was
galloping out into the gloom in the direction of the
attacked station.
The night was dark, and hot as the inside of an oven.
The track was so rough, stony, and precipitous that few
but native-born Australians could have travelled it.
Now they plunged into deep gullies, where the horses
were breast high in thick fern; next minute they would
be climbing a slaty slope where loose stones rattled
down under the scrambling hoofs. It was all forest,
thick and dark and gloomy, with the great trunks rising
like enormous pillars towards the dim, starlit sky.
Mile after mile they traversed, no one speaking a word,
and the silence only broken by the mournful cry of the
raopoke or the sudden clatter of the unshod hoofs of a
Voa should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY,’’ now appearing In ‘‘THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


mob of brumbies, disturbed while grazing in some
secluded dell.
At last the forest ended, and the party rode out into
a great park-like expanse of fairly open land, covered
with grass, now dry like hay from the heat and drought,
and dotted with patches of thick scrub. This was the
Taroomba Run.
From somewhere in the unseen distance came the faint,
whip-like crack of a rifle, and instinctively everyone of
the party spurred up to greater speed. They topped a
rise; more shots were hoard, and in the far distance the
flash of the rifles was visible, like small sparks of tire.
Sergeant Tracy gave a low-voiced command, and in-
stantly his men pulled up, and one of them rode along-
side their leader. The two interchanged a few words.
Then Tracy said in a whisper: “ I’ll do all I. can to help
you, Mr. Blake, but remember this. It’s my duty to
catch the bushrangers if I can. Once we’ve done that
you are welcome to do as you please.”
Sexton Blake—for this smartly-drilled, well-mounted
man in the ddrk, handsome uniform of the Queensland
Mounted Police was no other than the detective him-
self—dropped back into his place, and the sergeant gave
the order “ Quick trot!”
Two abreast, the little force started for the scene of
the fight. All night the heat had been terrific. It
seemed to increase rather than diminish. The ground
was dry, and hard as iron; the grass crackled like burnt
paper. Up in the far northern horizon a dull red glow
showed that somewhere in the range the scrub was
burning.
The tiring in front soon ceased, and all was quiet again.
Within twenty minutes the police had gained a clump of
trees by a water-hole, so near the house that they could
faintly see the outlines of the long, low building. There
were lights in two end windows, but not a sign of anyone
moving. Here the sergeant halted them again, and,
calling up King Billy, the black tracker, sent him on to
reconnoitre. Tracey was an old soldier, and knew
the craft of Glyde and his gang. It was even betting
that the whole body of bushrangers were hidden some-
where close by, ready to pour a withering volley into the
troopers.
Billy slipped off his horse and melted into the blackness
like a snake into a thicket. The rest waited in absolute
silence. In an incredibly short time the native was back.
Blake, standing near Tracy, heard him say, “ They all
gone. Taken south road through scrub. Tink dey go
for Mulga Mountain.”
“ Where’s Mr. Callendar?” inquired the sergeant
sharply. He was bitterly disappointed at arriving too
late. .
“Tink they hab took him along. Ain’t no one left in
big house ’cept two station hands, and dey’s both dead.”
Tracy turned to his men. “ Boys, we're too late!
They’ve gone!”
A groan broke from the Not one of them but
would have given a month’s pay to get to close quarters
with Glyde and his pack of scoundrels.
“They can’t have got far,” v/ent on Tracy. “We’ll
catch them before morning.”
“We will that!” was the fierce reply. In spite of the
frightful heat and their long ride, the man were keen
as mustard to get on.
Blake whispered to the sergeant, “ I want to have a
look at the house first.”
“ All right—only be sharp. We’re off in five minutes.”
Then, in louder tones: “ Baker, you and two other men
go and see if there’s anyone alive in the house. The
rest of you wash your horses’ mouths out, and be ready
to start in five minutes.”
Blake took Tinker and another man, and ran into the
house. It was a long, low timber building, with a wide
verandah. Everywhere were signs of desperate fighting.
The windows were riddled wkh bullets. Remains of
broken furniture showed where a barricade had been
built across the front door. Inside the main living room
all was confusion. Two men lay dead inside, and a third,
evidently one of the bushrangers, was stretched on the
verandah by the window with his brains blown out.
Blak&,made for a writing-table in the far corner. Every
drav/er had already been turned out, and heaps of letters
and papers littered the floor. .The detective turned them
over with rapid fingers, but everything of value was gone.
There were plenty of the bold signatures “ E. Callendar,”
but so far as Blake could make out, not an English letter
among the lot, not a photograph —nothing to give the
slightest clue to connect the owner of Taroomba with tha
man he was in search of.
“ Fooled !” muttered Blake, with such unusual bitter-
ness that Tinker started.
“Then that letter was a hoax?” he whispered quickly.
“Yes; a trap laid by that beauty, Griffiths. But he
didn’t reckon on our turning policemen. Tinker. Now
we’ll run him down, or help to.”
“ That we will,” exclaimed the other, with boyish
fervour. “There’s the sergeant calling. Come on!”
Pitch dark as it was still. King Billy seemed to have
no more difficulty in following the trail of the bush-
rangers through the ink-black scrub than Pedro in
smelling out a hot scent. His knowledge of the intricacies
of the gloomy forest, into which they plunged shortly
after leaving Taroomba, was absolutely marvellous.
Well accustomed as Blake was to work of this kind, he
had never seen anything to equal the ability of this
Australian black fellow.
It was now about two hours before dawn, and hotter
than ever—hotter in spite of the fact that the air was
no longer still. A strong breeze was blowing in their
faces, and though they did not feel it much down on the
ground, the roaring in the lofty tree-tops told that up
there a regular gale was blowing.
Thicker and thicker grew the scrub beneath, while the
big trees made a roof overhead, and the path was nothing
but a narrow track, barely wide enough for a single
horseman, and lumbered with roots and rocks. The air
was almost unbreathable. Blake felt a nasty pricking in
his lungs, and his throat was like scorched leather. The
perspiration poured off his face in heavy drops, and his
clothes were wet through with it.
Then suddenly, just as they were in the thickest and
blackest of the 'whole gloomy forest, a twinkling star of
light appeared in front which sprang almost instan-
taneously into a flare of flame, A strange, roaring sound
came to their ears.
Billy the tracker, who was riding some yards in ad-
vance of the rest, reined in his horse.
“ Get back !” he shouted. “ They’ve fired the scrub !”
It didn’t need this to turn the men. The native-born
Ai’.stralian is as plucky a fellow as lives, but he knows
what a forest fire is. All the fire-engines and brigades in
the world couldn’t stop one, once fairly started in such a
place as this.
Almost before Blake could turn his horse the single
burst of flame was a wall of fire, that came leaping and
roaring through the thicket on the wings of the strong
wind. Instantly the whole scene was bright as noon-
day. Blake had one glimpse of rearing, snorting horses,
of tanned faces reddened by the crimson light. Then all
broke and galloped for dear life helter-skelter through
the fiery forest.
For the first moment the detective had all he could do
to prevent his horse, mad with fright, from taking the
bit in its teeth and bolting. Almost before he had got
control of it another horse cannoned against his violently
on the off-side, nearly knocking it off its legs. One glance
showed him that it was Tinker’s beast quite beyond con-
trol. Tinker was sitting well bq.ck, with all his weight
on the reins: but the animal was crazy with terror, and
the boy might as well have pulled at a stone wall.
Great branches spread low in every direction, and
nothing could save Tinker from being swept off within a
few strides. Blake saw the case was desperate, and bent
over and made a lightning grasp at the b.idle. The sharp
pull slewed Tinker’s animal round, bringing its head
against the neck of Blake’s own horse, which immediately
shied violently away to the right. The result was that
Blake was Jerked clean out of his saddle and flung vio-
lently to the ground. At the same instant Tinker’s horse
reared furiously, the bridle which Blake was still grasp-
ing broke short off at the bit, and Tinker slipped help-
lessly off over the beast’s quarters, falling almost on top
of the other.
Before anything could be done the two were alone in
the burning forest, the horses having galloped off to
join their companions.
“SEXTOS BLAKE. BEEF-EATER . A StiP |y S HERBER^VAXWELL° ndm SIEXT WEEfi !


THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.
A Race with the Flames.
BLAKE had fallen on a thick clump of prickly
bush. In an instant he was on his feet again
and had jerked Tinker up. The two started
running for dear life.
All the rest were out of sight. Their only,
companion was Blake’s faithful bloodhound Pedro, who
had followed all the way from Garrison Downs through
the reeking night, and who would have died a hundred
deaths rather than desert his much-loved master.
Fast as they ran the flames travelled faster still. Leap-
ing higher than the loftiest tree-top they sprang in giant
bounds through the air, roaring in appalling fashion and
increasing the already heavy gale till the whole air sang
like a blast furnace. Monstrous trees burst into flames
like tar-soaked torches. Whole branches, blazing furi-
ously, drove on in front of the advancing wall of fire,
spreading the conflagration as they dropped. The smoke
beat down in huge coils, eddying in the whirlwinds,
caused by the terrific draught.
Blinded, scorched, and choking, Blake and Tinker tore
along, hopeless of safety, yet, like true Britons, resolved
to make a stern fight for their lives.
A bunch of tall grass flashed into flame beside the
track. Another moment and they would be actually in
the centre of the sea of fire. All hope seemed gone.
Blake, trying to save his eyes with his coat-sleeve, felt a
sharp tug at his breeches. He heard Tinker gasp
hoarsely:
“ It’s Pedro!”
The dog, wiser than his master, was trying to lead
them off the track to the left, and Blake, knowing of old
the wonderful sagacity of the creature, followed. A few
steps found them floundering down the almost precipitous
side of a deep gully, which had been hidden from the path
by the network of vegetation.
Was it a stream? If it was a dry bed only —as seemed
more than likely after the long drought—nothing could
save them. Already the flames were upon them.
Fiercer and fiercer came the gusts of scorching air.
Human lungs could stand it no more. Blake felt his
powers failing. Tinker was flagging. Yet, as in a
ghastly nightmare, the two slipped and stumbled on-
wards down a long, shaky bank with the dog hurrying
on ahead.
Suddenly Blake felt the ground slipping away beneath
his feet. He grasped at the bushes to save himself. A
mass of tangled vegetation broke away in front of him,
and, hand in hand, as they had been running, he and
Tinker dropped together into the deep, hidden channel
of a narrow watercourse.
Joy, there was water! Shallow indeed, and more like
liquid mud than anything else, but yet water. Blake
stooped, and with both hands splashed the* thick fluid
over Tinker’s clothes, which were actually burning, and
then over himself. Pedro, whose hair was scorched away
in patches, rolled in the mud till he was coated with it
all over, and whined with relief and joy.
But the danger was not over yet. Far from it! The
trees and scrub met overhead, and already a shower of
sparks was driving through them. Unless they could
find water deep enough to cover them they would never
survive the passage of the main body of the flames.
Waiting only long enough to soak himself and his com-
panion thoroughly, Blake led the way as fast as the
difficulty of the nari’ow, brier-hung channel would allow,
down the bed of the stream.
There was terribly little water. It was barely over
their ankles. Yet, hoping against hope, the little party
pressed on. Now the bush above them was actually on
fire, the air became absolutely unbreathable. Again they
were literally at the last gasp.
Then, just when Blake felt that the next step must bo
their last, the banks fell away on either side, and they
plopped, waist deep, into a small water-hole, perhaps
twenty feet across and twice that length. The water was
warm as new milk, but it felt cool and delicious to their
scorched bodies. They ducked their heads under half a
dozen times, and then Blake made Tinker wet his pocket-
handkerchief and hold it across his mouth to breath
through. He himself did the same.
Now the fire was all aroimd them. But for finding this
refuge they ■ must have been burnt to death. They
crouched down with their heads just above water and
breathed as best they could, while the forest vanished
into flame and smoke overhead.
Quantities of fish splashed on the surface, and one by
one turned over and floated, belly upwards, dead from the
heat and lack of oxygen. It was strange to see that
many of the forest animals—hares, rabbits, wallabies, and
even snakes—had taken refuge in the water beside them,
terror of the fire having overcome their fear of man.
Time drew on, and the main body of the fire passed,
but there seemed no diminution, in the awful heat. The
scene was now one of the wildest grandeur. Behind, all
was blackened and charred ruins. Great trunks still
smouldered, and now and then one fell with an appalling
crash, sending up columns of sparks. But up to the north
the whole forest was one red-hot tempest, which stretched
as far as the fugitives in the pool could see, from one
side of the horizon to the other. The ground rose steeply
in that direction, and the hills had the appearance of
volcanoes in full blast.
There was nothing for it but to remain where they
were. It must be many hours at best before the burnt
forest would cool sufficiently to allow them to cross it.
Day broke at last, but the whole sky was dim with
smoke, and only a grey light filtered through the enorm-
ous canopy of darkness. The wind still blew strongly,
but happily it was growing cooler. The two exhausted
men were able to move to the edge and seat themselves on
charred logs by the waterside.
As the morning wore on it grew darker rather than
lighter, and the sky more black. Then suddenly thunder
crashed, and down came the rain in torrents, hissing on
the smouldering trunks and almost red-hot soil.
The change of temperature was amazing. The two
began to shiver in the heavy downpour. But it did not
last long, and as soon as it was over they both started
back afoot for Taroomba, hoping to get news of their
comrades.
The distance was not great, but it was slow work,, for
the ground was lumbered with fallen half-charred logs.
It was past midday when they at last emerged from the
burnt forest and found, to their intense relief, that
Taroomba had escaped the-flames.
But when they reached the place it was empty and
desolate. Not a soul was to be seen.
' " They must have been caught by the fire!” exclaimed
Tinker in dismay.
But Blake shook his head.
“ I don’t think so. Hereeare tracks of horses coming
bapk. See? Pedro, seek ’em out! Good dog!”
The bloodhound sniffed at the trail, and almost at once
started away in the direction of Garrison Downs. Blake
called him back.
“ That’s enough. They’ve gone back.” Then thought-
fully, “I wonder why?”
“What are we going to do?” inquired Tinker blankly.
The idea of trudging nearly twenty miles back to tho
town in his present exhausted condition did not appeal to
him.
“ Stay here for the present,” replied Blake promptly.
‘ c We can surely find a little food somewhere. After a
meal we shall know better what to do.”
They went into the wrecked house. Both were black
as sweeps with the fire, and their first job was to find
a couple of buckets and some soap and water. These they
took out on the back verandah, with the intention of
stripping and having a thorough wash.
Blake had just laid aside his carbine, and was pulling
off his coat, when a voice near by sang out fiercely, “ Bail
up!”
A wild-eyed man, with a bandage round his head, had
suddenly sprung out from behind a large umbrella-tree
which grew close to the back door, and was covering the
detective with a heavy-bore Navy revolver.
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY,” now appearing: in “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.
On Callendar’s Track.
YTfHERE was nothing for it but to obey, and up
I went their hands.
I “ Do yon mind if I finish my wash?” inquired
Blake mildly. “You can see I’m not armed."
A puzzled expression flitted across the
new-comer’s face.
“ Who are you?" he demanded roughly.
“ If there wasn’t quite so much charcoal on my clothes
you might see that my uniform is that of the Queensland
Police," answered Blake, laughing.
The threatening pistol dropped.
“My word, I took ye for two of Glyde’s gang!” ex-
claimed the man, in tones of deepest relief.
“I thought as much. At first I paid you the same
compliment; then I perceived that you were one of tho
station hands."
“How did you know that?”
“By your face. Aren’t you a brother of one of the
poor chaps who was killed last night?”
“ That’s true,” was the answer. “ The cowardly black-
guards ! They shot poor Ben down first. Then I got a
crack on the head from a spent bullet as I ran out to get,
a horse for Mr. Callendar. That was just as the bush-
rangers were leaving. I only came to a few hours ago."
“ Then what's become of Mr. Callendar?” inquired
Blake eagerly.
“ I reckon he rode off after Glyde. You see, he and I
got out of the house the back way just before the bush-
rangers rushed it. We weren’t strong enough to hold
the house, so tho boss said we’d better get out to the
storehouse there behind, where the two of us might have
a chance. The rum thing was that the beggars never
attempted to tackle the storehouse. They cleaned out the
house and left at once.”
“ I suppose they heard us coming,” said Blake.
“ Maybe they did. You’ve got here quick. We didn’t
expect you for another hour or more."
“ Well, what happened next? Mr. Callendar was gone
when we arrived.”
“As soon as Glyde’s fellows had left Mr. Callendar, he
slipped back into the house. He was out again in a '
minute, and his face like thunder. ‘My word, Phillips,’
he says to me, ‘ they’ve got more than the shearing
money !’ (That’s what we’d reckoned they was after).
‘l’m going after them. Get a horse up as*quick as you
cau.’ I thought he was crazy, an’ I told him so. But,
bless you, he ain’t a man to be contradicted. I had to
go and get that horse; an’ while I was doing it a bullet
come out o’ the scrub an’ hit me on the head, as I told
you, and that’s all I knowed till an hour or so ago,
when I came to and found myself lying out in the
paddock, with my head all over blood.”
“Then Mr. Callendar’s gone off alone after Glyde?”
exclaimed Blake.
“ I reckon so.”
Blake was much moved. He had taken a great fancy
to the big, golden-bearded Australian. This exploit
appealed to him strongly. He turned to Tinker.
“ Are you game to follow him. Tinker?”
“You bet!" replied the boy, forgetting his fatigue in
his excitement.
“I’ll come, too!” exclaimed Phillips.
But Blake forbade this. The man was badly hurt, and
not fit to travel. He would be much better at Taroomba,
looking after the station. They made him comfortable,
got some food, drove up a couple of horses, and by two
o’clock Pedro was on Callendar’s track, and Blake and
Tinker, well mounted and equipped, were riding steadily
after the dog.
They crossed the burnt forest again, to the spot where
the bushrangers had fired it, and there Pedro picked up
the trail, and soon led up into wild, hilly grasslands to
the south. They did not see a soul all the afternoon,
and at night camped under an overhanging rock by the
side of a water-hols.
A good night’s sleep did wonders for them, and next
day they travelled much more rapidly. Pedro kept the
trail steadily across the hills, and at last they reached
the top of the ranges, and looked down upon the most
desolate country they had ever yet seen.
Low hills rolled away towards the horizon, covered
with coarse grass or scrub. Not a tree of any size was
to be seen, nor any trace of water; and, beyond a few
kangaroos, and the usual crows, which seem to find food
in any desert, there was no sign of life. Fortunately,
their water-bags were full, and they had provisions for a
week. Mile after mile they travelled at a steady pace,
the hardy horses keeping up wonderfully, in spite of the
intense heat.
At last, just as the sun was setting over the desert
scrub to the xvest, Pedro suddenly ran on ‘ahead sharply,
and then stopped, uttering a low, mournful howl.
Blake spurred forward, and as he did so a cloud of crows
rose with loud croaking. There, in the middle of a
little patch of thin scmb, lay a dead horse. It had been
shot through the head, and the crows had already picked
out its eyes.
“Callendar’s!” muttered Tinker in horror,
There was no doubt about it. Both of them recog-
nised the animal as the same which Callendar had ridden
on the day when he drove the mob of cattle down the
pass and rescued them fi’om the bushrangers.
As they stood there, staring down at the poor dead
beast, the sun dropped below the horizon, and tho quick
tropical darkness fell like a curtain over the lonely land.
There was nothing further to be done that night, and,
sick at heart and dispirited, the two camped, to wait till
morning. They did not dare light a fire, with the
evidence of murderous work so near them, and there was
no water. As they ate their cold food, they discussed in
low tones the probable fate of the unlucky squatter.
At earliest dawn they were up, and, after a mouthful
of breakfast, started again. They moved very cautiously,
keeping a sharp look-out all the time. Pedro picked up
a trail, which seemed to be that of several horses, though
the ground was so dry and hard that it was very difficult
to distinguish marks of any kind.
They had not gone very far, when the trail led them
into a track of rocky ground, covered with loose stones, in
which crystalline quartz gleamed white. 1
“ There’s gold in this," observed Blake.
But Tinker did not seem to be listening.
“ Pedro’s stopped again !” he exclaimed.
So he had; and there, beneath the shadow of a huge
boulder, they found the dog standing b/ the body of the
man they had been following.
“ He’s dead!” cried Tinker, springing from his horse,
and throwing himself on his knees beside the body.
To all appearance he was right. Poor Callendar lay
still as death. There was clotted blood on his cheek, and
his golden beard was black with it. There was not the
least movement of the chest to show that he still breathed.
But Blake, who had picked up more than a smattering
of medicine in his long and varied experiences, fancied he
detected some signs of life, and set to work to endeavour
to revive him. For a long time his efforts met with no
response; but at last there was a flicker of an eyelid, then
a slight sigh, and presently Callendar opened his eyes, and
stared vaguely up into the faces of his rescuers.
“ What, you. Baker?" he muttered amazedly.
“All right, old chap; don’t try to talk yet,” advised
Blake. “ Wait till I’ve tied your head up and made you
a bit comfortable.”
Callendar made a motion towards his lips. They were
black, and his tongue horribly swollen. Blake under-
stood, and poured a little of their precious water into his
mouth. The man gasped with relief, and presently
dropped off into a doze. Blake set to work to build a
little bough-hut over him to shelter him from the burning
sun.
“ He’s pretty bad, isn’t he?" inquired Tinker, in a low
voice.
“ I’m afraid so,” answered Blake.
“ Then we shall be hung up here for some days before
he can travel.” *
“ Probably," was Blake’s reply.
“ What are we going to do for water? He’s got fever,
and will need a lot.”
“ I know. It’s rather a bad look-out.”
“ Best thing I can do is to go and try to find a water-
hole,” suggested Tinker.
“SEXTON BLAKE, BEEFEATER ,» A NEXT WEEK!


Blake was doubtful. He had a sort of idea that som-3
of Glyde’s gang might ha still hanging about in the
neighbourhood. But Tinker argued that this was not
likely. There was nothing to keep them in this unin-
habited country. They had probably gone back to one •
of their strongholds in the ranges. So, rather re- ’
luctantly, Blake gave his consent, and Tinker started off.
Two hours later he returned with a full water-bag, and
the welcome intelligence that he had discovered an old
mine shaft, with a half rotten, but still usable, ladder
down it. In a “ sumph ”at the bottom was about six
feet of drinkable water.
They were now able to give Callendar all the water he
needed, and he grew so much better that by evening he
was able to tell them his story.
THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.
Callendar’s Story,
T T was just before sunset three nights ago that a
I native boy brought news that a dozen mounted
I men were coming down from the ranges,” began
X. Callendar. “ I had about three hundred pounds
in the house, which I’d drawn from the bank at
Garrison Downs, so I knew what they were after.
“ There were only five of us altogether at the station.
Very carefully Blake raised the pistol and took alm. His right fore-
finger tightened, and there was a sharp report.
and, ae I sent on© off as fast as he could ride to Garrison
Downs for help, that left me with only three—the two
Phillips’ and a man called Mason. We barricaded the
house as well as we could, and by the time Glyde’s ean<»
were on hand we were ready for them. e °
" Glyde rode up, cool as you please, on that big bav
horse of his, and ordered us to bail up. I told him a few
home truths, and riled him considerably. Then the fun
began. It was as hot a thing as .ever I saw. The fools
tried to rush us, but we plugged two of them, and the
rest fell back, and began shooting from the scrub in front
of the house. But we were too snug for them to touch
us, and I began to feel pretty pleased, and to hope that
we d really be able to hold them off till help came. Then,
just when we least expected it, there came a volley from
somewhere close in, and killed poor Ben Phillips and
Mason on the spot. The brutes had crept up close with-
out our noticing them.
“That settled it. Two of us couldn’t hold the housaj
and so the other Phillips and I slipped out at the back
and posted ourselves in the storehouse, which is a little
iron-roofed building.”
“ Yes ! saw it ” put in Blake. “Phillips told me about
that part of the business. Then they raided the house I
suppose? ’
“Yes; we saw them at work there, and expected an
attack every minute. But they didn’t come, and sud-
denly we heard. Glyde give the order
for them, to mount and ride off. No
doubt they had a scout posted some-
where in the distance to warn them of
the police coming. As soon as they
were gone, I went back to the house to
see if I could do anything for the poor
fellows who’d been shot. But they
were both dead. Then I found some-
thing else. Not content with stealing
the money, the brutes must needs have
burst open my desk, and stolen a lot of
private papers. They couldn’t be any
possible use to them, but they were all
important to me. It made me so angry
I simply lost my head, and made up
iny mind to/ go after them at once. It
was a crazy thing to do, but, of course,
I didn’t know you people were so near,
or I’d have waited.”
. Blake was listening with the utmost
intentness. It was too dark to see
Callendar s face, but every word was of
the most intense interest to the detec-
tive.
“Phillips told me that you ordered
him to bring up a horse,” he said.
“Yes; and after that I heard one
shot, and he did not come back. I went
to look for him, but it was so intensely
. dark I coidd not find him. I fancy one
of Glydc’eTmen must have been left be-
hind as a sort of rear-guard, to ride
after and tell them if the police were
going to follow, and that poor Phillips
must have run into this man.”
“ Phillips is all right,” interrupted
Blake. “He was only wounded.”
“ Yes, you told me. Glad lam of it,
too. He’s a good fellow.”
“Well, then you followed. What
happened?” inquired Blake.
Callendar went on in a voice which
was growing weaker. He had been
badly hurt, and was hardly fit to talk
yet. Blake would not have allowed him
to, except for his great anxiety to know
how his friend had got into this terrible
state. “ I was close on their heels,” he
said, “ when they fired the scrub, so
close that I was easily able to keep on
the right side of the fire. Fortunately,
I know the ground like a book, and I
kept on a parallel track. I flattered
myself that they had no idea anyone


Sexton Blake leapt out of the cart right over the parapet, Next moment, cart and horse together came whirling
through the air, and plunged Into the river only a yard or two behind him.
was after them, and I rode along in an awful rage, plan-
ning how I could get among them and get back my
papers.
“ But I was wrong. Glyde is a good general. He has
his scouts —native boys mostly—all over the country, even
in a beastly desert like this. Yesterday morning, as I
was following the tracks through a bit of scrub a little
way behind here, someone hidden in the thick stuff
suddenly shot my poor horse, and as I came down with
him, popped out and gave me a crack over the head with
the butt end of his gun that ought to have settled my
hash. Probably he thought it had, but, luckily, my
skull’s pretty thick, and I was wearing a heavy cabbage-
tree hat. I must have laid there a long time, but at
last I came to with a most awful pain in my head. I
fancy I was a little bit off my chump, for all I remember
is a wild idea that I had to follow the trail at any cost.
I started off on hands and knees, got as far as this, and


chat was the end of it. I collapsed, and if you two good
Samaritans hadn't come along, here I should have stayed
till the crows picked my bones.”
Callendar had tried to speak lightly, but as he uttered
these words his voice broke slightly, and he weakly
stretched out his big brown hand to Blake, who took it
and clasped it warmly.
“ My dear chap,” said the detective, “ I’m jolly glad
we did get here i» time. But it’s Pedro you must thank,
not us. He followed the trail.”
The dog, hearing his name, got up and thrust his cold
nozzle affectionately into his master’s hand. Callendar
tried to pat him, but the effort was too much.
“ I say, I’m awfully tired,” he said, in a weak voice.
" I think I’d better sleep a bit.”
And Blake, though he was desperately anxious to ques-
tion Callendar further, promptly agreed. He himself
took first watch, and presently heard Tinker and Callen-
dar breathing deeply, while, rifle in hand, he watched
over their slumbers, Pedro crouching at his side. Twice
during the five hours of Blake’s vigil the big dog
stirred, and, sitting up, growled slightly. But Blake,
though his ears were keen beyond the common, could
hear nothing, and knowing that dingoes (wild dogsV’were
not uncommon in this scrubby country, paid little atten-
tion.
At one he roused Tinker, and slept himself the rest of
the night. It was the sun shining full in his face that
woke him. He sat up. Callendar was still asleep under
the little brush shed which they had built over his head.
Tinker was nowhere to be seen.
But this did not disturb Blake. The canvas bucket
was gone, so no doubt the boy had gone to the old mine-
shaft to fetch water for breakfast. Blake wondered if
they might light a fire. He was sick and tired of cold
food, and he knew how much good a cup of tea would
do to Callendar. He decided that it might be done if
he got twigs dry enough to burn without smoke, and
set himself to collect a quantity. This took some, time,,
and, to his great surprise. Tinker failed to return.
Blake remembered the rotten ladder which Tinker had
mentioned. “I wonder if it’s broken?” he muttered.
‘l’d better go and sec.”
Callendar was still asleep. Blake whistled up Pedro,
and started out on Tinker’s tracks. He himself had
never yet been to the mine.
THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER.
Trapped in the Old Shaft.
IT was easy enough to follow the tracks to the mine,
for Tinker had been there three or four times
already for water for themselves and their horses.
The place was not more than a quarter of a mile
from the camp, but hidden from it by rocks and
pat dies of heavy, dull mulga scrub. Blake soon found
it. It had evidently been sunk a good long time ago, and
by prospectors in search of gold, for there were traces
of a quartz ledge above ground, while scrub had grown
upon the dump (earth thrown out), and the top of the
shaft was no longer regular in shape, large pieces of rock
and earth having fallen inward in the course of years.
Blake reached the top, and leant over. “Tinker !” he
called.
A voice, resounding hollow from the depths below,
replied:
“ I thought you’d come, Mr. Blake. I can’t get up.”
"What’s the matter?”
“ Ladder’s broke. It snapped under me as I went
down.”
“ Wait! I’ll get a rope.”
Blake hurried back to camp, and, leaving Callendar
still peacefully sleeping, soon returned with the two ropes
which they used for picketing their horses. These he
tied together and made fast to the old windlass, which
still remained fairly sound, and dropped the other end
into the black depths.
“Wait a minute. Tinker!” he called. “I’m coming
down to have a look round. Seems to me there’s a lot
of likely looking rock here. 1 wonder why they stopped
working it?” ■'
So saying, he swung himself on to the rope, and went
down hand over hand.
It was only about thirty feet to the bottom. The air
was deliciously cool down below. On lighting a match,
Blake saw that the original miners had evidently been
interrupted in the middle of their work, for though they
had reached what looked like a vein of good ore, they
had only just begun to tunnel it. The cross-cut vras
not more than ten feet long. He told Tinker this, and
the boy watched with interest while the detective knocked
off a few small samples of the quartz for future reference.
“ Now we’d better get back to camp,” he said, after a
minute or two. “If Callendar wakes up he’ll be won-
dering what’s become of us. You first. Tinker. Leave
the bucket. You can pull it up afterwards, and then
drop me the rope again.”
Tinker obeyed, and, gripping the rope with hands and
legs, began up, while Blake steadied it from
below. The detective was watching the small, active
figure outlined against the patch of sky at the top of
the shaft when suddenly he saw the boy stop, and then
come sliding down again at a tremendous pace.
“What is it?” he exclaimed, as Tinker dropped beside
him.
The boy turned an ashen face to the other.
‘ It’s a big seven-foot snake, coiled in a cleft just
below the top of the shaft,” he answered, in a shaking
voice. “ The brute would have struck me if I hadn’t
dropped quick.”
“ It wasn’t there when I came down,” answered Blake.
“It must have slipped down from above. The ledge
sticks out a good two feet.”
“ What’s it look like?”
“ Blue-grey—thin, with a three-cornered head.”
Blake looked very grave.
“ That’s bad. It’s a Queensland mudga snake. A very
bad sort. Deadly as a puff adder, and vicious, too!”
“Suppose he falls down on top of us!” exclaimed
Tinker, in horror-struck tones.
It was odd that this boy, wdio before this had faced a
mad murderer, unarmed, grew white and shivered at the
danger which now threatened them. But they say that
everyone has one unconquerable aversion. Tinker’s was
a snake.
“Steady, old chap!” said Blake kindly. He was not
the man to sneer at the boy for his terror. “ You stay
here. I’ll go up with my pistol and shoot the brute!”
“You can’t do it!” cried Tinker, in uncontrollable
excitement. “ The shaft’s so narrow that he could strike
right across it. He’ll get you in the face before you
have a chance to shoot, and if you miss he’ll fall down on
top of us.”
“ All the same, I must try. Tinker,” answered Blake, in
his quiet, resolute way. “We can’t stay here for ever,
you know. Even now poor Callendar will be wondering
what has become of us!”
“I tell yon, there’s no chance!” repeated Tinker
fiercely. “ It’s certain death for you; and then, if the
snake falls to the bottom, for me, too!”
Blake paused.
“ Look here. Tinker! If, as you say, the snake falls,
you’ll be in serious danger. But suppose you get back
into the tunnel, and pile up some mullock* in front of
you, then you’ll have a chance of polishing him off with
big stones before he can get at you!”
Tinker did his best to conquer his fright, and agreed.
Blake helped him to pile up a three-foot dam of clay
at the mouth of the tunnel, so that if the snake did not
happen to fall into the sumph, or water-hole, in the
middle of the shaft bottom. Tinker would be able to
stone it before it could strike at him.
Tinker kept looking up. He was absolutely shivering
with horror. At last all was ready. Blake, with his
pistol between his teeth, took hold of the rope. Then
Tinker showed himself a hero. He pulled Blake aside.
“ Let me go,” he said firmly. “ Your life’s worth more
than mine.”
Sexton Blake took his right hand from the rope.
“ Shake hands, boy!” he said. And there was some-
* Clay.
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL'S Grand Tale, entitled "SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY.” now acnaairng in ‘‘THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


in his deep, quirt tones which made Tinker thrill
all over. “You’re a plucky chap; but I’m going. Get
back into the tunnel.”
Without another word, he started on his perilous
mission. Tinker crouched behind the clay-hank, with
his head out, and watched his friend go steadily up, the
rope swinging slightly with his weight. There was a
deadly fear at the boy’s heart, but it was no longer for
himself.
It seemed years before Blake reached the level of that
horrible ledge. Every instant Tinker expected to so©
that deadly head, driven by the long, whip-like body, flash
over the edge, and strike with venomed fangs into the
face of his friend. At last Blake stopped climbing, and
twisted one leg firmly in the rope. Then Tinker saw him
thrust out the other foot, and, kicking gently against the
side of the shaft, deliberately set the rope swinging.
What could he be doing? Tinker watched, with cold
chills crawling up and down his spine.
Blake allowed himself to swing gently to and fro until
his body touched the side of the shaft on the other side
from, and a little below, the cleft where the snake lay.
Just here a spur of rock projected a foot or more from
the side. Out shot the detective’s left arm, and hooked
round the spur. It held him safely, and Tinker saw
the brave man pull himself up very slowly and cautiously
until he was astride the pointed rock.
It seemed a horrible risk, but yet it was a wise one.
The shaft, being fully six feet across, Blake was now out
of reach of the strike of the venomous monster; for a
snake, as all who are familiar with these reptiles know,
can, when coiled, only strike an object half its own length
away from it.
As Blake settled himself astride the rock, some earth
and pebbles fell, and Tinker’s heart was in his mouth;
but the rock held firm. Now, Blake, still holding tightly
to the rope, took the pistol from his mouth, and raised
himself gradually as high as he could. Ah, the serpent
was roused! Tinker saw the hideous head come flicker-
ing over the edge. But Blake was well out of reach, and
the snake drew back. Very deliberately Blake, raised the
pistol and took careful aim. Of course, he could hardly
fail to hit the snake at so short a range; but Tinker
realised that he meant to kill, not merely maim,
Blake’s right forefinger tightened. In the confined
space the crash of the report seemed to shake the very
ground, and sent a torrent of loose stuff clattering to the
bottom. The smoke filled the shaft, jind left the bottom
in darkness.
Tinker, who, at the report, had sprung back to the
furthest limits of his narrow refuge, endeavoured, with
fingers that shook horribly, to find a match and strike it.
At last the tiny flame burnt up, and there, on the bare
rock at the bottom of the shaft, and just outside his
refuge, wriggled and squirmed horribly the long, grey
body of the deadly reptile.
But it was harmless. Blake’s fatal bullet had smashed
its venomous head into pulp.
“Is it all right?” came Blake’s anxious voice through
the wreathing smoke.
“You bet i” cried back Tinker exultantly. “You’ve
smashed his head to smithereens !”
At that moment a deep, heavy growl came from above.
It was Pedro. The dog never gave this warning sound
without good cause.
THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.
The Kidnapping of Callendar.
TINKER steadied the rope for Blake, who swung
from his perilous perch, and was quickly at the
“What’s wrong?” sang out Tinker from
below.
“ I see nothing,” replied Blake. “ But send up the
water, and come quickly.”
Tinker obeyed. Everything seemed perfectly quiet.
There was no sign of movement in any direction, yet
the bloodhound was plainly uneasy. Ho kept lifting his
great head, and sniffing the air, as though he perceived
some unaccustomed odour.
Blake knew that his favourite never deceived him, and
there came back to him the recollection of the dog’s
growls in the early part of the previous night. As soon
as ever Tinker had arrived safely at the top of the siiaft
Blake, full of secret anxiety, led the way rapidly back to
camp.
There was the big stone, there stood the little bough-
shed undisturbed. It must have been some wild animal
that had startled Pedro. . But, no! What was the dog
doing? He had run on before, and, reaching the bough-
shed first, suddenly turned up his head with a low, miser-
able howl. Blake, reaching the spot a moment later, saw
the reason. Callendar was gone !
* At first the detective and Tinker were almost stupefied.
They had left the squatter far too ill and weak to move
more than a few yards without help. Yet he had vanished
as completely as though the earth had swallowed him.
Almost immediately Tinker made a second discovery.'
“ Our horses are gone!” he exclaimed sharply.
It was true. Blake had left both animals tied by their
halters to mulga stumps close to the camp. They were
gone, like Callendar. The last straw was when they
found that their saddle-bags, with all their provisions
and their carbines, had been taken as well. They had
absolutely nothing left but the clothes they stood up in,
the rope, one bucket, and Blake’s revolver.
Most men would have been stunned by such a calamity;
for it must be remembered that they were two full
days’ ride from the nearest inhabited country. Two
days’ ride meant eighty miles at least. It would be four
days’ hard walking; and how could they possibly hope
to do that without food?
Meantime, Blake was on his knees, examining the
ground for tracks. Though not so expert as the native
Australian tracker, yet he had had plenty of experience
in such work, and, so long as the ground would hold a
mark at all, he was not easily foiled. Presently he got
up.
“ Two men have been here,” he said, in his quiet,
decided way. “ I think they lifted Callendar on to one
of our horses, and then, leading the other, went away to
the north-west.”
“ Only two !” exclaimed Tinker. “ Where’s the rest of
the gang? And how came two of them to be hanging
about till now? If they meant to do for Callendar, why
didn’t they finish him at first? And if they didn’t want
to kill him, why 4id they leave the job half done, and
then come and carry him off like this?”
“All these questions have occurred to me already.
Tinker, and I confess that I’m puzzled. You are taking
it for granted that it’s some of Glyde’s gang’s work; and
I must say I agree with you. The whole business is most
puzzling. How I wish that poor Callendar had told us
more last night! You see, there must have been some
very strong inducement—stronger than the mere loss of
his money —to make him follow the gang single-handed.
Was it possible that he still had something about him
which Glyde wanted, and which made him send back two
of his men to get it?”
“ If so, they would surely have killed him at first,”
broke in Tinker.
“ That seems most likely,” answered Blake thought-
fully. “ The only other alternative is that Callendar had
some information which Glyde wanted.”
“ In that case, they’ll not hurt him. They’ll take him
straight back to their headquarters,” said Tinker.
“ True! Do you know. Tinker, I have half a mind to
follow their trail!”
Tinker looked at the other w T ith a comical expression on
his small, keen face.
“ Strikes me we’re in such a hole ourselves that it
doesn’t much matter which way we go. It’s the bold
game pays. Yes, I vote for following the fellows that
have kidnapped Callendar!”
Forty-eight hours later two figures, following a dog,
were walking slowly across a waste of spinifex scrub,
which stretched mile after mile in every direction towards
the glaring horizon. Only in one place was the skyline
broken. That was by a conical blue hill, and it vas
towards this hill that the travellers were making their
way.
But the hill was still many miles away, and the twe
“SEXTON BLAKE. BEEF-E ATER.” A Sth By S ITE^BHRT I^t?AXWELu OndOn * NEXT WEEK!


men u'ere plainly very near exhaustion. They staggered
as they walked, and now and then the smaller of the
two would stumble. Their faces were haggard and
pinched, their cheeks blistered by the terrible sun, and
their lips were cracked and dry with thirst.
Their once smart uniforms were covered all over with
the fine desert dust, which rose like powder at every
step, and their feet and the calves of their legs were
almost raw with cuts from the terrible points of the
spinifex. There was absolutely no sign of life in this
horrible desert. The very crows shunned it. It was like
a dead world except for the dust-devils which spun across
it, whirling solemnly in dark columns across the blazing
white sand.
Tinker stumbled again, and would have fallen had not*
Blake seized him. The elder man unslung his water-flask,
held it up, and shook it. There wpre still a few drops of
warm, muddy fluid in the bottom. They were the last,
and more precious than gold.
“ You first!” muttered Tinker bravely, as Blake put
the cup to his lips.
Blake hesitated. Then he raised the cup, and
apparently sipped a little. It was only a pretence. Not
a drop passed his parched lips. Tinker, almost blind
with the frightful glare from the sand, never noticed this
self-sacrifice on the other’s part. He gulped the water
down, and felt new life flow into his sluggish veins.
Then the two tramped on again.
. Mile after mile, and the heat beating back from the
white surface of the desert till pain became agony. Mile
after mile, till their walking became a mere mechanical
action. Yet the distant blue mountain seemed no nearer,
Blake made a hoarse sound in his throat. He was try-
ing to speak, but his swollen tongue made it impossible.
He pointed to a patch of what had once been mulga
scrub, but was now a mere line of dead and blackened
stumps. Tinker understood, and turned towards it. As
they neared it they saw that it marked the line of a long-
dried-up watercourse. Blake moved to the deepest de-
pression in its bed and began to dig. Tinker helped. For
an hour they worked hard, and at the end of that time
the sand was just as dry as at the top.
Suddenly Tinker, whose back was turned to Blake,
heard a slight, choking sound. Turning, he saw his
friend lying in a heap at the bottom of the hole. With
infinite trouble he pulled him out and dragged him
under the scrub, and piled some withered branches over
him to shelter his head from the fierce sun. Then he
went back to his digging. The afternoon drew on, but
the sun’s heat increased rather than diminished. Still
Tinker toiled, though he was now very near exhaustion.
The sand was a little moist, and he felt that if he could
only get another foot or so down he might reach a few
drops of water.
But it was not to be. Suddenly the plucky youngster
felt his head going. He was just able to crawl out of
the hole, and stagger across to where Blake lay. Then
he collapsed completely, and the two lay there side by
side, with Pedro crouching beside them.
Hours passed, and the sun dropped slowly towards the
west. It was just sinking crimson below the sharp line
of the desert horizon when a solitary horseman, riding
across the great plain, was startled by a long, low, mourn-
ful howl, coming from a patch of mulga scrub. It was
not a dingo’s bark—it was too deep for that. He turned
his horse, and rode towards the scrub patch. As he
neared it a great bloodhound came out and staggered
towards him, whining hoarsely, then turned, as if to lead
him back. He followed, and there on the parched
ground lay the two figures, apparently dead. With a
startled exclamation the boy—for he was hardly more—
sprang off his horse, flung the bridle over its head, and
knelt beside the prostrate figures.
A short inspection proved that life still flickered in
both, and the young fellow blessed his luck that his
■water-bottle was almost full. Drop by drop, he poured
a little of the life-giving fluid between Blake’s dry lips,
and presently the detective opened his eyes and looked
up into the face which bent so anxiously over him.
“ What, you, Tom Field !” he gasped faintly. And
then, as Field turned his attention to Tinker, Blake lay
still again.
THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.
Back to Garrison Downs.
IT was Tom Field who dug out the water-hole until a
few cupfuls of brackish but drinkable fluid
collected at the bottom; Tom Field who gathered
sticks and made a fire; Tom Field who pulled out
from his saddle-bags a goodly parcel of bread and
cooked mutton, and fed the other two. And all the time
he had not offered a word of explanation, nor had the
others asked a single question.
At last the boy remarked suddenly: “I suppose you’re
wondering how on earth I came to turn up just at the
right minute?”
“ It was very lucky for us,” was all that Blake said.
“ I should think you’d be wondering what we’re doing
in this beastly desert,” put in Tinker.
“ Not at all. You are on the trail of two of Glyde’s
men.”
Tinker stared, but Blake betrayed no sign of astonish-
ment.
“Then you’ve left him?” he said quietly.
It was Field’s turn to start.
“How do you know?” he asked sharply.
“Merely by putting two and two together. When we
last saw you at the bush inn you were in some way in
Glyde’s power. If I’m not much mistaken, Glyde and
Griffiths are the same man?” He paused.
“ They are,” answered Field shortly. “ And you’re
right. I’ve left him. I couldn’t stand it any longer. I
know he’ll follow and finish me, for I know too much.
But I don’t care,” he added recklessly. “ That’s why I
took to the desert.”
“I think you’ve acted very wisely,” said Blake, in his
quiet way. “ Then I need hardly ask you whether this
is a forgery.” And he took from his pocket a letter,
and handed it to the boy.
The effect was startling. “ Maurice Hammond !” cried
Field, in tone of intense excitement. “ What do you
know about him?”
The detective glanced at the other curiously.
“Not much,” he answered. “Only I want to meet
him. But did you write the letter?”
“I? No. I can spell a bit better than that,” retorted
Field, recovering his self-possession with an evident
effort.
“ You have no idea who did?”
“I might make a guess,” said Field cautiously.
“ Some one of Glyde’s men? Perhaps Glyde himself?”
“ Yes.” •
“ I told you so,” said Blake to Tinker. "It was a trap
to get us up to Taroomba.”
“So you are police?” remarked Field curiously. “ I
didn’t know you were when we first met. I took you
for new chums.”
Blake laughed.
“We only joined lately,” he said. Then he paused,
and looked hard at Field. “ Does it occur to you that if
you’re afraid of Glyde’s vengeance it would be the best
thing for you to follow our example, and join the force?”
But Field shivered. “ No, no!” he exclaimed, in evi-
dent terror.
Blake was surprised, but did not press the matter.
“ I want to ask you a question or two,” was all he
said.
“Fire away !” replied Tom Field, recovering himself.
“ You knew we were on the trail of two of Glyde’a
gsng. Did you see the men?”
“ No. I saw them leave, but I came away before they
got in. I saw their trail, though—crossed it. They had
two led horses with them —yours, I suppose?”
Blake nodded. “Exactly,” he said; and proceeded to
explain how their camp had been raided in their absence,
and how Callendar had been carried off. Field listened
with a puzzled face.
“It’s not like Glyde to take a man to the Boost,” he
said at last, when he had heard the whole story. “ I
can’t imagine what he wants with him unless it’s to get
a ransom. All I know is that when he came in from
the last raid—the one on Taroomba—he left two men
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY,’’ now appearing In “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


behind, two of the biggest blackguards
Tn the gang. They came in next day,
but three days ago he sent them out
again. They were the two whose
tracks I told you that I crossed.”
Blake turned to Tinker.
“ Some spy must have told him that
Callendar was still alive,” he said.
“ Oh, he’s got spies everywhere,”
put in Tom Field. “ Scores of ’em.
He always knows what’s going on any-
where for a hundred miles round.”
“I’d like uncommonly to know how
he ever heard anything about Maurice
Hammond,” remarked Blake thought-
fully. And his quick eye did not fail
to notice that at the name Tom Field
started again, but more slightly than
before.
The talk then turned to their plans
for the future. Blake suggested that
the best thing to do was to make the
best of the'ir way back to Garrison
Downs, and, turning to Tom Field,
asked him plump and plain whether he
would be willing to guide a force to
the robbers’ stronghold, the Roost, as
it was called..
The boy’s tanned face went white.
“ I daren’t!” he muttered.
“ They’d skin me alive if I fell into
their hands.”
“ They’ll probably do something un-
pleasant to you, anyhow, if they catch
you. Look here. Field, so long as that
gang is in existence, so long are you in
danger. Surely the best thing, from
your point of view, is to guide us to
the Roost. With your knowledge and
a strong party we ought to be able to
wipe them out for good. Then you
and the country, too, will be safe.”
At first Field flatly refused. He
seemed to have a sort of horror of
Glyde, and his one idea was to get
away as fast as he could, and put the
utmost distance possible between him-
self and the man he stood in such fear,
of. So Blake said no more for the
present, and, leaving Pedro to watch, they took a short
sleep. It was decided that they should start before day-
break, and try to get back to Garrison Downs.
THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER
The Attack on the Roost.
“ T T ERE’S the path 1”
Kol The speaker was Tom Eield. Slake had at
I 'with the greatest difficulty, persuaded
him to act as guide to a large force of police
which had been sent out quietly from
Garrison Downs to attack the Roost. Tom Field’s terror
had surprised Blake a good deal, for the young fellow was
certainly not a coward in the ordinary sense of the word.
Yet before he would consent to act as guide he had in-
sisted upon a complete disguise and a change of name.
Nor would he let Blake, who seemed to be the only per-
son whom he trusted, breathe a word to any of the others
as to who he was or where he came from. It was only
on these conditions that he would consent to guide the
party to the Roost. And Blake, who was anxious above
all things to find out what had become of Callendar, had
consented.
Certainly Glyde had chosen his retreat well. Guarded
in the front by the wide stretch of desert where Blake
and Tinker had so nearly died of thirst, the Red Oak
Range, as it was called, was backed by the Never-Never
Country—that is to say, a barren and totally unexplored
region. The Roost, so Tom Field said, was a flat table-
THE BUSH ON FIRE!—Scorched and choking, Sexton Blake and Tinker
tore madly along through the burning forest.
land high up in the centre of a small, compact range of
hills, and was only approached by one pass, which was
guarded night and day. What was more, this road was
so narrow and steep, and so hidden by thick forest anti
scrub, that one might pass and repass it a hundred times
without ever suspecting its existence. Its entrance was
a mere crack or rift between the enormous rocks, and the
robbers had been most careful to cover up their tracks
whenever they entered, and those of the cattle which
they drove off from the Garrison Downs district.
It was the mouth of this rift in the rock thafl
Sergeant Tracy and his force had just halted. All was
quiet as death. It was a moonless night, and in the
faint starlight the entrance to the pass had an intensely
dark, gloomy, and forbidding appearance. The sergeantj
passed the word quietly to dismount, and leaving two
men to look after the horses, the rest entered the rock
gateway and cautiously began the long climb.
It was everything to move quietly and not alarm the(
robbers. Tom Field led the way with Blake and Tinker,
one on each side of him. The sergeant came immediately
behind and then the men, two by two, in a long line.
The path, very steep and covered with stones, wound
up among great rocks and thick trees. What with the
intense darkness and the necessity for caution, progress
was .very slow. Not a sound was to be heard, and no one
could possibly have imagined that within less than a
mile were camped between twenty and thirty of the most
cruel and bloodthirsty blackguards in the whole Austra-
lian Continent.
Now and then a stone, loosened by the feet of One of
the men, went tinkling away down the hillside, but on
the whole the silence in which the force moved was
“SEXTON BLAKE, BEEF-EATER A e jySxWELL.° ndoa NEXT WEEK!


worthy of all praise. Tip and up they climbed, and still
not a "sign of life. Blake marvelled that the bushrangers
should have left the path to their stronghold so utterly
unguarded. For one moment there flashed through his
mind a bare suspicion that Field might be wilfully lead-
ing them into a trap, but he dismissed the idea at once.
It was rare indeed that he ever made a mistake in his
man.
At last they reached the summit of the ridge, some
hundreds of feet above the plain, and the path here,
narrower than ever, dropped again steeply into a defile
with steep, rugged rocks on either side.
“We’re quite close now,” muttered Tom Field, in
Blake’s ears. “When you get round the next corner
you’ll see their fires.”
As he spoke he slightly quickened his pace, with the
result that he, Blake, and Tinker passed round the corner
which he spoke of a few yards in advance of their com-
panions.
Instantly, with a loud crash, something fell behind
them. Blake swung round. A sort of gate of solid
planking had dropped out of a slot in the rock wall and
cut them off from the rest. Before he could so much as
call out, half a dozen figures had flung themselves out of
some hidden recess in the side of the pass upon him and
Tinker, blankets were thrown over their heads, and they
were lifted and carried off bodily. In that moment of
suffocating captivity, Blake’s moat miserable thought
was that Tom Field, whom he had trusted so absolutely,
had played him false. Behind him he heard a volley
crash out, but whether from friends or foes he had no
means of knowing.
Presently he felt himself flung roughly to the ground,
the blanket was torn from his head, a noose-rope flung
round his body, pinning his arms to his sides, and he
found himself standing in a large cave, dimly lit by the
crimson flare of torches stuck against the walls. Tinker,
bound like himself, stood beside him,
“Here they are, cap’n,” jeered one of their captors,
and with his open hand brutally smacked Blake in the
mouth.
It was Griffiths, the sinister landlord of the bush Inn,
who faced them, a smile of savage satisfaction on his
dark face.
“ Well, Mr. Baker, we meet again,” he said, with
affected cordiality; “and you, my young friend,” turn-
ing to Tinker. “ Ha, and in uniform, too! So you be-
long to Tracy’s brilliant blunderers. Always running
your heads into traps. This time I hardly think you
will get away so easily as last,”
A fresh volley of shots and distant shoutings inter-
rupted him.
“Your friends are Impatient!” he remarked, with a
bitter sneer. “ I must go and welcome them. After-
wards ” —and his face was a study in cruelty—“l shall
have time to attend to you.”
So saying, he gave his satellites orders to tie the two
prisoners firmly to ring-bolts in the walls, and then
stalked off out of the cave.
When he had gone. Tinker looked up.
“Cheerful look-out!” he observed, with an attempt
at lightheartedness. “ That fellow Griffiths, or Glyde, or
whatever his name is, looks capable of anything. I won-
der what it will be—something with boiling oil in it, I
shouldn’t wonder.”
“ There’s hope yet, lad,” answered Blake firmly.
“ Tracy is not the man to give up without a big try.
Listen!”
As he spoke the firing broke out again tremendously
heavily. They could hear men running and shouting,
and the sound of heavy blows. Then slowly the sounds
died away and all was still again.
The prisoners’ hearts sank in spite of themselves.
“ Tinker, my dear boy, I’m precious sorry for getting
you into this hole,” said Blake, at last.
“It was my fault as much as yours,” exclaimed Tinker,
quite indignantly. “ Who’d have dreamed of Field play-
ing us a blackguardly like this?”
“You trusted him?” inquired Blake.
“ Absolutely,” was the reply. “ Never was so deceived
in my life. What a clever young brute he has been !”
“After all, he saved our lives in the spinifex,” re-
marked Blake thoughtfully. “ There are several points
about the whole business that puzzle me a good deal.”
But what these were Tinker was hot fated to hear, for
at that moment there was a sudden, tremendous report
like the firing of a heavy gun. Then came dead silence
again.
As Blake and Tinker listened with intense eagerness,
suddenly out burst the firing again with tremendous
fury. Volley after volley rang through the night air.
For the prisoners the suspense was positively hideous.
What had happened? Had Tracy managed to burst
through the barrier, or had the bushrangers sprung some
fresh trap? They could not tell. Minute after minute
passed, minutes which seemed as long as hours. Still the
firing went on, at times in volleys, and then again drop-
ping to scattered shots. For Blake and Tinker the worst
of it was that they did not even know where they were.
They could not see the mouth of the cave. They only
knew that they could not be very far from the pass, for
the firing sounded so distinct.
Shouts again, and then a rush of feet. Blake strained
violently at the rope, but it was too tight. He could not
get free.
“Now then, boys! After them!”
Good heavens, it was Tracy’s voice!
“ Sergeant!” shouted Blake and Tinker, both together,
at the top of their voices.
Next moment the welcome clatter of troopers’ spurs
was heard on the rocky floor of the cave.
“That you, Blake? ' Where are you?”
And here came .two of their own men rushing in.
In a trice the detective and the boy were free again.
THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER.
Glyde Gallops for Liberty.
WHAT’S happened?” exclaimed Tinker eagerly.
“It's all right,” responded the trooper
jubilantly. “We stuck a cake of gun-
cotton under that precious door of theirs and
blew it to blazes. Then we rushed ’em.
Half of them are down, and we’ve caught four or five.
Come on! We’ve got to collar the rest. That beggar
Glyde is still loose.”
He led the way out of the cave, and Blake and Tinker,
snatching up their rifles, which lay on the floor, followed
at a run. When they got outside they found to their
amazement that it was dawn. In the early grey light
they saw a small, flat plain covered with beautifxil grass
and surrounded by tall cliffs. Fighting was still going
on. A remnant of the bushrangers—desperate fellows all
of them —were holding their own behind rocks and trees,
and firing, at the troopers who, in open order, were
skirmishing across the plain. Here and there a dark
uniformed figure lay flat on the green grass.
But where was Glyde? That no one seemed to know.
He had been seen during the fight at the mouth of the
pass, but then had disappeared.
“ Come on. Tinker !” muttered Blake. “ We've got to
find him and Callendar.”
And, avoiding the open, he led the way under the
shelter of the trees and scrub, which grew thick beneath
the cliffs, towards the far end of the plain.
Twice they were fired at, and once Blake returned the
compliment with his usually deadly aim. Then Tinker,
whose eyes were sharp as a needle, suddenly exclaimed:
“ There’s a building of some sort in the trees over
there!”
Blake saw it almost at the same moment—a squat,
slab-roofed hut, almost hidden among thick trees.
“That will be where they’ve got Callendar shut up,”
continued Tinker hopefully; and broke into a run.
But Blake cried out sharply;
“Look-out, Tinker!”
And as the boy pulled up, there suddenly swept
through the trees, from the direction of the hut, two
mounted men, who came galloping hard right across in
front of the detective. They xvere Glyde and Dick
Callendar.
Vou should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY,” now appearing In “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday,


“Hi. Oalienchir, stop!” roared Blake.
Bub Caiiendar paid no attention. Not so Glyde! He
turned in his saddle and, whipping out a heavy revolver,
tired at Blake.
The bullet smacked upon a great tree-trunk just over
the detective’s head, and, dropping on one knee, Blake
raised his carbine to his shoulder and rapidly returned
the shot. For once his aim failed. The pinch of the
ropes with which he had been so long tied had cramped
his muscles. But it was a close call. The bushranger’s
hat flew from his head, and with a yell of pain he clapped
one hand to his skull, which the bullet had scored from
side to side. Then, with a furious oath, he fired again
at Blake, missed a second time, and before the other
could pump a second cartridge into the breech, had dis-
appeared at full speed behind the trees.
Blake and Tinker followed at full speed. They saw
the two horsemen, riding abreast, make for the cliff
which towered like a wall at the end of the plain.
“Hurrah!” yelled "Tinker. “We’ve got ’em!”
And, revolver in hand, he tore after them, closely fol-
lowed by Blake.
Straight at the cliff galloped the captain of the bush-
rangers. What was he going to do? For the life of him
Blake could not understand. Ha, he a little,
swinging to the left. For an instant he and Caiiendar
both were lost to sight, cut off by another clump of trees.
When Blake and Tinker had reached open ground once
more the two horsemen had disappeared as completely as
though the ground had swallowed them up.
For an instant the two pursuers stopped, staring at’
one another in blank amazement. Then Tinker shouted:
“ I hear hoofs still!” And broke into a run again.
A moment later the mystery was solved. Before them
yawned an opening in the rock wall that had seemed so
solid —an opening which had been entirely hidden from
the eyes of Blake and Tinker by a projecting wing of
rock. A pass led downwards from this opening, widen-
ing as it went, and down it Captain Glyde was galloping
at reckless speed, with Caiiendar still beside him.
"Look!” screamed Tinker. “ Callendar’s tied on!”
He was right. Now it was all clear. The unfortunate
Caiiendar was gagged, and fastened to his saddle by
ropes, and Glyde held his horse by a leading-rein. That
was why the squatter had made no attempt to escape.
Pursuit without horses was perfectly hopeless, and the
attacking force had left their animals at the foot of the
other pass. Yet Blake and Tinker, hoping against hope
that Glyde’s horse might come down, or something un-
foreseen happen, ran onwards at full sped.
And presently something did happen. Out of the scrub
by the side of the pass a figure sprang up in front of
the bushranger, and, pistol in hand, yelled “Bail up!”
Imagine the amazement of Blake when he recognised the
face as that of the traitor, Tom Field !
“Bail up!” shouted the boy again.
But it is very doubtful whether, going at the pace
he was, and downhill, too, Glyde could have pulled up.
Anyhow, he showed no sign of doing so, but swept on,
the loose stones flying beneath the clattering feet of the
two horses. As he neared the spot where Field stood
resolutely pointing his pistol, Blake saw the bushranger
duck, lying flat on his horse’s neck. By. so doing he
placed Callendar’s body between himself and Field’s
pistol.
Blake, still running at the top of his speed, saw Field
hesitate, saw his pistol hand drop. A change came over
his face. He gave a curious, shrill cry.
" My brother Maurice!” were the strange words which
burst lips.
At that moment Glyde lifted his right arm. A flash
of fire darted out, and young Field flung up his arms, and
fell backwards among the thick stuff in which he was
standing, while the echo of the heavy report drowned
tne hammering of the flying horses’ feet. Next moment
Glyde and his captive had vanished from sight round a
curve of the pass.
It was no earthly use chasing them any further. With
one accord Blake and Tinker pulled un, and turned to see
whether or no Field was badly hurt.
Blake’s face was grave as‘he knelt and examined the
lad. The bullet had struck him high up on the right
side of’ the chest. He was insensible, and breathing
thickly.
By this time others of the police had come up, and were
eagerly questioning Tinker. They were all bitterly
disappointed at Glyde’s escape, but brought the welcome
news that practically the whole of the rest of the gang
had been rounded up and made prisoners. Eight had
been killed outright, and four of the police. Many of
the rest were wounded, and all were pretty well tired out
with the night’s work.
They carried Field back to the cave which had been
the robbers’ headquarters, and then prepared to start
after Glyde. Just then in came Sergeant Tracy. When
he heal’d what had happened, he said outright that it
was mere foolishness to follow Glyde now. By the time
they got their horses he would be 'miles away. Besides,
they had twenty or more prisoners, and a number of
wounded to take back with them.
It would be best, he told Blake quietly, to get these
back to Garrison Downs, and then to organise a new
expedition of half a dozen specially well-mounted men,
and, with King Billy to show them the way, ride down
Glyde and his victim.
.“ He can’t possibly get away,” declared the sergeant.
“ I shall warn the whole country by wire from Garrison
Downs, and everyone will be on the alert. You know,
there’s a Government reward of a thousand pounds on
Glyde’s head.”
“That’s all very well; but how about Caiiendar?”
replied Blake. “ The brute may murder him !”
“He won’t,” answered Tracy confidently. “ He’d have
done it already if he’d been going to. Depend on it,
Caiiendar will be all right.”
Blake rvas not satisfied, but he could do nothing alone.
Besides, he was intensely anxiouslto find out from tho
unlucky Field what he had meant by that sudden ex-
clamation, “My brother Maurice !” Was it—could it lie
true that Caiiendar was actually the man he had eo
long been searching for, and that*Tom Field was the
younger brother Robert, who was “ wanted ” by th&
English police on the charge of murdering his uncle?
But when they at last reached Garrison Downs again
Tom Field was so desperately ill that it seemed extremely
unlikely that he would live to give any information.
Blake was forced to start on the hunt after Glyde with-
out hearing anything further. But he left Tinker to
look after the patient, with instructions to do his best t<?
pull him through.
THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER.
Tom Field Tells his Story.
W HEN, six weeks later, Sexton Blake staggered
into the lodgings in Garrison Downs where he
had left Tinker, his best friend would not have
known him. As an actual fact. Tinker, his
devoted companion for more than three years,
was almost unable to believe that the man who sank
wearily into the opposite chair was really the smart
detective. Blake was shrunken, shrivelled, heavily
bearded, and burnt almost as black as a native. Ho
looked quite ten years older than when Tinker had seen
him last.
One glance told the boy that the detective’s search had
been a vain one, and, with a tact that did him credit, he
only said: -*
• “ You look as if you’d been having a pretty rough time
of it, sir.”
Blake smiled bitterly.
“Tinker,” he said quietly, “Tve failed. Clyde has
got away. We have found absolutely no trace either of
him or of Caiiendar.”
Tinker was silent. He knew what such an admission
meant to the great detective. Instead of talking, he got
up and bustled round, making some tea. Then his eyes
fell on a yellow envelope upon the chimncypiece.
“ My word, I almost forgot this !” he exclaimed, giving
the telegram to Blake.
Blake read it, and an expression of stupefaction
“SEXTON BLAKE. BEEF-EATER • V A t^r By^j?EABER^^AXWHLL° ndOn ‘ NEXT WEEK!


faction came upon his face. Without a word, he handed
it back to Tinker. This was the message:
“ To Sexton Blake, Garrison Downs, Narragoola,
Queensland. —Maurice Hammond arrived in London to-,
day. (Signed) Simonds & Clarke.”
Tinker stared at the message as though he could not
believe his eyes. At last he muttered:
“ Then we’ve been on the wrong scent the whole
time?”
Blake made no reply. He sat, with his chin in
his hands, deep in thought. Some minutes passed. Then
suddenly the detective sprang to his feet with all his old'
energy.
“ Where’s Tom Field?” he cried. “ I hear he’s better.”
“Better—yes; but precious bad still,” said Tinker,
leading the way into another room.
If Blake was altered. Field was much more so. He
looked hardly alive as he lay there, with his eyes closed,
and the bones almost sticking through his drawn, white
cheeks. In spite of the trick the boy had played them
at the Roost, Blake felt a pang of pity.
“ Field,” he said softly.
The boy opened his eyes. A look of shame came into
them.
“ Mr. Baker, I swear to you I didn’t know of that
door,” were his first words.
Blake stared at him keenly with his piercing eyes.
“ Tinker believes me,” went on Tom Field implor-
ingly.
“Is that so. Tinker?” demanded Blake.
“ Yes,” answered Tinker firmly; “ I do believe it.”
“ Then I shall not refuse to,” answered Blake quietly.
And, indeed, if ever truth shone in anyone’s face, it was
in that of poor Field. At Blake’s words a look of
intense relief came into the boy’s eyes.
“ Thank you,” he muttered feebly. “ I couldn’t die
until I knew.” -•
“ Don’t talk about dying,” retorted Blake cheerily.
ft Look here, I want*you to answer some questions.” .
Tom Field looked up in a frightened way.
“ Don’t be scared,” said the detective. “ Believe if
you can that Tinker and I are your very good friends,
and want to get you out of your trouble, whatever it is.
And first let me tell you, my name is not Baker, but
Blake—Sexton Blake.”
“Not the detective?” gasped the othei.
“ Just so,” said Blake pleasantly. “ But not after
you. I came out here to find Maurice Hammond, the
lost heir to the great property of the late Mr. Green-
field.”
Tom Field gasped again. He seemed unable to speak.
At last he muttered:
“ Then you know all about me?”
“ On the contrary, I know nothing, except that our
vanished friend, Griffiths or Glyde, had some hold over
you, and that when you met him carrying Dick Callendar
off down the pass you cried out, f Maurice, my brother !’ ”
There was another long pause. Blake waited with out-
ward calm, but secretly consumed by anxiety. At last
Tom Field burst out:
“It doesn’t make much difference. I shall be dead
before they can hang me. I’ll tell you.”
Blake moved a little nearer. What was he going to
hear?
“ My name is not Field,” said the invalid; " it’s Robert
Hammond. And Glyde, or Griffiths, as he called himself
when he first came out, is really Arnold Grice, who used
to be my uncle’s private secretary.”
In spitevof himself, Blake started slightly.
“ You know now why I had to lie low,” went on the
boy, noticing the movement.
“ Yes, I know the story of your uncle’s death, and saw
the ‘ Hue and Cry ’ offering a reward for your arrest,”
answered Blake. “ Then, I take it, Grice traded on your
fear of apprehension to make you do his dirty work.
’Pon my soul, he’s a very pleasant gentleman!”
“That was it!” cried Bob Hammond. “He gave me
money to get away. He told me Australia would be the
safest place. I’d no idea he was coming here. Then
one day he found me in Sydney. He told me he could
give me work up here. Like a fool, I believed him.
He got me to that bush inn down by the river, and then
threw off all disguise. I was simply potboy and re-
ceiver of stolen property. Eut even then I didn’t know
about the Roost until a few weeks before I first saw you.
That’s why I’d never heard eft that door in the pass.”
He paused, and took a long breath.
“After you and Tracy raided and burnt the bush inn
I had to go up to the Roost. It was simply beastly.
I had to be camp cook. Glyde treated me worse than
a dog. At last I got reckless. I didn’t care what hap-
pened. I stole a horse and cleared, taking the track
across the desert, because I thought they wouldn’t be
so likely to look for me there. That’s how I came to find
you and Tinker.”
He paused again. “Go on,” said Blake breathlessly.
“ When that door fell behind us in the pass I knew
you’d think I’d let you into a trap on purpose. I swore
to myself I’d either get you free or kill Glyde. I
managed to escape in the darkness, and hid among the
trees. I must tell I knew nothing then of that other
pass that Glyde escaped by. I heard the gate blown up,
and then the police came pouring in. Presently two of
the bushrangers, trying to escape, passed quite close to
me where I lay hid. I heard one say to the other, ‘ The
cap’n’s killed those two chaps he caught at the gate.
It’s a hanging job. I’m going to try for.the pass out at
the back.”
“ Then I knew you were dead, and I swore I’d kill
Glyde. I felt pretty sure he’d take this back road, so I
followed the two fellows, and hid in the scrub, where
you saw me. You know why I failed in my plan. That
man that Glyde had tied on to the horse beside him was
my elder brother, Maurice Hammond, who left England
four years ago.”
Bob ceased speaking. Tinker was staring at him in a
sort of stupefaction. Blake’s forehead was knitted with
deep thought. He got up and took Bob’s thin hand.
“ You’ve filled up all the gaps nicely, Hammond,” he
said. “ I had already a pretty good idea of your
identity, and that of your brother. But I do not know
about Glyde. Believe me, you sha’n’t be sorry for being
open with me. I’ll see that you come to no harm. Now,
tell me, who do you think murdered your uncle?”
Bob looked up keenly. Then he said deliberately,
“ Arnold Grice.”
“ I’m inclined to agree with you,” answered Blake.
“ Hence his anxiety to get you out of England. It was
a pity'you went.”
“I was too scared to do anything else.”
“Of course. Well, the next thing to be done is to
prove your innocence. And if I had only managed to
lay hold of Grice, or Glyde, we could no doubt have made
him own up. One more question; What do you think of
this?” And he handed Bob the telegram he had just
received.
Bob Hammond looked astounded.
“What, Maurice in England? Then he must have
escaped.”
Blake grunted doubtfully. “ I think I’ll go and see,”
he remarked quietly. “ Hammond, I shall leave you here
in charge of Tinker. I leave for England to-night.
You’ll hear from me soon.”
He called Tinker out, gave him money and certain
directions, then packed his valise, and in less than an
hour was away.
THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
An Unexpected Meeting.
ONE morning about six weeks after Bob Hammond
had told his story, Mr. Simonds, of the well-
known firm of solicitors, Simonds & Clarke,
was sitting in his handsome office in Chancery
Lane, when the telephone-bell on his table rang,
and a clerk called up from below to ask if he would see
a gentleman.
"Who is it?” replied Mr. Simonds.
“ Won’t give his name, sir. lie’ll send up his card.”
Presently the card arrived, enclosed in an envelope,
and the two magic words, “ Sexton Blake ” were enough
to gain their owner speedy admittance. *
Privately, Mr. Simonds was of the opinion that the
You Should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY,” now appearing In “ THE BOYS’ FRIEND,’’ Id., Every Tuesday.


ANSWERS ONE PENNY. Every Tuesday.
detective had proved a costly and useless luxury, but
when Blake entered the room the lawyer’s greeting was
cordial enough. As for Blake, he was quite himself
again, and in well-cut tweeds, carefully groomed and
shaven, looked a very different man from the burnt and
half-starved trooper of six weeks ago.
“So Mr. Hammond has returned?” he said.
“ Yes; you were quite on the wrong track, Mr. Blake,”
answered the lawyer, with a slightly sarcastic smile.
“ Mr. Hammond was not in Australia at all, but in
America.”
Blake’s carefully trained face merely exhibited a
polite surprise. All he said was, “It’s odd he was so
long in replying to the advertisements.”
“ Ah, he was in a very out-of-the-way place—a rancho
up in the mountains of California. He tells me he rarely
saw a paper.”
At that moment a whirring sound was heard outside
the window, which was on the first floor, facing the
street. It ceased exactly opposite.
“ Ha, a coincidence! Here he is to answer for him-
self,” exclaimed the lawyer.
Blake looked out. A handsome electric brougham had
just pulled up outside, and a tall man stepped out. Next
minute there came a tap at the door.
Blake’s heart beat quickly, but outwardly he was as
cool as usual. He stepped a little to one side, so that
the big roll-topped desk concealed him from the door.
“ Come in !” cried Mr. Simonds cordially. And there
entered a tall, finely-built man. He was smooth shaven,
save for a fair moustache, and his hair was of a reddish
gold. He was exquisitely turned out, from the glossy
silk hat and perfectly-cut frock-coat to the top of his
varnished, patent-leather boots.
For a moment Blake was nonplussed. Was this
Callendar? Civilisation and clothes alter a man mar-
vellously. •
The beard, too, was gone. When the new-comer
answered the lawyer’s greeting, his voice, too, was mar-
vellously like that of Dick Callendar. Certainly any
man less trained to notice small differences in manner,
speech, and gesture would never have doubted his
identity. But Blake was not satisfied.
Mr. Simonds turned.
“ Mr. Blake, let me present you to the gentleman
whom you have so long been looking for. Mr. Ham-
mond, this is Mr. Sexton Blake, the detective. He has
been in Australia for several months past, endeavouring
to find you.”
Maurice Hammond bowed gravely. Not a muscle of
his face betrayed the slightest emotion of any kind.
“ Yery glad to meet you, Mr. Blake. I’m afraid I’ve
given you a lot of xxnnecessary troxxble. It really isn’t
my fault. I was up at a little uncivilised place called
Delgada, in Southern California, where I never saw a
paper from one month’s end to another. Jolly life,
though. Lots of hard work, but lots of sport. I don’t
know but that I really preferred it to London, with its
fog and conventionalities.”
“ ’Pon my soxxl, you’re a cool card, whoever you are!”
was Blake's unspoken thought. Aloud, he made some
polite reply, and then took up his hat to go.
But Mr. Simonds stopped him. "We have a little
business to finish,” he said. “ All Mr. Hammond wants
is a certain deed, which my clerk will give him.”
The self-styled Hammond assented, and after a few
words more, left. Mr. Simonds took out a cheque-book
and politely inquired what he owed Blake. The latter
presented his accounts, and took the opportunity of
making some cleverly-veiled inquiries as to how Ham-
mond had proved his identity. He learnt that the latter’s
papers were all in perfect order.
“Of course,” added Mr. Simonds, “it is difficult to
recognise a man who was a mere boy when one last saw
him. But I did so, and so did Mr. Clarke. And both
of us can swear to his handwriting.”
“Is he keeping on Mr. Greenfield’s business?” in-
quired Blake
“Yes, indeed. And it is marvellous how he takes to
it. For a man who ran away from home rather than
enter his uncle’s office, it is extraordinary to see what
his business capacities are.”
“ Ah, America is a good school for that sort of thing,”
remarked Blake carelessly; and took his leave.
All the rest of the morning he sat in his rooms, run-
ning over all his notes of the case, and carefully con-
sidering the facts. “I only wish,” he muttered at last
to himself, “ that I could get a chance of making this
fellow’s better acquaintance. I’d like uncommonly to
have a look at the top of his head.”
As if in answer to his wish, at that very moment a
district messenger boy appeared with a letter. This was
how it ran:
" Sexton Blake, Esq. Dear Sir, —If you are not other-
wise engaged, I should be glad if you could call on me
to-morrow morning at Greenfield Hall. I am anxious to
make inquiries as to what has become of my poor brother,
Robert. You may remember that he fled the country
under suspicion of being concerned in the death of our
uncle, the late Mr. Greenfield. Personally, I believe him
to be gxxiltless, and you, if anyone, I feel sure, are the
right man to undertake this talk. If you will wire me
your train, I will have you met at the station.—Yours
faithfully. Maxirice Hammond.”
Blake read this, and fairly gasped.
“ Well, I should like to know what his little game is,”
he muttered at last. “At any rate, I mean to see.” He
scribbled a telegram: ~
“To Hammond, Greenfield Hall. Expect me by train
arriving Grendon Station at 11.32. — Blake.”
This he took himself to the office, and at the same
time despatched another message, this to Australia.
Then he went to a restaurant, ate a good luncheon,
and afterwards took a cab to a little out-of-the-way shop
in Soho, where the window was full of second-hand
clothes. He went through the shop into a room behind,
where a sharp-faced, black-eyed boy met him. After a
short talk the boy said: “ All right, sir, I understand.
I’ll be there in good time.” Blake handed him some
money, and left.
THE TWENTY-FIRST CHAPTER.
A Motor and an Accident-BlaKe Scores a
TricK.
IT was only an hour by train to Grendon, the station
for Greenfield Hall, and when Blake arrived there
he found a small dogcart, with a tall chestnut horse
between the shafts, waiting for him. The groom
touched his hat, Blake stepped in, and the big
horse jumped forward with a spring.
“ Fine goer !” said Blake, who loved a good bit of
horseflesh.
Tli? groom, a young fellow who looked as if he had all
his work cut out for him to hold the animal, replied:
“ Yes, sir; he’s a new one, only came last week, and a
fine stepper. Pity he’s such a powerful puller; but he’ll
sober down on Wildrake Hill.” ;
Tire man was right. The hill, a long and steep one,
seemed to take it out of the fiery chestnut, and he jogged
peacefully enough up the long slope, between high hedges
with beautiful woods behind them. It was a lovely day
in late autumn, calm and still and sunny, though with a
suspicion of frost in the air, and Blake, in spite of cer-
tain ill-defined suspicions in his-mind, thoroughly enjoyed
the drive.
All the way down he had been wondering what the new
owner of Greenfield Hall was up to. If he were in truth
Maurice Hammond his letter was natural enough, but
if not—and Blake did not for one moment believe that
he was the man he pretended to be —this looked like a
counsel of desperation. He must know the danger he
ran at Blake’s hands, and the detective shrewdly;
“SEXTON BLAKE. BEEF-EATER / * A Stll, By g HE^BER? O IMXWBLL. OndOIL NEXT WEEK!


suspected that some plot was afoot against him. “I’ll
be precious careful what I eat and drink inside that
house,” was Blake’s secret resolve; and then, by an effort
of will, he dismissed the whole business from his mind
and gave himself up to enjoyment of the lovely English
surroundings, so different from the gloomy grandeur of
the Australian scenery in which he had recently spent so
many weary weeks.
They had reached the top of Wildrake Hill, and a
magnificent view lay before them. The road dropped
into a deep, wide valley, at the bottom of which ran the
River Marway, here a tidal stream, a quarter of a mile
broad, calm and shining in the sun. It was fringed with
heavy woods, which were reflected in its glassy surface,
and the road crossed it upon a stone bridge of light and
airy appearance.
“ There’s the Hall, sir,” said the groom, pointing to a
fine old red-brick building bowered in trees on the far
side of the valley, and—fronted by long, smooth lawns,
which sloped gently to the waterside.
At that moment the toot of a motor-horn was heard,
and, glancing back, Blake saw a heavy canopy-covered
car which had just topped the hill behind them. It was
rapidly catching them up. There was only one person in
it—the driver—and he was unrecognisable with his
goggles and fur cap and coat.
“ Toot, toot!” went the horn again. The horse
pricked up his ears sharply.
“ Better get a good hold on him,” said Blake to the
groom, at the same time holding up his hand to warn
the motor driver to pull up.
But the latter paid no attention. And as the great
mass of machinery came whirring on, the horse made one
desperate leap forward and was off at full gallop down
the hill.
The groom lay back and pulled with all his might,
but it was no earthly use. The beast had the bit well
between his teeth, and his driver might as well have
pulled on a stone wall. There was nothing for it but to sit
tight and trust to luck or good steering.
How the tall cart rocked ! The gravel flew in showers
and the hedges flew by at a positively frightful speed.
They neared the bottom of the hill with appalling
r dity.
- .en Blake saw—what had been hidden before by trees
it the road and bridge were not exactly in a straight
lins The road curved quite sharply to the right on
to the bridge. He realised that it would take the nicest
possible steering to escape an accident, and wished de-
voutly that the reins were in his own hands. But it was
too late to change now. He must trust to the groom.
Near the bottom the hill was steepest. The pace be-
came terrific. The horse galloped as hard as he*could
lay legs to the ground. Each second Blake expected the
wheel to mount one bank or the other, but more by good
luck than good management they escaped.
Now' the water was gleaming almost beneath them. It
lay a long way below the bridge. Blake saw the groom,
whose face was white and set with terror, yet who kept
his wits to some extent, shorten his grip on the right-
hand rein and give a violent wrench.
Too violent! With a loud crack the rein parted in the
middle. Blake saw that all hope of averting a cata-
strophe was gone; and as the horse raced straight for
the head of the bridge he flung the rug off his knees and
stood up. Utterly maddened with fright, the horse tore
straight on to the bridge and drove with an appalling
crash into the left-hand rail, which broke and smashed
under the force of the impact. At the same ifistant
Blake, seeing that his only chance for life was to clear
the ivreck, made one vigorous leap out of the cart right
over the parapet, and, shooting downwards with the
skill of a practised diver, struck deep water, and
vanished with a slight splash.
Next second, cart and horse together, with a twisted
mass of broken parapet, came whirling through the air
and plunged into the river only a yard or two behind
him.
The driver, too, had jumped, but on the other side,
and, falling heavily on the hard roadway, lay there
stunned. A moment later up shot the motor and stopped
abruptly at the entrance to the bridge. A man sprang
out. It was the owner of the Hall. Oddly enough, in-
stead of at once attending to the prostrate driver, he
rushed to the left-hand rail, and stared over into the
river with glaring eyes.
Second's passed. The ripples died away. The horse
and cart both had gone to the bottom. But where was
Blake? There was not a sign of him, and the tidal
current rippled gently past the bridge piers with never a
sign of life on its placid surface.
“He's gone!” muttered the watcher, at last. “So
perish all my enemies!”
Then he turned away, and set himself to revive the
groom.
The man was only stunned, and soon came to himself.
His master helped him into the motor, and they drove
away together in the direction of the Hall.
The car was hardly out of sight among the trees on
the far side of the river when a dripping figure emerged
from the water among the piles which protected the land-
ward pier of the bridge, and, climbing quickly up, gained
the bank. He clambered quietly up the grassy slope and
entered the trees, where he took off his soaked coat and
wrung it out. It was Sexton Blake, quite unhurt, and
with an odd smile on his keen face.
“I thought as much,” he muttered. “It was a clever
scheme. A s6ary horse, a motor—pure accident, of course.
My friend, you’ve overreached yourself this time. The
trick’s mine. You think I’m dead, and that’s just what
I wanted.”
He walked to the hedge and peered through. Ah, here
came a sharp-faced boy down the hill, carrying a small
hand-bag. Blake gave a low whistle. The boy answered,
and, slipping through the hedge like an eel, handed the
bag to Blake.
A few minutes later an elderly labourer, with a grey
beard and bent with rheumatism, emerged into the road
and took his way across the bridge in the direction of
Greenfield Hall,
THE TWENTY-SECOND CHAPTER.
The Lonely Farm.
TALL figure, in a long macintosh, strode along a
S I road in the late dusk of a winter evening. Ills
#]| collar was turned up over his ears, his cap
pulled down over his eyes, and every now and
then he glanced from side to side with quick
suspicion. But in spite of the keenness of his glances, he
never saw a figure which shadowed him with marvellous
skill, now trotting sharply, bent double behind a hedge,
and again taking advantage of a curve in the road to cut
across the sticky surface of a ploughed field.
The agility of the second man was marvellous, for to all
outward appearance he was an elderly labourer, dressed
in corduroys, heavy boots, and with a battered wide-
awake hat on his grizzled head.
■ It was blowing hard, and the keen wind brought sharp
gusts of cold rain, which grew heavier and more frequent
as darkness settled over the lonely scene.
The road went trailing up the side of a tall, chalk
down, and presently hedges were left behind and the
full force of the storm swept fiercely in the faces of the
travellers. But still the tall man kept on at a steady
pace, never faltering even for the fiercest squalls, while
his pursuer, taking advantage of the gathering darkness,
came gradually nearer. So they reached the top of the
hill, and there the wind was so strong that number one
was forced to put his head down and lean all his weight
against the gale. Somewhere, far down in the dark
valley below, a single star of light shone steadily, and
suddenly, turning off the main road, the man in the
macintosh struck into a rough cart track, which seemed
to lead straight towards the light.
Another mile, and he came to a rough wall of flints
which surrounded a good-sized building, apparently a
farm.- He - passed through a broken gate, up a weed-
grown path, and tapped sharply at a door. The labourer
arrived at the gate just as the door opened, and saw the
tall man pass inside, and the door closed at once behind
him.
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY,’’ now appearing- in “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


v No dog, that’s one comfort,” muttered the labourer;
and, lightly leaping over the wall, he began a cautious
tour round the building. It was now quite dark, and a
curtain had been drawn over the lighted window. The
ground was littered with stones and rubbish, and the
labourer, otherwise Sexton Blake, stumbled once or twice.
It was a ramshackle, ruinous sort of place, but Blake
very soon found out that the back door was locked and
all the ground-floor windows securely fastened. Some of
them were boarded up. He came round to the front
widow, where the light had been, and put his head close
to it. From inside came a faint murmur of voices, but
the moaning of the wind and the lash of the rain on the
roof drowned the sounds so that he could not distinguish
a single word. Only one thing he made out—that one
voice, quite a strange one to him, was occasionally raised
in tones of expostulation.
“I’ve got to get inside, but how?” thought Blake.
It seemed a hopeless task to do so without being heard.
But it took a good deal to stop the detective when he
had once made up his mind, and, after a moment’s
thought, he turned towards the farm buildings, which lay
at the far end of the walled enclosure. By the aid of a
pocket electric torch, which he always carried, he found
his way into a large barn, and a gleam of delight flashed
in his eyes as he caught sight of a ladder hung against
the wall on staples.
He tried to lift it, but it was far too heavy for one
man to tackle single-handed. But this did not dis-
courage Blake. Out came a big pocket-knife with a saw
in it, and in a very few minutes he had cut off the lower
ten feet. The other part, which was only about twelve
feet long, he carried easily, and shortly had it leaning
against the back of the house, with its top close below a
window.
Ah, this was better! This Avindow was only fastened
with an ordinary catch, which yielded in a few seconds to
Blake’s clever manipulation. The casement SAvnng open,
and the detective stepped inside. The rotten boards'
creaked beneath his weight.
He flashed his torch, and by its light saw that he
Avas in a bare, ruinous room. Not a stick of furniture,
the plaster scaling from the walls, and the rotten boards
of the floor deep in dust. He crept cautiously over to
the door, opened it, and found himself on a landing.
Several doors opened on to this landing, and at the far
end Avas the head of the stairs. Noav he could again hear *
the hum of voices below, but not what they were saying.
He paused, wondering what was best to do.
Blake had been hanging about the neighbourhood of
Greenfield Hall for several Avoeks in various disguises;
but he had been forced to-confess that up to the present
he had got no nearer to the object of his search. The
sham Hammond had given him no chie to work on,
though he had shadoAved him Avith unwearying steadiness.
To all appearance the new owner of the Hall was a
model country gentleman and business man. He Avcnt
to town three days a Aveek. and attended to business, and
on the other days shot and hunted.
He seemed to have no siispicious acquaintances, and as
the days passed Blake had felt more and more puzzled.
Yet he never wavered in his conviction that the tenant
of Greenfield Hall was a mere pretender, although he
had to confess that he had never seen a man play the
game more cleverly.
The question Avas, what had become of Dick Callendar?
And it Avas Blake’s conviction that the key to this mystery
Avas in the hands of the sham Maurice Hammond. It
Avas a peculiarity of Blake that, once he had taken up a
case, he never abandoned it until he had solved it to his
own satisfaction—and that quite irrespective of whether
his employers were satisfied or not. In the present
case, he was the more keen to straighten out the tangle
because Maurice Hammond once, and Bob tAvice, had
the lives of himself and Tinker.
Blake had jvwtrnade up his mind to take the risk and
go doAvn the stairs, when a slight sound in the room
immediately in front of the one he had come out of
attracted his attention. He Avent nearer, and listened at
the keyhole. A low groan broke on his ears.
He tried the door. It Avas locked!
Out came that marvellous knife, and presently the
screws of the lock were loosened, and the detective softlj
opened the door and peered in.
Out of the darkness came another groan. Blake hesi-
tated no longer. He passed in, closed the door, and
flashed his torch. The room was small, filthily dirty, and
the window heavily barred. The only furniture was a
chair and a truckle-bed. On the latter was stretched a
human figure, motionless, breathing heavily, and at
times uttering the low groan which had first attracted
Blake’s attention.
The detective went nearer, and held the light close tc
the man’s face. Then he started back with a muffled
exclamation of extreme surprise. He took a second
glance. Yes, there was no doubt about it. This poor,
living skeleton was no other than Dick Callendar, the
real Maurice Hammond.
But how came he in this terrible state? Was it
illness, or Blake rapidly examined the unfortunate
man, who showed no signs of consciousness.
“ I thought as much,” he muttered grimly. “ Drugged !
It’s that Australian stramonium. They’ve kept him
under it for months, no doubt.”
The question was, what to do next. It was quite plain
that, single-handed, he could not get the poor fellow
away, for he could not walk, Blake tried him with a
little brandy, but it was no good. It went to his heart
to leave him at the mercy of these scoundrels for ever so
short a time; but there was nothing else for it. They
might come up at any minute, and if they found him
there, and realised that their secret was a secret no
longer, neither his life nor Callendar’s would be worth a
minute’s purchase.
So, leaving Callendar where he lay, Blake turned back
towards the door. At that very instant the door was
flung suddenly open, and a burly man, with the most
villainous-looking face that Blake had ever seen in his
life, strode in.
THE TWENTY-THIRD CHAPTER
On the Edge of the Pit.
FOR a second the new-comer stared in stupid sur-
prise. Then he made a grab at something in
his pocket—a pistol, no doubt. That moment’s
hesitation lost him his chance. Blake was cn
him like a thunderbolt, and, seizing him by both
shoulders, flung him aside with such force that he fell
with a crash against the wall, the candle which he
carried going out in the fall. Leaping over him, Blake
darted back across the landing and into the room by
the window of which he had entered.
As he closed the door he heard a volley of furious
oaths, as the man picked himself up; and then a shout-.
“ Hammond, ’ere, quick !”
Blake could have chuckled as he opened the window.
If there were only those two in the house, he was now
quite safe. He stepped out on to the ladder into the
wind and rain, ran down it with the speed of a lamp*,
lighter, and, as he sprang to the ground, was suddenly
gripped by a pair of powerful arms, which closed round
his body like a vice.
“ Gubbins, you fool, bring a lantern!” shouted the
man who had caught him.
And the voice was strangely familiar in Blake’s ears.
He knew that if the farmer got there before he < ould
get free he was done for, and he struggled with all his
force to break away. With a clever dodge, he succeeded
in tripping his captor; but the man kept his hold, and,
locked in one another’s arms, the two rolled over and over
in the mud of the neglected garden. Blake had a pistol,
but he could not reach it, for his arms were pinned to
his sides.
He saw a light come flashing round the corner of the
house, and made a last desperate effort. He was fight-
ing for dear life, and he knew it. But the other was a
far bigger man than ho, and held him in a grasp of
iron.
“ Quick, hit him on the head !”ne heard the man yell.
“ I can’t hold him much longer !”
“SEXTON BLAKE, BEEF-EATER • A StiP By & HE^BER^ e iy^XWELL!. ondon ' NEXT WEEK


He saw a stick flung up, there was a crack, stars
flashed before his eyes, and he knew no more.
When Blake came to himself again he was lying on
the floor of the barn where he had found the ladder, and
voices came dimly to his stunned senses.
“ It’s no good, I tell you; I won’t have murder done
here ! So now you know!”
The voice was that of Gubbins, the villainous-looking
farmer.
Blake restrained the impulse to move, and remained
lying quite still, with his eyes shut. His face was stiff
with mud and dried blood, and his head was aching
savagely. But he was his own man again, watchful,
ready to snatch the slenderest chance of saving himself.
“ You fool, what’s turned you so squeamish?” retorted
the other savagely. “ We’ve got to get him out of the
way—that’s flat!”
“ I don’t deny it,” returned Gubbins. “ All I say is, I
won’t have him killed here !”
“What do you propose?” answered the big man, in
tones of concentrated fury. “Do you want me to lake
him back to the Hall and butcher him there?”
“ I don’t care what you do,” answered the farmer
obstinately. “Do the job any way as pleases you, only
not here!”
“Who’ll be the wiser? The longer we go messing
about the more risk there is. Why not knock him on
the head now, and bury him in the ploughed field? You
can run the harrow over it in the morning.”
Blake could hardly restrain a shiver—not of fright, but
of rage at the cold-blooded talk of the brute. But he
knew his only chance was to play ’possum, and he did
it to perfection. Both of the ruffians supposed him still
insensible.
The two wrangled a little longer, and finally Gubbins
said:
“Look here. I’ll put the horse in, and we’ll cart bim
out to the old chalk quarry on Merripit Down. Shove
him over the edge, and I’ll warrant he won’t give any
more trouble. It’s a lonely spot, and if anyone does find
him, why, it’ll be ‘ accidental death.’ ”
The other grumblingly agreed, and Gubbins went to
put the horse in.
Blake hoped that now he would get his chance; but
the big man never left him, and he was forced to go on
shamming dead.
At last the horse and cart were brought round. Blake’s
limp body was flung in behind, and the vehicle creaked
and groaned away through the rain and darkness. After
a bit it turned off the road up a hill. The big man
swore at the weather and the darkness the whole time.
“ Here we are !” said Gubbins at last, “We won’t
take the cart right up; we’ll carry him the last bit.”
As the cart stopped, Blake took one long breath, and
made a leap for life. Alas for him, the tailboard was
higher than he had thought! He caught his toe in it,
and came smash on his face on the soaking turf.
He heard a yell of surprise and rage, and then, before
he could gain his feet, the big man was on top of him.
“ Gubbins, quick!” he heard the fellow shriek, with a
fierce oath.
Blake fought like a fury, and, doubling himself up,
kicked out with all his might. One foot caught the big
man in the stomach, and he rolled over; but he still held
Blake by one arm.
■ “ Gubbins !” he yelled again, chokingly.
And, before the detective could jerk himself free, the
other brute had hold of him.
Even then Blake still struggled. But it was no use.
“ Quick, pick him up!” hissed the big man, in a voice
only half human.
And as he spoke he kicked at Blake with all the force
he was capable of. But in the darkness he missed his
aim, and his foot only grazed Blake’s side.
Gubbins growled: “Don’t waste time. And make less
noise; someone may hear. Catch hold !”
Blake, breathless and exhausted with the terrible fight,
felt Gubbins seize his legs, and the other his shoulders.
They lifted him and hurried forward.
“ You fool!” muttered Gubbins. " Look out, or you’ll
be over the edge! Now then, one swing!”
Even in that awful moment, hanging over the edge of
that black gulf, Blake did not lose his head. He knew
that he was doomed, but he vowed to himself that one
of his murderers should go with him. As they swung
him, he grabbed fiercely at the big man’s coat-sleeve.
Before the latter could cry out, the swing was ended,
and Gubbins had let go. Blake shot forward, his weight
came on the other; there was one ghastly shriek, and he
and his murderer went over the edge together.
Gubbins, left alone on the top of the great chalk cliff,
was so appalled by the sudden catastrophe to his accom-
plice that for a moment he stood quite motionless. Then,
as power of thought came back, he realised what this
meant to him. For weeks he had been living on the
money paid him for keeping Callendar. Now all this
was at an end. Worse; though a mere labourer—for
that was what he considered Sexton Blake—might dis-
appear without question, it was different with the owner
of Greenfield. There would be a terrible outcry. He
must be brought into it. Instantly he made up his mind
to go down and see what had happened.
To the left he knew the descent was easy. First tying
the horse to a bush, he began to climb down, and soon
reached the bottom in safety, and crept along under the
bushes which grew thick at the bottom of the long-
deserted quarry.
It was pitchy dark, and he could not tell where he
was. At all costs, he must have a light. It was calm
down here out of the wind, and surely it would be safe*
for he was far below the level of the downs, and on such
a wild night, and in so lonely a spot there was no risk
of being seen. He crouched beneath a bush, and, strik-
ing a match, held it in the hollow of his hands till it
burnt up.
The faint glimmer flickered on white lumps of chalk
and the withered leaves of hazel and blackberry. It
showed, too, a dark mass a few feet in front of him.
Gubbins took two steps forward and held the tiny flame
over the object. It was the body of his companion in
crime. The eyes w r ere shut, and the white face seamed
with a ghastly cut, which ran from eye to lip, and from
which the blood was still welling.
Gubbins shook him by the shoulder. “Hammond, are
you alive?” he muttered, in the man’s ear.
As he spoke, a great jagged lump of flint hurtled down
from above, and, catching Gubbins fairly between the
shoulders, stretched him flat on the body of his accom-
plice, £• ,
Some minutes passed, and then there was a flicker ol
light on the rugged face of the chalk some way above,
and a man came clambering slowly and stiffly down.
With great pain and difficulty he reached the bottom, and
stood over the two bodies.
It was the elderly labourer, otherwise Sexton Blake,
who, by a sort of miracle, had escaped the fate which
had overtaken his would-be murderers. The fact was
that in the darkness Gubbins had mistaken his ground,
and instead of taking his prisoner to a point where the
quarry side dropped sheer, had stopped short of that
spot, and flung Blake over where the bank was not quite
perpendicular, and was, into the bargain, thickly covered
with brush.
By a happy chance, Blake had dropped square across
a fair-sized young ash-tree, the springy stem of which
had bounced him back, at the same time tearing Ham-
mond from his hold. From the ash-tree Blake had rolled
rather than fallen into a regular thicket of holly and
brumble-bushes, where he had stuck fast, without injury
of any kind except many scratches and loss of breath.
This clump of holly grew on a ledge some twelve or
fourteen feet from the bottom, and Blake, crawling
quietly out of the tangle, had emerged safely on this
ledge, where, not knowing how far he was from the
bottom, or what Gubbins was doing, he had remained.
Presently he had heard Gubbins’s heavy steps beneath
him, and then seen him strike a light and bend over
the sham Hammond’s body.
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled ‘‘SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY,” now appearing in “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,” Id., Every Tuesday.


SEXTON BLAKE
ON THE RAILWAY.
SEE
ii
THE BOYS’ FRIEND.”
NOW ON SALE EVERYWHERE. ONE PENNY.
“DAILY MAIL.”
Tliis had given him his chance. He knew that in his
weak state he was no match for the burly farmer, so,
making up his mind with his usual lightning rapidity,
he had picked up a handy flint, and, with this deadly
missile, finished off his other enemy.
Neither of the men were dead. That Blake saw in
a moment. Gubbins, indeed, was only stunned by the
spinal shock. So the detective’s first care was to tie the
farmer up so securely that he could not move hand or
foot.
His next proceeding was an odd one. He took Ham-
mond by the hair and pulled sharply. Off came a most
perfectly built fair wig, disclosing a crown covered close
with short-shaven black hair, and seamed from side to
side with a long, bare, white scar.
A slight smile curved Blake’s lips.
“ Captain Glyde, otherwise Arnold Grice, your day is
done!” he said slowly. Then he set to work and
staunched the awful cut on the man’s face, and tied up
the wound.
Leaving the bodies where they lay, he climbed back
up the opposite bank and made for where the cart was
still standing.
THE TWENTY-FOURTH CHAPTER.
Bob Hammond Comes Home
TWO men sat before the fire in the luxurious smok-
ing-room at Greenfield Hall. They were Sex-
ton Blake and Maurice Hammond. Not the
sham Hammond, but the man whom Blake had
known in Australia as Dick Callendar the
squatter, owner of Taroomba. He was thin and pale, a
mere shadow of his former burly self; but his eyes were
clear, and he was fast recovering from the awful effects
af the abominable drug under which he had been suffer-
ing when Blake found him in the lonely farmhouse. He
had just come home from London, where he had been
undergoing treatment.
“ Blake, I can never thank you enough!” he was
saying earnestly.
The detective smiled.
“ There’s nothing to thank me for. You saved my life
in the first place, and, in the second, you’ve paid me
very well. What I want to know is what happened
when Grice rode off with you from the Roost.”
“ He took me to a cave in the hills,” replied Maurice.
“ There I lay down and was so fagged out that I went to
sleep at -once. Then I fancy he must have drugged me,
for after that everything is very vague and indistinct.
I have some recollection of travelling in a train in queer
sort of clothes—l think they must have been a parson’s—
and then of a long sea voyage, on my back all the time
in a bunk.”
“ Ah, just so!” put in Blake. “ I have since found
that a man answering Grice’s description brought an
invalid home three, months ago on the Serapis.”
" Sometimes,” went on Maurice, “ he would come into
the cabin and make me sit up and write to his dictation.
I didn’t seem able to help myself.”
“ No, you couldn’t. That’s one of the effects of that
Australian stramonium. It causes complete loss of will
power.” '' -
“ After that I remember less than ever,” said Maurice.
“ I think I must taken straight to that house
where you found me.-. I should have been dead,” he
added, with some emotion, “ if you hadn’t tracked me.”
“ The whole thing is pretty clear now,” replied Blake.
“ At first I wondered that Grice hadn’t finished you off
when he had the chance. I believe he sent back two of
his men to do so when you chased his gang across the
desert. But, then, it must have occurred to him that,
though he had all your papers which he stole from
Taroomba, he could not hope to personate you success-
fully unless he got your signature to certain necessary
documents. Also, no doubt, he wished to study your
peculiarities of manner and speech. Certainly he was as
clever a scoundrel as ever I had to do with. Upon my
word, he almost deceived me when I first met him in
Simonds & Clarke’s office.”
"Will they hang him?” inquired Maurice.
“ No; the fall has brought on paralysis. He is in the
prison infirmary, and there he will remain until he dies.
He can’t live many weeks. As for Gubbins, he’s safe in
Dartmoor for the next ten years.”
“And I’m here safe and sound, and owner of this
lovely place,” said Maurice thoughtfully. “If it wasn’t
for poor Bob I should be quite happy.”
“ Supposing we write and tell your brother to come
home?” suggested the detective quietly.
Maurice stared. “What do you mean? They’d have
him on the murder charge.”
“ But he didn’t commit it,”
“ I’m sure he didn’t.” As he spoke, there was a ring
at the front door bell. “Hallo, who’s that?” continued
Maurice, in surprise. It was past ten at night, a queer
time for callers.
“ Wait, and I’ll see,” said Blake, leaving the room.
Next minute he was back, and with him came two
young men, muffled in heavy overcoats.
“Maurice, old chap!” exclaimed the first, springing
forward.
The elder Hammond jumped from his seat, an ex-
pression of absolute consternation on his face.
“ You, Bob !” he muttered. “ But what did you come
home for? You must be mad!”
“ Not a bit!” was the cheerful reply. “ I always obey
Sexton Blake’s orders.”
“You ordered him home?” cried Maurice, turning to
Blake.
“ Just so,” replied the detective. “ I cabled to Tinker
to bring your brother here.”
“ But he’ll be arrested!” exclaimed Maurice, in tones
of horror.
“ Don’t excite yourself, my dear fellow!” said Blake.
“It will be all right, I promise, you. That interesting
scoundrel Qrice -was not quite so clever as he thought
himself. It was he, Maurice, who murdered your uncle.
He killed him because he caught him rifling his safe.
Among the plunder were a number of banknotes. Of
the numbers of these there’ were, fortunately, two
memoranda. One was in the safe. That Grice took, and
thought himself safe. But the other was in your uncle’s
desk. Through this, Scotland Yard traced several of the
notes, and if Grice had not escaped when he did he would
have been arrested for stealing them. Your brother,
therefore, is perfectly safe.”
Maurice heaved a long sigh of relief.
“ Blake, you’re a wonder !” he exclaimed. “ Now, Bob,
you must be starving. You and Tinker come and have
some supper.”
All four trooped into the dining-room, where a cold
meal was speedily brought in. It was a most festive
occasion, and even Pedro the bloodhound, cracking a
large bone under the table, plainly enjoyed himself.
Nor was it the last that Blake and Tinker enjoyed at
Maurice Hammond’s hospitable table. There are no more
welcome guests at Greenfield Hall than the detective and
his clever young assistant.
THE END.
(Next week's grand tale will be entitled "SEXTON BLAKB,
BEEF-EATER, ” a stirring story by HERBERT MAXWELL ,
“SEXTON BLAKE. BEEF-EATER.” NEXT WEEK!


GRAND NEW SERIAL.
OPENING CHAPTERS.
TROOPER and BUSHRANGER ;
Or, THE EAST DAYS OF NED KELLY.
BY CECIL HAYTER
The Previous Chapters Up to Date.
This is a story of Ned Kelly, the notorious Australian
bushranger. It tells how, after being; captured and
lodged In Melbourne Gaol, he escapes and makes his
way to his old haunts: In disguise he steers for the
gold diggings. On the train he meets a Government
inspector, a man named Hayes, who cheats Kelly at
cards. Kelly turns the tables, and then hands Hayes
the money back he has won. Kelly insists on Sub-
commissioner Hayes getting out of the train, throws
his disguise out of the window, resumes his role as
Captain Vyner, and reports that ho has been robbed,
and that Hayes is missing. Captain Vyner (Kelly) and
Jake Simpson become partners in the Good Hope
claim together, and “strike lucky.” After a number
of varied and exciting experiences at the gold dig.
gings, Kelly and his partner resolve to leavethe camp.
Kelly’s reason for so doing is that his identity is sus-
pected. They discover that they are being followed.
The two men elude their pursuers and get lost in the
bush.
At this point the new reader takes up the story.
Dost in the Bush.
“Bushed—hopelessly bushed!” said Kelly hoarsely.
“ It’s no good, old man; we may as well face the thing
now as later. We may go on wander-
ing and looking till we drop; and then
will come tKe madness and the horrors,
until something in the brain goes
snap. I’ve no use for ending my
days a gibbering, screaming maniac.
The game’s played, the stake’s made,
and there’s only one decent way out.
So here goes !” And he plucked his
revolver from his belt.
The tough old American \yatched
him with scared eyes, dazed and piti-
ful; the nerves of both were jangling
and broken.
They had hoped against hope, de-
luded themselves, tricked themselves
into a pretence that there was yet a
chance. But after all those long
hours of stifling, bone-racking march,
to find themselves where they started
was the finishing touch, and in a flash
delusions and pretence were swept
away, and nerves and strength snapped
under the prolonged strain.
Jake lurched forward, reeling like a
drunken man, and gripped Kelly’s
wrist.
“Don’t, pardner; don’t do it—not
yet!” His voice, which quavered, was
no more than a thin, hoarse whisper.
Already their tongues were swollen
with thirst and their lips cracked and
of a horrible congested purple colour.
They had not tasted food or drink for
jlose on twenty-four hours. “ Don’t
3o it, pardner,” he croaked again;
‘we may win through. Yes, sir; I
gfuess we’ll pull out all right.”
The sentences were dragged out
with long, husky wheezings in be-
tween. He was making a supreme
effort to choke back an hysterical
gulping in his throat. • There is no
:error like the bush terror!
« m m * Author of “The Quest of the Ruby Scarab.**
Kelly turned on him sourly; he also was fighting for
» last tattered remnant of self-control.
“ Leave go, Jake Simpson ! Let go my wrist, I tell
you! Have you ever seen a man die in the bush?”
“No, pardner: but ”
? ‘No; well I have, and that makes all the difference.
If I thought there was a fighting chance I’d fight till I
couldn’t stand; as it is, I prefer a decent death. After
all, it’s little enough to make a fuss about. Death in
itself is nothing; the manner of it everything.”
Jake let go the wrist, and stood swaying and rocking
on his feet, blinking uncertainly.
“ I tell you, pardner,” he said thickly—" I take leave
to tell you that though you’ve more sand than any man
I’ve ever run up against, you’re a blame coward at the
end of it all.” He paused, and then flung out his arms
sharply. “ An’ I’m worse—l’m a durned sight worse—
for I dursn’t do it. I tell you, man, I dursn’t!” And,
without any warning, he suddenly collapsed on the
ground with a choking sob.
The collapse brought Kelly up with a round turn, and
he lowered his revolver. The lonesomeness of the place
was awful, and it was hard to tell whether the blackness
of night or the pitiless glare of the sun was the worst.
The next instant the two partners were racing and stumbling to
the water’s edge amidst a cloud of spears.
You should not miss HERBERT MAXWELL’S Grand Tale, entitled “SEXTON BLAKE ON THE
RAILWAY.” now aoueaping in “THE BOYS’ FRIEND,’’ Id., Every Tuesday.


His anger against his companion flickered out, and he
only felt a sort of dull compassion. What did it matter,
since the end must come, whether he used his last resource
now or a few hours later?. He stuck his revolver back
in his belt and shook Jake by the shoulder.
“Get up, old man; we’d better be said
shortly. And, without another word, Jake rose to his
feet, and they began to plod wearily forward again.
Kelly watched the trail carefully. There to the right
was the fresh one they had broken at dawn leading due
east, and from this they had turned astray into the in-
terminable hirelings.
He took his bearings by this, and, hazarding a guess
at north, set his face resolutely towards it. If he could
keep only moderately straight, this would at any rate
keep them clear of old tracks, and so prove less confus-
ing-
Moreover, he made up his mind that for every half
mile traversed he would head out eastward at right
angles for a couple of hundred yards. In this way they
would diminish the risk of circling, and make a trail
somewhat like a badly made staircase laid on its side.
Jsle followed listless and dumb, the bridles looped
over his arm. As darkness fell they halted, waiting for
the moon; but before doing so Kelly made a deep mark
in the ground to indicate their direction, lest in turning
round whilst seated or lying down they should lose their
bearings, , .
Slowly, majestically, the moon slid up in a clear sky,
tinging everything with silver. It touched the topmost
bush twigs, throwing fantastic black shadows. Higher
yet, and it let a flood of light into the little open space
where they camped. Yet neither man stirred. Utterly
worn out, they slept like dead things, in spite of thirst
and hunger. The sun was full above the horizon before
they woke, with sore-rimmed eyes and aching bodies, to
face another day of torture.
Stiffly they dragged themselves to their feet, and eyed
with loathing the remnants of dry food still left them.
Starving though they were, eating was a sheer impos-
sibility without so much as a drop of water to moisten
their tongues. The horses, too, poor brutes, were in
nearly as bad a state, and maddened by the flies.
Kelly took his bearings as before, corrected them as
far as possible by the sun, and pushed forward sullenly
and despairingly. .
But they had not gone fifty yards before a sudden
cloud of flies rose buzzing angrily from a spot a little
to the right of the trail, and a minute or two later a
huge black crow flapped lazily away, scared but resentful.
“ Say, pardner, somethin’ in the bush there,” croaked
Jake through his cracked lips.
Kelly nodded dully; his thoughts were far away, and
he was lost in a strange dreamland of his own. Never-
theless, almost mechanically he turned and broke through
the bush towards the spot indicated.
An instant later a harsh cry —half terror, half amaze-
ment—reached Jake, and he plunged after his partner.
Kelly clutched him by the arm and shook it fiercely.
“You’ve never seen a man die in the bush. Now, then,
look for yourself; look for yourself, and you’ll under-
stand.” His eyes glared fiercely, and his face was
blanched white beneath the tan.
Jake looked, rubbed his eyes, and looked again. At
first he could see nothing—nothing but yellow, brownish
dead leaves and- Ah! he saw at last—saw with
horrible, ghastly clearness.
Almost at his feet, and burnt by exposure to the colour
of the leaves, was a nameless, shrunken thing, the face
mercifully hidden on a bent arm—a thing that had once
been a man—a young man, from the build of him. He
was naked, not a rag or stitch on him, for—and
this is perhaps one of the most curious features of the
last stages of bush mania—its victims, in their delirium,
become possessed by a frenzied desire to rid themselves
of the hamperings of civilisation. First go belt or boots,
then trousers, shirt, everything, till they are stripned to
the last shred, and the flies and the blistering sun does
the rest, '
The poor- fellow had apparently been wandering for
days before the end came; his skin was shrunken on to
the bones. He was in the last stages of emaciation, and
must have starved for long before death gripped him.
With a great effort they pulled themselves together,
and prepared to do what little they could. And that was
little enough. Too weak to lift him, without implements
of any kind, they could only pile leaves on him where
he lay, and so in some measure protect him from the
attacks of noisome insects.
It was whilst in the midst of this that the true inner l
horror of such a fate was revealed to them, and almost
sent them reeling away never to return, with their task
half completed. A chance movement dislodged the dead
man’s head from its resting-place, and the arm beneath
showed to what dire straits delirium and agonising feat
can drive the human mind.
“Come on!” whispered Kelly huskily at last; and they
turned once more towards the trail. As they did so
Jake’s foot struck against some hard object.
He stooped, groped blindly, and picked it up. It was
a coarse canvas sack, of small size, tied round the mouth
with a piece of raw hide thong, but without name or
means of identification. Evidently it had been the last
thing with which the dead man had parted. They undid
the thong with much fumbling, and discovered inside a
couple of double handfuls of superb fire opals in the
rough.
“Poor beggar!” said Kelly. “Mighty hard lines to
die of starvation with a fortune in your hand. It’s no
good leaving ’em, and it’s no good taking ’em, as far as
I can see. Still, there’s a bare chance, and we may find
out Oh, come along, anyway!”
Two hours more—three—and Kelly, after stumbling
heavily through a particularly dense patch, paused,
breathless and shaking, supporting himself against a
branch. He rubbed his eyes, stared, panted, and stared
again. A short half-mile «head a thin column of smoke
was rising idly in the hot air—a thin blue spiral, barely
visible.
He pointed with outstretched hand, which shook as
though he had an ague, and tried to force articulate
words from his swollen tongue in vain.
Jake saw it too, and nodded, too far gone for speech.
One of the horses dragged its head up wearily and
sniffed.
With a mighty effort Kelly managed to ejaculate
huskily
“ Bush camp—water!”
Again Jake nodded, and flung an arm across his horse
to save himself from falling.
Inspired with a new hope, they reeled, staggered, and
at times crawled along. The bush began to thin out
before them; it was evident that they were coming to
some sort of clearing, an oasis in that leafy wilderness.
- A faint reek of wood fire came to them across the still
air. There was a pale-coloured glimmer between the
lower branches, and both horses sniffed anxiously. In-
stinct told them that they were near water.
At last through the foliage they could see the sheen
of it, a fair-sized lake. And utterly regardless of possible
danger, maddened by the sight of that for want of which
they had been suffering the agonies of the damned, mep
and horses alike jostled and tramped a way to its edgfe
and flung themselves down, drinking savagely, immoder-
ately, as only those dying of thirst can drink.
The lake was irregular in shape, about a mile long, by
a third of that distance broad. The camp fire, the smoke
of which they had seen, was on the far side, hidden from
view by the tall grasses which grew right down to the
water’s edge. Before they had drunk their fill, however,
and, to a certain extent, revived their failing senses, an
infernal din sprang up from the other side of the lake—
bowlings and shriekings, shrill yellings, as of a host of
maniacs.
Before they had reached the lake and moistened their
parched and swollen lips they had been utterly reckless
of danger—they would have tried to rush the water in
the face of concentrated machine gun fire—but with the
edge of their craving dulled, caution returned, and they
made haste to get their horses and themselves under
cover, uncertain whether they had been observed or not.
The din continued, rising at times to an almost deafen-
ing pitch; and Jake, who was gnawing voraciously at a
piece of dried biltong, paused to listen. There was
something eerie and blood-chilling in the sound—some-
thing positively uncanny.
“SEXTON BLAKE. BEEF-EATER ■ A Sth Ey S^E^BEK^I>?AXWELL OndOn ' NEXT WEEK I


“ Say, pardner, what d’ye make of that, caterwauling?”
lie asked, in a whisper.
Kelly-had been listening attentively, and his carbine
lay across his knee, though he had barely strength to
raise it. Their eyas were aching and red-rimmed from
want of eleep,
“ I fancy we’ve fallen out of the frying-pan into the
fire,” he said thickly. “ I know something of blacks,
and unless I’m much mistaken there’s devilry of some
kind gojng on yonder. They sound to me like bad blacks,
and they’re holding an extra special corroboree about
something; I’ve heard of something of this sort before;
lots of fellows pitch yarns about bad tribes in the bush
who hold the most ghastly festivals and indulge in all
the primitive horrors of the old tribal traditions. It’s
precious seldom that a white £lan drops across them, and
still more sure that he gets away with a whole skin td
tell the tale.
We’d better take alternate spells of sleep, and try
and freshen ourselves up a bit whilst we have the chance.
They’ll be too busy to worry about us yet awhile, pro-
viding we haven’t been spotted already/’
“Say, what .should they be wanting our scalps for?
We ain’t harmed any of them.”
. “We are in the bush, for one thing, and they regard
the big bush belt as theirs. You’d better turn in for
your spell now. I’ll rouse you later. We must have
sleep.” ,
Jake grunted acquiescence, too fagged out to argue
the point, and dropped off instantly into a deep sleep,
whilst Kelly propped his back against a tree and tried
hard to pinch himself into wakefulness.
All through the long day they slept, turn and turn
about. At nightfall they Q&ept down to the water’s
edge, drank, and, stripping off their things, cooled their
blistered skins in the lake shallows. Then once more
they crawled cautiously back to their hiding-place and
slept again. .
The din in the camp had died away gradually into
silence, and no sound was to be heard but the hum of
myriads of insects and the occasional stealthy rustle of
small bush animals.
Once on the far side of the lake a horrible shriek rang
out, the shriek of a black in the grip of a loathsome-
nightmare; and once over the still waters there was
borne a scuttling of feet, the quick grunting interchange
of blows, a thud of something falling, and a stifled moan
—the only evidences of a hidden tragedy.
It was inexpressibly eerie, and the long hours dragged
out towards the dawn.
With the first lightening of the eastern sky, Kelly,
whose turn it was to do sentry, touched Jake lightly on
the shoulder.
The big American woke quietly and instantly, as men
learn to wake who have slept in the open surrounded by
danger.
“There’s something moving through the bush behind
us,” whispered Kelly, his mouth close to Jake’s ear;
“and a quarter of an hour back I saw a cloud of birds
rise at the far end of the lake. They’ve spotted us, for
sure—winded us, maybe, you know their extraordinary
powers of scent—and are working round to cut us off.”
“ Say, pardner, it kinder looks as if it were up against
us, an’ our name was Dennis. Hawses ain’t no durnod
use in this hyer bush, an’ ”
“Jump for it! Jump, man; break for the water!”
yelled Kelly suddenly,
Jake leapt on the word; a streak of light flashed past
his ear, and a light reed throwing spear quivered in the
ground a few paces ahead.
Crack! Kelly’s carbine coughed, swung round a little,
and coughed again. Two stunted figures fell forward.
The next instant the two partners were racing and
stumbling to the water’s edge, amidst a cloud of spears,
their one anxiety to get the lake at their backs before
the rush came; and already the outer fringe of the bush
was swarming with stealthily moving, fierce-eyed little
men, eager as terriers, waiting for the signal.
'Another thrillinginstalment of this grantl story will
be published next week.) '
The Skipper's
Weekly Chat.
A FINE STORY.
In next week's issue I shall present to my readers a
rattling: story of .the Adventures of Sexton Blake and
Tinker, chronicled by that popular author, Herbert
Maxwell. This yarn, which will be entitled "Sexton
Blake, Beefeater," possesses a most daringly original
plot, which is developed in a most fascinating manner.
The reader of our paper who neglects to obtain his
copy of next week’s issue will be missing one of the
finest of this series of stories we have yot had.
I may mention that Mr. Herbert Maxwell Is now
' writing a fine story of Sexton Blako and Tinker for
"The Boys' Friend"—ld., every Tuesday. . This tale is
entitled "Sexton Blake on the Railway."
In Want of a Tonic.
. A correspondent some little while ago read in our
paper a letter in which a reader recommended as a tonic
for those whose systems have become debilitated a pre-
paration called “Nerve Tonine.”
Now, my correspondent tells me he doesn’t know where
he can get this.
If my reader cannot obtain this Nerve Tonine from his
local chemist, I should advise him to ask the chemist to
recommend him some other nerve tonic. There are
dozens of them on the market, from Fellows’ Syrup of
Hypophosphites, Fer Bravais, Quinine and Iron Tonic,
or my young friend can make a pint of the following
tonic for himself for Is. 3d.:
• Get a bottle of Stone’s British Ginger Wine, and three
pennyworth of citrate of iron and quinine. The ginger
wine can be obtained from any grocer’s, and the citrate
of iron and quinine can be got from any chemist’s. Put
the citrate into the bottle of ginger wine, and shake it
up thoroughly until it is dissolved; then take a wine-
glassful after each meal, following this up by thoroughly
rinsing out the the mouth with warm or cold water to
remove any of the tonic from the teeth, as the iron in it
has a harmful action upon the enamel. '
A Boy Who Doesn't Grow.
- “ K. M.” |s a friend of mine who says he is getting on
for eighteen years of age, and only stands five feet high,
yet he takes plenty of exercise, such as cycling, football,
and swimming.
Now he wants me to give him a remedy which will
make him grow.
T am afraid, “K. M.,” if you take plenty of exercise
and plenty of nourishing food, I can do little beyond
advising you to persist in this course in order to promote
your growth.
Nature and temperament have something to do with
a man’s size, but it may be that you are built on the
small size, with the result that you will not be of any
great stature. Still, you have yet three years in which
to add inches to" your height, and these coining three
years should be used to the best advantage.
Don’t smoke or drink, eat plenty of nourishing food,
take a moderate and regular amount of exercise. One
of the secrets of beneficial exercise is the taking of it
regularly, at stated hours each day. If you don’t grow
much more, however, you still have a great consolation
left to you in the fact that, as a rule, little men have
very good constitutions and live long lives.
The tall man with long legs and a short body stands
a much poorer chance of living to a hearty old age than
the little man with short legs and a long body. It is the
long body that tells, that gives a man vitality and
strength, and enables him to fight the battle of life and
come out on top; so, “K. M.,” if you don’t grow much
more, remember that oven shortness of stature has its
advantages. THE SKIPPER.
Printed and published weekly by the Proprietors, the Amalgamated Press, Ltd., of 1, Carmelite House. Carmelite Street, London,
Rneland. Subscription, 7s. per annum. Saturday, January 20th, 1000.


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
mm
--
P* *1
m
: -.
X .|VVcd*»i <0 <4 »^vo<
The above illustration depicts a thrilling incident in the tale of Kit
and Cora, the brother and sister detectives. A larger reproduction
appears on the cover. Now on Sale. 32 pages. Price Id. Look out for it.
‘PLUCK’
It contains a Splendid Long,
Complete Story dealing with
the Adventures of
KIT and CORA
(The Brother and Sister Detectives),
Also a fine Complete Story of
The Captain, the Cook,
and the Engineer.
And a Long Instalment of a
rattling School Yarn, entitled
Chums of Waverley
Bv Maurice Merriman.
THREE GRAND ELECTRIC
NOVELTIES.
«A' MIIIIVUIIIWIU' IlilllliPlli'liiP'D - -
.MEDICAL COILI L
%
FOR-CIVINCSHOCKS
HU"; JMUJWWWIii
Each
Post
Free.
Electric Coil, complete with
‘battery and printed
, instructions.
Price Is. 2d. post free.
Each
Post
With two of these instruments Free,
telegraphic communication
can be kept up by two persons
in different parts of the house.
Complete with battery and
full instructions.
Price Is. 2d. post free.
ELECTRO-MOTOR PARTS
EVERYTHING v COMPLETE
W tp
-Hp-
Ccmplete Set of parts for
“ UNION JACK” NOVELTY DEPA
12 and 13, Broadway, Ludgate Hill, Lor
