

SHADOWS on The
SNOW
A
CHRISTMAS
STORY
BY B.L. FARJEON




SHADOWS ON THE SNOW:
A CHRISTMAS STORY,
BY B. L. FARJEON.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS
BY IST. CHEVALIER.


TO CHARLES DICKENS,
IS DEDICATED,
WITH FEELINGS OP DEEP RESPECT AND ADMIRATION,
THIS HUMBLE PEODUCTION
OF A
YOUNG COLONIAL AUTHOR.


PREFACE.
In presenting this Christmas Story to the public, the
Author hopes for welcome as much from the kindly
feeling engendered by the time, as from any merit of the
work itself. It has long been a matter of surprise to
him, that Christmas in this and other Colonies should
have been so often allowed to pass without some literary
effort being made to recognise its genial influence. If
the publication of this book serves as a link in the chain
that binds the hearts of residents in the Colonies to their
home-lands, his ambition will be satisfied.
The Author desires to thank Mr. N. Chevalier for
the generous readiness with which he has contributed,
by his artistic pencil, towards the success of this Christ-
mas Story. Had the Author’s acquaintance with


Me. Chevalier been of longer duration, the reader
would certainly have had the benefit of a larger number
of Illustrations.
The Author must cease to speak of his work and of
himself, but, in doing so, he would earnestly repeat the
words addressed to millions of readers by a greater
writer than the Colonies can hope to produce—“ May
we meet again ! ”
Dunedin, Otago, New Zealand,
Christmas, 1865,


CONTENTS.
PART I.
HOW THE SHADOWS APPEARED AT WARLEYCOMKE, AND WHAT
THEY SAID AND DID.
PART 11.
THE SHADOWS ON THE SNOW RANGES.
PART 111.
CHRISTMAS AGAIN AT WARLEYCOMBE.




SHADOWS ON THE SNOW.
PART I.
HOW THE SHADOWS APPEARED AT WARLEYCOMBE , AND
WHAT THEY SAID AND DID.
story comm™
sharp, thin twigs were whitely lighted up with pearl-
drooping eyes of icicle. A quiet, narrow lane, luxuriantly
dotted with violets and forget-me-nots, delicious in the
drowsy summer, when the hum of bees could be faintly
heard In the tangled bush of honeysuckles and wild roses.
A quiet, narrow lane, at the end of which came, sud-
denly and quaintly, a view of a shallow reach of a noble
river fresh from the sea, where the clear water lay calmly
in its. rustic shelter, while on its bosom glowed the
shadow of its gardened banks. A quiet, narrow lane,
a ■


wherein, summer and winter, a thousand new graces
unfolded themselves, and where Nature made holiday
in every season of the year.
It was the evening of a sharp wintry day in December,
so near to Christmas, that the sun threw golden shadows
on its holly-crowned head, and welcomed its approach
with a fiery splendor. Even the old elm tree that
stood outside Stephen Winkworth’s house, long before
Stephen Winkworth was thought of, blushed crim-
son sympathetically, and then, as if ashamed that so
venerable a piece of timber should be guilty of such
emotion, grew gradually grayer and grayer until it
resumed its wonted equanimity. Certainly there might
have been a cause for this, for Stephen Winkworth
himself, as he stood at his door watching the declining
day, was no very pleasant addition to the landscape, and
did not show in his face any signs of rejoicing. Indeed,
had the ancient elm tree possessed reflective powers, it
would probably have thought that the obliteration of
Stephen Winkworth’s presence from the scene would
have been no great loss. Be that as it may, there he
stood, watching the deepening shadows in the sky.
Bitter, morose, and discontented, there he stood, at war
with the world and with himself. “ Stephen the woman-
hater,’ ’ people called him ; they might have added man-
hater also, for all the love he bore his sex. It made one
bad-tempered to look at the surly wrinkles in his face,
and people felt an inclination to snarl at each other when
he was in their company. He was not ungainly, either,
and was still in the prime of life; but as he showed
himself to the world, he was like a dried-up piece of


anatomy, with every drop of the milk of human kindness
squeezed clean out of him.
There was only one occasion throughout the year on
which, of his own free will, he mixed with his neighbors,
and that was Christmas Eve. And there was only
one house in all Devonshire in which, even upon that
exceptional occasion, he could be seen in the company of
his fellows, and that house was Warleycombe Lodge, the
residence of his once firm friend, Reuben Harrild.
Harrild and he had been friends in their youthful days,
and in one of their boyish confidences had pledged them-
selves never to spend Christmas apart from each other.
Stephen Wiukworth had not broken his promise; and so
upon this Christmas eve he stood at his door, watching the
glowing tints darkening in the sky, and thinking of the
gay company in which he would presently find himself.
The house of his friend was within view, and he could see
the reflection of the dying sun in each pane of glass, that
shone like a fiery eye upon the landscape. No softening
influence came upon him, even as he gazed upon this
solemn splendor. With deep-set lines upon his face, and
with form immovable, he stood like an image carved
in stone—stern, impassive, relentless, and unfeeling.
As he stood thus, a cheerful voice accosted him, and he
turned abruptly, as if angry at the interruption to his
thoughts.
“ Good evening, neighbor. Fine weather this for
Christmas !”
The speaker was a good-looking man of some five-and-
twenty years of age, William Fairfield by name. He
was a farmer in the neighborhood of Warleycombe, and


although regarded somewhat in the light of a new-comer,
had been cordially welcomed into the society of his
neighbors. It was doubtful whether the common life of a
small country farmer would have suited a nature such as
his—daring, impulsive, and ambitious. But he had been
thrown into the society of .Reuben Harrild’s daughter,
Laura, and between the two an attachment had sprung
up sufficiently strong to bind him to Warleycombe.
William was accompanied by a singular-looking indi-
vidual, scarcely five feet in height, but with a head
so enormous, that it might properly have belonged to one
of the sons of Anak. This man was an institution
in the neighborhood ; had come many years ago from
nobody knew where, and had gradually worked himself
into the confidence, and gained the love and esteem, of
every man, woman, and child, for twenty miles round.
Nothing more was known of him than that his name
was Bax, that he was a Doctor, and that he practised his
profession more for love than for gain. Doctor Bax was
welcomed everywhere, and by everybody. He took an
interest in everything. Women would speak of him as
Dear Doctor Bax, and husbands were not jealous to hear ;
children would run out to meet him, and “ Laocoon ”
his legs without putting him out of temper; young men
in love would press him into their confidence ; and young
women would whisper their little troubles into his ear.
He had a kind word and honest advice for all, and never
seemed tired of doing good gratuitously.
Now, one would have thought that the very sight of
such a man would have been sufficient to induce some
sign of cheerful recognition. But not so thought Stephen


Winkworth ; he evidently looked upon the little Doctor
as an intrusion, and did not care to conceal his feelings
in the matter. But as for Doctor Bax, bless your soul !
sour looks had no more effect upon him than upon the
Sphynx, and he returned Stephen’s surly recognition
with a smile genial enough to have melted all the ice
in every water-butt in Devonshire.
“ Fine weather, sir !” exclaimed the little Doctor,
rubbing his hands and sniffing in the air. “ It’s finer
than fine weather, sir; it’s glorious weather. Smell
it !” and here he gave another vigorous sniff. “ Take
off your hat and bow to it; ” and taking off his hat, he
bared to the fresh air a poll as smooth as a billiard ball
and as polished as a looking-glass. “ Fine weather, sir !
By the Lord, if one could live in such weather for fifty
years, he would not be a day older at the end. If old
Parr had had such weather as this, he’d have lived to a
thousand. Not a year less, as lam a living man !”
Stephen made no reply, unless the sour look he threw
at the speaker could be construed into one.
“We live in a glorious climate,” proceeded Doctor
Bax, looking round with a thorough sense of enjoyment.
“ Christmas would lose half its charm if it were not for
the snow, and the ice, and the life-giving cold air. We
breathe in youth in such weather as this.”
“ You are a fortunate man. Doctor,” said Stephen,
with a little cynical laugh.
“ Fortunate ! yes I am fortunate,” quickly, yet some-
what gravely responded Doctor Bax.
“Fortunate,” continued Stephen, who had a manner of
pursuing a speech without heeding interruption, “in


disposition, I mean ; fortunate in being able to think so
well of things. Now, for my part, I think the evening
is cold, and chilly, and damp, a friend to rheumatism and
bronchitis. I see nothing fine in it.”
“ Probably not—probably not,” returned the Doctor ;
“ but that is not your fault; that is the fault of your
temperament. You can’t help that, you know. You
were born with it, and you are not to blame. The
question is,” continued Doctor Bax, musingly, “ who is
to blame 1 You can’t throw it upon your father and
mother, for they did not know anything about it. We
are all born with differently shaped heads ; we are not
accountable for that. You see, if a child came into the
world with two tongues, he could not help speaking double
could he 1 Rather a comical idea, that. Ha! ha !ha 1”
But although the Doctor laughed heartily at the notion,
and was as heartily joined by William Fairfield, Stephen
Winkworth did not seem to think that any demonstration
of enjoyment was necessary on his part. On the contrary,
he appeared rather displeased with the hilarity of his
companions, and a short pause elapsed before he spoke.
“ You call yourself a philosopher, I should not wonder,”
he then said, scornfully.
“ If philosophy mean contentment with things as they
are,” said Doctor Bax, “ then I say, yes, I am a philo-
sopher.”
“ I suppose you have never had any domestic misfor-
tunes,” Stephen said ; “ you have never experienced any
heart-shock that turned your blood from its natural
currents and diseased it. You are a happy man, con-
tented with yourself and with the world.”


“ I am happy, and contented with the world,” returned
Doctor Bax; “ but I have seen misfortune, and I thank
God for it.”
“ That is your cant, and of a piece with other human
hypocrisy,” sneered Stephen. “ You thank God for
misfortune, because it sounds well. You bless outwardly
what I curse inwardly. It is wise in you—for the world
likes you, and welcomes you, while it turns its back even
upon my shadow.”
“ That is the view you take of it, Stephen Winkworth,”
replied the Doctor, gently. “It is not your fault—it is
the fault of your temperament, and I joity you.”
“I do not need your pity. Bestow it where it is more
welcome. Why, look you here, Doctor Bax, who is the
braver of the two, you or 11 You, who cringe and
crouch beneath unmerited misfortune ; or I, who resent it,
and curse it ? As I do, as I shall, until I die ! And so
the world may go and hang itself for all the love I bear
it; and I might go and hang myself for all the love it
bears me. That’s my philosophy. A tougher one than
yours, I’ll engage.”
“ A tough one, indeed,” said the Doctor, shaking his
head sadly, “ but all the fault of your temperament. I
lay no blame to you for thinking thus, and I take no
credit to myself for being different. Why, here is our
young friend,” indicating William Fairfield, “ eng-aged to
be married to the sweetest girl in Devonshire. Suppose
he thought as you do. A pretty kettle of fish that would
be. And nice ideas your’s are to carry about with one at
Christmas time. I declare, seriously, I think you are
much to be pitied.”


“ And so you are going to marry Reuben Harrild'a
daughter,” said Stephen, turning to the young man.
“ You love her frantically, of course ?”
“ I love her as she deserves to be loved,” was the simple
reply.
“ Take care she does not deceive you ! ” exclaimed
Stephen, with sudden passion. “ Watch her—never let
her out of your sight, or she is no true woman if she do
not play you false.”
“ Do not answer him, William, do not answer him,”
said the Doctor, checking the reply that rose to William’s
lips. “He does not know what he is saying—he of all
others should not doubt the purity of woman’s love.”
“ Love ! ” said Stephen laughing bitterly, “ a fiction !
a sham ! a delusion ! It can be bought and sold.
Believe in it, trust in it, lavish all your thoughts on it,
work for it, centre all the earnestness of your soul on it;
and wake up one day from your dream, and look at your
idol, defaced, dishonored, lying at your feet.”
“ Ho, no,” interrupted Doctor Bax, earnestly. “He
does not mean it, William. Do not believe that he
means it. He knows that it is no delusion—he knows
that it is all good and holy. Why, William, think of
his daughter ”
“ Hush, man,” broke in Stephen, casting an almost
frightened look round him. “Do not let her hear you.”
“ Dear—dear !” said Doctor Bax, as he and William
walked away; “ what an unfortunate temperament
that man has. Come, Will, let us have a race to the
house.”


And off they set, running as fast as their legs would
carry them, towards Warleycombe Lodge, where they
arrived in a state of laughing breathlessness.
Meanwhile, Stephen Winkworth, with the same stern,
relentless look upon his countenance, with the same
bitter feelings at his heart, stood watching their depart-
ing forms, without a thought in unison with the sacred
peacefulness of the evening. The shadows grew deeper
and deeper, and the reflection from the dying sun’s couch
of fire grew darker and darker every moment. And as
the night crept on, his thoughts appeared to keep pace
with its increasing sombreness.
“ Father ! ” came a low plaintive voice from within the
house, and at the word a quivering emotion passed over
Stephen’s face.
“ My child ! ” and the man’s voice, before so harsh, had
a soft sweet sound as the words issued from his lips.
He turned to go in, but to his side had crept a ligure
so wan, so pitiful, that strange eyes looking upon it for
the first time would have filled with grief at the un-
happy sight.
A girl, dwarfed and mis-shapen, with a face on which
a quiet grief had so firmly set its seal that an expression
of gladness upon it seemed almost an impossibility. A
girl, scarce eighteen years of age, without a trace of
youth in her form or countenance. Yes, one. Hump-
backed, ghastly as she was, masses of silken hair enve-
loped her, and gave her something that belongs to the
grace of youth. As the man looked down upon her
crippled form, a shudder of remorse passed across his
features, and he stooped to lay his cheek against her
upturned face, caressingly.


“ Well, my lass,” cried he, “ we must make ourselves
fine to-night. Reuben Harrild’s house will be filled with
gay company, to welcome Christmas, forsooth ! as if
Christmas could not go on well enough without their
tom-foolery.”
Nothing but a sigh answered him for a time. Pre-
sently—
“ Father,’’ she said, “ I wish you would not speak so
lightly of Christmas. It is the only holiday we have'
through the year. It is a good time.”
“No time is good for me, child, when I see you thus,”
and his voice trembled with strong emotion as he turned
her hair from her face. “ I have no holiday while you
are suffering.”
“ Yes, yes,” she answered dreamily, “it is wearisome,
wearisome. But I am not quite unhappy, father. It
cannot last for ever. I often feel contented with my
pain when I think of by-and-bye. And Christmas is a
good time.”
“ I could think so, child, if I saw you, as I see others,
enjoying the time as they do. All times would be good
for me —aye, even me, whom all men hate ”
“ No, no, father,” she pleaded.
“ All times would be good for me,” he continued,
unheeding the interruption, “ if I could see you, as I see
others of your age, happy and light-hearted—if I could
see you as I see you in my dreams, as I should see you
but for the blight that fell upon my heart when you
were, thank God ! oh, thank God! too young to remem-
ber, Forgive me, child, for causing these tears. There,
let me kiss them away.”


“ It cannot be helped, father,” she said, with a kind of
pitiful humor. “ Doctor Bax said I could never come
straight again and she cast a look of pity upon her
stunted shape. “ And I might be worse, you know. I
can see, and hear, and speak ; all these are blessings
of which I might have been deprived, and so I
am thankful. When I look up to the sky, on such an
evening as this, I feel almost happy. And the time is
good, father, is it not 1 Christmas is a good time.”
But no assenting answer fell from his lips. He stood
there, with his poor maimed child by his side, gazing at
the floating clouds, and fighting with his heart.
“ I could be happier—l know I could be happier, if
you and the world were different to each other—if
you did not look upon it as your enemy. But it cannot
be, father, can it t ”
“ No, child, it cannot be.”
“You are good and kind to me, father. Stoop down
and kiss me. I love you as dearly as I know you love
me. Why should you so love me and be bitter with all
others 1 All men are not bad.”
“ Child, child, do not torture me.”
“ And nature is full of goodness,” she continued, “ still
sweetly pleading; “and see, father, see! there is my
angel.”
And pointing upward, the child showed him a large
gray cloud, with white fleecy wings, which her imagina-
tion had quaintly fashioned into the figure of an angel.
“ Look at his arms, extended as if he were blessing us
and the time. I can sometimes almost distinguish his
face. His wings arc stretching now as if he would


enfold all heaven to his bosom. I never saw him looking
»o grand before. I know he is at his best because of
the time. Say that Christmas is a good time, and make
me happy.”
“ Christmas is a good time, child,” he said, almost
doggedly.
“No, no ! not like that! From your heart, father—l
want you to say it from your heart. Look upon me,
father, look upon me, with gentle thoughts, and then sit
down by my side, for I must tell you something or I
shall die.”
There was so much vehement passion in her action,
there was so much agonised emotion in her voice, that,
almost fear-struck, he seated himself upon the door-step.
For a few moments she could not utter a word. Pre-
sently she said—
“ Father, I am very much deformed, am I not V
“Not to me, darling.”
“ No, not to you, father, for when you look at me your
eyes are in your heart. Bull I am, in reality, very ugly,
very uninteresting, maimed, defoi'med, and a cripple. It
is very sad.”
She had a way of pitying and speaking of herself
in commiserating tones that was very touching.
“ I am not like any other girl I have ever seen. There
is Laura Harrild, now, she is very pretty, is she not!
But I know she is, for when I look at her, I feel as glad
as when I see the early primroses peeping out of the
ground, telling me that Spring is coming.”
A. sharp anxious look passed into Stephen’s eyes when
lie heard her mention Laura Harrild’s name.


“ And she is like Spring, and as good as Spring. If
you -were to ask me my idea of perfect happiness, I
should say Laura Harrild. For she is young, beautiful,
and good—and she loves, and is beloved : oh, my heart !”
There was such anguish in the poor girl’s voice, that
Stephen’s face grew white as he supported her head upon
his shoulder.
“Do you know my secret, father!’ she whispered,
without moving her head.
“ I guess it, dear child.”
“ I cannot help it. I have always loved him. He is
so brave and strong. And there it is, you see,” she said,
recovering herself a little. “He so brave and strong,
and I such a poor cripple. What is my life worth ;is
it worth having, I wonder, in such a shape 1 If I were
anybody else, and could see such a one as myself, I should
look down with pity upon her, and wonder whether she
would not be happier if she were dead. You have plenty
of money, lather 1”
He nodded assent to her question.
“ Yet, what is the use of it 1 Money will not buy love,
will it 1 Money will not make me different to what I
am. I wonder if all homes are like ours. There is no
light in it; it is desolate and deserted. You and I,
father, are like two hermits, shut out from the world.
Must it always be so 1 Surely there must be something
better in life than my experience has shown me. There
is something better in it. There is love in it, which,
ah me ! I shall never, never have.”
She was speaking to herself now, while he, with humble
breath, sat watching her, silently. Unforgiving and


imperious as he was to the world, here he was a slave ;
and had he possessed the power, he would have laid his
heart in her lap, to have made her happy.
“ To-night is Christmas,” she resumed, “ and we shall
go round to Mr. Harrild’s house, and see so many young
people dancing, and laughing, and playing forfeits—while
I shall sit in a corner, watching them, like the envious
old witch I have read of in fairy stories. lam quite as
hideous, I know ; and it is natural and proper that they
should not come and pay court to me, as they do to each
other. And I deserve it, father,” she continued, her
humor suddenly changing again. “ I deserve it, for
reviling the world and everybody in it, as I am doing.
I deserve it for having bad and wicked thoughts at such
a good time as Christmas—for it is a good time after all,
is it not ?”
No words can express the entreating earnestness with
which she urged her pleading inquiry ; and thoroughly
humbled, the hard man said,
“ It is a good time, child,” and said it from his heart.
And then they went into the house together.
Now, at Reuben Harrild’s there was assembled on this
evening as merry and gay a company as ever met within
four walls. You would have thought that in the whole
of the happy group there did not exist a single anxiety.
But it was not so. For anxiety is a component part of
the business of human life, and it can be seen at odd
moments peeping out from the corner of every man’s eyes.
Some wear it habitually; others casually ; but all possess
a stock of it, more or less, stored upon the shelves of the


mind. And it is good thus ; for if life were all sweet,
affection would be valueless, and happiness a negative
good.
1 do not suppose that in the kitchen the question was
regarded in at all a philosophical light; indeed, it is
questionable whether it was thought of at all. But it is
certain that even in that region of shining saucepans and
stewpans there were heartburns, albeit they were mild
ones. Bor Samuel Nock had, some quarter of an
hour since, incontinently come upon Kitty Grater in the
passage, and had seen her then and there in the act of
being kissed, beneath the miserable pretence of a piece of
mistletoe, by a retainer of low degree, who had been
engag’ed to assist in the domestic arrangements. Between
Samuel Nock and Kitty Grater an attachment had been
supposed to exist for the last fifteen years—an attachment
which was always budding into promise, but had not yet
blossomed into proposal. Each looked upon each as
the other’s property, and it was tacitly understood between
the two that if any philanthropic individual should happen
to step forward and say, “ Wilt thou, Kitty Grater, take
Samuel Nock to be thy lawfully wedded husband ? ” or
“ Wilt thou, Samuel Nock, take Kitty Grater to be thy
lawfully wedded wife?” they would jump joyously
into each other’s arms, and the matter would be settled.
But during those fifteen years that happy idea had not
occurred to any philanthropic individual, and the twain
were still in a state of incipient courtship. The mental con-
dition of the two at the present moment was not analogous;
for Samuel Nock stood, pipe in mouth, leaning against
the chimney piece, seriously contemplating the advisability


of punching the head of the retainer of low degree, and
wondering whether such an act would be accepted by
Kitty as a downright declaration, about which there
could be no mistake; and Kitty, busy at the dresser,
was furtively watching Samuel, inwardly enjoying his
state of mind, and wondering whether he would be goaded
by jealousy to say something worth hearing, without any
nonsense in it. But Samuel Hock’s indignation was not
easily appeased ; his moral dignity was hurt; and he
preserved silence.
“ Oh, Samuel,” said Kitty, who had just come from
the parlor, and who saw that it was no use waiting any
longer for him to speak ; “ Oh, Samuel, they’re a playing
such a game upstairs.”
Samuel only grunted.
“ They’re playing,” said Kitty, slily, “ I love my love
with an A, because he’s Amiable, and Amusing, and an
Angel, and I hate my love with an A, because he’s Aggra-
vating, and Absurd, and Annoying; and his name is
Alexander, and he comes from Aberdeen, and I took
him to the sign of the Axe and Anchor, and treated
him to Apples and Anchovies.”
“ And I don’t love my love with a We,” grunted
Samuel Hock, jumping to the other end of the alphabet,
“because she’s a Wixen, and Wicious, and Wile; and I
hate her with a We, because she’s Wulgar, and Wain,
and a Wiper, and her name is Wenus, and she comes
from Wandieman’s Land, and I took her to the sign
of the Wenomous Wampire, and treated her to
Winegar and Water.”


“ And I hate my love with a B, because he’s a Brute,
and his name is Samuel,’’ said Kitty, rather vaguely, and
with a very red face.
“ Don’t be windictive, Kitty,” remonstrated Samuel.
“ It’s a low, wulgar sign.”
“Don’t be aggravating, Samuel,” rejoined Kitty,
goaded to such a state of mind that, looking upon the
retainer of low degree as the cause of the quarrel, she
suddenly turned upon that inoffensive individual, and
boxed his ears. Not content with which, she seized
his head, and rapped it sharply against the kitchen
wall; which had such an effect upon Samuel Nock,
that he caught her in his arms and kissed her into good
humor.
Every room in the house had such a bright look about
it that there was no mistaking the time. Had old
Father Time himself suddenly made his appearance out
of his weather-beaten residence, and told you it was all
a mistake, and that it wasn’t Christmas, you wouldn’t
have believed him. Not Christmas! A nice thing,
indeed ! As if you did not know better ! As if every
saucepan in the kitchen did not know better ! As if the
very sparks flying out of the fire up the chimney did not
know better ! Not Christmas ! Ask Mrs. Ramage!
Who was Mrs. Ramage? Why Mrs. Ramage was a
Large woman (the printer will please put a large L to
the word) with a Large mouth, and a Large nose, and
Large eyes, and Large limbs, and a Large way ot asserting
herself which there was no resisting. And in Mrs.
Ramage was merged Mr. Ramage, who was a little man
(the printer will please here put a little 1) with a little
B


mouth, and a little nose, and little eyes, and little limbs,
and such a very little way of asserting himself that no
one took the slightest notice of him. If, by the merest
chance, he was mentioned, he was spoken of as one who
had vested the whole of his right, title, and interest in
and to human life in the wife of his bosom; who, indeed,
had parted with it to her so thoroughly and completely
that it mig’ht be regarded as a sum, which she added up,
subtracted from, multiplied, or divided, at her pleasure.
Not Christmas ! Why here was Mrs. Eamage, this
tremendously solemn and magnificently Large woman,
actually laughing, and beaming kindly smiles upon poor
little Mr. Ramage, who hopped meekly about her, and
bobbed his little head in ecstasy at her affability.
Not Christmas ! Ask the Woys and the Wymers, of
Messrs. Wymer, Woy, and Wymer, the celebrated firm
which transacted all the legal business of the district.
The firm originally was Wymer and Woy, but a female
Wymer, sister of the senior partner, having in her own
particular right become possessed of a sum of money
which the firm was anxious to pass to its credit, would
only consent to invest it on the condition that her name
was added to the firm. As she was a strong-minded and
bony old maid, her condition was accepted, and the title
thenceforth was Wymer, Woy, and Wymer. They were
all long, lank, and lean, and grew, as did their parchments,
more shrunken and shrivelled every term. Life to them
was not made up of happiness and sorrow, sympathy,
love, affection, charity, and other such-like trifles, but it
was made up of Law. They talked nothing but Law—-
they knew nothing but Law—they breathed nothing but


Law. They played the game of existence with Law, and
they played it so skilfully that they never missed the
odd trick. Yet even they looked frostily pleasant, and
thawed a little under the genial influence of the time;
dimly recognising that kindliness at such a season was an
enactment of some old law of humanity.
And if there was a shadow of a doubt on the subject
■ —if any misguided person still entertained the most
infinitesimal particle of disbelief as to the fact—he had
but to look at the face of Laura Harrild, and the thing
was settled. There was nothing extraordinarily hand-
some about Laura she was simply a dear, lovable
woman, gemmed with the graces of a happy, innocent
youth. A pleasant gladness rested on her face, and shed
its influence upon all around her. Such women are the
roses of the world; happy the man who has one
blooming in the garden of his life !
“To think,” said Doctor Bax, as he sat dandling on
his knee a privileged, curly-headed youngster, “to think
of those two children going to get married in three
months ! Why, Mr. Harrild, what on earth will you do
without her ?”
The person addressed, a sober-looking man of nearly
fifty, gazed thoughtfully at Laura and William, who were
sitting among a group of young people, laughing and
chatting gaily, but he made no reply.
“ Dear, dear I” continued the Doctor. “ Three months!
And to-morrow we shall be looking back to it, and say
ing it was only yesterday that they were married. Life,
indeed, is nothing but a breath of wind ”
“ Ho such thing, sir ; no such thing,” interposed Mr.


Wymer, who was close by with the other members of
the firm. “ Life a breath of wind, indeed ! Pooh, pooh
Doctor, you know nothing about it. If everybody took
such a light view of it, what would become of all its most
important relations 1 What would be the use of making
marriage settlements in favor of a breath of wind '(
What would be the use of making one’s will, involving
large interests—often tremendously important interests,
let me tell you —in favor of a breath of wind 1 What
would be the use of actions at law, writs of ejectment,
pleas, interpleas, rules nisi, criminal prosecutions, chan-
cery suits, and insolvencies 1 What would become of
Law 1 ”
“ That is no breath of wind, I grant you,” said the
Doctor, good humoredly; “itis a grim reality. But I
spoke philosophically.”
“ Philosophically, my dear doctor,” returned Mr. Wymer,
in no way appeased ; “ of what practical use is it to speak
philosophically 1 Speak legally, and you are all right.
Speak legally, act legally, live legally, die legally, and you
can go to the other world with your title-deeds in your hand,
and take possession. What I find fault with in people
now-a-days,” continued the speaker, illustrating the point
with his forefinger, “ is, that they' diverge from
the straight course. They are dreamy, sentimental,
unpractical, and unbusiness-like. Now, there is no dreami-
ness or sentimentality in law. You must be wide awake,
my friend, when you deal with law. You must be
business-like and practical, or you will get the worst
of it,” and Mr. Wymer emitted a dry, chuckling laugh,
as if he was in the habit of dealing with people who were


unbusiness-like and unpractical, and who were always
getting the worst of it.
“ But the uncertainty of the law,” Doctor Bax ventured
to remark.
“ That’s the beauty of it,” answered Mr. Wymer,
rubbing his hands pleasantly. “ You never know where
to have it. It always gets the best of you when you least
expect it. You might study it for a hundred years, and it
would trip you up after all. It is wonderfully and
beautifully complex.”
“ There are cases which have lasted sixty or seventy
years, are there not T asked the Doctor.
“ More, sir; more,” replied Mr. Wymer, gleefully.
“ What could more fitly illustrate its amazing ingenuity,
than such cases 1 Think of the study, the speeches, the
learning, the arguments that have been used in one
simple suit. Think of the briefs ”
“ The fees,” the Doctor put in slily.
“ Of course, they follow, for every laborer is worthy of
his hire ; and we are all laborers after a fashion.”
“ How on earth did the world ever get on without
lawyers ?” asked Doctor Bax, maliciously.
“It never did, sir. For did not Abraham, the patriarch,
buy ‘ the field of Ephron, which was in Maohphelah,
which was before Mamre ; the field, and the cave, which
was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that
were in all the borders round about’ —the very words, sir,
you read in Genesis. And do you mean to tell me that any
one but a lawyer could have written such a description 1
Why, sir ”
“ Stop, stop!” exclaimed Doctor Bax, putting his


fingers to his ears. “ I yield, I give in. Whoever argued
with a lawyer and got the best of it 1 besides which,”
he muttered, as he walked away, “ I would sooner have
five minutes' chat with Laura and William, than spend
a week in the company of that dried-up old folio.”
The lovers were standing at the window, looking out
upon the night. The snow flakes were falling fast, and
a field of purest white spread before them, as far as
eye could reach. The window was in a recess, shut
off from the room by heavy curtains, so that they were
almost in seclusion. William Fairfield had once an idea
of emigrating to the Colonies ; but the lucky chance that
watches over true love had made the sentiments of these
two young people known to each other, and his inten-
tion now was to settle down into the quiet life of a
country farmer. He was speaking to her tenderly ; and
her pure, truthful face, though turned somewhat away
from him, showed how lovingly she was following his
words.
“ It is strange,” he was saying, “ how entirely my mind
has been weaned away from its intense desire of emigrating
to the Colonies. I think I must be a miser, Laura dear,
for I used absolutely to devour the news of each fresh
gold discovery in the other part of the world. I used to
dream night after night of tremendous nuggets, almost
too heavy to lift, and to wake in a rage to find it a delusion.
Why, I went to Wymer, who had found a purchaser
for our little farm, and gave instructions to draw
up the conveyance. Old Stephen Winkworth was the
purchaser ; but you know what happened just then,
darling 1 ” and he drew her tenderly towards him : “ I


discovered, what I scarcely dared to hope, that you loved
me, and away to the four winds went all ideas of selling
the farm and emigrating.”
His was an impulsive nature, self-willed and obstinate.
He had a rapid, confident way of speaking, and was, as
he looked, bold, manly, and fearless. Laura gazed into
his face somewhat timidly, and said,
“ I sometimes think, William, that it would have been
better for you if you had gone away ”
“ Why, Laura ! ” he broke in, amazed.
“ What I mean is, Will, that it would have done you
good. You are going to settle into a quiet, humdrum
life, not suited to you exactly) I think. You are so
impulsive ”
“ That is just what Stephen Winkworth said. Why,
do you know, Laura, when he went to the lawyer’s,
expecting the deeds were ready for signature (and he
went with his money in his hand, I can tell you—six
hundred golden sovereigns), and I told him I had altered
my mind, and did not intend to sell the farm, he called
me rash-headed and impulsive—said that the bargain
had been made, and that I could not draw back from it.
And there the money is to this day—at least, so old
Wymer is always telling me —and there are the deeds,
ready for signing; and all I have to do is to go to the
office and put my signature, and pocket the six hundred
sovereigns, which, of course, I do not intend to do—no,
not if there were six hundred thousand instead of six
hundred; for your love, darling, is worth all the gold in
the world to me, and I would not lose your love for
all the nuggets I have ever dreamt of.”


And he meant it, did William Fairfield. He loved
the girl with his whole heart. A year ago he might have
gone away, and time would have cooled his passion ; but
now, when his love had found expression, it could never
be extinguished. He believed in her implicitly : his was
a blind faith ; he did not question it or doubt it.
“ We shall be very happy, William,” presently she said
softly. “ But tell me, what made you so eager to go to
the gold colonies 1 ”
“ I can scarcely tell you. It was a restless craving for
excitement; and then there was a friend of mine, who
had been a scapegrace in his very young days, and he
had gone over and reformed, and made lots of money;
and he wrote so eloquently about the mode of life, and
the independence, and the gold, that it turned my
head.”
“Your friend 1 ” said Laura, and then stopped hesi-
tatingly.
“ Yes 1” he answered, questioning.
“ What had he done wrong 1 ”
“ A great deal. He forged his father’s name ”
“ Oh, William ! ” she cried, in such a voice of pain
that he caught her in his arms, and asked her what ailed
her.
“ Nothing, William, nothing,” she replied, half hysteri-
cally, and begging him, between laughing and crying,
to proceed with his story.
“Well,” continued William, “he forged his father’s
name, and it was discovered ; and the old man gave him
means to take ship to Australia. He escaped, although
his father was almost ruined.”


“ And then 1 ” said Laura.
“ The old man died, and the young scapegrace made a
fortune, and became a first-rate member of society. Why,
Laura, you look quite scared.”
“It is a melancholy story, William,” said Laura;
“ but see, there is Stephen Winkworth and poor Alice.”
“Go and speak to her, Laura, and bring her here. I
like to be away from the lights and the people when you
are with me. And here in this little nook we can see
everything without being seen. How it snows !”
“ How beautiful !” said Laura, nestling up to her lover.
“ The flakes float downwards from heaven to earth, like
feathers from the wings of the angels. I will bring Alice
here, and we will sit together as long as they don’t miss
us.”
“ Stop, Laura,” exclaimed William, as she was turning
away, “ what is that outside 1 There, do you not see it
moving ?”
It was the shadow of a man, who appeared to be
lurking about the house. As Laura looked, her heart
sank within her, and she turned as white as the falling
snow.
“Evidently some skulker. Not here for any good,
that’s certain, said William; “ I will go out and see who
it is.”
“No, no, William,” implored Laura, with sudden
earnestness, clinging to his arm, “do not go. I beg, I
implore you, do not go.”
“Why, Laura, this is the second time to-night you
have almost frightened me with some unaccountable
emotion. Let go my arm, my dear.”


“ No, no, no!” she exclaimed, with strange vehemence,
and still clinging to him, “ you shall not —you must not
go. And see—it is gone—it was only a shadow, after all.
We have been standing here away from the lights so long
that we are growing fanciful.”
And leaving him, she walked towards Alice Wink-
worth.
Strange contrasted were these two girls. One, lithe,
supple, graceful, handsome; the other, deformed, maimed,
white, and sickly. A world of tenderness was expressed
in Laura’s face, as she bent over Alice’s chair.
“ I am so glad to see you, Alice,” she said ; “ William
wants you to come and sit with ns by the window.”
A glad light passed over the sick girl’s face, as she rose
and walked with Laura to the curtained recess. Her
look turned to one of surprise, when Laura whispered,
“ Talk to him for a little while, Alice, until I come hack.
I will not be long gone.”
“ Where are you going, Laura V’ asked William.
“ I must attend to the guests, Will,” Laura replied ;
“ I will be back presently.” And she turned away
somewhat abruptly.
“ Strange,” muttered William, “ she seems quite
changed to-night. By heavens, there it is again,”
And, looking out, he saw again the shadow of a man
who was lurking about the house.
“ I have a good mind to go out and see about it. But,
no; Laura will he vexed with me, and perhaps it is
nothing, after all.”
So he sat down by the side of Alice, half discontented,
and not knowing why.


In the meantime the snow was falling slowly hut
steadily outside the study of Reuben Harrild, who
had left his guests for a while to their own devices. As
he leant his face upon his hand, gazing dreamily out of
the window, it could be seen that old memories were
passing through his mind. He looked older than he was.
Some lives, wild and stormy, are prolific of wrinkles ;
others, smooth and uneventful, do not raise a furrow on
the face. A life is counted, not by years, but by events;
and in some men’s lives occur earthquakes which leave
chasms never to be closed. The pages of a man’s life are
blotted with tears; and memory, as she scans the records,
lives over again,. with bitter brevity, the shedding of
each tear. As Reuben Harrild sat, wrapt in thought,
the ghosts of former joys and former griefs clung about
him with their sad faces, and a thousand pale spectres
rose and haunted him from the grave of his past life.
He was deep in these memories when the presence of his
daughter roused him.
“ What want you here, child 1 ” he asked gently,
smoothing her hair, and kissing her.
“ I want a Christmas-box, father,” she said, half
laughingly, half earnestly.
“ I have a great mind to give you one,” he said, raising
his hand playfully; but seeing something in her face that
spoke of grief, he asked gravely, “ Has anything hap-
pened, child 1 Has William been unkind 1 ”
“ No, father, he is too good. I do so wish I could
be brave, and speak to you what is in my mind.”
“ You may say what you please, dear child, on every
subject ”


“On every subject ? ” she questioned earnestly.
“ But one,” he said, gravely ; “ and that subject must
never be mentioned between us. You know me, Laura ;
you know how I love you—no father could bettor love a
daughter ; but you must obey me, dear child, in this, as
you have done in all other things, and be to me always
what you have ever been—a child I can love without one
shadow of remorse, without one spark of reproach.”
As he spoke, she saw outside the shadow of the man
upon the snow, and drawing her father hastily away, she
stood between him and the night.
“ To-night, Laura,” he said, as he placed his arm around
her, and led her out of the study, “ I have been
thinking of the past. Never a Christmas passes but I
think of what I know is in your mind. But I would
rather lose my life than my honor. A stab at the one
may be cured ; at the other, never ! And as I have
resolved, so will I perform, though it fill my heart with
pain. Every man has a skeleton in his house, and I must
not grumble at mine. I think I will get an iron safe,
and lock my skeleton in it, and throw the keys into
the sea, so that it cannot get at me.”
“ But it will get at you,” said Doctor Bax, who had
heard the last sentence as he came into the passage with
the household cat upon his shoulder ; “ you can’t get
away from it—no safe is strong enough to keep it. Just
think what a lot of skeletons there are in this house at
the present moment. I warrant you every man’s skeleton
has stepped out of its cupboard to accompany its owner to
vour Christmas party, and that there are a score of them
jostling up against us, if we could only see them. Just


for curiosity, now,” he continued, drawing them to the
half-open door of the room where some of the elderly
people were playing cards, and most of the young ones
playing forfeits; “look at Stephen Winkworth : there is
a skeleton he has got—it is a perpetual day-mare and
night-mare. It never leaves him. It sits grinning upon
his shoulder like the bird of ill-omen we read of. And
his daughter, poor little child, hasn’t she got a skeleton I
Heaven help her! her lot is the hardest of all to bear.
Look at little Mr. Ramage —Mrs. Ramage is his skeleton
—and isn’t she an awful one, hanging round a man’s neckl
Ah ! you may laugh,” he said to Laura, who was smiling;
“ but you have got your skeleton—do not look so grave,
my dear—and I have got mine, here ! here ! ” and he
smote his breast theatrically, and upset the cat.
“ Your skeleton, Doctor Bax,” exclaimed Laura; “ why,
what sort of a one is that 1”
“ A tearing, staring, horrible, malicious, wicked
skeleton,” said the Doctor, so loudly, that the eyes of
every one in the room were turned upon him. “ A
fearful, hideous, monstrous, hobgoblin kind of skeleton.
I will tell you what it is—in confidence : I love you, and
you are going to marry another 1 If it be not true, may
this kiss I am going to give you under the misletoe be
my last! ”
But Laura had darted away, and the little Doctor
pursuing her, turned all the card-tables topsy-turvey, and
set the whole room in an uproar.
Oh ! but it was a merry Christmas party this, and little
Doctor Bax was the soul of it. I verily believe he kissed
every female in the house half-a-dozen times over. Even


Mrs. Ramage submitted to the salute; and as for MrH„
Wymer, she stepped under the misletoe like a lamb to
the slaughter, and smacked her lips after the operation.
There were two or three little rooms about the house,
in which the guests found themselves almost by chance, if
they happened to stroll out of the drawing-room, where
the merriment was going on. In one of these, an hour
later, -were Stephen Winkworth and his daughter.
“ Take me home, father,” said the girl, “I am weary
of this; I want to be at home.”
“ I thought you wished to be here,” be said wistfully,
“ It is gayer for you than our dull house.”
“ I know it is—but how can I be gay, seeing what I
see T she exclaimed, fretfully. “I am like a baby crying
after a toy, which somebody else has got.”
“ Oh child,” whispered Stephen, “if William Fairfield
loved you, you would be happy.”
“Do not speak of it, father,” sobbed the girl. “It can
never, never be.”
“ I don’t know that,” muttered Stephen to himself, in
so low a voice that she. could not hear him. “Why
should she deceive him as she is doing 1 I do not love
William Fail-field, but I could love anything for her,”
glancing at his daughter; “ and why should the woman,
whom he is going to marry, deceive him 1. Upon my
word,” he added with a cynical laugh, “ I could almost
persuade myself that I ought to do a good action. What
hypocrites we are ! By chance, I discover this Laura
Harrild —this rival of my child in the affections of the
man she loves —playing her lever false. By chance, I see
her in the arms of another man, and Lear her make an


appointment with him at midnight. At midnight, by
the lord !” and his low, bitter laugh floated discordantly
on the night air. “ This girl, so outwardly fair, this
paragon of modesty and virtue, is like the rest—false,
false, false to the backbone ! Oh, my ladies ! shame,
shame upon you ! I would whip your false bodies with
whips made of your delicate hair—aye, every mother’s
daughter of you !”
There was a strange, biting bitterness in the man’s
voice. He was like a wild beast, striding up and down
the room, with vengeful thoughts and bitter memories
glaring out of his eyes.
“Yet, what business is it of mine?” he continued.
“ Why should I interfere in the character of a virtuous
eavesdropper ? Let him marry her, and let her deceive
him. It is of a piece with the rest. But, my child ! she
loves him ! Oh ! God ! grant her some compensation for
the torture of her life—grant her a recompense for her
long misery.”
“ What are you saying, father ?” said Alice, raising her
head, and adding, wdthout waiting for a reply, “ I thought
this night was to be such a happy one, and it is so
different.”
“It may be happy yet, child. Come, darling, I love
you, I love you,” and he pressed her passionately to his
breast. “ I would lose my soul for you ”
“ Hush, father ! ” and she put her hand to his lips.
“I would. We will not go home yet; we will wait
another hour. Let us go in.”
As they entered the passage, Laura passed swiftly by
them, out of the house. There were traces of tears upon


her face, and William was standing holding the handle of
the door in his hand, and looking somewhat annoyed.
“ Why, William,” said Stephen Winkworth, “ you
look as savage as a Bengal tiger.”
“ That is no business of yours, Mr. Winkworth,”
returned William. “ I generally mind my own.”
“ Hard words, lad, hard words these, upon Christmas
Eve,” said Stephen ; “ but perhaps I was in the wrong.
I beg your pardon.”
“ No; I beg yours, Stephen Winkworth,” said
William, remorsefully. “ There is my hand,”
“ And perhaps you are surprised at my speaking to
to you,” said Stephen, shaking it. “I am not over-given
to conversation, at the best of times; but I would like to
speak a word with you, if you will come into the open
air.”
And so they went out into the air. The snow-fall had
ceased, but had left a thick, soft carpet upon the
earth. The moon was peeping out, and the Heavens
seemed bright with the glorious whiteness beneath them.
As far as eye could reach, everything was shrouded
in white. The tall elm trees stood like white sentinels,
erect and watchful. The sloping roofs sloped whitely
down to the eaves, and the chimney pots reared their
heads whitely to the skies, while the cowls upon them
looked like the shrouded heads of white monks bending
in prayer.
“ I knew your father, William Fairfield,” Stephen
commenced, after a short pause ; “ and though in-
terest for human things is almost dead within me, I
still can feel an interest in you, and wish you well.”


“You did not wish me well when you wanted to force
me to sell my farm and emigrate,” said William. “ You
seemed to wish to get rid of me quickly, for all your
interest.”
“ That was a matter of business. And my part of the
bargain I will carry out any day. I am not a boastful
man, but what I do I do, and when I promise I perform.
If you go to the lawyer’s to-morrow, you will find the
money ready for you, if you will only sign your name.”
“ I know that. Mr. Wymer has told me so a dozen
times.”
“ Besides, what better would a young man have than a
pocketful of money, and a new land to go to, where, with
but common prudence, he could multiply it by ten in a
few years 1”
“ You must have plenty of money, Stephen Wink-
worth, to allow six hundred pounds to lie idle for nearly
a twelvemonth. It is a pity you have not a family to
benefit by it.”
“I have my daughter,” retorted Stephen, quickly.
“ She will have all; and if I had, or if I have a hundred
times as much, she will still have it all. She will bring
a rich dower to the man who marries her.”
William looked sharply at Stephen’s face, but it was
expressionless as stone.
“ Well, you broke that bargain, my lad,” continued
Stephen. “ The fault of your father was, that he was too
impetuous and impulsive. The fault of your father’s
son is the same. Had you fulfilled your bargain, you
might have been a happy man. As it is ”
“ As it is ]” said William, impatiently taking up the
words as Stephen paused.
c


“As it is, I think you stand a fair chance of being
anything hut a happy man.”
There was no mistaking the meaning Stephen intended
to convey, and William Fairfield paused long before he
could muster sufficient coolness to speak.
“ This is not the first time to-day,” he then said, “ that
you have thrown out insinuations to which I should not
listen. What do you mean by them 1 ”
“ Fair and softly, my lad. I mean nothing but what
I say. Instead of emigrating, you engaged yourself to
Laura Harrild. Would you marry a woman who does
not love you 1 ”
“ By Heaven ! ”
“ Forbear, and listen to me. I could be your father,
William Fairfield, for the years I bear. Forbear your
tongue, and hear me out.”
William Fairfield made no reply, but stood with his
hack against a tree, clenching his hands, and beating his
foot impatiently against the trunk. They had wandered
some little way from the house, and the notes of
merriment within fell but faintly upon their ears. Other-
wise, not a sound broke the stillness of the night.
“ You know what I am,” Stephen said; “ you know
the estimation in which lam held. If any man, woman,
or child in Devonshire were asked who in all Devonshire
was most disliked, most hated, most shunned, the reply
would be—Stephen Winkworth. If any dumb animal
in Devonshire could shew its dislike to one person more
than to all others, it would be to Stephen Winkworth.
No one has a smile of welcome for him. Were he to be.
deprived of his wealth, and were he lying parched and


starving by the roadside, no one out of love would give
him a cup of milk—no one out of compassion would give
him a bed of straw to lie upon. Were Stephen Winkworth
to die to-morrow, no one but the undertaker would attend
his funeral, and even he would be glad when the job was
done.”
The picture he had drawn was true. He spoke in his
usual bitter tone, as if he knew well and was satisfied
with the penalty he had invited.
“ Yes,” he continued, “ such is my fate. Ido not
complain. I have brought it upon myself, and I can bear
it. But I was not always thus, William Fairfield.”
“ I have heard so ; but you were always so in my
remembrance.”
“ That’s right, lad ; speak the truth. No, I was not
always thus. 1 once had a happy home—l once had
friends ! —Friends ! ” he echoed bitterly, “ I would scratch
the word out of the dictionary, had I my will, and send it
to hell to burn out its false meaning. Friends! vultures!
lies! call them what you will; I once had them. Do you
know what made me what I am 1 ” he asked abruptly
and fiercely, turning to William.
“ I do not.”
He took off his hat, and bared his head to the cold
wind. In this man’s heart was raging a tragic fire which
a score of lives could not quench. The memory of early
wrongs was burning within him as fiercely as when they
were first perpetrated. For years had he been hugging
them close, and fanning them into a blaze, which Death
alone could extinguish.
“What is this thing that men call life?” he asked.


“ The grave opens wider for us every day that we live.
We grow old, feeble, childish in our actions. Years have
passed over mo like the rest of men, and left their marks
upon my frame ; but fresh within me as at first burns the
wrong' which set me against my fellow-men for ever and
for ever.”
He stooped and took up a handful of snow, with which
he bathed his fevered head, and then resumed.
“You, in the hey-day of youth—you, with the dream
of life spread before you like a garden—you love. All
men do, some time in their early youth. Each man,
in his time, sees some woman whom he sets before
him as an idol, and falls down and worships, poor
blind fool! as if she were Heaven-born. Even I, in my
youth, did this thing; even I set up within my soul a
painted sham, a beautiful lie, and worshipped her as if
she were my salvation. I have read books wherein
woman’s love is described as something divine—wherein
a niche in a woman’s heart is said to sanctify a man’s
life, and make him better and fitter for the life to come.
Woman’s love ! What woman loves like a man 1 Their
natures are too false, too petty, to cope even with
the idea of the strength of a man’s devotion ! He sees
a smile upon the face which nature gave her, a smile of
heavenly sweetness, which fills his soul with adoration;
and this trick of the features, which she practises in his
absence a hundred times an hour, he believes to be a
heart-welcome to him, and to him alone. I who, before my
marriage, went courting as you have done to-night, and
would snigger up in out-of-the-way corners with my
love ” —(no pen can express the scornful expression he


put upon the word) —“ I would often meet her with such
a smile upon her beautiful face, and my heart would
laugh within my breast as the sunshine of her eyes fell
upon me !”
Scornful, bitter, as he was, his voice here grew softer
as old associations flocked around him.
“ She was all in all to me ; she was my life, my hope,
my prize in the world’s lottery ! I was always a scheming,
money-making man ; but I did not yearn for wealth for
myself—l yearned for it for her. Every fresh success I
gained was doubly welcome, because she would share it.
I have often rubbed my hands gladly to myself, and
thanked God I had succeeded, for her sake. I used to
whisper her name for luck if I entered into a new specula-
tion. With her name upon my tongue, with her image in
my heart, every step I mounted in the ladder of life brought
me nearer and nearer to Heaven. I took this piece of
clay, this image of dust, and fashioned it, and painted it,
and beautified it; I filled her face with innocence, her
eyes with love, her heart with faith; my devotion gave
music to her voice, sanctity to her touch. And I
loved her—l loved her as man never loved before ! ”
There was such a depth of tenderness in the man’s
voice and action, that William Fairfield instinctively
moved nearer to him, and would have taken his hand,
pityingly; but Stephen repulsed him, and continued—
“ After some time, we were married. There is a
Heaven upon earth for some men, during a portion of
their lives. Most of us can remember some few weeks,
some few months, which shine out from the past as if
they belonged to another and a happier life. I can look


back to the first few months of my wedded life, and
wonder at myself. It is not often that lam stirred to
emotion; but when I think of the glory of happiness
which bathed my heart during that brief time, and when
I look to my home as it is now—shunned, deserted, cold,
and joyless—l am lost in miserable wonder. I had a
smile for all men, then; aye, even for one whose
name would blister my tongue were I to mention it, the
very thought of whom drives my blood from its natural
channels, and fills me with a maddening thirst for ever-
lasting revenge ! ”
In his passion he raised his hand, and struck at the
tree as if it were his enemy.
“He was my friend, and I trusted him. He was my
friend, and he sat by my T hearth like a brother. He was
my friend, and was admitted as a sharer of my social
happiness. He was my friend, and I lauded him to my
wife, and sang his praises in her ear, in our moments of
confidence. He was my friend, and he betrayed me.
Curse him !”
Again he struck at the tree, and waved his hand
defiantly to the clouds.
“ I will hunt that man through all the worlds. What-
ever may be the life we live when this is done with, in
whatever sphere or shape I meet him, he shall expiate
the blight he has cast upon me ! My wife bore me a
child, a daughter, beautiful as the day. I declare that
as often as I returned home and saw my darling in her
mother’s lap, I used to bless God for His goodness. Even
as her little fairy fingers would enlace themselves round
one of mine, so did my love for her enlace itself and


grow round the roots of my heart. You would scarcely
believe, would you, that this exquisite baby-beauty—
straight-limbed, bright-eyed, rosy-cheeked—could become
the deformed thing she is now ! You would scarcely
believe that my poor maimed daughter and my baby-
beauty are one—that so fair a shoot should produce such
a stunted and mis-shapen tree !”
“ Poor Alice !” said William, pityingly.
“ Aye, poor Alice !” Stephen echoed, laughing bitterly.
‘‘ But for me, she might have been the pride of Devon-
shire—but for me, she might have been loved, admired,
cherished—but for me her life might have been all
Spring, and her youth would not be, as it is, a cold and
cheerless winter !”
“ One day,” he resumed, after a short pause, “ I left
my home on a journey. I was to be away only twenty-
four hours. It was the first night I had passed out of
my house since our marriage. Why did not my horse
fall down with me and kill me, instead of bringing me
safely back to the home I had left, honored and happy 1
But what some men call Pate, others Chance, others
Destiny, ordained that I should live and grapple with my
misery. For when I arrived home, William Fairfield, I
found that my wife had fled—had fled with him I called
my friend; I learned that she whom I loved with my
whole soul had betrayed me; that he whom I trusted
with my whole heart, had played the Judas. It took me
no time to learn all this. I had not been in my house
five minutes, before it flashed upon me like a picture
suddenly revealed. The past years spread out before me
like a map, and every glance and word that had passed


between us during that time, bore a new signification.
Her love had been a simulation; for months her heart
had not been mine. She had been to me a living lie;
and all a woman’s artifice had been employed to hide the
truth from my knowledge. What would you have done,
William Fairfield, had you been stricken with such a
a blow? What would you have done, had you found
your life’s happiness thus suddenly crumbled to ashes
upon your household hearth V’
He did not wait for a reply, but went on—
“ The thoughts and memories which clung about me
in those few moments of time would make an epic.
Amidst them all, one picture struggled to the foreground.
I saw, in my fancy, the face of my wife lying upon the
pillow in the early morning—a face of child-like, almost
angelic beauty—a face, which, could an artist paint and
call it Innocence, would immortalise his name through all
ages. She had fallen asleep in my arms but a few
hours before, with words of love upon her lips. I saw
her face, and it was heaven to mo. But I could not see
her heart ; and now that it was laid bare in all its naked
untruth, faith, love, religion, fled from me affrighted.
I looked round and saw her child lying in her cot; she
opened her eyes and smiled ; and as in that innocent
smile I caught the reflex of her false mother’s beauty, I
raised her in my arms, and in my rage dashed her to the
ground.”
The memory of that terrible time raised thick beads of
perspiration upon his face ; and again, in a wild
reckless manner, he scooped up a handful of snow, and
scattered it over his head.


“ I scarcely remember what followed. I know that I
pursued them day and night. I cannot remember
whether I ate, or drank, or slept. My life was com-
passed by but one thought—to overtake them and kill
them. I flung money about like a madman. Hearing
that I was in pursuit, they schemed, and baffled me for
some days. Could one for a time destroy all else in
nature, and annihilate space and every living thing that
intervened between me and my vengeance, what a picture
would be seen ! The false wife and the false friend flying
from the vengeful husband. Pluck from their hearts and
minds the thoughts and feelings of the three, and show
them in a palpable form, and all other tragedies of human
life would pale before the terror of this.”
William Fairfield shuddered at the vehemence of the
man’s words, and almost fancied he saw flying through
the air the dark shadows of the picture drawn by Stephen.
“At length I came upon them. I do not know how
many days or nights had passed, until their faces flashed
upon me one night at a railway station. Despite all
warning cries, I jumped upon the step of one of the
carriages, as the train was moving offl I did not think
of my own danger as I was whirled along—l only
thought that they were there, and that I must get to
them. The window through which I had caught a
glimpse of their faces was far in front of me, and with
feverish impatience I worked my way along the side
of the train. How I escaped being dashed to pieces is a
marvel. At last I came to the window, and peering
in, I saw them nestling side by side. Never shall I
forget the moment when with a glance, came mutual


recognition. I tore at the door like a wild animal, but it
was locked, and all my strength was powerless to open
it. I shouted—l rayed—l believe 1 must have been
mad. The engine was before me, and at the thought I
found myself upon it, struggling with the engineer, who
endeavoured to prevent my mad purpose. I can remem-
ber nothing more. A sudden crash—the flying- of a
million fiery particles in the air—and then, oblivion !
When I recovered my senses I learned that a terrible
accident, inexplicable now to all but me, had occurred
that my wife and her paramour were killed, with a score
of others, and that I should never see their faces again
upon this earth ! ”
At this moment, William, looking towards the house,
saw again on the snow the shadow of a man, and he
would have moved towards it, had not Stephen’s next
words stayed him.
“ When I arose from my bed of sickness I was another
man. I had tasted the sweetness of life, and it had
poisoned me. I closed my door upon all my former
associates and friends. The shadow of Death was
hanging over my house—for oh, William Fairfield, when
in my despair I had dashed my baby-beauty to the
earth, I had not killed her, although she lingered in
pain for many years—l had not killed her, but I had
maimed, deformed her, beyond all mortal cure, and she
grew what you see her now. I, her father, made her
what she is—I, her father, wrecked her young life upon
the rock of my despair—and I, her father, hour after
hour, and day after day, bear within me the seeds of a
remorse so strong and agonising, that I would chop


myself limb from limb to atone for tlie misery I have
made her bear.”
The night was very still; no sound of merriment
floated from the house. The shadow, too, had disap-
peared. As William noted this, there stole into his
heart a doubt, which made him shudder.
“ Do you wonder now that I am morose, sullen, and
uncharitable t Do you wonder now that I shun my
fellow-men—that I hate them all, scorn, distrust them
all 1 Why have I told you my story 1 I scarcely know;
except it be to save you from the same fate which has
fallen to my lot.”
“ The same fate ! ” echoed William.
“ Aye, the same fate,” returned Stephen; “ you love
Laura Harrild’s face, as I loved the face of my wife, but
do you know her heart 1 ”
“ Her heart! ”
“ All women are the same,” said Stephen, scornfully.
“ I warrant, now, she plays love and devotion to you
when you are together; and yet to-night ”
“ To-night! ” echoed William.
“ This very night, I saw her clasped in another man’s
arms ”
“ Hold! ” cried William, in an agonised voice;
“ hold ! Stephen, for God’s sake ! ”
“I must tell you the truth,” continued Stephen,
doggedly. “ But two hours since, I saw her yonder,”
—and he pointed to where William had seen the
shadow—“ pressing to her heart a man who was not
William Fairfield.”
Two hours ago! That was the time that he had


seen the shadow of a man upon the snow, and had called
Laura’s attention to it—the very time that she had
implored him not to go out, and had then left him for
full half-an-hour. His heart stood still at the thought.
Why, it was but this night that he had drawn again
from her lips the sweet confession of her love—but this
night that they had pictured forth the home she was
to sanctify ! He staggered against the tree, and looked
vacantly into Stephen’s face.
“Aye, it is true, lad,” said Stephen, as if answering
some question; “it is hard to bear, but it is true. And
there is more yet; for I heard her, as lam a living man,
make an appointment to meet him at midnight behind
the house ! ”
An appointment at midnight! His love, whom he
had thought as sacredly pure as she was beautiful! Oh,
shame ! shame ! Should he go to her, and accuse her to
her face 1 Should he go to her, and proclaim her shame
in the midst of her gay company, and then fling
her from him for ever 1 Was it true as this man
said, that all women were frail ? Was it true that
they lie to a man’s face, and laugh at him behind his
back 1 He had given his heart to this girl—he had sold
himself to her—and she was playing him false ! What
was his life worth to him now 1 The recollection of every
tender word she had spoken to him rose in judgment
against her. The memory of every loving look he had
received from her made the present more bitter to bear.
Should he openly dishonor her? No, he would watch
first; this night he would play the spy upon her, and
satisfy himself if Stephen’s words were true. If they


were, and if at midnight this false girl met her lover
secretly, why, then
But he eould think no further ; a dozen times his
thoughts carried him to this point, and there he stopped,
dazed and confused. Then he looked at Stephen Wink-
worth. Was it possible that he should ever grow like
this man—hated by and hating all 1 She had made the
world so beautiful to him ; his love for her had grown
into a faith; and if this faith were overturned, in what or
whom could he believe 1
If his faith were overturned ! Why, already he
doubted her ! Even now she was not to him what she
had been only an hour before; already in his heart her
pure image was defiled.
“Oh ! ” he groaned, as he clenched his hands in
mental agony ; “oh ! Laura ! Laura ! how could you
so deceive .me ? ”
He had judged her. Weak, unstable as he was, he
had already condemned her; the first thought that she
was unfaithful, had been to him a proof of her guilt.
But he would watch to-night. To this his mind was
settled; and so resolved, he moved mechanically towards
the house.
“ Never mind, lad,” said Stephen, as he walked by his
side. “It is hard to bear; but it is better now than
after.”
“Be silent!” exclaimed William, savagely. “You
have told me to-night that which mgy blast my life.”
Yes; this man had poisoned the well thathad sweetened
his existence. This man had made him doubt.
He met Laura in the passage. Uneasy at his long


absence, she had been looking for him about the house,
but had never thought that he had been out so long
in the cold night. Her face lit up gladly as she ran
towards him. Oh ! could he not see that there dwelt
only purity and innocence! Could he not look into her
truthful eyes, and see there the reflex of her stainless soul!
No ; doubt and jealousy had blinded him. Maddened
by the tale he had heard, by the suspicions that had
entered his heart, he pushed almost rudely by her.
“ Oh, William !” murmured the poor girl, going up
to him, and drawing him backward to the porch.
“ Forgive me, Laura,” he said, as, with a sudden
remorse, he stooped down and kissed her; “I am not
well.”
She repressed the tears that wore welling to her eyes,
and looked up anxiously. Oh ! blind and infatuated,
could he still look and doubt 1 She laid her hand timidly
upon his shoulder, and nestled up to him confidingly. In
her trusting love, she did not notice that he refrained
from drawing her closer to him.
“ I have missed you ever so long, William,” she said,
sweetly; “ and poor Alice has been asking after you
so anxiously, that she must have thought you were lost.”
“ Laura,” he said, suddenly, and with a fierce passion
in his voice, “ do you love me 1”
“You frighten me, William,” replied the girl, drawing
back from him.
He noticed the action, and misconstrued it.
“ Answer me,” he said abruptly. “Do not shrink from
me, or evade my question. You know I love you, do
you not 1”


“ Yes, William.”
Every harsh word he spoke to her wounded him as if
it were a dagger’s point. He knew the suffering he was
inflicting upon her, by his own pain in the infliction, but
he set his teeth close, and did not flinch.
“You know how perfectly I love you, Laura. You
know the hold you have upon my heart. You know that
I had better be dead than live in the belief that you loved
me, and find that it is not so. You know this, do you
not? Answer me !”
“ I believe it, William,” she answered, choking back
her sobs.
“ And now, answer me again, Laura,” he said, almost
solemnly, “ do you love me ?”
“ Yes, William,” she answered, calmly, and looking
fearlessly into his eyes.
Did this content him ? No. The doubts that beset him
were phantoms that haunted every word she spoke, and
bore them to his sense with a distorted meaning. What
had Stephen told him ? In another man’s arms, but an
hour agone ! Oh, shame ! shame !
“ I wonder,” he said, with a quiet bitterness, “ whether
girls often deceive, their lovers ! ”
“Oh, William! William!” cried Laura, turning her
face from him, her sobs breaking out almost into a
paroxysm.
He was frenzied with his jealousy and his love. Her
tears fell upon his heart like scalding rain, withering
every flower that erst was blooming in his soul. But he
could not be indifferent to her emotion. He bent over
her and tried to soothe her ; and although she was almost


heart-broken, her sweet, loving nature conquered her
womanly resentment, and after a time she looked up
through her tears and smiled. Fool that he was ! why
did he not then speak to her of his doubts, and ask for
an explanation? No (he thought), it will look like an
accusation : I will judge for myself.
And so the evening came to an end, and the guests pre-
pared to trudge to their several homes. Each one wished
his neighbor a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.
Even the Woys and the Wymcrs were jovial and genial
enough to shake hands with all sorts of people. And as
for Doctor Bax—there was not one in the company who
did not behave as if he were in a raging thirst, and took
the little Doctor for a pump !
“ The worst of it is,” said Doctor Bax, as, his face
beaming with good nature, he was tying a cravat round
his throat, “ that everything must come to an end”
“ Except the Law,” interposed Mr. Wymer—as much
as to say, That is Eternal.
“ Well, if you like, except the Law,” said the Doctor.
“ Here is a pleasant evening, pleasantly spent, come to
an end before we know where we are. It is distressing
to think that, although we shall have plum-pudding to-
morrow, we shall be looking back to to-morrow as we
are doing now to to-day, and sighing over the remains of
the feast we have not yet tasted. But then there are
our duties to attend to the day after that. As Mr.
Wymer would say,” added the Doctor slily, “ there is
the Law to look after”—(Mr. Wymer nodded pleasantly)
“ and no one will grumble at doing that,” —though
whether ho meant his duty or the law he did not divulge.


“ And it is pleasant, after all, to know that we part
from each other with kind feelings in our hearts, and
that, when we wish each other a Merry Christmas and a
Happy New Year, we mean it truly and sincerely.”
And so, with many more good wishes, the party
finally broke up.
William Fairfield had wished Laura good night. He
had repressed the passion that was raging within him,
and had somewhat soothed her agitation. But now, as
he wandered from the house in the cold night, the
jealous fire blazed up with fury. He looked back to the
house a dozen times, as if expecting to see evidence of
her guilt. Do what he would, he could not get Stephen
Winkworth’s words out of his mind. Clasped in another
man’s arms !—Could Stephen be lying 1 What purpose
had he to serve by so doing 1 No—it was true, and she
had deceived him! He stopped and conj ured up the picture
before him—Laura and her lover ! and he saw their lips
utter voiceless words of affection ; and he saw her lay her
head upon his shoulder: and he ground his teeth with
jealous rage.
This was his Christmas Eve! Next Christmas they
were to have had a merry party at their own house : it
had been arranged that night. If he proved Stephen’s
words to be true, where would his next Christmas
be spent 1 And here he laughed in helpless derision.
His future was gone ; and what recked he now where or
how his life was passed !
Some short distance from the house, But within sight
of it, stood an old gnarled tree, prolific in queerly-
knotted excrescences and twisted limbs and branches.
b


It was so old that there had rotted away, nearly at its
roots, a space sufficiently large to allow a man to seat
himself easily. Here William mechanically rested;
and, with a weary body, but active mind, set himself to
the task of watching Reuben Harrild’s house. Above
him spread the fantastic outshoots of the tree, and,
looking up, William could almost fancy he saw queer
faces peeping down upon him—over-leaning one another
to look at him as he sat. Some smiled, some frowned ;
and one old fellow, with a great knot in his forehead,
eyed him so sternly, that he turned away half-angry
at the delusion. As he turned, his attention was
attracted by the beautiful appearance of the hedgerow
which lined the boundary of Reuben Harrild’s land. It
was nearly man-high; and one could look through the
tangled skein of bare and naked bush, snow-lined in
purest white, and see pictured a thousand queer fancies
in the maze. It needed but little imagination to conjure
through the interlaced vista, castles, and rocks, and battle-
fields, with shreds of armies flying from eager pursuers;
or churchyards with a myriad white spectres in their
winding-sheets, gauntly stretching out their attenuated
limbs. And there, wonder upon wonder ! was the same
grim old fellow with the knob in his forehead, eyeing
him as severely as ever, and beckoning him to approach.
William blinked and rubbed his eyes, and looked again;
but there still stood the grim old man, beckoning him to
come. The old man was not alone this time; but on
each side, and at the rear of him, dozens of white phantom-
shadows stood, inviting William, with the same beckoning
gestures, to join their company. As he looked on with


wonder, their numbers increased. The whole landscape
became filled with motioning snow-shadows; and, glancing
upwards, a myriad white faces seemed crowding down
upon him, urging him to rise. Mechanically he stood
upon his feet, and, looking towards the house, found
that it had disappeared, and that he was standing
on a great plain, carpeted with snow as far as eye could
reach, without a single speck or mark upon it to show
that it was inhabited. Trees, hedges, houses, all had
vanished; but although the plain was crowded with
shadows moving restlessly around him, and although he
was himself continually turning about to note with
amazement their queer antics, the surface of the snow
did not present a single mark or stain to show that it
was trodden. But now a great wonder took place. A
sudden excitement appeared to possess the phantom
throng ; and the ranks dividing, a figure of surpassing
loveliness approached. It was that of a beautiful Woman,
with a crown of crystals upon her head. A thousand
corruscated icicles appeared to gleam about her. She
was robed in garments of snowy whiteness, which hung
loosely upon her form. Her limbs and features were fault-
lessly beautiful, and in her eyes there dwelt an expression
of such perfect love and goodness, that William felt as
though he could have knelt and worshipped her. But the
most remarkable thing about her was, that although she
appeared to be a palpable embodiment, she was nothing
but a crystal transparency, and lying on her heart could
be seen the form of a sleeping child.
As William gazed with delight on the vision, he felt
a cold touch upon his arm, and turned, as if expecting


some new sight. Bat the space was vacant, and a voice
whispered into his ear the word,
“ Faith ! ”
He knew that the presence of an Invisible Shadow was
about him, and that this was the name of the spotless
woman who stood before him.
Again the vast mass of white phantoms upheaved, and
the woman disappeared ; but in her place stood another
form, which made him shudder to look upon. The form
of a Thing, with scowling features, with dishevelled hair,
with bloodshot eyes, with nervous trembling limbs. Its
garments were soiled, and close upon its brow was fixed
a crown with sharp points pressing inwards on its
forehead. It was transparent as the first, and lying on
its heart could be seen the form of a sleeping child, with
a dagger in its breast.
For the second time, the cold touch came upon his arm,
and the voice whispered,
“Doubt !”
Once more the shadowy throng moved restlessly about,
and the scowling form had vanished, while where it stood
there crouched a pitiful-looking figure, with tears stream-
ing from its eyes. As it turned its face heavenward,
William saw upon it an expression of almost hopeless
despair, and noticed that in its arms there lay the form
of a child, cold and dead.
And then the voice whispered for the third time,
“ Remorse !”
No sooner had the word been uttered, than the vast
throng of phantom shadows made a sudden leap into the
air, as if it were an army performing an evolution, and


plunging headlong into the snow, vanished from his
sight.
William trembled with amazement. He looked upon
the ground, but could see no traces of the phantom
groups. The snow had closed upon them as if it were a
sea, and the great plain lay naked in the eyes of heaven.
But he knew that he was not alone, for he felt about him
the presence of the Invisible Shadow, and he heard the
voice addressing him—
“ Upon this evening, of all evenings in the year, when
, men’s hearts should be filled with love and goodwill, have
you allowed the seeds of doubt to be set within your
breast. Upon this Christmas Eve have you allowed to
be defiled the love which hallows life. She whom you
love, and who loves you with all the strength of a pure
woman’s love, is stainless and truthful. This morning,
Eaith filled your heart —this night, Doubt occupies its
place—beware, lest to-morrow comes Remorse ! Behold
what you were, what you are, and what you shall be, if
you let passion and unreason blind you !”
And as the voice ceased, William sank down, down
into the snow. In vain he strove to save himself.
Down he sank, lower and lower still, until he felt dizzily
afraid that each foot beneath him would disclose a
yawning precipice, over which he would be dashed to
pieces. But, although the soft white snow enveloped
him, he felt strangely the presence of shadowy spirits
about him, and ever and anon there would gleam athwart
his otherwise blinded sight, the vision of a face which
filled his soul with wonder. Eyes of lustrous beauty
peered suddenly upon him, and as suddenly vanished.


Strangely-familiar faces flashed upon him, and faded
slowly, as others usurped their places. Then a thick
darkness fell upon him; and when sight was restored, he
found himself standing before a house, surrounded by
waving fields, the golden corn gleaming in the sun.
Strange ! It was his own house before which he
was standing; they were his own fields he saw around
him ; not as he had seen them last—the evidence of care-
ful husbandry and cultivation was everywhere apparent.
It was the vision of what he had pictured to himself his
home and farm might have been a few years after
he had married. And there, in the garden, was
Laura, more matronly, but not less beautiful, than in her
maiden days. He walked up to her, and laid his hand
upon her shoulder, but she did not turn and look up to
him. He spoke to her, but she betrayed no sign of recog-
nition. He clasped her in his arms, but she melted from
his grasp, and he saw her looking with a glad light in her
eyes out on the landscape. Wonder upon wonders ! He
saw a form approaching—himself, with a little girl
upon his shoulders, crowing and clapping her tiny hands
to Laura, who ran towards them smiling, and was taken
to her husband’s embrace. And then he knew that he
was a shadow, invisible, impalpable, and that his other
self had taken his place in Laura’s affections. The day
passed, and he saw them in the evening sitting by the
window, her head resting lovingly upon his shoulder.
And he heard her speak, and he saw in her eyes such an
expression of pezTeot love, that he gnashed h is teeth with
despair, as ho thought that he had fade d out of his
place in the world, and that another filled it. She


was speaking to him of the past, of the time before they
were married. “Do you know, William,” she said, “of
what I am thinking V’
“ No, darling,” he answered, as he pressed his lips to
her forehead.
“ I am thinking,” she said, “of the last Christmas
Eve we were together in my father’s house, before we
were married. When you went away, I was so unhappy,
and I did not sleep the whole of the night. How I sighed
for the day to come, so that I might see you, and tell
you all. And when I saw you coming over the field,
oh, William ! I ran up to my bedroom, and cried for
very happiness. For I thought that you might not
come, and that, perhaps, I should never see you again.”
“ Do not speak of it,” he said; “ the remembrance of my
blind jealousy on that night always fills me with pain.”
“ But I like to speak of it, and to think of it, William,”
she persisted, “for it was such a proof of your love.
And lam so happy in your love, William; and I bless
God for it, hourly and daily.”
And then their forms melted in the night, and the history
of those two lives passed rapidly before him. He saw
them in their youthful wedded days—contented and
blessed. Years passed quickly over their heads, and
children grew around them, enriching their home with
perfect love. Then sickness came, and he saw them
standing in the chamber of death over the lifeless form
of one of their young ones, gathering consolation in their
bereavement from their mutual affection, and from their
faith that He, whose all-seeing eye watches equally over
all His earthly children, would yet unite them with their


child again in the blessed band of immortality. And so,
through the valley of the years, he watched them living
their honored lives, until they were gathered to the fold
of Him whose children live through all eternity.
Again, he felt about him the presence of the invisible
shadow, and the voice said—
“ Such lives as these are the reward of Faith and Love.
Doubter of all that is most holy and beautiful, behold
what shall spring from the seeds you have allowed this
night to be set within your heart! ”
And then he saw his homo and farm again, but, ah!
how changed ! Neglected lay the rich fields around
his homestead ; and in his garden, overrun with weeds,
stood Laura, looking out upon the landscape : but
not the Laura whom he loved. Although the familiar
features were there, the expression of anxious pain upon
them struck him with fear. Presently, his second self
came up to her; but she was not, as before, taken to her
husband’s embrace, and he made no response to the
yearning look with which she lifted up her eyes to his
face. In silence they walked side by side into the house,
and then he said—
“ Any one been here, Laura 1 ”
“ No, William,” she replied.
“ Sure 1 ” he exclaimed, sharply.
“ There has been no one here, William,” Laura said,
with a gasping sigh.
He did not speak again, but turned away from her.
And William saw what an unhappy home was here
before him : not illumined by Love, but darkened by
Doubt: not sanctified by Faith, but gloomed by Disbelief.


The evening came, and he saw the wife creep timidly to
her husband’s side, while in her eyes there dwelt a
mingled look of love and fear.
“ William,” said she, “why do you still continue to
doubt me 1 ”
“ Why do you give me cause 1 ” he asked, gloomily.
“ Heaven knows, Ido not,” she replied. “ I have been
true and faithful to you, in deed and thought. Oh,
William ! our past life has been very unhappy; do not
darken the future—there is no cause. Cast from your
heart the doubts that beset you, and do not entirely wreck
our future happiness. I love you still, despite your
unkindness.”
“Of course,” he said, bitterly ; “my unkindness—
throw it upon me. Like all you women. Stephen
Winkworth was right; you are all alike.”
“ William, William,” she cried, the hot tears rising
to her eyes, “ you will break my heart.”
But William left her abruptly, without reply—left her
to weep over the cold ashes of her love.
And so the next two or three years passed. Thinner
and paler grew the wife —more anxious and haggard
grew the husband. Then came a time when she lay upon
her bed of death ; her still sweet face looking up to his,
while the angel of Love and the demon of Doubt were
fighting- within him.
“ Stoop down and kiss me, William,” she said, slowly
and painfully. “I am sorry, and glad, to leave you. Our
life has been different to what I hoped it would have
been. Do you remember how happy we were before we
were married ? But it is all ended now; and when we


meet in Heaven you will love me again as you used, will
you not ? ”
He clicked back tlie spasms tliat rose to his throat, and,
kneeling down by the bed, laid his hand in her’s.
“ Thank God ! ” she said, as she put his hand to her
wasted breast, and then raised it, feebly, to her lips ; “ it
is all over —life was very hard to bear without your love.
I gave you all my heart, William ; but you took yours
from me. When I am gone, think of me sometimes,
with love in your thoughts. Look, William, look ! ”
—and she rose in her bed, and pointed out of window—
“ there is father’s house ! why, surely it is night, and
the snow is falling. It is very cold—but the light is
coming ”
And as the light came, her features grew again into
youthful beauty, and her soul winged its way to the
bosom of Our Heavenly Father.
“ Such lives as these,” said the voice of the Invisible
Shadow, “ are the fruit of Doubt. Behold Remorse ! ”
And William saw himself, a prematurely old, gray-
headed man, sitting alone in the midst of a desolate
home. No light of love shone upon his house ; the happy
voices of children were not heard within its walls.
Unfriended, unoared for, he sat with all the evidences
about him of a wrecked and wasted life. He was filled
with regretful thoughts and remorseful memories, and he
shuddered despairingly as the picture of what his life
might have been rose before him. And so he went
down into his grave, unsanotified by human love or human
sympathy.
And for the last time the voice spoke.




“ The story you have heard to-night from the lips of a
hard, bad man is true. But if one sin, are all guilty 1
Your life is now sanctified by the pure love of a pure
woman. Cast it not from you. Live and be blessed
with the angel Love 1 Live and be cursed with the
devil Doubt! The choice is before you. You have
received your warning ! ”
And then the voice ceased, and William starting to his
feet, rubbed his eyes, and looked about him. Had he been
dreaming 1 He looked up to the tree, but saw no faces
in its twisted limbs and branches. The hedge-row beyond
was very beautiful, but no beckoning shadows were there.
The stars were shining in the frosty heavens, and the
moon was throwing a soft tender light upon the snow
fields smiling in her face. The night was very lovely ;
all nature was in repose. Surely he had been dreaming.
He looked towards Laura’s house—and there
His heart stood still, and the] next instant his body
was full of maddening pulses. Stealing out from the
house, he saw a female, her form throwing a long Shadow
upon the Snow. He could not mistake the step, the
graceful turn of the neck as she looked around. It was
Laura ! Another form meeting hers —the Shadow of a
man upon the Snow! As the two met, William
pressed • forward in mad excitement : he saw warm
kisses pass between them—he saw them clinging to each
other in fond endearment—he saw her, his Laura! lying
in another man’s arms : and he dropped into his seat with
a bitter cry ! His love was stricken (lead !


PART II.
THE SHADOWS IN THE SNOW RANGES,
Far, far away from English homes and English firesides,
our story takes us, on a dark and cheerless night, to a
little narrow tent, pitched in a gully, on each side of
which frowning ranges rear their lofty heads, grandly.
To this little narrow tent we come across wild and
stormy seas, through storm and tempest, through tropi-
cal waters where the moon rises blood-red from a lurid
ocean, past icebergs looming threateningly near, through
miles of phosphorescent light gleaming in the eyes of
the solemn night—to this little narrow tent, wherein,
mayhap, are centred all the hopes and fears, all the
joys, sorrows, ambitions, which make up the sum of
human life in the great world beyond. Months fly,
seasons change, and once-glowing- aspirations fade away,
and are lost for ever in the gulf of time. . The drama of
some men’s lives is played out upon many stages ; in
others, a single scene upon a narrow stage suffices for the
commencement and the end. One man’s life may be a
cyclopaedia; another’s, a word of hut one syllable. A
look, a thought, a motion of the hand, may be sufficient
to change the peaceful current of an existence into a
turbulent whirlpool.
A dark, cold, cheerless night. With the exception of


this little tent, no trace of civilization near. Here
Nature reigns supreme. The lofty mountains, rising
range over range, appear to shut out from the world the
gully in which our scene is laid. And yet, between this
sterile, savage spot and our peaceful Devon lane, there is
a, close and human connexion. The thoughts of one man at
least, sitting in the tent are travelling back to that pleasant
yet bitter nook in Devon, wherein were culminated his life’s
happiness and his life’s sorrow. Again the scene rises
before him. Again the old familiar faces shape themselves
from the air, and visit him with loving looks and smiles.
Again a tearfully-happy face is resting on his breast, and
loving eyes seek his, yearningly. Again the fond arms
are thrown around him, and a tender form nestles con-
fidingly to his heart. And then he wakes, and, looking
round with a bitter smile, shakes off the dream, angrily.
Within the tent four men are seated round a miserably
scant fire. The canvas above their heads scarcely screens
them from the inclemency of the night; and strong and
hardy as they are, they huddle close together for warmth,
and greedily watch the dying embers before them. Out-
side the tent, no sign of human habitation or human life
can be seen. The district is wild, barren, and dismally
bare of vegetation. The men are rough-looking fellows,
with great beards and strong limbs, and a decided exertion
of physical strength in their every action. Each has
a short black pipe in his mouth, which he puffs vigor-
ously, and with a will; and all are alike attired in
rough jackets, moleskin trousers, and billy-cock hats.
Although they are in as desperate a condition as four
men well can be; although the country, for miles around,


is knee-deep, and, in some places, man-deep with snow ;
although a heavy drift without is raising barriers
almost impassable ; although their last handful of wood is
burning- on the fire, and they know that they can obtain no
more; although they have not three days provisions in their
tent—scarce an anxious thought crosses theirminds. Some
three or four weeks before, they had set off on the track of
a party of men, who were supposed to have found a new
Gold Field. Stealing out in the dead of nighi, lest they
themselves should be discovered, they had plunged into
a portion of the country which they did not hope to find
other than barren, inhospitable, and incapable of sustaining
human life. With the indomitable courage and reckless-
ness which appear to form part of the gold digger’s
character, they had set themselves the task of tracking
the men before them, and discovering the locality of their
workings. No pluck in the world can beat the pluck of
the gold digger. He laughs at obstacles at which others
would pale ; he fig'hts with the barrenness of nature, and,
conquering, opens up country, which, but for his hardi-
hood, might remain with its treasure for ever shut out from
the knowledge of mankind. There is no pioneer so brave,
so persistent, so enduring. It may be questioned if, in
any age, or in any country, the nobler physical qualities
of man have been more worthily exercised. In these
our antipodean Colonies, the g-old digger is the pioneer
of progress.
These four men, bound together for the time by the
almost brotherly tie of gold digging freemasonry, differed
widely in nature and appearance. Each of them
might have moved in different grades of life in the old


country ; but conventionalities were here set, aside, for a
gold digger’s existence levels all distinction. Their
great beards made their faces so many distinct puzzles,
physiognomically ; but there was that about their general
appearance, their gait, and their conversation, which in
some measure served as an index to their several charac-
ters. One of these was known as Gentleman George.
There was no satire meant in the name. Gentleman
George was simply a man of good breeding—a hand-
some fellow enough, with laughing blue eyes, and the
strength of a Hercules. Opposite to him, squatting upon
his blanket, was Cornish Tom. He had been a gold
digger for the last fifteen years ; and had mined in Cali-
fornia, Hew South Wales, Victoria, and New Zealand. He
might have made a moderate fortune half-a-dozen times,
for he had had fully that number of chances. But there was
no rest for the sole of Cornish Toni’s foot. Ho sooner
did he hear of a “ new rush,” than he was off. Many
were the rich claims he had abandoned to be among the first
on a new Gold Field. Hundreds and thousands of miles
of bush and plain had he traversed, patiently and cheer-
fully, to find that he had been following a Will-o’-
the-wisp. Yet he was always hopeful—always san-
guine. Free-handed, simple-minded, hard-working, and
restless, he was the type of a class which will be easily
recognised in the Colonies. The third of the party was
a young man, remarkable chiefly for his reticence and his
furious love for hard work. He hoarded his gold like a
miser. The very opposite of Cornish Tom, who flung
his money about with utter recklessness, Dick Driver
spent never a shilling in waste, and was so con


sistently steady and saving that he often brought upon
himself the ridicule of his companions. The fourth
of the party was William Fairfield.
Yes, maddened by what he had seen that Christmas
night, William Fairfield had gone the next morning to
Mr. Wymer, and signed away his farm to Stephen
Wink worth. He wrote but a few words to Laura.
They were these : “ I was outside your house last night,
and saw all. Ob, Laura, how could you so deceive
me! I leave you with a pang at my heart which time
can never alleviate. May your future be happier than
t hat I see before me. Farewell.” And without waiting
for explanation or reply, he travelled hastily to Liverpool,
and took passage in a ship just then departing for Hew
Zealand. Very commonplace reading this; but life is
made up of lights and shades, and ordinary events require
but ordinary language to express them.
As he sat by the miserable fire on this cold and bitter
night, his thoughts, with strange persistence, wandered
back to that Christmas Eve. Indeed, his thoughts were
always dwelling upon that time. He would lie awake
night after night wandering through the maze of
the past. In the midst of his work, the memory of some
trifle, which had given him pleasure, would thrill through
him again; and he would linger upon it, although
to do so was torture. At times he would wonder what
she was doing at the moment of his thought, and he
would set the old wound bleeding by calling up the
image of her face—her face, so innocently beautiful,
so fair, so sweet to look upon. He kept the memory of
it lingering about him, although he extracted from it
nothing but exquisite misery.


One thought continually haunted him. Could he have
been mistaken 1 Had he been rash in judging her 1 No;
he would sigh, as the memories of the shadows he had seen
upon the snow hovered again and again about him. But
still his thoughts would wander back to the theme, and
still the doubt remained.
“ Whew! ” whistled Gentleman George, casting his eyes
somewhat apprehensively round, “ I hope the wind won't
blow away the tent. I half expect we are in a pickle
as it is, but that would make it ten times worse. Just
take a peep out of doors, Willy, and see what it looks
like.”
Willy (that was the by which William
Fairfield was known) went to the ’door, and cautiously
opening it, and holding it fast lest it should be blown out
of his hand, let in a gust of wind that raised the dying
embers of the fire into a furious but deceitful blaze.
Stepping out quickly, and pulling the door behind him,
William gazed around and shivered. In truth, it was a
bitter night. A heavy wind was driving the snow
before it fiercely. The tremendous ranges which hemmed
in this little band of men were snow-clad from base to
summit, and the flying drift blowing into William's face
almost blinded him. Shading his eyes with his disengaged
hand, William looked about him keenly, as if in search of
some familiar object, and then, hastily stepping into the
tent, fastened the door, and resumed his seat.
“ Well ?” said Gentleman George, in a tone of inquiry.
“ Did you see the fork this afternoon ? ” abruptly asked
William, without heeding Gentleman George’s query.
“ Yes,” was the reply.
E


The fork was a tree with a quaintly forked branch,
which stood about a hundred yards from the tent.
“ Sure 1 ” asked William.
“ Certain.”
“ Well, it has either been blown down, or the snow
has covered it. If it is not blown away, there must be
twelve feet of snow where it stands.”
A low whistle broke from the lips of the three men,
and Cornish Tom, carefully re-filling his cutty, asked
composedly,
“ Ever snowed up, George ? ”
“ No,” replied George ; “ and never want to be.”
“ Dare say,” returned Cornish Tom, lighting his pipe;
“ but you’ll have a chance now.”
There was silence for a few moments, and then Cornish
Tom spoke again.
“ Look here, mates,” he said, “ I reckon we’re in for
it; we haven’t three days’ g'rub in the place, and can’t
get any more. This snow-storm is going to last, and I’m
blessed if I can see how we’re to get out of it.”
No one thought of disputing with Cornish Tom ; he
was known not to be fond of giving idle opinions.
“ I have heard from some of the shepherds, that places
like these are snowed up at this season of the year,
sometimes for months together,” said Gentleman George.
“ The best thing we can do,” said Cornish Tom, “ is to
try and hump it back again to-morrow. Did you see
any smoke from the next gully, to-day f
“ No,” replied William.
“ I saw it yesterday,” continued Tom; “ perhaps
they’re off. An eternal shame it is,” he grumbled, “ that


when we’ve found a rich gully like this, we should have
to run away from it. Why, we could make a pile in six
months. I wonder what sort of ground they’ve got in
the next gully.”
“ I wonder if they’ve got any provisions,” speculated
William.
“It strikes me,” said Dick Driver, speaking very
slowly, “ that we shall not be able to get out of this as
easily as we think. Look here,” and he kicked the
side of the tent, against which a mass of accumu-
lated snow was heavily pressing; “ there is an awful
drift going on; all the tracks are rubbed out, and
if the fork is buried, we might as well try to walk
through the sea as try to get out that way. I shouldn’t
be half surprised if we were never to get out at all !
Hark ! what was that T
They all bent their heads and listened. The only sound
they could hear was the roaring of the wind past the
tent.
“ We may as well look at it right in the face,” resumed
Dick; “ I was never very religious, but if I had been, I
think I should say my prayers twice over to-night.”
The only answer Gentleman George and Cornish Tom
gave to this, was a steadier puffing at their pipes. They
were well aware of their danger, but they did not
care to talk over-much about it; they all knew and could
grasp the full extent of their peril —all but William
Fairfield. He had never realised it until this night,
and now it came upon him with terrible force. Never
to get back ! he thought; to be snowed up here, and be
buried and lost to the world for ever ! Never to see


dear Devon again ! novel' again to see or licar of Laura !
And now an intense desire seized him to see and speak
with her once more ; for ho loved her still—loved her
dearly. Swiftly to his thought came her sweet face to his
mind; and the yearning that tilled his soul made him
sick with desire.
“ Oh ! ” he groaned to himself, as he had done him.
dreds of times before, “ would it have been better
for me not to have seen ?—lt would, for I should not
have known ; I should have been blest and happy, and
now ”
He looked round, shiveringly. Heedless of the blinding
snow, he went again to the door, and stepped out. He
strained his gaze across the hills, as if he could sec
Warleycombe in the distance. And if he could—if at
that moment a vision of what was passing in his old
home had visited him—what would he have seen and
heard ?
He would have seen Laura sitting, fistlessly, at her
bedroom window, overlooking the garden, now radiant
with Nature's loveliest gems. He would have seen her,
with a wistful look in her sweet eyes, gazing far, far
beyond, as if she, too, yearned to annihilate space, and
look again upon the form of the man she loved—for she
did love him, truthfully, faithfully ; and she yearned to
take him to her heart, and weep over him and forgive
him.
He would have seen her father enter slowly, and have
seen her turn to him, and lay her head gently upon his
breast. He would have heard Harrild say,
“ Still thinking, darling 1 ”


“ Still thinking, father,” she answers, softly ; “as I
shall always do.”
“ Child ! child !” Reuben Harild says, “he is not worthy
of you.”
“ Yes, he is, father,” she replies, laying- her hand upon
his lips. “Ho is mistaken, that is all. And, oh, father !
would that he were here, that I might forgive him.”
Looking again, William would have seen Laura upon
her knees, her prayer being that her lover might return
to her, or that she might die.
William misht have seen another home—that of
Stephen Winkworth. He might have seen poor crippled
Alice lying sick upon her bed, and Stephen standing by
in anguish ; Doctor Bax being present, looking some-
what graver than of old.
“ Something better to-day, Alice,” says the little
Doctor. “We shall have you presently running about
the house, as lively as a cricket.”
A weary, incredulous smile passes over the girl’s face,
and she murmurs something about never getting better.
“ Nonsense, child! nonsense!” says Doctor Bax. “You
don’t mean to say, you little goose, that you know better
than I do. Why, you would upset the whole science of
making people well if you had your way.”
“ There is only one thing that can make me better,
Doctor Bax,” says the girl.
“ And what is that 1 Just say it, and you shall have it
in a twinkling,” replied the Doctor.
She shakes her head sadly.
“ No,” she says ; “ you cannot get it for me. If William
Fairfield would come back and marry Laura, I think I


should be better. She is very unhappy, is she not,
Doctor?”
“Very unhappy, child.”
“ Poor Laura ! ” says Alice, pityingly. “ What made
him go away ?”
“What made him go away?” echoes Doctor Bax,
irascibly. “ How on earth should I know ? An unfor-
tunate temperament, I suppose. It is a most unaccount-
able thing. I have lived all these years in the world,
and the more I live, the more lam puzzled. How such
a young man could run away from that sw T eet girl—for
she’s an angel, my dear, and so are you —is the greatest
puzzle I have ever met with. Upon my word, I think the
world is going crazy. Good day, my dear, I will see you
to-morrow and Doctor Bax goes out, rubbing his head
vcxedly.
But William Fairfield saw nothing of all this. He
saw nothing but the desolate white ranges ; and as he
looked, a great despair gathered round his heart. The
thought of dying uncared for in this wild spot, almost
drove him mad. But he could not bear the cold, and
presently he re-joined his companions.
“ I am not much of a believer in presentiments,”
Gentleman George was saying, “ but I have got the idea
in my head that we shall never get out of this, alive.
We could keep the snow away for a good many days, but
we shall have enough work to do to keep ourselves from
freezing. Then, we have nothing to eat.”
“ And the baoca’s nearly run out,” grumbled Cornish
Tom. “ I’d give a pound of gold for a pound of Barrett’s
Twist. I wouldn’t care if we had plenty of bacca.”


“ I wonder if tlie folks at home will ever have an idea
of our fate, if we shouldn’t get away,” said Gentleman
George.
“ Don’t keep on talking- like that, George,” remon-
strated Tom; “ you make me feel as low-spirited as—as”—.
but Tom couldn’t get a simile, so he rattled the ashes out
of his pipe and re-filled it.
“I can’t help it, Tom; I have not seen my mother
or father for over ten years, and although I don’t write
to them, and don’t know, indeed, if they are alive, I
can’t help thinking of them at such a time as this. I
I never heard you speak of yours, Tom.”
“ Haven’t got none,” said Tom, shortly.
“ Have you, Will T asked Gentleman George.
William shook his head.
“You have, I know, Dick,” George pursued, “for I
have seen you reading their letters. You see I was a
scapegrace at home, and they were glad to get rid of me,
and I was not sorry to go. But I should like to see their
dear old faces again.”
“ And so you will, George,” said Tom, energetically;
“ but you’re not going the right way about it. We must
keep stout hearts, and we shall be all right. At all
events, we won’t stay here until we’re so tightly snowed
up, that we can’t get out. We’ll start to-morrow, and
cut our way out of it.”
“Hark !” said William, who had been listening with
bent head to something outside. “Do you not hear a
cry !”
They all listened attentively, but no sound reached
their ears but the moaning of the wind.


“ I thought I hoard some one crying out,” said ’William,
after a pause.
“ You couldn’t hear anything in such a wind as this,”
said Cornish Tom. “Lord! What is that?”
They all rushed to the door. A deadening roar, soft
at first, hut increasing every instant, had struck upon
their ears, and looking out, they saw a sight which
filled each man with awe and wonder. An avalanche,
slipping from the summit of one of the loftiest ranges!
Down, down it thundered, throwing out huge snow-
sprays, each one sufficient to bury a hundred men.
Down the steep side of the mountain it rushed, increas-
ing in volume with every foot it rolled, and detaching
great masses of snow and ice, which leaped over each
other with terrible velocity, until they thundered into
the gully. A roar as of ten thousand evil spirits : an
angry rush as of a giant army of white monsters, filling
the air with terrible sights and sounds : and then the
avalanche spread itself, with a great thud, at the base of
the mountain. The lookers-on held in their breaths; all
thought of their own peril gone in the terrific grandeur
of the scene,
“Wo shall be blown into ice-blocks,” presently, said
Gentleman George, as a sigh of relief escaped him, “if
we stand here much longer. Thank God, we were not
under it!”
And so, with a deep feeling of thankfulness at their
hearts, they went into the tent, and, scraping up the
scattered embers of the fire, huddled round it in close
companionship.
“ I don’t think any one of us is in the humour for
sleeping,” said George; “ tell us a story, Tom.”


Tom, without more ado, settled himself comfortably
and began.
“ When the Victorian gold fever was at its height,” he
said, “people were literally mad with excitement. Lord!
lord ! the queer sights I have seen, and the queer stories
I could tell, would fill a dozen books. I have worked
with all sorts of mates, and lived all sorts of lives. The
strangest mate I ever worked with was a man who went
by the name of Cranky Bill. He was as thin as a lath,
and as tall as a may-pole, and he would talk—Lord ! he
would talk, I believe, for days and nights without
stopping, if he could only get some one to listen to him.
He had come out to the colony under a cloud. When I
say under a cloud,” said Tom, taking his pipe from his
mouth, “ I don’t mean that he had done anything wrong;
but he was obliged to run away from England for a
reason I didn’t know then, but which I learned after-
wards. He had brought his wife out with him ; a poor,
weak, delicate creature, who died soon after he landed,
leaving behind her a little girl. This little girl, Cranky
Bill left with some people in Melbourne, and came to the
diggings to try his luck. I was working in Dead Dog
GIIII3-, near Forest Creek, which was just discovered, and
Cranky Bill and me had somehow or another come
together as mates. A better one I never wish for.
Barring his gift of the gab, which was an awful nuisance,
to be sure, I never had anything to complain of. He
never shirked his work ; and once, when I was laid up
with low fever, he nursed me like a woman, and
worked the claim without a murmur. Soon after I got


well our claim was worked out, and we had to look
elsewhere for another, for every inch of the gully was
taken up. I remember the night we parted. We were
sitting in the tent, with the gold before us, and our
revolvers on the table ; for we had to look out pretty
sharp, those days, mates. Many’s the man who has
been robbed and murdered without any one being the
wiser ; strange things have been done on the diggings,
which man’s tongue will never speak of. I’ve seen
some sights which make me shiver when I think of them ;
just the same as Cranky Bill but I mustn’t spoil my
story.
“ Well, we were sitting there with the gold before us.
Our claim had been a rich one, and we had over three
hundred ounces to divide, after all our sprees.
“ ‘ Tom,’ said Cranky Bill, as he sat looking at the gold,
‘if I had had my share of that gold at home, I should
never have come out to the gold fields, and my wife
would not have died.’
“ How can you tell that, Bill ?” I asked.
“Ah, but I know,” he said. “You see, ours was a
love match. We lived at Birkenhead. There was an
old hunks of a money-lender wanted to marry my Lizzie ;
but although her father tried to force her to the match,
she would not consent, and we were married one morning,
quietly, and without their knowing. We were very
happy—she was a good girl, was my Liz—and we
could have got along very well, if it had not been for that
money-lending miser. To spite me for marrying the
girl, he bought up all my debts—they were not much,
about four hundred pounds—and almost worried me mad.


And do you know one morning I caught the villain in
the act of insulting my wife, and learned that this was
not the first time he had done so, threatening that, if
she mentioned it, he would sell me up and put me in
prison. I didn’t show him any mercy, you may be sure ;
I beat him till he was sore, and kicked him out of the
house ; and the next morning I had to fly, for his bailiffs
were on the look-out to arrest me for the debt. He sold
me up, and turned my wife into the streets, and we came
together to Liverpool in a sad plight. However, I
shipped before the mast, and a friend assisted me to pay
for my wife’s passage. It was not until we had been
at sea a week that she told me that the doctor had said
if she left England she would not live a twelvemonth.
She died within the year. So, you see, if I had had my
share of that gold at home, I could have paid that old
scoundrel’s debt, and my wife would not have died. If
I can ever get enough money to go home and ruin him,
I shall die contented.”
“ And he broke out into a storm of oaths and curses.
“ ‘ I tell you what, Tom,’ he said, after a bit, * I shall
go down to Melbourne and see my little daughter, and
then I’ll go prospecting. I know that there are places
where the gold can be got in lumps, and I mean to find
them out. I dreamed the other night that I came upon
it in the rock, and that I had to cut it out with a chisel.’
“ I tried to persuade him from this; for I did not like
the idea of losing my mate, but I might as well have
talked to a mile-post. So we divided the gold, and that
very night he started on the tramp to Melbourne.
“ I did not see or hear anything of Cranky Bill for


some months after this ; and, somehow nr other, luck was
against me—every hole .1 bottomed turned out a duffer.
I went to every little rush ; had half-a-dozen different
mates in as many months; and didn’t earn tucker any
week during that time. I wonder,” said Cornish Tom,
meditatively, “ where all the names they give to the
gullies come from I I’ve worked in Jackass Gully,
Starvation Gully, Donkey-woman's Gully, Fcglcg Gully,
Choke’m Gully, Dead Horse Gully, and lots of others—
I’ve sunk holes in them all. But no place is so strong in
my mind as Madman's Gully, and I shall never forget the
way I came across it,
“ I had keen working for nearly three weeks on
Murdering Flat—nice sociable names, ain’t they ? —and
was pretty well down on my luck. I remember that I
had made about seven pennyweights in those throe weeks;
and I also remember that I hadn’t an ounce of gold
loft in my bag. I was working as a ‘ hatter,’ and
I had been particularly unlucky that day, having got
about three grains, which I flung away in a rage. I was
just thinking whether J. might not as well go to the
grog shanty for a nobbier or two—it was nine o’clock at
night—when who should walk in but Cranky Bill. I
did not know him at first, for he had let the hair grow
all over his face, and he was covered with it up to his
eyes and down to his breast ; but I wasn’t long in the
dark, for I recognised his voice directly he spoke.
“ ‘ All alone, Tom V he asked.
“ I nodded ; and without saying another word, he went
out, and brought in in his arms a beautiful little girl,
asleep. She wasn’t above six years old, but she was so


pretty, and looked ho like a little angel, that 1 fell in love
with her at once. Of course, 1 was a hit surprised when
he brought her in, and he could see this as he laid her
down upon my stretcher.
“ ‘ This is my daughter, Tom,’ Ire said, answering my
look ; ‘ if ever I go to heaven, I shall have her to thank
for it. She is my good angel.’
“ ‘ Where are you come from, Bill '] ’ I asked, after we
had covered her up with the blankets.
“He looked cautiously round, and then taking a seat
close to me at the end of the stretcher, said, in a whisper,
“ ‘ I’ve found it Tom! ’ ”
“ His eyes glared round so awfully, that I felt quite
scared as I asked him what he had found.
“ ‘ I’ve found the place where the gold comes from,’ he
said, in the same voice ;‘ I know lam near it. I always
thought 1 should find it at last. Look hero.’
“And he pulled out of his breast-pocket, a nugget
weighing nearly seventy ounces, and half a dozen others,
from fifteen to twenty-five ounces each. Lord ! how my
heart beat as I looked at them, and how 1 wished I could
drop across some of the same kidney. I don’t know how
it is with you, mates, but although I don’t value the
gold much when I have got it, I can't express the eager
delight which fills me when I come across a rich pocket.
I think the sight of blight shining gold down a dark
claim, is the prettiest in the world.
“ ‘ How are you doing, Tom V Cranky Bill asked, as
he put back the nuggets.
“ ‘ Can’t make tucker, Bill,’ I answered ; ‘ my luck’s
dead out.’


“ ‘ Well, look here,’ he said, ‘you’re all right now. I
have come to fetch you, and shew you where you can
make fifty ounces a day. Will you come V
“ That was a nice question to put to hard-up digger,
wasn’t it ?
“ ‘ When shall we start, old fellow V I said.
“ ‘ Stop a minute, Tom,’ he said, gravely. ‘ I have
something to say to you first. I want you for a mate
again : but we’ve got to make a bargain. You see my
little girl there V
“ I nodded.
“ ‘ Well, she is the blood of my heart. lam like a plant,
Tom, which would wither, if deprived of God Almighty’s
blessed dew. She is my dew. And if anything was
to happen to her, I should wither, and rot, and die.
I w'ant you for my mate, because I believe you to be
honest and true. And lam going to show you a place
which, of my own free will, I would not show to another
man in the world. But do you know, Tom, that since I
have had my little pet with mo,’ —and he laid his hand,
oh! so gently against her cheek, —‘ all my recklessness and
courage seem to have gone clean out of me. For I think
what will become of her if I should die—if I should slip
down a shaft, or the claim should tumble in upon me, or I
should fall ill of a fever, or anything of that sort. These
thoughts haunt me day and night, and I have a presenti-
ment of something I cannot express. Now, Tom, listen
to me. The place lam going to take you to will make
you rich—if we can keep it to ourselves for two or three
months (although there is another in the secret, but he
won’t peach for his own sake), we’ll get five thousand


ounces, and perhaps more. Now, lay your hand upon
your heart, and swear that if anything happens to me,
you will take care of my pet, and be a second father to
her, when I am gone.’
“ I rose and bent over the dear little one’s face—l
can feel her sweet breath again upon my cheek—and kissed
her. Then I said,
“ ‘ That kiss is a sacrament. Bilk By all that’s holy,
I will be a second father to your little girl. So help me
God!’
“He took my hand, and the big tears rolled' down
his beard. We neither of us spoke for five minutes, and
then he commenced again.
“ ‘ Now, I will tell you all about it. You remember
my leaving you to go to Melbourne, after we had worked
out our claim in Dead Dog 1 Well, I went down and
found that my little girl was not being well treated.
The people she was living with had taken to drink, and
had neglected her. And my heart so grew to her—her
face is the picture of my Lizzie’s—that I made up my
mind never to leave her again. We’ve travelled
together, since that time, I don’t know how many hun-
dreds of miles.’
“ * How did you manage that ?’ I asked ; ‘ the little
thing could not walk.’
“ ‘ Sometimes I carried her,’ he answered ; ‘ and I got
her odd lifts, now and then, upon the ■ drays and wagons.
There was never a drayman or a wagoner who refused
to give my little girl a ride, if he was going our way.
Why, do you know,’ he said, laughing, ‘ once she saved
me from the bushrangers. They were upon me in the


Black Forest, before I knew where I was, ami called
out to me to stand. We had just been having tea, and J
was stooping over the log fire to get a light for my pipe,
I jumped up, and saw them before me. There were
three of them. They were splendidly mounted, and
were dressed in red serge shirts and silk sashes. Well,
my girl runs up to my side, and stands looking at
the three men. They were dmnfoundered. “Is that
yours, mate V’ they asked. “ Yes,” I ans wered; and
then one of them got off his horse, and asked my little
girl to give him a kiss, which she did ; and he knelt
down before her, and put her two hands on his eyes, and
kissed them over and again. “If every man had a little
angel like that by his side,” he said, “it would be the
better for him.” And then, taking off his silk sash, he
put it round my girls waist ; and they all wished me
good night, and rode off. That was a lucky escape, was
it not 1 However, while on the road, I could not get
along as quickly as I wanted to, so I bought a wheel-
barrow.’
“ ‘ A wheelbarrow ! ’ I exclaimed, surprised.
“ ‘Yes, a wheelbarrow,’ ho said with a comical look;
‘ and I put my little girl in it, and wheel her wherever I
want to go. Well, to get along with, my story, I came
upon the, gully where lam working now. Directly I saw
it, I knew that it was rig]it for gold. I went to a station,
about twelve miles off, and laid up a stock of provisions.
Then I set to work, OlqToml it w a gully; and rising
up steeply on one side of it is a rocky range, with great
masses of quartz sticking out. I’ve broken up a lot
of it, and have got plenty of little nuggets out of the


stone ; and I know that if we could get a shaft down,
we should find the gold in lumps. I worked by myself
in this gully for two months, and got over four hundred
ounces; but one day, when I was cradling, I saw a man
looking at me. My mind was made up in a minute.
He had wandered by accident to the place, and had dis-
covered me working. So I took him for a mate, and we
were together until the day before yesterday.’
“ ‘ And now you have parted,’ I said.
“ ‘ Yes. My pet don’t like him, and I absolutely think
he doesn’t like my pet. Then there’s my dog Whiskey
snarls at him whenever he comes within chain-length ;
and I believe in dogs, Tom. I had a stand-up fight with
him, the day before yesterday. He said something to
Liz, that made her cry; so I gave him a thrashing, and
told him 1 would have nothing more to do with him.
I knew you were knocking about in these parts, and I
determined to come and find you.’
“ ‘ Did you bring the child in the wheelbarrow f I
asked.
“ ‘ Yes,’ he replied, ‘ it is in the bush, half-a-mile away,
with my swag, and Whiskey is taking care of them. Ho
one must know where you are going. What do you say
to packing up your swag, and starting right off?’
“ My swag did not take long putting together, and Bill,
taking the little girl, who was half asleep and half awake,
in his arms, led the way into the bush.”
Cornish Tom had got thus far with his story, when a
motion of William Fairfield’s finger to his lips, made him
pause.
F


“ 1 could swear I heard a cry for help,” said William,
listening anxiously.
They all went again to the door, but when they were
outside, the wind was so violent that they could scarcely
stand. They peered about them, and searched, and
called out for fully a quarter of an hour, but they saw
nothing, and heard no sound in reply to their shrill
cooeys.
“ Taney, Will,” suggested Gentleman George, as they
went in.
“ No,” said William, “ 1 don’t think it; I have thought
two or three times that I heard a cry. But it may have
been the wind, after all.”
“ There can’t be anyone there,” said Cornish Tom, “ or
they would have heard our cooeys, and answered them.”
So they huddled together again, and Tom proceeded
with his story.
“ We travelled the whole of that night, lest we should
bo tracked, taking it in turns to wheel the little girl, who
slept soundly all the time. It was a beautiful starlight
night, and as we went along, Cranky Bill pointed out lots
of likely looking places, that had never had a pick put
in them to prove if there was gold there or not. I wanted
to stop and try some of them, but Bill kept urging me
on, and would not listen to an hour’s delay. We lay
quiet, and slept by snatches during the next day,
and at night we pursued our journey. Well, about
midnight, we came to the gully. We had been
travelling for tw r o or three hours over a heavy rocky
range, and what with the steepness of the hill, and the


weight of our swags, and the wheelbarrow with little Liz
in it (although she often got out and walked, or was
carried in our arms a bit), it was awful work, I can tell
you. At last we got to the top, and there beneath us,
some five hundred yards down, was the gully. It was
scarcely a gully : it looked to me, when I first saw it, for
all the world like a large basin, shut in by the steep
ranges. You would have thought there was no outlet
from it, unless you climbed over the hills ; but when
you got down you discovered two or three artful little
turns, which took you to other gullies and basins,
almost as queer-looking as this. As we walked down,
Bill showed me his tent, and said that he should not
wonder if his mate was sleeping in it. Sure enough, as
we came near, out he rushed with a revolver in his hand,
and he let one barrel fly at Whiskey, who had sprung at
him the moment he made his appearance.
“ ‘ Lie down, Whiskey,’ said Cranky Bill, seizing the
dog by the collar; ‘ and you, Ted, put down that
revolver, or I’ll wring your neck for you.’ And, almost
on the words, Bill let go the dog, and jumped on the
fellow, wrested the revolver from his hands, and sent
him spinning a dozen yards away. It was not too soon
done, for I believe he would have shot us in another
minute. He was a desperate-looking fellow, was Teddy
the Tyler. 1 heard some queer stories about him
afterwards.
“ ‘You murdering villain, you,’ said Bill, as Teddy the
Tyler rose from the ground, with an evil look, and shook
himself; ‘ what do you mean by pointing your pistol at
me like that ? Do you know you might have shot my
little girl T


“She was standing at his side, and clinging to him,
trembling with fear.
“ ‘ A good job if I had,’ muttered Teddy the Tyler,
vindictively.
“ Cranky Bill strode quickly up, and seizing him by
the shirt-collar, forced him to the ground by dint of
sheer muscular strength.
“ ‘ Now, just you listen to me,’ he said, as Teddy lay
helpless at his feet. ‘lf ever you raise your hand against
me, or my little girl, or my mate, or my dog, or anything
that belongs to me, I’ll break your infernal back for you ;
I will, by-the lord ! ’
“‘What do you bring loafers into the gully fori”
growled Teddy.
“ ‘ That’s my business,’ answered Bill ; ‘ this is my
mate now, and if you call him a loafer again, I’ll knock
your ugly teeth down your throat. But I’m "not going
to have anything more to do with you. I make you a
present of the gully ; I know a better one —ah ! you may
stare, but you’ll not put your foot into it, my lad. To-
morrow morning I shall take my tent away, and you can
work here by yourself till you rot, if you like. I don’t
think you are fool enough to get the place rushed, for
that would put an end to your little game. Pick up that
revolver, Tom, and stick it in your belt. Throw out of
the tent everything that belongs to the thief.’
“ I carried his blankets and some clothes out to him,
and threw them down, while he stood scowling.
7 o
“ ‘ There’s another thing in there,’ he said ; ‘ there’s my
II eckhan dkerch i ef. ’
“ And I flung to him a bright-colored handkerchief,


which he wore round his neck. As he slung it carelessly
over his shoulders, the light of the moon caught it, and
I noticed particularly the combination of bright colors
in which it was woven.
“ ‘ Ain’t you going to give me my revolver V he asked,
sulkily.
“ ‘ Not likely, my lad,’ replied Cranky Bill. ‘ You
might find too much use for it.’
“ £ All right,’ he said. ‘But just you look out, Bill.
I’ll make this the worst night’s work for you, that you
have ever done. If I don’t make you smart for this,
may I be”
“We did not take any more notice of him, but,
putting the chain on Whiskey, we went into the tent, and
lay down till morning.
“We were up with the lark, and out. As we passed
along the gully, I noticed that Teddy the Tyler had put
up a sort of mimi, and that he was asleep under it.
“ ‘ Now then, Tom,’ said my mate, ‘ I’ll shew you a
place that will open your eyes. That fool there doesn’t
know anything about it. You remember the old school-
boy maxim, that ‘cheating never thrives.’ Upon my
word, I believe it to be true ; for if I had not found out
that he was a cheat and a thief, I would have shown him
a better gully than this one.’
“ Coming to the end of the gully, we walked over a
little bit of a rise, Bill leading the way, through a heavy
clump of timber on the other side. We might have gone
half a mile, when Bill clapped his hands before my eyes,
and told me not to look. We might have walked a
hundred yards further, when he took his hand away, and


told me to open my eyes. It was a strange-looking spot,
to be sure. It was a steep gully, that seemed to have
been scooped out of the range, and it was just the shape
of a saddle.
“ ‘ Look here, Tom,’ said Cranky Bill, stooping down
before the stump of what had been a large tree, and
scraping up the earth from the roots; ‘ here’s a couple of
pennyweights ;’ and he held up a little nugget he had
found in the dirt. ‘We shall get some heavy nuggets in
the saddle.’
“ Well, to cut a long story short, we removed the tent
here, and -commenced sinking. Talk of jewellers’ shops !
One of our claims took the shine out of all of them.
And as day after day went, and our bags got heavier and
heavier, I began to talk to Bill about going home,
and buying a farm, and settling down. It was all
settled. We were to live together, and the girl was
to grow up into a beautiful young woman, and get
married, and then we were to take care of the children
—and she used to listen to us, and laugh, and clap her
little hands lord!” mused Cornish Tom, “when I think
of those five weeks we worked together, I can scarcely
believe that what took place afterwards was real. How
I loved that dear little angel ! She called me Father
Tom, and every night, as she knelt by the crib we
had made for her, she used to wind up her prayers with
* Glod bless dear papa and Father Tom, and make me a
good child! ’ Then, on Sundays, we would take a walk,
and gather wild flowers ; and Bill in the evening would
read a chapter out of the Bible. Do you know, mates,
(said Tom, suddenly breaking off,) that I don’t think


Sunday on the diggings is at all properly spent. I know
lots of diggers who make a practice of spending it in
sly-grog shanties, and nobblerising. I don't know where
the fault lies, but it’s true enough there’s something
wrong. Those Sundays, with Bill and his little girl,
are never out of my thoughts. I wish 1 could spend my
Sundays now, as I did then.
“ During this time, we had only seen Teddy the Tyler
once. About a fortnight after we started working-, he
o D"
came strolling upon us in the after part of the day. A
tin dish, with nearly a pound of gold in it, was lying by
the claim, and as he came up, he threw a woefully covetous
look at it. I should tell you that the little girl was
asleep in the tent.
“ ‘ What do yon want here V asked my mate. We
were both at the top of the claim,
“ ‘ Nothing particular,’ he said. 1 1 came to see how
you’re getting on.’
“ He had his pick and shovel hanging over his shoulder,
and, walking past the claim we were working, he stuck
his pick in the ground, and began tucking up his shirt
sleeves.
“ Cranky Bill went up to him, and taking the pick and
shovel, pitched them a dozen yards off.
“ ‘ Do you remember me telling you that you shouldn’t
come into this gully V he asked.
“‘You might say what you pleased,’ said Teddy the
Tyler. ‘ltis as much mine as your’s. I mean to fight
for it, mate, at all events.’
“ ‘ That’s fair,’ said Cranky Bill. ‘lf you lick me,
we’ll give you our claim, and get another. Tom, come
and see fair play.’


“ And to it they went. But Teddy the Tyler might
as well have stood up against a rock as against my mate.
Bill was the strongest man I ever saw, and he gave Teddy
such an awful thrashing, that he threw up his arms in
less than a quarter of an hour.
“ ‘ Had enough, mate V asked Bill, coolly.
“ Teddy did not reply, but shouldering his pick and
shovel, he walked away without a word ; throwing- a
devil’s look behind him though, as he went.
“ ‘ He’d murder us, if he could,’ I said.
“ ‘ I dare say,’ said Bill, ‘ but we won’t give him the
chance.’ -
“ You would hardly believe, would you, that in five
weeks we got eleven hundred ounces of gold? We did,
though; and then something happened that makes my
blood shiver to think of. I had started the night before
to get some provisions. We used to start off in the night,
so that we should not be discovered, and when we went to
the station early in the morning, for meat and flour, the
people did not suspect we had been walking all the
previous night. I was the whole day getting back, for I
took my time, and kept my eyes well about me, to see
that I was not followed. I was within half a mile of
our gully, when who should I meet but Cranky Bill,
looking- like a madman. Running up to me, he said,
wildly—
“ ‘ Tom, for God’s sake, answer me quickly : have you
seen Lizzie ? ’
No,’ I said, while an uncomfortable feeling rose at
my throat.
“ ‘ She’s lost! She’s lost!’ he screamed. ‘ Oh, my pet,


my darling ! if I don’t find you, may the world be burned,
and all that’s in it.’
“ I really thought he was going mad. I had a deal
to do to keep myself cool, for I was full of fears, and
you know I loved the little thing as if she were my own
daughter. When I got him a bit calm, I said, as
quietly as I could—
“ ‘ Let us be cool, Bill, and we shall have a chance of
finding her. If we don’t keep our wits together, we
might be her death.’
“‘ I know! I know i ’ he said, repressing his agitation.
‘ What are we to do V
“ 1 First, when did you miss her V
“ ‘ This morning,’ he replied. ‘ I got up at daylight,
and left her sleeping in her crib. I kissed her before I
went out. I shall never kiss her again! I shall never
kiss her again !’ And he broke cut into a passionate fit
of sobbing.
“ I waited quietly until this was over, and then I told
him to go on.
“ ‘ I came back to breakfast, and she was gone ; and
the dog had been taken off his chain, and was gone, too.
I’ve been looking for her all day, and I shall never see
her any more !’
“‘ I am glad the dog was with her,’ I said. ‘ How
long is it since you were at the tent V
“ ‘ I was there an hour ago ; but all this talking will
not bring her back. Let’s search for her. Perhaps she
has climbed over the range, and is lost in the bush.’
“ ‘ She could never do it—she hasn’t strength enough,
the dear little thing, to get to the top. Now, Bill, listen


to me. lam cooler than you are, and I intend to
keep cool; although I'd give my legs and arms rather
than any hurt should come to her, I am not going to let
my feelings run away with me. If lam to assist you, I
must know everything. Let us go back at once to the
tent, and start from there. Here's my hand, Bill,
and I’ll search till I drop before I give her up.’
“ He took my hand, and we went back to the tent.
The first thing I did was to look at the dog's chain. It
had been unlocked in the usual manner, and the key
was lying on the table.
“ ‘ That’s plain proof,' I said, ‘ that Lizzie herself let
him loose, and took him out with her. Had she all her
things on V
“ Yes, her hat and mantle were gone, and also a little
basket which she used to take with her sometimes,
and fill with wild flowers.
“‘You see,’ I said, ‘she went out flower-gathering.
Now,, which way did she go?’
“ I was puzzled for a few moments, and then I thought
she would probably take the road she knew best • and
that was the one that led to the gully Crazy Bill had
first worked. There was a creek on the road, pretty deep
in some parts, and I jumped at the idea at once, that she
might have fallen in. All this time, Bill was behaving
in a mast dreadful manner. He took up the little
things that belonged to her, and kissed them over and over
again. He called her by name, as if she could hear
him ; spoke of his dead wife, as if she were standing
before him; and, altogether, he was about as useless as a
man well could be. Then, taking a match-box, half
filled with gold, he threw it on the ground, shouting—


44 4 To the devil with all the gold ! Devil gold ! Devil
gold ! Why did I come here and lose my pet for you 1
Oh, Lord! take all the gold, and give me back my
daughter/
“ 4 Come along, Bill,’ I said, without appearing to pay
any heed to his ravings, for I knew that was best; 4 I
am going to the creek to look for her/
“ 4 She hasn’t fallen in !’ he cried. 4 How do you
know she has fallen in 1 It’s not true ! My little pet is
not drowned ! Ho ! No !’
“ 4 1 don’t say she is drowned,’ said I. 4 God forbid
that she is ! Behave like a man, Bill, and keep your
senses about you, or we may as well give her up
altogether.’
44 You see, I could not help speaking so to him, and
after a time I got him to be a little more reasonable.
Then we started to walk to the creek. I searched
carefully all the way, but could see nothing that would
give me the slightest clue. When we got to the creek,
Bill absolutely shook with fear. We tracked it up and
down for a long way without any success, and then we
sat on the bank, looking at each other.
44 4 Don’t be cast down, Bill,’ I said, after a little
consideration, 4 she can’t be drowned.
44 4 How do you know that 1 ’ he asked moodily.
44 4 Why, the dog can swim,’ I answered, 4 and if he
could not have saved her, he would be somewhere about.’
And then, as a sudden thought came into my mind, I
said, 4 Bill, have you been to Teddy the Tyler 1 ’
44 He gave a sudden jump, and turning quite white,
be whispered—


“ ‘ Why, do you think ’
“ ‘ I don’t think anything,’ I interrupted, decidedly.
‘ Let us go and see him.’
“ So we walked in silence to '['eddy the Tyler’s tent.
It was late in the evening, now, snd Teddy was sitting
by a log fire, smoking his pipe. He barely looked up
as we approached, but I noticed that he drew near to him
with his foot an axe that was lying on the ground.
“ ‘ Hood evening, mate,’ I said, by way of commence-
ment, although I felt more inclined to throttle him than
to be civil to him. As for Bill, he was trembling with
excitement. There was a gleam in his eyes I did not
like, and I knew that I must keep myself cool for his
sake.
“ Teddy did not reply to my good evening, but still
sat smoking. He had one eye on the axe, though ; 1
didn’t miss that.
“ * Are you deaf 1 ’ I asked.
“ ‘ No,’ he snapped. ‘ Are you 1 ’
“ ‘ Look, here, mate,’ I said
“ ‘ And look you here, mate,’ he interrupted, ‘ I don’t
want any of your good evenings, or any of your company.
What are you loafing about my gully for 1 I’ll split your
skull open if you stop here much longer.’
“ ‘ Keep a civil tongue in your head, mate,’ said I.
“ ‘We’ve come here especially to see you, and I am
going to ask you a question or two. You will have to
answer them, my lad, or you will neyer answer another.’
“ ‘You can ask a thousand questions, if you like,’ said
Teddy, ‘you won’t get me to answer one.’
“‘We shall see,’ I replied. ‘We are in search of


Mttle Lizzie. She has not been home all day. Have
you seen her ? ’
“ Cranky Bill had been quiet all this time, but had
never moved his eyes off Teddy. He did not seem to
like this, didn’t Teddy, and he shifted his position more
than once. When I put the question to him, he gave
us both a sharp, quick look, but made no answer.
“ ‘ Have you seen Lizzie V I repeated. ‘ Has she been
here to-day 1 ’
“ Still no answer.
“ Suddenly, Bill made a spring at him, but Teddy was
on his legs in an instant, brandishing the axe over his
head. Bill avoided the blow, catching the handle on his
arm, and, closing with Teddy, had him on the ground in
no time, with his knee on his chest, and his hand at his
throat.
“ ‘ Hold off, Bill ! ’ Teddy choked out. ‘ Take the
madman off, or he’ll throttle me !’
“ ‘ Answer that question,’ shouted Bill, loosing his
grasp a little ; ‘ if you don’t, I’ll kill you !’
“ ‘ She hasn’t been here to-day,’ the fellow gasped.
“ ‘ Have you seen her anywhere, you devil 1 ’ asked
Bill.
“ ‘ No,’ was the sullen reply.
“ ‘You may get up,’ said Bill, rising ; ‘ I believe you
are lying, you thieving knave. If I find that you are,
I’ll tear your heart out. Mark me, Teddy the Tyler, if
I discover that you have seen my girl to-day, and have
been telling us lies, you shall cry blood. Come away,
Tom, the sight of him turns me sick.’
“We had a weary night of it. We searched in every


likely place; we lighted fives on every little rise, sc*
that they might catch the child’s eye, if she was any
where near; but when the morning came, we wore as far-
off finding her as ever. What puzzled me most, was the
absence of the dog. We could find no trace of him. If
anything had happened to the child, I thought, his
instinct would surely have led him back to the tent. We
came home tired and disheartened. We had not eaten
a morsel the whole night. Bill, I don’t believe,
had tasted food since he first missed her. He had not
even smoked a pipe. I was thinking to myself, what
shall we do next, when my mate, who had thrown him-
self upon the ground, said in a low voice, as if he was
frightened that any one should hear him, ‘ Tom, we have
not looked down the claims.’
“ The idea that our little girl might be lying at the
bottom of one of the holes, dying, turned me quite faint.
“ I jumped up without a word, and we re-commenced
our search. Bill was terribly shaky, every fresh hole we
came to. I went down myself, so as to save him the
shock ; and I cannot tell you the relief I felt when I
came up from the last hole, without finding her.
“ ‘ Let’s go to the old gully, and look there,’ said
Bill.
“ And we went in silence. The sun was just rising
over the hills, and the laughing jackass was waking
everything up with its gurgling laughter. Teddy
the Tyler was not out of bed, so I first went down the
claim he was then working. I suppose the noise dis-
turbed him. for he came presently, half undressed, and
looked over the claim. Bill was standing at the top, and.


Teddy had just come as I climbed out of the hole. He
began cursing, and asked what we wanted now.
“ ‘ It’s only fair to tell him,’ said Bill. ‘ We’re looking
for my Liz. She might have tumbled down one of the
claims, you know. ’
“ I noticed Teddy’s lips turn white. But he com-
menced again grumbling and swearing, and we left
him. We searched every hole in the gully, but found
nothing; and then we went away. I noticed that
Teddy was watching us all the time.
“ And now, mates, something happened that I have
thought of a hundred times since, with wonder. I was a
better man then than I am now, for you see I had the
impression of those Sundays with the chapters out of the
Bible, and the quiet walks with little Lizzie, full upon me.
And I thought at that time that God Almighty had assisted
us to the end of our search. We had got out of Teddy the
Tyler’s gully, and were passing a gum-tr'ee, upon which
half-a-dozen laughing jackasses were perched. As we
passed, they all set up a laugh, which, somehow or other,
so grated upon me, that I threw my stick at them, and
sent them flying away. I went to pick up my stick,
which had fallen to the ground a good distance off, when
I noticed an abrupt turn in the range, leading to a gully.
Knowing we had not searched there, I called out to Bill,
and we walked down the declivity.
“ ‘ Look, Bill,’ I said, ‘ some one has been prospecting.
Here’s a six-foot hole.’
“ And I put my foot at the side to go down. Before
I reached the bottom, I saw that our search was over.
There lay our little girl, with her face turned upwards,


as if she were asleep. I could not distinguish the
expression of her features, and, indeed, I did not stop
time enough, for directly I saw what was below, I came
out of the hole again.
“ ‘ Well, Tom V said Bill; and then seeing something
in my face, for I was awfully white and fear-struck, he
added, ‘ For God’s sake, speak, Tom, is she there V
“ ‘ She is, Bill,’ I said, as quietly as I could, ‘ but be
steady, lad, be steady, let us get her up first. Don’t give
way, Bill, as you love your dear little one ; don’t give
way yet a while.’
“And all the time I was speaking, I was getting
the rope ready to raise her. Bill was shaking and
quivering all over, but ho stopped himself and gave me
what assistance he could, and in a very short time she
was lying at the top of the claim. As she lay with her
eyes turned blindly to the sun, I could scarcely be-
lieve she was dead. In her innocent young face, the
roses were still blooming', and my eyes brimmed over as
1 saw grasped in her pretty little hands the remains of a
few wild flowers she had been gathering. I stooped and
kissed her pure fresh lips. Then I turned away, for my
emotion was overcoming me.
“ ‘ Oh, my darling ! my darling !’ I heard Bill say,
‘ You are not dead. Look at mo—speak to me, my pet.
Throw your arms round my nock,’ and he pressed her
to his breast, with a fierce eagerness, and kissed her a
thousand times. ‘ She can’t be dead, Tom. Feel her
heart, is it not beating '? Feel, feel! 1 say !’
“ I placed my hand upon her heart, to please him, but
its pulse was stilled lor ever.


“ ‘ Bill,’ I said, solemnly, for it was an awful thing, was
the sight of that dear angel lying dead upon the grass,
‘ she’s dead ! She has gone to a better world than this.’
“Dead !’ he cried, springing to his feet, and throwing
his arms wildly about him. ‘ Then strike me dead too ! ’
And he looked up, as if expecting a thunderbolt to fall
upon him.
“ ‘ Hush, Bill,’ I said ; ‘ do not blaspheme at such a time
as this. It is God’s will, and she has gone to Him.’
“He threw himself upon her body again. He
clasped her in his arms —he nursed and rocked her, as if
she were asleep—he called her by every endearing name;
and then, as if awaking to the fact that she was dead,
he sprang up, and screamed wildly—
“ ‘ How did she die, Tom 1 Who killed her 1 Do you
hear me 1 Who killed her 1 ’
“ I was hurrying away, when he seized my arm.
“ ‘ Where is the dog, Tom Vhe cried. ‘ Where is the
dog V
“ And he tore about like a madman, in search of the
dog. I looked for it too, for the absence of that dog was
a thing I could not understand. I heard Bill’s voice,
calling out that he had got it, from a clump of bush
hard by; and presently he came up to me, and laid poor
Whiskey dead at my feet. The dog had been shot through
the heart.
“ ‘ Who shot him V he asked, a little more quietly.
‘ You see he’s been shot. Who did it 1 Whoever killed
the dog killed my child ! ’
“I knelt down and examined the dog’s body. It was quite
stiff, and had something in its mouth. Forcing the jaws,
a


apart, I took it out, and recognised it immediately. It
was a piece of the colored silk handkerchief I had thrown
out of the tout to Teddy the Tyler, the first night we
came to the gull} 7 . The dog had evidently torn it away
savagely, for shreds of it were sticking in its teeth.
“ ‘ There has been foul play here, Bill,’ I said.
“‘I know, I know!’ he exclaimed, impatiently,
“ Whose handkerchief is that off, Tom 1 I want to hear
you say the name. Out with it, man ! ’
“ ‘ That is a piece of Teddy the Tyler’s handkerchief,’
I said; but I could say no more, for Cranky Bill had
dashed off, like a madman, in the direction of Teddy’s
tent. Although I followed him at once, I could not
keep pace with him, and when I got to the gully, I saw
Teddy flying up the range, with Cranky Bill tearing after
him. Teddy, who had a revolver in his hand, turned
round twice, and fired at Bill. The last time he did
so, Bill staggered, but recovered himself in an instant.
The range, as I told you, was very steep, and as they
scrambled up, Bill gained ground rapidly. Just before
they got to the top, my mate seized Teddy, and grappled
with him. Then commenced such a struggle as I never
wish to see again ; and, presently, down they dashed,
one over another, locked in each other’s arms. I ran up
to the spot where I knew they must fall; and although
they came down with a fearful crash, they were not
separated. They were both dead. Bill had been mortally
wounded by the pistol shot, but he had such a grasp on
Teddy’s neck, that I could not loosen his fingers. And
that was the end of Cranky B'dl and. poor little Lizzie !
“ 1 did not stop any longer by myself in the place, you


may be sure ; but I went and told tlie story, and in
twenty-four hours, five hundred men were working in
what was called—how it got the name, or who bestowed
it, I can’t tell—Madman’s Gully from that time.
“ I buried little Lizzie and Cranky Bill in one grave,
and the miners helped me to put a fence round it; and
that is the end of my story.”
Cornish Tom’s story done, the men in the snow-
shrouded tent sat about the fast-dying embers of their
fire, and commented on it. The wind had somewhat
abated, but the cold was intense.
“ I can’t help thinking,” said Gentleman George, “of
the party in the next gully. Do you know that when
Will thought he heard some one cry outside, I fancied
that they might have come over the range for company.
Perhaps —who can tell ?—they know a way out of this,
and came to tell us.”
“ Likely enough,” said Cornish Tom. “ What do you
say to our going over to them 1 We shall never be able,
by ourselves, to make our way out of this. If we stop
here any longer, we shall be frozen to death ; all* the
firewood is used up—bacca nearly gone—and grub not
very plentiful. I tell you what we’ll do ; well start off
at once. I couldn’t sleep if I tried. It is moonlight,
and we shall be able to pick our way as well if it were
day.”
Cornish Tom’s suggestion was eagerly listened to, and
was adopted without any hesitation. Some of the
party were inclined to sleep, and all were glad of the
opportunity of being active. It was resolved that


Gentleman George, Dick Driver, and Cornisli Tom, should
go, and that William should be left to take care of the
tent. They calculated to be back by daylight, when they
would commence the task of retracing their steps out of
the region of snow. They took some long poles and
ropes with them, and in a few minutes William was left
alone.
He was not sorry that they had left for a while.
He wanted an opportunity of being alone with his
thoughts. Standing by the tent door, he w r atched his mates
treading their way carefully along until they -were out of
sight, and then he went in and threw himself upon his
stretcher. As he lay dozily dreaming, a strange fancy
haunted him. He thought he heard a cry for help
sounding from afar off. He roused himself, and lis-
tened intently. Although the wind had lulled, he
heard no sound, and he dozed olf again—only to be
again awakened by the seeming cry. It was but
imagination ; of that he was certain; but he could
not rest, so he rose and went to the door. Nothing
but the snow-covered peaks and hills could be seen. No
sign of life was near ; and a shivering feeling of desolation
crept over him, as he thought that perhaps he might
never look upon mortal face again. As this impression
grew upon him, the scene reminded him strangely of his
last Christmas Eve at Warleycombe. He looked around,
almost expecting to see the queer faces and the shadows
of his dream. The hill, down which had swept the
avalanche, was before him; he could not see the faces
he had seen peeping down from the tree at W arleycombe
in which he had fallen asleep, but he saw


Yes, he saw the great hill nodding to him grimly. By
degrees it assumed the form and shape of a monster man,
and his. fevered fancy peopled its rug'ged sides with snow-
elves and shadows, all staring at him with glitter-
ing eyes. For a few moments, he gave himself up to
the vision, and allowed it to grow upon him. Yes, the
Shadows started up from the ground on all sides, and
surrounded him with their waving arms. As he advanced
among them, they retreated, but beckoned him still to
come. He felt as though drawn forward by an invisible
power, and he had already wandered some distance from
the tent, when, overpowered by nervous excitement, he
sank down half insensible upon the snow. He did not
lose his sense of consciousness; he was too nervously-
wakeful for that; but everything around him assumed
an air of strange unreality. He heard voices in the air,
voices that filled him with dread.
“ Crush him into the snow !” they said. “ Bury him a
hundred miles down ! Freeze for ever the heart of the
man who doubted Love, the Purifier !”
And as they spoke, he saw the Monster Man-Hill
bend threateningly over him, lower, lower, lower! until
he feared lest it should topple and crush him out of
existence.
“My life is over,” he thought. “ Hope has departed
from it. Love has melted out of it. The woman I
adored was false !”
“ No ! ” came an awfully deep voice upon his ear, and
the word was echoed and re-echoed a thousand times by
the surrounding hills. Then the echoes as suddenly
ceased; and, like a bell-note upon the rarified air, clear


and sweet, stole a voice which smote him with mingled
pain and pleasure.
“No !” it said, “ the woman you loved was not false.
Why did you judge unquestioningiy 1 Miserable atom as
you are ! it would be a fitting punishment if you were
left to die in your despair ! She whom you loved is pure
—pure as the snow which may be your grave. What
are you, that you should destroy and wither her young
life] Tear from the rose of Love the parasyte Doubt,
and awake from your dream !”
The voice ceased ; the Shadows disappeared ; and
William rose from the ground, and rubbed his eyes.
His limbs were almost benumbed. He had wandered
far from the tent; and he was about turning thither-
ward, when a dark shade upon the snow, some distance
off, caught his eye. He moved forward ; and he trembled
with agitation as he saw stretched upon the ground
the bodies of two men. Ho knelt and tried to rouse
them. In vain ; they were insensible ; perhaps dead.
The cries he had heard were real, and had proceeded
from these two men ! He could see their pale faces
in the moon-gleam ; and one, bearded as it was, struck
upon his memory like that of an almost forgotten friend.
He carried the men, still benumbed and rigid, to the
tent, and tried every means in his power to restore their
consciousness. Almost despairing, he searched in their
pockets for some means of identification. In the
pockets of the first he found nothing but a match-box
full of gold, and an empty pipe. On the other, he
found a pocket-book. As he knelt over him to take it
from his breast, and looked into his face, the same


impression of an old familiar association struck him;
and he passed his hand across his hrow, as if endeavour-
ing' to trace the connecting link to the fancy which
enthralled him. The next moment he opened the
pocket-book.
Was he dreaming still ? He started to his feet, his
body all a-glow with excitement; for in his hand lay the
picture of Laura Harrild, looking at him with her
truthful eyes ! With trembling hands he opened a letter,
the characters of which were familiar to him ; and -with
a despairing cry he dropped into his seat. Yes, he saw
it all now. This man lying at his feet was Laura’s
brother. It was he to whom she was bidding farewell on
Christmas live ; and as William read on, his eyes were
blurred with tears. He remembered Laura’s agitation on
that evening as they sat in the curtained recess, when he
told her the story of his friend who had forged his father’s
name. Now it was explained. Some years before, her
brother also had forged his father’s signature. His
father never forgave him, nor would he allow his son’s
name to be mentioned in his house. To all inquiries he
returned but one answer —that his son was dead; and
so the years rolled on, and to all Laura’s entreaties for
forgiveness for her brother Reuben Harrild turned a deaf
ear. Wiilliam recalled the shadow of the man he had seen
upon the snow outside the house, and Laura’s entreaties
that he would not stir to learn who was there; for her brother
had bound her to secresy, and had especially enjoined her
not to disclose the affair to her future husband. Wearied
with his unsuccessful efforts to obtain his father’s pardon,
Young Hamid resolved to emigrate, and to trust to time


to heal the breach between them. And on that Christ*
mas Eve ho had bidden Laura a secret farewell. Through
the window of the room in which the merriment was going
on, he had watched once more for the form of his
father, whom he might never see again; and so, with
good resolves in his heart, he had said adieu to his
native land, hoping that his future life might redeem in
his father’s eyes the -wrong he had done in the past. As
William read, an agony of remorse fell upon him, and the
words he had heard the Shadow speak to him in his dreams
bore a strangely new significance. Yes, she was pure—
she was true. She loved, and had ever loved him.
Even through his misery, this thought gave consolation.
“ I have not seen him,” Laura wrote in one part of the
letter, “ since the night you bade me farewell. He saw
our parting, and misconstrued it. I forgive him, dear
brother, for you know I never spoke to him about you.
Daily I reproach myself that I did not tell him; for a
woman should have no secrets from her husband. And,
oh ! dear Arthur, I loved him so, that my heart aches
sorely at the thought that he should deem me untrue.”
“ Fool, fool! that I was,” William muttered, as he
read. “ Forgive me, Laura, forgive me ! And oh, God !
pity me, for the blessing I have thrown away.”
“ If you should meet him,” the letter went on, “ for he
has gone to the Colonies, speak to him Arthur, dear.
Ask him to write to me, for I cannot live under the
thought that he thinks I have deceived him. I will not
grieve if he should have ceased to love mo—l can bear
that; but my heart is his, and I shall love him for ever.
Tell him all about yourself, and about our parting that
night; and if he is in error, undeceive him.”


And then she bade God bless her brother, and prosper
him, and bring him home again, safe and well ; and
prayed that he might be re-united to his lather once
more—for she still hoped to gain for him forgiveness.
When William had read on to the end, he bowed his
head, and buried his face in his hands. He had thrown
away his precious love, he had wrecked his life and her’s
by his unworthy suspicion. Going to the door of the
tent, the drift whizzed by him in blinding particles, and
the mournful wail of the wind filled him with dread.
“ I shall die here,” he thought, “ and she will never
know. Oh ! Shadows 1 that visited me on that night,
and on .this, would that I had listened and believed ! ”
And he fell upon his knees, and raised his hands in
an agony of pleading for forgiveness, while the flying snow
about him shrouded his form in white.


PART III.
CHRISTMAS AGAIN AT WARLEYCOMBE.
Theke are two faces under every hat—one is worn in
solitude, the other is shown to the world. Each mortal
lives two lives—an outer and an inner life. Simulation
appears to be a necessity ; and the glossy cloak exhibited
to the world has generally a somewhat ragged lining.
Another year has gone, .and it is Christmas again at
Warleycombe. The curtain has dropped upon the tragedy
of many thousands of human lives, and myriads of hopes
and fears have culminated and been engulphed in the
awful Mystery which surrounds humanity. Life-sorrows
have been quieted, and ambitions set at rest, since Father
Christmas last smiled upon the pretty Devon lane. As
we know, sorrow has visited Laura Harrild ; but she
still moves amongst her father’s guests with the quiet
grace of old. She has been smitten with a great grief,
which will shadow all her future years ■ but she has
her duties to perform in the world, and she performs
them meekly and patiently. She dwells with calm
sorrow upon the memory of her lover, and in her heart
she cherishes the hope that he will return to her ; and
she will forgive him, and take him to her heart again.
On that she has resolved ; for a nature like Laura’s loves
only once, and loves for ever.


But still, it is very painful to her. ' This Christmas
is so like the last: the snow is on the ground, and all
around is so little changed ; the company is the same ;
and, but for the absence of one, and the silent grief
which dwells within her heart, old Father Time might
have been standing still during the year.
The Woys and the Wymers are present, as are also
the Ramages. Time certainly has stood still for them.
There is so little change in them that they might have
been put to sleep last Christmas Eve, when the party
broke up, and might only have just awoke to continue
the festivity. The very young people have grown somewhat
taller, and have acquired additional experience : as witness
an extremely young lady in white muslin and a blue
sash, who last year was much too infantine to take an
important part in the proceedings, but who is now
flirting desperately with three little boys. It is wonderful,
indeed, where and how women learn the thousand charms
of manner which send the brains of the other sex
a-whirling. One thing is certain —they commence very
young.
In the kitchen are Samuel Nock and Kitty Grater.
It is scarcely necessary to mention the retainer of low-
degree, who has been again engaged to assist in the
domestic arrangements; for he has fallen to his proper
level. Had he been presumptuous enough this Christmas
Eve to attempt to kiss Kitty under a sprig of mistletoe,
the chances are that he would there and then have been
wiped out of existence by Samuel Nock; for, wonderful
to relate, in this the sixteenth year of their courtship,
Samuel’s passion has found expression. How it occurred


—in what shape or manner—remains a mystery to tins
day. Neither of them can tell ; but it has occurred,
and it is a settled thing between them. But when
marriage was talked of, Kitty resolutely shakes her head :
“ No, Samuel,” she says, “ it's no use your talking to
mo of that. For until Miss Laura’s sweetheart comes
back and makes it up, T’ll never marry, if I live to bo
as old as Methuselah.”
With this, Samuel was fain to be content; and he
had, indeed, by this time, accepted Kitty’s ultimatum
with perfect resignation.
Doctor Bax was there, as genial as ever. He had not
changed a whit. And except that during the past year
he had made himself more loved by his quiet sympathy.
Father Time would also seem to have stood still for him.
There are some men who never grow old ; the goodness
of their lives scares off wrinkles, and their faces are as
pleasant to look upon in their age as in their youth.
And Stephen Winkworth and his daughter were not
absent. True to his promise of spending Christmas with
his friend, Stephen would remain until death. The
faces' of father and daughter showed the impress of the
past year. Some fresh grief seemed to have fallen upon
them, and Stephen’s eyes were constantly wandering, ap-
prehensively, to his daughter’s face. In all that group,
Stephen, probably, was the only onewho knew the cause of
William Fairfield's flight. He had not divulged even to
his daughter, what had passed with William on that
Christmas Eve; she had once or twice asked him
questions which he had evaded; and he knew that she
suspected him to be the cause of the estrangement


between the lovers. He had accused himself, over and
over again, of his conduct on that night. True, he had
but told William the story of his life, but he had told it
with a purpose which he did not care to conceal; but
he was not at all certain that what he had seen of Laura’s
conduct was blamable. Then, what had been the result ?
His poor child had been rendered more wretched; her
happiness had been the stake, and he had lost. And
she was for ever mutely reproaching him with her eyes,
for the misery he had caused.
Laura was sitting in the curtained recess in which she
sat last year with William. Her thoughts were dwelling
sadly on that time ; and as she looked out upon the un-
changed scene, her eyes filled with tears. Her father,
who was watching her silently, presently joined her at the
window, and taking her hand, begged her not to grieve.
“I am not grieving, father,” she said ; “ but I cannot
help thinking of the difference between this Christmas
and the last. It does make me a little unhappy,” and
unable to proceed, the girl laid her head upon her father’s
breast, and sobbed quietly.
“ I wish,” said Reuben Harrild, '“ that William Fair-
field had been at the bottom of the Red Sea, before he
thought of coming to Warleycombe.”
“Hush, father!” said Laura, gently. “Do not say
that. William is not to blame. It was all my fault.”
“You are always saying that, child. How can it be
your fault that he should deceive you V’
“ He has not deceived me, father,” Laura replied ; “it
was I who deceived him. Yes,” she continued, quickly,
stopping the hasty remark that was rising to Reuben


Hamid's lips, “ I must tell you all, father. I cannot
bear that you should wrong him in your thoughts. Oh,
father, as you love me, let me speak, and listen to me
patiently for a few minutes.”
“ What are you going to say, Laura ?” asked Reuben
Hamid, as a grave expression stole over his face.
“You have made mo promise,” continued Laura, “not
to speak upon one subject; but I cannot keep silence any
longer. Do not shrink from me,” she said, as he turned
his head; “ look at me, dear father, and, as it is Christmas
Eve, be patient with me, only for a little time.”
He could not resist her pleading, and he motioned her
to proceed.
“Do you remember last Christmas Eve, father 1”
Laura asked.
“Yes, child.”
“ Do you remember my coming to you in the study,
and asking you for a Christmas box T
He nodded.
“ Father, I came then to ask your forgiveness for
Arthur ”
“ Laura !” He had risen hastily to his feet, but Laura
caught his hand and pressed it to her lips. Doctor Bax,
passing at the moment, carelessly arranged the curtains,
so that the two were shut out from observation.
“ I must speak, father, ” said Laura, passing his arm
round her neck, and pressing it to her bosom. “ I must
speak now, if I never speak again.”
He allowed himself to be drawn closer to her, and
listened.
“He was out in the cold, the whole night, father,” she


•continued. “ William and I were standing where we
are standing now, and I saw Arthur’s shadow on the
snow.”
“ But William did not knowl” he interrupted, quickly.
“ No; William did not know. That is the cause of my
unhappiness. William saw the Shadow, and wanted to
go out; but I knew it was Arthur, and begged William
to remain. Arthur had come to wish me good-bye, for
he was going to the Colonies the next day. Oh ! father,
it almost broke my heart to part with him, and I begged
him to see me once more at midnight. For I thought
I might prevail upon you to forgive him, and I came up
to your study to ask you; but you remember you would
not listen to me. He was watching you through the
window, father, and bade you good-bye in his heart; for
for he loves yon, and has never committed a fault since
that one.”
Reuben Harrild’s countenance twitched convulsively,
and he disengaged himself gently from Laura, and turned
his face to the wall.
“ At midnight last Christmas Eve, I wished him good-
bye. He bade me, if at any time you would allow me to
speak of him, to give you his dear love and duty, and to
tell you that he would, through all his future life,
endeavor to atone for the one fault of which he had been
guilty. Oh ! father, think of him with love, and forgive
him ! ”
“Go on to the end, child,” said Reuben Harrild,
quietly.
“ I have never seen William since that night. He
wrote me a few words, saying that he had watched our


meeting—of course, he did not know it was Arthur—and
he went away believing that I had deceived him. I did
blame him a little at first,” Laura said sweetly, “ for
doubting me. But I have thought since that he was hardly
to blame. For he did not know that I had a brother ;
and I was wrong in concealing it from him.”
“ And all your unhappiness has sprung from my fault,”
Reuben said, drawing his daughter to him; “ oil! my
child ! if I had only known ”
“ You would have forgiven Arthur, father T she
asked, in a whisper, as she lay upon his breast.
“Yes, child ! God pardon me ! I would have for-
given him ! ”
“ And you forgive him now, father t ”
“ I forgive him now, darling! ” and lie pressed his lips
to hers.
“ I am so happy,” said Laura; “ I can bear my pain,
now, for I shall write to Arthur, and tell him.”
Her grief seemed almost to pass from her as she spoke.
And presently they joined the guests.
“It is a most extraordinary case,” Mr. Wymer was
saying. “ I think the annals of the law can scarcely
furnish anything more remarkable. The overland mail
has just arrived, and I have the letter here, with all the
particulars,” and he pulled out an official-looking envelope,
which he regarded with solemn satisfaction. “ The man,
that is, the father of the girl, was a sailor, and was in
Port Phillip twenty years ago. Strolling into an auction
room, where some Government land was being sold, he,
with a sailor’s recklessness, bid for an allotment. It was
knocked down to him, and pulling some money out of


Bis pocket, he paid for it, and took a receipt. A few
days after that, his ship set sail for England, and lie arrived
here with the receipt, which he gave to his wife, who in
return gave him a great blowing up for throwing away
his money. Years passed, and the sailor died, leaving
behind him a little girl. The widow married again—this
time to a tallow chandler, who also had been married
before. The tallow chandler had two grown-up daughters,
and these two women behaved unkindly to the sailor’s
little girl ”
“ Quite a case of Cinderella over again,” interposed
Doctor Bax, pleasantly.
“ I don’t know anything about that,” grimly remarked
Mr. Wymer, and giving the little Doctor a severe look
for the interruption. “ I look at the matter only in its
legal aspect. The tallow chandler dies, and the tallow
chandler’s second wife dies, and the little girl is left to
the mercy of those two shrews. They treat her
abominably. They beat her, they do not give her enough
to eat; but for all that the girl grows up into a remarkably
good-looking young woman, and a respectable young man
falls in love with her. An attachment springs up between
them, but the two shrews, directly they become aware
of it, warn the young man away from the house, threaten
the girl with all sorts of punishments if she does not
break with him, and so persecute them' that the young
man emigrates to Victoria, promising the girl to send for
her or to come home for her directly he has made some
money. He arrives in Melbourne, and gets employment
in a lawyer’s office. His employers do a great business
in conveyancing, and he has to search over deeds and
H


government grants in the government land office, until
he knows who owns every inch of the city. One day he
comes across the record of the government sale at which the
sailor purchased this allotment—he sees the name of his
sweetheart’s father —he knows that he was a sailor ”
“ Ebenezer !” here exclaimed Mrs. Wymer, warningly,
“ don’t get excited.”
“ Only my enthusiasm, Eliza,” said Mr. Wymer apolo-
getically, and cooling down directly. “As I said, he
recognises the name, and writes home to the girl for
particulars. She writes, in return, that her father had
once been in that part of the world ; that she is very
miserable, and hopes he will come and fetch her. At the
same time, she sends him some old papers, which were
her mother’s; and, searching amongst them, he comes upon
an old receipt, worn almost to shreds, and finds that the
allotment the sailor purchased is in the very heart of
Melbourne city. He lays claim to it on behalf of the
girl, he comes home, and gives the case into our hands ;
we get up the case, and instruct proceedings, of course,”
and here all the members of the firm smile agreeably,
“ and this is the letter telling us we have won, and
that the young man is coming home again with twenty
thousand pounds to marry the poor sailor’s daughter.’ ”
“ Wonderful places, the Colonies,” remarked Doctor
Bax, “ and wonderful things have taken place there ;
some very dreadful things, too. I read in the papers this
morning, that at some new gold fields discovered in New
Zealand, forty men were found perishing in the snow,
and that most of them died. What is the matter,
Laura 1 ” he asked, as Laura rose, and, with a white face,
walked tremblingly away.


She did not reply, but went mechanically to the
door. How like to last year everything was, outwardly.
Upon this spot, William had kissed her, and bade her
good night; and she might never see him again. She
shuddered at what Doctor Bax had said—“ forty men
perishing in the snow ! ” Her brother or her lover might,
be amongst those men. There was horror in the thought,
and a sudden faintness came over her. In truth, she did
faint, dead into the arms of Doctor Bax, who had
followed her to the door.
“ Poor dear! poor dear!” exclaimed the Doctor, looking
at the white face lying upon his shoulder. “Itis a sad
Christmas this for you, my poor Laura. Come, cheer
up, my dear,” he said, as she opened her eyes ; “ we must
not have you fainting away like this. Idiot that I am,
to speak of such things. I might have known ”
“ How could you have known, Doctor Bax '! ” asked
Laura. “I do not know that he is amongst them. lam
strong again, thank you. It is very foolish of me to give
way. Go inside, dear Doctor. Don’t let me make
everybody miserable this Christmas Eve. Very well, if
you will not go in without me, I suppose I must
accompany you.”
And, smiling almost cheerfully, she took the Doctor’s
arm, and joined the guests. The young people of the
party were happy enough—sorrow had not entered into
their lives ; and most of them spent the evening pretty
much as they had done a year before.
But there was one present who was, indeed, supremely
unhappy. Hardened and cynical as he was, Stephen
Winkworth could not look unmoved upon the form of


his poor, crippled child. His misery was intense, for it
was not relieved by hope. Day by day he saw her
wasting away. She bore her lot uncomplainingly, and in
silence. In this lay his chief unhappiness. If she had
confided in him as of old—if she had complained to him
of her suffering—he would have been more content.
But no : the bond that united them was loosened She
chose rather to suffer in silence than seek his sympathy.
Hapless, indeed, is that mortal whose life is passed without
the light of sympathy and love !
He had been watching his daughter the whole of the
night. Not once did he see her smile ;■ —not once had
she looked to him with affection. He could not endure
it longer.
“ Alice,” he said, in a hoarse whisper, as he bent over
her chair; “ Alice, I want to speak with you alone.
Will you come out V’
He could not but speak tenderly to her. She was his
child ; she was all he loved on earth ; and though his
passionate agitation was mastering him, he schooled his
voice so that it should sound as little harshly as possible.
Without a word, she rose and followed him. It was a
strange fashion of her’s, that she should wear her hair
loosely ; and as it hung down in heavy masses, it almost
concealed her deformity when she was standing in repose
“ Come out into the night,” he said.
He scarcely knew what impelled him to take her into
the cold air; but he felt stifled in the house, and
experienced a sense of relief when he reached the garden
walk that bordered Warleyconibe Lodge. The girl stood
patiently before him.


“ Alice,” he said, “ why do you not speak to me?”
“What shall I say, father?” she asked, in a weary
tone.
“ Say !” he returned, almost harshly ; “ say anything.
Why do you avoid my look ? Why do you torture me
with your silence 1”
“ Father,” she said, solemnly, taking his hand, “ look
up to the stars. They are very beautiful. Not in my
dreams have I seen a grander picture than this. The
Divine Lord that shaped the world, that gave us eyes to
see, and ears to hear, and mind to understand, is looking
down upon us now. See ! the earth so pure—the trees
so lovely —the sky so bright! If Heaven be as beautiful
as this, how blessed is immortality ! ”
“ Well, child !” he said, awed into quietude.
“ Well, father !” she returned ; “ we are sent into this
beautiful world to enjoy its blessings. We are here not
to repine, not to murmur, but to live, and be grateful.
If any one of us has sorrow to bear, it must be borne.
My lot, Heaven help me ! is hard enough ”
“ It is, child, it is,” he groaned, remorsefully.
“ Why should you make it harder ?”
“ Alice !”
“You have brought me here to speak, and speak I
must. My heart cries out against you; I cannot help
it. Since last Christmas, a new light has shone upon me.
Father! ” she exclaimed, turning her face suddenly to
his ; “ why have you never spoken to me of my mother ?”
Stephen staggered as if he had been struck, and a
deadly shudder passed through him.
“ I never saw her— l have never seen her picture. I


often wonder if I shall know her when I see her in
Heaven ; or if there is something which will shut me
out from her love in the next world, as death has done in
this. Father, speak to me of my mother 1”
“ I cannot, child; I cannot,” he murmured, hiding his
face in his hands.
“I so yearn for love, father. It seems to me that I
can no longer live without it—your love—forgive, oh !
forgive me ! ” and she wound her arms round his nock,
and drew his lace down ; “ your love pains me. It
appears to me unholy; for you take it from all others to
give it to me. Do you think that, when I see the want of
sympathy that exists between you and all around you, I
am not pained 1 Do you think Ido not suffer when I
see good men and women smile upon each other, and not
upon you 1 When you shut yourself out from man’s
goodwill, you shut me out, also. Your life is not a
blessing', father—Heaven pardon me for saying so—but
it is a curse ! ”
Yes, he felt that what she said was true. His life was
a curse, blighting everything with which he came in
contact—blighting even his child’s happiness.
“ Alter it father, alter it!” she continued, earnestly.
“ Think better of the world. Live in it and be of it. Do
you remember what I told you, last Christmas Eve, of
my—of my love for William Fairfield!” and she blushed
crimson, and trembled as she spoke. “ I have conquered
it, father. Ilis love does not belong' to me—it belongs
to Laura. And oh ! I pray that he may come back and
make her happy. I have been silent to you. I have
not been to you what I was; for I have felt within my


heart that you did something last Christmas night to
part them. What you did was done for my sake, and
when I look at Laiira, who is good, who is true, I say to
myself, that lam the cause of her misery. Ido not ask
you to tell me anything, but, oh ! father, if you can
remedy any wrong you have done, do so at once, and
make her happy.”
There was such anguish in his face, that she took his
hand, and held it as if to comfort him.
“ You can make my life different to what it is, father,”
she continued, softly. “ Speak to me of my mother.”
“ Child,” he answered, as in agony, ‘ I cannot speak
of your mother. She made me what I am.”
“ How long has she been dead ? It must be a long,
long time, for she has been dead to me all my life. Did
she wrong you, father 1 ”
“ Silence, daughter ' ” he cried, in a voice of pain.
“ You must not question me ! ”
“ I must not be silent,” she returned, firmly. “ Oh,
if she wronged you, father, have you never forgiven her 1
It is awful to think that she has been dead all these years,
and that the ashes .of your anger are still burning. Bless
me, father, in my mother’s name, and say that you
forgive her ! ”
She knelt down upon the snow, and raised her hands.
Could he look upon his poor, maimed child, and not
relent 1 Slowly the tears came into his eyes and blinded
him. The flood-gates of his heart were opened once
more, and the memory of happier times—of times when
he was a better man—clung about him with softening
influence. Blurred in the moonlight, he saw the form


of Ms daughter still kneeling on the snow; and placing
his hands upon her head, he said—
“ For your sake, my child, I forgive ! In your mother’s
name, I bless you !”
There was certainly something extraordinary affecting
little Doctor Bax ; for Laura, who, struggling to forget her
grief, had been playing forfeits with the young peopl (if
raising her eyes, saw him looking at her with an expres-
sion she had never seen before. Directly their eyes met,
he turned away his head; but the next moment he was
looking at her again, and still so strangely, that she asked
him if anything' ailed him ?
“ No, my dear,” he replied, hut speaking very con-
fusedly, “ there is nothing the matter with me. What
should be the matter with me, you little puss, eh ?”
“ I don’t know,” said Laura; “ but, upon my word,
you look as if you had seen a ghost ?”
“ Ha ! ha !” exclaimed the Doctor, laughing so loudly
that all eyes were turned upon him immediately.
“ What do you think, Mr. Harrild? Do T look as if I
had seen a ghost.”
“ I don’t believe in ghosts,” replied Reuben Harrild,
smiling, “therefore I am not a competent judge.”
“You don’t believe in ghosts, don’t you?” said Doctor
Bax, taking' Laura’s hand in his, and patting it gently.
“Ido ; I see them often. lam always seeing them. I
never pass a churchyard at night without seeing a
hundred of them dodging round about the tombstones.
I do believe, now, that if I went outside this house, I
should see a ghost directly.”


“ What sort of one, Doctor t ” asked Laura, almost
gaiiy-
“lam a wizard, my dear,” replied the Doctor; “ and I
should raise up the one I most wished to see. If you
had your choice, now, what sort of a ghost would you
conjure up 2”
Laura turned very pale, and would have withdrawn
her hand, but Doctor Bax held it firmly.
“ Curious associations gather round one at odd
moments,” said the Doctor. They had drawn away from
the company, and were standing by the window. “ I
am just thinking of a little episode which happened in
our family. My father—it is forty years now since he
died—had a brother, Frank, from whom he parted in
anger, and whom he never saw again. Upon his death-bed,
the thought of that brother was his greatest trouble. I was
a youngster at the time, but I remember well his words.
‘ If I could but see Frank,’ he murmured ; ‘if I could
but see Frank !’ And then he turned to me, and bade
me solemnly never to nurse anger against mortal man.
* Your uncle treated me badly,’ he said, ‘ and I have been
at war with him all my life ; but if I could see him now,
and press his hand, and exchange a loving word, 1
should die happy.’ I have never forgotten his words,
and through all my life I have never let the sun go down
upon my wrath.”
He still held Laura’s hand, and did not appear to heed
the curious look that Reuben Harrild threw at him.
“ There are mysteries and miseries in all families,”
the Doctor continued. “It is wonderful, the suffering
man inflicts upon himself. You had a son, I remember,
Reuben ”


Laura held her breath,
“ Yes, I had a son,” said Reuben, gently. “Go on.
Doctor.”
“You parted from him in anger,” pursued Doctor Bax,
“ He went abroad : what if he should be dead”——
“No ! no ! Doctor Bax S” cried Laura. “Do not say
that ! For mercy’s sake, do not say that !”
“ What if he should be dead !” continued Doctor Bax,
firmly. “ What if he should have died, unforgiven ! If
it were so, would you not give your all, Reuben, to take
him once more to your heart, as you used to do when he
was a curly-headed boy 1”
“ I would, Heaven help me ! ”
“ Last Christmas he was here, was he not Laura T
asked the Doctor.
“Yes, he w T as here,” sighed Laura.
“ You saw his shadow upon the snow,” said the Doctor
waving his handkerchief across the window.
“ I saw his shadow upon the snow. Look, Doctor,
look !” Laura gasped, for at that moment, the shadow of
a man darkened the snow-plain without.
“ Keep up your courage, Laura. Do not tremble so
my dear. Reuben Harrild, if that were your son—if he
were come to ask his father’s pardon for a fault deeply
repented of—if, rescued almost miraculously from a
dreadful death, he should have travelled back over stormy
seas, to the home of his youth, humbled, contrite,
purified,”
“It is he !” cried Reuben Harrild, as the shadow
advanced. “ Come, child, let us welcome your brother 1 ”


“ Upon my word,” said little Doctor Bax, wiping his
eyes, as he was left alone, “ this promises to be the
most glorious Christmas Eve in my remembrance.”
And going amongst the company, he decoyed every
woman and every girl under the misletoe, from the little
thing in the blue sash to the dignified Mrs. Eamage,
and kissed them all with the most intense enjoyment ;
which operation being satisfactorily concluded, he went
out and joined the Harrild’s.
Laura was weeping upon her brother’s breast, while
Reuben stood by, holding his son’s hand.
“ God bless you, sister !” sobbed Arthur. “But for
your sweet counsel, this blessing might have been denied
me. Oh, Laura, do not weep ! There is a greater
blessing in store for you ”
“ Arthur ! ” she cried, raising her eyes to his with a
hungry, yearning look.
“ Yes, darling,” continued Arthur, “ there is a greater
blessing in store for you. Do not turn away, Laura !
He saved my life, dear : but for him, I should not now be
holding you in my arms ; and he has come with me to
ask your forgiveness. You will forgive him, will you not 1
He loves you perfectly, dear. Thank God ! thank God !
This moment recompenses for all! ”
At her feet knelt William Fairfield ! She raised him
to her breast, and on that blessed Christmas Eve, under
the solemn splendor of the starlit heavens, the lovers
were re-united, never more to part in life !
It was late before the Christmas party broke up. A
happier company had certainly never assembled within


the walls of Warleycombe Lodge. There was gladness
around all; everyone appeared to have grown sud-
denly younger. Even Stephen Winkworth’s countenance
wore a satisfied expression ; and, much to the astonish-
ment of the guests, he was observed to smile on two
distinct occasions.
“ Where is your skeleton now, Doctor Bax T asked
Laura, as she, William, and Alice walked up to him.
“ The skeleton you were grumbling at last year 2”
“ Gone, my dear,” replied the good Doctor, gaily;
“flown away, in company with a host of others. It is
hiding itself in a corner, grumbling at my happiness.
Ah, William ! before you sleep to-night, fall upon your
knees and thank God for the good he has bestowed upon
you ! As for you, my dear,” he added, turning to Alice,
“ if I were not an old man, I would marry you to-morrow;
but as it is, I suppose we must be contented with our
lots, and go on in the same hum-drum way as ever.
Stephen Winkworth,” he said, as Stephen approached,
“ will you let William have back his farm 2 Come, say
yes, good-naturedly.”
“ Yes,” returned Stephen, turning very red, as Alice
kissed his hand ; “ I have been wanting to offer it back
to him, but I did not know how.”
“ Then, everything is settled,” said the Doctor ; “and,
excepting that we are all happier, this Christmas might
be last Christmas, and the year that has passed might
have been a mistake. A mistake, however,” he added
gently, “ which cannot be rectified, and which will not
be taken into account when the life-account of each of us
is balanced in the ledger of Old Father Time ! ”


The guests had departed, and William, who had lingered
behind, was standing at the door with Laura, looking
out upon the night. He had told her of his dream on
last Christmas Eve, and was pointing out to her the
place where he had seen the shadows.
“ They have taught me a lesson that I shall never forget,
darling,” he said. “My Love, strengthened by Faith, can
never yield again to doubt. Tell me once more, Laura,
that you forgive me for the sorrow I have caused you.”
“ I forgive you, William,” she said ; “ although it
seems as if I had nothing to forgive, I am so perfectly
happy. The sorrow of the past year was bitter; but its
fruits will be sweet. And oh, William ! I shall never
think with any other feeling than gratitude, of the
Shadows you saw last Christmas upon the Snow ! ”
[the end.]
