

IVP
• 04^
Japanese Chamber of Commt.^ s^
SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE.
Shanghai Incident.
It is really a source of great regret to the world at
large, and especially to Japan, that, in spite of the latter’s
ever earnest hope and endeavour for non-aggravation and
a speedy solution, the hostilities in North China have
spread over Central and South China, in which is included
the great International City of Shanghai, now converted
into a theatre of constant horror and misery, in place of
a bright scene of commercial prosperity.
Our Chamber had hoped, and expected, that the two
circulars, issued on 21st and 30th July, concerning the
North China Incident, would have been the end of our
work in connection with the present trouble in China,
but its increasing growth, and the various questions voiced
by the Australian people, as well as the publicity given in
the Press, has necessitated our issuing the present circular,
to throw light on the cause and development of the
Shanghai Incident.
(1) CENTRAL AND SOUTH CHINA AFTER THE
OUTBREAK OF THE NORTH CHINA INCIDENT.
Since the outbreak of the present trouble in North
China, the activities of Japanese forces in Central and
Southern districts have been confined only to the protec-
tion of our national residents and our rights and interests
therein, pursuing the Government’s policy of local settle-
ment and non-aggravation, as pronounced in several places
in our last circulars.
The above was, in no less a measure, the general atti-
tude and wish of the thoughtful Chinese, who wanted to
keep their lives and property free from the menace fol-
lowing the spread of hostilities. This can be deduced
from the fact that, during the week commencing with
7th July, when the North China Incident broke out, the
civilians in Shanghai rejoiced in their celebration of the
10th anniversary of their Municipal Government, The
possible disorganisation of the money market was the


grave concern of the economic interests in Shanghai, and
they were constantly on the qui vive for every movement
of the Nanking Government.
The good civilians in other parts of China, we be-
lieve, were in almost the same condition.
However, behind this scene of apparent tranquility
in Shanghai there was a dark shadow. The evil hands of
the Nanking Government had been briskly working to-
wards the mobilisation of the anti-Japanese organisations
to instigate the uneducated rank and file.
Thus, since July 11th there had gradually appeared
strong criticism against Japan, from various corners of
the city, and, after a few days, anti-Japanese feeling
gradually penetrated the minds of the people. The Mayor
of Shanghai, assuring us of his co-operation in maintain-
ing peace and order, was trying to cut a deceptive figure
of calmness. However, about the 25 th of the month the
Chinese Peace Preservation Corps commenced the provo-
cative work of building sand barricades and trenches at
several places. A dark cloud of unrest then covered the
whole of the city of Shanghai; spreading of various
rumours, slump of Government bonds, and evacuation of
a large number of Chinese followed. The statement of a
challenging nature, issued by Chian Kai-Chek on 29th
July, accelerated the prevailing anti-Japanese feeling of
the public, and revealed his intention of launching a large-
scale and well-controlled offensive against Japan. The
Commander-in-Chief of our Third Fleet was thus obliged,
on 29th, to urge the Chinese authorities concerned to
make grave reflection upon the situation.
In August the conditions were worse. The Chinese
dealing with Japanese merchants and those employed by
the latter were threatened. Japanese women and chil-
dren were frequently attacked by stones, thrown by mobs,
out for amusement, and were menaced by visits from
strange Chinese, and the selling of provisions and supply
of electricity and water were often suspended for our
nationals. The closing of the Japanese firms and mills,
and the paralysation of business transactions were the
natural sequences. On the other hand, not only were
various military works resumed on a larger scale and


openly by the Chinese authorities, in violation of the
Truce Agreement of 1932, but armed soldiers, as well as
the Preservation Corps, frequently engaged in manoeuvres
surrounding the Japanese settlements.
Under these circumstances, especially in view of the
wholesale massacre of our nationals at Tungchow, near
Peiping, the evacuation of part of our residents —women
and children —became inevitable, whilst nearly all of the
Chinese around Chapei, Kiangwan, Hongkew and North
Szechuan Road took refuge, leaving their homes entirely
empty, which seems to have been quite unusual. Evacua-
tion, which had never been attempted during similar
trouble in the past, was also carried out by the Chinese in
the Yangtsezeppo district.
We may add that these unsettled circumstances also
prevailed in Hankow and other places along the Yangtze
River, as well as Canton, Foochow and other points in the
Southern Districts.
The tension in Shanghai was thus at breaking point,
of which the Oyama Incident of 9th August was the only
logical outcome.
(2) OYAMA INCIDENT.
As already published in the newspapers, about 6.30
p.m. on August 9th Sub-Lieutenant Oyama, in naval uni-
form, was passing along Monument Road (a part of Ex-
tension Road), Shanghai, in a car driven by Seaman Saito,
when the car was suddenly surrounded by the Chinese
Peace Preservation Corps and both men fired upon. They
were killed instantly. The Sub-Lieutenant was on his way
back to the headquarters of the Japanese landing party
after a routine patrol of Western Shanghai, where
Japanese-owned cotton mills are situated.
The Chinese took advantage of the incident occur-
ring near the Hungjao Aerodrome to allege that the cause
of the trouble was the firing of a revolver by Sub-
Lieutenant Oyama at one of the sentries. This allegation,
however, was entirely in accordance with their usual
evasion of the true facts, and entirely groundless, which


was proved and confirmed by the result of the post-
mortem examination on the Chinese sentry who was shot.
Extension Road is close by the International Settle-
ment and endowed with the same privileges as those of
the latter, over which China has no right or control.
The Peace Preservation Corps is the Chinese Armed
Police Force, whose duty, as the term indicates, should,
first and foremost, be to preserve peace and order, not to
murder a foreign naval officer who, wearing his uniform
and carrying out official duties, is passing along a road
protected by International Law, and assuredly beyond the
reach of Chinese interference.
The reader may easily be able to judge for himself
what China is like. In our last two circulars we pointed
out several untoward incidents caused by the unfaithful-
ness, and lawlessness, on the part of China in respecting
treaties and agreements. Here, again, have they been
repeated.
In telling this incident, mention must be made of
the atrocities committed by the shooters, which were more
than inhuman and insulting. The body of Sub-Lieutenant
Oyama had eighteen bullet wounds, as well as sword
gashes. He had also been clubbed and bayonetted; the
skull had been fractured, the face mutilated and the
bowels exposed. His sabre, shoes, watch and all other
belongings had been stolen. This is said to be the usual
manner of Chinese manslaughtering.
The Japanese Government, with regard to this affair,
took the most prudent and equitable attitude. Holding
over the settlement thereof for later negotiation, the
Government demanded the immediate withdrawal of the
Peace Preservation Corps, and the removal of all military
works from the Truce Area in order to avoid a possible
recurrence of similar unfortunate incidents. The Chinese
Authorities, however, refused to comply with the above
request and, instead, strengthened their armaments. This
ultimately necessitated partial reinforcement in Shanghai
on the part of the Japanese Navy for the protection of
their nationals.


(3) CHINA’S VIOLATION OF THE SHANGHAI
TRUCE AGREEMENT.
The Shanghai Truce Agreement was concluded be-
tween Japan and China upon the settlement of the last
Shanghai Incident on sth May, 1932, through the
mediation of the representatives of Great Britain,
America, France and Italy, who also signed this agree-
ment; its object was to prevent the recurrence of the
hostilities between the Japanese and Chinese forces, by an
avoidance of direct contact, and to maintain the peace
of the International City of Shanghai. The first Article
thereof mentioned as follows:
The Japanese and Chinese Authorities having already
ordered firing to cease, it is agreed that the cessation
of hostilities is rendered definite as from Mav sth
1932.
The forces of the two sides will so far as lies in their
control cease around Shanghai all and every form of
hostile act. In the event of doubt arising in regard
to the cessation of hostilities, the situation in this
respect will be ascertained by the representatives of
the participating friendly powers.”
In the annexed note to this agreement, is stipulated
the defined area where both forces can garrison their
troops.
Under the strict supervision of the Japanese Authori-
ties, this agreement was for some time carried out by the
Chinese, more or less, successfully. However, as time
passed, their unfaithfulness was gradually disclosed; in
November, 1933, they not only secretly, and without
permission, stationed a Gendarmerie at the North Station
(close by the Japanese Settlement), but repeatedly al-
lowed marching of their troops in the Truce Area without
justification, which necessitated the conclusion of another
agreement, after a series of negotiations, between both
countries in March, 1934.
Despite these endeavours, however, the Chinese con-
tinued to flout the agreement. The number of the Peace
Preservation Corps was increased, and equipment
strengthened beyond any real necessity as well as against
stipulation; trenches and other defensive military works


appeared in many places in the Truce Area; the Woosung
fortress was re-armed regardless of prohibition; an over-
whelming number of the Central Government’s Army
was concentrated in the districts between Nanking and
Shanghai soon after the National Conference held at
Nanking in 193 5. Moreover, the Chinese Authorities
were sending into the Truce Area their regular armies
disguised as the Peace Preservation Corps, or snipers, and
ordering them to make various preparations for war.
Meantime, to refute Japan’s accusation concerning these
circumstances, they resorted to their old trick of prevari-
cation of the truth. The actual inspection made in May,
1937, by the Japanese Naval Authorities and Consulate-
General in Shanghai brought to light the whole picture
of their warlike preparations in one form or another
within the Truce Zone.
On 23rd June, this year, a joint committee, repre-
senting the interested countries, was summoned by Japan
in connection with the re-armament of the Woosung
Fortress. Protests were then made to the Chinese repre-
sentative in regard to the unnecessary number, and equip-
ment, of the Peace Preservation Corps, the manoeuvres
of the war ’planes and various defensive military works.
The Chinese representative (the Mayor of Shanghai),
however, showed no sign of sincerity replying to the
effect that as long as China refrained from despatching
troops into the Truce Area it would not be in direct
contravention to the agreement to make preparations
for war, such as the building of fortresses, and to allow
their committee to supervise such work.
We hope it will be quite clear to the reader what
effect such an unfaithful attitude of a responsible man
would have upon the speech and action of the leace
Preservation Corps, Police Force and the general public
under his control.
(4) CHINA’S CHALLENGE TO THE JAPANESE
NAVAL LANDING PARTY.
Shanghai, after the Oyama Incident, reached an ever
darker and more menacing stage. On 11th August, the
Chinese forces commenced moving round the Settlement,
laying mines at several places. From 12th, the Woosung


Fortress was fortified by the Regular Troops, and the rail-
ways between Nanking and Shanghai used only for mili-
tary purposes, the transportation of ordinary passengers
being entirely suspended. Early on the following morn-
ing, the sentries of the Japanese Naval Landing Party
were attacked by snipers from many points in the city,
to which our forces did not respond with very great
endurance, but the resumed attack by rifles and machine
guns by the Regular Troops, as well as the snipers, upon
our landing party at 9.15 a.m. of the same morning at
last compelled the latter to take up the challenge.
(5) THE LAST GRAVE DECISION OF THE
JAPANESE NAVY.
To the last, Japan did not abandon her earnest wish
and endeavour to save the International City of Shanghai
from being turned into a shambles, and to ensure safety
for the lives and property of the innocent citizens of
3,000,000. The proposal of mediation made to the con-
tending parties on 12th August by the Consuls-General
for Great Britain, America and France was willingly
accepted by Japan, who joined the discussions with utmost
sincerity in order to avert the impending crisis. The
Japanese forces, therefore, did not take the offensive
against the demonstrative manoeuvres, of the Chinese war
’planes swooping over the Hongkew district, which took
place during the mediation conference on 13 th, but on
the morning of 14th a large number of Chinese war
’planes appeared again over Shanghai, and bombarded not
only the headquarters of the Japanese Landing Party,
their warships and their Consulate-General, but also the
whole of the International Settlement.
The earnest efforts of Japan and the Powers con-
cerned were thus nullified by Chinese outrages. Japan’s
endurance was exhausted. She could no longer do any-
thing but abandon all hope for a peaceful settlement,
and rose in arms for the protection of her 30,000 nationals
in Shanghai.
(6) JAPAN’S BASIC POLICY.
Let us close this circular with a quotation from the
speech by the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs at an


/flu* j .
■ J ft Is i
extraordinary session of the Diet on September 5 th, which
we believe should clarify the aim and policy of Japan: —
"Thus, the hostilities have now spread from north to
central China, and Japan finds herself engaged in
a major conflict with China on extended fields. I
am deeply pained to say that some 50,000 Japanese
residents in various parts of China have been forced
to evacuate, leaving behind them their huge invest-
ments, their business interests acquired through years
of arduous toil, and other rights and interests, while
not a few of them have been made victims of the
hostilities. It is also to be regretted that nationals
of third countries in China are being subjected to
similar trials and tribulations. All this is due to no
other cause than that the Nanking Government, and
also local militarist regimes in China, have for many
years past deliberately undertaken to incite public
opinion against Japan as a means of strengthening
their own political powers, and, in collusion with the
communist elements, they have still further impaired
Sino-Japanese relations.
It is hardly necessary to say that the basic policy of
the Japanese Government aims at the stabilisation of
East Asia through conciliation and co-operation
between Japan, Manchukuo, and China, for their
common prosperity and well-being. Since China,
ignoring our true motive, has mobilised her vast
armies against us, we can do no other than counter
it by force of arms. The urgent need at this moment
is that we take a resolute attitude and compel China
to mend her ways. Japan has no other objective
than to see a happy and tranquil North China, and
all China freed from the danger of a recurrence of
such calamitous hostilities as the present, and Sino-
Japanese relations so adjusted as to enable us to put
into practice our abovementioned policy. Let us
hope that the statesmen of China will be brought to
take a broad view of East Asia; that they will speed-
ily realise their mistakes; and that, turning over a
new leaf, they will act in unison with the high aim
and aspirations of Japan.”
30th September, 1937.
THE LANGLEA PRINTEEY PTY. LTD., 4JJ KENT ST., SYDNEY.
