

SHEEP HUSBANDRY
FOR
SMALL WOOLGROWERS.
WITH HARROLD BROTHERS' COMPLIMENTS.
By “WAUPMELTA.”
Reprinted from the “Adelaide Observer."
ADELAIDE:
W. K. THOMAS & CO., PRINTERS, GRENFELL STREET.
1885.




HARROLD BROTHERS have ob-
tained the Right of Reprinting these
Articles with the hope that they
may assist the Parmer and Wool-
grower in improving the Value of
their Clips, and thus better enable
them to compete with the other
Woolgrowing Countries of the
World.




SHEEP HUSBANDRY FOR FARMERS.
BY “WAUPMELTA.”
It is hoped that some practical instructions on the sort of wool which
can most profitably be grown, the sort of sheep to keep, with hints on
their management and some plain instructions on the proper method of
preparing small clips for market, will prove acceptable to farmers not
only those who are already sheepowners, bnt to those who find their
income from their farms gradually diminishing as the ground fiom long
cultivation becomes worn out and dirty, and who, having n °
experience, are afraid to begin with sheep. As wool has felt the decline
in value common to all staple products at the present time, it is necessary
all possible improvement in breeding and management should be carried
otherwise the price will reach an unprofitable level; and m view
of the great improvement in the best clips of Merino wool grown i m
Uruguay and the Argentine Republic (whose wool expoits in 1884
amounted to 330,000 bales, each weighing double the Austualian bale
and who are credited with 100,000,0.00 of sheep as against 76,500,000 m
Australasia in 1883), it becomes increasingly necessary Australian wools
should be of the very best quality the country will produce, and they
must also be much better packed and more carefully got up.
tLtoSSa wool report for 1884 quotes Port Phi hp greasy as
averaging lHd., Adelaide B|d., Buenos Ayres 6±d. per lb. TheMast-
mentioned low price is partly due to the great quantities of buns it
contains though the very best South American clips rival Sydney wools
in price.’ The South African wool (Eastern Province) is quoted by the
same authority at lOfd. per lb. greasy ; and the total South African clip,
including Natal, in 1884 was 189,218 bales. The totaL Austraasian
imports to Great Britain amounted, in 1884, to 1,084,300 bales. It
may be remembered, in passing, that Cape wools are mostly clothing,
whereas, excepting a few Mudgee clips, all leading Australian clips me
combing wools. To still further impress the necessity of improvements
in South Australian wools, a leading firm of London woolbrokers i: i
reporting on our clip of last year as a whole say, Mostly very wasty ,
difficult to estimate, and the cause of disappointment and loss.


By attention to the succeeding remarks farmers may do much to mend
this unpleasant but well-deserved criticism. The number of sheep in
this colony in 1874 was 6,120,241, and in 1883 6,388,366, but though
the numbers show so small an increase the number of sheepowners has
very largely increased the last ten years, almost entirely among farmers,
many of whom are relying more and more every year on their “ wool
money.” There is a Swedish proverb that wherever sheep tread the
ground yields gold, and nowhere is this truer than in Australia, which
in 1807 exported 245 lb. of wool, but in 1884 exported to England alone
£16,000,000 worth, taking the average value of scoured and greasy wool
at £l6 per bale as against £l9 95., the average in 1880, and of this
large amount a goodly proportion belonged to small graziers.
To those farmers not yet keeping sheep their chief advantage may be
thus stated :—they eat up all sorts of weeds; even stinkwort, where
sheep are turned into the stubbles immediately the wheat is reaped, gets
much scarcer, the young plants getting nipped off as soon as they
appear; they are of the greatest use in keeping the fallows clean, eating
off wild oats and other weeds; whilst on the warm dry parts their drop-
pings are one of the best manures, and if a flock is yarded for two or
three nights on one spot, however poor the land may be, for years after-
wards the increased luxuriance of the crop will plainly show the boun-
daries. As it has often been said, if the farmer gets neither wool nor
mutton from his flock, it would pay him handsomely by keeping down
weeds and restoring fertility to the soil. The great advantage gained by
eating off rank crops of wheat when the ground is not too wet is univer-
sally admitted. The young wheat plant stools out; sow-thistles and
cockspurs, &c., are also eaten down ; and many experienced men assert
that red rust does much less damage in crops well fed off, which are less
rank in their growth. The soil is trodden down about the young plant,
it becomes better rooted, and the moisture is better retained. The in-
creased yield of wheat is put down at one to two bushels per acre.
With a flock of sheep on the farm there is no butcher’s bill to pay,
and if the farmer’s daughters are industrious and thrifty they should
make all the family stockings, &c., by carefully washing and carding the
wool off dead sheep (commonly wasted). A fine yarn of soft Merino
wool is spun by the aid of the old-fashioned spinning-wheel, and the
extra warmth, softness, and comfort of home-made Merino stockings is
far above the rough, harsh, woollen ones imported, and they will last
much longer too. Indeed it is very remarkable how rare the once
universal spinning-wheel has become. Most of the present generation
have never seen one, and yet the wool wasted on most farms would
supply the whole household with a far superior article to any which is
bought. By collecting the common lichen (or white moss) off the rocks
and boiling it in water, the wool can be dyed a useful brown colour.


To the farmer then who farms, or tries to farm, without sheep, let
him consider the land yearly becoming poorer, the vast increase of
weeds the butcher’s bills he pays, and the feed wasted. If that does
not convince him of the profit, let him look at his neighbours who
already have sheep, and he may rest assured that he has either to keep
sheep or else make room at no distant period for some one who will.
Indeed, sheep are the only solution of farming profitably at present
prices over the greater part of this colony, and by them as much wheat
can be grown on half this area as at present off the whole farm, so
savin o ' much wages, and, come what will, they will always yield a hand-
some^Return, just in proportion to their treatment—a large return, it
well fed, well looked after, well chosen, or a small return where starved,
neglected, and carelessly bred.
There is no reason why the present number of sheep grown in the
farming districts should not be quite doubled by growing such plants
both for summer and winter feeding as experience is now teaching us,
for it is a disgrace to our farmers and graziers that we should yearly im-
port from New South Wales and Queensland such large numbers of fat
sheep to feed our very small population. Last year the total imports
from these two colonies amounted to 336,600 sheep.
THE MOST PROFITABLE SHEEP FOR FARMERS.
Near town and within reach of market the Lincoln ram on the Merino
ewe gives a very good return, but the ewes should have had two 01
three lambs before, as young ewes are liable to die during lambing.
The lambs sell well if ready for the butcher in May, going up to 12s.
each, almost every year. The wool is dense, of a fair average quality,
and they mature early if well fed and kept on a rich soil. The cross-
bred wether at two years old will weigh from 55 lb. to 75 lb. per
carcase, and yield from 6 lb. to 8 lb. of greasy wool. Cotswolds and
Leicesters, although of such large frame, do not give the best results,
and, although they have been tried around Adelaide, are now seldom
seen. . „ ,
The South Down ram, to use with Merino ewes, is very useful it
lambs for the butcher only are required, as they lay on flesh rapidly, are
well-shaped, deep and full in the flesh, but the very best sheep tobreed
butcher’s lambs from is the first cross from Lincoln ram and Merino
ewes, again crossed by the South Down ram. The progeny arrive at a
good size and weigh well very quickly, and from English experience,
according to the live-stock journals, the lambs arrive at maturity still
quicker if South Dpwn ram lambs cover the ewes, but where the flock is
to be permanent, full-grown rams only are recommended to be used.
Any wool, however, with the South Down cross in it sells badly, being
shorter and harsher. After the first cross the farmer has to decide


whether he will continue to breed for mutton or for wool; if mutton, he
must use the coarse-woolled ram; if for wool, the Merino ram ; but in
either case he must use the pure ram. This is essential, as half-bred
rams produce uneven mongrels, and if persisted in is the surest way to
get unprofitable brutes, the carcase getting smaller and the fleece
shorter, harsher, and wiry, and as the sheep gets older the fleece greatly
diminishes in weight, losing the wool off the belly, &c. Roughly speak-
ing, it may be said that only in the south of Adelaide, portions of the
hills, and around Mount Gambier, the Lincoln, when crossed on the
Merino, are the most profitable, the one great drawback to them being
the difficulty in keeping them within bounds, and the expense this
causes is a set-off against the profit derived from their larger carcase.
They resemble cattle in their habits, straying away singly, but generally
remaining near where they have been bred, only commonly preferring a
neighbour’s farm to their owner’s, and if removed from their native
place making surprising attempts at returning to it. A six-wire fence
offers no impediment,, and a stone wall they either climb over or jump.
It is possible a six-wire fence of Johnson’s close barbed wire might keep
them, but that runs into too much money. Another drawback is the
difficulty of getting early lambs ; the tups keep so fat that they are too
lazy, and the lambs seldom drop before June or July, and the purer the
breed the truer this is.
Of late years fashion has demanded fabrics made from fine crossbred
fleeces, and half-bred ewes put to the Merino ram gives a very high-
priced wool. Still, no one can say how long the fashion will last, but
while it does Australia can produce it cheaper than most countries,
owing to its favourable climate. The pure Lincoln wool, however, comes
into competition with coarser wools common in cold climates, and can
be produced cheaper in Europe and New Zealand. For the best fine
crossbred greasy, well skirted and in light condition, lOfd. and lOfd.
(Luxmoore’s) were the highest prices paid in Adelaide last season, and
in the above-mentioned districts it will pay the farmer to grow it, but he
must produce an even quality, and, at any rate, show some sense in
packing it. To put the fine stapled fleeces with heavy, hairy ones is
most prejudicial, and greatly tends to lower the price, each sort being
wanted by different manufacturers.
ON BUYING STORE SHEEP.
Excepting the districts named the Merino is undoubtedly the most
profitable animal, being very much hardier, standing more ill usage, and
peculiarly well adapted to our climate. Some farmers only buy store
sheep, and never breed any, and after topping them, sell them off before
harvest. To a novice who begins by this, a hint or two will not be out
of place. Of the very first importance to a grazier is the capacity for


fattening quickly. Let him bear in mind that wild wethers accustomed
to travel long distances do not settle down contentedly in sma
paddocks, and if shepherded will never fatten thoroughly, he slioulc
therefore choose quiet sheep that have been shepherded, m preference to
wild station-bred sheep. He should also avoid South-Eastern sheep, not
only because of their small size, for which the usual difference in price
partly compensates, but because they seldom fatten well, _ their con-
stitutions being weak, and they often have coast disease. If this disease is
much developed not only will the miserable condition proclaim it, but
careful examination shows the white of the eye discoloured by a yellowish
tint. The fine wool they grow is often tender, always short and
deficient in quantity, the fleece often weighing 2 lbs. to 4 lbs. less than
average Northern bred wethers. These remarks, however, do not apply
to sheep bred immediately round Border Town, they being larger and
he port 6 Lincoln sheep, too, seldom fatten well on this side of the Gulf.
It has often been remarked that it takes two years to do it, and then
are never first-class; they resemble South-Eastern sheep in size and
constitution, and are not liked by the experienced grazier. Northern or
Darling bred sheep are usually the best investment, especially the latter,
which ordinarily arrive in large numbers in September having fourteen
months’ wool, but are often too wild, and sometimes the grazier gets a
lot which puzzles him from their never getting “ tip-top. On killing
the poorest of them he will probably find the stomach (the mamplus)
filled with felted balls or bezoars of irregular size, caused by eating
indigestible food, especially old cotton bush during droughty seasons.
If the sheep be young and the season early with plenty of grass, they
will partially dissolve, but if old, or the grass drying up, there is no cure
except the butcher’s knife. Some parts of Queensland also breed sheep
which never thrive. , ~
The farmer who intends to keep a permanent flock, cannot do Deuei
than buy say 500 ewes five years old, (or full-mouthed the previous
lambing,) from a large station which has a good reputation. ey wi
be of better quality than maiden ewes, as no one ever sells his best
young ewes, and he will have a better lambing from old ewes than
maidens, but he must stipulate in making the bargain that he is not to
take any broken-mouthed or sheep with defective teeth. Some stations
will give in rams enough for the first season, but if he has to buy them
let them be of the best quality he can afford. When he takes delivery
of the flock they must be branded before he leaves the yard with his own
registered brand, in case any should be lost on the road. Ihe rams
must be put in five months before he wants the lambs to drop, and the
flock should be mustered up once a week to see that all the rams are
there, being apt to stray away with only one or two ewes ; but the best


plan is to yard them for one night each week for the six weeks it is
usual to leave them in, and if this is done one ram to eighty ewes will
be enough, instead of one to fifty. With plenty of feed, and water
always accessible, and the ewes always in good order and fat at lambing
time, eighty to ninety per cent, of lambs should be cut, supposing the
dogs are kept away. One important hint is—never shift your lambing
ewes into a paddock new and strange to them, just before they begin to
lamb, it always injures your lambing, the ewes being exceedingly timid,
especially in a strange place, are liable to drop the lambs and rejoin the
flocks at once before the lambs can follow them.
If, then, when shearing comes around, the sheep have been thoroughly
well fed, the returns would be represented as follows:
500 ewes cutting 6 lbs. wool at 7d. per lb. ... ... £B7 10 0
400 lambs (eighty per cent.) at ss. each ... ... 100 0 0
400 lambs wool each 2£ lbs. at fid. per lb. ... ... 22 10 0
a • , „ 0 0
Against the first cost of ewes at say ss. fid. £137 10 0
Cost of rams if hired, ten at 10s. ... ... 5 0 0
£142 10 0
The wool if grown on uncultivated land may bring up to 9d. per 1b.,,
and the lambs if dropped early and ready for the butcher in May*
would be worth 10s. each. These figures are at a low average, and for
the returns to be lower than the above example, there must be mis-
management, and above all there remains an item of profit less
evident j this is the benefit the soil has received. It may be interesting
to note that at Chichester, England, a sale of Twin South Down rams
was held, the auctioneers stated that the flock had il been recently started
with the object of procuring an increased fecundity in South Down
sheep of high character. Ample evidence sustains the view that the
quality of prolificness is as transmissible hereditarily as other qualities
are, and it may be expected that ewe lambs by twin born and twin bred
rams will inherit a tendency to produce twins,” but until our farmers
feed their sheep better than now, twins are not desirable, as the Merino
ewe has seldon an excess of milk. If ewes have not been starved and
the teeth worn down by sand and grit, they will if of strong constitu-
tion produce lambs till they are twelve years old; on no account what-
ever should old ewes be bought unless a very ample supply of feed is
certain, to starve them would mean very heavy loss.
CUTTING AND TAILING.
It is hardly necessary to give full instructions here as to cutting and
tailing, generally done about a month after the flock has ceased lambing.


but care must be taken that the lambs are not over-heated at the time,
nor should it be done in wet weather; wide brush wings should be
invariably made at the gateway to the yard, and the flock should in-
variably be returned to their own paddock, as otherwise many lambs are
likely to loose their dams.
ON CULLING SHEEP.
The most profitable sheep is “ the most perfect sheep the country will
produce.” This can only be done by close attention and culling, and to
do this it is necessary to know the “points” of a sheep thoroughly, not
only theoretically, but by training the eye with continual examinations
and comparisons. The points for carcase—and they apply equally to
Lincolns and Merinos—are depth, girth, roundness of barrel, with ribs
well sprung, thickness behind the shoulder, breadth of forehead, and
width between the eyes, shortness of neck and legs, and general square-
ness of frame; and what to avoid, are tall, thin-necked, leggy, flatsided,,
narrow made, small-footed, ill-shaped animals with prominent staring
eyes, and narrow, hard, faces.
The carcase of a first-class Lincoln should be covered with a long,
bright, lustrous, wavy fleece, in length from eight to ten inches at least,
free from fuzziness and not matted. A prime ram may cut up to A 5 lb.
greasy fleece, but over 15 lb. is good. The topknot should be free from,
fuzziness, which denotes a Merino cross, as does the presence of any-
thing like wool on the face, which should be covered with a short white
hair. Horns also denote a cross of some sort. Many farmers quite spoil
their flocks by breeding from mongrels, and a small lot of sheep con-
taining all sorts and breeds, except the very good, may often be seen,
and it is this stupid want of system that they have to blame for the
poor prices and poor result which they complain of, and the admixture
of mongrel Lincolns, is one great cause why farmers’ clips are so un-
popular with wool buyers. There is no certainty of the strain ever
being got rid of; in one well puffed Merino stud flock—the writer has
seen it crop up thirty years after the coarse mongrel has been used.
The Merino demands a longer description, still it is only by careful
culling, which is the secret of all high quality stock that it can be got.
All two and four-toothed ewes must be culled, for it costs no more to
feed a sheep cutting 9 or 10 lb. clean greasy wool, than to feed a
miserable runt with open fleece cutting only 4 lb., at the same time only
good country produces first-class sheep, and first-class wool. A model
Merino with first-class combing wool should be covered all over, bacfc,
belly, and legs, with an even quantitied soft bright wool, extremely
dense everywhere, filling the hand well when grasped. t IS 0 § rea
importance that it should open freely in every part, each fibre from root
to point should be independent of any other, should they entangle or


eross each other, then it is a bad fault and the cull mark must be put
6n. The yolk should be clean and glistening, the colour is, however,
much affected by soil and feed, a sticky, cheesy, gummy yolk is to be
avoided. The top of the wither should be a solid mass of wool, any
sign of the wool being short or parting and leaving a furrow is a sure
indication of a light fleece, deficient in quantity both on the back and
belly, a poor sheep in wet weather, if half starved, will often show a
parting along the back, especially the very fine long combing class, but
if the tip “ feathers,” or shows a pointed white tip, reject it at once;
it arises from fibres of unequalled length. Northern or saltbush sheep
require closer attention on this point, as, owing to the heat and di-y dust
drying up the yolk on the surface of the fleece, it presents one uniform
dead whiteness ; the test then is to examine the comparative length of
staple from neck to tail, and a corresponding shortness will be found on
the top of the rump, between the hipbones.
The evenness of quality in a fleece is of primary importance; too
often a nice, fine quality of wool on the back is found with a coarse,
hairy breech and thighs. The difficulty of covering a sheep with a really
even fleece is very great, but much to be desired. Long white hair or
kemp through- the fleece is also a bad fault; rams showing this, or on
the head or the scrotum, must be rejected.
The legs should be well covered with wool right down past the knee-
joint, almost to the hoofs. Sometimes people conclude that because a
sheep carries the wool all over his legs down to his hoof that he must
be a first-class animal, but the contrary is often the case, the back being
thinly covered with wool of a short, weak fibre.
The face of the model Merino should be of the well-known soft
creamy tinge, with the wool covering the cheeks and growing well down
towards the nose. Some Australian Merinos have the eyes quite hidden
by the wool all round the eyes, but the Americans object to the wool
meeting below the eye, and there is this to be said, that it saves the
bother of clipping off the wool from the face in winter, which has some-
times to be done on sheep walks in the grass country, where the lambs
get so blinded that they cannot see to feed ; certainly, an open-faced
animal suffers less from grass seeds, and there is no reason why this
excessive growth of wool, where it is valueless, should be unduly
encouraged.
The shape of the ram’s horns are an indication of the quality of his
fleece. For example, the short twisted horn close in against the ear
belongs to the short, extra close-woolled variety, such as the Negretti.
A wide-spread horn belongs to the longer stapled ram, and has the ad-
vantage of allowing the wool to be easily shorn around the head.
Sheep showing red, thin, scabby ears, narrow between the eyes, with
redness of skin round them, should be at once rejected ; they are always


thin fleeced, open in the withers, bad-doing sheep, and won’t pay to feed;
the wool, too, is washy, mushy, watery stuff, with clotted, cheesy yolk.
In the Port Lincoln District especially this bad type is not uncommon.
Spots on the nose or hoofs, especially brown spots, are objected to by
stud-breeders, who consider such animals as likely to produce black or
spotted lambs ; but for ordinary purposes this need not be considered
provided the animal is good in other respects.
Besides culling the ewes, it is of the utmost impoitance that no faulty
rams be used. Some people are too stingy and ignorant to buy really
good rams, and get cheap rubbish. Let such remember that the male
transmits his fleece and the female her shape, so that a ram which will
put one pound of wool extra on his progeny is worth having and worth
paying for. Hired rams are seldom of the best quality, and it pays best
to buy them, and if no separate paddock can be spared, get a neighbour
to take them in with his, paying him with the fleeces. The influence of
soil and climate must in all cases be allowed for; a very fine wool cannot
be produced profitably on saltbush plains, while it pays best in the cooler
parts. The highest-priced wools are grown on the mica schists and
granitic rocks, which give that bright white wool, with clear yolk and
beautiful softness of feel, characteristic of the best Merino wool, and so
remarkable in Tasmanian and Victorian clips. The dry limestone, with
saltbush vegetation, gives a harsher fibre and a heavy, cheesy yoke, but
the increased weight almost compensates for the lower price.
For this class of country pick rams having dense, long, strong wool,
with much yolk, as this secretion serves to protect the wool from decay,
prevents the dust penetrating to the skin, and so drying up the whole
fibre, rendering it harsh and tender, whilst the tip becomes so dead and
perished that it combs off in the manufacture of the yarn, and is called
“ noils.” A very large quantity of this description is sold in Adelaide,
and sometimes the length of noil is a quarter of an inch, let the Northern
farmer test his wool by pulling this white tip, if it breaks off at once,
he can then understand why the price is low.
Experiments with the heavy greasy American Merino are being made
in Riverina, and it is to be hoped that ultimately a sheep will be pro-
duced which will suffer less from dust and heat. So far our celebrated
strong-combing Adelaide Merino is the best for the hot, dry country, as
they retain their fleeces longer, and grow more wool, and have a larger
carcase than the fine small breeds, which in bad seasons have short, half-
rotten fleeces, and lose most of the belly wool. A good practical plan is
to weigh all rams’ fleeces as shorn, putting the heaviest fleeced ram to
the best lot of ewes, a good ram at four-tooth should cut at least 12 lbs.
of clean greasy wool, and our prize animals have often cut fleeces weighing
20 lb. to° 231 lbs., and Canowie Station boasts of cutting off about
50,000 an average of 8 lbs. 3 ozs., including lambs for four years running.


Leather necked and wrinkly rams are not liked in Australia, as they
collect more grass seeds, &c., and are more difficult to shear; the
Americans rather cultivate these peculiarities, as they urge the fleece is
bigger.
Finally, get rid by culling of all mongrel or irregular sheep ; breeding
as regular a flock with a fleece as even in length and quality as possible,
evenness and regularity being the great thing, and do not breed from all
sorts of breeders’ rams, however good the animals may be individually,
as this must produce the greatest irregularity of character.
ON MANAGEMENT GENERALLY.
The very first essentials for profitable sheep husbandry are an ample
supply of feed and water. This looks on paper ridiculous to mention,
but from the irregularity of our seasons a very difficult thing to secure,
unless the farm is kept under-stocked. Overstocking is the rule, and its
effects are, first of all, to injure the constitution of your sheep; to spoil
and wear down their teeth, so that they do not live out half their natural
term; to produce a ruinous loss among the lambs; and to spoil the
fleece, not only by not getting half the wool you ought to, but by
injuring that half by making a “break” in it or making it tender.
Want of water will cause this break quicker than anything, also
irregularity in feeding, by suddenly changing either the quantity or
quality of the food. Ewes suffering from fever while rearing the lamb is
another common cause, and the result is to lower the value of the clip
one penny or twopence per lb. Overstocking also destroys the best
varieties of grasses, leaving only the inferior to seed, and over a great
area of the colony, where saltbush and other edible shrubs are the
mainstay, they, also, are eaten out of existence, and the country
becomes a barren surface, except in those very wet seasons, which are all
too rare. The farmer cannot too soon learn that overstocking, with its
accompanying semi-starvation, does not pay. A striking example
■occurred a few years ago on a well-known large station. One season
90,000 sheep were shorn, and the next only 60,000, yet the clip off the
smaller number produced within fifty bales as many as the greater.
Sheep must be thoroughly well-fed all the year to pay thoroughly well,
and the man who treats his sheep as he does his old cows —fat one half
the year and skeletons the other half —must expect a poor clip and a
poor price for it. He who wishes to make the most money in the long
run, must give his grass lands the chance of seeding, and where he has
edible bushes will if he is wise take the greatest care that they are not
destroyed, as in late seasons they are invaluable. On many estates it
would pay well to cultivate the best of them in small corners fenced off.
It would also pay to grow a few acres of lucerne, even if it has to be
mown, to lamb in February, selling the wether lambs fat in May


or June; but if lambing in April or May, his ewes ought to have some
provision made, either a little hay or straw stacked and salted slightly;
or, best of all, some green crop. Professor Custance speaks highly of
mangolds; in some parts rape would be exceedingly useful. It is
surprising how far a little extra feed goes with sheep. In Riverina
during this summer’s drought, thousands of stud ewes were kept on a
ration of half a pound of hay brought from the farming districts by the
New South Wales Railways at reduced rates, and certainly the farmer
who can raise it easily and cheaply can afford to give his ewes during
the cold and scarcity common to the lambing season some little help, and
so save many more lambs, besides adding to the growth of the ewe’s
fleece. If the farm is big enough the best woolled sheep should be kept
on the grass lands, and the breeding sheep and wethers for sale should
be run on the fallows and stubbles, of course packing the wool of each
lot separately. The red dust off cultivated ground is very injurious, and
makes the clip nearly as bad as those far northern clips which are more
than half dirt and sand. Access to water at any time should always be
provided, and if there are no surface waters a windmill with tank and
a self-acting valve affixed in the trough is very useful, as sheep running
in paddocks will go away from an empty trough early in the morning,
and not returning will not feed at all during the day. Another very
desirable point, especially in the North, are shadetrees, not only on the
run but around the watering places; look at the poor brutes on a real
hot-wind day clustering about a telegraph pole, and consider the extra
dust put in the fleece as one tramples on another seeking some little
shelter, both heat and dust increasing the quantity of “ noils” above
referred to. By all means cultivate shadetrees for your sheep,
particularly round the water, gums, black figs (which grow in brackish
soil), mulberry-trees, &c., all will repay the merciful man who regards
the comfort and well-being of his flocks.
Paddock your sheep, if possible; shepherding usually fills the wool
with dirt, dirty yards in winter stain both the belly and thigh
wool, and in wet season causes footrot, and the fleeces are invariably
lighter. It is a good thing to shepherd your weaners if feed and water
are plentiful, as it cures that excessive wildness which prevents sheep
fattening quickly, but to shepherd sheep and let them run under three-
wire fences, tearing the wool out of the back and rubbing down the dust
to the skin is the most expensive way of mismanaging your flock ; add
to this dirty wet yards in winter causing footroot, and you have a perfect
picture of what ought never to be. Should footrot break out, it is
caused by the oilduct between the claws getting choked with dirt and by
the hoofs overgrowing, and to cure it the hoof must be pared down with
a sharp knife and dress the sore with powdered bluestone, or butyr of
antimony or other caustic, and then keep the sheep in dry clean yards.


If a large number are to be dressed, they can be stood in a race with a
deep layer of new quicklime, but this injures the belly wool and rots it.
ON PACKING SMALL CLIPS.
Recollect that wool like all other articles of commerce, must be got
up in the “best possible style to secure the highest market price;”
frequently a nice clip, by bad handling, the skirting, sorting, and pack-
ing being badly done, sells at .a reduced price, and the grower, instead of
blaming himself, accuses the broker of sacrificing his wool, and next
year tries another firm with no better result, and this together with the
sheep being kept on fallowed and cultivated ground (always dusty in dry
weather) are the chief reasons for the disappointment experienced by
the farmer who has bought good sheep from a first-class station, when
his returns are 2d. to 3d. per lb. less than that of the station clip.
The broker does his best by providing large well-lighted showrooms,
carefully tinted so as to give a favourable light, spares no expense to
show it off to the greatest advantage, and then when the bales are cut
open, and a few fleeces pulled out, the faulty “get up” becomes very
glaring, and the grower has only his own stupidity to blame for the poor
prices. The brokers must, for their own interests, get the highest price
the wool is worth, but a badly got up clip is always difficult to sell,
especially in a falling market. The importance attached to good pack-
ing was shown in 1883 by the two leading woolbrokers’firms in Adelaide
offering very handsome prizes, Luxmoore & Co., Limited, leading the
way, Elder’s Wool and Produce Company following, each offering about
£2OO in prizes. The results seem to have been very unsatisfactory,
probably from too little competition. The experiment was not repeated
in 1884. Very striking is the eager competition for a well got up clip; the
lively bidding testifies to the value buyers place on such lots. Last
season’s highest prices for Merino greasy wool were llfd. for a Mount
Crawford clip, and llfd. (Luxmoore’s) for one from Woodside. The
latter had one bale of pieces, bellies, locks, &c., to each five bales of
fleece, the former, however, had nineteen bales inferior wool, bellies,
locks, &c., to fourteen bales greasy fleece. This is not an example to be
followed, but the first was a specimen of what can be done by a farmer.
Northern clips run about six bales of fleece to one bale of pieces, &c.,
but the South-East and Port Lincoln average about five bales to one of
pieces, &c.
To get up wool properly, the shearing floor should be smooth and
level, of wood or stone, and kept well swept during shearing hours, as
otherwise clippings and tags, or scraps of stained wool get rolled up in
the fleeces. The bellies must always be shorn off first, and put into a
bin or corner by themselves ; no second cuts should be allowed, but the
wool ought to be closely and evenly shorn all over—a bad shearer will


by taking too large a blow leave three-quarters of an inch sticking up on
the shoulder or in shearing round the back, and then he cuts it off with
a back blow. Such frauds of shearers should be sacked at once. The
best of the wool is minced up and wasted besides shortening the staple
of the best part of the fleece. Pieces of skin, too, are often cut off by
the “ tomahawker,” and these have to be handpicked out by the manu-
facturer, or they would break the delicate combing machines. When
the fleece is shorn, the boy who picks it up should put it carefully to-
gether so as not to sever any portion, and throw it out flat on the table
with the branded side uppermost, then the wool-roller takes off the dis-
coloured parts all round, including the breech and the thighs if very
seedy, and puts them in a separate bin, and they are packed and branded
as pieces. Any “dillberries” or masses of clotted dung must be thrown
QfWßiy,
The fleece must then have each side folded over until they meet, and
then doubling over the tail and neck ends roll up tightly, and it is
ready to be baled up. String should never be used for tying, as it is
not only unnecessary but the fluff off hempen twine gets mixed with the
woollen yarn and does not take the dye ; this hempen fibre is so objec-
tionable that extra good clips are packed in paper-lined or specially
finished packs. Cotted or felted fleeces (very uncommon here) must on
no account be packed up, being quite useless and condemn a clip should
the buyer observe them ; short and broken fleeces are better packed by
themselves or any very dirty ones.
It is absolutely necessary to pack Crossbreds and Merino wools apart.
This is most important, yet so badly are South Australian farmers’ clips
packed that last season one firm of woolscourers who had bought nothing
but Merino clips had sixteen bales of crossbred to dispose of. Sometimes
when only two or three crossbred fleeces are in the whole clip one or other
has appeared when the buyer has examined it, with the result that they
have valued it as mixed all through, and so the price would be fd. to
Id. per lb. less. Pieces, bellies, and locks should, if the clip is big
enough, be packed separately; scraps of clean wool falling under the
table should be picked out of the locks and put with the pieces.
The farmer should himself always attend to the wool-table the whole
time, and to avoid such a loss as the above he cannot be too careful and
particular in putting each sort of wool together, and if at all possible
putting all fleeces into the bales. Putting any into sacks always means
loss, as exporters won’t touch them, and the woolscourers alone buy
them. All seedy wool should be packed by itself, the “ corkscrew” or
clover burr being the cause of enormous loss every year, as it depreciates
wool from Id. to 2d. per lb., and entirely unfits it for some purposes.
In packing lambs’ wool the very short fleeces, the bellies, with all
dirty and seedy parts, should be very carefully sorted out and put by


themselves and branded seconds, supposing the clip to be large enough
and of good enough quality. If grown in the South-East, the Hills, or
the best North country it most decidedly pays to do so. Eightpence
three farthings per lb. (Luxmoore’s) was realized in Adelaide for a small
lot the last season, but it was properly got up ; the ordinary lambs’ wool
ranged from 4f d. to 6d. per lb. All “ dry” sheep fleeces—that is to
say, hoggets, wethers, or ewes not breeding, may be packed together if a
small clip, or if large enough, each sort separately ; rams’ fleeces being
worth less than wethers should also be packed alone. The fleeces in
packing the bale must be placed in regular level tiers all round the bale.
This prevents lumpy soft bales.
ON BRANDING BALES.
As each bale is sewn up it should be branded with the owner’s brand
neatly put on, with the description of wool underneath, as ewe, hogget,
lamb, &c„ with the number under that. Some growers just dab on
their registered stock brand, or with a brush make some ill-shaped letter.
Buyers know well that this slovenly branding usually belongs to care-
lessly packed clips, and so form a bad opinion at first sight. Buyers of
good -wools will not look at such bad lots, experience teaching
them that it is a waste of time. So the farmer who intends to. carry
out the principle of producing the best article and getting the highest
price, must get or make for himself a set of small stencil-plates; the
first should be the name of his place, or some contraction of his name,
distinct and easily recollected, say in three-inch letters; the next
should be the description—ewe, wether, &c., in two-inch letters ; and
then a set of number plates three-inch size. Putting on only one or
two letters leads to much confusion at the wharves, railways, and wool
stores, as it often happens that two or three lots having the same brand
are there at the same time. One letter and two numerals, which is the
system for registered stock brands, is objectionable, as the numbers
cause confusion and mistakes by being taken for the number of the bale
itself.
If the farmer has a press he can, instead of dumping his bales,
“box-press” them by putting down the “monkey” till the bale
measures 2 ft. 10 in., it is better than dumping, and saves the hoops, etc.,
but the packs need to be very strong and well sewn. Short bales, extra
strong, full weights, can now be had especially for box-pressing, which is
yearly increasing. Wools are now generally sold in the grease, as
scouring by the grower was found to offer no advantage in selling, indeed
it makes faults more conspicious, and it is almost invariably put through
the scouring-machine again by the manufacturer, who often mixes his
wools in the process, whilst by doing it himself there is less risk of the
wool being “ropey” or tangled. “Fleece,” or wools washed on the


sheep’s back, is seldom tried here, for not only in this dry climate is
clean soft water too scarce, but to dry it without getting the wool dingy
with dry dust is commonly impossible ; where it can be done it has this
advantage that when the sheep comes out of the water the clover or
corkscrew burr may be combed out by using a wide toothed comb, as the
little hooks which line the edge of each coil become quite soft; the burrs
not being removed, washing only makes them more conspicious.
WHY WOOL LOSES OE GAINS WEIGHT.
3STo subject puzzles the ill-informed wool-grower more than the
differences in the weights of his bales, sometimes he fancies he is robbed
but does not exactly see how. To make the matter clear, watch what
becomes of the bale of wool. It has been shorn on a dull day when
there is a good deal of moisture in the air, after being branded it lays
exposed to the hot October sun for some days, then it is put on a dray
and it reaches the railway, still more hot sun, then after being in the
trucks two or three days it reaches Adelaide, where there may be a
strong hot wind blowing, taking every partical of moisture out of it, then
it reaches the wool stores, the weigh clerk weighs each bale, and if the
specification has been sent to the broker another clerk compares the two
and if any great difference is noted the grower is advised, when it often
hajfpens that his scales are not correct. Then the bales shown are
opened, the contents examined by buyers, who each pull out or perhaps
unroll a fleece and drop it on the floor, the grower comes in, sees the
floor knee deep with wool, and thinks to himself, “ it never all goes back
again.” Whereas experienced men are always at hand, and as soon as
the buyers (at three o’clock) have left the showroom for the auction
room the wool is all replaced, not invariably into the bale it came out of,
but into some bale of the same parcel, not a difficult thing to do, for
two lots of wool shown side by side have always some great difference.
The grower cannot lose after the wool is weighed into the warehouse, as
the buyers accept the weights as weighed in on arrival, and he con-
sequently pays on precisely the amount the grower gets paid for. To
any one conversant with the routine of a large woolbroker’s warehouse
the suspicion of unfair weighing seems too ridiculous. Of course, if wool
is entrusted to small men of no standing or reputation, unfair weighing
might take place, but in large establishments it is no one’s interest to do
other than correctly.
As a rule loose-pressed undumped bales vary the most, and entirely
according to the amount of moisture in the air. Buyers, too, some-
times complain of the loss of weight, and shippers find that if two clips
of wool are shipped by the same steamer —one from the River Darling
and one from the South-East—the former has gained what the other has
lost. These variations arise from the fact that the potash in the yolk


rapidly absorbs and rapidly loses moisture according to the weather.
Years ago, when wool was three or four months on the voyage in a leaky
old wooden ship, the gain of weight was occasionally 10 lb. per bale; now,
however, with fast iron steamers, but little increase takes place.
ON TICKS AND DISEASE.
Ticks are getting very prevalent; at one time they were never seen
north of Adelaide, but may now be found up to Mount Remarkable.
They are injurious as tending to keep the sheep poor by the constant
irritation, and as greatly staining the wool ; the fleece suffers by having
the fibres torn out by the victim scratching its sides against stumps.
The worst places for this parasite are the cooler and damper positions of
the colony. One dipping in any of the numerous compositions is usually
enough, if the sheep are then put on a,clean part of the run, for the old
camping-grounds get much infested. Our saltbush country is not only
free from ticks but from all other disease. Along the coast, however, in
particular amongst the white sandhills, coast disease is prevalent, and
no cure but a complete change of country is found to answer ; still, a
little sulphate of iron put in the watertroughs is decidedly useful, and
in the South-East, where fluke exists, give the sheep plenty of salt,
mixed with one-tenth sulphate of iron. They soon get exceedingly
fond of it, and make regular tracks to the troughs, which ought to be
roofed over to keep off the wet. This, with a change of pasture, is a
complete cure.
ON BRANDING.
Formerly pitch, Stockholm tar, and oil, were all boiled together, and
when scalding hot dabbed on with a flatfaced brand ; this plan is trouble-
some and expensive. A better plan now usual is boiled oil and lamp-
black, and the branding iron should be like a blunt horse brand, which
being v-shaped concentrates the paint on the middle of the outline of
each letter; the old flat brands used to put the paint thickest on the
edge of the outline, and so the brand wore off. Red paint is un-
doubtedly very good, but is more expensive, though useful if there is a
suspected neighbour ; a little tallow may be mixed with the paint, which
then requires heating, but it makes the oil go further.
For fire-branding where a letter is used it should be of steel, and a
little nick filed out of each corner will prevent blotching or running.
This applies to all fire brands.
VARIATIONS IN VALUE OF WOOL.
The fluctuations in the London values of greasy wool of really first-
class quality of super combing have been very considerable. Twenty
years since—in 1864—the sales opened at 13|d. per lb., and declined to


10M. at the end of the year, and this decline reached its lowest limit in
1870 —namely, 7|d. ; then a steady rise brought it up to 14|d. in 1872.
The next year it fell to lid., and after several fluctuations again reached
14M. for a short while in 1880, Since then a steady decline has taken
place, and still continues. During these years the local market has taken
great strides, for in each year the price here has been equal to, and occa-
sionally exceeded, London value at the time, and this year was the case
to a very marked degree, and if it was not for the great interest Banks
and other financial Companies have in wool being sold in London, the
bulk of colonial wool would be sold here.
As to the future prospects, we may expect to see a vast improvement
in our competitors’ wools in South America, and perhaps also in Russia,
in which case our inferior wools will feel the competition most. In con-
clusion, it may be of interest to show what has been the highest price
for Australian wool. In February, 1876 (the year of the Paris Exhibi-
tion), thirty-six bales sold in London as follows: —S. Wilson over
Ercildoun, 1 bale, ss. o|d. per lb.; 2 do., 4s. 6d. do.; 33 do., 3s. lOd.
do. This was hot-water-washed fleece from Learmouth’s merinos.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR PRESERVING SHEEPSKINS.
All sheepskins as soon as flayed should be dried as flatly as possible,
under cover, and washed over with a soluable preparation of arsenic
which can be obtained from the wool brokers, which prevents the ravages
of the weevil. Every time is wetted it shrinks and is of less
value, or if eaten by weevils the pelt becomes useless for tanning,
besides small particles of skin adhere to the wool and so makes it useless
for combing purposes. Thousands of pounds are lost yearly in Australia
from carelessness in drying and preserving sheepskins.


WATER-RAISING APPLIANCES.
We wish to draw the particular attention of Squatters, Farmers, and
Others to the various appliances shown in the following pages.
The first, most important, and in every way suitable for the require-
ments of this Colony is the now world-famed
MCCOMAS 5 PATENT PRIZE WATER LIFTERS
FIFTY FIRST PRIZES
comprising Gold, Siluer,
and Bronze Medals, and
First Orders of Merit.
Awarded at Exhibitions
Sydney, 1879-80
Melbourne, 1880-81
Adelaide, 1881
New Zealand, 1882
and Royal Agricultural
Shows throughout all
the Colonies.
This is a combination of the syringe and endless chain. The column
of water is always kept in motion by ascending plugs. These plugs are
formed on mathematical principles, which ensure a motion without
oscillation with the least possible friction. The sides of the working
cylinder are clean or polished on the inner surface. The leather cup
enters with the edges inverted, and, while the plug is thus made to fit
with tolerable tightness, the cohesion is reduced to a minimum, and the
loss of power by avoidable friction is obviated.


As the upper pipes are larger than the cylinder or working barrel, the
friction is not carried on further than is absolutely necessary for the
elevation of water, and the wear and tear is reduced so much that
numerous testimonials have been sent to the Agents of the efficient
working of these apparatus after eight, ten, or eleven years of constant use.
The following Outline Sketch will more fully describe
THE PECULIARITIES OF THE McCOMAS WATER-LIFTERS :
L They reach the hands of the owner so complete and simple that they
can be put to work by any ordinary man in a very few minutes.
2. Each Water-Lifter is accompanied by “Directions” so plain that there
can be no possibility of blunder or difficulty in erection.
3. They never require to go into the hands of an engineer or fitter after
they leave the factory. Each part is counterpart of its fellow in
any similar machine, and any casual injury can be made good by
its replacement. Leathers, plugs, chains, wheels, and cylindeis can
at any time be ordered with the certainty of obtaining the very
thing required, as each machine is not only made on the same
templates, but carefully registered for reference.
PRICE LIST.
The following list of prices shows what any quantity may cost at any
height:—
Size.
Power and Height.
Quantity per Minute.
Price, with
Frame, for
12 feet.
Price per
foot extra.
U-
One-man, 35 feet ...
30 gallons
£16
10/-
2 2
3
One-man, 15 feet ...
60
£16
10/-
One-man, 12 feet ...
80
£20
12/0
3*
Two-men, 12 feet ...
120
£24
15/-
5
One-horse, 20 feet
300
£36
20/-
7
One-horse, 8 feet ...
1,000
£54
30/-
9
Two-horse, 8 feet ...
2,000
£81
60/-
The quantities can be increased without limit by velocity.
The standard for general use is twelve feet, after which the price per
foot is added. Say 20 feet would be for all sizes under 2J inclusive,
£l6 for twelve feet, and ten shillings per foot for each foot extra, which,
in 20 feet would be 8 feet, or £4, the total cost being £2O.
Numerous Testimonials as to efficiency and complete success can be seen on
application.
HARROLD BROTHERS, Sole Manufacturers
FOR SOUTH AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


THE
IRON TURBINE WINDMILL
We have much pleasure in stating that we have been appointed direct by
Messrs. Mast Foos & Co., of Springfield, Ohio, U.S.A., Sole Agents
in the Australian Colonies for the sale of their Iron Turbine Wind-
mills, and, having made special arrangements, are now enabled to supply
these Windmills at considerably Reduced Prices, equivalent to the cost of
Wood Windmills by other makers.
The superior points of the IRON TURBINE WINDMILL are
easily comprehended. The ENTIRE MACHINE is made of Iron.
The Wheel and Vane are made of No. 24 Sheet Iron, well bound and
braced with the best quality of wrought bar iron, and so well put
together that it is impossible for the wind to tear it to pieces or injure it
in any way. The wheel being constructed on the Turbine principle
causes it to give more power than any other xvheel of the same diameter in
the market, and as there is no wood about it to swell, shrink, rattle, and
be torn to pieces by the wind, it is certainly much more durable.


THE IRON TURBINE WINDMILL
Is acknowledged by all who have seen it to be far superior to any other. It is
entirely self-regulating in time of storms, without the use of weights. Since we
introduced these Windmills we have supplied a large number of them, which are now
in operation in this colony and are giving complete satisfaction. The wonderful
success of last season has encouraged us to make extensive preparations to meet the
increasing demand. We would respectfully invite all parties who propose putting up
a Windmill to favour us with a call, or to inquire before making a selection, as we can
prove beyond a doubt that this Mill is the best. It was awarded a Gold Medal
at the Adelaide Exhibition, beating all others.
The power of a Windmill is best understood by the amount of work it will do*
We recommend the Ten-foot Mills for wells to ioo feet deep, and the Twelve-foot
Mills for wells to 150 feet deep. We have much pleasure in giving copies of a few
out of the numerous testimonials we have received from actual users of the Iron
Turbine Windmill in this colony.
TESTIMONIALS.
Booyoolie Station, Gladstone, May 13th, 1884.
Messrs. Harrold Brothers. _ _
Dear Sirs —I have three of your Iron Turbine Windmills now in use. They
have given every satisfaction since erected, and 1 consider them the most reliable and
lasting Mill for this climate, being all made of iron, and no wood to warp and split
with the great heat and wet at different seasons. They are wonderfully strong for
their size, and regulate themselves in the heaviest gales with greatest ease. I consider
the Iron Turbine Windmill the most suitable pf all the numerous patterns I have seen
erected about the country for this climate, and, I believe, will last much longer.—
Yours truly,
H. B. HUGHES (per W. B. Hughes).
Bungaree, May 14th, 1884.
Messrs. Harrold Bros.
Dear Sirs—The twelve-foot Iron Turbine Windmill purchased from you on February
27th, 1883, has given satisfaction. Depth of well, about 36 feet. The Mill keeps supplied
four 400-gallon tanks for use of garden, stables, &c. I shall be pleased to iecom-
mend the Mill should occasion offer. —Yours truly,
G. C. HAWKER, Jun.
Adelaide Milling Company, Gawler, May 17th, 1884.
Messrs. Harrold Bros.
Dear Sirs—The ten-foot Iron Turbine Windmill I had from you m January,
1883, has given every satisfaction. It works a four-inch pump, and lifts from the
well 85 feet deep, and raises the water 101 feet in all. During the summer we usually
raised from 12,000 to 20,000 gallons of water per week ; more could have been done
if wind was at all regular. I consider the Mill a great boon, and very economic
in working. Yours truly, w _ MALCOLM.


Messrs. Harrold Bros. Mannum, May 14th, 1884.
Dear Sirs —I have much pleasure in stating that the twelve-foot Iron Turbine
Windmill which I purchased from you in January last works well, giving me entire
satisfaction. The Mill drives a four-inch double-throw force pump, raising the water
from the River Murray a vertical height of about 70 feet. The length of piping
from the river to. where it discharges into a reservoir, ascending an inclined plane
nearly the whole distance, is about 300 feet. It requires very little looking after, as
it eases itself if the wind is too hard, and throws itself out of gear and stops in a
gale altogether. From what I have seen of the Iron Turbine Windmill I can safely
recommend it, and believe it is the best kind in the colony.—Yours faithfully,
W. R. RANDELL.
Messrs. Harrold Bros. Brighton, May 15th, 1884.
Dear Sirs—The twelve-foot Iron Turbine Windmill we had from you last
November has given us every satisfaction. It pumps about 2,000 gallons every 24
hours through 1 bi-inch pipe, and has to raise it 145 feet.—Yours truly,
AYLIFFE & BROWN.
Messrs. Harrold Bros. Plympton, May 20th, 1884.
Dear Sirs —The ten-foot Iron Turbine Windmill’ydu erected for me last October
has given entire satisfaction. The Mill is lifting water 50 feet with a 3-inch lift and
force-pump, and with a moderate wind fills my tanks, containing altogether 4,000
gallons, in about six hours. The arrangement for throwing itself out of gear in case
of high wind is very perfect, and as the Mill is entirely made of iron it is specially
suited for this colony. I consider it the best of the numerous kinds of Windmills I
have seen, and shall be very pleased to recommend it to anyone you may refer to me.
Yours truly,
, J. MARTIN.
Messrs. Harrold Bros. Kooringa, May 17th, 1884.
Dear Sirs —I have much pleasure in informing you that the Iron Turbine Wind-
mill, twelve feet, purchased from you October last has given me eveiy satisfaction. I
looked after the Mill myself through the summer, and am exceedingly proud of the
smooth way in which it works. It draws the water out of a well 97 feet deep into a
dam. The Mill works without any trouble. As she is constructed of iron, she will
never go to rack. She works, with a very light breeze, about 30 to 40 revolutions
per minute; strong, up to 100 quite easily. In conclusion, the Mill works quite up
to your representations in regard to simplicity and efficiency.—Yours faithfully,
G. A. GEBHARDT.
Messrs. Harrold Bros. Redruth, May 6th, 1884.
Dear Sirs—The twelve-foot Iron Turbine Windmill supplied me last December
has given very great satisfaction. It is working a 3^ -inch lift and force-pump from a
depth of 130 feet. lam very thankful that I was induced by a friend to take the
Iron Turbine Windmill. It has worked splendidly, without requiring any repairs,
and, so far as I can learn, is more powerful than any of the other Mills ; its x being all
iron makes it so substantial, and its arrangement for putting itself out of gear in
strong wind is most ingenious and perfect.—Yours truly,
A. H. FORDER.
Estimates Given and Complete Plans Furnished for Erection.
HARROLD BROS., Adelaide, Sole Agents.


CLASS A.—Single Acting with ONE Ram.
HULME & LUND’S
PATENT NOISELESS
STEAM PUMPS
zm
, *
E3
HARROLD BROTHERS,
{Sole (Agents for $ Western (Australia.
CLASS 8.-Doub
e Acting with TWO Rams.


ROBEY & CO.'S PATENT PORTABLE CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS.
The Pump is mounted upon travelling wheels, with carriage and'shafts, whereby
it can be affixed to the fore carriage of the Engine. This pump is constructed
upon scientific principles, which renders it the most efficient of any yet offered to the
public, and combines the following advantages :
1. It can be erected with ease and celerity.
2. It works with an easy rotatory motion, without valves, eccentrics, or other
contrivances which consume power in friction.
3. It will discharge a quantity of water greater in proportion to the power
applied than any other Pump, 70 per cent, being taken as the average ; under
favourable circumstances a higher duty has been attained. _ .
4. It is economical in use, simple in construction, and of very great durability.
5. It discharges a continuous and steady stream without air vessels.
6. Its costs, measured by the quantity of water discharged, is greatly below that
of all other Pumps in use.
7. It is little affected by sand, mud, grit, or other foreign matter in the water,
which so rapidly destroy all other pumps. _
8. It will admit, in the large sizes, the passage of solid bodies, six inches in
diameter, and the smaller sizes in proportion, without injury.
9. It will pump hot or cold liquids equally well,
10. It requires a very light and inexpensive foundation, having no vibration or
oscillation in its working, as in Reciprocating Pumps.
To the proprietor or occupier of low lands, fens, marshes, or reclaimed lands,
the Engine and Pump will be found invaluable, as by their means he will be
enabled at all times to keep his lands dry. For the irrigation of coffee, cotton,
sugarcane, rice, and other estates, and for the distribution of liquid manures, it
will be found all that can be desired.
For Contractors’ work the above arrangement will be found of considerable
value. The Engine, if necessary, may be fixed at some distance from the Pump,
when, as in the case of sinking foundations, in pumping out coffer dams, &c., it
may be found inconvenient, and perhaps impossible to bring the Engine close to
the work to be performed.
For prices of these Pumps, the sizes of which depend upon the varying con-
ditions of each requirement, special quotations will be given.
Purchasers asking for Prices are requested to give, Ist, the quantity of water
required to be discharged per minute, and 2nd, the height the water or other fluid
has to be raised. QF THE pUMps USUALLY MADE.
MANY OF WHICH ARE KEPT IN STOCK.
ter
lute,
10 It. Lift.
20 ft.
Lift.
30 ft. Lift.
Size of
Pump.
Quantity of Wa
discharged per mil
in Gallons.
Nominal
H.P.
recom-
mended.
Revs,
of Pump
per
minute.
Nominal
H.P.
recom-
mended.
Revs,
of Pump
per
minute.
N ominal
H.P.
recom-
mended.
Revs,
of Pump
per
minute.
3
100 to
150
i
903
1280
2
1568
4
200 “
300
U
757
2 h
1075
1317
5
300 “
450
2
611
3
867
4
1062
6
500 “
650
2£
512
4
726
6
890
7
650 “
900
3
440
5
625
8
766
8
900 “
1,200
4
379
7
537
10
658
9
1,200 “
1,500
5
340
10
482
16
591
10
1,500 “
2,000
6
302
12
428
20
524
12
2,000 “
3,000
8
252
16
358
30
439
15
3,500 “
5,000
14
203
30
289
45
354
18
5,000 “
7,000
20
174
40
246
60
302
The best results are obtained when the Pump is throwing the minimum quantity.
The power here given is for discharging the minimum quantity.
HARROLD BROTHERS, Sole Agents for South and Western Australia.


NORTON’S PATENT
“ABYSSINIAN TUBE WELL” AND PUMP.
n
<§>
mam
I
P
0
Adopted by Her
Majesty’s Indian Govern-
ment, the War Office, the
Royal Engineers’ Estab-
ments at Chatham,
Aldershot, Gibraltar,
Cape of Good Hope, the
Autumn Manoeuvres,
&c., &c. ; the Emperor
of the French and King
of Portugal; and the
largest landed propi’ietors
in Great Britain and on
the Continent.
HARROLD BROTHERS, Sole Agents.


ROBEY’S
Patent Double-Action
DEEP-WELL
PUMPS
complete with cast-
iron Framing, Gearing,
Crank, and Connections.
The most suitable Barrel
Pump for Sandy Bottom
Wells, or Impure Water.
per hour.
3- will raise 700
4- “ “ 1,200
5- “ “ 2,000
U
Sole Agents.


We have also in Stock a large assortment of
VARIOUS KINDS OF PUMPS
Suitable for every requirement, comprising—
Brass Lift and Force Pumps,
On Plank, 3, 3|, 4, 4£, and 5-inch.
Single Brass Lift and Force Pumps for ordinary Wells,
3, 3|, 4,4 f, and 5-inch.
Double Brass Lift and Force Pumps for ordinary Wells ;
With or without Gearing, 3, 3-|, 4, 4|, and 5-inch.
Douglas American Lift and Cistern Pumps,
Nos. 1,2, 3,4, 5, and 6.
Douglas American Lift and Force Pumps,
On Plank, with or without Air Chamber.
Cowing’s American Deep Well Pumps,
Various kinds and sizes.
Windmill Pumps of euery description.
Hydraulic Rams and Fittings.
PRICES AND PARTICULARS ON APPLICATION.
We invite inspection of our extensive assortment of Water-Raising
Appliances, brief particulars of which are given in the foregoing pages.
We need hardly say that in a Colony like this, where surface water is so
scarce, too much attention cannot be paid to obtain the very best possible
appliances, and we can say, with confidence, that our varied selection is
the Largest and Best to be found in the Australian Colonies.
HARROLD BROTHERS, Adelaide.


GORNGRUSHERS
by
Hunt & Tawell,
Bentall, and
Richmond and
Chandler,
for
Hand, Horse,
and
Steam Power.
CHAFFCUTTERS
by
Bentall,
Hunt & Tawell,
and
Richmond and
Chandler,
for
Hand, Horse,
and
Steam Power.
PENNY’S PATENT ADJUSTABLE CORN SCREEN
For Separating and Finishing Grain for Market.
SPECIALLY INTRODUCED BY US TO SUIT THE REQUIRE-
MENTS OF FARMERS.
Awarded First Prize at the Adelaide Show, September, 1884, against all comers.
HARROLD BROTHERS, Sole Agents,


HACK
WOOL
PRESSES.
EARTH
SCOOPS.
WHIM
BUCKETS.
WHIM
MOUNTINGS.
/!
Si
■
Att
SCREW
WOOL
PRESSES.
WELL
BORING
ROBS ANB
TOOLS.
CATTLE
ANB SHEEP
TROUGHING.
And every description of Machinery required for Farm and Station Purposes.
HORSE-GEARS, for 1,2, 3, and 4 Horses.


We have much pleasure in drawing attention to our Stock
ROBEY & CO.’S PRIZE STEAM' EfBE
Which is the largest in the Colonies.
- &
More than 8,000 of Rebels Steam-Engines
are now iikrise throughout the World.
throughout'
C & A
JDEisiGN.
EASE OF’ERECTION. O*
ECONOMY
£> V
. Ogreat
More than 200 o£ So
. Ogreat saying in fuel
Sr Vsj
ohey’s Steam Engines
in use in South Australia.
Qj
£
<D
ROBEY’S PATENT PRIZE WINDING ENGINE,
Specially Station purposes to take the place of Horse-gear for Deep Wells.
RR
BROTHERS, Sole Agents.


O'
Qt 06
96
s
IR, O IB E Yl’S '
IMPROVED PRIZE PORTABLE PAT£WT PRIZE ROBEY
All Sizes in Stock, from 6 to 20 H Stock, from 6
<Z)
nt
a
<D
a>®Q
<V
•N
°o®
«>
£
Q
£rs
•s
Sizes'll
<•?
« $
More thanf*
8,000 of
~
ENGINES
are jkbfr
iai ufce
throughout
th£jY orld.
£r—
More than
200 of
Engine.
6 to 20 H.P
EOBEY’S
ENGINES
are now
m use m
South
MS
'
Australia.
ROBY’S PRIZE VERTICAL ENGINES WITH BOILERS.
All .Sizes in Stock from 2 to lO Horsepower.
All Slz
*WHAfeROLD BROTHERS, Sole Agents.


96
to
Sift) <
to
far
ROBEY’S IMPROVED PRIZE ENGINE.
All Sizes in Stock, from to 50^4. P.
A •$
More than 8,000
» f .$
ROBETS ENGINES
are now in use
throughout the
• jSr
World.
<u
5S
Qj
to
90
to
to
s
<D
&
More than 200
of
ROBEY’S ENGINES
are now in use
in
South Australia.
IMPROVED PRIZE VERTICAL ENGINE
. O . BOILER.)
All Sizds in Stock, from 2 to 6 H.P.
—
BROTHERS, Sole Agents.


De Laval's Patent Cream Separator.
Awarded Gold Medal by the Royal Agricultural Society of Eng-
land, and 48 First Prizes on the Continent and America.
THE DE LAVAL CREAM SEPARATOR
Is a machine for effecting the rapid and complete separation of the cream
from the milk by application of centrifugal power.
Thesale of this machine was first started in 1879, and has since then
attained such an extension that now more than 3,000 Separators are in use
in all parts of the world.
The principal advantages are as follows :
Enables the production of more and better butter.
The cream can be separated from the milk immediately after it comes
from the cow.
Great saving in time and space.
Adapted to farms with 20 cows and upwards, as well as to industrial
dairies.
About 60 gallons can be separated in an hour.
Greater percentage of butter, as the skim milk only retains about J per
cent, of fat.
The construction is simple, and the apparatus easily cleansed ; no heavy
foundation necessary.
The small amount of power required to drive it makes it especially
adapted for introduction on farms where no steam power could be had,
but where a horse gear as a rule is in existence. Let us take an example :
a farmer produces from his cows say 30 imperial gallons of milk ; by using
the Separator he will be able to produce about 3 lbs. of butter per day
more than when he skimmed his milk by hand.
When we take into consideration the saving in labour and cost of a great
many utensils, it is easily seen what enormous saving the use of the above
separator brings about. It must also be taken into consideration that
the products from the cream and milk from De Laval’s Separators are far
superior to any product from hand-skimmed milk or cream on account
of the freshness, as the milk need not be kept for many hours before it
can be used. ,
IN STOCK AND FOR SALE BY HARROLD BROTHERS,
SOLE AGENTS.


MACDERMOTT & GLOVER’S
Hand-Labour Patent Percussive Rock Drill.
The
by the
PERCUSSIVE DRILL has been designed for boring in Hard Rook,
hand-labour of two men.
It drills in granite at the rate of 1\ to 2
inches per minute.
It is very portable and can be set up and
•worked by two (unskilled) labourers.
By the arrangement of Cams (specially
patented), four blows are given to each revo-
lution of the fly wheels, the work done is
therefore 50 to 100 per cent, in excess of
that accomplished by other Hand Power
Machines using the ordinary Cams.
The FEED IS PERFECTLY AUTOMATIC
and will adjust itself to hard or soft rock.
The weight of a Perforator complete with
Frame, is about 3| cwt.
P
HAEEOLB BROTHERS, Sole Agents.
m
&
Wsam
•S
SURE
SAl=£
m
W
IHI
★
c c IKI EH ~R S 7 7
DYNAMITE AND LITHOFRACTEUR
Manufactured bif the AUSTRALIAN LITHO-
FRACTEUR COMPANY, Melbourne,
Unsurpassed for Mining, Engineering, and
Submarine Purposes.
These Explosives, being manufactured in Victoria, are Fresher and consequently
Much Stronger than those that are subjected to long sea voyages.
o
PERFECTLY SAFE, FREE FROM NOXIOUS GASES, AND CAN BE
EXPLODED BY ANY DETONATOR.
SOLE AGENTS FOR SOUTH AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA—


HARROLD BROTHERS’ MACHINERY DEPOT,
NORTH TERRACE, ADELAIDE.
On Thursday, October 30, we were afforded an opportunity of inspect-
ing Harrold Brothers’ machinery depot, North Terrace, Adelaide. The
manager of the machinery department showed us over the premises,
which contains a well-assorted and extensive stock of general machinery,
agricultural implements, and engineers’ tools, well calculated to assist in
any branch of colonial enterprise. The premises are about 1| acre in
extent, and have been used for their present purpose for about three
years, and to have reached such perfection in so short a period reflects
the greatest credit on the enterprise of Harrold Brothers. We were
rather surprised to find that the firm are not only importers, but also
manufacturers to some extent, for we witnessed a considerable quantity
of galvanised guttering, down-pipes, ridging, &c., turned out by a very
simple and effective machine; also a number of workmen turning and
fitting, and making McComas’ water-lifters, sack-trucks, churns, knife-
boards, and other work, fully occupying all the different labour-saving
machines in their workshop, and to which the motive power is given by
a 6-horse power Robey engine. We also inspected a large assortment of
boring rods and tools made on the premises. In both of the machinery-
sheds are well-arranged travelling-cranes fixed so that machinery can be
shifted about with ease and despatch. was called to the large
collection of engines of different designs manufactured by Robey & Co.,
the eminent engineers, of Lincoln, England, for the sale of which
Harrold Brothers are the sole agents in this colony and Western
Australia. We were assured that Harrold Brothers’ present stock com-
prised the largest show of engines in the colonies, and that over 200 of
Robey’s engines have been supplied to this colony. Attention was next
directed to an assortment of sawing and wood-working machinery
manufactured by the well-known firm of Thomas Robinson & Son, Roch-
dale. An examination was also made of some lathes and engineers’
tools by Scott Brothers, Halifax, England. We were then shown a very fine
assortment of lathes both for amateurs and professionals, hand drilling-
machines, and engineers’ tools of every description, together with a large
stock of shafting, pullies, plummer blocks, collars and couplings of all


sizes. Everything in this department was first-class, and of excellent
workmanship. Attention was next directed to some “ water-raising
appliances,” and, among others, Hulme & Lund’s patent noiseless “steam-
pumps,” designed to raise water and other liquids to any required height.
Some pumps of this class are at present in work, forcing water 1,200
feet vertically in one lift. They are made either single-acting with one
ram, or double acting with two rams; and a single acting 6-inch ram
will raise 3,200 gallons per hour, while double-acting 15-inch rams will
raise 50,000 gallons per hour. Then “ McComas’ patent prize water-
lifters” were shown and explained. This seems to be a very simple and
effective appliance, and we can readily believe all that we were told of its
abilities. It is a combination of the syringe and endless chain, the
column of water always being kept in motion, by ascending plugs, which
are formed on mathematical principles, which ensure a motion without
oscillation, and with the least possible friction, it is said that one man
can raise 2,000 gallons 35 feet high per hour, or he can with ease water
5,000 sheep or 1,000 head of cattle every hour from a depth of 16 feet.
McComas’ water-lifters are specially suited for irrigation. A 9-inch lifter
is working at Sir W. Jervois’s station at Wellington, on the River Murray,
raising 120,000 gallons of water per hour, driven by a 4-horse power
Robey engine. We next came to an “ iron turbine windmill,” by Mast,
Foos & Co., for which Messrs. Harrold are the sole agents in the colonies,
as also for the “ Buckeye windmill force-pump.” The stock includes,
also, rods and appliances for “Norton’s patent,” “Abyssinian tube-wells,”
the Douglas lift and cistern and force-pumps on plank, with or without
air-chamber, Cowing’s American deep-well pumps, Scheile’s noiseless blow-
ing-fans, a large assortment of Weston’s differential pulley-blocks,
Cranstone’s patent tire-benders, a large variety of agricultural implements,
such as chaff-cutters, oat-crushers, horse-gears, power-converters, harrows,
mowers, earth-scoops, Hall’s patent “Victor” bone-mill, and an assort-
ment of milling-machinery.—“ South Australian Register ,” Oct. 31, 1884.
Messrs. Harrold Brothers have just issued the third edition of their
Illustrated Machinery Catalogue which is very comprehensive and
contains a lot of useful information relative to the Extensive Stock of
Machinery they have, a copy of which they will be pleased to post free
to any one who is unable to visit Adelaide.


MINE RAIL
LUBRICATING OILS
MANUFACTURED BY
BORNE, SCRYMSER, & CO.,
IsTEW TOBK.
All the Oils here spoken of are manufactured directly from the
Crude Petroleum, by improved processes, controlled
exclusively by the above-named firm.
Upwards of 30,000 gallons of these Oils have been sold in this
Colony during the last two years.
HARROLD BROTHERS, Adelaide
Sole Agents for the Australian Colonies.


TESTIMONIALS OF MINERAL LUBRICATING OILS.
From Walters & Co., - Laura, April 4th, 1883.
Laura Flour Mills.
We, having used the No. 1, Standard Cylinder Oil, and also the Extra
Red Machinery Oil, have pleasure in testifying to its being the best we
have ever used for such purposes. We therefore, recommend same to
Millers and others.
Portland Estate, January 18th, 1884.
Dear Sirs, —As I have only used your Red Machinery Oil, I cannot
say anything of the other Oils. I can highly recommend your Red
Machinery Oils (to all those who have coaches and cabs) for patent axles,
as it has given me, and those I have sold it to, great satisfaction.
(Signed) Chas. E. Lawton, Coachbuilder, &c.
From F. W. Smith & Co., Machinists. Clare, January 19th, 1884.
We have used the Dark Lubricating Oil ourselves, and find it superior
to castor oil, inasmuch as it does not clog in the bearings. After stand-
ing months it can be rubbed off with a piece of rag. We had applica-
tions for more than ten times the quantity we were able to supply.
(Signed) F. W. Smith & Co.
Steam Mills, Port Pirie, January 22, 1884.
We have much pleasure in informing you that the Brilliant Cylinder
Oil which you have supplied us with has given satisfaction, and much
prefer it for the cylinders of our engines, to any that we have used
previously. Re Extra Red Machinery Oil —We have used this on all
our quick running shafts in the mill, and find it much better than colza
or castor oil. These are the only two kinds of the oil we have tried.
(Signed) J. Dunn & Co., Per J. Manson, Manager.
From J. J. Gordon, Gawler, January 25, 1884.
Agent for Adelaide Milling and Mercantile Co., Limited.
Dear Sirs —Re Mineral Lubricating Oils—We have so far only used
two qualities, and report upon them as follows :
Brilliant Cylinder Oil has been used by us freely, and is decidedly
a splendid oil for cylinder purposes, keeping them clean and in good
order, and in every way superior to tallow, which we had previously used.
Red Machinery Oil is a good lubricant, especially for roller mills
and fast working machinery. It also feeds well through the ordinary
lubricators.
(Signed) Jno. J. Gordon.


Wallaroo Steam Saw Mills, January 22, 1884.
We have used the Mineral Lubricating Oils manufactured by Messrs..
Borne Scrymser, & Co., New York, for several months.
Standard No. 1, Dark Cylinder Oil. —We have used this in our
Cylinder and found it very superior to anything we have used before.
Brilliant Cylinder Oil proved highly satisfactory.
Extra Red Machinery Oil.—Very useful and good.
Red Machinery Oil. —The best we have ever used for wood-planing
and moulding machines, and for all rapidly revolving spindles.
Dark Lubricating Oil. —Have for bearings, and found it
very superior to best tallow or anti-friction grease.
We have supplied to various manufacturers and engineers these oils,
and in every case they have given great satisfaction, and we feel assured
that when they are better known they will be largely used.
(Signed) Davies & Co.
From A. A. Robertson, Machinist, &c. Redhill, January 22, 1884.
I have used the Red Machinery Oil for engine and machinery, and'
consider it the best oil I have used. I have an eccentric bearing on
engine, and have used several other oils, and could not prevent it from
getting hot till I used the Red J&ichinery Oil obtained from you.
Standard No. 1, Dark Cylinder Oil, I use for cylinder, and find it a good
oil for that purpose. I have sold it this last year to the farmers for
mowing machine work, and those who have used it like it well, so that
there will be more of it sold this next harvest.
(Signed) A. A. Robertson.
S.S. “. Karaweera,” January 31, 1884.
I have used Borne, Scrymser, & Co.’s Mineral Oils since their intro-
duction into the colony, and can bear testimony to their excellent
lubricating powers ; in fact they do all that the manufacturers claim for
them.
Frederick H. Jackson, Chief Engineer S.S. “ Karaweera.”
Albion Flour Mills, Gawler, January 31, 1884.
Dear Sirs—We received the five cases Cylinder Oil in good order.
We have been using this kind now for about nine months, and find it
the best Cylinder Oil we ever used ; it is, besides, the cheapest, as it
takes so much less. We should not like to use any other oil. The
engines work splendidly.
Yours faithfully, G. Hilfers <fc Co.


USEFUL MEMORANDA.
GALVANIZED CORRUGATED IRON.
Gauge.
5
6
7
8
9
10
Feet.
24
160
140
120
100
90
84
Sheets.
26
230
180
16fi
140
120
100
Per ton.
FENCING WIRE.
WEIGHT OF
LENGTH OF
GAUGE.
100 yfls.
1 Mile.
1 cwt.
1 Ton.
lbs.
lbs.
yds.
yds.
4
40-6
714
276
5,520
5
30*8
595
332
6,640
G
28-2
495
397
7,940
7
23-4
412
479
9,580
8
196
*344
573
11,460
9
16-5
290
680
13,600
10
13-7
241
819
16,380
ROUND WIRE ROPES.
Girth in inches.
Founds weight per fathom.
Breaking Strain in tons.
Working Load in ewts.
1
1
2
6
H
H
3
9
if
2i
5
15
2
* ) 2
7
21
2 f
4 1
9
27
24-
5|
11
33
2f
13
39
3
7*
15
45
H
8|
17
51
H
10
20
60
3 f
12
24 ‘
72
4
14
28
84
