



THE
Sheriffs of Shropshire,
1831 TO 1886,
WITH THEIR
AEMOEIAL BEAEINGS;
AND
NOTICES,
d> malaria I anfr Utograpljual,
OF
THEIR FAMILIES;
BEING A CONTINUATION OF THE REVEREND JOHN BRICKDALE BLAKEWAY’S WORK
EDITED BY THE LATE WILLIAM HUGHES,
LIBRARIAN, FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY, SHREWSBURY.
Shrewsbury:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY BUNNY AND DAVIES, HIGH STREET,
1886.




NOTE OF THE PUBLISHERS.
rpHE Publishers, in submitting to their Subscribers the Supplementary Volume of the Sheriffs of Shropshire,
from 1831 to 1836, in succession to that of the Rev. J. B. Blakeway’s Sheriffs of Shropshire, from
'William the Conqueror down to 1830, would beg to express their regret at the delay in its publication.
The circumstance has arisen chiefly from the time the proofs have been under the correction of the respective
Sheriffs, or their living representatives. To insure the accuracy of every Biographical Notice, a printed or
press proof, has been submitted to each, for correction, extension, or abridgment, as the case might be. This
has occasioned a great consumption of time, as many points were disputed, and had to undergo critical
revision, and reference to State Documents in. the Library of the British Museum, before passed by the
respective Sheriffs. The Publishers hope this explanation will be deemed satisfactory to their Subscribers.
In arriving at the greater part of the local histories, they are indebted to a MS. volume of the late
T. C. Eyton, Esq., of Eyton, Wellington, Shropshire, which was kindly lent them by T. Slaney Eyton, Esq,,
of Walford Hall, Shrewsbury, to whom they render their best thanks. At the same time they desire to
acknowledge the valuable aid rendered by all concerned, in bringing the work to a successful issue.
No effort has been lacking to make this volume as perfect a typographical imitation of its predecessor
as possible, the paper being expressly prepared for it, with a new fount of type; whilst all the Armorial
Bearings have been specially engraved in outline to correspond with the original.
BUNNY & DAVIES.
May, 1886.


PREFACE .
f j IHE office of Sheriff is of very great antiquity and dates back to a period almost
prehistoric. The title and office was undoubtedly in force in the Saxon era of our
national history, but its origin in Europe must be attributed to our Aryan ancestors who
brought out of Asia the ancient village systems to which may be traced the germs of
the local government systems of civilisation. The name is derived from the Anglo-Saxon
words scire, a Shire, and gerefa, a Governor (in modern German graf, a Count). The
Shire Reeve was the unit of Anglo-Saxon municipal life. Elected by the people in
common Husting or Folk-mote, he represented the Sovereign as well as his subjects, and
was in those days a popular as well as a Royal functionary. His appointment then in
all probability required confirmation by the Crown, but the popular election was put
an end to by a statute of 9th Edward 11., which enacted that the Sheriff should in future
be nominated by the High Officers of State in conjunction with the Judges, and
since that time to this day the custom has been for all the Judges of Common Law
Courts with the Lord Chancellor and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, to meet in the
Court of Exchequer, on the morrow of All Souls’ Day in every year, to propose the
names of three persons in each county to the Crown. Out of this list the Sovereign
selects one name for each shire in the manner hereafter referred to.
In Saxon times the Sheriff was, under the Earl and next to the Bishop, the chief
man of the shire, and possessed unlimited jurisdiction to keep the peace within the shire
over which he was placed. In the Tourn, the ancient tribunal which constituted the
Shire Reeve’s Court, he sat supreme as the Royal Vicegerent, with the Bishop of the
Diocese as his Assessor. The office, it should be observed, was always, not only gratuitous,
but compulsory also. Though now shorn of its judicial functions to a very great extent,
the appointment places its holder technically in the position of “the first gentleman of the
county,” and gives him precedence over the Lord-Lieutenant, a creation of a later date.
Now, as in the days of Egbert and Alfred, he is the Sovereign’s deputy, and is answer-
able to the Crown for the peace of his bailiwick during his year of office. He alone has
the power to summon the posse comitatus to assist him in maintaining the peace, and
though the calling out of the Militia is generally carried out by the Lord-Lieutentant by
command of the Crown, the Sheriff has an undoubted right to exercise the function.
Macaulay’s fine lines in the Armada are thus correct in a legal sense—
“ With his white hair unbonnetted the stout old Sheriff comes,
Behind him march the halberdiers, before him sound the drums ;
His yeomen round the Market Cross make clear an ample space,
Por there behoves him to set up the standard of Her Grace.”
The ancient extensive jurisdiction of the Sheriff has, however, in modern times been
greatly limited, partly by exercise of the Royal prerogative, and partly by the action of
Parliament, and his chief vocations are now to conduct the elections of Coroners and
Members of Parliament, to receive the Judges of Assize, to carry out the judgment and


orders of the High Court of Judicature, to summon Jurors, and to assess damages upon
issues ordered by the Superior Court. County gentlemen of wealth arc always appointed
to the office, and it is the invariable practice of such to appoint an Under-Sheriff, who
is generally a Solicitor of the High Courts. An Acting Under-Sheriff is sometimes also
appointed.
The method of nominating and appointing the incumbents of this ancient office is
sufficiently interesting to merit a brief description. A list of three gentlemen in each
county in England and Wales is made out, which list is afterwards submitted to the
Sovereign in Council, who selects one in each county to serve for the ensuing year, which,
of course, leaves two only for the next year, added to which one or both may die or become
incapacitated or excused from serving before the day comes round again for the preparation
of the list, and in order to provide for the additional name or names required in every
county, the senior Judge, going the Summer Assizes, receives in every county from the
Sheriff the names of two or. three gentlemen for the county fit and proper to serve in the
office, and the senior Judges of Assize, acting at the last Summer Assizes, attend in court
on the occasion, prepared to supply the number of names required. The Queen’s
Remembrancer, the principal officer of the Exchequer to which the Sheriffs used to
“ account,” has, by ancient usage, the charge of the list, and attends on the occasion in
State costume, and reads over the name or names on the list for each county, which is
sure to require one name, and may, in cases of death or incapacitation, require one or
two more. If any of the gentlemen on the Judges’ lists are excused, more than two
names may have to be given by the Judge of Assize for the county. The Remembrancer
reads the name, or names on the list he has, and says, “ One name wanted,” or, “ Two
names wanted,” upon which, the Judge of Assize for the county reads from his list the
one or two names required. Then, if any excuse is urged—age, illness, bodily infirmity,
insufficiency of means, or otherwise—it is for the Lords of the Council present to decide
upon the excuse. If the excuse is not allowed, the name stands ; if it is allowed, the
name is struck off, and another name is called for, which is supplied by the Judge of
Assize as before, and so the fist is gone through until three names in each county are
upon it. This list is afterwards laid before the Sovereign for selection of one out of the
three as the name of the Sheriff for the ensuing year, the Sovereign making her selection
by pricking the list with a gold bodkin, an usage, which arose, as Lord Campbell, when
Lord Chancellor, told Her present Majesty, in an age when Kings could not write their
names, or possibly, in order to save them the trouble of writing their names 50 times, there
being about that number of counties in England and Wales. Among the Lords of the
Council, who attend on the occasion, some of the principal Ministers of the Crown for the
time being are usually present, including always the Lord Chancellor, the Lord President
of the Council, the Home Secretary, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and sometimes the
First Lord of the Treasury, who represents the Lord Treasurer, the ancient head of the
Court of Exchequer, the Chancellor of the Exchequer having, originally, been his deputy.
The latter, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, always attends, and is, as the chief in the
Court of Exchequer after the abolition of the office of Lord Treasurer, the principal and
presiding member of the Council on such occasions. The reason of this is, that the Privy
Council used to meet then in the Exchequer Court or Chamber, of which, the Chancellor
of the Exchequer was the chief. Hence, even when there was a Lord Chief Baron, the
Chancellor of the Exchequer used to take precedence of him and preside, marking his
Presidency of the Council held on this occasion, by wearing his State robes.


Sheriffs of Shropshire.
WILLIAM IV.
Began his Beign, Jane 36th, 1830. Under-Sheriffs and Deputies.
1831. 1. Sir EDWARD JOSEPH SMYTHE, William Egerton Jeffreys,
of Acton Burnell, Baronet. Junr., of Salop.
1832. 2. WILLIAM OAKELEY, of Oakeley. G. Dansey, of Ludlow,
Joshua John Peels, of
Salop, Deputy.
1833. 3. WALTER MOSELEY, of Buildwas. Thomas Panting, of Shrews-
bury.
1834. 4. Honourable HENRY WENTWORTH POWYS, William Wybergh How, of
of Berwick. Salop.
1835. 5. Sir BALDWIN LEIGHTON, of Loton, Thomas Salt, of Salop.
Baronet.
1836. 6. Sir WILLIAM EDWARD ROUSE BOUGHTON, John Lloyd, of Ludlow,
of Downton, Stanton Lacy, Baronet. Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1837. 7. THOMAS HENRY HOPE, of Netley. John Loxdale, of Salop.
VICTORIA.
Began her Beign, June 30th, 1837.
1838. 1. WILLIAM WOLRYCHE WHITMORE, George Pritchard, of Brose-
of Dudmaston. ley, Joshua John Peele,
of Salop, Deputy.
1839. 2. PETER BROUGHTON, of Tunstall. Creswell Pigot, of Drayton,
Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1840. 3. THOMAS EYTON, of Eyton. Joshua John Peele, of Salop.
1841. 4. Honourable GUSTAYUS FREDERICK John Lloyd, of Ludlow,
HAMILTON, of Burwarton. Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.


Under-Sheriffs and Deputies.
1842. 5. HENRY JUSTICE, of Hinstock. Creswell Pigot, of Drayton,
Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1843. 6. Sir ANDREW VINCENT CORBET, George Pritchard, of Brosc-
of Acton Reynald, Baronet. ley, Joshua John Peele,
of Salop, Deputy.
1844. 7. JOHN CHARLES BURTON-BOROUGH, Henry Heane, of Newport,
of Chetwynd. Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1845. 8. ST. JOHN CHIYERTON CHARLTON, William Nock, of Welling-
of Apley Castle. ton, Joshua John Peele,
of Salop, Deputy.
1846. 9. RICHARD HENRY KINCHANT, of Park. Richard Jones Croxon, of
Oswestry, Joshua John
Peele, of Salop, Deputy.
184 7. 10. JOSEPH VENABLES LOVETT, of Belmont. Thomas Longubville Lon-
gueville, of Oswestry,
. . • • Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1848. 11. WILLI AM HENRY FRANCIS PLOWDEN, Joshua John Peele, of Salop.
of Plowden.
1849. 12. PANTON CORBETT, of Longnor. George M. Salt, of Salop.
1850. 13. RALPH MERRICK LEEKE, of Longford. Robert Fisher, Junr., of
Newport, Joshua John
Peele, of Salop, Deputy.
1851. 14. ROBERT HENRY CHENEY, of Badger. William Reynolds Anstice,
of Madeley, Joshua John
Peele, of Salop, Deputy.
1852. 15. ROBERT BURTON, of Longner. George Moultrie Salt, of
Salop.
1853. 16. ALGERNON CHARLES HEBER-PERCY, Joseph Loxdale Warren,
of Hodnet. of Drayton, Joshua John
Peele, of Salop, Deputy.
1854. 17. ROBERT AGLIONBY SLANEY, of Walford William Henry Cooper, of
Manor. Salop.
1855. 18. WILLIAM WILLOUGHBY GEORGE HURT Richard Green, of Knighton,
SITWELL, of Ferney Hall. Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.


Under-Sheriffs and Deputies.
1856. 19. EDWARD LLOYD GATACRE, of Gatacre. Edward Richmond Nicholas,
of Bewdley, Joshua John
Peele, of Salop, Deputy.
1857. 20. Sir WILLIAM CURTIS, of Cainham Court, Joshua John Peele, of Salop.
Baronet.
1858. 21. EDMUND WRIGHT, of Halston. Robert Worthington, of
Manchester, Joshua John
Peele, of Salop, Deputy.
1859. 22. CHARLES ORLANDO CHILDE-PEMBERTON, William Salt, of Salop.
of Millichope.
1860. . 23. Sir CHARLES HENRY ROUSE BOUGHTON, John Lloyd, of Ludlow,
of Downton, Baronet. Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1861. 24. GEORGE PRITCHARD, of Broseley. • George Potts, of Broseley,
Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1862. 25. Sir VINCENT ROWLAND CORBET, George Potts, .of Broseley,
of Acton Reynald, Baronet. . Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1863. 26. THOMAS CHARLTON WHITMORE, Samuel Thomas ’ Nicholls,
of Apley Park of Bridgnorth, Joshua John
Peele, of Salop, Deputy.
1864. 27. DAVID FRANCIS ATCHERLEY, Joshua John Peele, of Salop.
of Marton.
1865. 28. FRANCIS HARRIES, of Cruckton. George Potts, of Broseley,
Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1866. 29. THOMAS HUGH SANDFORD, of Sandford. William Lee Brookes, of
Whitchurch, Joshua John
Peele, of Salop, Deputy.
1867. 30. Sir CHARLES FREDERICK SMYTHE, Joshua John Peele, of Salop.
of Acton Burnell, Baronet.
1868. 31. CHARLES SPENCER LLOYD, of Leaton Knolls. John Jones, of Oswestry,
Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1869. 32. JOHN ROCKE, of Clungunford. Joshua John Peele, of Salop.


Under-Sheriffs and Deputies.
1870. 33. SALUSBURY KYNASTON MAINWARING, Henry Bloxam, of Salop,
of Oteley. Joshua John Peele, of
Salop, Deputy.
1871. 34. WILLIAM KENYON-SLANEY, Edmund Cresswell Peele,
of Hatton Grange. of Salop.
1872. 35. JOHN HENNIKER LOVETT, of Fernhill. John Jones, of Oswestry,
Edmund Cresswell Peele,
of Salop, Deputy.
1873. 36. CHARLES GEORGE WINGFIELD, of Onslow. William Salt, of Salop.
1874. 37. RICHARD THOMAS LLOYD, of Aston. John Jones, of Oswestry,
Edmund Cresswell Peele,
of Salop, Deputy.
1875. 38. Sir HENRY GEORGE HARNAGE, Edmund Cresswell Peele,
of Belswardyne, Baronet. and J. Hawley Edwards,
of Salop.
1876. 39. ARTHUR MOSTYN OWEN, of Woodhouse. William Salt, of Salop,
1877. 40. Sir HENRY THOMAS TYRWHITT, of Stanley, Edmund Cresswell Peele,
Baronet. of Salop.
1878. 41. Honourable ROBERT CHARLES HERBERT, William Salt, of Salop.
of Orleton.
1879. 42. HENRY De GREY WARTER, William Salt, of Salop.
of Longden.
1880. 43. CHARLES DONALDSON HUDSON, George Gordon Warren,
of - Clieswardine. of Market Drayton.
1881. 44. ROBERT JASPER MORE, of Linley. Thomas Maynard How, of
Salop, Edmund Cresswell
Peele, of Salop, Deputy.
1882. 45. JAMES JENKINSON BIBBY, Edmund Cresswell Peele,
of Hardwicke Grange. of Salop.
1883. 46. WILLIAM ORME FOSTER, Edmund Cresswell Peele,
of Apley Park. of Salop.
1884. 47. CHARLES JOHN MORRIS, of Oxon. Edmund Cresswell Peele,
of Salop.
1885. 48. WILLIAM EDWARD MONTAGU HULTON- Edmund Cresswell Peele,
HARROP, of Lythwood. of Salop.
1886. 49. ARTHUR SPARROW, of Preen Manor. Edmund Cresswell Peele,
of Salop.


NOTICES:
Genealogical and Biographical.
1831. SIR EDWARD JOSEPH SMYTHE, BARONET.
ARMS.—Satie, three roses Arg.
gIR EDWARD JOSEPH SMYTHE, of Acton Burnell, and of
Eshe Hall, in the county of Durham, Baronet, was the only son
of Sir Edward Smythe, Baronet, who married, 15th October, 1781,
Catherine Maria, only daughter and heiress of Peter Holford, of
Wootton Hall, in the county of Warwick, Esquire, and obtained the
Wootton Hall estate, jure uxoris.
He was born 1787, and married, 23rd October, 1809, Frances,
daughter of Sir Edward Bellew, of Barmeatb, county Loutb, Baronet, by whom be bad four
sons and three daughters.
The eldest son, Edward Joseph, who was born 11th December, 1813, married, 28th
April, 1840, Anastasia Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Fenton Boughey, of Aqualate, in the
county of Stafford, Baronet, M.P. for Staffordshire. He died, without issue, 28th August,
1841. His widow married, secondly, 16th May, 1848, Edward Henry, second son of
Sir Edward Mostyn, of Talacre, in the county of Flint, Baronet. The second son,.Richard
Peter Carrington, was born 29th January, 1815, and became an officer in the Bth Hussars.
He married the Honourable Eleanor Mary, daughter of William Lord Stourton, and died,
14th September, 1853. The third son, Charles Frederick, (of whom hereafter), succeeded
to the baronetcy in 1856, and was Sheriff, 1867. The fourth son, John Walter, horn
7th November, 1827, married Mary Louisa, youngest daughter of William Herbert, of
Clytha, in the county of Monmouth, Esquire. The eldest daughter, Catherine Maria, died
unmarried, in 1861. The second, Constantin Frances, married, 27th October, 1841, Arthur


James Netterville, Esquire, who became eighth Viscount Netterville, and died 1869. The
youngest, Agnes Mary, married, 9th November, 1847, Nicholas Blundell, of Crosby Hall,
in the county of Lancaster, Esquire.
Edward Smythe, of Eshe Hall, in the county of Durham, Esquire, the descendant of a
family long settled in that county, was created a Baronet, 1660, and married Mary,
daughter and co-heiress of Sir Richard Lee, of Langley and Acton Burnell, in the county
of Salop, Baronet, and thus acquired the Langley and Acton Burnell estates.
Sir Richard Lee was a staunch Royalist, and having, during the civil war, zealously
exerted himself on behalf of the Stuarts, was compelled by the Parliament to compound
for his estates, by the payment, in gross, of £3719, and an annual payment of £169.
He died about a month before the Restoration, but his son-in-law, out of respect to his
memory and services, was immediately advanced to the degree of a Baronet. Sir Edward
lived to the advanced age of fourscore, leaving two surviving sons, Richard and John ;
his second son, Rowland, having been previously slain in Ireland. The eldest son, Richard,
succeeded to the title and estates. Sir Richard married a niece of Lord Carrington, and
had issue, only one child, a daughter, Clare or Clara, who died unmarried.
Upon his death in December, 1736, the title and estates devolved on his brother John,
who succeeded as third Baronet. This Sir John married Constantia, daughter of George
Blount, Esquire, and sister of Sir Edward Blount,, of Sodington, in the county of Salop,
Baronet. He died, 17th September, 1737, only nine months after inheriting the title, and
was succeeded by his elder son, Edward, who now became fourth Baronet. Sir Edward
married, first, 25th July, 1743, Maria, daughter of Peter Giffard, of Chillington, in the county
of Stafford, Esquire, by whom he had an only son, Edward, his successor. He married,
secondly, Mary, daughter of Hugh, 4th Lord Clifford, and by this marriage had three
sons and one daughter. His only brother, Walter, who married a daughter of John
Errington, of Errington, Esquire, had four- sons and two daughters; Beaufront, the
eldest son, married Louisa, daughter of Thomas Boycott, of Rudge, in the county of
Salop, Esquire, and the eldest daughter, Mary Ann, who was born on Claremont Hill, in
Shrewsbury, married, first, at the age of 15, Edward Weld, of Lulworth Castle, in the
county of Dorset, Esquire, who died within twelve months, leaving her an annuity of £BOO,
and secondly, (before she was 20), Thomas Fitzherbert, of Swinnerton Hall, in the county
of Stafford, Esquire, who died about three years afterwards, leaving his young widow an
annuity of £IOOO. She died 27th March, 1837.
On the death of Sir Edward, (fifth Baronet,) he was succeeded by Edward, his only
son by his first wife, (before alluded to,) the father of the present Sheriff. Sir Edward
Joseph Smythe, wdio was the first Sheriff, professing the Roman Catholic faith, appointed
after the passing of the Emancipation Act, died as aforesaid, 11th March, 1856, and was
succeeded by his third and eldest surviving son, now (1884) Sir Charles Frederick Smythe,.
Baronet, Sheriff in 1867, (which see.)


1832. WILLIAM OAKELEY.
ARMS.— Argent, on a fesse, between three crescents, gales, as many fleurs-de-lis, Or.
ILLIAM OAKELEY, of Oakeley, in the county of Salop,
Esquire, was the eldest son of the Reverend Herbert Oakeley,
D.D., of Oakeley, Rector of Lydham, and Prebendary of Worcester,
by his wife Catherine, daughter of John Bolland, of Clapham, Esquire.
He was bom 12th November, 1806, and married, 1834, Alicia Mary,
daughter of General Sir Evan Lloyd, of Ferney Hall, in the county
of Salop, Knight. He died, without issue, in June, 1851, and was
succeeded by his eldest surviving brother, the Reverend Arthur Oakeley, M.A., of Oakeley,
who was born 28th April, 1815, and died, unmarried, 2nd January, 1870. The estate
then devolved on the next brother, Captain Henry Oakeley, R.N., who married Emily
Letitia, third daughter of Colonel Hamlin Trelawny, R.A., of Trelawny, in the county
of Cornwall, He died 12th March, 1877, and was succeeded by his only surviving son,
John, now (1884) of Oakeley, who was bom 7th November, 1856, and married, 23rd
October, 1880, Mary Catharine, daughter of the Reverend Charles Kent, of Dinham House,
Ludlow.
This family has been seated at Oakeley, formerly called Fir Grove, in the parish of
Lydham, near Bishop’s Castle, from a remote period. Rowland Oakeley, who was born
about 1550, married Mary, daughter of William Crowther, Esquire, of Betson, (probably
Bedstone), in the county of Salop. His son and successor, Richard Oakeley, of Oakeley,
Esquire, who was Member of Parliament for Bishop’s Castle, 1623, was a distinguished supporter
of the Royal cause. At his death, in 1658, he was succeeded by his eldest son, William
Oakeley, of Oakeley, Esquire, Sheriff 1660, and, like his father, Member of Parliament
for Bishop’s Castle, in which borough the family enjoyed considerable influence. He
married, first, Mary, second daughter of Walter Waring, of Owlbury, in the county
of Salop, Esquire, by whom he had no surviving issue. He married, secondly, Barbara,
eldest daughter of Charles Walcot, of Walcot, in the county of Salop, Esquire, by Anne,
his wife, daughter of James, Bth Lord Chandos, and sister of James, Ist Duke of Chandos.
His eldest son and successor was Richard Oakeley, of Oakeley, Esquire, Sheriff in 1724.
His third son, William, was ancestor of the Oakeleys, of Plas Tan-y-bwleh, in the county
of Merioneth, and of Sir Herbert Oakeley, Baronet. Richard married Margaret, daughter
of Sir Herbert Croft, of Croft Castle, in the county of Hereford, Baronet, and' grand-
daughter of Bishop Croft, by whom he had two sons, Richard and Herbert. The former-
dying without issue, was succeeded by his nephew, John, son of Herbert, who was the
father of the Reverend Herbert Oakeley, referred to at the commencement of this notice.
The present' Sheriff had four sisters, the eldest of whom married Robert Burton, of
Longner, in the county of Salop, Esqrrire, Sheriff in 1852.


1833. WALTER MOSELEY.
ARMS. —Quarterly, 1st and 4th sable, a chevron between three mill-picks, Arg. 2nd, Or, impaling quarterly per fesse, indented,
Sa. and Arg., in the first quarter, a lion guardant, Or. 3rd, gules, two lions, passant, Arg. between nine crosslets, fitchée, Or.
ALTER MOSELEY, of Buildwas, in the county of Salop,
Esquire, was the only son of Walter Michael Moseley, of the
Mere, in the county of Stafford, Esquire, by Anne Elizabeth,
daughter of Richard Sockett, of Worcester, Esquire. He was born
Bth February, 1801, and married, 11th April, 1829, Elizabeth Sarah,
fourth daughter of Colonel Steward, of Myton House, near
Warwick, by whom he had four sons and three daughters, Mr.
Moseley died 19tlx April, 1849, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Walter Moseley, now
(1883) of Buildwas, in the county of Salop, who was born 11th February, 1832, and
married, Bth September, 1864, Maria Katherine, youngest daughter of the Reverend
R. Anderson, of the Grange, Bedale, in the county of York.
This family, which is in direct descent from Alfred the Great, (Burke’s Royal Descents,
ped. Ixii.), derives from Edwyn de Billeston, who married in the reign of Henry 111.,
Juliana, heiress of Mollesley, of Mollesley, in the county of Stafford. Walter Moseley, of
the Mere, who was Sheriff of Staffordshire, 9th of Queen Anne, married Jane, only
daughter of William Acton, of Buildwas, third son of Sir Edward Acton, of Aldenham,
Ist Baronet, (and thus acquired the Buildwas estate), and died, 1712, leaving one son,
Acton Moseley, of the Mere and Buildwas, Sheriff of Staffordshire, 1757; who married
Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Sir Herbert Croft, of Croft Castle, in the county of Hereford,
Baronet. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Walter Acton Moseley, whose eldest son,
Walter Michael, 1 was father of the present Sheriff, by whom the mansion at Buildwas
was erected. 2
(1) This gentleman was the author of an elaborate history and description of Buildwas Abbey, published in Britton’s
Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain.
(2) The magnificent and well-preserved ruins of the Cistercian Monastery at Buildwas, which form so prominent a feature
in the Valley of the Severn, are too well known to require more than a brief and passing notice. Their history has been
recently so graphically described, and their present features so accurately depicted by the late lamented Reverend Mackenzie
E. C. Walcott, in his admirable volume, “ Four Minsters round the Wrekin,” published in 1877, by Adnitt and Naunton, of
Shrewsbury, that any description here would be superfluous. But it may be well to mention the fact, as showing the growing
feeling of reverence for the ancient monuments of the land, that the Abbot’s House, adjoining the ruined minster, which, for
centuries previously had been utilized as a farm house, has been restored by the present owner, Walter Moseley, Esquire, eldest
son of the Sheriff, as a residence for his mother.


1834. THE HONOURABLE HENRY WENTWORTH POWYS.
ARMS. —Or, a lion’s gamb, erased, between two cross crosslets fitcbeè, gules.
'J’HE HONOURABLE HENRY WENTWORTH FEILDING was
the second son of William Robert Basil, Viscount Feilding,
(eldest son and heir of Basil, 6th Earl of Denbigh,) by Anne
Catherine, eldest daughter of Thomas Jelf Powys, of Berwick, in the
county of Salop, Esquire, Sheriff in 1776. He was born 31st July,
1798, and, by Royal license, and in accordance with the will of
his maternal grandfather, assumed the surname and arms of Powys,
on succeeding to the Berwick estate, at the death of his grandmother, Lissey Anne Powys,
in 1832, Mr. Powys died, unmarried, 14th March, 1875, and his estates devolved on his
nephew, Rudolph William Basil, Bth Earl of Denbigh. Shortly afterwards, Lord Denbigh
disposed of his property in Shropshire, when the Berwick estate was purchased by
James Watson, of Warley Hall, in the county of Warwick,- Esquire, the present owner, who
has since greatly improved the house, and taken up his residence there. 1 Viscount Feilding
died during the lifetime of his father, in 1799, and, in 1813, his children were, by Royal
warrant, granted the rank and precedence of - sons and daughters of an Earl. The present
Sheriff was for many years a Captain, and afterwards Major, in the South Salopian
Regiment of Yeomanry. Cavalry.
Further particulars of the family of Powys will be found in Blakeway’s “ Sheriffs”
pages 195 and 207.
The family of Feilding is descended from a very ancient German family, which settled
in England in the time of Henry HI. The name Feilding, formerly Filding, and Felden,
was adopted from a place called Rheinfelden or Rinfilding, in Germany, to which, as well
as to Lauffenburg, their progenitor, Geoffrey, Count of Hapsburg, had pretensions. From
a MS. of the reign of Edward IV., it appears that this Geoffrey, in consequence of the
tyranny and oppression of Count Rudolph, afterwards Emperor of Germany, was reduced
to extreme poverty, and that Geoffrey, his son, entered into the sendee of Henry HI.,
King of England, wherein he so much distinguished himself by his great bravery, as to
attract the particular notice of the English Monarch, who, compassionating the low condition
to which the heir of the House of Hapsburg had been reduced, rewarded him for his
merits as a warrior, with the grant of several Knight’s fees, together with rents in various
parts of the country. In direct descent from him was Sir William Feilding, Custos
Botulorum of the county of Warwick, who was created by patent, dated December 30th,
(X) Lord Denbigh, in selling the property, reserved the magnificent gates of wrought iron, which adorned the entrance to the
demesne, and were known for generations as “ Berwick Gates,” and removed them to Newnham Paddox.


1620, Baron Feilding, of Newnliam Paddox, in the county of Warwick, and Viscount
Feilding. In 1621 lie became Master of the great Wardrobe, to Charles L, and
on September 14th, 1622, was created Earl of Denbigh. In 1631 he was appointed
Ambassador to the Court of Persia.
During the Civil War which unfortunately afflicted the country he espoused the cause
of Monarchy, and, on April 3rd, 1643, he received several severe wounds in a hot engage-
ment with the Parliamentarians in the neighbourhood of Birmingham, which caused his
death five days afterwards. By his wife, Susan, only daughter of Sir George Yilliers, of
Brokesby, in the county of Leicester, and sister to George, the great but unfortunate
Duke of Buckingham, King James’s favourite, he had several children, and was succeeded
in his title and estates by his son and heir, Basil, 2nd Earl of Denbigh, who, during his
father’s lifetime, and notwithstanding the piteous entreaties of the Countess, his mother, had
enrolled himself on the side opposite to that for which his noble father was to shed his
blood: at Edgehill, October 23rd, 1642, father and son were engaged on opposite sides in
the same battle. We are not informed of the reasons that induced Lord Feilding to join
the popular side. Probably, he had already fallen under the displeasure of the Court for
his popular tendencies; for when the nobility were invited to meet the king at Nottingham,
Lord Feilding was dismissed from all offices and attendance upon the king’s person, a
circumstance that, in later years, he referred to as a grievance. His abilities in the field
and his station in society soon gained him promotion in the Army; in June, 1643, the
Parliament appointed him Major-General of Coventry and the parts adjacent, and amongst
other battles in which he was engaged, he, in conjunction with General Mytton, on the
15th June, 1644, besieged Oswestry, which, with the Castle, was soon taken by assault.
He appears to have heartily concurred in the general objects of the Solemn League and
Covenant, both signing it himself, and, by a general order issued to his soldiers at
Coventry, November 26th, 1643, he insisted on every man in his regiment doing the same.
Personally, however, his own signature was accompanied with an explanation and exception
to the clause, “ Abolishing Episcopacy, root and branch,” an act, which he deemed
“ contrary to the Word of God.” That he was no violent partisan is clear from the fact
that, in July, 1644, the Committee at Wem charged him with dilatoriness in the discharge
of his military functions, and something very much like treason to the popular cause.
He was cleared by the House of Lords; but that there were good grounds for the charges
against him is claimed as a point in his favour at the Restoration. Upon the passing of
the “ Self-denying Ordinance,” in 1645, Lord Denbigh resigned his commission, and, with
others, received the thanks of Parliament for his services. He had strenuously opposed
the measure, and more especially the expunging from the Parliamentary Commission the
clause of fighting in defence of the king’s person. A very strong attempt was made to
retain Lord Denbigh as the Military Commander of the associated counties, to which end
petitions, signed by some 16,000 of the chief persons, were addressed to Parliament, but
in vain.


In December, 1649, he was accused, in Parliament, of correspondence with the
Royalist party, a charge that probably had - its origin in his desire to have seen some
accommodation with the late king, as well as in his endeavours to assuage, some of the
asperities of the times, by protecting his friends. Indeed, in his plea for pardon in
1661, he claims that he had in readiness 4000 officers and gentlemen engaged under
himself, prepared to hazard their lives to avert that ill-fate which afterwards befel the
unfortunate king; that he also had endeavoured to share the fortune of Charles 11., on
his coming from Scotland to England, but was prevented by the issue of the battle of
Worcester, 1651 ; and that he incurred grave peril with Cromwell in consequence of these
leanings towards the Royal cause. His mother, the Dowager Countess Susan, had escaped
to France, and the correspondence of the Earl with her having been intercepted, he was
placed under irritating restrictions as to his further intercourse.
Earl Basil appears to have frankly accepted the issue of the war, for he was twice a
member of the Council of State for the Commonwealth of England, i.e., in the years
1649 and 1650, and, during these years, stood high in the confidence of the Parliament,
as the following extracts show ;
The first, dated February 13th, 1649, records that he, and forty others, (any
nine of whom could act), were constituted “A Council of State for the
Commonwealth of England, to oppose the pretensions of Charles Stuart, eldest
son of the late king.”
February 19th, 1649. —“The Earl of Denbigh (and others) said that they had served
Parliament faithfully, and were willing to do so still, there being no power but
that of the House of Commons; but they cannot subscribe the engagement , l as it
looks backward, and is contrary to what they professed as Peers in the House
of Lords.”
February 26th, 1649.- —“Earl Denbigh to nominate those he thinks fit to assist him
in a matter that requires secrecy and dispatch. To be present at the next
meeting to report on his business, before the Council be otherwise engaged.”
February 27th, 1649. —“ The commissions engrossed and brought in for the three
Commissioners to command the fleet: to be signed by the Earl of Denbigh,
prases pro tempore.”
February 16th, 1660. —“An Act of Parliament, appointing Basil, Earl of Denbigh, with
others (or any nine of them), to be a Council of State until February 17th, 1651
1. To oppose and suppress all who maintain the pretended title of Charles Stuart.
2. To order all military forces, and
3. To reduce all places not yet subdued.”
(1) The engagement referred to was founded on an order in Parliament, of February 13. It was the substitute for the Oath
of Allegiance taken by the members of the Privy Council. This engagement was to be subscribed by every member of the
Council of State before lie could in any way discharge the functions of his office.


The list of the Parliament of 1658 does not contain Lord Denbigh’s name, from
which it is surmised that he had broken with the government of Cromwell; nor does it
appear again until his active concurrence in the restoration of Charles II.; and his known
moderation during the Civil Wars, his attempted and acknowledged services to the Royal
cause, together with his repudiation of the “root and branch” theory, were made the grounds
of an appeal for the restoration to royal favour, and the payment of his claim of £13,000,
due to him on account of his embassy and pension in the late king’s reign.
His plea was admitted; though how far he was restored to royal favour is not
shown. 1 The debt was not discharged in March, 1674—5, for the High Treasurer, Danby,
then certified the equity of his claim, and submitted it “to His Majesty’s consideration
and greater wisdom.” He was, however, February 2nd, 1663 —4, created Baron St. Liz,
in consideration of his being descended from the family St. Liz, Earls of Northampton, and
in June, 1667, was made Captain of a troop of horse, but he does not appear to have
attained to higher rank. He died, without issue, November 28th, 1675, when the title and
estates devolved on his nephew, William, son and heir of Sir George Feilding, Earl of
Desmond, whose second son, John, was the grandfather of Henry, the celebrated author of
“ Tom Jones” and many other humorous and entertaining works. This William, 3rd
Earl of Denbigh, had, besides an only daughter, who married Evelyn Pierpoint, Ist Duke
of Kingston, two sons ; the younger married Lady Diana Newport, youngest daughter of
Francis Newport, Earl of Bradford, and died without issue ; the elder son and heir, Basil,
4th Earl of Denbigh, and 3rd Earl of Desmond, had a large family, and was the great-
grandfather of William Robert, Viscount Feilding, (son of the 6th Earl,) who was born
June 15th, 1760, and married, April, 1791, Anne Catherine, daughter of Thomas Jelf Powys,
of Berwick, as before mentioned.
Besides the present Sheriff, Viscount Feilding had two sons, William Basil Percy, who
succeeded his grandfather as 7th Earl of Denbigh, and Everard Robert Bruce, Rector of
Stapleton, in the county of Salop, who married, in' 1831, Anne Henrietta, eldest daughter
of Sir John Fenton Boughey, of Aqualate, in the county of Stafford, Baronet; and three
daughters, Catherine Frances, born 1793, and died 1818; Mary Ann, born 1795, died 1814;
and Emily, born 1797, who married, 1827, the Reverend Henry Harding, sometime Rector
of Stapleton, and died 1883.
(1) He subsequently received a formal pardon from King Charles 11., which document is in the possession of the present Bari
of Denbigh, (1881.)


1835. SIR BALDWIN LEIGHTON, BARONET.
ARMS.—Quarterly, per fesse, indented, Or and gules.
gIR BALDWIN LEIGHTON, of Wattlesborough and Loton, in
the county of Salop, Baronet, was the only son of General Sir
Baldwin Leighton, 6th Baronet, by his second wife Louisa Margaretta
Anne, second daughter of Sir John Thomas Stanley of Alderley, in
the county of Cheshire, Baronet, and sister of the first Lord Stanley
of Alderley, to whom he was married, 25th November, 1802.
The learned and exact antiquary, Eyton, says of this family;—
“ The reign of Henry I. closed about 50 years after Domesday: within that 50 years,
Rainald, or one of his successors, enfeoffed a tenant in Leighton. That tenant was ancestor
of the knightly family which took a name from the place, and which has borne its part
in Shropshire history from that day to this.”
Tihel, or Tiel, the known ancestor of the Leightons, was probably the first feoffee who
held the manor, and his sera was, if so, the reign of Henry I. His name is apparently
Saxon. He survived the restoration of Henry 11. to the throne, and of the first William
Fitzalan, to his Shropshire estates. Between 1155 and 1160 he attests two charters, but
before the year 1165, he had been succeeded by his son, who appears in the Liber Niger
as Richard Fitz-Tiel, and as holding one knight’s fee of old feoffment in the barony of
Fitzalan.
In 1177, we find Richard Fitz-Tiel paying the half of a sum of 40/-, in which
he had been amerced by King Henry 11., for forest trespass. He was succeeded by a son
and grandson of the same name: it was, perhaps, his son Richard de Lecton (II) who was
subjected to a charge of half a merk, in 1200, by Hugh de Nevill, then justice of the
Forest, and it was, probably, to him, that a deed (now in the possession of Mr. Gardner,
of Leighton) refers, which may be looked on as a confirmation granted by the Suzerain at
the period of the grantee’s succession. 1 This Richard (II) appears as a knight, and as a
juror in several causes tried by the process of grand assize, and, between 1210 and 1215,
he was a benefactor of Buildwas Abbey, near Leighton, endowing it with certain lands.
Richard de Leighton (III) son of the preceding, sided against King John, in the struggles
which closed that reign, and his lands were escheated and handed over to one John
Fitz-Philip, but, in 1217, they were restored by Henry 111. In 1221, we have this Sir
Richard de Lechton as a knight, and as a selector of other knights, who tried certain
causes of the grand assize, and, in 1224, he is mentioned as King’s Yerderer for Shropshire,
with Richard de Middlehope and Thomas de Constantine. Sir William de Leghton, son of
(1) This deed is given verbatim in Eyton’s “Antiquities of Shropshire.”


this Richard, held the important post of Constable of Oswestry, and his son, Richard (IV.)
we find included amongst others in a patent of February 18th, 1263, to be protected from
all lawsuits as long as there should be war with Wales, so that he undoubtedly shared in
the toils of that period so memorable on the Shropshire Borders, when the Princes of
North Wales and of Powys stood leagued with De Montfort against the English crown.
His son, Sir Richard de Leighton (V) was returned as Knight of the Shire for Salop to
five Parliaments, namely, three in 1313, one in 1314, and one in 1318.
Fourth in direct lineal descent from him was John Leighton, of Stretton-in-le-dale,
which he acquired through his grandmother, heiress of Walter Cambray. He was Sheriff in
1468, 1474, and 1482 (see ante,) and M.P. for the county, in 1472 and 1477. He married
Anchoret, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of Sir John Burgh, and thus acquired
Wattlesborough, Loton, Cardeston, and Bausley, (ancient Corbet estates,) where the family
still reside.
His successor, who was Knight of the body to Henry VII., was one of the chief
commanders in the army sent over to France in the beginning of that reign, in aid of the
Duke of Bretagne, against the French Monarch, and was made a Knight banneret, under
the King’s own banner, for his valour at the battle of Spurs. 1 He represented the county of
Salop in the reigns of Henry VII, and Henry VIII. He married a daughter of Lord
Ferrers, of Chartley, in the county of Leicester, widow of Sir Richard Corbet. He died
1519, and was succeeded by his son John, who about the close of the reign of Henry YIIL
also represented the county in Parliament. Sixth in direct descent from him, was Edward
Leighton, of Wattlesborough, Esquire, who was the first Baronet, (created 2nd March,
1692), and represented the county in the Orange interest, in 1697. He married Dorothy,
daughter of Sir Job Charlton, of Ludford, in the county of Hereford, Baronet, by whom
he had Edward, his successor. He married, secondly, Jane, daughter of Daniel Nicholl,
of London, Esquire, by whom, Daniel, his eldest son, was great-grandfather to Colonel
Francis Knyvett Leighton, of Shrewsbury, who married the Honourable Louisa Ann
St. Leger, the eldest daughter of St. Leger, Ist Viscount Doneraile, and whose son,
the Reverend Francis Knyvett Leighton, D.D., was Canon of Westminster, and
Warden of All Souls’ College, Oxford. Sir Edward, (2nd Baronet), married, first, Rachael,
daughter of Sir William Forester, of Dothill, in the county of Salop, Knight, grand-
daughter of James, 3rd Earl of Salisbury, by whom he had two sons and one
daughter, Rachael, who married Thomas Jenkins, Esquire, the founder of the Charlton-
Hill branch of that family. The second son, Baldwin, Captain in the 27th Regiment of
Foot, was the father of Thomas, Major-General in the Hon. E. I. Company’s Service, whose
only son, The Reverend Francis Leighton, married Catherine, daughter of Samuel Amy
Severne, of Wallop, in the county of Salop, Esquire, and was for ma,ny years Rector of
Cardeston, in this county. The eldest son, Charlton, succeeded his* father in 1756, as 3rd
(1) This Sir Thomas Leighton, among others, was attainted temp. Hie. 111., for espousing the interests of the then Earl of
Richmond, to whom he was collaterally allied; on the accession of Richmond to the crown as Henry VH. the attainder was
taken off, and a pardon granted him.— (Kiniber.)


Baronet. He married, first,' Anna Maria, daughter of Eichard Mytton, of Halston, in the
county of Salop, Esquire, (by his wife Letitia, sister and sole heir of Thomas Owen, of Condover,
in the county of Salop, Esquire), and, secondly, Emma, eldest.daughter of Sir Eobert Maude,
Baronet. Sir Charlton died in 1780, and was succeeded by his son of the first marriage,
Sir Charlton, 4th Baronet, Member of Parliament for Shrewsbury, who, dying, unmarried,
in 1784, the title devolved on the son by the second marriage, Sir Eobert, (sth Baronet),
Sheriff 1780. He died, unmarried, in 1819, when the title reverted to General Baldwin
Leighton, second and only surviving son of Baldwin, second son of Sir Edward, (2nd
Baronet), who thus succeeded his cousin as 6th Baronet.
General Sir Baldwin Leighton, born in 1747, entered the army at 13, and, at 14, was
present in the trenches at the siege of Madura,, in the East Indies. He afterwards saw
service in America, was at the action at Brooklyn, taking of New York, Long Island,
White Plains, Storming of Fort Washington, Ehode Island, Brandywine, and the action
near Monmouth Court House, where he was severely wounded. In 1795 he succeeded to
the command of his Eegiment (the 46th), and was engaged against the French in the West
Indies, where his Eegiment was reduced from 520 to 120 men. On embarking for England,
finding his luggage put on board’ the “Mackarel,” he refused to be separated from his
men, and got the order countermanded. The “ Mackarel ” foundered on her way home,
with all on board. In 1809 he was in command at Jersey, and, in 1817, was made
Governor of Carrickfergus, and a General in the Army. He was also Colonel of the Ist
Garrison Battalion of the 46th. He married, first, Anne, daughter of the ‘Eeverend William
Pigott, of Edgmond, who died, 1800, without issue; and, secondly, in 1802, Louisa Margaretta
Anne, daughter of Sir John Thomas Stanley, of Alderley, by whom he had one son, the
present Sheriff. He died, 13th November, 1828, and was succeeded by his only son, Sir
Baldwin Leighton, (7th Baronet), who married, 1832, Mary, daughter of Thomas Netherton
Parker, of Sweeney Hall, in the county of Salop, by whom he had issue, two sons and
four daughters.
From his succession, at the age of 23, Sir Baldwin devoted himself to the improve-
ment of the property, (especially as regarded the condition of the poor), and to the
administration of public business. When the new Poor Law came into operation in 1836,
he undertook the Chairmanship of the Atcham Union, and soon reduced the pauperism to
the lowest in the kingdom, by the application of sound economic principles, and by the
encouragement of thrift. These principles have now been adopted, more or less, all over
England, In 1844 he became Chairman of the Montgomeryshire Quarter Sessions, which
he resigned in 1850, on becoming Vice-Chairman of' the Shropshire Sessions, and eventually
(1856) Chairman—an office he retained till his death in 1871. During this period the
Court of Quarter Sessions, at his instigation, organised the new County Police, taking
immediate advantage of the Permissive Act of 1839, established the new Lunatic Asylum,
and paid off the County Debt of £70,000, reducing the County Eate at the same time
to the lowest in England. In the year of his Shrievalty, he set his face against the abuses
and unnecessary expenses of the office, and quoted to the Judges the Act of Charles 11.,


which forbad them, or their officers or servants, to receive presents from the High Sheriff.
After the year of his office, he handed over to the Salop Infirmary the sum by which he
had reduced the costs of the system, and since then Parliament has had to take up the
question, and still further reduce the expenses of an office, that was once, it should he
remembered, one of profit. In 1867, he acted, by request, as Chairman of the Bench of
Magistrates at Market Drayton, who dismissed the charge of complicity in the murder of
Gordon against Mr, Eyre, Ex-Governor of Jamaica. In 1859, after coming forward for
North Shropshire in the spring, but retiring before the poll, he was returned in the
Conservative interest, without opposition, for South Shropshire, which he continued to
represent till 1865, when he lost his seat at the General Election. During his short
Parliamentary career, he took an active part in all matters relating to local administration,
finance, and the condition of the poor, but, in general politics, he adopted a somewhat
independent line. On his death, in 1871, he was succeeded by his eldest son, Sir
Baldwyn Leighton, now (1884) Bth Baronet, of Wattlesborough and Loton. He married,
30th January, 1864, the Honourable Eleanor Leicester "Warren, third daughter of George
Warren, 2nd Lord de Tahley, and has issue, a son and heir, Bryan Baldwin Mawddwy,
horn 1868; Cuthbert, horn 1877, and two daughters. He is an active Magistrate of the
county, and was elected Member of Parliament for South Shropshire, without opposition,
in 1877. At the General Election of 1880, after a contest, he was returned at the head
of the poll for the same Division, which he continues to represent.
The second son of the present Sheriff, Stanley Leighton, succeeded to the Sweeney
estates through his mother, and married Jessie Marie, daughter of Henry Bertie Williams
Wynn, of Howbery Park, in the county of Oxford, Esquire. In 1874 he was an unsuccessful
candidate for the representation of Bewdley, hut in 1876 he was returned, after an exciting
contest, for North Shropshire, and has since (1884) continued to represent that Division of
the County, without opposition.
The eldest daughter, Frances Christina, married, 23rd April, 1862, The Eeverend
Edward George Childe, Vicar of Kinlet and Cleobury Mortimer, Prebendary of Hereford,
now Baldwyn-Childe, of Kyre Park, Worcestershire, fourth son of William Lacon Childe,
of Kinlet, in the county of Salop, Esquire, Sheriff 1828, sometime Member of Parliament
for Wenlock, and younger brother of Charles Orlando Childe Pemberton, of Millichope,
Esquire, Sheriff 1859. The second, Isabella, married, first, Beriah Botfield, of Norton
Hall, in the county of Northampton, and Decker Hill, in the county of Salop, Esquire,
Member of Parliament for Ludlow, and secondly, Alfred Seymour, of Knoyle, in the
county of Wilts, Esquire, Member of Parliament for Salisbury. Charlotte is unmarried,
and Margaret died, unmarried, September, 1883.


1836. SIR WILLIAM EDWARD ROUSE BOUGHTON, BARONET.
ARMS. —Quarterly 1st and 4th sable, two bars engrailed, Arg. for Rouse. 2nd Arg. on a chevron between three trefoils, slipped sable;
as many bucks heads cabossed, Or.; on a chief, gules, a goat, passant, of the field, for Boughton of Loughton. 3rd sable, three
crescents, Or. for Boughton.
S IB WILLIAM EDWARD ROUSE BOUGIITON. Baronet, was
descended from a family of remote antiquity in the counties
of Hereford, Worcester, Gloucester, Sussex, and Warwick. Dr. Nash,
in his “ History of Worcestershire ,” says that “ its patriarch ” in
that county accompanied the Conqueror to England, and this state-
ment is confirmed by the Battle Abbey Roll. The Baronetcy of
Rouse dates so far back as 1641, when the dignity was conferred
on Thomas Rouse, of Rouse Lench, in the county of Worcester, from whom it passed
through successive generations, but became extinct on the death of Sir Thomas Rouse, in
1821. The Worcestershire estates then passed to Charles William Boughton, Esquire.
This gentleman went out, in 1765, to Bengal, on the Civil Establishment of the East
India Company, where, by intense application, he distinguished himself by an intimate
knowledge of the various languages used in that part of our Empire, and discharged
many important engagements with great ability. It appears, from a statement of a
Select Committee of the House of Commons, that, in the Court where he presided for
nearly two years, and which was instituted for the decision of all causes amongst the
natives in Calcutta relating to property, that between two and three thousand judgments
had been passed by him, from which there were only twenty-five appeals to the
Supreme Court, and, of these, there was not a single instance of reversal. His last
appointment in that climate was that of Provincial Chief of Decca, where, it was said
by the Mahommedan and Hindoo inhabitants of that rich district, that his administration
would be gratefully remembered as long as one stone remained of the ancient palace
of the Mogul Viceroys, He returned from Bengal in 1778, and, in 1780, after a
severe contest, was elected Member of Parliament for Evesham, which borough he
continued to represent until 1790. .In 1784 he was appointed Chief Secretary to
the Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of India, and on relinquishing office in
1791, was, on the 21st of June, created a Baronet, by the style and title of Sir
Charles William Boughton Rouse, of Rouse Lench, in the county of Worcester, and
of Downton Hall, in the county of Salop. In 1796 he was elected Member of Parliament
for Bramber, in the county of Sussex, but vacated his seat in 1799, on being appointed
a Commissioner for auditing the Public Accounts. He was Lieutenant-Colonel of the
Somerset Place Volunteers in 1803, and a Fellow of the Royal Society. He married, in
1782, Catherine, only daughter and heiress of William Pearce Hall, of Downton Hall, in
the county of Salop, Esquire, and thus acquired the Downton and other estates in that
county. He died, 26th February, 1821, and was succeeded by his only son, Sir William


Edward Rouse Boughton, (the subject of our present notice), of Lawford Hall, in the county
of Warwick, and Downton Hall, in the county of Salop, 10th Baronet, who was born
14th September, 1788, and married, 24th March, 1824, Charlotte, youngest daughter of
Thomas Andrew Knight, of Wormsley Grange, and afterwards of Downton Castle, Esquire,
President of the Horticultural Society, and niece of Richard Payne Knight, of Downton
Castle, in the county of Hereford, Esquire, M.P., the celebrated Grecian. The issue of
this marriage was three sons and five daughters. The eldest son, Charles Henry, of whom
hereafter, succeeded his father as 11th Baronet, in 1856. The second son, now (1884)
Andrew Johnes Rouse Boughton Knight, of Downton Castle, Esquire, who was born 26th
May, 1826, assumed, by Royal license, the additional surname of Knight, in 1857, and
married, 28th September, 1858, Eliza, youngest daughter of John Michael Severne, of
Wallop, in the county of Salop, Esquire. The third son died, unmarried, 1843,
The first member of the family of whom there is any record, is Robert de Boveton,
of Boveton, in the county of Northampton, who is thus described prior to the reign of
Edward HI, His son, Robert, made a grant of land to one of the monastic houses of
Northampton, that was subsequently confirmed by King Edward HI, in the second year
of his reign, 1328. William, great-grandson of the second Robert, is said to be the
first who adopted the present mode of spelling the name; and his grandson, Thomas,
acquired the manor of Lawford, in the county of Warwick, and other property in that
county, by marriage with Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Geoffrey de Allesley, of that
place; he subsequently, 31st King Henry YI., had the honour of representing that
county in Parliament. His great-grandson, Richard, was the King’s Escheator for the
counties of Warwick and Leicester, Edward IV., 1473, and Edward V., 1483. He
espoused the cause of Richard HI., and, subsequently, lost his life in the service of that
monarch, August 20th, 1485, three days before the memorable battle of Bosworth-field.
William, his son, Esquire, of the body of King Henry YIIL, (a position in those days
of much importance and distinction), married, first, the daughter and heiress of John
Danvers, of Waterstoke, in the county of Oxford, Esquire, by whom he had a son and
heir, Edward. By his second wife, Miss Elizabeth Barrington, of the Isle of Wight, he
was progenitor of the Boughtons of Causton, near Dunchurch.
The Causton line terminated in five generations, with Francis Boughton, the munificent
founder of Dunchurch Free School, who died in 1709, without issue, having previously
devised the Causton estate to his kinsman, Edward Boughton, of the Lawford line, who
was Sheriff of the county of Warwick, 1712. He married Jane, daughter and heiress of
Michael Desmond, a citizen of London, but died without issue, and in him ended the
wealthy fine, as it was called, of the Boughtons of Causton.
Edward Boughton, of Lawford, son of the above-mentioned William, obtained, in 1541,
a grant of Newbold Grange and the lands thereto belonging. He married Elizabeth,
daughter and heiress of William Willington, of Barcheston, Esquire, 1583, leaving a son
and heir, William, Sheriff of the counties of Warwick and Leicester, 1575 and 1590, who,


by Jane,- sister of Sir Thomas Coningsby, was father of Edward, Sheriff of the county
of Warwick, 1606; and he, by his marriage with Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of
Edward Catesby, of Lapworth, Esquire, left two sons, William and Thomas, and a
daughter, Catherine, who married William Coombe, of Stratford-on-Avon, Esquire, The
younger son seated himself at Bilton, which was settled on him by his father. William,
the elder son and heir succeeded his father in the Lawford estate, and was created a
Baronet by Charles L, August 4th, 1641. By Abigail, his wife, eldest daughter and
co-heiress of Henry Baker, Esquire, he left three sons, of whom, the youngest, Henry,
was father of Humphrey and Edward. The former was of AHesley, in the county of
Warwick, and died, 1703, leaving five daughters, his co-heiresses, and the latter, Edward,
inherited the Causton estate, as before-mentioned, by devise of his relative, Francis
Boughton, of that place.
Sir William was succeeded in his title and estates by his eldest son, Edward, who
represented the county of Warwick in Parliament. He was twice married, but died
without issue, in 1680, and was succeeded by his brother, Sir William Boughton, 3rd
Baronet, who was Sheriff of Warwickshire, 1689. He married Mary, daughter of Hastings
Ingram, of Little Woolford, Esquire, by whom he had three daughters and an only son
and heir, William, who succeeded as 4th Baronet.
He, like his - predecessors, represented the county of Warwick in Parliament, and, in
that station, declined the offer of a peerage. He was succeeded by his son, Sir Edward,
the sth Baronet, Sheriff of Warwickshire in 1720, who died the following year at the
early age of 33, leaving, by his wife Grace, eldest daughter of Sir John Shuckburg, of
Shuckburg, Baronet, an only child and heir, Sir Edward, (6th Baronet), Sheriff of the
county of Warwick in 1748, who, by his second wife, had a daughter, Theodosia, married
to John Donellan, Esquire, and an only son, Sir Theodosius AHesley Boughton, (7th Baronet).
Sir Theodosius enjoyed the title and estate but a short time after he was grown up,
dying suddenly at Lawford, August 29th, 1780, just before he came of age. Soon after
the funeral had taken place, various circumstances transpired which gave rise to strong
suspicions that his death was caused by poison. The body was exhumed and examined,
and the coroner’s inquest thereon returned a verdict of wilful murder against the brother-
in-law, John Donellan, who was subsequently tried, convicted, and executed at Warwick.
On the sudden termination of this branch of the family, the succession devolved on the
family of Shuckburg Boughton, of Poston Court, in the county of Hereford, who married
Mary, daughter of the Hon. Algernon Greville, second son of Eulke, Lord Brooke, one
of the Ladies of the Bedchamber to Queen Charlotte. By this union he had four sons
and five daughters. Of the former, the eldest, Arthur, died in infancy; the second,
Edward, Bth Baronet, who succeeded to the title as well as to a great part of the estate
of the elder line, died, unmarried, in 1794, when he was succeeded by his next brother,
Charles William, above referred to as the father of the Sheriff now under notice.
Sir William, like his father, was a Fellow of the Royal Society, and also Member
of Parliament for Evesham, from 1818 to 1824.


1837. THOMAS HENRY HOPE.
ARMS. —Azure, two chevronelles engrailed, between four bezants, three and one, Or.
HENEY HOPE, of Netley, Esquire, was the eldest son
of John Thomas Hope, Esquire, by his wife, Helen Esther Mary,
only daughter and heiress of Sir Thomas Edwardes, of Shrewsbury,
6th Baronet, of that name. By this lady, who died 4th June,
1837, besides the above-mentioned Thomas Henry, he had an only
daughter, Louisa Mary Anne, who married, 19th June, 1828,
Sir Henry Edwardes, of Frodesley, in the above county, the 9th
Baronet, and is the mother of the present Sir Henry Hope Edwardes, 10th Baronet.
Thomas Henry Hope was born 13th December, 1794, and married, 23rd April, 1833,
Louisa Charlotte Anne, elder daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Francis Knyvett Leighton, of
Shrewsbury, great-grandson of Sir Edward Leighton, of Wattlesborough, in the county of
Salop, Baronet, (Sheriff, 1697), by his wife Louisa Anne St. Leger, fourth daughter of
St. Leger, Ist Yiscount Doneraile. By this marriage, he, besides other issue, had five sons,
viz. ; —(1) Henry Knyvett Edwardes, Lieutenant 60th Eifles, born 31st October, 1834, died
sth December, 1854. (2) William John, born 23rd August, 1836, and married, 23rd July,
1867, Emily, 2nd daughter of John Ireland Blackburne, of Hale Hall, in the county of
Lancaster, Esquire, and grand-daughter of Sir Henry Bold-Hoghton, of Hoghton Tower,
in the county of Lancaster, Baronet, and died, shortly afterwards, 30th September, 1867.
(3) St. Leger Frederick, in holy orders, Eector of Greet, in the county of Salop, born 4th
October, 1839. (4) Leighton, also in holy orders, born 12th February, 1843. (5) Herbert
James, Captain 60th Eifles, born 16th February, 1848, and five daughters, viz. :—Ellen
Charlotte, Louisa Clare, Julia Caroline Hester, Anne Eiversdale, and Clare Victoria. The
last-named was married 21st October, 1875, to Eobert Hanson Coldwell, Esquire.
Mr. Hope obtained the Eoyal license 7th November, 1854, to take the surname of
Edwardes, in addition to, and after that of Hope, and to bear the arms quarterly. He
died, 7th April, 1871, and was succeeded by his eldest surviving son, the Eeverend
St. Leger Frederick Hope-Edwardes, now (1884) of Netley.
The Church of St. Edward, at Dorrington, an ecclesiastical district in the parish of
Condover, was built in 1836, and endowed by the aforesaid John Thomas Hope, Esquire,
who died 13th March, 1854.


1838. WILLIAM WOLRYCHE WHITMORE.
ARMS.—Vert., fretty, Or.
WOLRYCHE WHITMORE, of Dudmaston, Esquire,
great grandson of William Whitmore, of Apley, Esquire,
Member of Parliament for Bridgnorth, by his wife, Elizabeth, sister
of Bromwich Pope, of Woolstaston, Esquire, Sheriff in 1722. He was
born in 1787, and married, 29th January, 1810, Lady Lucy Elizabeth
Georgiana Bridgeman, daughter of Orlando, Ist Earl of Bradford, by
whom he had no issue.
The present Sheriff was elected one of the first Members for Wolverhampton
in 1832, and sat previously for Bridgnorth from 1820 to that time. The family acquired
the Woolstaston estate from the family of Pope, which, though now extinct, was once
of considerable opulence in Shrewsbury. That of Dudmaston was inherited, indirectly,
from Sir John Wolrych, Baronet, who was Sheriff in 1716, after whose death in 1723,
it was held by his mother, daughter of George Weld, of Willey, Esquire, until her
death in 1765. It then passed to her brother, Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Weld, on
whose death in 1774, it devolved on the before-mentioned William Whitmore, who was
descended from Eichard Whitmore, of - Lower Slaughter, in the county of Gloucester, by
Ann, sister to the Colonel’s father.
An ample account of the family of Wolrych will be found in page 168 of Blakeway’s
Sheriffs of Shropshire , under 1716, and of that of Whitmore at page 106, under 1620.
Mr. Wolryche Whitmore was a Whig, and a prominent politician of his time—a time
during which changes of a momentous character were enacted by the British Legislature,
such as Catholic Emancipation and Parliamentary Reform, both of which measures received
his strenuous advocacy. The abolition of the Corn Laws, too, which had for many years
been a subject of angry discussion and fiery debate in the House of Commons, was one
on which, by his writings and in his speeches in Parliament, he proved himself an ardent
supporter. This fact, probably, more than any other reason, led to his selection by the
newly-enfranchised and populous borough of Wolverhampton, as one of their first represen-
tatives. A writer in the Quarterly Review, for October, 1861, speaking of Mr. Whitmore’s
attacks on the Corn Laws, says, “They entitled him to a more widely-spread fame than,
in this forth-setting age, falls to the lot of merit when clogged with modesty and an
unselfish indifference to applause. Whatever merit may be claimed for opposition to the
Corn Laws, that merit is due to Mr. Whitmore beyond all others. More than twenty
years before their repeal, he published his first pamphlet in favour of Free Trade. He
was scouted as a visionary by statesmen of all parties, and by none more contemptuously
than by the leaders of the Whigs. His annual motion on the subject had no effect but


to lower his reputation as a statesman, and to send the House to dinner.” He, however,
was not in Parliament when his favourite measure received the sanction of the Legislature,
which, by the conversion of Sir Robert Peel to the cause, it did, in 1846.
Mr. Wolryche Whitmore died 1858, bequeathing his estates to his nephew, the only
son of his sister, Mary Dorothea, who married the Reverend Francis Laing, of the Mythe,
in the county of Gloucester. This gentleman, now the Reverend Francis Henry Wolryche
Whitmore, was born 1820, and married, 1845, Isabella, youngest daughter of Captain H.
Bazeley, R.N., and has three sons, Francis Alexander, bom 1845, Malcolm, 1849, and
Henry Bazeley, 1856, and one daughter, Isabella Louisa.
He assumed, in 1864, by Royal License, the surname and arms of his late uncle, in
lieu of his patronymic, Laing.
His eldest son, Francis Alexander, is now (1884) Major in the 3rd Battalion King’s
Light Infantry, (Shropshire Regiment of Militia), and married, Alice Mary, daughter of
Alfred Darby, of Coalbrookdale, Esquire, and his wife Rebecca, daughter of William Miller
Christy, of the Woodbines, in the county of Surrey, Esquire, and has one son and two
daughters.
1839. PETER BROUGHTON.
ARMS. —Argent, two bars gules; on a canton of the second, a cross of the field, a label on a crescent for a difference.
JDETER BROUGHTON, of Lowdham, in the county of Nottingham,
was descended from Thomas Broughton, of Broughton, in the
county of Stafford, Esquire, whose son, Peter, married Eleanor Church,
youngest daughter and co-heiress of William Church, of Tunstall,
Esquire, (Sheriff 1715), which estate thus came to the family. His
son, the Reverend Peter Broughton, of Tunstall and Lowdham,
aforesaid, Rector of East Bridgeford, Notts, married, in 1785, Jane,
daughter of John Alcock, of Market Drayton, Esquire, by whom he had one son, Peter,
(the present Sheriff), who was born Ist August, 1788, and married, 2nd November, 1818,
Anna Ogilvie, youngest daughter of John Smithwick, of Lilliput, in the county of Limerick,
second son of William Smithwick, of Mount Catherine, in the same county, Esquire, by whom
he had issue, (first) Peter, (who succeeded him in his estates’at his death in 1870), late
Captain in the 3rd Dragoon Guards, and afterwards Major of the 3rd Staffordshire Militia,
who was born Ist August, 1822, and married, 2nd April, 1856, Florence, fourth daughter
of Swynfen Stevens Jervis, of Darlaston, in the county of Stafford, Esquire, of the family
of Yiscount St. Vincent, and died 11th September, 1881; (secondly), John Lambart, born
19th January, 1831 ; who married, 11th October, 1859, Anne Selina, youngest daughter of
Ralph Adderley, of Barlaston, in the county of Stafford, Esquire, who is (1884) the now
representative of the family; and four daughters


Mr. Broughton was paternally descended from Richard, a younger son of Hugh Vernon,
Baron of Shipbroke, in the county of Chester, ancestor of the great family of the Vernons
of Haddon, in the county of Derby.
Adam, son of Richard, adopted the surname of De Napton, and his grandson, Roger
de Napton, was lord of Burghton, (now Broughton), Chirleton, and Swineshed, in the county
of Stafford, and Tofts, in the county of Warwick, 55, Henry HI., 1270 —1, and during
the whole reign of Edward I. By his wife Juliana, daughter and co-heiress of Reginald
de Chames, or Chavernes, who survived him, he had two, if not three sons, the eldest of
whom, Elias de Napton, by his wife Margery, daughter of Sir Robert de Bromley, of
Ashley, in the county of Stafford, Knight, was father of John, lord of Burghton, Chirleton,
&c., who appears to have been the first of the family who adopted the surname of
Burghton or Broughton, from his then place of residence. His great-grandson Thomas,
married Eva, daughter and co-heiress of Thomas Greenway, of Bedulf, in the county of
Stafford, by which marriage he acquired property in Bedulf, Moreton, and Stoke, in that
county, and by whom he was father of John Broughton, Esquire, who, in the family
pedigree, is said to be noticed by Fuller, in his Worthies of England.
Thomas, son of this John, increased the family property by his marriage with
Margaret, daughter of John Young, of Charnes, with whom, who survived him, he obtained
lands in Sugenhall and Podmore, Pethale and Sutton, in the county of Stafford. His son
and heir, John, died shortly after his father, without issue, and was succeeded by his
brother Richard, who, by his wife Margaret, daughter of Richard Sandford, of Sandford, in
the county of Salop, Esquire, had five sons and three daughters. Four of the sons married
and had issue, but the line was continued by the eldest son and heir, Richard Broughton,
fourth in descent from whom was Thomas, who is recorded as the founder of Broughton
Chapel, which he afterwards endowed. He married Frances, daughter of Walter, and sister
of Sir Harvey Bagot, of Blithfield, in the county of Stafford, first Baronet, by whom he
had two sons and three daughters. The elder son, Bryan, afterwards Knighted, and
March 10th, 1661, created a Baronet by Charles 11., was the ancestor of that line now
represented by Sir Henry Delves Broughton, 9th Baronet, of Broughton, in the county of
Stafford. The younger son, Peter, was seated at Lowdham, where, in 1636, he married
Anne, daughter of William Staunton, of Staunton, in the county of Nottingham, by whom
he had four sons and three daughters. Peter also possessed Bilsthorpe, and other Manors
in Northamptonshire, and died in 1694. He was the grandfather of Peter Broughton,
mentioned at the commencement of this notice. His grandson, the Reverend Peter
Broughton, before mentioned, took the surname of Strey, in addition to, and before that of
Broughton, and dying, July 23rd, 1827, was succeeded by his only son, Peter, the present
Sheriff, This gentleman, for a few years, adopted the surname of Strey, in addition to,
and after that of Broughton, but dropped the same prior to his being appointed Sheriff.


1840. THOMAS EYTON.
ARMS.—Quarterly 1st and 4th Or, a fret azure, (Eyton); 2nd and 3rd gules, two bars, ermine, (Pantulph.)
family of Eyton settled at a very early period at Eyton-
on-the-Weald-Mores, and they are presumed, from their armorial
bearings, to have been a younger branch, or, at least, very early
vassals of Pantulf, Baron of Wem, who was mesne Lord of Eyton,
at the time of Domesday. The first name on the pedigree is
Robert de Eyton, who witnessed a grant by Robert, to the Abbey
of Shrewsbury, together with William, Alan, and Hugh, sons of
Hugh Pantulf; and he himself granted to that monastery, the lands of Buttery, in the
reign of Henry 11. Ninth in descent from this Robert, was John Eyton, Sheriff in 1394,
whose brother, Humphrey Eyton, Esquire, ranger of the forest of Wrekin and Wildmore,
was grandfather of Nicholas Eyton, of Eyton, Esquire, Sheriff in 1440, 1 and Knight of the
Shire in 1449. He was father of Lewis Eyton, of Eyton, Esquire, who married Anne,
daughter of Sir John Savage, and great-grandfather of Thomas Eyton, of Eyton, Esquire,
Sheriff in 1567. Thomas Eyton married Alice, daughter of William Charlton, of Apley, ;
Esquire, and their third son Thomas, was father of Sir Philip Eyton, Sheriff in 1633.
Sir Philip, who succeeded his cousin Richard, at Eyton, married Mary, daughter of
David Yale, Chancellor of Chester, and was the father of Sir Thomas Eyton, of Eyton,
whose son, the Reverend John Eyton, Vicar of Wellington, succeeded to the family
• estates, at the decease of his nephew, Sowdley Eyton. This gentleman married Rachel,
daughter of Thomas Acton, of Gatacre Park, Esquire, and was succeeded by his eldest son,
Thomas Eyton, of Eyton, Esquire, Sheriff in 1741, who married Ann, daughter of the
Right Reverend Robert Butts, Bishop of Ely, by whom he had two sons and two
daughters. The latter married, respectively, Thomas Kynnersley, of Leighton, Esquire,
and Richard Morhall, of Onslow, Esquire. The elder son was Thomas Eyton, of Eyton,
Esquire, Sheriff in 1779. He married in 1776, Mary, daughter of John Rocke, of
Trefnanney, in the county of Montgomery, Esquire, by whom he had three sons, Thomas,
Robert, who died in 1780, and John. The latter took holy orders, and became, in due
time, Rector of Eyton, and Vicar of Wellington. He married Anna Maria, daughter and
sole heiress of Edmund Joseph Plowden, of Plowden, Esquire, by whom he had six sons
and three daughters. The fourth son was Robert William, sometime Rector of Ryton,
the learned author of Antiquities of Shropshire, and several other , archaeological works
of great interest, who died, 1881.
(1) According to Blalreway, Nicholas was also Sheriff in 1445, and Boget Eton or Eyton, believed to be of the same family,
in 1450.


The eldest son, Thomas Eyton, of Eyton, Esquire, is the present Sheriff. He succeeded
his father in 1816. He was born 27th March, 1777, and married, Bth December, 1808,
Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Major-General Dugald Campbell, by which lady, who died
July 23rd, 1817, he had three sons, Thomas Campbell, Charles James, who died 1854, and
William Archibald, formerly Captain in the 36th Eegiment, Mr. Eyton, who was also
Recorder of Wenlock, and a Deputy-Lieutenant of the county of Salop, removed the
residence of the family from Wellington to Eyton, where he built the present spacious
mansion. Mr. Eyton was educated at Rugby, he matriculated at St. John’s College,
Cambridge, entered at Lincoln’s Inn, and was called to the Bar on the same day as the
late Lord Lyndhurst. He was for several years a member of the Oxford Circuit, and, on
retiring therefrom, took up his residence at Eyton, which formed part of the patrimonial
property of this very ancient Shropshire family from the compilation of Domesday, 1086,
to the present time. Here he performed the duties of an active, intelligent, and impartial
magistrate, to the universal satisfaction of that populous district. Here also he enjoyed
the true pleasures and sports of a country life, whilst cultivating and improving a portion
of his estate; at the same time pursuing his refined taste for music, of which he was not
only passionately fond, and, in consequence, from his station, the chief patron in this
county, but in which he exhibited his great talent by publishing, a short time after his
Shrievalty was over, in six handsome folio parts, Musical Illustrations of the Waverley
Novels, parts of which have been selected to form portions of the performances at various
first-rate concerts in London and other places, where they have been much admired by
the most competent judges. He died 13th February, 1855, and was succeeded by his
eldest son, Thomas Campbell Eyton, of Eyton, Esquire, who was born 10th September,
1809, and married, 13th May, 1835, Elizabeth Frances, eldest daughter of Robert Aglionby
Slaney, of Hatton, and Walford Manor, in the county of Salop, Esquire, Sheriff in 1854,
Member of Parliament for Shrewsbury, {vide 1854), by whom he had three sons and six
daughters. This gentleman was an accomplished naturalist, and possessed one of the
finest private Museums of Natural History in the kingdom. He was the author of several
books on scientific subjects, and his library contained specimens of the most valuable and
important works on Natural History which the world has produced. He was one of the
earliest promoters of the great Volunteer movement in 1860, in which he took the
deepest interest, and was for many years Captain of the Wellington Corps. He had also
previously commanded a troop in the South Shropshire Yeomanry Cavalry. He died
25th October, 1880, at the age of 71, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas
Slaney Eyton, Esquire, now (1884) of Eyton and Walford, who was bom 19th June, 1843,
and married, 10th March, 1866, Isabel Sarah Dashwood, eldest daughter of John Henry
Hay Ruxton, of Broad Oak, Brenchley, in the county of Kent, Esquire. This gentleman
is an Alderman of the Borough of Shrewsbury, and was elected to the office of Mayor,
November 9th, 1876, and again in November, 1883.


1841. THE HONOURABLE GUSTAVUS FREDERICK JOHN JAMES HAMILTON.
ARMS.— Quarterly 14st and 4th Arg., between two Chevronells, a cinquefoil, all between three cross-crosslets, fitchy,
sa. for Russell ; 2nd and 3rd gu., three cinquefoils pierced, erm., for Hamilton.
present Sheriff was the only son and heir of Gustavus, 6th
Viscount Boyne, in the peerage of Ireland, by Harriet, only
daughter of Benjamin Baugh, of Ludlow, and of Burwarton House,
in the county of Salop, Esquire. He was born at Downton Hall,
near Ludlow, May 12th, 1797, and married, 9th September, 1828,
Emma Maria, only daughter of Matthew Eussell, of Brancepeth
Castle, in the county of Durham, Esquire, by whom he had an only son. This lady
inherited "the Brancepeth estates, on the death of her brother, in 1850, when her husband
(the present Sheriff) assumed, by Eoyal License, the additional surname of Eussell, He
succeeded his father as 7th Viscount in 1855, and was, in 1866, created a Peer of the
United Kingdom, by the title of Baron Brancepeth. The first of this family, of whom
we have authentic record, is Sir James Hamilton, of Cadyow, living at the end of the
14th and the beginning of the 15th century; who is presumed to be lineally descended
from Sir Walter, son of Gilbert de Hamilton, living 1272; which Walter, having
performed his fealty to King Edward 1., 1292 and 1294, afterwards attached himself to
Eobert Bruce, King of Scotland, from whom he had a grant of the Barony of Kenil and
Cadyow, in Lanarkshire, Sir James Hamilton married Janet, eldest daughter of Sir
Alexander de Lerinstown, by whom, besides other issue, he had a son, James, who was
Knighted 28th June, 1445, created a Lord of Parliament as Baron Hamilton, and,
immediately afterwards, honoured with a grant of the “ Sheriffdom ” of Lanarkshire,
together with extensive territorial possessions. By his first wife, Lady Euphemia Graham,
eldest daughter of Patrick, Earl of Strathern, dowager of Archibald, fifth Earl of Douglas,
he had an only daughter, who married David, fourth Earl of Crawford. By his second
wife, Mary, eldest daughter of James 11., King of Scotland, and relict of Thomas Boyd,
Earl of Arran, whom he married in 1474, he had an only son, James, who, 10th August,
1503, obtained a charter of the lands and Earldom of Arran, limited to himself and his
heirs male; was subsequently appointed Lieutenant-General of Scotland, Warden of the
Marches, and, in 1517, one of the Lords of the Eegency. He died, 1530, and his grandson
Claude Hamilton, who died, 1621, and was younger brother to John, ancestor of the
Dukes of Hamilton, had by his wife, Margaret, only daughter of George, Lord Seton,
besides other issue, James Hamilton, created 1603, Baron of Abercorn, ancestor of the
present Duke of Abercorn, and Frederick Hamilton, who distinguished himself in the
service of Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, was Knighted and appointed Gentleman
in Ordinary of the Privy Chamber to King James and to Charles 1., from whom he had
extensive grants of land in Ireland.


Sir Frederick Hamilton married Sidney, daughter and heiress of Sir John Vaughan,
Governor of Londonderry/ by whom he had three, sons and one daughter. The eldest,
James, died without male issue; the second, Frederick, was slain in the wars in Ireland,
where the third son, Gustavus, distinguished himself in the service of King William HI.,
for whom he raised six regiments, two of which are now crack regiments, the 27th or
Inniskillings, and the 6th Dragoons. For his services at the Battle of the Boyne, the
Siege of Londonderry, and the Storming of Athlone, he was appointed a Brigadier-General
of the King’s armies in Ireland, and a Privy Councillor, and rewarded with a grant of
part of the forfeited lands. In the reign of Queen Anne, he became a Lieutenant-General.
By George I. (1715) he was created a Peer of Ireland, by the title of Baron Hamilton,
of Stackallan, and August 20th, 1717, he was raised a step in the Irish Peerage, and
became the first Viscount Boyne, He died, 16th September, 1723, and fourth in descent
from him' was the present Sheriff, 6th Viscount Boyne.
The present Sheriff died in 1872, and was succeeded by his son, Gustavus Russell,
Bth Viscount Boyne, and second Baron Brancepeth, who was bom 28th May, 1830, and
married, 1858, Lady Katharine Frances Scott, third daughter of John, 2nd Earl of Eldon,
by whom he has five sons, viz., Gustavus William, bom 1864 ; Frederick Gustavus,
1867; Claud Eustace, 1871; Arthur, 1872; Eustace Scott, 1878; and four daughters,
Alice Katharine, bom 1862; Maud Harriet, 1865; Constance Elizabeth, 1866; and Florence
Rachel, 1875. He was educated at Eton and Oxford, and is a Magistrate and Deputy-
Lieutenant of Shropshire, and a Magistrate of the counties of Durham and Meath.
1842. HENRY JUSTICE.
ARMS. —Vert., a bend ermine, cotised, Or, between two Falcons, rising, of the last.
JpHILIP JUSTICE, of Hinstock, Esquire, married, 1787, Judith,
daughter of John Rottor, of Duffield, in the county of Derby,
Esquire, and died October, 1827, being succeeded by his eldest son,
Henry, the present Sheriff, who was born in 1790, and married,
26th October, 1839, Louisa Anne, daughter of Alexander Radford,
Esquire, and niece of William Church Norcop, of Betton, Esquire,
Sheriff in 1813, and has issue, one son, Philip William, 55th Regiment, born July 3rd,
1840, and one daughter, Louisa, born October 26th, 1842. Philip Justice had, besides,
four sons, viz., Philip, Robert, William, and John, the latter of whom was for many years
Rector of Ightfield, and tw'o daughters, Elizabeth and Caroline.
Of the early branches of the family of Justice, prior to the 17th century, there
appears to be no connected account, though it is certain that they had resided on the
borders of the counties of Salop and Stafford long before the commencement of that period.


Roger Justice, of Newport, in the county of Salop, was a substantial yeoman when
he married, October 26th, 1607, Alicia, (or Alice, as in the register), daughter of Mr.
John Adams, of Newport, and sister of William Adams, the munificent founder of Newport
Grammar School, who is recorded in the parish register as “Newport’s, great benefactor.”
By that lady, who was buried there, July 26th, 1629: he had three sons and three
daughters. William, the eldest son, godson to William Adams before mentioned, and
afterwards hound apprentice to and ultimately taken into partnership with him, became an
Alderman of London, where he died September 16th, 1672, and was buried at Hackney,
leaving two daughters only. The. second son, Luke Justice, married Mary, daughter of
John Cotton, of Edgmond, and settled at Knighton Grange, in the county of Stafford,
which lordship was purchased for and given to him by his uncle, William Adams, charged
with the payment of certain sums to the Free School and Church of Newport. In addition
to what he had from his uncle Adams, he had acquired a good property, and, in
1662, purchased estates in Hinstock, Woodseaves, Drayton-in-Hales, and Little Drayton,
with the advowson of Ightfield Church, which has several times been held by younger
members of the family. He was buried at Adbaston, in the county of Stafford, December
14th, 1674. His eldest son, William, succeeded him, who, dying unmarried, in 1683, was
succeeded by his brother Roger, of Knighton, in the parish of Adbaston aforesaid, .who, by
his wife Jane, daughter and sole heiress of William Knight, of Water-Eaton, was the
father of eight children. His grandson, Philip, bom 1711, was for many years principal
storekeeper of the Dockyard of Plymouth, an office, as the handsome mural monument in
Drayton Church, erected by his widow, Avis, second daughter of Philemon Pownall, of
Plymouth, Esquire, truly records, “he executed with fidelity, and retired from, with great
reputation, to spend the remainder of his days in the county where his ancestors had long
inhabited.” On resigning his official appointment at Plymouth, he took up his residence
at Market Drayton, where he closed a long and valuable life, June sth, 1792, leaving an
only child, Philip, of Drayton, the father of the present Sheriff, as before mentioned.
1843. SIR ANDREW VINCENT CORBET, BARONET.
ARMS.—Or, a Raven sable.
ANDEEW VINCENT COEBET, Baronet, of Acton Eeynald,
was eldest son and heir of Andrew Corbet, of Shawbury Park,
afterwards Sir Andrew Corbet, Baronet, Sheriff in 1798, and eighth
in descent from Sir Andrew Corbet, Knight, of Moreton Corbet,
Sheriff in 1551. He was born 15th June, 1800, married, 19th
September, 1820, Eachel Stephens, eldest daughter of Colonel John
Hill, of Hawkstone, (who contested the Borough of Shrewsbury at the memorable election


in 1796), and sister of Rowland, 2nd Viscount Hill, Lord-Lieutenant of Shropshire, by
whom he had four sons and three daughters. The eldest, Vincent Rowland, was Sheriff
in 1862. Andrew Corbet, of Shawbury Park, was created a Baronet in 1808, and dying,
6th June, 1835, was succeeded by his eldest son, the present Sheriff. His second son,
Richard, succeeded to the Adderley estates, under the will of the late Sir Corbet Corbet,
Baronet. He died 25th January, 1877, and was succeeded by his son, Henry Reginald,
now (1884) of Adderley, who is married to a daughter of Sir Philip de Malpas Grey
Egerton, Baronet, Member of Parliament for West Cheshire. The third son, Robert, died
in 1829, and the youngest was Vincent Roger. For the early history of the family, see
Blakeway’s Sheriffs of Shropshire, pp. 43 and 130, under the years 1249 and 1798.
Sir Andrew died at Brancepeth Castle, whilst on a visit to Viscount Boyne, 13tlx
September, 1855, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Vincent Rowland, 3rd Baronet,
of whom hereafter. His second son, Andrew George, Captain 52nd Light Infantry, was
born 28th July, 1824, and married, 19th April, 1853, Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Ralph
Thomas Adderley, of Coton and Barlaston, in the county of Stafford, Esquire, and cousin
to Sir Charles Adderley, created Baron Norton. The third, Reginald John, born 14th
October, 1825, married in 1854, the Baroness Maltzin, and died 26th December, 1877,
leaving two sons. The fourth and youngest son, Walter Robert, Captain 49th Regiment,
born 25th March, 1832, was through the campaign in the Crimea, and died on his way
home, 19th March, 1855. His eldest daughter, Elizabeth Mary, married Edward Holmes
Baldock, Esquire, Member of Parliament for Shrewsbury, and had a son and two daughters,
the second of whom is married to Francis Charles, 3rd Earl of Kilmorey, who, as Viscount
Newry, contested the Borough of Shrewsbury at the General Election of 1880. During
the Shrievalty of Sir Andrew Corbet, there was a Winter Assize, held for the first time
at Shrewsbury.
1844. JOHN CHARLES BURTON-BOROUGH.
ARMS. —Gules, the Root of an Oak Tree, eradicated and couped, in pale, sprouting out two branches, ppr. with the shield of
Pallas hanging thereon, Or.
JOHN CHARLES BURTON-BOROUGH, of Chetwynd Park, in
the county of Salop, and Hulland Hall, in the county of
Derby, was the son of Thomas Borough, of Castlefield, Esquire,
by Jane, only daughter of William Smithson, of Bedstone Park, in
the county of York, Esquire. He was born 30th July, 1810, and
married, 11th July, 1848, Elizabeth Charlotte, daughter of Rear--
Admiral Robert Gawen, and has issue three sons and one daughter. The family of


Borrow (as the name was formerly spelt) is lineally descended from Robert Borrowe,
(noticed by Leland in bis Itinerary), who died in 1418, and was father of Robert de
Stokeden, Lord of Erdborongh, in the county of Leicester. Thomas Borrow, of Castlefield,
Esquire, was the eldest son of Isaac Borrow, of Hulland, Esquire, by Honora, his second
wife, daughter of. Thomas Burton, Esquire, and eventually sole heiress of her brother,
Robert Burton,
The very ancient Staffordshire family of Burton, now represented in the elder line by
John Charles Burton-Borough, Esquire, derives its descent from Ingenulph de Burton,
Lord of Tutbury, in the county of Stafford, who flourished in the reign of William the
Conqueror; fifth in descent from whom was Sir James de Burton, Knight “ escutifer ”to
King Richard 1., and, by letters patent of that monarch, appointed Master of the celebrated
forest of Needwood. His great grandson, Adam de Burton, living temp. Edward I. and 11,
was one of the witnesses to Burton Abbey Roll in 1321, and, by his wife, Jane, daughter
and heiress of Richard de Mortimer, had a son, Nicholas de Burton, temp. Edward 11. and
111., who, by his first wife, Agnes, daughter of Stephen and sister and heiress of John
Curzon, of Raids, in the county of Stafford, (lineally descended from Africa, daughter of
Clave, King of Man), had William *de Burton, whose grandson of the same name was
Standard Bearer to King Henry YI, in his wars in France, and died 1469, aged 70. His
grandson, James Burton, married Eliza, daughter and co-heiress of John Hardwick, of
Bindley, in the county of Leicester, by whom he acquired that estate, and had two sons,
Robert and Thomas. Robert married Catherine, daughter of William Repington, of
Annington, in the county of Warwick, and had a son Ralph, father inter alia of those
two eminent literary characters, William Burton, the historian of Leicestershire, Barrister-
at-Law, and Reporter of the Common Pleas, and Robert Burton, of Seagrove, in the
county of Leicester, of which place he was Rector, also Vicar of St. Thomas’s, Oxford,
author of The Anatomy of Melancholy. This line ended in the historian’s grandson,
Constantine, who died, unmarried, 1642, and grand-daughter Helen, second wife of Francis
Burton, of Dronfield, hereinafter mentioned.
Thomas Burton, second son of James above-mentioned, married Elizabeth, daughter
and heiress of Robert Shaw, of the Hill, in the county of York, Esquire, and their great
grandson John Burton, of Dronfield, in the county of Derby, Esquire, had several children;
the eldest of whom, Thomas Burton, was father of Francis Burton, of Dronfield, who
married, first, Anne, daughter of Thomas Wright, of Unthank, Esquire, and, secondly, his
kinswoman, Helen Burton, aforesaid, grand-daughter of the historian. Francis and Helen
had two sons, who died without issue, and two daughters.
Thomas Burton, brother of Francis, was of London and Putney, and, by his second
wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir David Watkin, Knight, Chief Searcher of the Port of
London, was father of Robert Burton, Esquire, who died, unmarried, at Edmonton, in 1709,
and of Honora, heiress to her brother, who married, July Bth, 1708, Isaac Borrow, Esquire,
lineal ancestor of the present Sheriff.


The family of Borowe, alias Borrow, now Borough, was originally and very anciently
seated in the county of Norfolk, in which county Herald’s Coll., 4 Norfolk, p. 189,
the early portion of their pedigree.is recorded, John Borrow, Esquire, father of the
above Isaac, is the first member thereof who appears domiciled in Derbyshire, of which
county he was High Sheriff in 1688, being then resident at Hulland. He died in 1707,
leaving issue by Mary, his wife, daughter of Curwen Eawlinson, of Cark Hall, in the
county of Lancaster, Esquire, an only son, the said Isaac Borrow, and two daughters.
Isaac Borrow, Lord of Hulland and other property, was of Gray’s Inn, London, and
Mayor of Derby, in 1730 and 1742. During his first mayoralty, he re-built the Town Hall
of Derby. He died in 1745, having married, first, Mary, daughter of William Tempest,
of Waddon, in the county of Cambridge, and of Southampton Buildings, London, by whom
he had an only son, John Tempest Borrow, born August 16th, 1702, Lord of Hulland,
Hough, Musden, lands in Alsopp-in-the-dale, and Hanson Grange, in the county of Derby,
under his father’s marriage settlement; and by virtue of his own marriage with Mary,
heiress of the family of Allestrey, (by whom he had no issue), became Lord of Alvaston,
Boulton, and other property in the same county. He died at Lichfield, April 29th, 1781,
and by his will, proved May sth, 1781, after providing for his surviving widow, devised
all his real estates in fee simple to John, eldest son of his youngest brother.
Isaac Borrowe, the father, married, secondly, Honora, only daughter of Thomas, and
sister and heiress to Eobert Burton, before-mentioned, also heiress to the elder fine.
By this lady, who died August 19th,- 1756, he had four daughters, three of whom
married and had issue; also three sons, Thomas, John, and Isaac.
The youngest son died in infancy; the second, John, was born at Putney, September
9th, 1710, and married Barbara, daughter of Thomas Bainbrigge, of Woodseat, in the
county of Stafford, Esquire, by whom he had three sons, Isaac, who died, unmarried,
October 14th, 1813; Thomas, who also died unmarried, May 23rd, 1827 ; and John
Borrowe, afterwards Borough, the eldest son, born 1746, Lord of Hulland, et cetera, in the
county of Derby, and of property in the county of Stafford, by will of his uncle, the
above-named John Tempest Borrowe, to whom he was executor. He died June 15th, 1825,
and by his will, dated April 29th, 1823, devised all the above-mentioned estates, first, to
his surviving brother, Thomas, (who died in 1827), for life ; secondly, to his first cousin,
Thomas Borough, for life; and, thirdly, to the present John Charles Burton Borough.
Thomas Borrowe, eldest son of Isaac and Honora, was of Castlefields, in the county
of Derby; of Merton College, Oxford; and of Gray’s Inn, London; Eecorder of Derby for
forty years, and died August 6th, 1786, leaving issue by his wife, Ann, daughter and
heiress of John Alt, of Loughborough, in the county of Leicester, Esquire, one son, (his
only daughter, Anna Honora, having died young), Thomas, who, agreeably with a notifi-
cation to, and record made by, the College of Arms, changed the spelling of the surname
to Borough.


This Thomas Borough, was of University College, Oxford, and of the Middle Temple,
London, sometime a Captain in the Leicester Militia. He purchased the Chetwynd estate,
in the county of Salop, from Thomas Lloyd, Esquire, in 1802-3, and removed from Castle-
fields to the mansion at Chetwynd Park, in 1803. He married Jane, only surviving
daughter of William Smithson, of Ledstone Park, Ferrybridge, in the county of York, by
which lady he had three daughters; Anne, who died in infancy; Jane, married, May 3rd,
1832, to George Hill, Esquire, then Captain in the Royal Horse Guards Blue, eldest son
of Sir Robert Chambre Hill, and nephew to the late General Rowland Hill, G.C.8.,
Ist Baron and Ist Viscount Hill, of Hardwicke Grange, and of Hawkstone; and Anna
Honora; also two sons, John Charles Borough, who died in infancy, at Ledstone Park;
and the present Sheriff, John Charles Burton Borough, of Christ Church, Oxford, and
now (1884) of Chetwynd Park
1845. ST. JOHN CHIVERTON CHARLTON.
ARMS.—Or, a lion, rampant gu; a canton sinister. Quarterly, 1st and 4th gu, ten bezants, four, three, two, and one for ZOUCH;
2nd and 3rd az. on a mount ppr. a lion passant-guardant, Or, for FITZ-AER.
gT. JOHN CHIVERTON CHARLTON, of Apley Castle, in the
county of Salop, Esquire, was the only son and heir of
William Charlton, of Apley, Esquire, Sheriff 1807, by Catherine,
relict of Thomas Thomason, of the city of York, Esquire. He
was born 29th May, 1799, and married, first, 7th September, 1820,
Jane Sophia, only daughter of Thomas Meyrick, of Bush, in the
county of Pembroke, Esquire, (which lady died March 26th, 1837), by
whom he had issue, two sons and five daughters. The eldest son, St. John William, was
a Captain in the Eoyal Dragoons, and one of the survivors of the fatal charge of Balaclava,
in the Crimean War. He died, v. p, 30th October, 1864. The second son, Thomas, who
was born 1837, and .educated at Eton, on succeeding to the Pembroke estates of his uncle,
assumed the additional surname of Meyrick. He married, 1860, Mary Rhoda,' second
daughter of Colonel Frederick Hill, and niece of the second Viscount Hill. He represented
the Pembroke Boroughs from 1868 to 1874, and was created a Baronet in 1880.
Mr. Charlton married, secondly, 24th February, 1842, his cousin, Ann, third daughter
of Philip Charlton, of Wytheford, Esquire, by whom he had one daughter, Mary Eleanor,
married, in 1868, to the Honourable Henry Edmund Butler, only son of the 13th Viscount
Mountgarrett. On his death, in 1873, the Apley estate fell to the surviving son, now
(1884) Sir Thomas Charlton Meyrick, Baronet, Lieutenant-Colonel in the Shropshire Militia.
For the early history of the family, see Blakeway’s Sheriffs of Shropshire, under
the years 1472, 1665, and 1757.


1846. RICHARD HENRY KINCHANT.
ARMS.—Azure, three lions’ heads, two and one, erased, Arg., ducally crowned, Or.
RICHARD HENRY KINCHANT, of Park Hall, in the county
of Salop, Esquire, was the nephew of John Charlton Kinchant,
of Park Hall, Esquire, Sheriff in 1775. The name of this family
was formerly Quinchant. John Quinchant, the first who appears in
English history, was born in France, and was brought over to
England by his mother, whilst an infant, the only part of the
family who escaped the persecution of Louis XIY. He ultimately married a daughter of
Benjamin Scott, of Eltham, (ancestor of the Scotts of Betton Strange), a London merchant,
and became a Captain in General Harry Pulteney’s Kegiment of Foot, and was killed at
the battle of Fontenoy, 1745. His son, John, 1 who altered the spelling of the name to
Kin chant, was a Captain in the 23rd Eegiment. He married Emma, daughter of Sir
Francis Charlton, of Ludford, in the county of Hereford, Baronet, relict of Richard Jenkins,
of Bicton, in the county of Salop, Esquire, and previously, of John Lloyd, of Aston,
Esquire, co-heiress of her brother, Job Charlton, of Park Hall, Esquire, by which marriage
he acquired the Park Hall estate. He had two other sons, Francis, of Easton, in the county
of Hereford, who took holy orders, and Richard, above mentioned, father of the present
Sheriff. He had also two daughters, Emma, who married John Gardner, of Sansaw, in the
county of Salop, Esquire, and Eliza, who married Richard Rocke, of Shrewsbury, and of
Trefnanny, in the county of Montgomery, Esquire. The present Sheriff was the eldest son
of Richard, of the H. E. I. Co.’s Civil Service, youngest brother of the Sheriff of 1775, by
Myra Catherine Anne, daughter of John Wilkinson, Esquire, Recorder of Bombay. By
this marriage he had also a second son, John Robert Nathaniel, and a daughter, Myra
Anne; this lady married Charles John Ellis, Esquire, of the East India Civil Service, and
had one son and one daughter. John Robert Nathaniel entered into holy orders,
and, since 1833, has been and is now (1884) Yicar of Llanvair-Waterdine, in the county
of Salop. He married, May 20th, 1835, Maria, eldest daughter of Richard Phayre,
H. E. I. C. S., of Claremont Buildings, in the town of Shrewsbury, Esquire, by whom he
has three sons and three daughters. •
The elder son, Richard Henry, (the present Sheriff), was born 16th January, 1804,
and married, 2nd December, 1831, Eliza Maria, only daughter of the Reverend Richard
Bewley Caton, of Binfield, in the county of Lincoln. By this lady he had three sons
(1) The Burgess 801 l of Shrewsbury records that on the 6th day of October, 1752, John Quinchant, of Salop, Esquire, was
admitted and sworn a Burgess.


Charlton John, born 27th May, 1834; Job Henry, born 20th August, 1835; and Richard
Caton, born 4th April, 1841; and two daughters, Eliza Power, and Myra Catherine Anne,
the former of whom married, 23rd April, 1851, Edward Frederick Venables, third son of
Lazarus Jones Venables, of Woodhill, in the county of Salop, Esquire.
Mr. Kinchant died after a few hours’ illness, Bth day of. June, 1864, and is buried
in the family vault under the chancel of his parish church, Whittington, in the county of
Salop; and, shortly afterwards, the Park Hall estate was sold by his heir and successor,
to the Honourable Robert Stapleton Wellington Cotton, eldest son of the second Viscount
Combermere.
J OSEPH VENABLES LOVETT, of Belmont, in the county of
Salop, Esquire, was the second son of John Lovett, of Belmont,
Esquire, by Anne, daughter of Edward Venables, of Liverpool,
Esquire. He was born Ist August, 1787, and married April 24th,
1815, Margaret, daughter of Richard Heaton, of Plas Heaton, in
the county of Denbigh, Esquire, by whom he had three sons and
1847. JOSEPH VENABLES LOVETT.
ARMS.—Arg., three wolves, passant, in pale, sa.
five daughters. He died 15th January, 1866, and was succeeded by his eldest son,
Thomas Heaton Lovett, formerly a Major in the 98th Eegiment, and Honorary Colonel of
the 2nd Administrative Battalion of the Shropshire Rifle Yolunteers.
This family claims to be a branch of the house of Lovett, of Liscombe, Bucks, which
descended from Richard de Louet, who lived at the time of the Conquest. Liscombe
still remains in the possession of the Lovetts, who have held it in an unbroken male line
for more than 600 years. One of the Lovett tombs in the Chancel of the Church of
Soulbury, in the county of Bucks, is dated 1304. William Louet, brother to the above
Richard Louet, was Master of the Wolf-hounds, A.D. 1067.


1848. WILLIAM HENRY FRANCIS PLOWDEN.
ARMS.—Azure, a fesse dancettée, the two upper points terminating in fleurs-de-lis, Or.¹
HENRY FRANCIS PLOWDEN, of Plowden, in the
county of Salop, Esquire, was nephew and heir of Edmund
Plowden, of Plowden, (referred to hereafter), who married Anna
Maria, daughter of Robert Burton, of Longner, Esquire, (Sheriff
1763), whose only child, Anna Maria, married the Reverend John
Eyton, Vicar of Wellington, and Rector of Eyton-on-the-Wealdmores,
in the county of Salop. The present Sheriff was born 21st October,
1802, and married, 23rd January, 1834, Barbara, eldest daughter of Francis Cbolmeley, of
Brandsby Hall, in tbe county of York, Esquire. He died 23rd July, 1870, and was
succeeded by bis son, William Francis, now (1884) of Plowden, wbo married, 12tb October,
1874, Lady Mary Dundas, sister of Lawrence, 3rd Earl of Zetland, by wbom he has three
sons, William Edwin, born 21st May, 1876 ; Francis Charles, bom 26th September, 1877;
and Roger Edmund Joseph, born sth June, 1879.
The family of Plowden ranks amongst the most ancient in the county of Salop,
having resided at Plowden, 2 in the parish of Lydbury North, in unbroken succession nearly
seven hundred years. At the head of the family tree, stands Roger de Plowden, who
went with King Richard to the Holy Land, (3 Richard 1., 1191), when, by his valiant
and prudent conduct, he, in 1194,, obtained the fleurs-de-lis, as an augmentation to his
arms.
His grandson, Roger de Ploeden, is mentioned in the Hundred Rolls, 39, Henry 111.,
1254, page 78, voh 2, as then holding property in Eyton and Ploeden, The former
property he acquired with his wife, who was daughter and heiress of Philip de Eyton, 8
alias Eaton, lord of that place, near Plowden, and their son, Philip de Plouedene,
inherited that estate, which continues in the family to the present day. 4
(1) Anna.—The fesse dancettge has 2 upper points only, but Mr. Eyton states that in the Grammar of Heraldry, 1724,
page 35, section 8, speaking of fesses — Fesse dancettee Flowden in this work, the fesse has three upper points.
(2) Pleaudain and Playdane are mentioned in Beauchamp’s Plantagenets’ work—as well as Ployden and Playden —he says
the Norman pronunciation for Dane is Dene, e pronounced like a ; he maintains that Ployden means kill Dane.
(3) There is no mention in any of the Plowden pedigrees of the marriage of a Roger de Plowden with the daughter of a
Philip de Eyton, nor is it named in the Eyton pedigree in Burke’s Landed Gentry, (unless in a very recent number). There are
hamlets named Eaton and Eyton to this day, close to Plowden.
(4) The Reverend R. Eyton mentions, as living between the years 1252 and 1280, a Eager de Plowden, a William de Plowden,
and a Philip de Plowden, probably brothers or uncles of John de Plowden, first of the name of John, who was Lord of the
Manor in the reign of King Henry 111. Roger de Plowden, and William, his brother, are named in some old deeds belonging to
Humphrey Sandford, Esquire, not dated, but, by comparing them with others, supposed to be about or before 1278.


Philip’s great-grandson, John de Plowden, otherwise John Plowden, married Joan,
daughter of John Salter, by, as is said by some genealogists, a daughter of Sir Adam de
Montgomery; this, Mr. Eyton thinks, is doubtful. 1
John Plowden, son and heir of the last-named John, married Maud, daughter of Sir John
Burley, of Broncroft, Knight, by whom he had a daughter, Katherine, married to John
Higgons, of Church Stretton, Esquire, and a son, Edmund Plowden, of Plowden, admitted
a burgess of Shrewsbury, 1451; who, by his wife Jane, daughter of Edmund de Clebury,
had three sons, John, Rowland, and Richard; and four daughters, Margaret, wife of John
Walcot, of Walcot, Esquire; Sibilla, wife of Grulfydd ap Reignold, ap Sir Gruffydd
Yaughan, Knight; Anne and Alice.
Humphrey, son of John Plowden, married Elizabeth, daughter of John Sturry, of
Down Rossall, near Shrewsbury, Esquire, by which lady, who died March 30th, 1559,
having survived her husband two years, he had at the least nine children; the eldest of
whom, Edmund, born at Plowden, 1517, was educated for the Bar, and became, as Lloyd
in his MS. Collection states, “the famous Lawyer and Sarjeant” of the quoif, to whom
the students of that profession are indebted “ for his excellent commentaries,” being, as
Fuller, in his Worthies, states, “ one who excellently deserves of our Municipal Law, in his
learned writings thereon.” Though a Roman Catholic, he was very much in the confidence
of Queen Elizabeth, who consulted him upon all important questions; and, as a proof of
the high opinion she had of his integrity, granted him a license to have a private Mass
in his own houses at Plowden and Shiplake. 2
An interesting account of this eminent individual, may be seen in Blakeway’s Sheriffs
of Shropshire, p. 222, &c.
In 1580, he appears upon the books of St. Mary’s Church, Shrewsbury, as a
contributor to the repairs of the windows of the High Altar, and Trinity Chapel, in that
Church, blown down by the great tempest October 28th, 1579.® He is said to have been
author of the oft-quoted proverb—“ The case is altered, quoth Plowden.” Many different
accounts are given of its origin, but the following version of it, derived from sources
which are indisputable, may be accepted as the true one. Under the operation of the
Penal Laws against Catholics, a priest was liable to be punished with death, and anybody
convicted of having assisted at Mass, to various severe penalties. It is related of Edmund
Plowden that he once came within danger of the law. One day, some evil-disposed
persons informed him that Mass was about to be celebrated in a certain house in the
(1) Adam de Montgomery had only one daughter, Alice, who married Eoger de la More, and who, either in herself or-
her issue, became heir to her brother Thomas.
(2) From the information of the late Edmund Plowden, Esquire, to the late Thomas Campbell Eyton, Esquire.
(3) This tempest is described in Taylor’s MSS. in the Library of Shrewsbury School, from which all matters relating to
Shropshire were transcribed by the Reverend William Allport Leighton, and published in the Transactions of the Shropshire
ArchKological and Natural History Society in 1880.


neighbourhood, in case he might wish to assist thereat. Edmund accepted the invitation,
attended the service, and was seen to make the sign of the Cross, and use his Prayer
Book. Shortly afterwards, he was summoned and tried for the offence, hut being suspicious
of foul play, somewhere or other, he cross-examined the witnesses, and amongst others, the
supposed Priest who had officiated. He demanded of this man whether he would swear
to being a Priest, and upon his answering in the negative, “ Then,” quoth Plowden, “ the
case is altered, no Priest, no Mass; no Mass, no violation of the Law.”
“ The case is altered, quoth Plowden,” became a common proverb. (Sec various
family MSS., and also Cooper’s Athence Cantab, vol. I, page 502.)
He was Treasurer for the Honourable Society of the Middle Temple, 1572, when
their magnificent hall was erected, to the building of which he was a great promoter.
Camden, in speaking of him, says—“ Vitce integritate inter omnes sues professionis nulli
secundus.” He married Katherine, daughter of William Sheldon, of Beoley, in the county
of Worcester, and of Weston, in the county of Warwick, by which lady he had three
sons and three or four daughters, and died, 6th February, 1584, aged 67. He was
buried on' the north side of the east end of the Choir of the Temple Church, London,"
where, on a monument erected to his memory, is his effigy and the following inscription;—
“ Conditur in hoc tumvilo corpus Edmundi Plowden armigeri. Claris, ortus, parentibus,
“apud Plowden in Comitatu Salop natus est; a pueritia in literarum studio liberaliter
“ est educatus, in provectione vero cetate legibus et operam dedit. Senex
“jam factus, et annum cetatis suce agens 67, mundo valedicens, in Christo Jesu sancte
a obdormivit, die sexto, mensis. Februar, anno 1584”
Has grandson, Francis Plowden, married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Alban
Butler, of Aston-le-Walls, in the county of Northampton, Esquire, by which marriage he
acquired that estate;' and of his son, Sir Edmund Plowden, to his honour be it said,
that though a Catholic, he was a true loyalist, fighting for his King and the Monarchy
during the Civil War, for which he suffered in his estate, being obliged to sell the
Burghfield estate, in the county of Berks, together with some property in Shropshire.
Edmund Plowden, son and heir of Sir Edmund, by Penelope, daughter and co-heiress
of Sir Maurice Drummond, Knight, was father of William Plowden, 1 of Plowden and
(1) William Plowden was a colonel in King James’s service, and commanded the second regiment ol Guards at the
Battle of the Boyne, on King James’s side, whose fortunes he followed into Ireland and France; but, after a short residence at
the Court of St. Germains, he was, through the interest of his wife’s uncle, the Duke of Shrewsbury, and the Countess of
Sutherland, permitted to return to England, and take possession of the family estates, his three elder brothers having died
without surviving issue. From his presumed attachment to the Countess, originated the tale of “ Plowden, of Plowden Hall,”
by Wycherley, the comic Shropshire poet. He built the mansion-house at Aston-le-Walls, and lived there a few years, but,
being a Papist, he became obnoxious to the violent Whigs of the neighbourhood, and particularly to a Colonel Montague, who
then resided in Lord Guildford’s house at Chipping Warden; and, not having taken the oath of allegiance to King William,
his six coach horses, by virtue of an act then recently passed against non-jurors, were seized on entering Banbury, and
impounded by a magistrate, being worth about five pounds each. He immediately quitted Aston in disgust, and it has been
deserted by the family ever since. The estate, however, has not been alienated, and it is now vested in his great-grandson,
Edmund Plowden, Esquire.—{Baker’s Northampton.)


Aston-le-Walls, who married, first, Mary Morley, and secondly, Mary, daughter of John
Stonor, of Stonor, in the county of Oxford, by Mary, sister of Francis Talbot, fourteenth
Earl of Shrewsbury, and, thereby, their issue claim descent from Edward 111., through
Stonor, Talbot, Fortescue, and Manners. William Plowden married, thirdly, Maria,
daughter of Sir C. Lyttleton.
William Plowden’s grandson, Edmund, married Elizabeth Lucy, daughter and co-heiress
of William Thomson, of Leicester Square, London, by whom he was father of Edmund
and William; Elizabeth Lucy, wife of Sir Henry Tichborne, Baronet; Lucy Mary,
married to Anthony Wright, Esquire; Maria Theresa, who died young; Felicia, a nun of
Princulhoff, near Bruges; Frances Xaveria, wife of Francis Sheldon Constable, Esquire;
and Mary Margaretta, married to Charles Throckmorton, Esquire.
Edmund Plowden, eldest son and heir of Edmund and Elizabeth, was bom in 1756,
and, September Bth, 1785, married Anna Maria, only daughter of Robert Burton, of
Longner, in the county of Salop, Esquire, as previously mentioned, by which lady, who
died July 21st, 1830, he had an only child, and in her issue, heiress, Anna Maria,
who married the Reverend John Eyton, M.A., Rector of Eyton, and Vicar of Wellington,
and had issue six sons, the third of whom was the Reverend Robert William Eyton, M.A,
the eminent author of Antiquities of Shropshire. Mr. Plowden died April 4th, 1838,
aged 82, and the estates, being strictly entailed on the male line, passed to his nephew,
William Henry Francis Plowden, the present Sheriff ; but he bequeathed handsome fortunes
to each of his surviving grandchildren, who, through his wife, Miss Burton, claim descent
from Kings Henry HI., and Edward 1., 11., and HI.
William Plowden, younger brother of Edmund, married Mary, daughter of Simon
Winter, of London, Esquire, by whom he had two sons and one daughter. The elder
son, William Henry Francis Plowden, succeeded as heir male to the estates of Plowden,
Aston-le-Walls, &c., and is the first of this very ancient family who has filled the office
of High Sheriff for the county of Salop.
Since the above was written, the following early pedigree of the Plowdens has been
supplied to the Editor by an acknowledged authority, and it confirms the above statement
in its main points, besides giving other interesting particulars relating to this ancient
family.
Eooee de Plowden, at the siege of Acre in 1191.
His son,
Philip de Plowden, 1215—1230. A William de Plowden, living in 1203, probably a younger brother of Eoger de Plowden.
(See Byton’s Antiquities of Shropshire, vol. XI., p. 219.)
His son,
John de Plowden, (1), 1216—1272.)
His son,
John de Plowden, (2), 1306—1316, said to have married a daughter of Sir Adam de Montgomery.


His aon,
John de Plowden, (3), married Johanna (Joan or Jane) Salter, daughter of John Salter. They had two sons and six
daughters—John and 'William; Eose, Elizabeth, Joyce, Ellinor, Katherine, and Margaret. One of the daughters, Eose, married
Sir Eowland Wedinghurg, whose property adjoined that of her father; Elizabeth married Sir Eohert Corbett, of Lee, in the
county of Salop; Ellinor, Eoger Corbett, of Lee, (probably a younger brother of Sir Eohert); Katherine, Sir Geoffrey Harley,
of Brampton, in the county of Hereford; and Margaret, Mitton, of Weston, in the county of Salop. Of the sons, William,
the younger, married Cecillia, daughter and heiress of Thomas Mitton; and John, the eldest son, succeeded his father, and
married a daughter of Sir John Burley, Knight.
John de Plowden, (4), married Matilda (or Maud) Burley. They had a son Edmund, and a daughter Katherine, who
married John Higgons, of Stretton, in the county of Salop, Esquire. (No other children are named in the Plowden pedigrees.)
His aon,
Edmund Plowden, married Jane, daughter of Edmund Cleobury, or Clibury. (The name of Edmund Plowden occurs in a
faculty or vestry meeting at St. Mary’s, Shrewsbury, May 15th, 1451, 29 Henry VI.
His son,
John Plowden, (5), married Margaret, daughter of John Blaewny, or Blayney.
His son,
Humphrey Plowden, succeeded to the Plowden estates, and died March 10th, 1557. He married Elizabeth, daughter of
John Sturry, of Down Eossall, in the county of Salop, Esquire, and widow of WiEiam Wollasoott. They had three sons and
seven daughters, viz., Edmund Plowden, (the great Lawyer); John, who died without issue; and Edward, who married a
daughter of Thomas Lee, of Langley; Margaret, married Eichard Sandford; Jane, who married first, Eiohard Blunden, of
Burghfield, in the county of Berks, and secondly, Lewis Jones; Elizabeth, married Peter Greenway; Anchoret, Eowland Byton,
of Eyton; Anne, Thomas Higge; Mary, Charles Needham; and Joyce, Leonard Meysey.
Edmund Plowden (the Lawyer) married Katherine, daughter of William Sheldon, of Beoley, in the county of Worcester,
Esquire, by Mary, his wife, daughter of William Willington, of Barchester, in the county of Warwick. They had six children,
viz., Edmund, Humphrey, Francis, Mary, Anne, and Mary.
Edmund Plowden, the eldest surviving son of the great Lawyer, died unmarried, in 1586, and was succeeded by his next
surviving brother, Francis Plowden.
Feancis Plowden married Mary, daughter of Thomas Fermor, Esquire, and sister of Sir Eichard Fermor, (or Farmer), of
Somerton, in the county of Oxford. They had twelve children, of whom only seven are mentioned in the pedigrees, viz., Francis,
Edmund, Thomas, Mary, Katherine, Anne, and Margaret. Francis, the eldest, succeeded his father in the family estates.
Edmund, the second son, (styled in his will, dated July 29th, 1655, “ Sir Edmund Plowden, Lord Earl Palatine, Governor and
Captain General of the Province of New Albion, in America,” went out with a considerable number of emigrants, and settled
in that country. He married Mabel, daughter and heiress of John Chatterton, of Chatterton, in the county of Lancaster,
Esquire. The Plowdens of Ewhurst and Lassam, in the county of Hants, are descended from him. Thomas, died unmarried.
Feancis Plowden, eldest son of the above-named Francis, succeeded his father, and married, first, Elizabeth, daughter and
heiress of Alban Butler, of Aston-le-Walls, in the county of Northampton, Esquire, by whom he had two children, Edmund-and
Mary. The latter married Edward Massey, of Puddington, in the county of Chester, Esquire. Francis Plowden’s second wife was
Katherine, daughter and co-heiress of Thomas Audeley-de-Morton, Esquire, in the county of Norfolk, and widow of Eichard
Butler, of Gallon, county Kilkenny, Ireland. Francis had two daughters by this second marriage.
His son,
Edmund Plowden, of Plowden and Aslon-le-Walls, married Elizabeth, daughter of George Cotton, of Bedbampton, in the
county of Sussex, Esquire. They had a daughter Elizabeth, (who married Walter Blount, of Mapledurham, in the county of
Oxford, Esquire), and six sons, viz., Edmund, Francis, Eiohard, John Cotton, George, and Joseph. (For particulars, see Burke’s
latest edition.)
Edmund Plowden, the eldest son, succeeded his father, and married Penelope, daughter and co-heiress of Sir Maurice
Drummond, Knight. Edmund and Penelope had one daughter, Dorothy, and five sons, all of whom took to the Church, with
the exception of the fourth son, William, who married three times, the first wife was Mary Morley, who died with her infant in her
first confinement. His second wife was Mary Stonor, daughter of John Stonor, of Stonor, in the county of Oxford, Esquire,
and from whom the present possessor of Plowden is descended. They had five children, their eldest son William married Lord
Dormer’s daughter. His third wife was Maria, daughter of Sir C. Lyttelton, by whom he had issue.


1849. PANTON CORBETT.
ARMS.—Arg. two Havens in pale, sable, within a bordure engrailed sable, bezantèe.
jpANTON COEBETT, of Longnor, in the county of Salop, and
Leighton, in the county of Montgomery, Esquire, was the
eldest son of the Venerable Joseph Corbett, 8.D., Archdeacon of
Salop, in the diocese of Hereford, by his first wife, Jane Josepha,
daughter of Thomas Panton, Esquire, of Leghorn. He was bom
in 1785, and married, in 1814, Lucy Favoretta, only daughter
of Trevor Jones, of Lichfield, Esquire.
This is a branch of the great Shropshire family of Corbet, of Moreton Corbet, descended,
though not lineally, from the Corbets of. Cans, who acquired that Barony soon after the
Conquest. A John Corbet was, 4th Henry Y., appointed by the Abbot and Convent of
Shrewsbury, "Forester of the Wrekin; his son John acquired Longnor by marriage with the
heiress of Carles, of Albrighton, and he was styled in 35th Henry VI., “John Corbett de
Longnore, gentilman.” Sir Edward Corbett, of Longnor, who was Sheriff in 1651, and
fifth in descent from him, was created a Baronet by Charles I. in 1642. The senior
branch of the family expired in 1774, at the death of Sir Eichard Corbett. The title
devolved upon Charles Corbett, of London, great-grandson of Thomas, the second son of
the first Baronet; but the estates were devised by Sir Eichard, to Eobert Flint, great-
grandson (maternally) of AVaties Corbett, youngest brother of the aforesaid Thomas, who,
thereupon, took the surname of Corbett, and was Sheriff in 1778. Upon his death,
without issue, the estates devolved on his nephew, Archdeacon Plymley, who assumed the
arms and surname of Corbett, in 1804. The Archdeacon was, however, not permitted to
enjoy his inheritance without dispute. An attempt was made in 1813 to oust him from
possession of the estates. Eichard Corbett, (who claimed to be the sixth. Baronet), as
heir-at-law of the before-mentioned Charles, sued the Archdeacon, in formd pauperis, under
a writ of ejectment, directed by the Court of Chancery, and the cause was tried at
Shrewsbury at the March Assize of 1813, before Mr. Justice Bayley and a Special Jury,
on the ground of the incompetency of the testator, (Sir Eichard Corbett), but the case of
the Archdeacon was so completely established, almost entirely by documentary evidence,
that the Counsel for the plaintiff withdrew from the cause without calling witnesses, the
learned judge observing that no case was ever more clearly established, and that he should
have stopped the trial sooner, if it had not been a pauper cause.
The present Sheriff was nominated as a candidate for the representation of Shrewsbury,
in 1819, against John Mytton, Esquire, but was unsuccessful. At the general election in


the following year, on the death of George 111., he was elected without opposition, in
conjunction with the. Honourable Henry Grey Bennett. In 1826, he was again returned,
hut, in 1830, he failed to secure re-election. 1 Some years afterwards he contested the
Montgomery Boroughs, hut without success, and, subsequently, was elected Deputy-Chairman
of Quarter Sessions for the County of Salop. He afterwards became Chairman, and so
continued until near his death. He sold the Leighton estate to Christopher Bullen, Esquire,
by whom it -was devised to John Naylor, Esquire, the present possessor. He died
22nd November, 1855, and was succeeded by his second and only surviving son, Edward,
who was horn 1817, and educated at Eton. He entered the army in 1837, as Ensign, in
the 51st King’s Own Light Infantry, retired 1844, and is now (1884) Lieutenant-Colonel of
the 3rd Battalion of King’s Light Infantry (Shropshire Militia), to which he was appointed
1855, 2 This gentleman married, 1842, at Perth, in Western Australia, Elizabeth Ann
Theresa, daughter of Kobert Scholl, Esquire, by whom he has a numerous family. He
was elected M.P. for South Shropshire, in December, 1868, and again in 1874, but
resigned his seat in 1877. His eldest son, Edward, who was formerly Lieutenant,
17th Lancers, and is now a Captain in the Shropshire Regiment of Yeomanry, married,
12th July, 1871, Louisa Mary, elder daughter of Sir Charles Edmund Isham, of Lamport,
in the county of Northampton, Baronet. Mr. Panton Corbett, had, besides, one daughter,
Favoretta,-born 1815, who married, 7th April, 1842, John James Edward, elder son of
Admiral Sir Edward Hamilton, of Trebinshum House, in the county of Brecknock,
Baronet, who died, v.p. 1847, and is the mother of Sir Edward Archibald Hamilton,
2nd Baronet'.
(1) The cause o£ his defeat was described in the following humorous distich, in The Salopian Journal: —
“ Said Jenkins to Salop,
‘l’m off in a gallop,
I won by a head at Nagpore 1 ’
Said Slaney, ‘ Don’t banter,
I’m off in a canter,
In that, who could ever do more ?
Said Corbett to Salop,
‘ Pray, why should I gallop ?
My nag shall walk over the course,’
Said Salop, ‘They’ve won it!
And you could have done it,
By clapping gold spurs to your horse.’ ”
(2) Colonel Corbett resigned his commission, October, 1884, and was succeeded by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Thomas Charlton
Meyrick, of Apley Castle, Baronet.


1850. RALPH MERRICK LEEKE.
ARMS.—Arg. on a chief, gn., a fleur-de-lis, Or, over all, a bend, engr., az.
E ALPH MERRICK LEEKE, of Longford, Esquire, was the only
son of Thomas Leeke, of Longford, Esquire, by Louisa, youngest
daughter of Brigadier-General Robert Shawe. He was born 4th
September, 1813, and married, 26th October, 1847, Lady Hester
Urania, daughter of Newton Fellowes, 4th Earl of Portsmouth, by
his wife, Catharine, daughter of Hugh, Ist Earl Fortescue. The
issue of this marriage was four sons and five daughters. The eldest
son, Ralph, who was born 1849, entered the army, and became Captain and Lieutenant-
Colonel in the Grenadier Guards. He married, in 1881, the Honourable Mary Theresa,
second daughter of the late Lord Manners, and has issue a son and daughter. The second
son, Thomas Newton, is married to Annabella Mary, daughter of Sir James Williams
Drummond, Baronet, of Edwinsford, in the county of Carmarthen, and is now (1884)
Vicar of Inkberrow, Worcestershire. Mr. Leeke was a Magistrate and Deputy-Lieutenant
of the county of Salop, and for many years Captain in the South Salopian Regiment of
Yeomanry Cavalry.
Mr. Leeke died November 26th, 1882, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Ralph,
above-mentioned,
Longford is one of those numerous manors which have undergone many vicissitudes
since the Conquest. It was granted, by the Norman Earl, Roger, as we learn from
Domesday, to one of his dependents. It is there stated that “ Turold holds of the Earl,
“ Longford. Edwyn, the Earl, held it. There are six hides with four berewicks, and
“ they pay geld. In the demesne are two hides, and there eight villans have three
“ ox-teams. Two knights hold of him four hides, and have three ox-teams, and four
“ neatherds, and seven villans, and three bordarii, and one radman with three ox-teams
“ and a half, and there might be four ox-teams more. There is a mill. In the time of
“ King Edward the whole manor was worth nine pounds; now, forty-four shillings.
“He found it waste.” This extraordinary depreciation in value is not accounted for,
but the fact is indisputable. After the decease of Turold, the manor reverted to the
Crown, when Henry I. granted it one Hamo, whose successors held it down to the early
part of the 14th century. Here they held their Eree Court twice a year, and it is said
“They had gallows and warren, and exercised their rights in these respects.” At, the
time of the Civil War it was held by Thomas Talbot, eldest son of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, to whom, and to his wife, a splendid monument now exists in a plain little
chapel standing in the graveyard behind Longford Church, How the estate came into


the family of Talbot does not appear, but it remained in their hands until 178 7, when
it was purchased from the then Earl by Ralph Leeke, Esquire, Sheriff in 1796, grand-
father of the present Sheriff.
A full account of this family, which has, for more than five centuries, held an
important position in the county, will be found at page 228, of Blakeway’s Sheriffs of
Shropshire, under the Shrievalty of Ralph Leeke, the grandfather of the present Sheriff,
who filled that office in 1796.
JJOBERT HENRY CHENEY, of Badger Hall, in the county of
Salop, Esquire. This family claims to be a branch of the
family of Cheney (or Cheyne) of Sherland, in the Isle of Sheppey, 1
founded by Ralph de Cainets, one of the companions-in-arms of the
Conqueror. Of this ancient house was Sir John Cheney, K.G-., who
was created Baron Cheney by Henry YIL, for his service at
Bosworth Field, to whom there is an altar tomb in Salisbury
1851. EGBERT HENRY CHENEY.
ARMS.—Az. six lions rampant, Arg. a canton Erm.
Cathedral. From him descended Robert Cheney, of Meynell Langley, in the county of
Derby, who was son of Edward Cheney, of Money ash, in the same county. Edward
Cheney married Anne, sister of Isaac Hawkins Browne, of Burton-on-Trent, Esquire,
Member of Parliament for Wenlock, Isaac Hawkins Browne, son of the above, and
Member of Parliament for Bridgnorth from 1784 to 1812, Sheriff, 1783, D.C.L., and
F.R.S., 2 devised the Badger estate, which he had purchased from the Kinnersleys, to his
(1). Roger de Cheyne, o £ China, or Cheney Longville, was Sheriff in 1316, and Roger Cheyne in 1365, but Mr.
Blakeway does not connect them with the Cheneys of the present day.
(3) Died May 30th, 1818, and was buried at Badger. Mr. Blakeway in his Sheriffs, page 211, says of this gentleman’s father,
(who was a Barrister-at-Law), that “he did not obtain much practice, for the same reason that deterred him from speaking in
Parliament,” but does not give the reason. He relates, however, an anecdote to prove how high be stood in the estimation of
the legal luminaries of the day. He was sitting one day in a back seat in the Court of Chancery during the hearing of a cause,
the discussion of which involved some of the principles of the early feudal law, when Lord Chancellor Hardwick, observing that
the learned pleaders were not much at home in the subject, said courteously, “ I see a gentleman yonder, who, I am sure,
could throw much light on what we none of us seem to understand.”) Mr. Blakeway’s informant went on to say, “Mr. Browne
obeyed the call with great modesty, yet promptitude, and, in a very luminous manner, justified the high opinion conceived of
him by the Chancellor.” Lord Lyttelton (on the authority of the late Reverend Mackenzie Walcott, in a contribution to Salopian
Shreds and Patches, vol. HI., page 79J said to Mr. Browne one evening, having outstayed the usual hour, “You are so
entertaining, there is no leaving you; I think you are like the nightingale,' who sings the sweetest songs at midnight.” “ No,
my Lord,” replied Mr. Browne, “I am rather like the flying fish, who soars the higher for having his wings wet.” Dr. Johnson
is said to have expressed the following opinion of him: “Of all conveners, the late Hawkins Browne was the most delightful,
with whom I ever was in company; his talk was at once so elegant, so apparently artless, so pure, and so pleasing, it seemed
a perpetual stream of sentiment, enlivened by gaiety, and sparkling with images.”


first cousin and heir-at-law, Robert Cheney, (son of Edward above-mentioned), of the Ist
Guards, and a Lieutenant-General in the Army, who married, 1799, Harriet, youngest
daughter of Ralph Carr, of Dunstan Hill, in the county of Durham, Esquire. He died
in 1820, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Robert Henry, the present Sheriff, who
died in 1866.
The estate ultimately devolved on his nephew, Alfred Capel Cure, a Colonel in the
Grenadier Guards, second son of Capel Cure, of Blake Hall, Ongar, in the county of
Essex, Esquire, and Frederica, (Cheney), his wife, sister of the Sheriff, by whom it is
now held. Colonel Cure was born December, 1826.
1852. ROBERT BURTON.
ARMS. —Patty per pale, Purpure and Az., a cross engrailed, Or, between four roses, Arg.
J>OBERT BURTON, of Longner, in the parish of Saint Chad,
Esquire, was the eldest son of the Reverend Henry Burton,
Vicar of Atcham, of Madeley, and sometime Vicar of Holy Cross
and Saint Giles, all in the county of Salop, by his wife, Mary,
daughter of William Gittins, of Chilton, Esquire. He was born
28th April, 1f96, educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, and
married, first, Ist November, 1825, Catherine, second daughter of William Walcot, of Ferry
Park, in the county' of Dublin, and afterwards of The Moor, in the county of Salop,
Esquire, by whom he had one daughter, who married, 1851, her cousin, William Henry,
third son of the Reverend Charles Walcot, of Bitterley Court, and died, 1853. He married,
secondly, 6th August, 1835, Catherine, eldest daughter of the Reverend Herbert Oakeley,
of Oakeley, in the county of Salop, D.D., by whom he had five sons ; Robert Lingen,
born 1836, who succeeded his father at Longner, in 1860, married, in 1861, his cousin,
Catherine Sophia, eldest daughter of Richard Francis Cleaveland, commander R.N., and
died, 1881. Robert Henry Lingen, born 1841, married the only child of Sir Colley Harman
Scotland, Knight, late Chief Justice of Madras ; Robert Edward Lingen, born 1842, who
married Marion, eldest daughter of Colonel Soulden Oakeley, 56th Regiment, and died
in Texas, October 24th, 1883; two sons who died young, and one daughter, Constance
Lingen, married to Charles John Morris, of Oxon, in the county of Salop, and Woodeaton
Manor, in the county of Stafford, Sheriff, 1884. The present Sheriff was the last Mayor
of Shrewsbury (1835) under the old Corporation. He was again elected to that office in
the reformed Corporation in 1844, and was an Alderman to the time of his death, 14th
September, 1860. He was a Magistrate for the borough as well as for the county, and


a Deputy-Lieutenant; a Trustee of Shrewsbury School, and of the Municipal and most of
the other public Charities of the town, and was for some time Grand Master of the Loyal
Orange Lodge of England.
The Reverend Henry Burton, before-mentioned, was younger brother of Robert Burton,
of Longner, Esquire, Sheriff in 1804, who, dying without issue in 1841, was succeeded by
his nephew, the present Sheriff. Their father was Robert Lingen, the eldest son of
Thomas Lingen, of Radbrook, in the county of Gloucester, Esquire, by Anne, daughter of
Robert Burton, of Longner, Sheriff in 1709, heiress of her uncle, Thomas, the last, male
representative of the Burtons of Longner. In pursuance of the will of his great uncle, he
assumed the additional surname of Burton by Act of Parliament in 1748, and married,
7th June, 1749, Anne, daughter of Thomas Hill, of Tem, Esquire, (father of the first Lord
Berwick), and was the father of Robert, the Sheriff of 1804, and of the Reverend Henry
Burton, father of the present Sheriff.
The first of the name who appears on the roll of Sheriffs was John de Burton, who
appears to have held the office from 1354 to 1359, and the second being Edmund de
Burton, in 1371, who married Agnes-de-la-Hull, and from whom the family probably
descended.
Mr. Burton was universally respected by his contemporaries. He was an ardent,
politician, and for many years looked up to as the leader of the Conservative party in
Shrewsbury, where he possessed considerable influence. From a habit he had acquired in
early life, he received, among his intimate friends, the soubriquet of “ Whistling Bob,”
and this fact gave rise to a laughable incident at the general election in 1830, when
Mr. (afterwards Sir Richard) Jenkins first aspired to the representation of Shrewsbury.
Mr. Boycott (of Rudge) was a candidate, but retired in favour of his cousin, Mr. Jenkins.
The Committee were sitting at the Talbot Hotel, awaiting the arrival of the new candidate,
when Mr. Boycott, accompanied by three other gentlemen, opened the door, and said—
“ Gentlemen, allow me to introduce to you the ‘Three Bobs,’ first of all, here’s ‘Whistling
Bob,’ next comes ‘Squinting Bob,’ 1 and last of all the ‘Nabob.’” 2
(1) Major Robert Jenkins, of Charlton Hill.
(2) A happy allusion to Mr. Jenkins’s (the candidate’s) brilliant career in India.


1853. ALGERNON CHARLES HEBER-PERCY.
ARMS: —Quarterly, 1st and 4th, per fesse az. and gu. a lion rampant, Or, in the dexter chief point, a cinquefoil, az.;
2nd and 3rd az., five fusils in fesse, Or.
CHARLES HEBER-PERCY, of Hodnet Hall,
Esquire, was the son of the Right Reverend the Honourable
Hugh Percy, Bishop of Carlisle, by Mary, eldest daughter of the
Most Reverend Charles Manners Sutton, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and sister of the first Viscount Canterbury. He was born 27th
June, 1812, married 29th July, 1839, Emily, eldest daughter of
the Eight Reverend Reginald Heber, Bishop of Calcutta, by his
wife, Amelia, daughter of the Very Reverend William Davies Shipley, Dean of St. Asaph,
and, thereupon, assumed the additional surname of Heber. The issue of this marriage
was five sons and six daughters, viz., Algernon, late Lieutenant R.N., born 1845,
married 1867, Alice Charlotte Mary, only child of the Reverend F. Y. Lockwood;
Reginald Joceline, born 1849 ; Hugh Louis, born 1853 ; Harry Vernon, born 1858 ; and
Alan William; Blanche Emily, died 1870; Ethel Cecilia, married 1870, the Hon. Alexander
Frederic Hood, late Lieutenant 15th Hussars, third son of Samuel, 3rd Viscount Hood,
who have two sons, Algernon Hugh, born July 13th, 1869, and Josceline Reginald, born
September 2nd, 1880 ; Agnes Katherine; Maude Ellen, who married, 1880, Captain
E. L. Durand, Indian Staff; Evelyn Mary; and Isabel Harriet.
The Rev. Reginald Heber inherited the Hodnet estate from his brother Richard, who
died without issue in 1766. He was rector of Chelsea, and afterwards of Malpas and
Hodnet. He married, first, in 1733, Mary, daughter and co-heir of Martin Bay ley, M.A.,
of Wicklewood Ampnors, county of Norfolk, by whom he had one son, Richard Heber,
of Hodnet, Esquire, Sheriff, in 1821, Member of Parliament for the University of Oxford,
and Lieutenant-Colonel of Yeomanry. He, Richard, was a most accomplished scholar and
bibliophilist, and expended vast sums of money in collecting and accumulating rare and
curious books. He had libraries in London, Oxford, and Hodnet, where it was said that
the house was nearly all library. His house at Pimlico, where he died in 1833, was filled
with books from top to bottom, every chair, table, and passage containing “ piles of
erudition.” He also had libraries at Paris, Antwerp, Brussels, and other continental
towns, in houses rented merely to contain them, but, in how many, his executors did
not know, as there was no mention of them in his will. Certain portions were sold by
auction in London, in 1834 —6, and the catalogue of that portion fills over 2000 printed
octavo pages. The number of volumes was 117,613, grouped into 56,672 lots; the sale
occupied 202 days, and realized £56,775. There appears no record of those sold or
otherwise disposed of abroad. It was an axiom of his that no man could do comfortably


without three copies of a book—one, a “show book, for his country house, another for his
own use and reference, and a third he must needs have to lend to his friends.” He died,
unmarried, as before-mentioned, 4th October, 1833, leaving all his freehold and personal
property to “ his only sister Mary, with remainder to his nieces, daughters of his deceased
half-brother, Eeginald.”
Mary Heber married, first, the Reverend Charles Cowper Cholmondeley, Rector of
Hodnet, and nephew of Lord Delamere, and by him, who died in 1831, had four sons,
the youngest of whom, Richard Hugh, is now (1884) Rector of Hodnet. She married,
secondly, the Reverend S. H, Macaulay, who succeeded as Rector.
The Reverend Reginald Heber married, secondly, 1782, Mary, daughter of Cuthbert
Allanson, D.D., of Middleton Hall, Yorkshire, and had three children, Reginald,. (the
bishop), Thomas Cuthbert, Rector of Marton, who died unmarried, 1816, and Mary,
aforesaid, on whose death, the estates devolved on her niece, Emily, wife of the present
Sheriff.
Mr. Heber-Percy’s father, Hugh, Bishop of Carlisle, was the third son of Algernon,
2nd Lord Lovaine, and Ist Earl of Beverley, whose eldest son, George, succeeded as 2nd
Earl of Beverley, and subsequently, in 1865, as sth Duke of Northumberland, and was
the father of the present Duke (1884).
JJOBERT AGLIONBY SLANEY, of Walford Manor, and Hatton
Grange, in the county of Salop, Esquire, was the eldest son of
Eobert Slaney, of Hatton Grange, Esquire, by Mary, daughter of
Thomas Mason, of Shrewsbury, Esquire, born 9th June, 1791, married
first, 7th February, 1812, Elizabeth, only child of William Hawkins
Mucklestdn, M.D., and sole heiress of her uncle, Joseph Muckleston,
of Walford, Esquire, Sheriff 1788. By this marriage he acquired
1854. EGBERT AGLIONBY SLANEY.
ARMS.—Gules, a bend between three Martlets, Or.
the Walford estates of that gentleman, which are now held by his grandson, Thomas
Slaney Eyton, of Walford, Esquire. The new mansion, called Walford Manor, was built
by this Sheriff, He was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, and called to the Bar
at Lincoln’s Inn, 1817. He was a Commissioner on the Health of Towns, 1843 —46,
a subject on which, as well as the improvement of the condition of the labouring class,
and the provision of recreation grounds, he took a deep interest. He contested the
representation of the Borough of Shrewsbury at no less than seven general elections, and


was successful five times, viz., 1826, 1830, 1837, 1847, and 1857, retaining his seat until
his death, 19th May, 1862. This event was the result of an accident by injury to his
leg from slipping through the temporary flooring during the erection of the building in
Hyde Park for the second Great International Exhibition in 1862. He married, secondly,
1854, Catherine, daughter of the Reverend George Buckston, M.A., of Bradborne, in
the county of Derby, and widow of Graves Archer, of the county of Wicklow, Esquire.
By the first marriage, he had issue, three daughters, viz., Elizabeth Frances, who married,
13th May, 1835, Thomas Campbell Eyton, of Eyton, Esquire, eldest son of Thomas
Eyton, Esquire, Sheriff 1840; Mary, married, Bth May, 1839, William Watkyn Edward
Wynne, of Peniarth, in the county of Merioneth, Esquire, sometime Member of Parliament
for that county; and Frances Catherine, married, 9th October, 1845, William Kenyon,
Esquire, fifth son of the Honourable Thomas Kenyon, who was son of the Ist Lord
Kenyon, and who assumed the additional surname of Slaney on succeeding to the Hatton
estate at the death of the present Sheriff.
The family, which has been settled at Hatton for nearly three centuries, derives from
Rudolphe de Slanie, who lived in the reign of Henry 1., and is supposed to have come
to England from Bohemia, in the train of the Empress Maud. He is mentioned in an old
pedigree, drawn out at the Herald’s College, as having, in the, above-mentioned reign,
fought in a tournament on behalf of the Crown. His lineal descendant was Ralph Slanie,
of Yardley, in the county of Worcester, who had four sons, Stephen, Ralph, John, and
Thomas, of these, Ralph and Thomas, died without issue; John was the grandfather of Sir
Stephen Slaney, Knight, Lord Mayor of London in 1596. The eldest, Stephen, was the
father of Ralph Slaney, of Bloxwich, third in descent from whom was Robert Slaney, of
Hatton Grange, Esquire, the first of the family whose name appears in connexion with
that estate. He married, first, Anne, daughter of Thomas Moreton, of Brockton Grange,
in the county of Stafford, Esquire, by whom he had two sons, Moreton and Robert; and
secondly, - Elizabeth, daughter of John Cotes, of Woodcote, Esquire, but by her lie had no
issue. Robert Slaney, the second son, married, 1696, Arabella, daughter of Jonathan Cope,
of Ranton Abbey, Esquire, and was Sheriff in 1707. Moreton, the elder, who succeeded his
father in 1672, married, 1680, Elizabeth, only daughter and heiress of John Aglionby, of
Knoll, in the county of Warwick, Esquire. His only son, Robert Aglionby Slaney, of
Hatton Grange, Esquire, who was born 1693, married, 1722, Frances Theresa, daughter
of William Plowden, of Plowden, Esquire, by whom, with other issue, he had, Plowden,
his heir, and Richard, whose son, Moreton Aglionby, had by Mary, his wife, sister of
Sir Andrew Corbet, Baronet, an only child, Mary, who married Sir John Somerset Pakington,
Baronet, Member of Parliament, (afterwards Ist Lord Hampton). The eldest son, Plowden,
was born 1724, and married, 1761, Martha, a daughter and co-heir of Humphrey Pitt, of
Prior’s Lee, Esquire, and had two sons, the elder of whom, Humphrey Moreton, died
unmarried, the younger was Robert, mentioned before, w r ho was father of the present
Sheriff.


1855. WILLIAM WILLOUGHBY GEORGE HURT-SITWELL.
ARMS. —Per pale, dexter, barry of eight, Or and vert., three lions rampant, sable, sinister, Argent, on a chevron,
Or, three acorns ppr. between three oak trees ppr.
family of Sitwell is one of very ancient standing in the
county of Derby. The eventual heiress, Catherine, daughter of
William Sitwell, Esquire, married Jonathan Hurt, of Sheffield,
Esquire, and by him had a son, Francis, who ultimately assumed,
by sign-manual, the arms and surname of Sitwell, and married
Mary, daughter of the Reverend Dr. Warneford, of York, by whom
he had three sons and one daughter; the third son was Hurt
Sitwell, of Ferney Hall, in the county of Salop, Esquire. He was the great-grandfather
of William Willoughby George Hurt-Sitwell, Esquire, the present Sheriff, who married,
first, 29th September, 1853, Harriet Margaret, daughter of William Henry Harford, of
Barley Wood, Wrington, in the county of Somerset, Esquire, who died 18th May, 1855,
by whom he had an only son, Willoughby Harford Hurt. He married, secondly, Eliza
Harriet, only daughter of Richard Burton Phillipson, of Dunston House, in the county
of Stafford, Esquire, and niece of William Watkin Edward Wynne, of Peniarth, Esquire,
Member of Parliament for Merionethshire. The issue of this marriage was one son,
Francis Hurt, born 14th January, 1860, and one daughter, Ellinor Harriet Hurt. This
lady was married 16th September, 1884, to Sir William Grenville Williams, of Bodel-
wyddan, in the county of Flint, Baronet, nephew of Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, of
Wynnstay, Baronet, Member of Parliament for the county of Denbigh. Sitwell, the
eldest son of Francis Hurt, mentioned above as having taken the name of Sitwell,
was created a Baronet, 3rd October, 1808, and was great-grandfather of the fourth and
present Baronet, Sir George Eeresby Sitwell, of Renishaw, in the county of Derby.
1856. EDWARD LLOYD GATACRE.
ARMS. —Per pale, dexter, quarterly, 1st and 4th gules; 2nd and 3rd ermine, three piles of the first on a fesse az., five
bezants, Or, sinister, az., three boars’ heads erased, arg., muzzled, gules.
LLOYD GATACRE, of Gatacre, Esquire, was the
only son of Edward Gatacre, Esquire, Colonel of the Shropshire
Militia, by his first wife, Annabella, eldest daughter and co-heir of
Robert Lloyd, of Swan Hill, in the county of Salop, Esquire.
He was bom 1806, and married, 1838, Jessie, second daughter
of William Forbes, of Callendar, in the county of Stirling, Esquire,
by whom he has four sons and one daughter. The eldest son


and heir is Edward Lloyd, (7th Royal Fusiliers), born 1839, and married, first, Fanny
Wright, only daughter of Thomas Fereday, of Tuck Hill, Esquire ; and, secondly, Helen
Brown, in 1880, only daughter of George Nicholson Berwick, Esquire, of St. Andrews, N. 8.,
by whom he has issue, Edward George, born 30th April, 1884 ; and Hilda Lloyd.
In the reign of Henry HI., Stephen de Gatacre possessed the Manors of Gatacre and
Sutton, with lands in Claverley, which he held of the king by military service. These, it
is stated, had been obtained by his ancestor, by grant, from Edward the Confessor, and
have been transmitted, through male heirs, to the present time. John Gatacre was
Member of Parliament for Bridgnorth, 12th Edward IY. Colonel Gatacre married, secondly,
Harriet Constantia, eldest daughter of Richard Jenkins, of Bicton, Esquire, and sister of
Sir Richard Jenkins, G.C.8., Member of Parliament for Shrewsbury.
1857. SIR WILLIAM CURTIS, BARONET.
ARMS. —Paly of six, Or and azure, a fesse chequy, Argent and sable; on a canton, gules, a dragon’s wing erect of the
third; in base a sword ppr. pommel and hilt of the first surmounting a key, in saltier, of the second.
ILL!AM CURTIS, Esquire, Alderman of the city of London,
and Lord Mayor in 1795, was, for 35 years, Member of
Parliament for that city, and created a Baronet 23rd December,
1802. He married, 1778, Anne, youngest daughter and co-heir of
Edward Constable, Esquire, and had three sons and two daughters.
The eldest son, William, second Baronet, married Mary Ann, daughter
of George Lear, of Leytonstone, in the county of Essex, Esquire, by whom he had seven
sons and eleven daughters. The eldest son was Sir William, the third Baronet, and
present Sheriff, who was born 1804, and married, 1831, Georgina Maria, eldest daughter
of John Stratton, of Farthinghoe Lodge, in the county of Northampton, Esquire. His
eldest son, William Edmund, Lieutenant Ist Royal Dragoons, married Ariana Emily,
daughter of Colonel Master, of Knole Park, in the county of Gloucester, but, dying in
his father’s lifetime, the Baronetcy devolved on his only son, Sir William Michael Curtis,
who was born 11th November, 1859, and succeeded his grandfather as fourth Baronet
in 1870.


1858. EDMUND WRIGHT.
ARMS.— Sable, on a cross, Or, between four unicorns, heads erased, armed, maned and tufted of the second, a cross engrailled,
gules, charged with a javelin erect, staff, Or, headed of the third.
JJDMUND WRIGHT, of Halston, Esquire, was the son of Edmund
Wright, of Manchester, and Mauldeth Hall, in the county of
Lancaster, Esquire, who acquired the Halston estate by purchase, from
John Fitzgiffard Mytton, Esquire, in 1847. He was born in 1812,
and married, 1844, Helen, eldest daughter of Sir David Moncreiffe,
of Moncreiffe, in the county of Perth, Baronet, by his wife, Helen,
second daughter of iEneas Mackay, of Scotstown, Peebles, Esquire,
(which lady, re-married, 30th October, 1849, George Augustus, 2nd Earl of Bradford, of the
present creation,) by whom he has had issue, two sons, viz., Edmund David Moncreiffe,
born May 25th, 1849, died at Cannes, December 22nd, 1865, and Charles Henry,
born December 24th, 1851, a Lieutenant in the Shropshire Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry,
and three daughters, viz., Helen, Catherine Mary, married Julius Alington, Esquire, of
Little Barford, in the county of Bedford, Esquire; and Louisa Elizabeth.
The present Sheriff held, for some years previously, a Captaincy in the Yeomanry.
1859. CHARLES ORLANDO CHILDE PEMBERTON.
ARMS. —Quarterly, 1st and 4th PEMBERTON, or two chevronels between three buckets, sable; 2nd CHILDE, gules, a chevron ermine,
between three eagles, close, Argent; 3rd BALDWYN, Argent, a saltire, sable, a crescent for difference.
£jHARLES ORLANDO CHILDE PEMBERTON, of Millichope,
in the county of Salop, Esquire, was the third son of William
Lacon Childe, of Kinlet, Esquire, Sheriff in 1828, hy Harriet, second
daughter of William Cludde, of Orleton, Esquire. He was born
12th December, 1812, and educated at Harrow and Christ Church,
Oxford, where he graduated B.A. 1834. He married, 21st August,
1849, Augusta Mary, eldest surviving daughter of Henry Davenport
Shakespear, Esquire, a member of the Supreme Council of India, by whom he had two
sons and two daughters.


The Pembertons, of Milliehope, originally of Pemberton, in the county of Lancaster,
removed at an early period into Shropshire. The Milliehope estate was bequeathed by
Mrs. Catherine More, elder daughter and co-heir of Thomas More, of Milliehope, Esquire,
to Robert, second son of John Pemberton, of Wrockwardine, Esquire, and brother of
Edward Pemberton, also of Wrockwardine, Sheriff in 1754, (which see), and for many
years Chairman of Quarter Sessions of the County.
Robert Pemberton died in 1794, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas Pemberton,
of Shrewsbury, Esquire, Barrister-at-Law, Recorder of Wenlock, and also for many years
Chairman of Quarter Sessions for the county of Salop. He died, unmarried, in 1832, and
was succeeded by his nephew, the Reverend Robert Norgrave Pemberton, Rector of Church
Stretton, who was born 7th August, 1791, and married, 11th November, 1820, Caroline,
youngest daughter of Augustus Pechell, of Berkhampstead, Esquire. This gentleman, who
built the present mansion at Milliehope, though residing principally at Church Stretton,
died without issue, 7th October, 1848, and bequeathed his estate to his kinsman, Charles
Orlando Childe, (the present Sheriff), who thereupon assumed, by Royal licence, and in
compliance with the will of the testator, the additional surname and arms of Pemberton.
A full account of the family of Childe will be found in Blakeway’s Sheriffs of
Shropshire, page 212, under 1784. This memoir would not, however, be complete without
recording the death of Mr. Childe, the Sheriff of 1828, and father of Mr. Childe Pemberton.
That event took place at Kinlet Hall, the place of his birth, on the 12th December, 1880,
at the ripe old age of 95. He was, as he himself testified in 1876, “the only surviving
Magistrate, and probably, the only living man,” who was present at the famous Cinderhill
riots in 1821. He was succeeded by his eldest son, William Lacon, who, however, survived
his father only ten months, dying on the 28th October, 1881, in his 72nd year. He
married, in 1839, a daughter of Thomas Giffard, of Chillington, Esquire, by whom he had
a son, who died young. Mrs. Childe, also died, in 1841. The late Mr. Childe, by his will,
left his estates to his nearest male relative, and to his eldest and other sons in succession,
and expressed a desire that an arrangement might be made for uniting the Kinlet and
Milliehope estates. The Kyre Park estate devolved on the next brother, Edward George,
who assumed the additional surname of Baldwyn, and is now the Reverend Edward George
Baldwyn-Childe, of Kyre Park, Yicar of Kinlet and Cleobury Mortimer, who is married
to the eldest daughter of Sir Baldwin Leighton, 7th Baronet, Member of Parliament for
South Shropshire. The present representative of the family is Charles Baldwyn-Childe,
Esquire, who has dropped the name of Pemberton.


1860. SIR CHARLES HENRY ROUSE BOUGHTON, BARONET.
ARMS. — 1st and 4th sable, two bars engrailed, Argent, for Rouse; 2nd Argent on a chevron between three trefoils, slipped, sable,
as many buck’s heads cabossed, Or, on a chief, gules, a goat passant of the field for BOUGHTON, of Loughton;
3rd sable, three crescents, Or, for BOUGHTON.
gIR CHARLES HENRY ROUSE BOUCHTON, of Downton
Hall, Baronet, is the eldest son of Sir William Edward Rouse
Boughton, Baronet, Member of Parliament, Sheriff in 1836, whom
he succeeded as 11th Baronet in 1856. He was born 16th January,
1825, educated at Harrow, and was formerly a Lieutenant in the
52nd Foot. He married, 23rd August, 1852, Mary Caroline, second
daughter of John Michael Severne, of Wallop, Esquire, and has two
sons, William St. Andrew, born 23rd September, 1853, and Edward Shuckburgh, born
24th July, 1858. The elder son, William St. Andrew, married, Ist October, 1878, Eleanor
Frances, eldest daughter of the Reverend Frederick Harry Hotham, a cousin of Lord
Hotham, and Rector of Rushbury.
For a fuller account of the family, vide page 17 of the present volume, under 1836.
1861. GEORGE PRITCHARD.
ARMS. —Per pale dexter, Argent, on a fesse, sable, between three escallops of the last, a stag’s head, cabossed, Or, between
two buckles of the last. Sinister, Argent, on a fesse, azure, between two Martlets, sable, three fleur-de-lis, Or.
PRITCHARD, of Broseley, and Astley Abbotts, in the
County of Salop, was the eldest son of John Pritchard,
Esquire, Banker, of Broseley. He was born 26th September, 1793,
and educated, first, with the Reverend Richard Thursfield, of
Albrighton, and afterwards at Shrewsbury Royal Free Grammar
School, under Dr. Butler, subsequently Bishop of Lichfield. In
1818 he entered upon his father’s professions of Solicitor and Banker, and, ultimately,
became principal partner in the Broseley and Bridgnorth Bank. In May, 1821, he
married Harriett, daughter of William Ostler, of Grantham, in the county of Lincoln,
Esquire, of which marriage there was no issue. In 1846 he retired from the profession
of the Law, and was appointed a Magistrate and Deputy-Lieutenant for the county of
Salop, and was also placed on the Commission of the Peace for the Boroughs of Wenlock


and Bridgnorth, and was from 1848 to the time of his death Chairman of the Madeley
Poor Law Union. He died, 24th December, 1861, after a brief illness, in his sixty-ninth
year, amid the universal sorrow of his friends and neighbours. The inscription on his
monument in Broseley Church, records that he was “an able and upright Magistrate, and
a considerate guardian and benefactor of the poor.” The Church of Jackfield was erected
by public subscription to perpetuate his memory, as was also a monument in the public
street of Broseley. He was Under-Sheriff in the years 1838 and 1843. His brother,
John Pritchard, of Stanmore, Esquire, sat as Member of Parliament for Bridgnorth from
1853 to 1868.
1862. SIR VINCENT ROWLAND CORBET, BARONET.
ARMS.— Or, a Raven sable.
gIR VINCENT ROWLAND CORBET, Baronet, of Moreton
Corbet, was the eldest son of Sir Andrew Vincent Corbet,
Baronet, Sheriff 1843, by his wife Rachel Stephens, sister of the
2nd Viscount Hill. He was born 11th August, 1821, and succeeded
his father as 3rd Baronet in 1855. He married, 9th May, 1854,
Caroline Agnes, third daughter of Admiral the Honourable Charles
Orlando Bridgeman, brother of the 2nd Earl of Bradford, and has
issue two sons, Walter Orlando, born 11th July, 1856, Gerald Vincent, born 29th October,
1868, and eight daughters, viz., Alice Nina, Sybell Eachel, Isabel Agnes, Beatrice Augusta,
Judith Elizabeth, Mabel Hermione, Constance Edith, and Gertrude Ursula. The eldest
daughter, Alice Nina, was married, September 30th, 1884, to George Fydell Rowley, of
Morcott Hall, in the county of Rutland, Esquire.
Sir Vincent entered the Royal Horse Guards (Blue) in 1841. He was also for
several years a Captain in the North Salopian Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry, and is a
Deputy-Lieutenant of the County. Sir Vincent unobtrusively fulfils the duties appertaining
to his position as a landlord and an English gentleman; as a sportsman of the true
stamp, he has, for many years, with his harriers, provided sport for his friends and
neighbours, and for several seasons undertook the Mastership of the Shropshire Fox Hounds,
and, as such, fully maintained the credit of his native County.
For an account of this family, vide page 28, and also pages 43 and 130 in Blakeway’s
Sheriffs of Shropshire.


1863. THOMAS CHARLTON WHITMORE.
ARMS.—Vert., fretty, Or.
'J'HOMAS CHAELTON WHITMOEE, of Apley, Esquire, was
the eldest son of Thomas Whitmore, of Apley, Esquire, Sheriff
1805, and Member of Parliament for Bridgnorth, by his wife
Catherine, only daughter and heiress of Thomas Thomason, of York,
Esquire. He was born sth January, 1807, and married, 11th April,
1833, Lady Louisa Ann Douglas, eldest daughter of Charles, sth
Marquis of Queensbury, and had issue, two sons and eight daughters.
The eldest son, Thomas Charlton Douglas Whitmore, who was born 26th May, 1839,
entered the Eoyal Horse Guards, in which distinguished regiment he attained the rank of
Captain. He married, 11th May, 1867, Louisa Margaret Emily, fifth daughter of Sir W.
E. Cradock Hartopp, Baronet, and having sold the patrimonial estate and manor of Apley
to William Orme Foster, Esquire, an eminent ironmaster, of Stourton Castle, Worcestershire,
sometime Member of Parliament for South Staffordshire, went to reside at Gumley, in the
county of Leicester, of which county he was Sheriff in 1875.
The second son, Walter Henry, who was born 21st August, 1842, was for some years
a Captain in the Shropshire Eegiment of Militia, and died at Brighton in 1880. The
present Sheriff had two brothers, George and Henry, and three sisters. George, the elder,
and now (1884) sole survivor, was born 1812, and married, 1848, Sarah, third daughter of
John Deacon, of Mabledon, in the county of Kent, Esquire. He became Eector of Stockton,
one of the livings in the patronage of the family, in 1856. The younger, Henry,
who was born in 1813, married, 1852, Adelaide Anna, daughter of Francis Darby, of
Coalbrookdale, Esquire. He was chosen Member of Parliament for Bridgnorth, in succession
to his brother, the present Sheriff, in 1852, and retired in 1870. He was a Lord of the
Treasury in the administration of Lord Derby, and again in that of Mr. Disraeli,
afterwards Earl of Beaconsfield, and Keeper of the Privy Seal to the Prince of Wales,
1858-9. Mr. Henry Whitmore died, May 2nd, 1876, and his late constituents erected a
handsome memorial to him in Bridgnorth. The eldest sister married Francis Bernard,
3rd Earl of Bandon; the second married Major-General Wilmot, son of Sir Eobert
Wilmot, Baronet; and the youngest, Lieutenant-Colonel John Forbes, of the Coldstreams.
The family was originally seated at Whytemore, in the Manor of Claverley, which
latter place subsequently became its settled residence until the purchase of the Apley


estate by Sir William Whitmore, Knight, Sheriff in 1620, under which date, at page 106
of Blakeway’s Sheriffs , an account of the early history of the family will be found.
The representation of Bridgnorth has been held by one or more of the family for
nearly three centuries. Mr. Wolryche Whitmore, Sheriff in 1839, was descended from a
common ancestor, William, of Apley, Member of Parliament for that Borough, who died,
1725. 1
1864. DAVID FRANCIS ATCHERLEY.
ARMS. —Gules, on a fesse engrailed, Argent, between three griffin’s heads, erased, Or, as many crosses patee-fitchee, sable.
family of Atcherley, of Marion, has been settled in that
neighbourhood as far back as the reign of Henry VII. Their
ancestor, Sir Eoger Atcherley, Knight, was born at Stanwardine, in
the parish of Baschurch. He was elected Sheriff of London and
Middlesex, 20th Henry YIL, and was chosen Lord Mayor, 1511,
3rd Henry YHL It is recorded that he munificently stored
Leadenhall Market for the relief of the poor. He also filled several
civic offices of high trust with distinction, and died, July, 1521, 13th Henry VIII. His
descendant, Richard Atcherley, who was also born at Stanwardine, went to reside at Marton,
and afterwards lived at Wycherley Hall, in the parish of Baschurch. His eldest son,
Thomas, augmented the Marton estate in 1611, and again in 1620. His eldest son, Thomas,
who succeeded him, rebuilt Marton Hall, as it now stands, with the exception of some
recent additions. His last male descendant, dying without issue, devised his estates to his
nephew, David Francis Jones, only son of his sister Jane, by her husband, David Francis
Jones, of Cymmau, in the county of Flint, Esquire, with an injunction that he should
adopt the name and arms of Atcherley, in lieu of those of Jones, which he accordingly
did by Royal license, 21st March, 1834. This gentleman, who thus became David
Francis Atcherley, of Marton, Esquire, was a fellow of the Royal Society, a Serjeant-at-
Law, and Attorney-General of the counties palatine of Lancaster and Durham. He was
born in 1783, and married, 1817, Anne Margaret, second daughter of James Topping, of
Whatcroft Hall, in the county of Chester, and died in 1846. He was succeeded by his
eldest son, David Francis Atcherley, of Marton and Whatcroft, Esquire, the present Sheriff
This gentleman, who was born Ist July, 1818, was educated at Harrow and Christ-Church,
Oxford, where he graduated, in 1842, married, 10th February, 1866, Minnie Caroline
Frances Amhurst, daughter of Courtney Stacey, of Sanding, in the county of Kent,
Esquire, and niece of the late Tyssen Amhurst, Esquire, of Didlington Park, Norfolk, by
whom he has issue, one daughter.
(1) The above-named Sir William, was the first of the family who enjoyed that honour, having been elected in 1G32, and
Mr. Henry Whitmore, who resigned his seat in 1870, was the last.


1865. FRANCIS HARRIES.
ARMS. —Barry of eight, ermine and azure, over all three annulets, Or.
JjIEANCIS HAEEIES, of Cruckton, Esquire, was the eldest son
of Francis Blithe Harries, of Benthall Hall, Broseley, Esquire,
by his wife, Emma Gertrude, daughter of Edward Jenkins, of
Charlton Hill, Esquire, and nephew of Thomas Harries, of Cruckton,
Esquire, Sheriff in 1802, whom he succeeded in his estates (his
father having died a short time previously) in 1848. The present
Sheriff was born in 1804, and married, in 1828, Harriet, daughter
and co-heir of Thomas Boycott, of Budge, Esquire. He died without issue, 19th February,
1875, when the estates devolved on his only surviving brother, Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas
Harries, Knight of the Legion of Honour. This gentleman entered the army at an early
age, and, in 1844, became Captain in the 63rd Eegiment of Foot. He served many years
in India, passed through the arduous campaigns of the Crimean War, and was present at
the battles of the Alma, Balaclava, and Inkerman, in which latter action he was severely
wounded at the head of his company. In the brevet which speedily followed, he was
gazetted as Lieutenant-Colonel. He was also decorated with the Crimean Medal with four
clasps, and the Turkish War Medal. He received from the French Government the
Knighthood of the Legion of Honour, and from that of Turkey the sth class of the Order
of Medjidie, He sold his commission, and retired in 1860. He died, 12th October, 1879,
having enjoyed the estates little more than four years, and being the last of the family,
devised them by will to his first cousin, Major-General Charles Vanbrugh Jenkins, now
(1884) of Cruckton.
The Cruckton estate has been vested in the family of Harries since about the middle
of the 15th century, having been held by John Harries, in 1463. The fourth in descent
from him was John, who had four sons, Sir Thomas Harries, of Tong Castle, Knight and
Baronet', Serjeant-at-Law, who is said to have been an eminent Lawyer; Eowland, of
Ludlow; Arthur, of Prescott; and Eichard, the youngest, who inherited the Cruckton,
according to the custom of the Manor of Pontcsbury. The posterity of Eichard became
extinct in the third generation, when Thomas, grandson of Arthur, succeeded to the estate.
This Thomas, was Sheriff in 1730, and the present Sheriff was fifth in direct descent
from him.


1866. THOMAS HUGH SANDFORD.
ARMS.— 1st and 4th Quarterly per fesse indented, Ermine and Azure.
fJIHOMAS HUGH SANDFORD, of Sandford, Esquire, is the
elder and only surviving son of Thomas Hugh Sandford,
Esquire, by Eliza Ann, his wife, daughter of Thomas Kirkpatrick,
Esquire, grandson of Sir Roger Kirkpatrick, of Closeburn, Baronet.
He was born 9th April, 1820, and was educated at Trinity College,
Cambridge. He married, first, 21st April, 1849, Alexina-Nisbet,
daughter of the Honourable Charles Lindsay, brother of the 24th
or 25th Earl of Crawford and Balcarres, which lady died 30th August, 1851 ; and secondly,
2nd October, 1856, Sarah Halsted, second daughter of William Halsted Poole, of Terrick
Hall, near Whitchurch, Shropshire, Esquire.
This family came to England with the Conqueror, and the name of its founder occurs
in every known copy of the Roll of Battle Abbey. He, Thomas de Sandford, a Norman,
held the Manor of Sandford or Sanford, under Gerard de Tournay, a powerful Baron,
whose name appears in Domesday, as the owner of no less than eighteen Manors in the
county of Salop. That of Sandford is thus particularized;—“ Ibi 111, Mdce geldabiles.
Terra est lit carucarum. In dominio est una et dimidia, et 11. servi, et HH. villani
cum I. caruca. Ihi silva XXX. porcis incrassandis, et haia. Tempore regis, Edwardi
valebat XY. solidos; modo X. solidos. Wastam invenit.” Sixth in descent from him was
Sir Ralph de Sandford, who held the Manor in capite by the service of half a Knight’s
fee. He joined the Barons against King John, and his estates were forfeited, but after-
wards restored by Henry HI. There is a bull extant from Pope Honorius HI, concerning
Sandford Chapel. His son, Sir Richard, married Eleanor, probably co-heir of Elkin
Cadwgan, who, after his death, re-married Richard Burnell, Lord of Langley, in 1251. One
of his grandsons, Sir William, was Knight of the Shire in 1320, and Commissioner of
Array in Shropshire, for the King, in 1321. Richard de Sandford fought at Cressy, and
his “good service” is acknowledged in letters patent, under the Great Seal of Edward HI.,
which document is still preserved at Sandford. His second son, Sir Richard, was one of
King Henry IV.’s body guard at the Battle of Shrewsbury. He was knighted on the
morning of the fight, and fell before night. A representation of him and other Knights
was once on a window in Battlefield Church, and is now preserved in a north window in


the Sandford Chapel at Frees. His son and heir, Nicholas de Sandford, 1 Sheriff in 1386,
was the first of the name who appears on the roll of Sheriffs, (see page 54 in Blakeway.)
He married Alice, daughter of William, Lord Botiler of Wemme, by whom he had three
sons, the youngest Nicholas, of the Lee, was the immediate progenitor of that branch
of the family which subsequently settled at the Isle of Up Eossall, near Shrewsbury,
the present (1884) representative of which is Humphrey Sandford, Esquire, whose great-
grandfather, Humphrey, was Sheriff in 1787.
The eldest, Richard, the last who was styled “ Lord of Sandford,” was the King’s
escheator for Shropshire, 6th Henry Y. In the civil wars of the 17th century, several
members of the family distinguished themselves on the side of the King. Thomas was
a celebrated “Captain of the' Firelocks.” He besieged and took Hawarden Castle in 1643,
stormed Beeston Castle, and was killed at the taking of Nantwich in 1643. His elder
brother, Arthur, was made prisoner in 1645, when Shrewsbury was taken, as was also his
second son, Robert, a Captain in the King’s army, who was wounded at Oswestry. His
elder son, Francis, was, in 1643, constituted by Prince Rupert one of the Commissioners
to act in his absence in Shropshire. Francis, the third son of Francis, who was born in
1630, the celebrated genealogist, was created rouge dragon pursuivant of arms in 1661,
and Lancaster Herald in 1675. In 1689 he surrendered this office rather than proclaim
William of Orange, King. He was the author of a Genealogical History of the Kings of
England, published 1677. A later representative of the family, Thomas Sandford, Esquire,
who was Sheriff in 1752, was at heart a Jacobite, and carried out his opinions so far as
to clothe his javelin men in the Stuart tartan. One of his grandsons, Daniel, was first
Episcopal Bishop of Edinburgh, and his (the Bishop’s) grandson is the present Sir F. E.
Sandford, M.A., who was Secretary to the Royal Commissioners for the International
Exhibition of 1862, and Assistant Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies. The Bishop’s
elder brother, Thomas, who was in holy orders, succeeded to the family estates on the
death of his father in 1770. He married Armine Rebecca, eldest daughter of Dr. Kennedy,
Physician to George HI., and sister of Commissary-General Sir Robert Kennedy, by
whom he had two sons, the elder of whom, Thomas Hugh, was the father of the present
Sheriff, and is mentioned at the commencement of this notice. From the last-named
Sheriff (Thomas Sandford), 2 the present Sheriff is fourth in descent, and is the lineal
descendant, in the male line, of the earliest known feofee of Sandford Manor. 8
(1) Fuller, in his Worthies of England, in a note on Nicholas, the Sheriff in 1386, observes:—“This ancient name is
still extant, at the same place, in this county, in a worshipful equipage wellfare, a clear token thereof, for in the list of such as
compounded for their reputed delinquency in our late civil wars, X find Francis Sandford, Esquire, of Sandford, paying four
hundred and fifty-nine pounds for his composition, yet I believe the gentleman begrudged not his money, in preservation of his
own integrity, acting according to the information of his conscience, and the practice of all his ancestors. I understand that the
said Francis Sandford was very well skilled in making warlike fortifications.”
(2) See Blaheway's Sheriffs of Shropshire, p. 190.
(3) See Eyton's Antiquities of Shropshire, vol. ix.


1867. SIR CHARLES FREDERICK SMYTHE, BARONET.
ARMS.—Sable, three roses, Argent.
gIR CHARLES FREDERICK SMYTHE, of Acton Burnell,
Baronet, is the third and eldest surviving son of Sir Edward
Joseph Smythe, Baronet, Sheriff in 1831, whom he succeeded as
7th Baronet, 11th March, 1856.
Sir Frederick was born 16th March, 1819, and married, 17th
October, 1855, the Honourable Maria Stonor, fourth daughter of
Thomas, 3rd Baron Camoys, by whom he has had a son, Edward Joseph, bom 17th
November, 1857, and died 13th September, 1858, and a daughter, Mary Frances, wdio
married, July 25th, 1875, Oscar Henry Blount, Esquire.
1868. CHARLES SPENCER LLOYD.
ARMS.—Party per bend, sinister, ermine and erminois, a lion rampant, Or, the whole within a bordure, gules.
rjnms Sheriff was a descendant of a branch of the distinguished
line of Tudor Trevor, Lord of Hereford. The family had been
seated for several generations at Croesmere, near Ellesmere, Edward
LLoyd, Esquire, who died in 1693, being the first of the family
who resided at Leaton Knolls. His son Edward, who was Sheriff
in 1727, was born in 1689, and married Susan, daughter of Peter
Scarlett, of Hogstow, Esquire, and dying in 1764, was succeeded by his son, Edward LLoyd,
of Leaton Knolls, Esquire, who was born 1714. The latter married Jane, eldest daughter
and heir of Thomas LLoyd, of Domgay, in the county of Montgomery, and, like his father,
added considerably by marriage to the family possessions. He was the father of Francis,
sometime Member of Parliament for Montgomeryshire, wdio married Elizabeth, daughter of
Arthur Graham, of Hockley Lodge, in the county of Armagh, Esquire, and co-heiress of
her maternal grandfather, John, Viscount Ligonier. The issue of this marriage was five
sons and four daughters. The eldest son, Francis, who succeeded his father, died without
issue, 14th July, 1814, when the estates devolved on his next brother, John Arthur LLoyd,
Esquire, who held them fifty years, during wdiich time he built the present mansion at


Leaton Knolls. He was a man who possessed considerable influence amongst his compeers,
and was for some time Vice-Chairman of Quarter Sessions. He never married, and was
succeeded on his death, in 1864, by his brother, Charles Spencer LLoyd, of Leaton Knolls
and Domgay, Esquire, the present Sheriff, who was born 11th September, 1789, and died,
unmarried, in his 87th year, 20th June, 1876. The youngest of the five brothers was the
Reverend Henry James LLoyd, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Philip John Miles,
of Leigh Court, in the county of Somerset, Esquire, and whose elder son, Arthur Philip
LLoyd, Esquire, now (1884) of Leaton Knolls, succeeded to the family estates on the
death of his uncle. This gentleman was born in 1833, and married, 1863, Katherine
Selina, youngest daughter of Vice-Admiral the Honourable Charles Orlando Bridgeman,
brother of George Augustus Frederick Henry, 2nd Earl of Bradford, by whom he has a
numerous family.
The beautiful new church at Leaton was built by Mrs. LLoyd, the widow of the
Rev. Henry James LLoyd, and the present Sheriff added, in memory of his brother, John
Arthur,qthe very elegant tower and spire, and also built the Vicarage-house.
JOHN ROCKE, of Clungunford, Esquire, was the eldest son of
the Reverend John Rocke, Vicar of Clungunford, by Anne,
daughter of Thomas Beale, of Heath House, Esquire. He was born
10th June, 1817, and educated at Harrow and Trinity College,
Cambridge, where he graduated B.A. in 1839. He married, 2nd
February, 1853, Constance Ann, second daughter of Sir Charles
Cuyler, Baronet.
1869. JOHN ROCKE.
ARMS.—Or, three chess rooks, and a chief embattled, sable.
Mr. Rocke was the representative of a very ancient family resident in the Abbey
Foregate, Shrewsbury. John Rock, of Shrewsbury, being mentioned in a deed dated 1230.
The name also appears very early, (February, 1542), in the oldest register extant, of the
parish of Holy Cross and St. Giles, and occurs frequently down to 1814, and in the
Abbey Church is a mosaic window of stained glass displaying twelve shields of the
armorial bearings of families connected by marriage with that of Rocke, with the following
inscription;—“ Majorvm svorvm insignia depingi cvravit Johannes Rocke, MDCCCXX.”
In 1620, Richard Rocke was Sheriff of Montgomeryshire, and died during his year of office,
his son, Richard, being appointed to fulfil his father’s term. The designation of the father


is thus given, in Montgomeryshire Collections of the Powys-land Club: —“ Ricu’s Rocke de
FForriatt Monachor’m in vel prope villam Salop, in com. Salop, armiger,” the date of
appointment being 2nd December, 17th James 1., whilst the appointment of the son is
thus alluded to in the Peniarth list of Sheriffs:—“ 1620, Ricu’s Rock qui tempore officii
sui obiit, et Ricus Jilius et Heres suus ellectus fait Vic. com. pro. resid, Anni,”
Richard Rocke, the father, was born (so says the Reverend W. Y. Lloyd) 29th March,
1564, and married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Hatton, of the Abbey Foregate, who
died 3rd March, 1610, and was buried in the Abbey Church.
The son, Richard, who was born 1594, and was at Shrewsbury School in 1607,
married Eleanor, daughter of Richard Prowde, of Shrewsbury, draper, and from James, the
fourth son of this marriage, the present Sheriff is lineally descended. This James, married
Sarah, daughter and co-heiress of Robert Owen, of Shrewsbury. His eldest son and
heir, Richard, was the first of the family who settled at Trefnanney, in the county of
Montgomery, of which county, his grandson Richard, son of John, was Sheriff in 1786.
The second wife of John Rocke, was Mary, daughter of. Borlase Wingfield, of Preston
Brockhurst, Esquire, by whom he had issue, a daughter, who married John Eyton, of
Eyton, Esquire, Sheriff 1779, and a son and heir, John, who took holy orders, and became
Vicar of Wellington and Rector of Clungunford. He married in 1782, Harriet, daughter
of Pryce Owen, of Shrewsbury, M.D., by whom he had four sons and one daughter. The
latter married, 11th October, 1811, Colonel John Wingfield, of Onslow, Sheriff 1824. The
eldest son and heir, was the Reverend John Rocke, the father of the present Sheriff.
Mr. Rocke died 3rd April, 1881, and was succeeded by his only surviving son, John Charles
Levcson, now (1884) of Clungunford, who was born 24th September, 1855.
1870. SALUSBURY KYNASTON MAINWARING.
ARMS.—Argent, two bars, gules.
gALUSBURY KYNASTON MAINWARING, of Oteley Park,
Esquire, was the only child of Charles Kynastou Mainwaring,
Esquire, Sheriff 1829, by his wife, Frances, second daughter of
John Lloyd Salusbury, of Galltfaenan, in the county of Denbigh,
Esquire, to whom he was married 2nd October, 1832.
He was born Bth September, 1844, and married, 20th May,
1869, Edith Sarah, daughter of Sir Hugh Williams, of Bodelwyddan, in the county of


Flint, by bis wife, Henrietta Charlotte, daughter of Sir AVatkin AVilliams AVynn, sth
Baronet.
The family of Mainwaring, was originally of Peover, in the county of Chester. James
Mainwaring, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, who was baptized, 1701 —2, purchased
the estate of Brombrough Court, in the same county, from the Hardwares. He married
Mary, elder daughter, and ultimate heiress, of Charles Kinaston, of Oteley, Esquire, by his
wife Jane, daughter of Sir Edward Laeon, of AVest Coppice, and thus became possessed of
the Oteley estate. He died, 23rd October, 1749, and was succeeded by his son, Charles,
who, by his wife, Mary, daughter of AVilliam Falconer, Esquire, Recorder of Chester, had
(besides three daughters) two sons, James and Charles. The latter took holy orders, but
ultimately succeeded to Oteley. He w T as born 1768, and married, 1800, Sarah Susannah,
daughter of John Townshend, of Hern House, in the county of Denbigh, Esquire, by
whom he had (with one daughter, who married the Reverend Edward Duncombe, of
Aldborough, in the county of York,) two sons, Charles Kynaston, (father of the present
Sheriff), and Townshend, sometime Member of Parliament for Denbigh Boroughs, who
married, 1837, Anna Maria, elder daughter and co-heir of John Lloyd Salusbury, of
Galtfaenan, Esquire, aforesaid.
The family of Kinaston, distinguished alike by antiquity of descent, high alliances,
and historic fame, derives from Jorwerth Goch, Lord of Mochnant, in Powysland, and
through him, from the Royal line of Powys, John (or Jenkin) Kinaston, (second son of
Griffith Kynaston, of Stocks, Esquire, seneschal of the Lordship of Ellesmere, tempore
Henry YL, and elder brother of Sir Roger Kynaston, of Hordley, ancestor of the Baronets
of that name), had the estate of Stocks settled on him and his heirs. He married Johanna,
daughter of John Mainwaring, of Peover, Esquire. His grandson Humphrey, of Stocks,
who was living in the reign of Henry VIIL, married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of
AVilliam Oteley, of Oteley, Esquire, who thus brought that estate into the family of
Kinaston. Fourth in descent from Humphrey, was Sir Francis Kinaston, of Oteley, Knight,
a celebrated scholar and poet, who translated the Troilus and Cressida of Chaucer into
Latin verse. He married Margaret, daughter of Sir Humphrey Lee, of Langley, Baronet,
the first Shropshire gentleman on whom that rank was conferred. The great grandson of
Sir Francis (who w r as an Esquire of the body to Charles I.) was Charles, of Oteley, whose
daughter Mary, as mentioned ante, brought that estate to the Mainwarings.
The present Sheriff was an unsuccessful candidate for the representation of the
Northern Division of the county of Salop, on the elevation to the Peerage of the Ist
Lord Harlech in 1876.


1871. WILLIAM KENYON-SLANEY.
ARMS. —Quarterly, Ist and 4th for SLANEY, gu., a bend between three Martlets, erminois, and for distinction a canton, Arg.;
2nd and 3rd for Kenyon, aa., a chevron engrailed, Or, between three crosses, flenry, Arg.
'J'HE Ist Lord Kenyon was descended from an ancient family of
that name, settled in Lancashire, in the twelfth century. He
was the great grandson of Roger Kenyon, Member of Parliament
for Clithero, and Governor of the Isle of Man, whose pedigree will
be found in Fosters’s edition of Lancashire Collection. He was
created a Baronet in 1784, on his appointment as Master of the
Rolls, after having been successively Chief Justice of Chester in
1780, and Attorney-General in 1782. Two years later he became Lord Chief Justice of
the King’s Bench, when he was created a Peer of Great Britain as Baron Kenyon, of
Gredington, in the county of Flint. He married, 16th October, 1773, Mary, third
daughter of George Kenyon, of Peel Hall, in the county of Lancaster, Esquire, by whom
he had three sons, of whom the eldest died, v.p. 1801. The second, George, succeeded
his father as 2nd Baron, 1802, and the youngest was Thomas, of the Pradoe, so well
known to Salopians in the first half of the present century, who was sometime filazer and
clerk of the outlawries of the Court of King’s Bench. He was born 1780, and married,
2nd April, 1803, Louisa Charlotte, second daughter of the Reverend John Robert Lloyd,
of Aston, in the county of Salop, by whom he had, besides eight sons, a daughter
Charlotte, who married, 1883, the Reverend John Hill, Rector of Bolas, brother of the
2nd Viscount Hill. The Honourable Thomas Kenyon presided with singular ability over
the Court of Quarter Sessions for the county of Salop, from 1830 to 1850, a position,
which his third son, John Robert, who was a D.C.L., Q.C., and Yinerian Professor of the
University of Oxford, filled with distinction for many years, till his death in 1880, as
well as that of Recorder of Oswestry. The fifth son was William, the subject of this
notice, who was born 20th February, 1815, and was educated at Rugby and Christ-Church,
Oxford. He afterwards entered the Indian Army as Cornet in the 2nd Bombay Light
Cavalry. He became Lieutenant in 1838, Captain in 1846, and retired on half-pay in 1852.
From 1839 to 1843, Captain Kenyon acted as Brigade-Major to the Malwa Field Forces
during the disturbances which preceded the Sikh War. He married, in 1845, Fanny
Catherine, youngest daughter and co-heir of Robert Aglionby Slaney, of Hatton and
Walford Manor, in the county of Salop, Esquire, Member of Parliament for Shrewsbury,
Sheriff 1854, by whom he had, with other issue, five sons and three daughters, on whose
death he succeeded to the Hatton estates, and adopted the additional surname and arms


of Slaney. Soon after his return to England he accepted the command of a troop in the
North Shropshire Yeomanry, and subsequently was appointed Major, and afterwards
Lieutenant-Colonel of the Ist Battalion of the Shropshire Rifle Volunteers. He was also a
Magistrate and Deputy-Lieutenant of the counties of Salop and Merioneth. When his
brother, John Robert, died, the post of Chairman of Quarter Sessions devolved on his
deputy, Mr. Layton Lowndes, and the latter office was filled by Colonel Kenyon-Slaney,
which appointment was a graceful tribute to the services of his father and brother, no less
than his own abilities. He retired in 1883, on account of failing health, not merely from
that post, but from public business generally, carrying with him the respect and esteem
of his compeers, as well as of all with whom he was in any way connected. He died
10th December, 1884, and was buried at Ryton, near Shifnal. He is succeeded in his
estates by his widow, and is represented by his eldest son, Lieutenant-Colonel William
Slaney Kenyon-Slaney, of the Grenadier Guards, who was born 24th August, 1847, and
served in Egypt under Sir Garnet, now Lord, Wolseley, in 1882.
The 4th Baron is the only son of the Honourable Lloyd Kenyon, eldest son of Lloyd,
3rd Baron, who died, v.p. 1865, having married, 1863, Fanny Mary Catherine, only child
of Ralph, Ist Lord Harlech, who is re-married to the Reverend Thomas Main waring
Bulkeley Bulkeley-Owen, of Tedsmorc. He was born sth July, 1864.
JOHN HENNIKER LOVETT, of Fernhill, Esquire, is the eldest
son of Thomas Lovett, Esquire, of Fernhill, by his wife Emily,
third daughter of John Minet, 3rd Lord Henniker, and was born
February 11th, 1836. He married, 1859, Laura, youngest daughter
of Philip Morier, Esquire, Her Majesty’s Minister at Dresden.
1872. JOHN HENNIKER LOVETT.
ARMS.—Argent, three wolves passant, in pale, sable.


1873. CHARLES GEORGE WINGFIELD.
ARMS. —Argent, on a bend, gules, cottised, sable, three pairs of wings in lure, their points downwards of the first.
GEORGE WINGFIELD, of Onslow, Esquire, is the
second (eldest surviving) son of the Reverend Charles Wingfield,
M.A., of the Gro, in the county of Montgomery, Rector of
Llanllwchaiarn, in the same county, by Emma, fourth daughter of
Richard Jenkins, of Bicton, Esquire, and sister of Sir Richard
Jenkins, G.C.8., Member of Parliament for Shrewsbury. He was
born 21st April, 1833, and married, Ist February, 1865, his second
cousin, Jane Mary Anne, only daughter of Clopton Lewis Wingfield, of Rhysnant, in the
county of Montgomery, Esquire, by whom he has issue a son and daughter.
The present Sheriff entered the army at an early age, and served in the 71st
Highland Light Infantry for some years, and went through the arduous campaigns of
the Crimean War. He attained the rank of Lieutenant in 1854, retired 1857, and is now
(1884) Lieutenant-Colonel of the Shropshire Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry. He succeeded
to the Onslow and other estates of his uncle, Colonel John Wingfield, (who was Sheriff in
1824, and Mayor of Shrewsbury in 1834), on the death of that gentleman at the great
age of 93, on the 31st August, 1862. Of this family, which is descended from the
Wingfields, of Wingfield Castle, in Suffolk, an elaborate account will be found in Blakeway’s
Sheriffs, pp. 147 to 151, under 1692.
Colonel Wingfield is the fourth Sheriff of the family, the others being Thomas, of
Preston Brockhurst, 1692; Rowland, of the same place, 1753; and John, of Onslow, 1824.
The first of the family who is mentioned in connection with Shropshire was Thomas
Wingfield, Esquire, an Alderman of Shrewsbury, who was Bailiff of that town in 1617 and
1623, and Mayor in 1640.


1874. RICHARD THOMAS LLOYD.
ARMS.— Per fesse, sable and Argent, a lion, rampant, counterchanged of the field.
Sheriff is the second son of William Lloyd, of Aston,'
Esquire, (Sheriff 1810), by Louisa, eldest daughter and co-heir
of Admiral Sir Eliab Harvey, G.C.8., of Rolls Park, in the county
of Essex, by whom the estate of Aston was enjoyed for life, after
the death of her husband, as well as that of Rolls Park.
He was born 9th September, 1820, and married, 19th August,
1852, Lady Frances Hay, third daughter of Thomas Robert, 10th Earl of Kinnoull, by
whom he has issue a son and heir, Francis, born - 12th August, 1853, and four other sons
and five daughters. He was formerly Captain in the Grenadier Guards,, and subsequently,
Captain in the North Shropshire Yeomanry Cavalry, and succeeded to the Lieutenant-
Colonelcy of the amalgamated regiment, on the death of Viscount Hill in 1875. On the
decease of his mother, 7th March, 1866, Mr. Lloyd became possessed of the patrimonial
estates.
The family, according to Burke, has been seated at Aston from an early period, and
derives from the Royal house of Powys, through their immediate progenitor, Einion Efell,
Lord of Cynllaeth, son of Madoc, last Prince of Powys. But Mr. Blakeway, in his Sheriff's
of Shropshire , p. 239, says that Andrew Lloyd, who was a Colonel in the Parliamentarian
Army, in the time of Charles 1., was the first of the name resident at Aston.
1875. SIR HENRY GEORGE HARNAGE, BARONET.
ARMS. —Quarterly, 1st and 4th Argent, six torteaux, three, two, and one tor HARNAGE ; 2nd and 3rd ermine, three lions rampant,
Argent, within a bordure, Or, semée of crescents, azure for BLACKMAN.
gIE HENRY GEORGE EARN AGE, of Belswardyne, Baronet,
is the only son of Sir George Harnage, Baronet, by his wife,
Caroline Helena, daughter of Bartlett Goodrich, of Saling Grove,
Essex, Esquire. He was born 24th June, 1827, and married, 1866,
Elizabeth Sara Maude, third daughter of the Reverend Edward
Egremont, Vicar of Wroxeter.


The grandfather of this Sheriff was George Blackman, Esquire, of London and
Barbadoes, whose father married Mary, daughter of Henry Harnage, of London, Esquire.
He was born 1767, and created a Baronet in 1821, and assumed, by Royal grant, the
surname of Harnage only, as the representative of that family, which held a high rank in
the county of Salop, so far back as 1330. Richard de Harnage, who was born at Harnage,
in the parish of Cound, was the direct maternal ancestor of the family. He was a leading
personage among the gentry of the county, and his name is mentioned in the records of
the Corporation of Shrewsbury in 1384. His son, William, married Joyce, daughter of
Robert Scriven, of Frodesley, and was the father of Hugh de Harnage, Sheriff 1423. He
was Member of Parliament for Bridgnorth in 1402 and 1419, and Bailiff of that town in
1403. His son, Thomas, purchased the Belswardyne estate from the Dudleys, in the year
1542. George Harnage, who was a Colonel of Marines, married Sarah, 2nd daughter of
the celebrated Lord Chancellor Jeffreys.
The male line of this family became extinct by the death, in 1826, of Lieutenant-
Colonel Henry Harnage, of the 62nd Regiment, whose daughter married Sir George
Blackman, the Ist Baronet, mentioned ante, the grandfather of the present Sheriff.
Colonel Harnage served under General Burgoyne during the American War, and was
severely wounded at the battle of Freeman’s Farm, 19th September, 1777. John Harnage,
of Belswardyne, Esquire, a Colonel of Marines, was killed at the battle of Almanza, in
Spain, 14th April, 1707. Sir Henry succeeded his father as 3rd Baronet, in 1866.
MOSTYN OWEN, of Woodhouse, Esquire, is the
second and eldest surviving son of William Owen, of Wood-
house, Esquire, by Harriet Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Major
T. Gumming, of Bath, He was born November, 1813, and
married Julia, third daughter of William Herring, of Heathersett
Hall, in the county of Norfolk, Esquire, and has issue two sons,
of whom, the elder, Arthur William, born 1853, is a Captain in
the Ist Royal Dragoons.
1876. ARTHUR MOSTYN OWEN.
ARMS. —Argent, a lion rampant, and a canton, sable.
This family is descended from Howel Owen, of Machynlleth, in the county of
Montgomery, who was also the ancestor of the Owens of Condover. He was the father


of Eichard Owen, of Shrewsbury, who married Alicia, daughter of David Ireland, of
the same place, whose residence in High Street is still known as “ Ireland’s Mansion.”
Another Eichard, a younger brother of the aforesaid Howel, built the beautiful timber
house opposite “ Ireland’s Mansion,” as is testified by the ancient embossed stone which
now stands in its front, with the inscription in Tudor characters, “ Erected by Eichard
Owen the Elder, Gentelman, And. Dnl, 1592.” He was, doubtless, styled “the Elder,”
to distinguish him from his nephew, Eichard, above-mentioned, who probably succeeded
him in his business as a draper, Edward, the son of the younger Eichard, was one of
the executors of his cousin, Judge Owen, of Condover, who built the present stately
mansion at that place. His son Eobert, of Woodhouse, who was Sheriff in 1618, had
(by three wives,) eighteen children. His grandson, Eobert, was Sheriff in 1667. The
male line ended with the death of his only son, John, who married Sarah, daughter
and co-heir of Thomas Cotton, of Pulley, Esquire, Sheriff in 1678, and dying in 1737,
left two daughters, co-heirs, Muriel and Sarah. These ladies agreed to put in possession
of the Woodhouse estate (by deed of gift,) Hugh Owen, M.D., who was descended in
the seventh degree from the above-named Howel, of Machynlleth. He died (in con-
sequence of an accident,) 1784, having previously made a will bequeathing the estate
to his benefactress, who survived him. This lady, soon after she came into sole possession,
created a new entail in favour of, (1) John Lloyd, of Trawscoed; (2 and 3) William and
Eobert, eldest and third sons of William Mostyn, of Bryngwyn ; and (4) Pryce Owen,
of Shrewsbury, M.D. On the death, without issue, of the aforesaid John Lloyd,
Woodhouse devolved on William Mostyn, who thereupon assumed the surname of Owen.
This gentleman, who represented the county of Montgomery, in three parliaments, married
Eebecca, eldest daughter of, Thomas Dod, of Edge, in the county of Chester, Esquire, an
ancestor of the Dods of Cloverley. By this marriage he had two sons and six daughters.
The elder son and heir was William Mostyn Owen, of Woodhouse, Esquire, (father of
the present Sheriff). The second son was the Eeverend Edward Henry Owen, Eector of
Cound. Of the daughters, Eebecca, the eldest, married John Humffreys, of Llwyn, Esquire;
Frances Maria, the second, married the Eeverend The Honourable Eichard Noel Hill,
Eector of Berrington, who afterwards became 4th Lord Berwick; the third, Harriet,
married John Mytton, of Halston, Esquire; the fourth, Sobeiski, was the wife of E. B.
Dean, Esquire; the fifth, Eloisa, married the Eeyerend Henry Cotton, Eector of Hinstock
and Vicar of Great Ness; and Laura, the youngest, died unmarried.


1877. SIR HENRY THOMAS TYRWHITT, BARONET.
ARMS.—Quarterly, 1st and 4th Argent, a lion rampant, vert., vulned in the mouth, proper, Jones ; 2nd and 3rd gules,
three lapwings, (tyrwhitts or peewitts), Or, TYRWHITT.
gIR HENRY THOMAS TYRWHITT, of Stanley Hall, Baronet,
is the eldest son of Sir Thomas John Tyrwhitt Jones, Baronet,
Sheriff 1816, and sometime Member of Parliament for Bridgnorth,
by Ms wife, Elizabeth Walwyn, youngest daughter of John
Macnamara, of St. Kitts, Esquire, and was born 16th April, 1824.
He succeeded his father as 3rd Baronet, sth October, 1839, and
married, 3rd November, 1853, Emma Harriet, only daughter of the
Honourable Robert Wilson, and niece of Henry William, 6th Lord Berners, of Ashwell-
Thorpe, in the county of -Norfolk, whom she succeeded in the Barony, 1871. The issue
of this marriage is The Honourable Harry Tyrwhitt Wilson, born 1854, Lieutenant 16th
Foot, Equerry to the Prince of Wales, eight other sons and three daughters.
The Tyrwhitt’s rank amongst the most ancient of English families, being descended
from Sir Archil, or Hercules, Tyrwhitt, 1 who was living in 1067.
The Reverend Robert Tyrwhitt, D.D., Canon of Windsor and Residentiary of St. Paul’s,
married Elizabeth, daughter of the Right Reverend Edmund Gibson, D.D., Lord Bishop of
London, by his wife, Margaret, daughter and co-heir of the Reverend John Jones, D.D.,
Rector of Selatyn. His eldest son, Thomas, was the annotator on Chaucer and Shakespeare,
who, as well as three brothers, died unmarried. He was succeeded by his fifth son, John
Tyrwhitt, of Netherclay, in the county of Somerset, Esquire, whose eldest son and heir,
Thomas, inherited, in 1790, the estates of Sir Thomas Jones, Knight, heir of Sir Thomas
Jones, Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, tempore, James 11., and assumed, by
sign manual, the surname and arms of Jones only, under the provisions of the will of his
relative. He married, 1791, Harriet Rebecca, daughter of Edward Williams, of Eaton
Mascott, Esquire, and was created a Baronet 3rd October, 1808, and was the grandfather
of the present Sheriff. He was sometime Member of Parliament for Denbigh, and after-
wards for Shrewsbury, and it was during the latter period that he made his celebrated
declaration of independence, which formed the subject of the now rare and curious
(1) . There is a tradition in the family of Tyrwhitt, of Stanifield, in Lincolnshire, which has been handed down from
father to son, that the first of the Tyrwhitts, valiantly defending a bridge, (though the time is not mentioned), was, after the
action was over, sought after by the General on the other side, and found sleeping among the rushes, and was discovered by
the cries and beating of some lapwings, from whence he was called Tyrwhitt, and afterwards had the three lapwings assigned to
him for his coat of arms. —Anecdotes of Heraldry and Chivalry , p. 294.


caricature by Gilray, in which he is depicted in an act of defiance, snapping his fingers
at the minister of the day.
The family of Jones boasts of a still higher antiquity, the pedigree being deduced
from Edenowen, Lord of Tegengel, and Baron Enghtffild, one of the 15 tribes of North
Wales, in the time of Llewellyn Tissell, 1075, whilst that of Edenowen is traced on the
female side from Rhodr-Mawr, King of Wales, 843, the progenitor of the Eoyal House of
Powys. The name of Jones first appears in the pedigree in the person of Richard Jones,
of Holt, in the county of Denbigh, Esquire, who was the son of John Kynrick, (John ap
Cynric), tenth in descent from the aforesaid Edenowen, by his wife Margaret, daughter of
John Conway, of Bodrhyddon. Fourth in descent from him, was William Jones, of
Shrewsbury, described as “ a great Merchant, and of the Draper’s Company of that town,
of which he was also an Alderman,” who lived in the fine old half-timber house under the
Wyle, demolished in the first quarter of the present century, known as “Jones’s Mansion.”
He died in 1612, and was buried in the family vault at St. Alkmund’s, in which church,
until its unfortunate demolition by Act of Parliament, (34, Geo, HI.), in 1794, there was
a magnificent altar tomb, with two recumbent figures, representing William Jones and his
wife, attired in the furred robe of a Bailiff, (which office he filled in 1607), similar to that
still worn by the Mayors of Shrewsbury. On one side of the tomb, the frieze bears the
following inscription :—“ Guliehnus Jones , Aldermanus Salopice, et JElianora uxor ejus
jacent suh hoc monument of and on the other side— “Gulielmus Jones, Ohijt. July 13,
A.D., 1612.” The tomb is now preserved in the Abbey Church, to which it was
subsequently removed. His second son, Thomas, called “ The Rich Jones,” was Sheriff
1625, and the first Mayor of Shrewsbury, having been appointed to that office by the
Crown in 1638, after having previously filled the office of Bailiff six times. His fourth
son, Isaac, of London, who purchased the estate of Berwick Leybourne, near Shrewsbury,
married a daughter of Richard Prince, of the White Hall, by whom he had four sons and
four daughters. His eldest son, Sir William Jones, Knight, inherited the Berwick estate,
but dying without issue, he was succeeded by his next brother, Sir Samuel Jones, Knight,
of Courtenhall, in the county of Northampton, who built and endowed the Almshouses at
Berwick, and was representative of Shrewsbury in Parliament from 1656 to 1670. He also
became possessed of the Sandford Hall estate. He died without issue, and his brother
Edward, of Sandford, (third son of Isaac), succeeded. Edward, in his turn, was succeeded
by his second son, Sir Thomas Jones, Knight, sometime Member of Parliament for
Shrewsbury, and afterwards Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. In the Life of Jeffreys,
of whom he was a contemporary, it is recorded that he sacrificed his high office for his
integrity, being dismissed by James 11. on account of his refusing to proclaim the
dispensing power. The King wished to dispense with the Test Act whenever he thought
fit to do so, but Sir Thomas, and three of his fellow-judges, declared “that the King had
not power to dispense with a statute which Parliament had enacted for the preservation of
the established religion of the country.” They were immediately sent for, but no


impression could be made upon them. Being told that he must either give up his opinion
or his place, Sir Thomas replied, “For my place I care little, I am old and worn out in
the service of the Crown; but I am mortified to find that Your Majesty thinks me
capable of giving a judgment which none but an ignorant or a dishonest man could give.”
To this, the King responded, “ I am determined to have twelve lawyers for judges, who
will be all of one mind in this matter.” The Chief Justice replied, “Your Majesty may
find twelve judges of your mind, but hardly twelve lawyers .” The King always piqued
himself upon being a man of his word, and Sir Thomas and the others received their
dismissal the next morning. He then retired to his mansion at Carrighova, and died at
the age of 78, May 31st, 1692. He was buried in St. Alkmund’s Church, where there is
a handsome mural monument to his memory. The Stanley estate came into possession of
the Joneses by the marriage of Edward Jones, grandson of the Chief Justice, with Mary,
daughter of John Huxley, of Stanley, by whom he had an only son, Sir Thomas Jones,
Knight, Sheriff 1760, who, dying without issue in 1782, at the early age of 48, devised
his estates to his cousin Thomas, son of John Tyrwhitt, of Netherclay, Esquire, who, as
mentioned above, assumed the surname of Jones, which name was discontinued by his
grandson, the present Sheriff and 3rd Baronet.
1878. THE HONOURABLE ROBERT CHARLES HERBERT.
ARMS.—Per pale, azure and gules, three lions, rampant, Argent; the Arms of CLUDDE on a shield of pretence.
HONOURABLE ROBERT CHARLES HERBERT is the
fourth son of Edward, 2nd Earl of Powis, K.G., Lord-
Lieutenant of Montgomeryshire, by his wife, Lady Lucy Graham,
third daughter of James, 3rd Duke of Montrose. He was born
24th June, 1827, and educated at Eton, and St. John’s College,
Cambridge, where he graduated M.A. (first-class in Classics,) 1849.
He was called to the Bar at Lincoln’s Inn, 1853, and was appointed to the office of
Chancellor of the Diocese of Lichfield, in 1875, by his friend and former tutor, Bishop
Selwyn. He married, 22nd June, 1854, Anna Maria, only daughter and heiress of
Edward Cludde, of Orleton, in the county of Salop, Esquire, son of William Cludde,
Sheriff in 1814, and great-grandson, maternally, of William, Sheriff in 1723. He is lineally
descended, in the eighth degree, from Robert Clive, of Styche, Esquire, a member of the
Long Parliament, who was Sheriff in 1674, and is a great-grandson of Robert, Ist Lord
Clive, the founder of our Indian Empire, Member of Parliament for Shrewsbury from
1760 to his death in 1774, and Mayor of that borough in 1762, in which year he was,


in recognition of his brilliant services in India, created an Irish Peer by the title of
Baron Clive, of Plassey. The history of this great man is too well known to need
any further mention of it here. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Edward, 2nd Lord
Clive, who married, 7th May, 1784, Henrietta Antonia, daughter of Henry Arthur
Herbert, Earl of Fowls, and sister and heir of George Edward Henry Arthur, the last
Earl of the family of Herbert. He was, in 1794, created a Peer of Great Britain, and,
in 1804, the Earldom of Powis was revived in his person. His eldest son, Edward,
2nd Earl of the new creation, represented the borough of Ludlow for many years in the
House of Commons, and after his accession to the Upper House, introduced and carried
a measure for preventing the contemplated union of the Sees of St. Asaph and Bangor.
In 1847, he was put in nomination for the high office of Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, a large section of the Members of Convocation being desirous of marking their
appreciation of his services to the Church by electing him Chancellor. H. R. H. The Prince
Consort was also nominated, and Lord Powis very reluctantly consented to a poll on his
behalf. The Prince was elected by a narrow majority, and his Lordship was afterwards
made a Knight of the Garter, the first in modern times below the rank of a Marquis, who
had received that distinguished honour. His eldest son and successor, the present (1884)
Earl, has been, since 1863, High Steward of the University, and Lord-Lieutenant of
Montgomeryshire. His second son was Lieutenant-General The Right Honourable Sir
Percy Egerton Herbert, K.C.8., P.C., and A.D.C. to the Queen. His third son, George,
is Dean of Hereford, and the fifth, William Henry, is a Colonel in the Army. The
present Sheriff, who, by his marriage, became possessed of the Orleton estate, was
successively Lieutenant, 1860, and Captain, 1867, of the 7th (Wellington) Shropshire Rifles,
and Major of the 2nd Administrative Battalion, in 1869,
1879. HENRY De GREY WARTER.
A RMS—Sable, on a chevron, engrailed, between three chess-rooks, Argent, as many cross-crosslets, fitchée of the first.
rjHIS Sheriff is the representative of an ancient Anglo-Saxon
family, originally settled at Warter, in the county of York.
The name has been variously spelt, Wartyr, Water, Watur, and
Walter, in the loose and uncertain manner of former times, though
it has now, without doubt, reverted to the original form.
Richard Wartyr, brother of Francis Nicholas Warter, Bishop of
Dromore, was an eminent Merchant of York, of which city he was Sheriff in 1431, and


Lord Mayor in 1436 and 1451, and was also one of its representatives in Parliament,
13th Henry VI., 1434. He had three sons, from the youngest of whom, John, the
present family is lineally descended. This John AVarter married Joan, daughter and heiress
of AValter Bullock, of Hatton, by which marriage he became the owner of the Stableford
estate in AVorfield, and afterwards purchased those of Cruckmeole, AVhitley, and AYelbatch.
His grandson, John, succeeded to the Cruckmeole estate, which was, in 1615, re-purchased
from Hugo AVarter, by his relative, John, of Swancote and Hatton, a descendant of John,
the original purchaser above-mentioned. He was succeeded in its possession by his second
son, Joseph, whose grandson, Henry, of Cruckmeole, married Mary, daughter of J. Evason,
of Cardington, Esquire, by whom he had issue, three sons and two daughters. He died in
1763, and the Cruckmeole property devolved on his third son, born 1745, who married,
1767, Mary, only child of John Degrey. He had two sons, of whom the elder, John, took
holy orders, and became a Fellow of Magdalen College, Cambridge, and died there s.p. in
1802, being at the time one of the Proctors of the University. The younger son, Henry
Diggory AVarter, succeeded. He was born 31st March, 1770, and married, 19th March,
1805, Emma Sarah Moore, daughter of AVilliam AVood, of the Marsh and Hanwood,
Esquire, by whom he had three sons. The eldest, the Reverend John AVood AVarter,
married the daughter of Robert Southey, the Poet-Laureate, and the youngest, Edward,
also in holy orders, President and Fellow of Magdalen College, Cambridge. This gentleman
married, first, Charlotte Gertrude, daughter of Francis Blythe Harries, of Benthall, near
Broseley, and secondly, Rosamond, daughter of the Reverend Frederick Holmes, Professor
at Bishop’s College, Calcutta, by whom he had one son, Hugo Francis, who died young,
himself dying at Hanwood Rectory, 25th November, 1878. The second son was Henry
De Grey AVarter, Esquire, the present Sheriff, who was born 26th January, 1807, who
adopted, in early life, the profession of the Law, and married, first, 7th March, 1833,
Harriett, daughter of John Benbow, Esquire, of Lincoln’s Inn, Member of Parliament for
Dudley, by whom he had one son, Henry De Grey, and one daughter. He married,
secondly, 10th November, 1875, Ellen Graham, younger daughter of the late Thomas
Goddard, Esquire, of Lee, Kent.
Mr. AVarter, within recent years, acquired, by purchase, extensive property at Longden,
in the parish of Pontesbury, as well as the advowson of the third portion of that parish,
and erected, at the former place, a handsome mansion, Longden Manor. Degory AVatur,
a collateral branch of this family, was an opulent Draper in Shrewsbury, and a member of
the AVorshipful Company of Drapers. He founded, in 1461, the Draper’s Almshouse, on
the west side of St. Mary’s Churchyard, which, having become dilapidated, were taken
down in 1825, and re-built on the opposite side of the street. A portrait of Degory AVatur
and his wife, is preserved in the Draper’s Hall. A John AVaters was Bailiff of Shrewsbury
in 1534. Mr. AVarter, who was an active Magistrate of the county of Salop, died sth
December, 1884, and was buried at Hanwood.


1880. CHARLES DONALDSON HUDSON.
ARMS.—Quarterly, 1st and 4th, on a fesse dancettèe, between two boar’s heads, couped in chief, and a lion rampant, in base,
gules, two martlets of the field for Hudson; 2nd and 3rd Argent, a lymphad, sable, between three dolphins,
naiant, azure for Donaldson.
QHARLES DONALDSON HUDSON, of Cheswardine, Esquire,
is the second son of John Donaldson, Esquire, by his wife,
Catherine, daughter of Anthony Halliley, of Wigton, Esquire, by
his wife, Elizabeth Hudson, sister of Thomas Hudson, of Cheswardine,
Esquire. This gentleman bequeathed his estates to the present
Sheriff, his great nephew, who, thereupon assumed, by Royal license,
the additional surname and arms of Hudson.
He was born 12th February, 1840, and married, 10th February, 1870, Sara Marie,
only daughter of Major Sidney Robert Streatfield, of the 52nd Foot, and step-daughter of
Henry Francis Cockayne Oust, Esquire, of Cockayne Hatley, in the county of Bedford,
and of Ellesmere, in the county of Salop, a member of the noble house of which Earl
Brownlow is the head.
Mr. Donaldson Hudson was elected a member of the London School Board on its
formation, as one of the representatives of Westminster; and at the General Election, in
1880, was returned to Parliament as member for Newcastle-under-Lyme. He has effected
considerable improvements on his estate, especially in the matter of farm buildings, his
homestead at Cheswardine being considered a model of what agricultural buildings should
be; and has, besides, erected a handsome, new mansion on a fresh site in the same
village.
1881. EGBERT JASPER MORE.
ARMS.—Sable, a swan, close, proper, beaked, gules, all within a bordure, engrailed, Argent.
JASPER MORE, of Linley, Esquire, is the only son
of The Reverend Thomas Frederick More, of Linley, by
Harriett Mary, only daughter of his relative, Thomas More, of
Larden, Esquire, by Harriott, daughter of Thomas Mytton, of
Shipton, Esquire, Magistrate and Deputy-Lieutenant of Shropshire.
He was born October 30th, 1836, and educated at Shrewsbury


School, and Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated 8.A., 1861; B.C.L. and M.A. in
1862. He was called to the Bar by the Honorable Society of Lincoln’s Inn, June 6th,
1863, and went the Oxford Circuit, but he soon after relinquished the profession of the
law, and was placed on the Commission of the Peace for the County, and appointed a
Deputy-Lieutenant in 1865. He is also a Magistrate for Montgomeryshire and Much
Wenlock, and a Burgess of Shrewsbury. He married in 1871, Evaline Frances, daughter
of Canon Carr, of St. Helens, in the county of Lancaster, and has issue four sons and
one daughter.
Mr. Jasper More, at the General Election in 1865, was elected Member of Parliament
for South Shropshire, displacing Sir Baldwin Leighton, Baronet, (Sheriff 1835,) but lost
his seat at the General Election of 1868. He again contested the Division, unsuccessfully,
in 1880.
Mr. More took great interest in the cause of the Bulgarians, at the time of the
“Atrocities,” which they suffered at the hands of the Turks in 1876, and visited Roumelia,
with the relief fund subscribed in England at that time, and for the purpose of ascertain-
ing the true position of affairs. The outcome of his investigation was the publication of
a detailed history of the condition of the country, entitled, “ Under the Balkans”
He was an active promoter, if not the actual originator of the Shropshire Chamber
of Agriculture, of which he was the first President, having been the second President of
the Central Chamber of Agriculture in London in 1866.
The family of More is one of great antiquity deriving from Richard de la Mora, who
came from Normandy with the Conqueror, and perished at the battle of Hastings, leaving
a son, Sir Thomas, who, according to Camden, “builte faire houses at Launceston, in
Cornwall; Halton, in Cheshire; and More, in Shropshire; giving to the latter place his
paternal name.” More was exalted into a tenure by Grand Sergeantry by Henry 1., (see
Eyton’s History of Shropshire, vol, xi. part iii.), and endowed with estates at Wittintre,
near Chirbury, and Long Stanton, near Holdgate, “ The service assigned to the said
Serjeantry was as honourable as the endowment was handsome. The lord of More was,
as Constable of the King’s host, to assume the command of two hundred foot soldiers
whenever any King of England crossed the Welsh border in hostile array. The said
Constable was to march in the vanguard of the army, and, with his own hands, to carry
the King’s standard.”—(Eyton.) The Inquisition of Henry 111. finds this service done for
three generations back, (abavus), which, reckoning thirty years for a generation, takes the
service and the family at More back to the first year of Henry 11. One entry in Testa
de Neville, p. 59, p. 272, under Hindr’ de Russelawe, would take the family back for
six generations to a period prior to William the Conqueror.
The More who was best attested in Documentary Evidence was living at the beginning
of Henry 111.


A roll of Shropshire Serjeantries drawn np in or before 1210, speaks of Roger de la
More’s Serjeantry, as a Constdbularia peditum (a command of Infantry) in the armies
of Wales. A roll drawn np in 1211, contains the following entry: — Rogerus de la More
tenet per Serjanciam et debet esse Constahularius peditum in exercitu Domini regis in
Wallid ad custodem Domini regis.” 1 The first of the name who appears on the roll of
Sheriffs (according to Mr. Blakeway, who supplies an interesting account of the family,
under the year 1785,) was John de la More, who held the office three years, viz.,
1367—8—9, and who, though not mentioned by Burke , was unquestionably descended
in a not very remote degree from the founder of the family. Larden Hall has the
name of Jasper More upon it, with the date 1602, but part, of the hall is much older.
The Larden and Linley (or More) estates, which had for -some years been held by different
branches of the family, were re-united in the person of Richard, of Linley, who married
a sister of Sir Thomas Harries, of Boreatton, Baronet, (Sheriff 1619,) and represented the
Borough of Bishop’s Castle, in the Long Parliament of Charles I. He was one .of the
most active partizans in the County, of the Parliamentarians, but died in 1643, before
they had achieved success. His eldest son, Samuel, who succeeded him, and espoused
the same cause, also took a leading part in the civil commotions of the County, for
which he was Member of Parliament in Cromwell’s Parliament, and gallantly sustained,
against a vastly superior force, a month’s siege of Hopton Castle, a graphic account of
which, from his own pen, is given by Mr. Blakeway, in his account of the family,
before-mentioned under 1785. His eldest son, born 1627, was Richard More, of More
and Larden, Esquire, Member of Parliament for Bishop’s Castle, from 1688 until his
death, ten years later, when the estates passed to his younger son, Thomas, (the elder
son, Richard, having been slain in battle, in 1709,) who, dying without issue, in 1731,
was succeeded by his cousin, Robert, only son of Robert More, of Linley, third son
of Samuel, the Parliamentarian Colonel, above-mentioned. This gentleman, who was a
distinguished naturalist, was born in 1703. He was a Eellow and Member of the Council
of the Royal Society, and Member of Parliament for Shrewsbury, 1754. He was the
pupil and friend of Linnaeus, in whose writings there are frequent references to Robertus
More, Salopiensis. He is believed to have planted the first larch in England, probably
contemporaneously with those at Dunkeld, the Duke of Athol, who planted the larch there,
being a Member of the Council of the Royal Society at the same time as Mr. More. He
married, first, in 1750, Ellen, daughter of Thomas Wilson, of Trevallyn, Denbighshire, by
whom he had two sons; and secondly, Catherine, daughter of Thomas More, of Millichope,
Esquire, who died without issue. His eldest son, Robert, succeeded to the Linley estate,
and his second son, Thomas, to that of Larden, the two estates thus being again divided.
The latter was the father of the Reverend Robert Henry Gayer More, of Larden, and
of Harriett Mary, who married her cousin, as before-mentioned, the father of the present
Sheriff. The Reverend Robert Henry Gayer More was the Patron and Incumbent of the
(1) Eyton in loco. Testa do Neville and tlie Inquisitions in the Record Office, pp. 53 and GO.


donative of Shipton, of which church there is record in the reign of Stephen, (see Eyton),
and in which parish Larden is situated, from 1826 until his death in 1880. He was never
married. The elder son, Eobert, who was Sheriff in 1785, was the father of Eobert
Bridgeman More, of Linley, Esquire, Sheriff in 1822, who, dying unmarried in 1851, was
succeeded by his next brother, Thomas Frederick, before-mentioned, after whose death in
1869, and that of The Eeverend Eobert Henry Gayer More, in 1880, the estates of
Linley and Larden became once more reunited in the person of the present Sheriff, as well
as the Mytton estates of Shipton and Cleobury North. •
Eichard More, descended from the Larden branch of this family, settled in Ireland in
the reign of James 1., and had issue, Thomas, of Barne, Tipperary, ancestor of the High
Sheriff of Tipperary, 1885, and Member of Parliament for Tipperary county, 1876, and
Stephen, whose grandson was created Baron Kilworth, of More Park, county Cork, 1764,
Viscount Mount Cashell, 1766, whose son was created Earl of Mount Cashell, 1781.
The second Earl and 3rd Viscount died 1884.
Sir Thomas More, the Lord Chancellor, was a collateral branch of this family.
Ckests. —A goshawk, preying on a coney. Also a swan’s head out of a ducal coronet, said to he granted for saving the
King’s life in the expedition into Flintshire, recorded by Eyton, temp. Henry H.
1882. JAMES JENKINSON BIBBY.
ARMS.—Azure, on a saltire, Argent, a lion rampant, Gules; in chief and base, two escallops, Or, and in flanque
two mullets, Argent.
JAMES JENKINSON BIBBY, of Hardwicke Grange, in the county
of Salop, Esquire, is tlie youngest son of John Bibby, Esquire,
formerly a skip-owner and merchant of considerable eminence in
the city of Liverpool, by his wife, Mary, daughter of Joseph Mellard,
Esquire, of Newcastle-under-Lyme, He was born 1813, and married,
1844, Sarah, daughter of Thomas Cook, of Dewsbury, in the county
of York, Esquire. Mr. Bibby was himself engaged in extensive
mercantile pursuits in Liverpool. He purchased the estate of Hardwicke Grange, formerly
the property and favourite residence of General Viscount Hill, from the representatives of
that distinguished man, in 1868.


1883. WILLIAM ORME FOSTER
ARMS. —Sable, on a chevron, Argent, between three pheons, Or, as many escallops of the field.
ILLIAM ORME FOSTER, of Apley Park, in the county
of Salop, Esquire, is the eldest son of William Foster, of
Stourton Court, in the county of Stafford, Esquire, by Charlotte,
daughter of William Orme, of Dulwich, Esquire. Mr. Foster is the
grandson of Henry Foster, of Stourbridge, Esquire, who married the
widow of Gabriel Bradley, the father of John Bradley, founder of
the Stourbridge Ironworks, by whom he had two sons, William, of Stourton Court, above
referred to, and James, of Stourton Castle, sometime Member of Parliament for Bridgnorth,
and High Sheriff of the county of Worcester in 1840. This gentleman, having become
head and sole representative of the eminent firm of ironmasters, known as “ John Bradley
and C 0.,” died, unmarried, in 1853, and was succeeded by his nephew, the present Sheriff.
Mr. Foster was born in 1814, and married, 1843, Isabella, daughter of Henry Grazebrook,
of Liverpool, Esquire, and has issue, two sons and four daughters. He is a Magistrate and
Deputy-Lieutenant of Shropshire and Staffordshire, and was formerly Member of Parliament
for South Staffordshire, and was Sheriff of the county of Wexford in 1876. In 1867 he
purchased, from the then possessor, Captain Douglas Whitmore, the beautiful estate of
Apley, near Bridgnorth, with its imposing mansion, delightfully situated on the banks of
the Severn, and has yearly expended large sums in its improvement. The estate comprised
a large portion of the neighbouring town of Bridgnorth, which gave its owner a prepon-
derating political influence in the borough, an influence, by the way, which is always
acknowledged to have been exercised beneficially, in the past as well as in the present
time. The representation of the borough in Parliament has been for centuries held by a
member of the Apley family, and on the retirement of Mr. Henry Whitmore, in 1870, it
was but natural that it should be offered to Mr. Foster, and by him accepted on behalf of
his son and heir, who was born 9th April, 1846, and married, 7th March, 1874, Henrietta
Grace, daughter of Henry Sandford Pakenham Mahon, of Strokestown, in the county of
Eoscommon, Esquire. The restoration, or rather the re-building, in its original form, of
the fine old tower of St. Leonard, owes much to the munificence of Mr. Foster, and his
discriminate taste has made its mark on other buildings in the interesting town of
Bridgnorth.


1884. CHARLES JOHN MORRIS.
ARMS.—Sable, a lion passant, Or, between three sealing ladders, Argent.
rjiHE grandfather of the present Sheriff was Thomas Morris, who
had a very large business at Newport, in the county of
Salop, as a Conveyancer. He married, in 1786, Margaret, daughter
of William Spearman, Esquire, of Donnington, and grand-daughter
of William Marigold, Esquire, of Aston, near Wem, and died
November, 1817. He had four sons, Charles, Thomas William,
John, and Edward. Thomas William died in 1813. Charles and John bought the estate
of Wood Eaton Manor, in the county of Stafford, in 1845, to which considerable additions
have been made. Charles died, unmarried, December 11th, 1848 : he lived and was
buried at Newport. His share in the Wood Eaton, and his other estates as well, passed,
on his death, to his brother John. John married, in 1830, Julia, youngest daughter of
Samuel Amy Seveme, of Wallop, in the county of Salop, and Thenford, in the county of
Northampton, Esquire. John resided for some few years at Down Eossall, in the county
of Salop, afterwards removing to Oxon, the property of his brother Edward, and finally to
Wood Eaton Manor: he died at Oxon, July sth, 1866, and his estates and other property
devolved upon his only child, Charles John.
Charles John, the Sheriff now under notice, was born May 24th, 1831. He was
educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford; B.A. 1853. He married, May 6th, 1862,
Constance Lingen, only daughter of Robert Burton, of Longner Hall, Esquire, (Sheriff
1852), by his second wife, Catharine, eldest daughter of the Reverend Herbert Oakeley, D.D.,
of Oakeley, in the county of Salop, and sister of William, Sheriff 1832.
Edward, the youngest of the four sons, purchased, 1832, the Oxon property from his
relatives, the Spearmans, and lived the greater part of his fife with his brother John at
Oxon. He died, unmarried, November 12th, 1878, at the age of 79. He purchased,
besides other property round Oxon, an extensive estate in Montgomeryshire, and was
Sheriff of that county, 1859. At his death his nephew, the Sheriff under notice, succeeded
to his estates in Salop and Montgomeryshire.


1885. WILLIAM EDWARD MONTAGU HULTON-HARROP.
ARMS.—Quarterly, 1st and 4th per chevron, Argent and sable, three eagles, displayed, each charged with a fleur-de-lis for
difference, countercharged of the field 2nd and 3rd, Argent, a lion rampant, gules.
EDWARD MONTAGU HULTON-HARROP, of
Bardsley House, in the county of Lancaster, and Lythwood
Hall, in the county of Salop, Esquire, is a member of a family
which can boast of very high antiquity, and possesses the most
unerring proofs of it in the title deeds of the estate of Hulton,
from which the name is derived, and, of which, the Hultons, have
been uninterrupted lords since the Conquest. He is the second
son of the Reverend Arthur Hyde Hulton, incumbent of Christ-Church, Ashton-under-Lyne,
by his wife, Elizabeth Margaret, second daughter and co-heir of Jonah Harrop, of Bardsley
House, in the county of Lancaster, Esquire, and was born August 30th, 1848. He was
educated by private tutor, and at Magdalen College, Cambridge; and, by Royal license,
dated Bth December, 1866, in accordance with the testamentary injunctions of his maternal
grandfather, (to whose property he succeeded), assumed the surname and arms of Harrop,
in addition to those of Hulton. He married, 16th January, 1878, Margaret Henrietta
Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Calverley Bewicke, of Close House, in the county of
Northumberland, Esquire, by whom he has four children, two sons and two daughters.
The earliest name recorded in the Hulton pedigree, is that of Bleythin de Hulton,
who was seated in the county of Lancaster, tempore Henry 11., and from whom the
present Sheriff is thirtieth in direct descent. The next name is Jorwith, alias Yarwiel de
Hulton, (son of Bleythin), who lived in the reign of King Richard I. and that of King
John, to whom the latter monarch, by Royal Charter, dated at Mans, 10th October, in
the first year of his reign, granted the town of Penelton, (now Pendleton), in the county
of Lancaster, in exchange for other lands which he had granted him, when he, the King,
was Count of Mortain. 1
(1) The folloicing is a translation of the Charter of King John to Jorwith de Hulton.
Jons, by the grace of God, &0., know ye that we give and concede, and by this out present charter do confirm, to
Jorwith de Hulton and his heirs, the town of Penhulton, with all its appurtenances, in exchange for Barton and the "Wood of
Kereshall, which we gave, conceded, and by our charter confirmed, to him by his homage and service when Earl of Horton (or
Montaigne), to have and to hold of ns and our heirs to him and to his heirs, by the service of six parts of one Knight, for
every service. Wherefore, we will .and strictly charge that the same Jorweth, and his heirs and posterity, have and hold the
aforesaid town of Penhulton, with all the appurtenances, at the aforesaid service, of ns and our heirs quietly, freely, and in


Catherine de Hulton, daughter of Jorwith, married Philip de Malpas, called Goch,
second son of David de Malpas, ancestor of the family of Egerton.
The line, however, was continued through his eldest son, Robert, whose son, Robert,
sometime seneschall of William de Ferrers, Earl of Derby, Sheriff of Lancashire, 1225,
married Alice, daughter and heir of John de Pontefract, sixth Baron of Hulton, Constable
of Chester, and founder of Stornlaw, 1178.
Thomas Hulton, (a member of this family), of Wroxham Hall, in the county of
Norfolk, assumed, by Royal license, the surname and arms of Preston, was created a
Baronet, 27th December, 1814. This gentleman was great-grandson of John Hulton, of
Chester, Esquire, who married Ann, youngest daughter of the Reverend Philip Henry, and
sister of the Reverend Mathew Henry, author of Commentary on the Bible. William
Hulton, of Hulton Park and Farnworth, Esquire, was the High Sheriff of Lancashire, 1789,
and his son, William, who succeeded him, was High Sheriff of the same county, 1810,
and Constable of Lancaster Castle. The latter gentleman, who married Maria, daughter
and co-heiress of Randle Ford, of Wexham, in the county of Bucks, Esquire, was the
father of the Reverend Arthur Hulton, above referred to, and grandfather of the present
Sheriff.
Although Mr. Hulton-Harrop’s connection with, and residence in, the county of Salop
has been of so brief a duration, counting only from the death of his grandfather, when
he came into possession of the Gatten estate in 1866, his family enjoys a position (as
has been mentioned before) in the County Palatine of Lancaster almost unequalled, certainly
unsurpassed, by the highest nobles of the land. If, in their long career, extending over
nearly eight centuries, they have done few striking things, performed no remarkable feats
of prowess, either in the protracted struggles of the Roses, or the equally sanguinary
conflicts between Cavalier and Roundhead, achieved no great distinction either at Court or
in the Cabinet, they have yet been steady, clear-headed, singularly efficient men, who have
never shirked their responsibilities, but been ready to do battle in defence of their country,
and, if need be, to risk their possessions in the interest of the State. Men of sound
judgment and capacity, they have been useful rather than great, and though they have
never been ennobled, or attained to any exalted rank, they have intermarried with the
best families in their county, and may pride themselves upon the fact that the best blood
in the Palatinate courses through their veins.
peace, fully and honourably, in wood and plain, in roads and dales, in moors and marshes, in waters and wells, stagnant and
running, and in fisheries in all places and things, with all the liberties and rights that by custom to the aforesaid appertain.
Given by the hand of S., Archdeacon of Wells, John de Grai, at Le Mans, on the tenth day of October, in the first year
of our reign.
X. G., Archbishop of Tork.
H., Bishop of Salisbury.
E., Bishop of St. Andrews, &c.


Their original ancestry it is difficult to trace. Though, as has been said, they are,
genealogically, 700 years old; Burke claims for them a much higher antiquity; he may
have good ground for his belief, but his statement is unsupported by ascertained facts.
Blethyn de Hulton is the first who appears bodily, but his name, as well as those of his
sons, Jorwith and Madoc, and his grandson, Meredith, and others of a decided Welsh
character, give some degree of force to the conjecture that they spring originally from the
Principality.
Mr, Langton conceived the idea that the progenitors of the stock formed part of the
immigration into Lancashire, which took place in the reign of Henry 11., when Owen
Gwynnedd succeeded in driving all the Norman and English settlers out of North Wales,
as set forth in a petition of Eobert Banaster contained in the Eolls of Parliament, whose
Castle at Prestatyn had been overthrown in 1157, when, by stratagem, the English army,
under Henry, was decoyed into the defile of Coed Ewloc, near Holywell, where they were
surprised by David and Conau, sons of Owen Gwynnedd, and vanquished with much
slaughter. The fact, however, that the victors did not continue their pursuit beyond
Henry’s camp at Saltney, somewhat militates against Mr. Langton’s theory. It is not of
much moment now, to enquire whether this or that supposition be the correct one. It is
sufficient to know that the Hultons have quietly discharged their duty to their King,
their country, and their family in their generations.
1886. ARTHUR SPARROW.
ARMS. —Per fesse, az. and Argent, in chief three roses of the second, and in base an arrow, in pale ppr.; quartering Hanbury.
SPAEEOW, of Preen Manor, in the county of Salop,
Esquire, is the youngest son of William Hanbury Sparrow,
of Penn, in the county of Stafford, Esquire, by his second wife,
Sarah Higgs, daughter of William Turton, of Sedgley. He was
born 28th November, 1826, and married Euth, daughter of William
Gratrix, of Eccles, Esquire, by whom he has issue living, three
daughters, the second of whom is married to Edward Lennox Peel,
Esquire, of Liverpool, and two sons, Cecil Blair, born 1859, and called to the Bar at the
Inner Temple, in 1885, and Alan Bertram Hanbury, born 1863. The present Sheriff is a
Deputy-Lieutenant for the county of Salop, and a Magistrate for the counties of Salop
and Stafford.
in Q r i qqr i (WILLIAM EDWARD MONTAGU HULTON-HAEROP. 1
A ■ ibbb.j ARTHUR SPARROW. . f


The family of Sparrow has long been settled in Staffordshire, formerly residing in
the north of that county.
Thomas Sparroy, of Audley, in the county of Stafford, living circa 1500, was great-
great-grandfather of John Sparroy, father of John Sparroy, also of Audley, who married
Joanna Kettle, and was father of John Sparrow, of Wolstanton, in the county of Stafford.
His son, William Sparrow, by Mary, daughter of Richard Booth, emigrated, about 1750,
from North into South Staffordshire, in company with his cousin, Burslem Sparrow, who
held large collieries in the neighbourhood of Wolverhampton, and was the first person to
erect, in South Staffordshire, a steam engine for the purpose of pumping water from the
coal mines.
Burslem Sparrow married the sister and heiress of George Port, of Ham Hall, in
the county of Stafford, and his son, John, assumed the name and arms of Port, upon
succeeding to the Ham estate.
William Sparrow, above-mentioned, married Elizabeth, daughter of William Allen,
of Sedgley, and had issue, one son, William, of Wolverhampton and Pattingham, who
married Mary, daughter and co-heiress of Thomas Hanbury, of Birmingham. The said
Thomas Hanbury was a great-grandson of Francis Hanbury, of Norton Hall, in the
county of Stafford, who was the great-grandson of Robert Hanbury, of Wolverhampton.
Robert Hanbury was the son of John Hanbury, who lived circa 1559, at Elmley Lovett,
in the county of Worcester, and who was grandson of Richard Hanbury, third son of
John de Hanbury, who lived in the reign of Henry IY.
The eldest son of William Sparrow, by his wife, Mary Hanbury, was William
Hanbury Sparrow, of Penn, the father of the present Sheriff. He was a well-known
ironmaster in South Staffordshire, and was a man of great energy and decision of
character. In his early days he was one of the pioneers of the railway system of this
country, and, in company with George Stephenson, fought many a hard battle before
Parliamentary committees against the opponents of the system. In the possession of
the present Sheriff, are the minutes of a meeting called by his father and held at
Wolverhampton, on the 7th April, 1824, “for the purpose of forming and carrying into
effect a railroad from Birmingham and the Staffordshire and Shropshire Ironworks to
Liverpool and Manchester, for the conveyance of iron and other goods to and from the
above-mentioned places.” A list of subscribers is then given, the first name on the list
being the Sheriff’s father, in whose handwriting the minutes are drawn up. The result
of the meeting was that the old Grand Junction Railway was constructed, and the great
system of the London and North Western Railway inaugurated.
The aforesaid William Hanbury Sparrow was on the Roll for High Sheriff of the
county of Stafford, in 1860, but he did not serve. He acquired, by purchase, considerable
property in Shropshire, Worcestershire, and Herefordshire. Pie was twice married. By


his first wife, Caroline, daughter' of Thomas Mander, of Edgbaston, he had issue, two sons,
one of whom died unmarried, and three daughters. The eldest son, William Mander
Sparrow, of Albrighton Hall, in the county of Salop, was Sheriff of Staffordshire in 1873,
and died, without issue, in 1881. The second wife was the above-mentioned Sarah Higgs,
daughter of William Turton, of Sedgley. William Turton was a descendant of Nicholas
Turton, of Dudley, who lived circa 1470, another branch of whose descendants were
settled at the Oak House, West Bromwich, and from whom sprang Sir John Turton,
one of the Barons of the Exchequer, knighted by William 111. in 1689. By his second
wife, William Hanbury Sparrow had issue, three daughters and two sons—Frederick Turton,
of Habberley Hall; and the present Sheriff, who succeeded to the Church Preen, Eaton-
under-Haywood, and Rushbury properties of his father.
At Church Preen, Mr. Sparrow has built a house upon the site of the old Monastic
Cell, formerly connected with Wenlock Abbey.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO THE SHERIFFS.
Atcherloy, David Erancis, 1864.
Bibby, James Jenkinson, 1882.
Borough, John Charles Burton, 1844.
Boughton, Sir William Edward Rouse, 1836.
Boughton, Sir Charles Henry Rouse, 1860.
Broughton, Peter, 1839.
Burton, Robert, 1852.
Charlton, St. John Chivorton, 1845.
Cheney, Robert Henry, 1851.
Corbet, Sir Andrew Vincent, 1843.
Corbet, Sir Vincent Rowland, 1862.
Corbett, Panton, 1849.
Curtis, Sir William, 1857.
Eyton, Thomas, 1840.
Foster, William Orme, 1883.
Gatacre, Edward Lloyd, 1856.
Hamilton, The Honourable Gustavus Frederick John
James, 1841.
Harnage, Sir Henry George, 1875.
Harries, Francis, 1865.
Harrop, William Edward Montagu Hulton, 1885.
Herbert, The Honourable Robert Charles, 1878.
Hope, Thomas Henry, 1837.
Hudson, Charles Donaldson, 1880.
Justice, Henry, 1842.
Kinchant, Richard Henry, 1846.
Leighton, Sir Baldwin, 1835.
Leeke, Ralph Merrick, 1850.
LLoyd, Charles Spencer, 1868.
Lloyd, Richard Thomas, 1874.
Lovett, John Henniker, 1872.
Lovett, Joseph Venables, 1847.
Main waring, Salusbury Kynaston, 1870.
More, Robert Jasper, 1881.
. Morris, Charles John, 1884.
Moseley, Walter, 1833.
Oakeley, William, 1832.
Owen, Arthur Mostyn, 1876.
Pemberton, Charles Orlando Childe, 1859.
Percy, Algernon Charles Heber-, 1853.
Plowden, William Henry Francis, 1848.
Powys, The Honourable Henry Wentworth, 1834.
Pritchard, George, 1861.
Rooke, John, 1869.
Sandford, Thomas Hugh, 1866.
Sitwell, William Willoughby George Hurt, 1855.
Slaney, Robert Aglionby, 1854.
Slaney, William Kenyon, 1871.
Smylhe, Sir Edward Joseph, 1831.
Smythe, Sir Charles Erederick, 1867.
Sparrow, Arthur, 1886.
Tyrwhitt, Sir Henry Thomas, 1877.
Waiter, Henry De Grey, 1879.
Whitmore, William Wolryche, 1838.'
Whitmore, Thomas Charlton, 1863.
Wingfield, Charles George, 1873.
Wright, Edmund, 1868.


INDEX
OF
THE PERSONS AND PRINCIPAL MATTERS.
Abercorn, Duke of, 26.
Acton Burnell estate, 6.
Acton, William, of Buildwas, 8.
Eachel, daughter of Thomas, of Gatacre, 24.
Sir Edward, 8.
Adams, Alicia, daughter of John, 28.
William, founder of Newport School, 28.
Adderley, Anne Selina, daughter of Ealph, 22.
Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Ealph Thomas, 29.
Sir Charles, Baron Norton, 29.
Aglionby, Elizabeth, daughter of John, 48.
John, of Knoll, 48.
Aloock, John, of Market Drayton, 22.
Alfred the Great, 8.
Allesley, Elizabeth, daughter of Geoffrey de, 18.
AUestrey, family of, 31.
Alington, Julius, 51.
Alt, Anne, daughter of John, of Loughborough, 31.
Amherst, Tyssen, 56.
Anderson, Eeverend E., of Bedale, 8.
Maria Katherine, daughter of Eeverend E., 8.
Anne, Queen, 27.
Antiquities of Shropshire, 24.
Apley estates, 32.
Arran, Mary, relict of Earl of, 26.
Charter of Lands and Earldom of, 26.
Assize, First Winter, in Shrewsbury, 29.
Aston-le-Walls, estate of, 37.
Atcherley, David Francis; arms and family of, 56.
of Marton and Stanwardine, 56.
Sir Eoger, Lord Mayor, 56.
Eichard, of Stanwardine, 56.
Thomas (1), of Marton, 56.
—: (2), of Marton, 56.
Athlone, Storming of, 27.
Badqbb estate, 43.
Baker, Abigail, daughter of Henry, 19.
Bagot, Sir Harvey, 23.
Bainbrigge, Barbara, daughter of Thomas, 31.
Balaclava, Fatal Charge of, 32.
Baldock, Edward Holmes, M.P., 29.
Baldwyn-Childe, Eeverend E. G., 16.
Bandon, 3rd Earl of, 55.
Barrington, Elizabeth, 18.
Bausley estate, 14.
Baugh, Harriet, daughter of Benjamin, of Ludlow, 26.
Bayley, May, daughter of Martin, 31. A., 46.
Beale, Ann, daughter of Thomas, 61.
Bedulf estate, 23.
Bellew, Sir Edward, 5.
Frances, daughter of Sir Edwardj 5.
Benbow, Harriett, daughter of John, M.P., 74.
Bennett, Honourable Henry Grey, 41.
Berners, 6th Lord, 70.
Berwick estate, 9.
gates, 9.
Helen Brown, daughter of George Nicholson, 50.
4th Lord, 69.
Bewicke, Elizabeth, daughter of Calveley, 81.
Beverley, Earl of, Ist and 2nd, 47.
Bibby, James Jenkinson; arms and family of, 78. .
John, 78.
Billeston, Edwyn de, 7.
— : Edward de, 8.
Bilsthorpe, Manor of, 23.
Blackman, Sir George, Baronet, 68.
Blount, Constantia, daughter of George, 6.
Sir Edward, 6.
George, 6.
Oscar Henry, 60.
Blundell, Nicholas, 6.
Bolland, John, of Clapham, 7.
Catherine, daughter of John, 7.
Borough, Thomas, 29, 31.
Borrowe, Bobert, 30.
John Tempest, 31.
(afterwards Borough), John, 31.
Borrow, Thomas, of Castle Field, 30, 31.
lsaac, of Hulland, 30, 31.
Boughton, Sir William Edward Bouse; arms and family of, 17.
Francis, 18.
Edward, 18, 19.
Henry, 19.
_ William, 19.
Boughton, Humphrey, 19.
Edward, 19.
Theodosia, 19.
—: Sir Theodosius, Allesley, 19.
Shuekburg, 19.
Sir Charles William, 17.
Sir William Edward, 17, 18.
Sir Charles Henry Bouse, Baronet; arms and family
of, 53.
Sir William Edward Bouse, Baronet, M.P., 53.
William St. Andrew, 53.
Edward Shuckburgh, 53.
Boughtons, of Causton, 18.
Bosworth Field, Battle of, 18.
Boveton, Bobert de, 18.
Eichard, 18.
Botfield, Beriah, of Decker Hill, 16.
Boughey, Anastasia Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John, 5.
Boycott, Thomas, of Budge, 0, 57.
Louisa, daughter of Thomas, 6.
Harriet, daughter of Thomas, 57.
of Budge, 45.
Boyne, Viscount; arms and family of, 26.
Battle of the, 27, 37.
Bradford, Francis Newport, Earl of, 12.
2nd Earl of, 51.
Bradeley, John, 79.
Bbancepeth estates, 26.
Brancepeth, Baron, 27.
Bretagne, Duke of, 14.
Bridgeman, Lady Lucy B. G., 21.
Honourable Admiral Charles Orlando, 54.
Bromley de, Margery, daughter of Sir John, 23.
Broughton, Peter; arms and family of, 22.
Thomas, of Broughton, 22.
Eeverend Peter, 22.
John Lambart, 22.
Sir Henry Delves, 23.
Eichard, 23.
Chapel, founder of, 23.
Bryan, 23.
Browne, Isaac Hawkins, M.P. for Wenlock, 43.
: junior, M.P. for Bridgnorth, 43.
Buokstone, Catherine, daughter of Eeverend George, 48.
Buildwas estate, 8.
Buildwas, Cistercian Monastery of, n. 8.
Abbey, Buins of, 8.
described in Mr. Walcott’s Four Minsters round
the Wrckin, 8.
Britton’s Architectural Antiquities of, 8.
Abbey, 13.
Bullen, Christopher, 41.
Burghton, John, Lord of, 23.
Burgh, Anchoret, daughter of Sir John, 14.
Bueghfield estate,-37.
Burley, Maud, daughter of Sir John, of Broncroft, 36.
Burton-Borough, John Charles, 29, 31; arms and family of
29, 31, 32.
Burton, Honora, daughter of Thomas, 30.
lngenulph de, 30.
Sir James de,- 30.
Adam de, 30.
Nicholas de, 30.
William de, 30.
Abbey 8011, 30.
Francis, of Dronfield, 30.
Thomas, 30.
William, historian of Leicester, 30.
Bobert, author of Anatomy of Melancholy, 30.
Anna Maria, daughter of Bobert, of Longner, 35.
Constance Lingen, daughter of Bobert, 80.
Anna Maria, daughter of Bobert, of Longner, 38.
Bobert, 7; arms and family of, 44.
Eeverend Henry, 44.
Bobert Lingen, 44.
Constance Lingen, 44.
Busn estates, 32.
Butler, Elizabeth, daughter of Alban, of Aston-le-Walls, 37.
Honourable Henry Edmund, 32.
Buttery, Grant of land to Shrewsbury Abbey, 24.
Butts, Ann, daughter of Bobert, Bishop of Ely, 24.
Cainets, Ealph de, 43.
Campbell, Elizabeth, daughter of Major-General Dugald, ,25.
Oaedesxos estate, 14,


Carr, Balph, 44.
Evaline Frances, daughter o£ Canon, 76.
Carrington, Lord, 6.
Clare or Clara, 6.
Catesby, Elizabeth, daughter ol Edward, 19.
Caton, Eliza Maria, daughter of Eey. B. 8., 33.
Chames, de, Juliana, daughter of Beginald, 23.
Chandos, James, Bth Lord, 7.
Anne, 7.
James, Ist Dube of, .7.
Charles 1., King, 10, 19.
II., King, 11.
Charlton, St. John Chiverton; arm ami family of, 32.
William, of Apley, 32.
Ann, daughter of Philip, of Wytheford, 32.
Captain St. John William, 32.
Emma, daughter of Sir Francis, 33.
Job, of Park Hall, 33.
Francis, of Easton, 33.
; Sir Job, of Ludford, 14.
Alice, daughter of William, 24.
Cheney, Eobert Henry; arm and family of, 43.
Sir John, K.G., created Baron by Henry VII., 43.
Edward, 43.
Eobert, 43.
Frederica, 44.
Cheiwynd estate, 32.
Childe, William Lacon, of Kinlet, 16.
Childe-Pemberton, Charles Orlando, 51; arms and family of,
51, 52.
Charles Orlando, of Milliohope, 16.
Childe, Eeverend Edward George Baldwyn, 52.
William Lacon, of Kinlet, 51.
Cholmondeley, Eeverend Charles Cowpcr, 47.
Cholmeley, Barbara, daughter of Francis, of Brandsby, 35.
Church, Eleanor, daughter of William, 22.
Christy, Eebecca, daughter of William Miller, 22.
Civil War, 1643, 10.
CinderhiU Eiots, (1821), 52.
Claremont Hill, Shrewsbury, 6.
Clifford, Hugh, Lord, 6.
Mary, daughter of Lord, 6.
Clebury, Jane, daughter of Edmund de, 36.
Cludde, Anna Maria, daughter of Edward, 72.
William, 51.
Constable, Anne, daughter of Edward, 50.
Constantine, Thomas de, 13.
Coningsby, Jane, sister of Sir Thomas, 19.
Cook, Sarah, daughter of Thomas, 78.
Coombe, William, of Stratford-on-Avon, 19.
Cope, Arabella, daughter of Jonathan, 48.
Cobeet family, ancient estates of, 14.
Sir Eichard, 14.
Sir Andrew Vincent; arm and family of, 28.
Andrew, of Shawbury Park, 28.
Sir Andrew, of Moreton Corbet, 28.
Eichard, of Adderley, 29.
Henry Beginald, 29.
Sir Corbet, 29.
Vincent Eowland, 29.
Andrew George, 29.
Beginald John, 29.
Walter Bobert, 29.
■ ■ ■ - Sir Vincent Eowland; arms and family of, 54.
— Walter Orlando, 54.
Gerald Vincent, 54.
The Misses (8), 54.
Corbett, Panton, of Longnor; arm and family of, 40.
descent from Corbet’s of Cans, 40.
John, appointed Forester of Wrekin, 40.
John de Longnore, gentilman, 40.
Sir Edward, created a Baronet by Charles L, 40.
Charles, of London, 40.
Archdeacon, 40.
Pantbn, elected. M.P. for Shrewsbury, 41.
■ ■■ Sir Eichard, 41.
. Colonel Edward, M.P. for South Salop, 41.
Captain Edward, 41.
Favoretta, 41.
Jeu-d’esprit on Shrewsbury Election, 41.
Cotes, Elizabeth, daughter of John, 48.
Cotton, Honourable Eobert Stapleton Wellington, son of 2nd
Viscount Combermere, 34.
Eeverend Henry, 69.
Mary, daughter of John, 28.
Council of State, 11.
County Police, New, 15.
Crawford, David, 4th Earl of, 26.
Croft Castle, 7.
Croft, Sir Herbert, 7, 8.
Bishop, 7.
Margaret, daughter of Sir Herbert, 7.
Cromwell, Oliver, 11, 12..
Crowther, William, of Bedston, 7.
Cruckton estate, 57.
Gumming, Harriett Elizabeth, daughter of Major, 68.
Cure, Colonel Alfred Capel, 44.
Curtis, Sir William, 50; arm and family of, 50.
Curtis, Sir William Michael, 50.
William Edmund, 50.
Ouyler, Constance Ann, daughter of Sir Charles, 61.
Curzon, Agnes, daughter of Stephen, 30.
Danvers, John, daughter of, 18.
Darby, Alice Mary, daughter of Alfred, 22. '
Adelaide Anna, daughter of Francis, 55.
De Montfort, 14.
De Napton, of Broughton, 23.
Elias, 23.
Deacon, Sarah, daughter of John, 55.
Delamer, Lord, 47.
Denbigh, Basil, 6th Earl of, 9.
Eandolph William Basil, Bth Earl of, 9.
William, 3rd Earl of, 12.
Basil, 4th Earl of, 12.
William Basil Percy, 7th Earl of, 12.
Desmond, Sir George Feilding, 12.
Jane, daughter of Michael, 18.
Donellan, John, 19.
Doneraile, Louisa Anne, daughter of Viscount, 20.
Doemngton, Church of St. Edward at, 20.
Douglas, Archibald, sth Earl of, 26.
Lady Louisa Ann, 55.
Downtos estates, 17.
Drummond, Penelope, daughter of Sir Maurice, 37.
Annabelle Mary, daughter of Sir James, 42.
Williams, of Inkborrow, 42.
Durand, Captain E. L., Indian Staff, 46.
Edgehill, Battle of, 10.
Edward, The Confessor, 50.
HI., 18.
IV., 9.
V., 18.
Edwardes, Helen Esther Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas, 20.
Sir Henry, of Frodesley, 20.
Sir Henry Hope, 10th Baronet, 20.
William John, 20.
St. Leger Frederick, 20.
Leighton, 20.
Egremont, Elizabeth Sara Maude, daughter of Eeverend Edward,
67.
Eldon, Catherine Frances, daughter of 2nd Earl of, 27.
Errington, John, 6.
Eshe Hall, county Durham, 5.
Exhibition, Great International, 1862, 48.
Eyre, Mr., Ex-Governor of Jamaica, 16.
Eyton, Thomas, 24, 48; arms and family of, 24.
on-the-Wild-Moors, 24.
Eobert de, 24.
John, 24.
— Humphrey, 24.
Nicholas, 24.
Lewis, 24.
Sir Philip, 24.
Eichard, 24.
Sir Thomas, 24.
Eeverend John, Vicar of Wellington, 24, 35, 38.
Sowdley, 24.
Eobert William, the historian, 24, 38.
Thomas Campbell, accomplished naturalist, 25.
Charles James, 25.
William Archibald, 25.
Philip de, n. 35.
: Thomas Slaney, 25.
Thomas Campbell, 47, 48.
Feilding, The Honourable Henry Wentworth; arm and family
of, 9.
Sir William, 9.
Everard Eobert Bruce, 12.
Catherine Frances, 12.
Mary Ann, 12.
Emily, 12.
Ferrers, Lord, of Chartley, 14.
Ferriday, Fanny Wright, daughter of Thomas, 50.
Fir Grove, 7.
Fitzherbert, Thomas, of Swinnerton, 6.
Mrs., of Swinnerton, 6.
Fitzalan, William, 13.
Barony of, 13.
Fitz-Philip, John, 13.
Fitz-Tiel, Eichard, 13.
Flint, Eobert, g g son of Waties Corbett, 40.
assumed the surname of Corbett, 40.
Fontenoy, Battle of, 33.
Forbes, Lieutenant-Colonel, John, 55.
Forbes, Jessie, daughter of William, 49.
Forester, Eachel, daughter of Sir William, 14.
Foster, William Orme; arm and family of, 79.
William, 79.
Henry, of Stourbridge, 79.
Foster, James, M.P., 79.
William Henry, M.P., 79.
Four Minsters Round the Wrekin, n. 8.
Fuller’s Worthies of England, 23.
Gardner, of Leighton, 13.
Gardner, Emma, wife of John, of Sansaw, 33.
Gatacre, Edward Lloyd, 49, 50; arms and family of, 49.
Colonel, 49, 50.
Manor of, 50..
Edward George, 50.
Stephen de, 50.
John, M.P. for Bridgnorth, 50.
Gawen, Elizabeth Charlotte, daughter of Eear-Admiral
Eobert, 29.
George 1., 27.
Giflard, Thomas, 52.
Peter, 6.
Maria, 6.
Gittins, William, of Chilton, 44.
Goodrich, Catherine Helena, daughter of Bartlett, 67.
Goddard, Ellen Graham, daughter of Thomas, 74
Graham, Lady Euphemia, daughter of Patrick, Earl of
Strathern, 26.
Graham, Arthur, of county Armagh, 60.
Gratrix, Euth, daughter of William, 83.
Grazebrook, Isabella, daughter of Henry, 79.
Greenway, Eva, daughter of Thomas, 23.
Greville, Mary, daughter of Honourable Algernon, 19,
Gruffydd ap Eeignold, Isabella, wife of, 36,


Ralston estate, 51.
Hall, Catherine, daughter of William Pearce, of Downton, 17.
Halliley, Catherine, daughter of Anthony, 75.
Hamilton, Gustavus Frederick John James; arms and family
of, 26.
Sir James, of Cadyow, 26.
Sir Walter, 26.
Gilbert de, 26.
Claude, 26.
John, ancestor of Dukes of, 26.
James, 26.
Gustavus, Ist Viscount Boyne, 26.
John James, son of Sir Edward, 11.
Sir Edward Archibald Hamilton, 41.
Hapsburg, Geoffrey, Count of, 9.
Harding, Reverend Henry, 12.
Hardwick, Eliza, daughter of John, of Bindley, 30.
Harford, Harriet, Margaret daughter of W. H., 49.
Hamage, Sir Henry George, Baronet, 67; arms and family
of, 68.
Harries, Francis; arms and family of, 57.
Francis Blithe, 57.
Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas, 57.
Harrop, William Edward Montagu Hulton-; arms and family
of, 81.
Elizabeth Margaret, daughter of Jonah, 81.
Harvey, Louisa, daughter of Sir Eliab, 67.
Henry 1., 13.
H., 13, 20.
HI., time of, 9, 13.
VI., 18.
VH., 14.
VHI., 14, 18.
Henniker, Honourable Emily, daughter of 3rd Lord, 65.
Herbert, Honourable Robert Charles; arms and family of, 72.
Percy Egerton, 73.
George, 73.
William Henry, 73.
May Louisa, daughter of William, of Olytha, 5.
William, of Olytha, 5.
Catharine Maria, 5.
Heber, Reverend Reginald, 46, 47.
Richard, 46; value of his library, 46.
.— Thomas Cuthhert, Reverend, 47.
Percy Algernon Charles, 46.
Eight Reverend Reginald Heber, Bishop of Calcutta, 46.
Higgons, John, of Church Stretton, 36.
Hill, Rachel Stephens, daughter of Colonel John, 28.
Rowland, 2nd Viscount, 29.
Mary Ehoda, daughter of Colonel F., 32.
Ann, daughter of Thomas, of Tern, 45.
Honourable Rachel Stephens, 54.
Hinstock, &c., estates, 28.
Holford, Peter, of Wootton, 5.
Catherine Maria, daughter of Peter, 5.
Hood, Honourable Alexander, 46.
Hope, Thomas Henry; arms and family of, 20.
John Thomas, 20.
Hotham, Eleanor Frances, 53.
Reverend Frederick Harry, 53.
Hudson, Charles Donaldson-; arms and family of, 75.
Hulton, Reverend Arthur Hyde, 81.
Bleythin de, 81.
Humfireys, John, of Llwyn, 69.
Hurt, William, of Sheffield, 49.
Hurt-Sitwell, William Willoughby George; arms and family of,
49.
Ightfleld, Advowson of, 28.
Ingram, Mary, daughter of Hastings, 19.
Isham, Louisa Mary, daughter of Sir Charles, 41.
James H., King of Scotland, Mary daughter of, 26.
Jeffreys, Lord Chancellor, 68.
Jenkins, Richard, of Bicton, 33, 50.
Major Robert, n 45.
Sir Richard, G. 0.8., M.P., 50.
Thomas, of Charlton Hill, 14.
Emma Gertrude, daughter of Edward, 57.
Charles Vanbrugh, 57.
Jervis, Florence, daughter of Swinfen Stevens, 22.
John, King, 14.
Jones, Francis David, of Cymmau, 56.
of Shrewsbury and Sandford, 71.
Justice, Henry ; arms and family of, 27.
Boger, of Newport, 28.
Luke, 28.
Roger, of Knighton, 28.
Philip, Monument to, Drayton Church, 28.
—.— Storekeeper at Plymouth Dockyard, 28.
Kent, Reverend Charles, of Ludlow, 7.
Mary Catherine, daughter of Reverend Charles, 7.
Kenyon, William, 48.
Honourable Thomas, son of Ist Lord, 48.
family of, 64, 65.
Kinaston, family of, 63.
Kinchant, Richard Henry; arms and family of, 33.
John Charlton, 33.
Richard, 33,
John Robert Nathaniel, of Llanvair-Waterdine, 33.
Charlton John, 34.
Job Henry, 34.
Richard Caton, 34.
Eliza Power, 34.
Myra Catherine Anne, 34.
King’s Light Infantry, 3rd Battalion, 41.
Kingston, Evelyn Pierpoint, Ist Duke of, 12.
Kinlbt and Milliohoee estates, 52.
Kilmorey, Francis Charles, 3rd Earl of, 29.
Kirkpatrick, Eliza Ann, daughter of Sir Boger, 58.
Knight, Charlotte, daughter of Thomas Andrew, 18.
; Richard Payne, 18.
Andrew Johnes Rouse Boughton, 18.
Jane, daughter of William, of Water-Eaton, 28.
Kynnersley, Thomas, of Leighton, 24.
Kybe Park estate, 52.
Langley estate, 6.
Langley and Acton Burnell estates, 6.
Lear, Mary Ann, daughter of George, 50.
Leeton, Richard de, 13.
Lee, Sir Richard, 6.
Richard, 6.
John, 6.
Rowland, 6.
Sir John, 6.
Leeke, Ralph Merrick; arms and family of, 42.
Thomas, 42.
Ralph, Captain and Lieutenant-Colonel, 42.
Thomas Newton, 42.
Leghton, Sir William de, 13.
Leighton estate, 41.
Leighton, Sir Baldwin; arms and family of, 13.
Edward, Ist Baronet, 14.
Sir Edward, 2nd Baronet, 14, 15, 20.
Charlton, 3rd Baronet, 15.
Sir Robert, sth Baronet, 15.
General Sir Baldwin, 6th Baronet, 13, 15.
Sir Baldwin, 7th Baronet, 15.
Richard de, 13.
John, of Stretton-in-le-dale, 14.
Colonel Francis Knyvett, 14.
Reverend Francis Knyvett, Canon of Westminster, 14.
Captain Baldwin, 14.
Major-General Thomas, 14.
Reverend Francis, of Cardeston, 14.
Sir Baldwyn, 16.
Bryan Baldwin Mawddwy, 16.
Cuthhert, 16.
Stanley, of Sweeney, 16.
Louisa Charlotte Anne, daughter of Colonel F. K., 20.
■ Reverend William Allport, 36.
Leland’s Itinerary, 30.
Lerinstoun, Janet, daughter of Sir Alexander de, 26.
Linley estate, 30.
Lingen, Thomas, 45.
Lindsay, Alexina Nisbet, daughter of Honourable Charles, 58.
LLoyd, Charles Spencer; arms and family of, 60.
John Arthur, 60.
Arthur Philip, 61.
Lloyd, John, of Aston, 33.
Lloyd, Richard Thomas; arms and family of, 67.
Annabella, daughter of Robert, 49.
Sir Evan, 7.
Alicia Mary, daughter of Sir Evan, 7.
Loton estate, 14.
Lockwood, Alice Charlotte Mary, daughter of Reverend F. V., 46.
Londonderry, Siege of, 27.
Longford Manor, 42.
Free Court of, 42.
Church, 42.
Lovett, Joseph Venables ; arms and family of, 34.
John, of Belmont, 34.
Thomas Heaton, 34.
tombs in Soulbury Church, 34.
of Liscombe, Bucks, 34.
Louet, Richard de, 34.
William, master of wolf-hounds, 1067, 34.
Lovett, John Henniker; arms and family of, 65.
Lunatic Asylum, 15.
Lyttleton, Maria, daughter of Sir C., 38.
Macaulay, Rev. S. H., 47.
Macnamara, Elizabeth Walwyn, daughter of John, 70.
Maokay, Helen, daughter of iEneas, 51.
Mahon, Jane, daughter of H. S. Pakenham, 79.
Mainwaring, Salusbury Kynaston; arms and family of, 62, 63.
Maltzin, Baroness, 29.
Mander, Caroline, daughter of Thomas, 85.
Manners, Honourable Mary Theresa, daughter of late Lord, 42.
Manners-Sutton, Archbishop of Canterbury, Mary, daughter of, 46.
Marigold, William, of Wem, 80.
Mason, Mary, daughter of Thomas, 47.
Master, Ariana Emily, daughter of Colonel, 50.
Maude, Emma, daughter of Sir Robert, 1-3.
Meyrick, Jane Sophia, daughter of Thomas, 32.
Sir Thomas Charlton, 32, 41.
Middlehope, Richard de, 13.
Millard, Mary, daughter of Joseph, 78.
Millichoee estate, 51.
Mollesley, of Mollesley, 8.
Mollesley, Juliana, heiress of, 8.
Moncriefie, Helen, daughter of Sir David, 51.
Edmund David, 51.
Sir David, 51.
Montgomery, Sir Adam de, 36.
More, Robert Jasper; arms and family of, 75.
Reverend Thomas Frederick, 75.
Colonel, 77.
Robert, M.P., F.R.S., 77.
Reverend Robert Henry Gayer, 77.
Mrs. Catherine, of Millichope, 51.
Roger de la, 36.
Morhall, Richard, of Onslow, 24.
Morier, Laura, daughter of Philip, 65.
Morley, Mary, 38.
Morris, Charles John; arms and family of, 44, 80.
Thomas, 80.
John, of Wood Eaton, 80.
Edward, of Oxon, 80.
Mortimer, Richard de, 30,


Moseley, Walter; arms and family of, 8.
Walter Michael, 8.
■ ■ Walter Acton, 8.
Acton, 8.
family descended from Alfred the Great, 8.
Mostyn, Edward Henry, son of Sir Edward, 5.
Sir Edward, of Talacre, 5.
Mount-Garrett, 13th Viscount, 32.
Mount-Cashell, Viscount and Earl, 78.
Muokleston, Elizabeth, daughter of William Hawkes, M.D., 47.
Joseph, of Walford, 47.
Mytton, John Fitzgiffard, 51.
John, of Halston, 69.
Harriett, daughter of Thomas, of Shipton, 75.
General, 10.
Anna Maria, daughter of Eichard, of Halston, 15.
Naylor, John, 41.
Netterville, Arthur James, 6.
Viscount, 6.
Nevill, Hugh de, 13.
Newhold Grange, 18.
Newnham Paddox, 9, 10.
Newport, Lady Diana, 12.
Nicholl, Jane, daughter of Daniel, 14.
Noroop, William Church, 27.
Northampton, Earl of, 12.
Northumberland, sth Duke of, 47.
Oakeley, William; arms and family of, 7.
Eeverend Herbert, D.D., 7.
Eeverend Arthur, 7.
Captain Henry, 7.
John, 7.
Eichard, 7.
Sir Herbert, Baronet, 7.
Eowland, 7.
of Plas Tan-y-bwlch, 7.
Catherine, daughter of Eeverend Herbert, D.D., 44—7
Colonel Soulden, 44.
Orme, Charlotte, daughter of William, 79.
Ostler, Harriett, daughter of William, of Grantham, 53.
Oswestry, Constable of, 14.
Owen, Arthur Mostyn; arms and family of, 68.
Letitia, daughter of Thomas, of Condover, 15.
Pryce, M.D., 62, 69.
of Machynlleth and Woodhouse, 68.
William Mostyn, of Woodhouse, 69.
Judge, of Condover, 69.
—■—Eichard, of Shrewsbury, 69.
Pakington, Sir John, (Ist Lord Hampton), 48.
Pantulph, Baron, of Wem, 24.
Mesne Lord of Eyton, 24.
Pack Hall estate, 33, 34.
Parker, Mary, daughter of Thomas Netherton, of Sweeney, 15.
Peohell, Caroline, daughter of Augustus, 52.
Pemberton, Charles Orlando Childe-; arms and family of, 51.
John, 52.
Edward, 52.
• Thomas, 52.
Eobert, 52.
Eeverend Eobert Norgrave, 52.
Percy, Algernon Charles Heber; arms and family of, 46.
Honourable Hugh, Bishop of Carlisle, 46.
Phayre, Maria, daughter of Eichard, H.8.1.C.5., 33.
Phillipsdn, Eliza Harriet, daughter of Eichard Burton, 49.
Pigott, Anne, daughter of Eeverend William, of Edgmond, 15.
Pitt, Martha, daughter and co-heiress of Humphrey, 48.
Ploeden, Eoger de, 35.
Plouedene, Philip de, 35; derivation of name, n. 35.
Plowden, William Henry Francis; arms and family of, 35.
Edmund, 35, 36; admitted a Burgess of Shrewsbury, 36.
William Francis, 35.
William Edwin, 35.
Francis , Charles, 35.
Eoger Edmund Joseph, 35.
John de, 36.
Humphrey, son of John, 36.
Edmund, in the confidence of Queen Elizabeth, 36.
author of “ The case is altered,” 36, 37;
origin of the proverb, 36.
Monument to, in Temple Church, 37.
Francis, 37.
Sir Edmund, 37.
William, Colonel, 37.
Descent from Edward HI., 88; descent from Henry
HI., and Edward 1., 11., HI., 38.
Elizabeth Lucy, wife of Sir Henry Tiohbome, 38.
Felicia, a nun of Prinoulhoff, 38.
Lucy Mary, married to Anthony Wright, 38.
Frances Xaveria, married to Francis Sheldon
Constable, 38.
Mary Margaretta, married to Charles Throckmorton, 38.
Early pedigree of family, 38, 39.
Frances Theresa, daughter of William, 48.
Plymley, Archdeacon, 40; succeeded to Longnor estate, and
took the name of Corbett, 40; lawsuit against, 40.
Poole, Sarah Halsted, daughter of William Halsted, of Terriok, 58.
Pope, Bromwich, of Woolstaston, 21.
Portsmouth, Lady Hester, daughter of 4th Earl of, 42.
Pownal, Avis, daughter of Philemon, 28.
Powis, Eight Honourable The (3rd) Earl of, 73.
Powys, Honourable Henry Wentworth; arms ami family of, 9.
Thomas Jell, 9.
Powys, Lissey Anne, 9.
Anne Catherine, 12.
Princes of, and North Wales, 14.
Pritchard, George; arms and family of, 53.
John, M.P., 53.
Pulteney, General Harry, 33.
Quinchant, family of, 33.
John, admitted Burgess of Shrewsbury, 1752, 33.
Eadford, Louisa Ann, daughter of Alexander, 27.
Bepington, Catherine, daughter of William, of Annington, 30.
Kheinfelden, or Einfilding, 9.
Eichard 1., 30.
III., 18.
Eocke, John; arms and family of, 61.
of Clungunford and Shrewsbury, 61.
of Trefnanney, 62.
Eeverend John, 62.
Eliza, wife of Eichard, of Trefnanney, 33.
Mary, daughter of John Eocke, of Trefnanney, 21.
Eussill, Emma Maria, daughter of Mathew, of Branoepeth, 26.
Eotter, Judith, daughter of John, of Duffield, 27.
Bouse, Baronetcy of, 17.
Thomas, of Bouse Bench, 17.
Eowley, George Eydell, 54.
Buxton, Isabel Sarah Dashwood, daughter of John Henry Hay,
of Broad Oak, 25. .
Salisbury Cathedral, tomb of Baron Cheney in, 43.
Salisbury, James, 3rd Earl of, 14.
Salter, Joan, daughter of John, 36.
Salusbury, Frances, daughter of John Lloyd, 62.
Sandford, Thomas Hugh; arms and family of, 58.
Margaret, daughter of Eichard, 23.
Humphrey, 35.
Savage, Anne, daughter of Sir John, 24.
Scholl, Elizabeth Ann Theresa, daughter of Eobert, 41.
Scott, Benjamin, of Eltham, 33.
of Betton Strange, 33.
Scriven, Joyce, daughter of Eobert, 68.
Self-Denying Ordinance, 10.
Seton, Margaret, daughter of George, Lord, 26.
Seveme, Eliza, daughter of John, Michael, 18.
Catherine, daughter of Samuel Amy, of Wallop, 14.
Julia, daughter of Samuel Amy, 80.
Edward Joseph, 5.
Eichard Peter Carrington, 5.
Mary Caroline, daughter of Colonel, 53.
John Michael, of Wallop, 53.
Seymour, Alfred, of Knoyle, 16.
Shakespear, H. D., 51.
Augusta Mary, daughter of Henry Davenport, 51.
Shaw, Louisa, daughter of Brigadier-General Eobert, 42.
Elizabeth, daughter of Eobert, 30.
Sheldon, Katherine, daughter of William, of Beoley, 37.
Shipley, Very Eeverend William Davies, Dean of St. Asaph, 46.
Shrewsbury, Duke of, 37.
Mary, sister of Frances Talbot, 14th Earl of, 38.
Thomas Talbot, son of Earl of, 42.
Shropshire Archeological and Natural History Society, Trans-
actions of, 36.
Shuckburg, Grace, daughter of Sir John, 19.
SitweU, William Willoughby George Hurt-; arms and family
of, 49.
Ellinor Harriet Hurt, 49.
" Sir George Eeresby, Baronet, 49.
Slaney, Eobert Aglionby; arms and family of, 47 ; cause of
death of, 48.
Mary, daughter of Eobert, of Hatton Grange, 47, 48.
Sir Stephen, Lord Mayor of London, 48.
Elizabeth Frances, daughter of Eobert Aglionby, M.P.,
20.
Ealph, of Bloxwich, 48.
Moreton, 48.
Plowden, 48.
Humphrey Moreton, 48.
William Kenyon; arms and family of, 64.
William Slaney Kenyon Slaney, 65.
Fanny Catherine, daughter of Eobert Aglionby, M.P., 64.
Slaney-Eyton, Thomas, 25, 47.
Slanie, Eudolph de, 48.
Ealph, 48.
Smithson, Jane, daughter of William, 29, 32.
Smithwick, Anne Ogilvie, daughter of John, 22.
Smythe, Sir Edward Joseph; arms and family of, 5.
Sir Charles Frederick, 5.
John Walter, 5.
Catherine Maria, 5.
; Constantia Frances, 5.
Sir Edward, 4th Baronet, 5.
Peter Carrington, 5.
Beaufront, 6.
Mary Ann, 6.
Walter, 6.
Agnes Mary, 6.
—! Edward, Ist Baronet, 6.
Sir Eichard, 3rd Baronet, 6.
Sir John, 6.
Sir Charles Frederick, Baronet; arms and family of, 60.
— Mary Frances, 60.
Sookett, Eichard, of Worcester, 8.
Solemn League and Covenant, 10.
Sparrow, Arthur; arms and family of, 83, 84.
of Audley, family of, 84.
William Hanbury, 84.
William Mander, 85.
Frederick Turton, 85.
Spearman, Margaret, daughter of William, of Bennington, 80.
Spurs, Battle of, 14.
St. Liz, Baron, 12.
St. Leger, Louisa Anne, Honourable, 20.
St. Vincent, family of, Viscount, 22.
Stacey, Frances Amherst, daughter of Courtney, 56.
Stanley, Sir John Thomas, 13.
Louisa Margaretta Anne, daughter of Sir John Thomas,
15.
Lord, of Alderley, 13.


Staunton, Anne, daughter of William, 23.
Steward, Elizabeth Sarah, daughter of Colonel, 8.
Stokedon, Lord of Erdborough, 30.
Stonor, Mary, daughter of John, of Stonor, 38.
Honourable Maria, daughter of 3rd Lord Camoys, 60.
Stourtou, Eleanor Mary, daughter of Lord, 5.
Lord, 5.
Honourable Eleanor Mary, 5.
Stratton, Georgina Maria, daughter of John, 50.
Streatfield, Sarah Marie, daughter of Major, 75.
Steward, Colonel, of Myton, 8. .
Strey, surname of, 23.
Sturry, Elizabeth, daughter of John, of Down Eossall, 36.
Sugenhall, Podmore, Ac., lands in, 23.
Susan, Dowager Countess of Denbigh, 11.
Sutherland, Countess of, 37.
Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus, King of, 26.
Taylor’s MSS. in School Library, Shrewsbury, 36.
Tempest, Mary, daughter of William, 31.
Thomason, Thomas, of York, 32.
Catherine, 55.
Thomson, Elizabeth Lucy, daughter of William, 38.
Tichborne, Elizabeth Lucy, wife of Sir Henry, Baronet, 38.
Tihel or Tiel, 13.
Trelawny, Colonel Hamlin, E.A., of Trelawny, 7.
Tudor, Trevor, Lord of Hereford, 60.
Turton, Sarah Higgs, daughter of William, 63.
Sir John, 83.
Tyrwhitt, Sir Henry Thomas, Baronet; arms and family of, 70.
Honourable Harry Tyrwhitt Wilson, 70.
Vaughan, Sir Grufiydd, 36.
Sidney, daughter of Sir John, 27.
Venables, Edward Frederick, son of Lazarus Jones, of Woodhill, 34.
Vernons, Hugh, 23.
of Haddon, 23.
Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, 10.
Walcot, Charles, 7.
Barbara, 7.
Margaret, wife of John, of Walcot, 36.
William, of The Moor, 44.
William Henry, 44.
Walcott, Eeverend Mackenzie E. C., 8.
Warneford, Eeverend Doctor, of York, 49.
Warren, Honourable Eleanor Leicester, daughter of Lord de
Tabley, 16.
Waring, Walter, of Owlbury, 7.
Warter, Henry de Grey; arms and family of, 73.
Eeverend John Wood, 73.
Edward, 73.
Watkin, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir David, 30.
Watson, James, of Warley Hall, 9.
WATTLESEoaouon estate, 14.
Waverley Novels, Musical Illustrations of, 25.
Weld, George, of Willey, 21.
Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas, 21.
Edward, of Lulworth, G.
“Whistling Boh,” 45.
Whitmore, William Wolryohe; arms and family of, 21, 22;
as a politician, 21.
William, of Apley, 21.
Kichard, of Slaughter, 21.
Mary Dorothea, 21.
Eeverend Eranois Henry Wolryohe, 22.
Major Francis Alexander Wolryche, 22.
Thomas Charlton; arms and family of, 55.
Thomas Charlton Douglas, 55.
Walter Henry, 55.
The Eeverend George, 55.
Henry, M.P., 55.
Whytemore, in the Manor of Claverley, 55.
Willdnson, Myra Catherine Anne, daughter of John, 33.
Williams-Wynn, Jesse Maria, daughter of Henry Bertie, 16.
Willington, Elizabeth, daughter of William, 18.
Wilmot, Major-General, 55.
Winter, Mary, daughter of Simon, of London, 38.
Williams, Sir William Grenville, Baronet, 49.
Wingfield, Charles George; arms and family of, 66.
Eeverend Charles, 66.
Jane Mary Ann, daughter of Clopton, 66.
Colonel John, of Shrewsbury, 66.
Wolryche, family of, 21.
Woolstaston estate, 21.
Wootton Hall estate, 6.
Worcester, Battle of, 11.
1 Vrekin, Four Minsters Round the, 8.
Wright, Edmund; arms and family of, 51.
Charles Henry, 51.
Wright, Anne, daughter of Thomas, of Unthank, 30.
Wycherley, the Comic Shropshire Poet, 37.
Wynne, William Watkyn Edward, of Peniarth, 48, 49.
Wynn, Sir Watkin Williams, Baronet, M.P., 49.
Young, Margaret, daughter of John, of Charnes, 23.
Yale, Mary, daughter of David Chandler, of Chester, 24.
BUNNY AND DAVIES, PRINTERS, SHREWSBURY.




