

SHIP YACHTS
AND
FULL-POWER STEAMERS.
1872
William Thomson




SHIP YACHTS
AND
FULL-POWER STEAMERS.
To THE PRESIDENT OE THE MELBOURNE
Chamber op Commerce.
Sir, —When the new postal arrangements
between England and Australia were re-
cently considered at a meeting of the Chamber
of Commerce, the conclusion was come to
that the Suez route was the preferable for
both a monthly and a fortnightly service ;
but some of the speakers advocated an alter-
nate service by the Cape of Good Hope, be-
cause, by this route, merchandise as well as
passengers could be more economically com-
bined with the conveyance of mails, to the
great convenience of the main bulk of the
travelling public, and consequent benefit of
the colony. However, some of the arguments
so adduced to prove these advantages were
wholly untenable, and deserve notice on ac-
count of the great commercial interests that
would be involved were such a project found
to be eventually a mistake.
For example, it was urged by one of the
leading supporters of what is known as the


Cape route that what was regularly being
done to Valparaiso by steamers should
be equally practicable to Melbourne,
a voyage of similar length. Yet, while
it is undeniable that large full-powered
steamers by the Cape, subsidised for postal
purposes, might doubtless be speedy, safe,
and comfortable for all classes of passengers,
it must not be forgotten that they would
also be very costly for everybody. Nor
must it be supposed that what is regularly
done to Valparaiso should be equally prac-
ticable to Melbourne, for the two voyages
are by no means alike. Steamers do not go to
the former port direct, but stop for coal,
cargo, and passengers at eight intermediate
stations, Bordeaux, Lisbon, St. Vincent,
Pernambuco, Bahia, Rio, Platte, Sandy
Point, and thence to Valparaiso. The dis-
tance is thus broken up into eight short
voyages. In traversing an equal distance to
Melbourne there would be no halt by the
way. On the one voyage steamers coal only
from port to port, or for about 2000 miles at
a time ; on the other, they would require
to coal at starting for the whole distance of
some 12,000 miles. The steamers of the
White Star line, in the west coast trade, are
of 3800 tons register, with 600-horse power
engines ; and as they never require to have
on board more than 500 tons of coal
at any time for their short runs, as
explained, they have always room for
2500 tons of cargo ; but if the same ships
were placed in the Australian trade, they
would have to take on board at the begin-
ning of the long voyage about 2500 tons of


■coal, leaving room for only about 500 tons
of cargo, being a difference in the cargo-
carrying capacity of the same ships in the
two different trades of 2000 tons, thus suffi-
ciently explaining the extra costliness of the
one service as compared with the other —a
point that was altogether overlooked at the
meeting.
From the meagre details that can be
gleaned of the actual working of vessels
with the newest forms of engines, it seems
doubtful whether ships of even 4500 tons,
and with engines of 1000-horse power, could
run either way in forty days, the time
named.* A new ship, lately here, of 2000
tons, with engines of 300-horse power,
burned 20 tons of coal daily, at a speed of
ten knots. At the same rate, engines of
1000 horse-power would consume 67
tons, or in thirty-eight days, also a
time named, 2646 tons. To reach the
average of thirteen knots necessary to make
the run in that time, an extra pressure might
be required, and probably 3500 tons would be
used. The larger ship, with the relatively
greater power, would steam the faster ; but
the deductions for bunkers, boilers, and
machinery would be proportionably greater,
encroaching still further on the space for
cargo. The Queen of the Thames, of 2600
tons register and 400-horse power, was to
have burned over 20 tons daily for an esti-
mated speed of 240 miles. This was
the computation of her builder, and irre-
spective of actual performances ; and is now
adduced not for any inferential argument
from the voyage, but as giving the data used
by one of the ablest engineers of the time.
On starting from Plymouth she had 1100
tons of the best steaming coal on board, ex-
cluding the same quantity of cargo. Had
* Forty days are allowed for the passage by the
company newly projected in England by Messrs.
Tyndal Bright, Elder, and others.


she gone to America she would have had
only about 300 tons on board, with 800 tons
additional space for cargo. The Adriatic, of
3800 tons, with engines of 600 horse-power,
in steaming to New York in nine days at an
average speed of fourteen knots an hour,
burns over 500 tons of coal, displacing that
amount of cargo ; in the Australian trip she
could not use less than 2000 tons of coal,
probably a much larger quantity, excluding.
2000 tons of cargo, or 1500 tons more than
in the American trade. The difference in
the earnings of the same ship in the Atlantic-
as compared with the Australian trade
would be represented by the freight on those
1500 tons displaced. The Adriatic completes
the voyage round in twenty-six days, and in
nine voyages yearly would carry 36,000 tons
of cargo between Liverpool and New York ;
in three voyages in a year to Melbourne she
might carry 3000 tons, so that by a simple
equation they who know the exact money
value of every ton carried on each
trip respectively could easily ascertain
the annual loss. It would probably be
found equivalent to the interest at 5 per-
cent. per annum on a capital invested in two-
ships like the Adriatic.
The longest steaming distance at present
in operation by full power steamers is
about 3350 miles, so that the 12,000 miles
to this port from England would be from
three to four times longer. It might be
possible to continue an equal rate of speed
in both ; but to enable the Adriatic to do it,
she would, on the long journey, carry little
else than coals. Although she is a vessel of
3800 gross register tonnage she cannot be of
more than, if so much as, 2000 tons net, to
be appropriated for all purposes of cargo
space, cabins, and other accommodation
for passengers and crew, and only
because actual burthen exceeds register
tonnage could she take any cargo at


all. A steamship of 4500 tons gross,
register, with engines of 1000 horse-power,,
would require half of the hull for bunkers,
boilers, machinery, &c., leaving little more
than 2000 tons of space for cargo and pas-
sengers. The Northumberland is of 2000
tons gross register, but only 1362 net. The
Queen of the Thames was 2600 tons gross,
and 1500 net ; both vessels having auxiliary
power only. With full power the deductions
for engines would necessarily be much
greater. The Neva, a new West India screw
steamship, is of 3000 tons gross and 165;>
net, with 600 horse-power engines, and
short coaling stations. The 1655 tons is all
the space left for passengers and cargo, but
if the vessel went on a voyage longer than
her usual one, it is obvious that
the space would be still further re-
duced by the extra quantity of coal neces-
sary ; or a deck load would have to be
carried, a most objectionable and dangerous
practice.
There is a limit to the steaming distance
of every ship, however large she may be, and
no facts have ever yet been adduced showing
the probability of any steamer, no matter of
what power, coming to Melbourne, from
England, under forty days on a single coal-
ing. * Engineers may venture to contract,
but able men have erred in analogous enter-
prises. The number of transformed steamers,
disappointed builders, and ruined owners is
very great. Many of the mistakes were fore-
told, not from any sort of prophecy, but
from obvious calculation. When Dr. Lardner
said that no steamer could cross the Atlantic,
only a year or so before the Europa
* Messrs. Francis and Langton say, “the voyage
from Galle to Melbourne is 4635 miles, an extreme
distance for any vessel to be kept under steam,
and to perform her voyage with regularity at the
speed required.”


and the Sirius first did so, he was
no further wrong than were the builders of
the Great Eastern, by whom that huge ship
was designed to go round the world on one
coaling, at high speed, without rolling or
tossing, yet the result proved the reverse of
their anticipations. *
Again, a ship that is only lightened by the
consumption of 500 tons of fuel in crossing
the Atlantic, would on the longer run to
Australia lose 2000 tons of dead weight.
In the first case the trim would be little
affected, but in the second greatly
altered, making water ballast necessary,
adding to the first cost of construction,
working expenses, and waste of fuel in
carrying an unprofitable load of water.
Every advance in steam navigation has
been the outcome of tentative experiments,
the great losses having resulted from
incautious speculation. Some engineers have
built steamers as rashly as others have ex-
plored for coal. David Napier steamed
down the Clyde in John Wood’s little Comet,
and, leaning over the bows, studied whether
the bigger waves of the channel would let a
steamer cross. It was a great adventure in
those days. In a similar spirit of inquiry
two of Britain’s greatest naval architects
lately voyaged to Australia, and judged for
themselves whether those large steamers
could successfully ply ; but as yet no pioneer
Rob Roy—Napier’s first of ocean steam-
boats —has appeared in Australian waters.
It is not, then, enough to say, even if it
were true, as it is not, that large steamers of
full power would be most expeditious, safe,
and comfortable, until the cost of employ -
* Dr. Larclner corrected his error on seeing a
steamer cross the Atlantic. When an auxiliary
comes here in fifty, or a full power in forty days,
the writer will do likewise. Till either feat be
achieved, the possibility is moot and debatable.


ing them be also counted ; although, con-
trary to mercantile usage and method, this
important item is seldom dealt with in dis-
cussions upon this subject. What would be
the first, second, and third-class fares in
those large steamers ? To America, with
competition of the keenest, the steerage fare
is £6 6s. by steamer, and to this port the
corresponding fare could not, even with a
large subsidy, be much under four times the
amount. To Melbourne, through America,,
the steerage is £3B; and at that heavy
charge steerage passengers are detained
twenty days on the great railway journey
alone, and not six days, as with Pullman’s
drawingroom carriages. They are thrown in
with the cargo, as in cargo ships. In respect
of cost of passage, therefore, neither the
American nor the Cape route will ever suit
the means of the less affluent class of pas-
sengers, who will always form the vast ma-
jority. The former route can never be
either quick or cheap ; the latter may be
quick but it must be costly ; and, therefore,
both projects must fail, at least for the ordi-
nary immigration purposes of this colony.
It follows that some other system, meet-
ing all the requirements of a passenger trade,
must be adopted, one commending itself
for support by combining speed with safety,
comfort, and inexpensiveness; the utmost
economy of money and time being essential.
If large steamers could afford to charge
fares at from £4O to £2O and £lO, even when
aided by large subsidies for postage, they
might claim support, but the terms are im-
possible, and the project is disregarded.
There need be little hesitation in saying that
those fares, with improved accommodation,
and not over fifty days at sea, can alone
satisfy the future requirements, conditions
that steamers, as at present worked, cannot
meet.
If, then, we cannot have steamers of full


power for the bulk of the passenger traffic,
on what other class of ships shall we de-
pend ? Upon the old style of merchant
ship, adapted for cargo or passengers, as
■either may offer ? In that case, to the
tardy, dreary, tedious seventy or ninety
days are we committed, with makeshifts,
dearness, often dirt and discomfort, and
never more than a driblet from the great
emigration stream perennially flowing out of
Europe.
It is thought by many extremely probable
that by adopting a wholly different system
of carrying passengers only and no cargo,
sailing vessels could be built able to sail
without steam the run within fifty days ;
and that such vessels would be the most
efficient means of conducting the universally
hoped for increase in the passenger trade.
The quickest run out by steam was only
five days less than the fastest by sails, or
fifty-three and a half to fifty-eight days to
the Otway, the steamer being a large vessel
over 2000 tons, the sailing ship a small one
of 900 tons. The steamer’s average speed
was under ten knots an hour ; the
sailing ship’s 9although heavily laden with
1600 tons of cargo. If the lines of the
smaller ship were enlarged upon to equal
the size of the other, they would produce a
ship fit, in good trim, to average 11 knots,
and so run out in fifty days. Sailing ships
are faster than ocean steamers, and large
ships, other things being equal, faster than
small ones. Sailing ships have made longer
days’ runs than steamers. The Ther-
mopylae on her last passage, 1871, had eight
days each over 300 miles, the longest being
333. On another run out she had one day’s
work of 342 miles. On her first voyage,
1869, she had nine days over 300 miles, the
longest being 330. The Red Jacket often
on her first voyage logged over 400 miles a
day, so did the James Baines, in 1855. No


steamer to this port has approached that
work.*
The Argus, on 4th March, 1871, in allud-
ing to the marvellous constancy of the
Thermopylae’s speed, says:—“lt would
.almost appear that the best passages of this
ship are made in spite of wind and weather,
and that when other ships have to give way
to adverse winds, the Thermopylae, on the
contrary, turns these baffling winds to good
account by making headway against every-
thing.”
A large ship of similar build, and sailed in
good trim, that is, without being laden to
her scuppers, as most fine ships usually are
laden, with all sorts of apologies save the
true one for their slowness, would easily sail
more than 400 miles a day, and still make
fine weather for passengers, to use a nautical
phrase. Such a ship would float upon and
ride over the waves, and not lob in the sea,
as deeply sunken cargo ships always do, ap-
parently as greatly to the delight of mer-
chants as it certainly is to the fear of pas-
sengers.
The dreaded tropical calms are true only
for dull deep ships. In 1855, the Lightning,
when in the calm belt with five other sail,
was the only one amongst them that kept
steerage way. There was an absolute calm
for the others, but light airs enough for her
to glide away in, and leave them in the dol-
-drums flapping their useless sails against the
rattling spars, to the sailors’ grief and the
owner’s ruin. There has never yet in her
four voyages been an intertropical calm
region for the Thermopylae. An inspection
* In the China tea trade steam may supersede
sails, so variable are the winds and so many the
ports for coaling stations; but there is no voyage
in the world where sails have so many advantages
over steam as in the Australian; “there are too
many good good winds to throw away” for full
steam power to be used with advantage.


of her log shows that in those four
voyages she crossed from north-east to
south-east trades without detention, the
shortest day’s work showing good progress.
In the only two voyages of which the log is
published in detail, 1869 and 1871, there were
only six days and four days under 100 miles
each. This proves that there need not be
any prolonged delay, as is often supposed in-
evitable to every sailing ship ; and personal
experience and observation during many
voyages have satisfied the writer of the cor*
rectness of this inference. Many of the
puffs, light airs, cats’-paws and sudden
squalls of short duration, that make little or
no impression on the deep dull ship, would
drive the smart light vessel well onwards.
A fine lofty-rigged ship would never be many
hours together perfectly motionless. The
calm dread is a pure bugbear, bred of ex-
perience in old-fashioned dull ships. The
rapidity of a fine powerful ship has never
been fairly tried.* Once it was only par-
tially ascertained. The first trip out of the
Red Jacket, in 1854, the ship being in
ballast trim, drawing less than nineteen feet
of water, would have been finished in fifty
days or under, had not the vessel’s enormous
velocity so terrified and paralysed the com-
mander as to cause him in fright to shorten
sail. It was a rule in the old school of
Indiamen to reef-down snug at sun-down in
high latitudes, whether the wind blew
strong or not ; and in the voyage in ques-
tion apparently some equally careful order
was maintained, till at length an officer of
modem training prevailed to let the utmost
speed be attained. This was near Tristan
d’Acunha, where the trial of speed began.
From the longitude of the Cape the run was
the shortest known before or since, the
* A yacht-like ship in fair sailing trim has never
even attempted to make the passage; the experi-
ment lias yet to be tried.


speed often exceeding eighteen knots, and
reached an average on several occa-
sions of over 400 miles a day,
or faster, by the hour or by the full day,
than the quickest speed of the famous
Adriatic, with full steaming power, fair
wind, and smooth sea. As it was, with a
faltering beginning, the time of the voyage
was under seventy days, from anchorage in
the Mersey to anchorage in Hobson’s Bay ;
and the more active commander of a com-
peting ship declared that it should have
been accomplished in twelve days less time.
The Red Jacket crossed from New York te
Liverpool in thirteen days, or four days
more than the Adriatic. Three small yachts
of 200 tons each raced across in twelve days,,
and ships of similarly fine lines, of 2000 tons,
could run across in less than ten days. Re-
cently, the Jerusalem, of some 900 tons,
came from Foo Chow in thirty-six days ;
some years ago the Brilliant, an English-
built yacht of 400 tons, in 35 days ; and
when the steamer Bernard did the same
distance last year in 28 days it was thought
very rapid. The fastest steamers in the
channel have often been beaten when sailed
against yachts. As already remarked,
large ships are, all things being equal, faster
than small ones. In comparing the voyages
of the Thermopylae and Red Jacket, it is
seen that the former had the shortest
voyage, but the latter the longest day’s run,
as 342 miles to 402 miles. _lt was the very
high average that told in favor of the
Thermopylae, and it has been already ex-
plained how the Red Jacket might easily
have attained to a much higher daily
average ; for as 402 miles a day, the longest
run of the Red Jacket, are to 342 miles, the
longest run of the Thermopylae, so would
50 days for the former ship be to 60 days of
the latter.
This increased speed and power of modern


sailing ships, together with the accumulated
knowledge of winds, oeean currents, &c., at
various seasons, gained through the investi-
gations of Maury, Neumayer, and others,
make it appear almost certain that under
the specified conditions, that is to say by
ships constructed on the finest lines for speed
without studying carrying capacity, but pas-
senger accommodation only, the run could
well be accomplished within 50 days.
Commercially, it might be feared that
.such a purely passenger trade as is here
spoken of would scarcely pay, and unless
the practical object could be realised it is
useless to dwell on the merely poeti-
cal ideal of pleasant voyaging. But,
it may be asked, have mercantile
men, here or elsewhere, taken any pains to
investigate the subject, or to calculate its
probable working? They will admit that
improved facilities for travelling have al-
most - invariably increased traffic, particu-
larly amongst growing populations. But
even the numbers now travelling would
sufficiently support the proposed scheme.
Last year, of 300,000 emigrants from British
ports, 12,000 came to Australia. This would
have given 300 each to forty ships. In other
words, 1000 embarked every month, of
whom 300 would have filled the monthly
packet, leaving 700 for other vessels.
That some ships leave half empty
is scarcely a valid reason for suppos-
ing that other ships charging lower
fares, sailing faster and more pleasantly,
should not succeed better. Melbourne
would become the grand Australian entrepot
—“A merchant of the people of many isles,”
with a fleet of swift, cheap, safe, cheery, and
■even elegant sailing ships—as readily as by
means of any line of mixed traders. The
plan could hardly fail of being a great com-
mercial success. If sailing ships afford to
-carry passengers to America for £2 10s.,


keeping them fifteen or twenty days on
board, what should hinder similar vessels
from bringing passengers to Melbourne
for £lO, when they would only be main-
tained for fifty days ? At present
many slow cargo ships carry steerage passen-
gers 80 or 90 days for £l2 or £l4, and in the
cabin for £4O. Ships pay best when kept
always at sea, with as short a time as pos-
sible on the voyage. Ordinary cargo ships
pass a third part of their time in port; the
passenger ship would not stay a twelfth
part. Immediately upon arrival passengers
would land, and within a few days the vessel
would be again ready for sea. There would
be no loading nor discharging, no coaling
nor wear and tear, heavy disbursements or
expenses unavoidable during a protracted
stay in harbor. Minute inquiry into
«very item of income and expenditure
shows great profit likely to accrue from a
purely passenger service. With 300 at £2O
all round, or from £lO to £4O each, would
gross £6OOO in fifty days, exclusively of pay-
ments for carrying mails, specie, and some
other contingent sources of income, well
enough understood by business men. As
every ship could easily make five trips
yearly every one would gross over £30,000,
a sum which few of the most successful
mixed ships will equal or exceed.
If it be doubted whether the requisite
number of passengers could be procured, so
may it be answered that if there be not
enough for such sailing ships, so must there
be too few for supplying the big steamers.
As for doubting or denying the ability of
•ships to sail without steam in 50 days, it is
so far gratuitous that the experiment never
has been fairly tried. On the contrary, the
high hopes that have every now and again
been raised of great things to be achieved by
auxiliary boats have never been realised.
Every new ship has been a fresh failure. The


latest and greatest, the Atrato, proves it.
Though so much was boasted, she took six
days from Plymouth to Madeira, or about
230 miles a day, making at the rate of 52
days to Melbourne, instead of 45, as
promised. No doubt reasons will be
given for the slower work, just as
reasons were offered to account for the slow-
ness of the Queen of the Thames, Royal
Charter, Royal Standard, Northumberland,
and how the last named is to grow into full
power as she gets older. Those, and many
other instances, show the inability of auxiliary
power to drive a vessel in 50 days ; leaving
it certain that if ever the passage is to be
brought under that time, and the cost of
passage kept within the means of the vast
majority of those likely to travel, it must be
by essentially sailing vessels. Practical
men may differ from this opinion ; but prac-
tical men are often very conservative, es-
pecially nautical men. Every sailor thinks
his ship a paragon, and his modes
not to be improved upon. If
the ideas of the purely nautical mind had
always been indulged, to this day the modern
British barque would have been no better
shape than an ancient galleon, or a Chinese
junk. The true sea-dog ever hated change,
and growled in prejudice. It opposed iron
ships and wire rigging, double top-sails and
tubular masts without couplings or cross-
trees. What was true of those who jeered
at Sir John Hawkins’s smart frigates has
been true through all time. ‘ ‘ Old seamen
shook their heads at the invention, and fore-
told the usual disasters. They (the new
ships) would be too crank, it was said, to
carry sail. They were fit only for smooth
water, and would founder in the heavy seas
of the Atlantic.” Yet those fine ships did
their work cleverly, manoeuvring round
the ponderous hulks, so dear to the old tars’
notions, just as the proposed ocean yachts


will one day be found to perform in the front
of a more peaceful armada.
When the double topsail yard was first
suggested, on board the old General Hewit,
from Sydney to London, in 1850, Captain
Gatenby asked the contriver, his passenger,
“ What fault he had to find with the rigging
of his ship?” “None whatever,” was the
reply; “but all large ships would be much
better with it.” Very shortly after that, all
large ships were rigged with the double top-
sail yard ; and thus came about the greatest
improvement in ship’s rigging effected in
modern times. It was the invention of a
landsman, a revolutionising radical who
would not even read the Sunday morning
lesson in the order set down, the sturdy
good-hearted old tory seaman setting his face
alike against both innovations. Before 1850
no large ship was ever seen with a double
topsail yard ; since then none are ever seen
without it, except men-of-war, who cling
tenaciously to ancient traditions.
The approval of practical men need not,
therefore, be waited for. Between the costly
steamer, the slow, deep, dear, dirty ship,
and the hybrid auxiliary with the worst
faults of both, and the advantages of neither,
there is the swift inexpensive ocean yacht,
for passengers only, as the fittest form of
vessel adapted for the long Australian
voyage.
As for safety, and the inspired feeling of
security, an iron yacht of 2000 tons could be
made as strong as an iron-braced girder.
From keel to floor it would be equal to such
a framework twelve feet through, defying
rock or bank, should accident or design lay
it on either. Such a vessel would be abso-
lutely fireproof to ignition or to spontaneous
combustion, always a source of anxiety in
wool ships. The wrecks of steamers prove
them to be no safer than ordinary ships.
What sailing vessel could behave worse in a


sea way than the London, or drift more
helplessly broadside on the beach
than the Royal Charter ? A ship
built solely for speed and sea-going
qualities would be for a thousand easily
plainable reasons the best of all forms for
safety. Next to safety is comfort, and com-
parisons will always be drawn between steam
and sails in reference to it. To most people
the gliding movement of a fine sailing ship
will the better suit their sea-borne nervous
systems.
In an ocean yacht the spacious deck would
be clear fore and aft for exercise, free from
obstructing hen-coops, cow-sheds, sheep-
pens, and piggeries ; the caboose with the
usual deck encumbrances would be in the
lower hold ; disagreeables arising from dirt,
dust of coal, smoke, ashes, smells of singeing
fat, heating wool, putrid hides or bones, sour
tallow, relics of guano, would be unknown ;
as would be likewise the noise incessant of
groaning steam-chests, rattling cog-wheels,,
crunching screws, and ceaseless vibration.
It is needless tormenting imagination with
memories of life at sea on board of some
ships, where the sufferings endured arose
from loss of buoyancy by over immersion,
the commonest, although seldom thought of,
cause of the worst troubles to body and
mind in voyaging as ordinarily practised.
Suffice it to say that in a yacht-built ship
the outward sources of distress would be re-
moved, while rapid motion, the most exhi-
larating of mental cheering influences, would
be a sovereign remedy against peevishness,
the ennui and inward miseries bred of
delay. Neither would there be that other
cause of discomfort, wet decks. Fine ships in
good trim are always dry at sea, contrary to
ordinary belief. The highest speed in a
sailing ship is almost necessarily associated
with dry decks and easy motion ; but not in
deep cargo ships, that like tidal rocks lie


buried half their time under water. The
Thermopylae, with all her celerity of work-
ing, is one of the easiest and driest of ships.
During the entire length of her quickest
passage to Australia the carpenter’s grind-
stone stood unfastened on the deck. The
Eed Jacket was a similarly easy and dry
ship. With exquisitely fine lines, both
models presented a perfectly oval body
planted on a sharply rising floor, and
long entrance and run, that could sit equably
poised on the water, with the centre of gravity
and centre of oscillation in the same spot.
They had also great stability, because, from
the angular floor in midship section, the
centre of gravity of the floating body was
well below the centre of gravity of the body
of water displaced. In most vessels having-
sharp entrances there are full lines abaft,
making them pitch heavily on end. The
finest steamers crossing the Atlantic are all
provided with whale backs to shed off the
green seas tumbling on board, lifted with
every dive into the waves ; as long, lean,,
narrow, deep, wall-sided, flat-bottomed,
bilgy ships best can dive. Even the
whale-back affords only partial shelter, for
in moderate weather the hurricane-deck
is usually deluged. A visit to the Ther-
mopyke when the hold is empty will at
once enable anyone to observe the peculiari-
ties of the fine model as contrasted with the
forms of ordinary carrying ships. The same
qualities were fully exemplified in the Eed
Jacket. As a cargo vessel she was a “pick-
pocket as a purely passenger ship she
might have been a fortune maker. When
raised upon for cargo purposes she was
spoiled. As originally built, nothing that
ever sat on water surpassed her in beauty,
or excelled her in speed or in any sea-going
work. In the roughest sea her motion was
easy and her decks dry, and one man was


able to steer her with one hand, even in a
gale, the truest test of a fine ship.
As for overcrowding, the space allotted to
every one on board could be better regu-
lated in a purely passenger vessel. On board
of a mixed ship, six people can be stowed in
a cabin meant for four more easily than
barrels that cannot be squeezed into less
bulk ; but where there is no cargo there can
be no temptation to force cargo to encroach
•on the passengers’ room. In Atlantic
steamers each passenger is allowed by
statute 5 feet of deck space, and from 80 to
00 cubic feet of cabin room, according as it
is on the orlop or on the main deck, allow-
ances that in exclusively passenger vessels
could readily be quadrupled. #
The details of the working of a system of
special passenger ships enhance its general
merits. Passengers being placed under the
care of a purser and a medical superin-
tendent, the captain, relieved of his irk-
some duties of half hotelkeeper and half
private host, in addition to his nautical
duties, would not be expected to entertain
them as if they were his guests or lodgers,
but be left free to sail his ship, ever on the
alert, always ready for every shift of wind.
Quick passages are not made so much by
sheer force of cracking on, as by constant
watchfulness, especially at night. Both
commander and officers, as well as the men
under them, should be encouraged by a pre-
mium when the passage is made within a
given time.
The surgeon should be a Government offi-
cial, under orders of the Emigration Com-
missioners, and remunerated as are medical
officers in their service. This new feature
would meet the view of those who are now
* Passengers being all on one deck, there would
be ample facilities for lighting and ventilation,
unhindered by poop, forecastle, deck-houses or
hatchways.


calling for better supervision of all passen-
ger traffic. When a great philosopher, Mr.
Herbert Spencer, declaimed against such a
Governmental meddlesomeness, he depre-
cated the kind of interference with private
enterprise that had rescued the passenger
ship of old from being the floating pande-
monium, such as it has lately been desig-
nated by the public press in England when
that press again asked for the very in-
tervention which Mr. Spencer has denounced.
Mr. Spencer had no personal knowledge of
the working of the system of Government
management, and seized upon an exceptional
departure from it, by way of experiment,
with two-decked ships, as if it had been a
general fault, to illustrate his philosophical
theme of the abuses of excessive govern-
ment. Under the benign rule of the Emi-
gration Commissioners, exerted solely
through their medical officers, the condition
of passengers on long voyages has been im-
mensely ameliorated ; and their regulations
could beneficially be extended rather than
curtailed. *
As an approximate illustration of the form
of vessel required for this novel scheme, a
model in the round, to use a ship-builder’s
phrase, has been exhibited ; and a view of it
will help to explain what is meant to be ex-
pressed in an imperfectly written descrip-
tion. This model shows the rounded or
rather ovoid side, great rise of floor, long
entrance, and fine run, true of all bottoms of
modern yachts, combining great speed with
the best sea-going qualities. These fine
lines may not appear to be full enough to
please those whose eyes have become
familiar with looking at full-bilged, flat-
bottomed, wall - sided ships of great
. * The Board of Trade have recently taken action
in this direction. (See Brit. Med. Journal, Nov.
13, 1872, p. 58.)


cargo carrying capacity, usually seen lying
alongside the piers, and by paint and decora-
tions made to look like crack sailers, as
tempting from the shore as they often are
deceptive at sea, for the comfort or the rapid
transit of passengers.
Without being oversanguine, it is scarcely
too much to say that with a fleet of yacht-
like ships the Australian voyage would be-
come popular, and one of the holiday trips
of the world. Many who are deterred from
venturing on the sea, partly owing to
the time and cost, and partly from
the natural dread of ordinary deep-
laden ships, would be induced to travel,
some for pastime, pleasure, and recreation
on the excursion ; and others to seek a new
home. If our commercial men were animated
by the spirit of enterprise and energy of
character that let Glasgow flourish and
made Liverpood great, such voyagers would
not have long to wait for an opportunity,
I am, Sir, very truly yours.
William Thomson.
South Yarra, 15th December, 1872.
P.S.—Since the foregoing was written, the
non-arrival of the Atrato after fifty-three
days at sea, and the run of the Thermopylae
in fifty-three days from Madeira, verify what
is said of those vessels; and the argument
might further be strengthened by references
to the voyages of the Thomas Stephens and
Cutty Sark.
(After sixty days the Atrato has not ar-
rived, although it was specially taken up
by Mr. Childers to experimentally demon-
strate the feasibility of making the voyage
by the Cape route by steam in forty-five
days.)




