

V V'v'v ■!
SHORT-HAND ALPHABETS 1
ENGLISH, LATIN and GREEK;
Confifting of the Mod Regular, Concife and
Uniform Characters for the Letters of the Alpha-
bet, that can be deviled, or written with Pen and
Ink;
With Characters for Numbers, as a!fo Points-
or Stops, and other Marks, tiled in Writing,
fuitable to them; and likewife Specimens and
Directions for writing by them.
PUBLISHED,
For die Ufc and Benefit of all Pen-Men, and
cfpecially of Writing-Matters and their Young-
Pupils of both Sexes,
Bv S. G. B O R D L E Y.
Printed for the Aiithor; and Sold by I. ? v
Coghlan, Bookfellcr in Duke-ftreet Lon-
don, and T. Billinge, Printer in Li-
verpool, either by Wholesale or
Retail, with good Allowance
to fuch as fell them a-
gain. . Price per
Single Pam-
phlet, 6d.


ADVERTISEMENT.-
The following Treatifes, compofed by S. G.
Bordley, are fold by I. P. Coghlan, Bookfellsr
in Dukc-ffreet, London, and Thomas Billinge,
Printer in Liverpool, both by Wholefale and
Retail.
I. Cadmus Britauvicus-, Containing fir ft, a Short-
Hand for Common Writing. Secondly, A
Short-Hand for taking down Speeches and
Sermons after a Speaker or Preacher. Third!/,
A Short-Hand for Mafic. And fourthly, An
Univerfal Character. Price 4s. bound.
IR £hiinti!ianus Bntannhus ; Wherein is (hewn,
frit. That the Method of Tcaching Latin in
England is extremely Defective. Secondly,
Wherein the Defect chiefly conflfts, and the
Caufes of it. Thirdly, How to teach Latin
after the moft EfFe&ual and Expeditious Man-
ner, and as it is taught by the Ablcft and belt
Mailers in Foreign Countries. With an Ap-
pendix, wherein is fliown,. that Latin may be
taught Effectually and Expeditioufly by making
a right Ufc of Lily’s Grammar. Price 3s.
bound.


OBSERVATIONS 'on the ALPHABETS;
Shewing the .Nature and Utility of them> and the
different Ways of Writing them.
About three Years ago, I printed a fmall
Treatife entitled Cadmus Britannicus , or the Art
of Writing improved; the Contents of which are,
Firft, A Slower Short-Hand, the fame as in this
Pamphlet, Secondly,’ A Swifter Short-Hand, for
taking down Speeches and Sermons after a Speaker
or Preacher. Thirdly, A Short-Hand for Mufic.
Fourthly, An Univerfal Character. But my
Friend dying, that was to dlfpole of it for me, I
defered publishing it till this Time.
But confidering with myfclf, that there are few
Perfons, that may have Occafion either for the
Swifter Short-Hand, or that for Mufic; and fewer
Bill, that would ever think of making Ufa of the
Univerfal Charadfer, though it was unproved bv
'O* L 4
tl'.e Public, and reduced to Practice ; yet, as I
believe, there are few Writers, but what would be
glad on. many Occafions, to difpatch a Piece of
a 2 Writing


Writing In one Hour, that would take up two by
oar Common Letters, I offer my Fellow-Citizens
■here my Slower Short-Hand by itfelf alone, where
-all the Letters are expreft ; yet is Shorter by one
Half than our Common Writing, which I prove
thus;
Fach of my Characters, for die Letters of the
Alphabet, conhfts of one lingle Down-ftroke
.only, and that the mod: fimple and natural;
whereas the Letters we ufe in Common Writing
on an Average require two, <?r Dots that arc
equivalent to Strokes. For there are only three
Letters, viz. r, /, and one Kind of r, that can be
formed with one Stroke; and there, are three
Letters, viz. m , and z, that require three Strokes
a Piece; and all the Reft require two Strokes
each, or Dots to them, as, l> } r, t, r, v, and w,
which take up the fame Time in Writing, as if
they were Strokes.
And Secondly, That the Strokes of my Charac-
ters are as Natural and cafy to be formed, as diofc
of Common Writing, I prove thus All my
Confonants.arc Parts of the Letters they ftand for,
except if, «>, y and z. And my Reafons for choof-
ing them were thole. In the iirft Place, r/, has a
Rent at the Top towards the Left-hand, though
not fo full and round as the Round-back’d d. —
Secondly
' 5


Secondly, If a ftrokc be drawn through the Mid-
dle of the to, the lower Part is a w eredt, and the
upper a v revers’d.—Thirdly, As the y in com-
mon Writing is an b revers’d, I have chofe the
fame Character for it, only have placed it a De-
gree lower.—And fourthly, If a Stroke be drawn
through the Middle of z, the upper part is an s
‘erect, and the lower an s revers’d. Which Cha-
racter is proper enough, as z has nearly the fame
Sound as r, only a little more grofs and buzzing.
Isfoie here. That in ■writing the Confonants, it
is not necefiary to make the Stems and Tails of
them as long as in Common Writing; it being
lufneient to make them only fo much above or
below the fnort Confonants, - that they may be
diftinguhhcd from them. By this Means the
Lines may ftand clofer together, and more Writ-
ing be contained in the fame Space of Paper.
Now to come to the Vowels, I have given- two
Sorts of them ; the f.rfl are-of the fame Size as the
fnort Confonants r, /«, k, See. in Order to render
the Writing uniform.,—Of thefe the a is an 'a %
only it wants a foot. The eis a whole e. The i
has an Eye in it’s Head inflead of a Dot over it.
The o may be made quite round, but is better as
I have given it. The f.rft u is a Part of the
Character for die GreekDipthong ou erect. The
a 3 third


Place this fronting Plats I.
Explanation of the Alphabets.
cdefghijklmnopqrstuuuv
y z. ae cc. & &c. &c. eg, i. e, viz. g I n,
a c eii o o u.—« (3 ydr
it, <n, »,
Comma, Colon: Semi colon; Period.
Interrogation ? Admiration 1
(Parenthefis) [Brackets] Hyphen-
u Quotation.” Book b. Se&ion s.
Page p. Line I. Chapter c. Verfe v.
Thefe Letters may cither be fet
eredt or hoping like thofe of the
Italian and Round-Hands: they may
either be written feparate or join-
ed together with Hair-Strokes, or


PLATE 1*
tfe jl]fjLur.%*
jlchfi[fjJh i^sus
0 j* j*. £ 3 ,/.'■* t . 1 fij.
' £ u (-} A \ . J I j] £ j t ) i
ch 113 ]uu [ C ]2 . f f s".
and’ cdhi- feucsldi,
n uiisjJ i?Ji r jhfUcfQir ,
fijienfcrrr)lLucJzLj] ffjfei-
C jS3Ulfdi \ bdJj L. fCCLFd (j r.
lneJ. cOjitijC. jeu% j.
tfcre /mar u[ eafn U fei j
u ccl 71 f/>//// fry? ifcre 3 f >fe I
/>{<//&/ j// /W '/i/7r. ifefvf- j
LtSinUl UjjUiC 21 J3fJ~
el snf fan i>mJtf n


PLATTE 2 *
yu af hd- ifcrkii jzslnf rr-
tfi b n I*Jei 111 nlnsn deal-
nurltbn bun dainuitc.
ik hi/ il ffJiLJdselr ufiuiui
]2s vrc/trl[ I'jhvit'fcufVin
a]?u! huei sinedtskkssil n
Uifei cfjuutif. ifiUir.iULfc
l isi3e.i2.iej2f. *z bi,rfjja(3i
fi fer ami jmnj far frc \muc-
iici/di j>ulnr/u fruet ifn rk/f//'
If! ff/ewr tfor/p/ // (Wafsine/j
[n Fulrcr la fn radii fjzfjfi. '
uji/ > frcm.-j,vr~"'rcs'-i.
2 .1 -J A/ 7 c‘- /. 3. n • e/u- \•-• u i.
4. ndn-s-z-ni'


Place this fronting Plate IL
Part of both. The fhort Vowels may ci-
ther be fet above or below or between the Con-
fonants, but bell between the Confonants.
The long and fhort Vowels may be written
promifeuoufiy at Pleafure. For a great or
capital Letter write the whole Word in
larger Characters. Numbers, 123456.
789 00. 10. 20. too. * | . If a Pcrfon
in his common Writing fets his Letters c-
reft, for Italics let him fet them doping:
■ \
but if he fets them Hoping in common Writing,
for Italics let him fet. them upright.
Magnificent I. Mr. William M a foils.
2. Mr. M‘Aulay’s. 3. Dr. Byrom’s.
4. Mr. William Williamfon’s. 5. Mr. Baldwin's.


third u is a Part of the Dipthong on revers’d.
And as for the midle u, it is of no Ufe, except
when it is joined to the preceding and following
Letters.—The firft u is proper for the Beginnings
of Words, and the third u for the End of Words.
Of the fhort Vowels, a is Part of A, e, i and t,
are Parts of the Vowels they {land for, and u is
a Part of V.—Now for the Ufe of thefe Vowels,
a Pcrfon may either write by the larger Vowels
alone, or the fhort ones alone, or by a Mixture of
both, as I have done in die 2d and 3d Lines of
Plate 2.
As to reading by them, it will be eafieft by the
fhort Vowels ; becaufe they differ more from the
Confonants than the large Vowels, and are more
readily feen and diftinguifhed from them.—-And
bcudes this, one of diem may be written under.
another, when two of them come together; and
may likewife be joined to the Tops and Bottoms
of Confonants. Only obferve that e before </, »/,.
p, r, is made by turning the Bents quite round ;
and 0 after b y r, t,. ■by turning die Bents quite
round.
For the Greek Alphabet the Characters I have
given are proper enough: and for the Accents
the fame may be ufed as in Greek Print,
Foa


For Numeral Figures the nine fhort Con-
fonants may ferve very well, with a ort for the
.Cypher; in the fame Manner as the Greek and
Hebrew Letters Hand for Numbers. And if a
Dot be placed after any Number, or after the
. Characters for Ac. eg. i. e. viz. it will fhow, that
they either fiand for Numbers, or are Contractions
for Words. So b. with a Dot after it ftands for
Boook, c. for Chapter, Ac.
Now to ihew the Advantages of this Kind of
Writing ; in the firft Place the Characters for the
Letters are Eficntially diffindt ; fo, that if they are
properly formed, they cannot be miftaken one for
another.—And though feveral of them have the.
fame Form, and differ only in Length and Situa-
tion, as h., q, t, and *■, /> *, yet when joined in
Words with other Letters, they are cafdy dif-
tinguilhed.—And any one of them written by it-
felf alone on a Piece of Paper, may likewife be
known, by writing it thus ;Ifitbe an for Ex-
ample, draw a Stroke over it and another under it.
If it be a long Confonant above the Line, as an /,
draw a Line through the .Middle of it, and another
under it. And if it be a long Confonant that
comes below the Line, draw a Stroke over it, and
another through the Middle of it. And in the
fame Manner any other Confonant may be known.,


if written alone. See Examples at die End of the
fccond Line of Plate I.
Secondly, The Writing performed’ by thefe
Characters, may be read at any Difiance of Time,
though not fo readily as our Common Writing j
bccaufe the Letters confiding of one Stroke only,
do not make fo drong an Imprcflion on the Eye as
our common Letters, which on an Average con-
dd of two drokes, or Dots which are equivalent
to Strokes; yet with a little Pradlice they will
become more familiar, and that difficulty in a
great Mcafure, if not entirely removed.
Thirdly, It faves one Half of the Time and'
Labour, that is bedovved on Common Writing;
as it only requires half the Number of Strokes,
and thofe as eafily made, as in Common Writing,
being the very felf fame with them. Now the
Saving of Time and Labour in all other Arts,,
both Liberal and Mechanical,' is reckoned an Ad-
vantage, as it is in this that the Improvements
made in them chiefly condd. If then it is an Im-
provement in all other Arts, why is it not fo in
the Arc of Writing?
Fourthly, 'The Charaflers arc fo Natural, that
they may be learnt in a few Hours by any one
that, can write, (unlefs he be very dull indeed) if


he will only obferve, that In each of our Common
Letters there is a Radical Stroke peculiar to itfelf.
And out of thefc ftrokes my Alphabet is formed ;
fo that whether the Letters of Common Writing
are long or Short, or have Stems or Tails above
or below the other Letters, my Characters are the
lame, as being Parts of them.
Fifthly, Though this Kind of Writing may not
■be proper for Writings of great Importance, it
maybe Ufeful in private Prafticc, and even in
Public Matters of lefs Confequcnce, if the Public
.pleafes to adopt it.—The Art of Writing is liable
to Cliangc, as well as other Things. A Hundred
Years ago, Secretary was the prevailing Hand,
but now gives Place to Round-Hand, as being
both neater and more expeditious than it; yet my
Way of Writing is much more Expeditious titan
Round-Hand, than Round-Hand is if compared
with Secretary.
Sixthly, Thefc Characters arc the molt proper
of all others for innitiating Children in the Art of
Writing; as they confift of the molt plain and
llmple Strokes that can be made with a pen; and
are at fame Time the Radical and Fundamental
Strokes of our Common Letters.
Laftly,


Laitly, if I am afked, Why are not the Alpha-
bets of former Authors of Short-Hand as good as
mine ?—I anfwer, that, as all their Alphabets,
that I have fecn, confift of Right-lines and Curves
in every direction, no Uniform Kind of Writing
can be effected by them: and to convince the
Reader of the truth of what I affert, I haye given
Specimens of five of them, at the end of Plate 11.
where I have written the Word Magnificent in
their Characters, as exactly as I was able to Copy
them, though fome of them are very irregular
ones.—The firfi: Specimen is Mr. William
Mafon’s, as alfo Mr. John Angell’s, who copied
his Alphabet from Mr. Mafon’s. The fecond is
Mr. MtAulay’s. The third is DoCtor Byrom’s.
The fourth is Mr. William Williamfon’s, who has
neither Characters nor Dots for the Vowels, fo I
have put none. The fifth is Mr. Baldwin’s in his
London Magazine for July 1779.' And I have
Rcafon to believe, that all the Authors of Short-
hand that wrote before them formed their Alpha-
bets on no better plans.
FINIS.




YY 410 A 464 v. 32
