

stus* Ai. Ju
SUHNYSIDE,
iisaonn sma
HANDBOOK
OF THE
SINGAPORE ROUTE TO AUSTRALIA
INCLUDING TIME TABLES OF THE
EASTERN & AUSTRALIAN
MAIL STEAM C?
LIMITED.
Printed and Published for the Company
o^hLeadeiihall Street, LondoipE.G
Price 2/-
ffl
AJaclnre & Macdonald Lith™ Lou'kai










Wih % S


SHORT SEA ROUTE TO AUSTRALIA
descriptive
ILLUSTRATED HANDBOOK
OF THE
SINGAPORE ROUTE TO AUSTRALIA.
INCLUDING TIME TABLES
Cjw Eastern anb Australian ||laH Sfeant
Compaim, famiteb.
LONDON;
printed and published for the company,
34, LEADENHALL STREET, E.C.
1875.


TO THE E HTOE OF THE P'
• .*c"r- v y rpfo** . *
it * n -
* : r - «A .w...«r ™fy
•<->.iT(i <«t- ■'
f
PRINTED BY
DUNN, COLLIN, AND C 0.,.
ST. MARY AXE, LONDON, E.C.


B. H. HALL,
sunnyside
ffATTORD, HEKT* 1
THE
SHORT SEA ROUTE TO AUSTRALIA,
Via MARSEILLES AND SINGAPORE.
THE journey from London to Marseilles occupies about twenty-eight
hours, there are two express trains from London leaving Charing
Cross at 7-40 a.m. and 8-45 p.m., respectively. Passengers will pro-
bably make some stay in Paris, and are recommended to travel to
Marseilles by the night mail leaving the Lyons Station at 8 p.m.
This train is the fastest and also gives opportunity for seeing the
picturesque valley of the Rhone.
Some excellent carriages have been lately put on the Paris, Lyons,
and Marseilles Railway. They are called Fauteuils Lits, and are in
fact wide coupes with three comfortable arm chairs in place of the
usual seat. The chairs can bo drawn out and with a board that is
let down opposite them, make a nearly full length bed. The charge
for each seat in these compartments is one-third over a first-class
fare, so that the whole three seats can be engaged on payment for
four places. Written application for these seats should be made
some days before they are required, to the Chef de la Gare, Paris,
Lyons and Marseilles Railway.
Marseilles is reached at 3-45 p.m., and a day or two may be
pleasantly passed in the City, which under the Empire was greatly
improved and now possesses handsome boulevards, magnificent docks
and excellent hotels. Among the places of interest well worthy of a
visit are the Museum, and Notre Dame de la Gare, from which a


magnificent view of the harbour and Mediterranean is obtained. A
drive should be taken along the Prado. The offices of the Messageries
Maritimes are in the Kue Noaille.
The Steamer for Singapore leaves on Sunday morning, and
passengers are recommended to see then’ cabins and make arrange-
ments with the Head Steward the previous day. Heavy baggage
sent from London is transhipped by the Company without any
trouble to passengers.
Passing between the Islands of Corsica and Sardinia the steamer
first touches at Naples, and from there to Messina, the view of the
Italian Coast is striking. The scenery among the Lipari Islands,
before making the Straits of Messina, is most attractive and the
Stromboli with its volcanic phenomena, will be a special source of
interest. On the sixth day after leaving Marseilles, the steamer
enters the canal at Port Said.
After the arid and cheerless coasts of the Eed Sea and the barrenness
of Socotra, the Island of Ceylon becomes a delightful surprise to the
traveller eastward. The shores are fringed with graceful cocoa nuts ;
the green is brilliant and fresh, the scenery picturesque, and
backed by the magnificent height of Adam’s Peak. The arrival of
the pilot is worth watching for, as he comes out to meet the steamer
in one of the boats peculiar to Galle, and known as “ katameran,”
It consists of a hollowed tree from 18 to 30 feet long and 2 deep, in
which sit three or four men. From the gunwale, stretch out three
elastic outriggers, which support the balance log, shaped like a cigar
and distant from the boat several feet. These boats, though uncom-
fortable, are very safe and sail rapidly and often to a great distance
from land.
The steamer lies but a few yards from the shore in Galle harbour,
and while she is coaling, there may be time to take a drive into the
country, or to explore the town.
There is a curious old fashioned look about Galle. The batteries
which are now the evening promenade, w T ere constructed during the
Hutch occupation of the Island in 1663. The church was built by
the Netherlands India Trading Company.


Our possession of Ceylon dates from 1795, when an expedition
was fitted out in Madras for the purpose, but it was not till 1817
that the Kandyans, who occupy the interior of the Island, were com-
pletely pacified.
In the view of Sir Emerson Tennant, Galle formed the great
central depot of commerce, in the pre-historic time, between the East
and the West. He supposes that it was to this port, that the ships
of Solomon tiaded and where they procured the rich Oriental pro-
duce and manufactures brought thither by the junks from China.
The present productions of the Colony are valuable—coffee, tortoise-
shell, sandalwood, ebony, and ivory. The cocoa-nut plantations
supply the bulk of the oil imported into Europe, the husks of the
nut are manufactured into coir rope and matting, and the sap is
converted into arrack. Precious stones are fairly abundant in Ceylon,
and a large number of traders in Galle support themselves by the
sale of them. The traveller will have rubies, sapphires, and pearls
offeied him hi such profusion, that he may be tempted to believe that
Galle is the veritable site of Aladdin’s cave, but he will be wise to
exercise extreme caution in his dealings with the jewellers, who
throng the verandah of the hotel, lest his offer “ of half” what was
asked him may be eagerly accepted, and he may have to moralize for
the rest of his voyage on the proverb “ All is not gold that glitters.”
If the traveller should pass the night at an hotel he will make the
acquaintance of mosquitos, who invariably affect the company of
new arrivals from Europe, bringing with them vigorous constitutions
and fiesh blood. By the old residents in the East these gnats are
unnoticed, and the art, only to be acquired by practice, of closing the
mosquito curtains puts the sleeper out of reach of them. To new
comers they are troublesome, and sometimes a real grievance. The
pain from then’ bite will be relieved by application of ammonia or
eau de Cologne : rubbing the swelling should be carefully abstained
from, for it will only aggravate it. If the servant has carefully
attended to the curtains before sundown, and they have been skilfully
tucked in, the traveller may enjoy the buzzing of his enemies outside
as much as he may do a storm outside the window, but if a few of


them are inside waiting for him his rest will be disturbed and his temper
tried. In such case he may avoid a greater evil by adopting a lesser
and rub his face and hands with cocoa-nut oil, the smell of which is
very repugnant to the mosquito. Of mosquitos it may be said, that
on the whole they are not so bad as they seem ; to the irritable, they
are irritable, and can rebuke vanity by unduly swelling an eye
that is bent on a triumph, but they soon cease to annoy persons
of an equable temperament, and so may become a constant incentive
to the good humour that makes a ship’s saloon and quarter deck so
agreeable to all.
The new highway between England and the Continent of Aus-
tralia are the Straits of Malacca, which form almost a land-locked sea,
of which the extreme length is about 500 miles, the breadth varying
from 40 to 300. In four to five days after leaving Galle, the entrance
of the Straits is made, and Penang, which forms part of the Colony
of the Straits Settlements, is passed. Opposite it, on the east
side, lies Province Wellesley, a district comprising about 140 miles of
the mainland, but which is also within the limits of the Colony ,
here, sugar is largely and successfully cultivated.
The acquisition of Penang was first determined on by Warren
Hastings, but it was not till after his death that the island was ceded
to the British in 1780 by the then Eajah of Quedah. As a harbour
and commercial emporium Penang has made consideiable advance,
but its soil has not equalled the expectations which its founder for-
med of it. The cultivation of pepper, at one time large, has given
place to nutmegs ; and fruits, which flourish luxuriantly, add to the
health of the island.
Approaching the eastern end of the Straits, and separated from
the island of Sumatra by a channel only 45 miles wide, is Malacca,
the oldest European settlement in the Far East. The setting up of
the roadstead and the growing importance of Singapore has deprived
Malacca —which, like Penang, is the seat of a Lieutenant Governor
of the Straits Settlements—of all commercial importance, and the
Unfortunate system of land tenure left us by its former occupants,
the Dutch, has hitherto stood in the way of a full development of the


country’s natural resources. These, both mineral and agricultural,
are of importance, the former especially so, gold and excellent tin
being successfully worked. Inland from Malacca, about forty miles
is situated Ledang (4,820 feet), to which the Portuguese gave the
name of Mount Ophir, which is still retained, there being however no
ground whatever for identifying it with the country of that name
trading with Europe in the time of Solomon.
The Straits, after leaving Malacca, become an archipelago of small
islands, and through one of the most picturesque channels, the
steamer skirts the shore of the Island of Singapore, and anchors
alongside the wharf in what is now the harbour.
The glimpse that will have been had in passing, of Ceylon, by the
traveller from Europe will have prepared him for the luxurious and
brilliant foliage of Singapore. The island is covered with hills, three
to four hundred feet high, which in the interior are still covered
with almost impenetrable jungle, and afford an excellent collecting
ground for the naturalist. Work of this kind must however be con-
ducted with [extreme caution, as tigers are frequently met, and it is
no uncommon thing for the Chinamen employed on the gambler
plantations, to be carried away by them. It seems hopeless to rid
the island of these brutes, as they are known to swim across from
the mainland. Drives through the jungle roads, which are good, may
be made without any risk, and will afford interest and pleasure. To
be thoroughly enjoyable, they should be taken however in the early
morning, or after five in the evening. Midday heat should be
avoided, specially by new comers from England, who cannot be
too strongly advised to adopt the well-known “ solar topee,” or at any
rate a pugaree of white muslin.
From the point (Tanjoug Pagar Wharf) at which the Eastern
and Australian Mail Steamers Ire, the distance to the town is little
over a mile, and gharries can always be had either for going or
returning. The hotels are on the more distant side of the town,
separated from the commercial and Chinese quarter by a small river,
which is crossed by two bridges and a ferry from Commercial Square;
on this the northern side is a handsome green, known as “ the Plain,”


skirting the sea shore, flanked by the Cathedral, the Town Hall,
the Eaffles Institution, Masonic Lodge, &c. The band plays here
during the evening, and the cricket club practise frequently. To
this club, as well as to the fives clubs, of which there are two, an
introduction may be readily obtained.
The Botanical Gardens, about three miles from the town, cover a
large area and are tastefully laid out, the general effect being greatly
enhanced by patches of virgin forest, which have been left here and
there among well kept lawns and gay parterres. They afford some
beautiful specimens of tropical plants and shrubs.
To the traveller new to the tropics, the town of Singapore will
afford a good deal of interest and amusement. The streets for the
most part have covered footways on which the native shops open, dis-
playing wares of the most varied description. The shopkeepers are
either Chinese or Klings (from the Madras Coast), and the colloquial
language for almost all races is Malay, an easily acquired tongue,
and when well spoken, so musical as to have acquired the designa-
tion of the “ Italian of the East.” The thoroughfares are crowded
with Orientals, of whom perhaps a greater variety is to be met with hi
Singapore, than in any other Eastern Port. Chinese monopolise
trades involving handicraft, and are deservedly famed as blacksmiths,
carpenters, tailors and barbers. Klings supply crew r s for the boats;
Arabs and Hadjis, recognised by the long flowing robe that evidences
then* pilgrimage to Mecca, carry on mercantile transactions with
volubility, if not with scrupulousness. Chitties, with closely shaven
heads and scanty white clothing, gesticulate wildly on the price of
opium ; and Parsees with their tall, peculiar-shaped hats, discuss im-
portant questions of exchange. Traders from the many distant islands
eastward, may be seen inside the Chinese shops gathered in groups
and intent on the sale of their cargoes, or the purchase of Manchester
and Birmingham goods. Morning and evening, a string of gharries
and buggies pass through the town, conveying Government officials
and European merchants, all of whom live in the country, at a dis-
tance of two to three miles.
Singapore, which, at the instance of Sir Stamford Eaffles, became
a part of our Indian possessions in 1819, has made marvellously


SINGAPORE AT SUNRISE, FROM THE HILLS WESTWARD.




rapid progress as a commercial settlement. In 1811, it was occupied
only by a few Malay fishermen, in 18G8 its exports had reached
the value of over one and a half million. Its geographical posi-
tion and the wise free-trade policy of its founder, has tended
greatly to this result. It is a half-way house between Europe and
Australia, between India and China, and is practically an entrepot
for the commerce of the Eastern Archipelago, Siam and Cochin
China.
lip till the year 1865 it formed, in common with Penang and
Malacca, a part of the Bengal presidency, the form of government
was then changed, and the settlements were formed into a colony,
with a Governor appointed by the Crown, assisted by a Legislative
Council. It is the seat also of a Bishopric.
The climate is healthy, and equable throughout the year. During
the North-east monsoon, and especially in December and January,
there is more than the usual rainfall, but showers are constant and
refreshing, keeping the mean midday temperature at about 82°
in the shade, and preserving a constant freshness and beauty hi
vegetation. The nights are considerably cooler and extremely
pleasant, except in the occasional prevalence of what is known as
“ the Angin Jawa,” or warm easterly wind.
The Straits Settlements are celebrated for fruit, which it eaten
early in the morning will prove agreeable and wholesome. The
more esteemed are the Mangosteen, Duku, Langsat and Plantain, the
latter being eaten at almost every meal. The Mangosteen is deser-
vedly famous, its growth being curiously restricted to a very narrow
district. The Durian is also by some considered unrivalled for
deliciousness, while by others it is regarded as a simple abomination.-
These conflicting opinions may induce a trial of it, but in event of
their doing so, the traveller is recommended to make the attempt
in the open air, and with a handkerchief well saturated with eau de
Cologne.
The Straits of Malacca, of which Singapore is the capital, have an
interesting history. Long prior to historic times, Chinese and
Cingalese traditions tellof fleets of trading junks passing Malacca south-


ward for Ceylon, with the north-east monsoon and returning with the
regularity of the south-west winds. It is to Portugal that belongs
the honour of opening up their wealth and beauty to Europe, by the
discovery of Sumatra by Alonzo Talasso in 1506. A fierce struggle
ensued between the Malays and these European adventures in
Malacca, which ended as might be expected, in the triumph of the
former, aided as they were by St. Francis Xavier and a charge of
elephants. The tale of the next two centuries, is one mainly of the
struggle for supremacy between Portuguese, Spaniards and Dutch, the
latter of whom gave up the then capital—Malacca—to England, in
virtue of the treaty of 1816.
The Eastern Archipelago, into which the Straits of Malacca form
the western entrance, extends over an area greater than the whole
of Europe, from the extreme west far into Central Asia. There are
in it, three islands larger than Great Britain, and an innumerable
number of smaller ones.
It has been shown by Mr. Alfred Wallace that the islands of this
Archipelago form two clearly defined groups. The one with
all its natural characteristics and productions belonging to Asia,
and the other unmistakeably to be identified with Australia. The
division is made abruptly by the Strait, only 15 miles wide, which
divides the island of Bali from Lombok, and the conclusion drawn
by the above naturalist is that at a comparatively recent geological
period, Asia included the islands of Java, Sumatra and Borneo.
Passing out eastward from the new Harbour of Singapore the
voyage is continued through the Straits of Ehio.* At a distance of
about 50 miles, the town of that name is passed. It was established
by the Dutch, soon after the settlement of Singapore, and intended
to neutralise the influence of the latter Port, free trade being estab-
lished at Ehio, although contrary to the Dutch system. The place
however has never made much progress, and its staple products,
which are Gambier and Pepper, find their way to Singapore.
The Straits widen after passing Ehio, and the island of Banca will
he seen on the port side. It is the chief source of the tin supplies of
Netheriands India, and its production in 1873 w r as about 4,500 tons.
* The course taken by the Mail Steamers varies with the Monsoons.


The ore is worked by Chinese, who are brought to the island under
contract, and very often kept there under a system of advances. Banca
extends in a south-easterly direction for a distance of 120 miles, and
is in width about 60 miles. The aborigines are quiet and inoffensive,
but little civilised. The island was occupied by the English in 1811,
but restored to Holland in 1816.
A little after passing Muntok, the chief town of Banca, the en-
trance of the Palembang river may be made out on the Sumatra side.
The district formed an independent and important Malay State till
subdued by the Dutch in 1823. This town is still one of the most
important in Sumatra and contains a large population of Javanese,
Malays, Arabs and Chinese. It is celebrated for the workmanship
of non, gold and silver ornaments and utensils, and a large trade is
carried on between it and other ports in the Eastern Archipelago.
If the weather is clear, the island of Billiton may be seen to the
east of Banca, separated from it by Gaspar Straits ; it is also the seat
of considerable tin mining, which is carried on by a Mining Com-
pany with results scarcely less successful than those in the more
westerly island.
Lucepara island lies here in the direct route, and marks the en-
trance into the Java Sea. Barely losing sight of the Sumatra Coast,
the picturesque little Archipelago, known as the thousand islands is
sighted and almost immediately after the roads of Batavia come in
view.
Batavia is the chief city of Netherlands India, and the seat of
Government. Founded by the Dutch, in 1619, it has remained in their
undisturbed possession excepting for a short period from 1811 to 1816,
when it was occupied by England. The city is many miles in extent
and deservedly admired. The streets are handsome boulevards and
through the centre of many of them runs the invariable canal, which
the Dutch founders have transported with them as a souvenir of
their European capital. The houses, whether European or native,
stand some distance from the road, and are screened from it by
luxuriant and exquisitely beautiful vegetation. There is a very
large resident European population in Batavia, for the Dutch, unlike


the English in India, have made Java a home, and it is not an un-
common thing to find persons of pure Dutch parentage who have
never seen Europe.
Courtesy is inseparable from Dutch life, whether official or private,
and travellers making the tour of the island, will always get infor-
mation and assistance, if supplied with introductions to the “ Re-
sident ” of the different districts.
The roads throughout Java, are excellent, and a system of posting
is maintained by the Government, which provides a fresh supply of
horses every few miles, and by means of which a traveller taking his
own travelling carriage, may go from one end to the other of Java,
and enjoy a scenery, perhaps unrivalled in the world. In the
interior of the island, are magnificent ruins of ancient Hindoo tem-
ples, of which Sir Stamford Raffles remarks that the amount of
human labour and skill expended on the great pyramids of Egypt,
sinks into insignificance, when compared with that required to com-
plete the sculptured hill temples in the interior of Java. A month
would be required for a visit to these interesting scenes, but a day
or two delay will allow of a visit to the Palace of the Governor
General at Buitenzorg, where there is a botanical garden, reputed as
the finest in the world.
The best season for travelling in Java is from April to September.
A knowledge of Malay, or an interpreter is required.
The currency of Java is guilders and cents, for which see Handbook,
page xviii.
Along the coast of Java, the scenery is varied and magnificent,
mountains of ten to twelve thousand feet are covered with luxuriant
vegetation to the very summit; going eastward the evidence of vol-
canic action becomes more marked. The views on the north, are
very numerous, and towns of considerable importance succeed one
another, —Chcribon, Tagal, Samarang, Sourabaya, are all the seats of
a large trade in rice, sugar, coffee and tobacco.
At the extreme eastern end of Java, the route lies south through
the Straits of Bali or Lombok. The islands of these names are
particularly interesting, as being the only spots in the Archipelago


where Hindooism is still extant, and, as already pointed out, between
them is the natural division of the two continents, Asia and Australia.
Similar in their physical features, they differ in the most marked
manner in production and zoology.
The great mountain range of Java is continued in Bah, where are
heights of from four to ten thousand feet, on which exist several re-
markable lakes, probably extinct craters of volcanoes ; severe and
destructive eruptions have occurred in Bali, as well as in Java, during
the present century, and smoking mountains attest the activity
which at any time may depopulate and ruin a district.
In Lombok, which possesses a magnificent peak 12,375 in height,
there are active volcanoes, but many extinct craters also exist. The
soil is rich and well cultivated, and the natives well-to-do, hospitable
and industrious. From this island eastward, we are in Australia. It
is in Lombok, that the animals and even the birds distinctive of Asia,
are lost sight of, and cockatoos, honeysuckers and brush-turkeys, all
unknown to Asia, make their first apperance. The chief town—Am-
panam—is situated on the east side of the island, and is a favorite
port of call for vessels sailing in the seas. Fine cattle are bred on the
plains, and in the mountains, a wild race of them is to be met with.
According to the season, the steamers will pass on the northern or
southern, side of a long and interesting chain of islands—Sumbawa—
celebrated for an excellent breed of small horses, and where the
people are still for the most part, though inoffensive, uncivilised.
The Mahomedan missionaries have not had much success here, and
the result may be attributed perhaps to then- method, which was to
visit the village, cane in hand, and convert with its assistance.
Floris, the next large island eastward, yields large quantities of
sapanwood. The people are woolley-headed, more like the Papuan
race in appearance, than the Malay. Hangarai is the principal
port on the northern coast, and Ende on the southern; near the latter
is an active volcano 1,500 feet high.
A chain of small islands connects Floris with Timor, a Portuguese
possession. This island is of a geological character different to any to
the westward. In place of being volcanic it is sedimentary, and the


limestone rocks are full of caves. A chain of mountains runs from
east to west, and the surface of the island consists of hills and
narrow steep valleys. The vegetation here shows a marked falling
off and becomes of the character of Northern Australia. Palms are
rare, and the fruits of Singapore and Java are unknown. At the
west end of the island, is a Dutch territory, but the trade is
insignificant. The country is capable of considerable development.
Cofiee of a superior quality thrives. Horses and sheep can be
raised without difficulty, but the present European rulers of Timor,
content themselves with prolonging their existence without caring
to improve it.
Passing Rotti Island, the south-western extremity of the Timor
group, a rapid change takes place in the soundings of the ocean.
From the time that the Straits of Bali are fairly cleared, the soundings
which in the Java Sea had averaged from 30 to 50 fathoms suddenly
deepen to 200, increasing as the easterly course is made, and reaching
their maximum depth about south of Sumba Island to over 2000.
From this they gradually lessen to about 200 fathoms when about 80
miles east of Rotti, and then suddenly decrease to less than 70. This
change can easily be perceived in ordinary weather by the altered tint
of the ocean, as the deep blue color that had prevailed for so many
miles now gives place to a light muddy green. From this the soundings
gradually lessen to about 20 fathoms as the promontory of Cape York
is approached. This question of soundings, which at first appears of
trivial interest, resolves itself into one of considerable importance, as
will be detailed farther on. About 500 miles east of Rotti the meri-
dian of 130° E. is passed, and due south from this about 70 miles lies
Melville Island, the most northerly point of the possessions of the
Colony of South Australia ; while on the other hand, some 100 miles
to the north, lies the island of Timor Laut, of which but little is
known, but which has been rendered of some importance lately by
the proposal to establish upon it a repeating station for the submarine
cable to be laid by the Queensland Government from their northern
possessions in the Gulf of Carpentaria to Singapore, which proposal,
however, has since been abandoned in favour of the more central


position of the Celebes. A mail station on the southern point is
also talked of, to be in correspondence with Port Darwin. Passing
the 132nd meridian, and about 60 miles to the southward, lies
the N.W. point of W'hat is termed Arnheim’s Land, the posses-
sion also of the Queensland government. Years ago a settle-
ment was established here, by some active government officials
on behalf of the Imperial Government for the transportation
of convicts, to which the name of Port Essington was given,
aqd the dreams of its founders w T ere, that by that means
northern Australia might be colonised and brought within the
reach of the commerce and trade of the East. Fortunately for that
great continent, this settlement had but an ephemeral existence, as
Dame Nature stepped forward, as it were to blight the hopes of those
men who prided themselves rather on the degradation than the eleva-
tion of their kind, and by the increasing and alarming death rate
amongst the officials and convicts, Port Essington proved to be notably
the permanent abode of mosquitoes, malaria and death. In conse-
quence, the Settlement was abandoned, and that plague spot for ever
exterminated from the shores of northern Australia, the only records
now remaining of that absurd scheme being herds of wild cattle that
roam the country, the descendants of the domestic cattle of that
period. About 120 miles S.W. of this locality lies a settlement of a
very different kind—Port Darwin. It is
the north by Melville Island, round the eastern and western shores of
which good sea communication is obtained, and forms the most north-
ern settlement of South Australia, and is the last point at which the
overland telegraph line touches before disappearing in the ocean on its
course through the Dutch possessions. Since its establishment it has not
shown much sign of advancement, although everything has been done
by its parent Government to encourage emigration to its shores in the
form of cheap land, easy payments, and other advantages. Rumours
have been current of the discovery of gold within easy access of the
place, but as yet no tangible results have been obtained. From the
last position to the 137th meridian the ship pursues a course parallel
with the coast, and there is nothing of interest to record except that


when midway and about due north 220 miles, lies the group of the
Aru Islands, famed for the produce of their pearl fisheries. To the
south about 70 miles lies Cape Weasel, the north-eastern outlier of
Amheim’s Land, the coast of which now trends away to the southward
fbr many hundred miles, and forms the western arm of the Gulf of
Carpentaria, over the northern part of which sea a due easterly course
is run for the next 350 miles until the Prince of Wales Islands arc
sighted, the north-western outliers of Cape York peninsula. Far
away to the south now stretches the Gulf, -which has a maximum
length of about 500 miles and a width of 350, the soundings through-
out being extremely regular, decreasing gradually from 30 fathoms
as the respective shores are reached. The 138th meridian marks the
respective boundaries in northern Australia of the two colonies of
South Australia and Queensland. Of the character of the possessions
of the former colony on the Gulf, but little is known except from the
narrative of the lamented Leichhardt in his bold enterprise of traversing
the northern continent from Brisbane to Port Essington in the years
1845 and 1846, from which however we must infer, that a large por-
tion of the southern part bordering the Gulf is unavailable for any
practical purpose. The only river in the territory of any importance
is the Roper, which is reported to be navigable for some miles from its
mouth. The possessions of Queensland on its southern shores are,
however, well known. Within the area several rivers of importance
debouch, as the Nicholson, Albert, Leichhardt, Flinders and Norman.
Most of these rivers flow through country of the richest descrip-
tion for pastoral purposes, being principally of cretaceous formation
and of late secondary age, and the famed “ Plains of Promise ’’ of a
former Australian explorer exist within this area. The character of
the upper course of the Flinders river, is that of rolling downs of great
proportion, stretching away as far as the eye can reach, rich in natural
grasses, herbs and saliferous shrubs, and forming the very best class of
pasturage. The country nearer to the Gulf, although the land is of
the best description, is liable to serious inundations at certain seasons
of the year, and occupation in this locality must long remain in abey-
ance, except some extraordinary climatic change should occur, or the


land be npheaved above the level of the floods. The low lying south-
ern shores of the Gulf, belted with mangroves for many miles inland,
evidence clearly a former state of subsidence, and all the detritus
brought down by so many rivers and inundations has not yet been
enabled to improve away this plague of mangroves and its accompanying
drawbacks. The eastern shore is but little known. The Mitchell, the
Staaten and Gilbert rivers flow into it, but the geological character of
the country evidences an unfavourable report. Large tracts of
“ desert sandstone” stretch away from the north banks of the Norman
to those of the Mitchell, and probably even to Cape York. This
wretched sandstone, with its accompanying spinifex grass and poison
plants, is the abhorrence of the settler, and it exists in undisputed sway
over thousands and thousands of square miles in Australia. Norman
town, situated on the Norman river, is the most northerly settlement
of Queensland on the Gulf, and is the most available outlet at present
for a large tract of pastoral country, and forms also the easiest access
for heavy goods to the Gilbert, Etheridge and Cloncurry gold fields.
The latter, which are about 270 miles south of Norman town, are
situated at the heads of the Cloncurry river and McKinlay ranges,
which separate the northern and southern watersheds. This locality
represents an area of over 2000 square miles of metamorphic rocks,
surrounded completely by cretaceous deposits ; and as these rocks in
the presence of “ dykes ” possess as their associated minerals gold and
copper, it is not surprising that one of the richest copper mines in the
colony has been discovered there, which, though at the present time
but feebly worked, is likely at no distant date to be as well known as
that of the Peak Downs. Norman Town has also the advantage of
direct telegraphic communication with Cardwell and other parts of the
Colonics, and it is now proposed by the co-operation of the adjoining
colony of New South Wales to extend the line to Singapore direct by
way of the Gulf, Celebes, and the Java Sea, with the object of placing
the eastern portion of Australia in direct communication with Asia and
Europe, and independent of the line now constructed through the
continent from Adelaide to Port Darwen, which is always liable to
disconnection from so many unforeseen causes that must naturally


arise in a line passing through so great an extent of barren and
unoccupied country.
As the Prince of Wales Island is approached a small island may be
seen to the southward, called Booby Island, which formerly constituted
a place of refuge lor shipwrecked seamen. Prior to the establishment
of Somerset, it was usual for all vessels passing through Torres Straits
to call at this island in order to take away any letters that were
lying there, and also to leave a certain amount of preserved pro-
visions for those who might seek refuge on the island. The soundings
now gradually diminish to 8 fathoms, as the land is approached.
The reefs situated between the Prince of Wales’ group on the
southern side and Mulgrave, Hawkesbury, and Banks Islands
on the northern, lie in an east and west direction, being from
one to two miles in width and ten in length and form what is
known as Torres Straits. The principal opening and that generally
used is the Prince of Wales Channel having Hammond and Wednesday
Islands for its southern boundary and carrying throughout not less than
7 fathoms. Passing Wednesday Island the Strait is left behind and the
ship now steers a south-east course to Albany Island opposite to which
on the main land lies the settlement of Somerset.
The narrow strait which separates Albany Island from the main
land, in a great measure conceals Somerset, and it has been proposed to
remove the settlement to some spot where it would command a full
prospect of all vessels coming within the limits of its horizon. Ham-
mond Island has been proposed, but the great drawback of that selec-
tion would be the removal of the settlement from the mainland. At
Somerset a Government Resident is located with an efficient staff of black
and white police under his charge, and since its foundation, it has been
the means of rescuing numerous seamen who have been shipwrecked
on the coral reefs to the eastward. Moreover, it is likely to form an
important depot for the traders engaged in the pearl and trepang
fisheries established near the coral reefs, and to become a port
of direct export of their produce to Singapore and China, especi-
ally as Somerset being declared a free port, offers advantages
similar to that of Singapore. It is also only a question of time


to connect this place with the south by the means of an overland tele-
graph wire, whereby its importance would be brought more prominently
into view. At the present time the Settlement is virtually maintained
at the expense of the Queensland Government, the other Colonies only
aiding in proportion to the tonnage of their respective ships passing the
Straits. Until the establishment of the Eastern and Australian Mail
Eoute by the Inner Channel, few vessels bound to the Dutch
Settlements or China, availed themselves of this communication, pre-
ferring the more stormy and lengthened route by way of Cape Lewin,
or that of the Outer Channel, since 39 vessels only are recorded as
having passed between the years 1870 and 1873, but from the im-
proved survey and the addition of numerous beacons and land-marks,
and light ships the inner route is now considered as safe and even safer
than any other.
Eighty miles due north of Somerset lies the great island of New
Guinea, connected almost with Australia by a series of coral reefs, and
of soundings never exceeding 60 feet in depth. This island is more
than half as large again as all the British Isles put together, having a
length of over 1400 miles, by a maximum width of 400. At its north-
ern end a high range of mountains tower up to nearly 17,000 feet, and
from the little that is known of the island it is believed that the
same chain continues in the form of a Cordillera to its south-eastern
shores, where mountains of 13,000 feet in height have been seen.
New Guinea, as is well-known, is the home the birds of paradise,
those gorgeous beauties of nature that have for so many thousands of
years concealed themselves from the intrusion of the white man.
Navigators have reported that the island abounds in magnificent
forests, luxuriating in a hot and moist atmosphere and thronged with
birds of brilliant and varied plumage and where innumerable species
of parrots, kingfishers, pigeons, fly catchers, and great black cockatoos
revel in all the advantages of tropical luxuriance. But what renders
the country so interesting is the remarkable character of its known
fauna. Like Australia it possesses no carnivora, whilst it resembles
that continent in possessing marsupials in their stead, The deep sea
that has been already alluded to, in the passage from Bali to near the


coast of Australia sweeps away to the northward embracing the Celebes
and Moluccas, approaching the coast of New Guinea only on its
northern and western shores, thereby isolating it completely from all
communication with the old world. Hence of theseventeen known mam-
malia existing in the island, fourteen are marsupial and it possesses
kangaroos of a medium size. Here also dwell kangaroos of the genus
Dendrologus that live principally in trees, having the fore legs nearly as
long as the hind, not using the tail as a support, and having the claws
curved and pointed, evidently for the purpose of adapting it to a new
form of life; another proof, if any is required, that species are not
permanent and immutable, but that they undergo a modification in
time according to their environment. The birds of paradise on the
other hand, are represented by allied forms in Northern Australia,
not however revelling in the gorgeous plumage of their progenitors, but
modified under the influences of time and a sterile and inhospitable
abode. What conclusion then must be drawn from these extraordinary
zoological and physical conditions 1 No other but that Australia
and New Guinea, with all the islands embraced within the area of the
limited soundings already mentioned, formed, in an age of a remote
geological history, one great continent. Mr. Wallace, the celebrated
naturalist, was the first to draw attention to this circumstance, which
is fully detailed in his exhaustive work on the Malay Archipelago, and
he would have greatly strengthened the conclusion he arrived at had
he brought forward the formation of the Australian Barrier Reef in
support of the remarkable proofs obtained from the zoological resem-
blence. An elevation of land to a height of even sixty feet would
unite these severed countries again, but one of 300 feet would
define, in a great measure, the lines of coast as they existed cycles of
ages ago, when the outer walls of the Barrier Reef formed the eastern
shoi'es of the great southern continent. When New Guinea comes
under the domination of the white man and when scientific research
is brought to bear upon the remains of the extinct fauna that lie
buried in the Tertiary deposits; then the exact geological age may be
determined upon when these countries were united and also the period
when the subsidence of Northern Australia took place. New Guinea


may be regarded ethnologically as the head quarters of the Papurn
race. Flat in forehead, face elongated, prominent brows, nose large
with high nostrils, broad large month, thick and protuberant lips
mark the exterior features of the Papuan. Abounding in vital
energy, of a higher type of intellect than the Malay, impulsive
in speech, and demonstrative in action, it is very questionable if he
can associate himself with the servitude of a white man’s civilization.
When that day comes, as come it must, the Papuan, from this point
of view, is doomed to extinction. The same race extends in the South
Sea Islands as far as the Fijis, and the ethnological history of even the
brown Polynesian may yet be traced to a mixture of the Malay and
black Papuan, the latter proving to be the original inheritors of that
great oceanic continent that once existed in the Pacific Ocean, the
records of which would have perished for ever, except for the existence
of scattered atolls, attesting like monuments the former existence of
that submerged continent. From the recent discoveries on the south
and north-eastern coasts by H. M. S. “ Basilisk ” it is reported that fine
harbours and navigable rivers extending some distance into the in-
terior exist, together with a more friendly disposition on the part of
the natives. Geological evidence, although partially of a hypothetical
nature had marked the eastern portion as probably auriferous, a con-
firmation of which opinion has now been practically made by Captain
Moresby, who has found auriferous quartz at Fairfax Bay, on the
western shores of the Papuan Gulf. This discovery will doubtless
soon attract thousands of miners from the northern coasts of Australia,
regarding only that as an Eldorado whiclr is distant and dangerous,
and fascinated by the romance of visiting a hitherto unknown
country. Mr, Daintree, the present Agent-General for Queensland
in London, has made special reference to this subject in his report to
the Queensland Government in 1870, when he held the position of
Government Geologist, an extract from which must prove interesting
should his prognostications become verified. He says, “ that the rock
formation of the three largest northern diggings, Peak Downs, Cape,
and a portion of the Gilbert is largely represented at the S. E. extremity
of New Guinea, with an authenticated trend or strike, which if continuous


would give such rocks a large development in the interior and so afford a
fair promise of Gold fields when colonised The Dutch Government is
represented to claim jurisdiction over the island from the west point
to the 141st meridian represented on the northern shore by Humboldt
Bay, but upon what grounds is yet to be decided, as no settlements of
that nation are established in New Guinea which take the form of
jurisdiction over the native races. The importance therefore of the
occupation bj> the English of New Guinea in an imperial and colonial
point of view is not to be overlooked. The land in the neighbourhood
of Somerset is of inferior character and the little that is known of the
peninsula from this point to Princess Charlotte Bay, 300 miles further
south is gathered from the records of Kennedy’s expedition and that
of the Jardines. The former having accomplished his arduous under-
taking was murdered by the natives near Cape York, when almost in
sight of the vessel that was sent to bring his party back to New South
Wales, but his diary and that of the Jardines represent it as altogether
composed of granite ranges and barren soil. From Somerset to Cook
Town, the most northern industrial settlement on the east Coast, is
about 370 miles, by the inner channel. The attentive observer
may almost mark the line of the Barrier by the configuration
of the land, picturing in his own mind the line of slope extended
beneath the sea and taking as a general rule that where the mainland
is steep and lofty the reefs approach the shore, but where the slope is
gradual they recede in proportion to the imaginary angle. The voyage
down the channel is at all times highly interesting, the soundings
rarely exceeding twelve fathoms, and during calm weather the bottom of
the sea may almost be seen adorned as a fairy garden, with all the
many variegated forms and contrasting colours, and abounding
in aquatic life of varied description. Various kinds of turtle,
as the edible or green turtle ( Chilonia mydas ), the loggerhead
(C. caorianna), and hawksbill {C. imbricata), may be seen paddling
away or lying motionless on the surface of the water, and the sea snake
with its brilliant coating cannot fail to attract the eye. The Hawks-
bill turtle is prized for the horny epidermic plates of its outer casing
or “ carapace,” which form the tortoise shell of commerce. As nothing


of importance is to be seen until the ship approaches Lizard Island, it
may prove a subject of some interest to give a brief description devoid as
far as possible of any scientific terminology of the meaning of the Barrier
Reef, the method whereby it is constructed, and the organism to which
its construction is due. The Barrier Reef may be regarded as a series
of irregular and detached masses of coral, flanking each other and
resembling a gigantic wail of some 1300 miles in length and 600 to 1000
feet in depth, lying off the coast of North East Australia at a distance
from the land of from 10 to 120 miles, and extending from the latitude
of Break Sea Spit in 24° 30', to the southern shores of New Guinea.
Within the Barrier, is the moat or inner channel guarded completely
during low tide from the rolling swell of the Pacific Ocean. The depth of
the inner channel varies according to locality. From Cape York to
Hinchinbrook Island, a distance of about 560 miles, it varies from 10
to 20 fathoms, from that point to the soundings of the deep sea at the
Capricorn Channel from 20 to 60. Outside thg Barrier and as close
as soundings can be safely taken to the reef, the depth suddenly
descends to 600 and in many places to over 1000 feet. From this it is
plainly to be perceived that the line of the Barrier formed, in a past
age, the shores of the Australian continent, as the same remarkable
characteristics are observable on the west coast where no barrier exists,
but soundings of a similar nature correspond. To illustrate the matter
more clearly, let us picture the northern part of Australia with its
shores devoid of reefs raised from 600 to 1000 feet above the sea, and
in the position they probably appeared at the opening of the
Tertiary age, whereby the coast line would be represented by
the land underneath the present Barrier, and the Gulf of Car-
pentaria converted into a vast plain stretching away to New Guinea.
The habitat of the various forms of the reef constructing polyp, is confined
to the sea and beneath the level of the lowest tide, the most
vigorous invariably selecting positions exposed to the full force of the
breaking wave. Some, on the other hand, thrive at depths varying from
60 tol 20 feet, whilst others select soundings from 3 to 60 feet, others again
preferring positions where the reef is barely covered at low tide. No coral
polyp can exist for even a short time free from water or ocean spray,


and animated masses moisture and exposed to the full
rays of the sun quickly perish. Not possessing any organ of loco-
motion, its destiny is to attach itself to the rock or soil in positions
suitable to its habits, on which the reef building zoophyte com-
mences to lay the foundation of its mighty structure. Extracting by
its movable tentacles the corpuscles in the surrounding water requisite
for its subsistence and separating one by one the atoms of lime, either
in the form of sulphate, chloride, or carbonate, held in solution in
the ocean, it unites them, by the same powers of elaboration that
exists in all animals, into a symmetrical structure assuming a variety
of forms, Propagating invariably their kind by buds produced from
the sides of the original polyp, they become engrafted on each other
like the growth of plants, assuming generally dendroidal or tree
like forms resembling plants laden with flowers, whilst others partake
of the form of columns, domes, or hemispheres, of small or great
dimensions. Although each possesses its separate structure of
tentacles, mouth, and stomach, here its individuality ceases,
since the internal membrane and calcareous tissue of the various
organisms coalescing together, form a means of living communication
and nutrition to the whole community. The mass at first, pulpy
and gelatinous in appearance, gradually assumes a harder structure
and as the original polyps cease to exist, their calcareous skeleton forms
a basis for new generations to build upon. As time goes on and ages
elapse, the wdiole coast becomes fringed with a coral bed, resembling
a great flat of sandstone, and as the animated mass approaches the
surface it is forced for the preservation of its existence to extend itself
in a lateral form. Pure ocean water free from detritus being requisite
for their existence, reefs are situated a long distance from the
shore, leaving between them and the mainland a sort of moat or
channel. Fresh water laden with mud or sand, or even in its pure
state, is highly prejudicial to their existence, and wherever rivers of
any proportion flow T into the sea precipitous openings will there be found
even though the reef may now be situated some miles from the shore.
In a nautical point of view this is highly important, and up to the
present time a knowdedge of this circumstance seems to have entirely


escaped the attention of those marine surveyors, who have been en-
gaged in the survey of the N. E. coast of Australia. Further on atten-
tion will be drawn to the important advantages to be obtained from
the knowledge of the habits of the reef building zoophyte. The fringing,
reef now bordering our imaginary shores is'that assumed in numerous
parts of the globe, where geological evidence proves that the land is
either stationary or rising. Assuming now that the whole of North
Australia commenced gradually to subside and continued to do'
so until a subsidence equal to the elevation already alluded to-
had been arrived at, and bearing in mind the limited depth at
which reef building zoophytes can flourish, and their tendency
to maintain their existence by growing upwards in proportion
to the subsidence, it will plainly be percieved that in cycles of
time a barrier and inner channel of the gigantic proportions as now
existing would then be constructed. During this great period of time
an incessant struggle had been going on between the animated mass
of coral and the mechanical force of the waves, and wonder and aston-
ishment must be felt how such insignificant organisms could with-
stand the ceaseless breakers of the sea, which even the greatest works
of man would be vain to resist. Even at the present day this action
is continually going on, the waves of the sea tearing off huge fragments
from the outer walls, which damage is quickly repaired by myriads
upon myriads of frail animals engaged from age to age in this perpetual
conflict between mechanical and vital forces. Should the zoophytes
facing the outer -walls of the barrier from some cause or other cease to-
exist, there can be little doubt but that the sea would in a very brief
space of time wash away every vestige of its existence. Independent of
this action these industrious animals have other enemies to contend
against, in the form of shoals of fish, vermiform and molluscous-
animals that subsist on them, and the formidable Holuthurise which
swarm in every part of the reefs and whose bodies appear so well
adapted to subsist on this class of zoophyte. This fish forms an
article of important trade, and so far as is known is the only product
of commercial value derivable from the presence of this class of coral
reefs, the red coral of commerce being principally confined to the


coasts of Barbary and Algeria in the Mediterranean. These zoophytes,
however, deposit in the interior of the common tissue by which they
are united a calcareous matter which constitutes an interior stalk or
axis finely grooved and of a deep red colour, which is the red coral of
commerce. 1 his axis is invested with a cenosarc or coating also of abright
red colour and is studded with the apertures of the stellar zoophytes
which are, however, white. The Holuthurise is popularly known as the
sea cucumber, trepang, or Beche de mer (a corruption of the Portu-
guese Bicho do mar or sea worm), and is one of the most
highly organized of the Echinodermata. It is vermiform or slug
shaped about six to eight inches in length and two in breadth,
and effects its locomotion by rows of ambulaced tubed feet, or by the
alternate expansion and contraction of its worm like body. There are
various forms of Holuthurise, the best being obtained in one or two
fathoms deep on the reefs, the more inferior sorts being found on
the reefs at low water. _ Malays, Papuans, Polynesians and Australian
Aboriginals, are employed by the colonists in diving for these slugs
and as they are brought up, are cast into the hold of the launch
which when full is removed to the depot on some island in the straits,
where the intestines are removed on the same day, and the mass then boiled
and dried either artifically or by the heat of the sun. Some six tons are
required to make one ton of trepang or beche de mer. It forms a
staple export to China, where it is regarded as a kind of aphrodasaical
food, like edible birds’ nests, and fetches prices varying fron <£loo to
£l5O per ton. When well boiled and strengthened by good stock, it
forms a very palatable soup and by no means to be despised. It may be
here remarked that the edible birds’ nests which form the equivalent to
the trepang, are obtained on the rocky cliffs of Java, being constructed
by the Salangana, a bird allied to the swallow (Hirundo esculenta),
from sea weed softened in the stomach and then disgorged, new layers
being deposited from time to time until the nest assumes the proper
size. Pearl fishing has of late begun to assume an important feature,
but the operations, as yet, are principally confined to the more north-
ern parts of the Barrier and near New Guinea. Before quitting the
subject of corals and reefs it may be remarked, that the Australian


Barrier does not form an isolated case to bear out the hypothesis,
•established by the celebrated naturalist Dr. Darwin, of the sub-
sidence of the land, nor does the circumstance of an elevation
of 500 feet in the southern portion of the Australian Continent, during
or since Tertiary times, in any way invalidate it, as the reefs that
surround New Caledonia afford much more direct evidence on the
subject* These reefs extend 150 miles north on each side of the
submarine projection of the island, and the sea is always encroaching
on the northern end, towards which the mountains slope down.
But to resume the narrative. Proceeding down the inner channel
and passing, severally, Shelburne, Temple, Weymouth, Lloyd’s, and
Princess Charlotte’s Bays, with their accompanying Capes, Grenville,
Fair, Weymouth, Direction, and Melville, the vessel comes in sight of
Lizard Island (situated nearly midway between Point Lookout and
the Barrier Reef), a granite mass 1,200 feet high, and rendered re-
markable by the circumstance that Captain Cook ascended it after the
the repair of his vessel in the Endeavour River in 1769, to survey the
channel ahead. Little could he then imagine that a large and thriving
settlement would spring up in another century, upon the very spot
where he and his party had spent many anxious days in the repair of
their vessel, and that a line of mail steam ships should be plying
regularly on the seas that appeared to him so fraught with every
class of danger. At Cape Melville the Barrier Reef approaches within
twelve miles of the mainland. Rounding Capes Flattery and Bedford
a high hill of 1,500 feet, composed of granite and schistose rock
termed Mount Cook, may be seen, forming the southern landmark of the
entrance to the Endeavour river. On the southern bank of this river,
near the entrance, Captain Cook careened his ship, and he and his
•crew for a long time encamped in the neighbourhood, laboring under
all the uncertainty of their position, and formed in the year 1769 the
only settlement of white people which existed on the -whole Continent
■of Australia. This spot remained until very lately (1874) as
primitive as when Cook visited it; but the discovery of rich
gold deposits at the heads of the Palmer and other rivers, taking
their rise in the granges at the rear, soon brought it into im-


portance as being the nearest available seaport. Steam ships
and sailing vessels of every description were soon laid on to the
Endeavour River from all the southern ports, and in the course of a
few months a township some two miles in length took the place of the
aboriginal forest, which in commemoration of the great navigator was
termed Cook Town. It now forms a thriving settlement with many of
the accessories of colonial requirements ; the various banking institu-
tions of the Colonies beingrepresented by branches, and last but not least
it possesses a weekly newspaper. All this has been mainly brought about
by the suggestion contained in Mr. Daintree’s report, of 1870, on the
geological features of Northern Queensland, which ran as follows
“ It 18 now more tha n three years since I pointed out, in a private
letter to the Rev. W. B. Clarke, of Sydney, my conviction, partly from
personal inspection' and partly from the published statements of
skilled observers, that auriferous tracts would be found to extend from
the heads of the Gilbert by way of Kirchner’s Range, towards the En-
deavour River , and the contents of this letter were embodied, with
other matter, in a paper read before the Royal Society of New South
Wales soon after its receipt.” In consequence of this, the Administra-
tion of the Colony at that time equipped an expedition under the
leadership of Mr. W. Hann to prospect the country therein represented.
Ihe result of this, was a report confirming the opinion expressed in
Wi- Daintree s report, and the discovery of gold in situ in various
places in the bed of a river, which was termed, after the Premier,
the Palmer River. This river flows to the westward entering the
Gulf of Carpentaria. A rush of miners soon took place from the
southern gold fields to this distant Eldorado, and a few months of
practical prospecting developed a field scarcely equalled in Australia
for the purity of its gold and the richness of its alluvial deposits.
Since this state of excitement the result of the mineral yield has con-
firmed all the reports, and it is stated that during the nine months end-
ing September, 1874, no less than 78,000 ounces of gold, valued
at £1,314,000, have been shipped from Cook .Town, the entire
produce of the Palmer Diggings. The whole area of the upper
country representing the watersheds of the rivers flowing to the


westward are reported to be equally auriferous, and there is
every reason to believe that this locality will form a centre of
permanent mining industry, as the reefs appear to be as abundant in
the precious metal as the alluvial deposits. Cook Town is well
situated, possessing a sheltered harbour accessible at all times
and with a good depth of water. The river is of no great extent
the land in its neighbourhood being of a poor description, and, with the
exception of a very small portion, is valueless for the purpose of agri-
culture. Cook Town has probably a great future before it as an
emporium of mining industry, providing no other accessible port
should be opened up possessing nearer and better communication to the
upper auriferous country, and a telegraph line will soon? connect it
with the south, when it will then become the second port of call for
the line of mail steamers.
Pursuing now a southerly course for about fifty miles and
passing Weary Bay and Cape Tribulation, the latter conspicuous
by an isolated mountain in its rear 3300 ft. in height and called
Peter Botte, Cape Kimberley is approached which forms the northern
arm of Trinity Bay. In the north west bend of this bay a river of
some importance, called the Daintree, enters, navigable for some few
miles from its mouth for vessels of a fair draught of water. The land
adjacent to this river is reported to be of the richest description, and
especially suited to the growth of sugar cane, and as this river has
only lately been discovered it may be advisable to quote the re-
marks contained in the published reports of the leader of the expedi-
tion, Mr. G. E. Dalrymple, and of the Government Botanist, Mr.W. Hill.
‘"The description of the trees on the Upper Daintree and their
luxuriant growth would alone testify to the natural richness of the
soil. The extent of the land suitable for sugar cane, between the
river and the ranges, varies from a quarter of a mile to several miles
in breadth. From the farthest point we reached, the Palmer range
approaches near the river and appears to join on to another range
more to the westward. The latter appears to offer an easier means of
ingress to the Palmer Piver than any other place we had seen. From
what I saw of the Daintree River and of its upper valley, just referred to,


it appeared to me to be well adapted to support a large population and
to afford openings for prosecuting a greater variety of industrial pursuits
than any other of these coast rivers. There 's abundance of land for
the cultivation of sugar cane and of other tropica l productions ; there
is also a large quantity of pastoral land, and I feel convinced that from
this river will be found the best and easiest route to the newly dis-
covered mineral regions beyond the ranges, from which its head waters
flow.” Mr. Dalrymple says : “ I venture to say that no river reach
in North Australia possesses surroundings comb'o'ng so much of
distant mount am grandeur with local beauty and wealth of soil and
vegetation, hrom Cape Kimberley a south easterly course is pursued
for about fifty miles until Cape Grafton is reached, a little to the west
of which is Trinity Injet extending for some seven or eight miles'in-
land, Twenty miles to southward now lies a small island flanking-
the entrance to two rivers, known as the Mulgrave and Russell Rivers,
the land suitable for cultivation, however, being confined to narrow
belts. Twenty miles farther to the southward, in lat. 17.30, is the
entrance to the Johnstone River, the land upon which is thus described
in the official report: “From Kind’s Creek, on the Johnstone, up to
the head of boat navigation, a distance of twelve or fourteen miles,
the soil upon both banks of the river, and for a mile inland, I ascer-
tained to be of the best description, and may be described as consisting
of very rich yellow and brown loams adapted for the cultivation of
sugar.” Mr. Dalrymple thus describes the locality : “At a rough
calculation, not less than half a million of acres of soil unsurpassed by
any in the w-orld and fitted for tropical agriculture, and fully 300,000
acres of which are suitable for sugar, spread far around us, penetrated
in three different directions by navigable rivers, with a fine harbour.
We had suddenly come face to face with a true tropical Australia.”
Some five miles to the southward lies Mourilyan Harbour and
Moresby River, discovered by Captain Moresby of H.M.S. Basilisk, and
the land in its neighbourhood is reported to be well suited for the growth
of tropical and semi-tropical products, particularly coffee, cinnamon, &c.
Its capabilities as a harbour are represented by Mr. Dalrymple as
being completely landlocked, having a depth of five fathoms at its en-


trance and gradually deepening to seven fathoms at the anchorage,
about forty feet from the shore.” Twenty-five miles to the south-
ward Dunk Island is reached upon passing a series of islands called
the North and South Barnards. This island is about eight miles in
circumference, and is reported to contain a considerable area of first-
class agricultural land well suited for the growth of sugar cane
and coffee. The Government Botanist reports, “ that the largest
and finest shade trees, the Calophyllum, he had seen are growing on
the border of the beach, on the eastern side of the island, forming a
fine avenue for the natural promenade of the beach.” On the main
land are two other rivers also reported to be suitable fo the cultiva-
tion of sugar cane and coffee. Mr. Hill alluding to some magnificent
trees at a place called Marie Inlet, between Dunk Island and
Mourilyan Harbour, says : “ In the study and practice of my profes-
sion I have visited the Royal Parks and the most celebrated of those
belonging to the nobility and landed gentry of the mother country,
but the natural groves of Marie Inlet, to my taste, produced a far
more pleasing effect than any work of the landscape gardener’s art
which I have seen. At Dunk Island the Calophyllum surpasses all
other trees for shade, but here the Eugenia takes the lead. The trunk
is taller and stouter than any other that can be compared with it, its
branches extend a greater distance, the foliage is much closer, the
flowers give a better effect at a distance and it bears a fruit which is
often used as a relish.”
The above extracts, culled from the newly published report of
last year’s expedition to survey the coast, rivers, and inlets,
between Cardwell and the Endeavour River, offer a reasonable
probability that in the course of a brief period such rivers as the
Daintree and Johnstone will become the scenes of thriving industry,
and that coffee and sugar will eventually aid with the mineral wealth
of the interior in rendering these localities of great commercial im-
portance.
Passing Dunk Island the high peaks of Hinchinbrook, to the
southward, come prominently into view. This mountainous island,
lying about two to four miles from the mainland, forms the Hinchin-


brook channel, at the northern end of which is Port Hinchinbi’ook, and
on the mainland is situated the town of Cardwell, in lat. 18° 15', and
kmg, 146°, 3' E. This harbour represents one of the best if not the
best in Queensland, as it is easily approached in all weathers, and
has a depth of water varying from four to ten fathoms at low water,
the construction of a jetty some few hundred yards in length from the
shore, being all that is required to render it available for the largest
vessels. It is completely protected from the prevailing winds, and is
exposed only on its northern side, from which quarter, however, light
breezes generally prevail. At the rear of the town, and distant a few
miles rises a formidable range, an outlier of the main range in the rear,
forming on its western side the valley of the Herbert river, which
takes its rise at the junction of these ranges about fifty miles more to
the northward. The dividing range of the eastern and western
watersheds of North Queensland, rises to its highest elevation about
fifty miles due west of Cardwell, and forms the head watershed of the
River Burdekin, the largest river of North Eastern Queensland, and
of the Lynd, Einesleigh, and Gilbert rivers, flowing into the Gulf of
Carpentaria. This elevated land forms the picturesque country
described by Leichhardt the explorer, under the title of “ The Valley
of Lagoons,” which he describes in the following terms, “ Water, grass,
hills and mountains, plains and forest land, all the elements of a fine
pasturing country are here united, and forming the most picturesque
landscape we had met with.”
On the most northern plateau is situated Mount Lang, the chief of
a chain of extinct volcanoes of Tertiary age, the decomposed lavas
from which have rendered that country so favourable to the pastoral
occupant.
Cardwell, founded in 1863 by Mr. G. E. Dalrymple, is the outlet
for a considerable tract of mineral and pastoral country, and em-
braces the export trade of the gold fields situated on the Gilbert,
Einesleigh, and Etheridge rivers. From the metamorphic and basaltic
formation of a large portion of the country in its rear, and its well
known but at present dormant mineral resources, it is reasonable to
expect that Cardwell will eventually become a town of considerable


Maolure kMacionili.lTth lomlon.
CARDWELL
1 8 7 2.




importance, Notwithstanding the maiiy obstacles it has had to contend
with, it has shown a steady progress from its commencement, and its
exports and imports officially recorded for the year 1872, show the
amount of £55,726. Cardwell is at present the most northern point
on the eastern coast, reached by the Electric Telegraph wire, which is
in connection with the various colonies of Australia, and the Eastern
Companies Telegraph line to Europe. Formerly the Mail Company's
vessels made Cardwell the second port of call, but this regulation
has been for the present withdrawn, otherwise if it had been practi-
cable, .a short stay at the place to view the adjoining country, would
have well repaid the visitor for the loss of time occasioned thereby,
and a more suitable locality could not be selected for the stranger to
make his first acquaintance with the Colony of Queensland. From
Cardwell to the Valley of Lagoons is about 100 miles, during which
journey the traveller would become familiar with some of the most
striking, bold and romantic scenery that Queensland possesses, and at the
same time be familiarised with some of the difficulties colonists have
to contend with in opening up roads from the coast to the interior,
over mountainous and almost impassable localities. To the sportsman
good shooting may also be depended upon, and it was in this neigh-
bourhood that the splendid specimen of Cassowary was obtained,which
adorns one of the cases of the British Museum. Hinchinbrook
Channel extends about thirty-five miles to the southward, and is
navigable for coasting vessels, and presents a scene of wild and varied
interest. The Herbert river, already alluded to, enters the channel
about four miles from its southern junction with the sea, and is also
available for coasting craft. This river, as it reaches the lowlands,
passes through a considerable area of rich agricultural land, the
greater portion of which has been taken up for the purpose of sugar
cultivation, for which object it is reputed to be most suitable. At
the present time large plantations are in full working order on its
banks ; the produce of the cane having exceeded that of any other
district m the colony. The lofty mountains that surround the Hinchin-
brook Channel and the Vale of the Herbert cause this locality to represent
the area of maximum rain fall in the colony, its annual average varying


from 90 to 100 inches. In the mouth of January, which is the
wettest month, 36 inches of rain have frequently fallen, the driest
month September being represented by less than half an inch of fall. In
consequence of this abundant moisture combined with a favourable
soil and meridian sun, every article of tropical product grows with
amazing luxuriance, and the banana, pine apple and other tropical
fruits, with Indian corn and sugar cane, may here be seen under the
most favourable conditions. The passage between the south part of the
Hinchinbrook Island and the main land is available for coasting
vessels, and is generally used except when a rough easterly sea causes
a heavy surf to break upon the bar.
Proceeding now in a southerly direction the ship soon comes
abreast of the north eastern point of Hinchinbrook Island, which is
termed Cape Sandwich. From this to the southern point of the island
the bold land furrowed by deep ravines and precipitous gullies
surmounted with jagged and precipitous peaks, form a coup d’ooil
of rugged grandeur and in some degree realizes the character
of the scenery that prevails in the Hinchinbrook Channel itself.
A series of islands called the Palm Islands, the eastern outliers
of Halifax Bay may now be seen rising into view on the ship s
course. The passage between these islands and the main land is
that generally preferred, as it is protected from easterly winds. From
these islands, Magnetic Island to the southward, is distinctly visible.
Its bold granite peaks of nearly 2000 feet in height, lie in front of
Cleveland Bay, the eastern and western channels of which form the Port
of Townsville, the second port of call for the mail steamers. The western
channel and under the lee of Magnetic Island is that selected
for sea-going ships as it is well protected from the prevailing
winds of S.E. and E., and exposed only on its northern side. Round-
in„- Bay Rock (a 'small islet about a mile and a half from the west
point of the island) on its eastern side, the anchorage ground is entered
upon, and the shore is approached. About eight miles distant the town
of Townsville—in lat. 19°. 15'. and long. 146°. 50'—may now
be distinctly seen lying at the base of Castle Hill, which
rises in its rear to about 1000 feet. Coasting vessels, in


¥aclure Bf¥aodonalci,lirt London
ESPLANADE TOWNSVILLE in 1872. (now omit onrer




ordinary weather, lay directly off the town, those of light
draught entering a small harbour at the town, formed by one
of the outlets of a larger river entering the bay a little farther to
the south and termed Ross River. Of all the northern settlements
of Queensland, Townsville must take pre-eminence for the steady pro-
giess it has made since its first establishment. Discovered in 1864
by Mr. J. M. Black, and selected by him as a most suitable port of
outlet for the extensive country that lay to the westward of it, it soon
began, notwithstanding much opposition, to take its place with much
oldei and more favored settlements. Named by the Government
Townsville after the Hon. Robert Towns, his partner in his
pastoral operations, it was proclaimed a port of entry in 1865,
the Customs receipts for that year amounting to £753, and its gross
exports and imports to £8,715. In the year 1872 the last official
return represents the Customs receipts at £61,600, and the exports
and imports at £009,109. This p>ort is the outlet for an extensive
pastoral country extending to the heads of the Flinders River and
of the Charters Towers, Ravenswood, Broughton, Cape, and Star gold
fields. The Ravenswood field, distant about 100 miles, possesses a
numerous population and may be considered as the second most im-
poitaut in Queensland, since mining industry has there commenced
to “Shinns a permanent character. Two newspapers dispense also the
weekly pabulum to its inhabitants. Mining on the Ravenswood is
canied on by the appliances of extensive machinery for crushing and
extracting the gold, but as the precious metal is combined in large
proportions with iron and copper this process of extraction has not
met with that success which the character of the stone warranted.
Instances are known where large returns have been obtained, as
on one reef 901 tons of quartz yielded, in crushing, 5,566
ounces of gold, but in such cases the stone may generally be
considered as obtained above the water level. Many of the
reefs are known to contain the enormous quantity of from twelve
to fourteen ounces of gold to the ton of stone; but rarely more
than from one to two ounces can be extracted. What is required to
render the Queensland auriferous ree£ the richest in Australia is a


more scientific method of manipulation. By open air roasting and the
use of Reverberatory furnaces for fusion, a decomposition of the crude
ores might be brought about, ■which would not only free the gold
from its impurities but also render the whole of the copper available j
the cost of which process might in some instances be entirely liquidated
by the sale of the latter metal. The gold on these several fields is allied
with silver and not of the pure description of that of the Palmer
River. Tin in payable quantities is reported to have been discovered
in the neighbourhood of the Star River, as well as copper lodes, but the
permanent character of these has not yet been ascertained The country
in the neighbourhood of Townsville being chiefly composed of granitic
debris is of inferior character, and in consequence of the limited rain
fall, which rarely exceeds forty inches annually, is unsuitable for any
kind of tropical agriculture. Townsville is governed by a municipality,
possesses a School of Art, a Hospital, boasts of two weekly newspapers,
and is connected with the south by means of the telegraph
wire. A regular line of steamships trade between this port, Brisbane
and Sydney, to the south, and Cardwell and Cook Town, to the
north, besides numerous sailing vessels engaged in the coasting
trade. To render the outer harbour available for sea-going ships to
discharge their cargo without lightering, a sea-wall would have to be
raised upon the banks, dry at low water, which extend about If miles
to the northward of the western promontory of the bay, from which a
pier run out at right angles to the wall to a distance of 1000 yards,
would give accommodation to sea-going ships with a depth of twenty-
four feet at low water springs, a line of railway of about seven miles
connecting the pier with the township.
From the Port of Townsville an easterly course is taken passing
the high land of Cape Cleveland, which forms the eastern arm of
Cleveland Bay, and distant about three and a half miles to the east of
this cape are some isolated rocks covered at high water, bearing the
name of the Salamander Reef. Bearing now r more to the southward the
vessel passes for some tw T enty-five milesacrossthe head of Bowling Green
Bay, which is about fourteen miles in depth, at the S.W. corner of
which may be seen an isolated range about 4000 feet in height, named






Mount Elliott, which formed for a long time after the country was
settled a refuge for the hostile aborigines of the coast. The land at
Cape Bowling Green rises only some few feet above the level of the
sea, and a long sandy spit runs off from it, covered at high water.
The Queensland Government is constructing a lighthouse upon
this point which will prove of very great service to the navigation of
this part of the coast. From this Cape to the high and precipitous
cliffs of Gape Upstart, 2000 feet in height, which cape forms the
eastern arm of Upstart Bay, is about thirty-five miles. Directly to
the westward of this and on the low lying opposite shore enters the
River Burdekiu, the largest of all the Queensland rivers, having an
extent of watershed in a north and south direction ©f over 450 miles
It embraces as its tributaries, the Belyando, Suttor, Bowen, and
Bogie Rivers, to the southward; the Cape, Campaspie, Clarke, Fletcher,
and Lolworth Rivers to the westward; and the Fanning, Star, and
Perry Rivers to the northward. It has its source near the Valley of
Lagoons, as already mentioned. In consequence of its rapid descent, it
is fordable at most points during the dry season, and during extremely
dry weather the bed is sometimes completely dry, the stream flowing
under the surface, magnificent reaches of water, however, remaining
permanent, wherever a wall of rocks crosses the river. Draining so
large an extent of country, the river rapidly assumes an altered form
when the rains set in, a rise of seventy feet in height having been
known-, to take place within 50 miles of the month in twenty .four
hours, and where the width was not less than 1000 yards. One hundred
and fifty miles up, its width is over 500 yards, and throughout its
course its banks are invariably clothed with trees of magnificent pro-
portions. When in full flood, bearing upon its bosom huge trunks of
trees and other debris it forms a noble stream, and it cannot but be re-
garded with regret that so large a volume of water cannot be
used fox any practical purpose of internal communication. Since
recent times it has changed its course as it approached the sea,
the low spit at Bowling Green Bay having formed in past times
its principal outlet, and traces are now plainly perceptible in the
delta of this course having been taken. Blocked up probably by


debris, it forced another opening to the eastward, which forms now its
present channel. When in past geological age the Barrier reef fringed
the Australian shore, an opening several miles in width with preci-
pitous sides must have been formed, to permit the egress of this great
river to the ocean, and as the land subsided to its present position, the
break in the reef would probably still be maintained. A thorough survey
of the barrier at this point will no doubt confirm this conclusion, which,
if fully borne out, must prove of incalculable benefit to navigation, as it
would afford a clear and safe opening through the barrier to seaward, or
vice versfi, and possess the great advantage of being easily distinguishable
by the bearings of the headland of Mount Elliott, and Capes Cleveland
and Upstart. From Cape Upstart to Cape Edgecombe, a distance of
thirty-five miles, Abbot Bay and Point are passed, and Edgecombe
Bay is entered, on the western shore of which a light-house may be
seen, marking the northern entrance to the inlet, sheltered by Stone
Island, which forms the harbour of Port Denison in lat. 20°.
On the northern shore of this inlet is situated the town of Bowen,
which for advantage of situation and picturesqueness of scenery
around, surpasses any of the towns of Queensland. The harbour is
well sheltered, and there is a fine commodious jetty, extending out
several hundred yards, at which coasting vessels can lay at all
times and discharge. Established in 1861, Bowmen progressed
with wonderful rapidity during the first few years of its existence,
its combined exports and imports having in the year 1865 reached
£136,263, but in consequence of the establishment of the port
of Cleveland Bay to the northward, these figures have been
gradually reduced year by year to £59,707 for the year 1872. It
forms, however, the outlet for a large tract of pastoral country, and
for the Mount Wyatt and some other minor gold fields, and should the
coal deposits on the Bowen River, which are of considerable area, prove
on examination of commercial value and easy to be w r orked,it is evident
that Bowen has a prosperous future before it. It also possesses a con-
siderable area of good agricultural land in its vicinity suitable for the
cultivation of sugar cane and cotton, which might be rendered of
certain importance, providing a cheap system of irrigation could be


adopted to counterbalance the lack of a sufficient annual rain fall,
which experience up to the present time has proved to be the case.
Bowen is in telegraphic communication with the towns north and south
•and a well-conducted newspaper is published weekly. It is governed
by a municipality, and possesses a school of arts, hospital, court-
house, &c., and is for the present the residence of the Judge of
the Northern districts.
Leaving Port Denison, Edgecombe Bay (having a depth of
about fifteen miles) is soon crossed, and the high precipitous
and inhospitable cliffs of Gloucester Island being rounded, a south-
erly course is now maintained for some distance a-head. There
are two passages to the southward, the one keeping the channel between
the main land and the series of islands that lie off the coast almost pa-
rallel with the land for about 150 miles, and the other, that between these
islands and the Barrier reef. On the latter course, little of interest is to
be noted, the remarkable configurations of the various islands forming
the only incidents to break the monotony of the voyage. The former
passage however, is that generally taken by all coasting vessels and
steamers engaged in the northern trade, since it is well guarded from the
swell of the sea by the archipelago of islands lying to the eastward of
it, and moreover it is highly picturesque and interesting. Proceeding
along this route the Whitsunday passage is soon entered, flanked by
Hook, Whitsunday, and Passage Islands on the east, and the bold
mainland surmounted by Mount Dryander of considerable elevation on
the west. An inlet in the mainland, called Port Molle, Arcing Whitsun-
day island, is well worthy of a visit to those who may have the oppor-
tunity of doing so, as it is charmingly situated, completely, sheltered from
every quarter by a series of islands, rich in vegetation, interlac-
ing each other, but the absence of any available land for settle-
ment on its shores has, up to the present time, rendered it
unoccupied, Pentecost Island, resembling a lion couchant, and the
Sir James Smith’s group of islands are then passed, and Repulse Bay
is opened to view; then Cape Hillsborough, with the Cumberland group
to the eastward, and the latitude of 21 Q 10' is reached, at which spot
on the south bank of the Pioneer River, the important settlement of


Mackay is situated, tlie most progressive of all the northern possessions,
so far as the cultivation of the sugar cane is concerned.
The district in the neighbourhood of Mackay, and bordering the
Pioneer River, contains large areas of rich alluvial deposits of considerable
depth, and in 1865 cane growing first commenced to assume a practical
form, since which time it has been yearly increasing with rapid strides.
Independent of the suitability of soil, the climate of Mackay, free from
frost, and with a regular average annual rainfall, has been found to be
most favourable to the production of a large amount of saccharine juice
in the cane, and on some plantations, where effective machinery is em-
ployed, as much as tons per acre have been obtained. To those in-
terested in sugar cultivation, there is no part‘of the colony, more-
worthy of a visit, and an inspection of some of the extensive plantations*,
with their complete mechanical appliances for crushing and refining
the sugar, and for the conversion of the molasses into rum, will
well repay the visitor. At the present time there are several
thousand acres under crop. Independent of these advantages
Mackay forms the outlet for an important pastoral district at
the heads of the Isaac and other rivers, in the Leichhardt district,
and if greater facility was offered, in the form of good roads to the
interior, a much larger trade would be carried on. During the year 1872
its combined exports and imports were £55,702. The river is difficult
of access during certain winds, but in ordinary weather the port is-
easily made, as the rise and fall of tide is from twelve to sixteen feet.
Improvements are being made to render the river more accessible,
which, when completed, will add materially to the prosperity of the
settlement, A small flat island lying a few miles to the eastward of
the entrance to the Pioneer River serves as a place of call to those
vessels not entering the river, and is now used as a depot for the
coasting and mail service, a steam tender connecting the island with
the port. South of Mackay about thirty-five miles, is the range
terminating seaward in the high land of Cape Palmerston which separ-
ates the watersheds of the Burdekin and Fitzroy Rivers, extending
in a south west direction to the 24th degree of latitude, then noi’th
west to the 21st degree, and thence in a westerly direction to the


boundary of tlie colony, separating the waters flowing gulfwise from
those that flow to the south. This natural boundary divides the
colony into, what may be termed, the two geographical divisions of
tropical and semi-tropical. It is also remarkable as representing
the limit to the profitable operation of wool growing ; experience
having proved that the Merino sheep do not thrive north of that
line, the fleece becoming year by year lighter and lighter, and the
wool deprived in a great measure of that yolk which gives to it
its softness and elasticity. In support c f this important observa-
tion it is only necessary to state that prior to the year 1868 the
majority of the stations occupied north of this line w y ere stocked
by Merino sheep, the descendants of the flocks of Southern Queens-
land and numbered, in the year 1867, over three-quarters of a
million. Five or six years experience having thus tested the
capabilities of tropical Australia, as defined by the above limits, for
the successful growth of wool, it was found in many cases that on
country which would have been considered of the best description else-
where, the returns were not commensurate with the outlay, and
in many instances very heavy pecuniary losses were sustained by
those who had sought to acclimatise the merino to these northern
latitudes. The result could not be better shown than that in the
beginning of 1873 (according to the returns in Pugh’s Almanac of
1874) there were only thirty-six thousand sheep on the area where but
a few years ago over three-quarters of a million had depastured. On the
other hand, there is every reason to suppose that sheep of a different
class —large framed like the Leicester and South Down, and bred specially
for the carcase, and not for the wool, would prove a most remunerative
operation,as sheep for killing purposes are not now to be obtained at
any of the centres of population in the northern district, except from
stations several hundred miles to the Southward. A cross between the
fertile Chinese sheep and the Leicester, might retain many of thequalities
of the latter with the profitable advantages of the former. Cattle breed-
ing however, has atall timesproved a most successful industry in tropical
Australia ; no matter whether on the coast, uplands, or rolling plains
of the western district, and must, as population increases in the mining


areas and the stations become fenced in, assume much more im-
portant proportions. Even before the discovery of gold and when
there was no other market than the boiling down establishments, the
fattening properties of the grasses had been fully sustained by the
great yield of tallow 7 obtained, herds frequently averaging as high as
400 lbs per head of that product. Independent of the mining industry,
which must under any circumstances be regarded as the main stay of the
northern districts together with that of horse and cattle breeding, the
cultivation of the sugar cane, coffee, and other tropical products, must
before many years make considerable headway. The large areas of rich
agricultural land, already alluded to, possessing the incalculable ad-
vantages of easy seaboard communication offer a field for the develop-
ment of these industries, and whatever doubts may arise about the
cultivation of the sugar cane in latitudes subject to frosts, there can
be none in regard to those areas which being situated on the coast are
entirely free from that most serious drawback. The question, however,
to be dwelt upon before venturing into this class of industry- is the all
important one of labour. Up to the present time the labour employed
on nearly all the sugar plantations is that of the Polynesian Islanders,
imported from the South Sea Islands under a three years’ agreement,
and upon condition of a return passage being paid to the islands on the
•expiration of that term. The Tanna, Solomon, and other islands adjoin-
ing New Caledonia have supplied the greater proportion of the islanders,
which class of labour has proved as satisfactory as could be expected.
In consequence of the villanies practised by many of the adventurers
engaged in importingthis class of labour, together with the opposition and
difficulties thrown in the w 7 ay by those who are non-producers of tropi-
cal products, the planter has been frequently placed in very great, and
often, hazardous straits for want of labour, especially as the neigh-
bouring gold fields offer at all times a refuge for those who prefer a
roving and independent to a settled and stead} 7 life. Hopes w T ere,
for some time, maintained that the Act for the importation of the
Indian coolie, which merely lacks the appointment of an agent in
India, would have been put into force, but considering the divided
opinion of the colonistsou this question, and the bearing of geographical
position, the Act is likely to remain a dead letter.


The planter must, therefore, rely for the future either upon white
labour or turn his attention to the importation of the Chinese coolie,
it is the opinion of many, that white labour is not capable of contending
with the constant exposure to a tropical and vertical sun, and that at the
very hottest period of the year; but viewing the hearty manner in
which the diggers on the gold fields, even as far north as the Palmer
River, brave this exposure, it is questionable whether this view can now
be sustained. Labour becomes rather a question of price than colour,
since the planter is compelled to have labour that he can depend upon
at certain seasons, and which, it is said, he could not afford to retain
during the whole period of the year. It is therefore evident, that if
sugar growing is to form one of the great staple industries of Queens-
land, and to attract capital to its shores for that purpose, this question
of labour must be satisfactorily settled. With the advantages of direct
monthly communication to Hong Kong by means of the steamships of
the Eastern and Australian Mail Steam Company, it would appear
feasible by the appointment of an emigration agent at that port, nomi-
nated by the Queensland Government, to engage Chinese Coolies
specially indented for by the planters, for a term of three or five years,
the employer undertaking to pay the passage to and fro by this line
of vessels, and engagements made in this form to be binding under the
Master and Servants’ Act of the colon}'. To encourage an indiscrimi-
nate immigration of this class would not be for the beneficial interest or
moral well-being of the colony, as it labours under the serious draw-
back of being confined to the male population only; females not
being allowed to emigrate according to the laws of China. This evil
has entailed upon Chinese emigration special regulations, as in the
United States and Victoria, and it appears a serious omission on the
part of the framers of the treaty with that Power, to have neglected
the important question of free emigration of both sexes from its shores,
oven on the ground of humanity (which by the way is never thought
of in matters of treaties), as infanticide of the female children on that
account exists throughout China to a frightful extent. On the other
hand, viewing the question from the stand-point of white labour, with
all the appliances as far as possible of labour saving machinery being


employed, there is reason to believe that if the experiment was fairly
tried and the planter satisfied with a fair profit, it would succeed,,
even on the matter of economy, for there can be little doubt that a
white man can do the work of at least two if not three islanders. Taking
into account the low price of the land in the first instance, the planter
possesses advantages on this ground alone, which should enable him to
compete with other free sugar producing countries, as the Mauritius,
where the value of Indian coolie labour is comparatively reasonable,
but the price of land thirty times dearer than in Queensland. How this
would apply to countries where a kind of forced labour is still supplied,
as in the Dutch settlements, is more difficult of sohition. It must, how-
ever, be borne in mind that the position of Queensland is exceptional
and highly favoured, being the only colony of all the Australias capable
of producing sugar. It therefore has its market at its own doors, and
that to such an extent that must eventually drive out all foreign im-
ported sugars, whether produced by free or semi-free labcui.
From Cape Palmerston the inner course continues to the S.E.,having
the Pine Peak, the two Percy Islands, and High Peak Island on the
easterL side, and Broad Sound and Shoalwater Bay with the outlying
islands of the Beverly Gi’oup to the southward and westward,
and continuing in that direction unites, off Cape Townshend,
with the course generally taken by those who prefer the outer passage.
On the western side of Broad Sound is situated the township of St.
Lawrence, on a salt water creek of that name which of late has come
into some importance on account of its being selected as the port of
shipment for the ore obtained from the rich copper mines of Peak
Downs situated about 100 miles to the westward of this port. These
mines discovered in 1862 have already produced copper to the value
of over one million sterling. They are situated on the Peak Downs—
an extensive volcanic area of Tertiary age ( Miocene ), extending in
a north and south direction, elevated about 2000 fret above the
level of the sea, and watered by the northern tributaries of the Fitzroy
River. The township of Clermont, within a few miles of the copper
mines, is an important centre of commercial communication, and
within a limited radius several minor gold fields have been discovered


and are being actively developed. Clermont has a considerable popula-
tion, and a weekly newspaper published there represents the respective
interests of the district. Independent of the mineral wealth of this
locality, it is also celebrated for the richness of its pasturage, and
stations situated on the downs or within the volcanic area realise prices
almost equal to those of the best stations in the colony. At the present
time it depastures nearly one million sheep, but when the stations are
fenced in, it is calculated to support double that number. The great
drawback the settlers have at present to contend with is the scarcity of
water in the dry season, but the construction of dams to
preserve the same will soon set aside this serious impediment. St.
Lawrence forms the outlet for a portion of this district, its imports and
exports amounting, in 1872, to £134,011. At the rear, however, of the
settlement is a high range known as Connor’s Range, which is difficult
of ascent and debars many from using the port, preferring the longer
and more tedious route to Rockhampton ; and as soon as the railway
from Rockhampton is extended to Peak Downs, St. Lawrence will be
deprived of a great portion of its trade and have to rtiy solely upon
that of the country situated at the heads of the Isaac’s and Cooper’s
Creeks. It, however possesses some fine coast country admirably
adapted for cattle farming, and the herds of cattle in this neighbourhood,
are considered some of the best in the colony. Broad Sound is remark-
able for the extraordinary rise of tides compared with the coast north
and south of infrequently the tides being known to rise as high as thirty-
six feet. This is in a great measure owing to the peculiar configuration
of the land, which here takes an easterly direction, forming the two large
bays of Broad Sound and Shoal water thereby acting as a barrier to the
flow of the tide coming from the northward, added to the circumstance
that the tides to the southward of Cape Townshend flow from the
south, and meeting the northern flow pile the water up, as it were, at
this junction. In consequence vessels approaching St. Lawrence re-
quire to be provided with extra strong warps and cables to meet any
eventuality that might arise. Near Thirsty Sound—a passage con-
necting these two bays—a copper lode of some thickness crops out on
the coast and the beach is strewed with great blocks of ore, which


are now being collected and the lode developed by the owner o the
property.
The inner and outer tracks being now united, the vessel steers
a southerly course, passing Port Bowen, Cape Manifold, and the
Keppel Isles, and entering Keppel Bay, casts anchor near the lightship,,
about one mile and a half from the shore. Here a steam tender is wait-
ing to take off’ the mails, cargo, or any passengers whose business leads
them to Rockhampton. Keppel Bay is sheltered from the prevailing winds
by Curtis Island, and on its west side debouches the River Fitzroy—the
largest tidal river of Queensland —the entrance to which may be dis-
tinguished by a high hill, known as Broad Mount, situated on its
northern bank. The town of Rockhampton—the third largest in
Queensland—is situated on the south bank of the Fitzroy, about forty
miles from the entrance and at the head of navigation, and is accessible
to all vessels not exceeding twelve feet draught; the river being barred
by a series of flats which at low water have only eighteen inches of
water upon them, but through which a narrow channel has been cut,,
giving an additional depth of abouttwofeet. With further improvements
to clear the river of these obstructions, it is probable that several feet
more may be eventually obtained. The Fitzroy drains an extent of
country almost equal to that of the Burdekin, extending for 350 miles,
in a north and south direction and about 250 miles east and west, in-
cluding the whole area known as the Leichhardt district, having for its.
tributaries the Mackenzie and Isaac’s Rivers, with Cooper’s and
Theresa Greeks from the north, the Nogoa from the west, and the Comet
and Dawson from the south. Rockhampton situated on the high banks
of the Fitzroy, which at the township is about 600 yards in width, has-
a population of over 6,000, and is governed by a municipality. The
town is well laid out in rectangular blocks, having wide streets and
pavements, with numerous well-built and substantial private and
public buildings, and is lighted with gas. Amongst the numerous and
conspicuous structures may be mentioned the branches of the various
Australian Banks, Hotels, Hospital, School of Arts, Gaol, and places of
Public Worship. Two newspapers are published there, each three
times in the week. It forms also the terminus of the Great Northern


Railway, which, at present, extends as far as Westwood, a distance of
thirty miles, but is being rapidly pushed on to a place called Lurline,
at the junction of the Comet and Mackenzie Rivers, to the westward,
a distance of 110 miles, which it is contemplated to extend to Cler-
mont, Peak Downs, and so tap the entire trade of that fertile locality.
The exports and imports for the year 1872 amounted to £727,429,
the half of its exports being represented by wool, of which staple it ex-
ported four and a half million pounds. In the neighbourhood of the
town are several minor gold fields which are being industriously de-
veloped, as the Calliope, Raglan, Crocodile, Rosewood, Cawarral and
Canoona, all within a radius of fifty miles, >and outcrops of copper
ore have also been discovered in the neighbourhood. But the great
advantage that Rockhampton possesses and which marks it as of great
future importance, is the large extent of rich pastoral country
appertaining to it, extending as far to the westward as the Alice, Barcoo,
and Thompson Rivers in the Mitchell district, a distance of 600 miles,,
and including almost the whole of the Leichhardt district, upon which
alone upwards of two million and a half of sheep are now depastured
independent altogether of large herds of horses and cattle. Numerous
outcrops of coal have also been discovered, extending along the leading
tributaries of the Fitzroy, evidencing a bed of coal extending over some
thousands of square miles, but which must remain dormant and unde-
veloped until the railway system of the colony is much more extended.
Meat preserving, in tins, for export, has of late become a branch of
industry at Rockhampton ; but with the rapid increase of population,
it is questionable whether the price of cattle will long remain at a
rate sufficient to allow of remunerative returns. Viewing the position
of Rockhampton and the extensive undeveloped resources at its com-
mand, its future importance cannot bo disputed, as it possesses advan-
tages almost equal to the Capital itself. The Fitzroy marks the zoological
division of the habitat of the alligator, since all the rivers to the north-
wai’d of it contain this saurian, whilst south of the tropical
line it is rarely, if ever, to be found. The alligator of Queensland
frequently attains the length of over twenty feet, and although ex-
tremely shy when on the land is a dangerous creature in the water,.


and to be carefully avoided. It seizes its prey generally when near
deep water.
From Keppel Bay to Brisbane there are three routes, each
possessing special advantages. By the first, a course is taken
from Keppel Bay in an E.N.E. direction for about eighty miles, passing
the northern extremities of Curtis Island, and of the coral reefs, known
as the Capricorn Group, when a south-easterly course takes the vessel
through the Capricorn Channel, formed by the latter reefs on the one
side and the continuation of the Great Barrier which terminates
in Swain’s Reefs on the other, into the Pacific Ocean; the soundings
suddenly changing frem 60 to over 200 fathoms. By the second, a course
is taken through the channel formed by the coral reefs of the Capricorn
and Bunker’s Groups on the one side and the mainland on the other.
Passing Cape Capricorn (the north-east point of Curtis Island), Port
Curtis, Bustard Head (upon which a lighthouse, elevated at 320 feet,
is placed, the light flashing and being eclipsed every alternate
minute), and thence across the heads of Harvey’s Bay the Pacific
Ocean is reached by the channel known as Curtis Channel, formed
by Lady Elliott Island—of coral formation—on the north side (upon
which a lighthouse, elevated about sixty-five feet, the light flashing
at intervals of half a minute, is placed, and visible about ten miles
distant), and the Break Sea Spit on the south. This spit, covered
at high water, runs out about twenty miles to the northward of Great
Sandy Island, and upon the high land of Sandy Island a light-
house of the first order is placed, elevated about 400 feet above the
sea, the light of which attains its greatest brilliancy every two minutes
and is visible twenty-eight miles distant. The width of the Capricorn
Channel is about sixty miles, and is that generally used by vessels pro-
ceeding directly to the northern and southern ports, the width of Curtis
Channel being about twenty-eight miles, and that generally used by
vesselsinthe Rockhampton or Harvey’s Bay trade. The third and Smooth
Channel route is that generally used by vessels in the coasting trade.
Proceeding from Bustard Head down Harvey’s Bay and through the
channel formed by Great Sandy Island and the mainland (bearing the
term Wide Bay Harbour), the Pacific Ocean is reached by the


Waclute Jr Macdonald. Lith London
W'H A R F


■
»


passage of the Wide Bay entrance at the southern extremity
of Sandy Island. This entrance is often rendered dangerous, especially
in the summer months, by the short abrupt sea forming heavy rollers
upon the bar, in which case vessels are compelled to take the more
circuitous route, by way of the Break Sea Spit. The mail steamer
takes the second of these routes, and rounding Break Sea Spit takes
a southerly course for about 200 miles, passing Indian Head (the most
eastern point of Great Sandy Island), Double Island Point (marking
the entrance to Wide Bay Harbour), Noosa Head and some remark-
able hills on the mainland, resembling the exterior of a glass manufac-
turing furnace, when Cape Moreton, the northern point of Moreton
Island, comes into view, surmounted by a lighthouse of the first order.
Passing along the western shore of Moreton Island, Moreton Bay
is entered and the anchorage ground for ocean going vessels is soon
reached, where a steam tender is waiting to carry passengers, mails,
&c. to Brisbane, the capital of the colony, a distance of about thirty
miles. As several places of importance are passed in the last mentioned
of the three routes, a brief account of their features are necessary to
give an adequate view of the relative importance of the several sea
coast and river towns of Queensland.
The first place of interest on this route is the harbour of Port
Curtis, into which the Calliope and Boyne rivers enter, and upon the
shores of which the town of Gladstone is situated. The harbour of
Port Curtis is without doubt the best that the Colony possesses,
well sheltered from every quarter by Facing and Curtis islands, of
spacious extent, and affording a depth of water for the largest vessels
afloat. Up to the present time this magnificent harbour has been in
a great measure neglected by reason of the more advantageous position
that Rockhampton possesses for the trade, which at present may be
considered as of a special local character, the great proportion of the
rich produce of the district being transmitted coastwise, at consi-
derable expense, to Brisbane or Sydney, wdiich places form the ports
of departure for ocean-going vessels. As this country gradually
becomes richer, and the resources of the district more developed, it
will be enabled to free itself from the incubus that compels its


inhabitants to deprive themselves in a great measure of the direct-
trade to Europe ; but when that time comes Gladstone is destined to
assume a most important position., in consequence of its connection
with so commodious and well-sheltered a harbour, and imagination
may safely picture in the limited future a jetty running out into Pert
Curtis harbour, where ocean-going ships may discharge and take in
their cargoes, and a line of railway to Rockhampton to connect it with
the railway communication of the interior. Gladstone, distant about
ninety miles from Rockhampton, is governed by a municipality, is well
laid out, and commands a pictm-esque view. Its trade is at present
limited, the exports and imports for 1872 amounting to £21,72d. It
is the outlet to a certain extent of pastoral country in the Port Curtis
district, and in its neighbourhood the Calliope and Raglan
gold fields are being worked, and a copper lode at Kroombit is
also being developed. Vessels of considerable draught can lay along-
side the wharf at Gladstone, and in consequence the port has been
used for some time for supplying the French Colony at New Caledonia
with cattle. A communication for vessels of limited draught between
Port Curtis and Keppel Bay is practicable by the channel formed
between the former and the mainland, which bears the name of
the Narrows. Gladstone is the first port south of the tropic of
Capricorn; Rockhampton the first north of that line, the one being in
the tropical, the other in the temperate zone. Seventy miles south-
east of Gladstone is Baffle Creek, a port of entry, but its trade is
confined to the export of tallow, the produce of the boiling down
establishments on its banks, and in 1872 it exported produce to the
value of £15,26-5. Thirty miles further, along the coast, the Burnet
river enters the sea, upon the banks of which is Bundaberg township,
about nine miles from the entrance, accessible to vessels of ordinary
draught at high tide. Established only in 1871, it already possesses
several hundred inhabitants, and being the outlet for a fair tract of
pastoral country, and for the coal mines at Bingera and other localities,
and the rich copper mine at Mount Perry (situated about forty miles
to the westward, and reported to be as rich in copper as that of the
Peak Downs itself) together with the numerous sugar plantations on


MARYB OROUGH
I 3 7 4.


■


the banks of the river, its future progress may be regarded with cer-
tainty. The Burnet river is one of considerable dimensions, since to
its head waters is upwards of 200 miles, having the Boyne as a tributary
to the south, and the Auburn to the north, ani it waters the whole
area known as the Burnet district, which depastures a large number
of horses, cattle, and sheep.
Fifty miles farther to the southward the river Mary enters
Harvey’s Bay and the township of Maryborough is situated on the
north bank of that river, about thirty miles from the entrance, and
accessible to all vessels of ordinary draught. Maryborough, a muni-
cipal township, is one of the most thriving in the Colony, possessing a
population of over 5,000 inhabitants, is well laid out in rectangular
form, possesses many good public and private buildings, and prides
itself on being enabled to support three newspapers, one of
which is published three times in the week. Its combined exports
and imports for the year 1872 were <£383,826, the value of wool only
representing one fifth of the yearly export, the balance being made up
of other products, as gold, sugar, &c. Maryborough may be considered
the head quarters of the cultivation of the sugar cane in temperate
Queensland, and so far as experience has gone, has proved highly
successful. The rich soils along the banks formed in past times by the
decaying vegetation of the dense scrubs that are so characteristic of
the Mary River, have proved when cleared most suitable to this class of
cultivation. Only a few years ago, in steaming up the Mary, it was
impossible to obtain a glimpse of any part of the country, the river
being hemmed in on both sides by dense luxuriant vegetation. Now
thousands of acres of these srcub lands have been reclaimed, cleared,
and planted, and the sugar cane may be seen thriving in all the
luxuriance of an apparently suitable soil and climate. Indeed, it may
be said that the cultivation of the cane in this district has gone ahead
of the appliances for crushing it by the grower himself, and a novel ex-
pedient has been introduced, which would be regarded as extraordinary
in any other sugar producing country than Queensland, of selling the
cane to the mill owner, like wheat, for a tertain percentage of the
product returned. This may undoubtedly answer in cases where


the mill is close at hand ; but otherwise it imist assuredly entail
considerable risk to the grower, not only from the loss of
the cane juice but from the greater risk of fermentation. Nine
miles from Maryborough at a place called Yengarie is an estab-
lishment, the property of Messrs. Tooth & Cran, so complete in all
its details, represented not only by the most improved machinery for
crushing and refining the sugar, but for the novel expedient of gathering
the cane from the plantation by the appliances of the wire railway,
that it is worthy of a visit to all those whose inclinations lead them
in this direction. At this establishment also an extensive industry is
carried on in the preservation of meat, in tins, and for the preparation
of that well known product of the salts of meat —“ Liebig’s Extract.”
Fifty miles south of Maryborough, on the upper waters of the Mary
is the Gympie gold field, the first developed in Queensland, and now
maintaining a population of over one thousand miners. The shallow
alluvial deposits on this field have been entirely exhausted, and in-
dustry is now confined to the development of the rich auriferous reefs
which traverse the area. The produce from this field, so far as can be
ascertained by recent returns, was about 50,000 ounces in 1872, but
it is expected that with additional appliances of improved machinery
a much larger return may be annually obtained. So far as the crush-
ing of quartz stone has yet gone the yield has averaged about two and
a half ounces of gold per ton. A weekly newspaper is published at
the township on the diggings. Other minor gold fields surround
Gympie, and at one of these, Kilkivan, a rich deposit of Cinnabar
( Mercury Sulphide) has of late been discovered. On the Burrum,
a thick seam of cannel coal has been opened up and is now
being developed. A considerable area of this district, facing
the Harvey and Wide Bays contains seams of coal and, possessing
such a favourable position for exploitation, cannot long remain
dormant. Eighty miles to the westward of Maryborough is the
township of Gayndah, on the Burnet River, with a population
of about 700, and forming the commercial centre of of the Burnet dis-
trict, already alluded to. Maryborough surrounded with all these
varied industries, holds a position that must render it year by year of




Madure & Macdonald,lath,London
8 7 2
B R I SB ANE


greater importance, situated as it is midway between the capital and
the flourishing township of Rockhampton.
Tins digression from the narrative being completed, a survey
may now be taken of the position from the ship’s anchor-
age. Moreton Bay, sheltered from all quarters but the north,
is formed by two islands named Moreton and Stradbroke,
running in a north and south direction for about sixty-five
miles, approaching the mainland at its southern extremity but
distant about twenty miles from the mainland at the northern,
by reason of the trend of the coast. Between these two Islands,
a narrow passage tb seaward is open, available for coasting vessels
in ordinary weather, and termed the South Entrance. Into this
bay the Brisbane, Logan, and Tweed Rivers discharge themselves,
and on the west shore two sea-side townships may be seen—Lytton to
the north of the entrance to the Brisbane, and Cleveland to the
south of it. In the bay oyster fisheries, under special regulations, form
an important industry, and the almost extinct Dugong or sea cow, of
the order Sirenia, varying in length from seven to ten feet, may
occasionally be seen sporting itself in the water. This animal is
prized for its oil, which resembles that of the cod (cod liver oil), and
its flesh, especially the snout, is considered by many a delicacy. The
bones being of dense structure, are also valuable on account of their
close resemblance to ivory. A lightship marks the entrance to the
Brisbane River, and 14 miles from this position, Brisbane, the capital
of the colony, is beautifully laid out on the flats and slopes on the
north and south banks of this broad and winding river. Many miles
before the capital is appi'oached, picturesque homesteads may be seen
surrounded by cultivated grounds, in which the graceful banana pre-
dominates over other tropical plants, and the beautiful greenness of the
vegetation relieves the eye from the bright glare of a brilliant sky.
Brisbane, at first established in 1825, by the Governor of New South
Wales, as an outlying province of that colony, made scarcely any
progress until the year 1859, the period when separation and respon-
sible Government was granted, by the Imperial Legislation, to the
province that at that time was only known as Moreton Bay. Since


that period, the memory of which is regarded annually as a public
holiday in the colony, Brisbane has made most rapid advancement, and
now possesses, including its suburbs, a population of over 25,000, about
equal to that of the whole province at the time of separation. The
city consists of wide streets laid out in rectangular blocks, the principal
of which is Queen Street, where shops and buildings of every des-
cription may be seen, and of as substantial structure as in any long
established town. A handsome iron bridge, supported on massive
iron columns, spans the river at a considerable elevation, uniting
North and South Brisbane. The most conspicuous of the public
buildings are the Town Hall, in Queen Street, containing a great re-
ception hall and the Offices of the Municipality • and the Houses of
Parliament, the latter of which has been constructed at a cost of
£lOO,OOO, and in a most eligible position. The Governor’s residence,
situated on a bend of the river, commands a most beautiful
prospect, the grounds of which are contiguous to the Parliament
Houses and the Botanical Gardens, The latter, however, will
strike the observer as being the most interesting feature of the
capital. Admirably situated on the banks of the Brisbane and
beautifully laid out in parterres and shady walks, they present
every variety of vegetation that a favourable climate can foster,
and being under the special care of Mr. Hill, the Government Botanist,
have been utilised also in a practical point of view to demonstrate the
various marketable products that Queensland is capable of producing.
Brisbane possesses all the requirements and advantages of an old-
established place : buildings for the public service, clubs, private and
public schools, hospitals and charitable institutions of various kinds,
schools of art, museums, churches and chapels for every creed and
denomination, concert rooms, hotels of various kinds, and a theatre,
although the last is but of minor proportions. It supports two news-
papers, one published daily the other -weekly. A walk to the
Observatory Hill will give the stranger a better idea of Brisbane and
its picturesque situation than any description that can be written. The
Capital is well supplied with water from reservoirs some miles distant
from the city, and is lighted with gas. The great advantage that Bris-




Machine &. Macdonald JjUiXondon
IPSWICH
8 7 2.


bane possesses over all the coast towns, is that the river has been made
accessible by a series of cuttings of about 200 feet in width through
the bar at the entrance and the upper flats, whereby ships drawing
eighteen feet of water can come up the river and lay alongside any of
the numerous wharfs that line the north and south banks of the river,
where commodious warehouses and bonded stores afford every accom-
modation for the taking in and discharging of cargo. The Brisbane
is joined by the Bremer, about forty miles up its winding course, upon
the banks of which ten miles farther is situated the town of Ipswich at
the head of the navigation. In a direct line the distance between the
two towns would not exceed twenty-five miles, Ipswich for a long
period was a town of considerable importance, almost rivalling the
capital itself, and formed the depot at which all the commerce of the
country to the westward was carried on, the produce being shipped
direct from there to either Brisbane or the Bay by flat bottomed steam
vessels.
The extension of the Western Railway to Brisbane from its
present terminus at Ipswich, will seriously affect its commercial in-
terests, and it will soon have to rely upon those of a local character,
which, however, are considerable. Beds of coal underlie it in every
direction, many of which are now being worked, and it is the centre of
a large tract of rich agricultural land, of which maize and cotton at
present form the chief products. Ipswich is a municipal town, having
a population of about 5,500, and possesses many good substantial
public and private buildings, and supports two newspapers published
three times in each week. To the north and south of Brisbane, and
on the Logan and Tweed Rivers large tracts of land are being rapidly
brought under cult ivation, on which a variety of products are profitably
raised : Cereals, as wheat, barley, and oats; Grasses, as lucerne
sorghum and sainfin ; Fruits, as bananas, pine apples, grapes, oranges,
lemons, melons, nectarines, peaches, apples, and pears ; Vegetables, as
beans, potatoes (dry and sweet), leeks, onions, carrots, parsnips, and
beets ; and other Products, as cotton, sugar, and tobacco. Minor
deposits of gold have been found over these areas together with iron and
chrome iron ore, but the results from these have not as yet assumed any


commercial importance. The great wealth of the capital depends,
however, on that rich locality to the westward known as the Darling
Downs District—the Eldorado both of the grazier and the agricul-
turist. This district, situated about 80 miles from the capital and at
an elevation of 2000 feet above the sea, possesses a soil of rich vol-
canic debris, watered by the Condamine, Upper Moonie, and Weir
Rivers, tributaries of the Great Darling River (a tributary itself of the
Murray entering the sea some 2000 miles to the south west), and em-
braces advantages rivalling that of any other district either in this or
the adjoining colonies. Its elevation renders it capable of producing
all the cereals and fruits of a temperate climate, and when fairly
brought under cultivation it will be capable of supplying the whole
colony with these most valuable products. Upon this rich area many
flourishing towns are situated, as Toowoomba, Drayton, Warwick,
Dalby, and others, forming centres of commerce to the agriculturists
who are daily encroaching upon the virgin soil. Scattered over the
whole area lie the valuable squattages of the sheep farmer, the natural
grasses of which afford pasturage for some two and a half million
sheep, together with herds of cattle and horses. To the south lie the
gold fields of Talgai and Canal Creek, affording employment to
numerous miners ; and farther again to the southward, on the banks
of the Severn, rich deposits of stream tin are being exported by private
and public companies. Underneath a considerable area lie rich de-
posits of coal all eventually to be called upon to render employment
to a large mining population. To enter into the full details of the
various subjects of interest in this magnificent domain would require
many pages, and as space will not permit, the best advice that can
be offered to the stranger is to go to the district and judge for himself.
A line of railway connects Ipswich with Toowoomba, a distance of
seventy-eight miles, and Toowoomba with Warwick, to the south,
sixty five miles ; and Dalby, to the west, fifty-two miles; on which line
the visitor wall have an opportunity of viewing some of the famed
squattages of the district, with all the appliances for shearing, cleaning,
and preparing the wool for market, as at Jondaryan, which depastures
upwards of 150,000 sheep. Beyond the Darling Downs lie great


Maclure &Ma.cdonald l lith,loadDii.
W A R W I G K .




tracts of country watered by the Maranoa, Warrego, Paroo, and
Barcoo Rivers, and Cooper’s Creek stretching away to the western
boundary of the colony, a distance of 650 miles, and now occupied by
scpiattages, many of princely dimensions, depasturing at the present
time over one and a half million sheep, with their accompanying herds
of cattle and horses. The commercial progress of the capital since the
date of Independence, in 1859, has fully kept pace with the extra-
ordinary advantages by which it is surrounded. When allied to the
adjoining colony of New South Wales its trade was figured by
thousands, which is at the present time represented by millions ; the
combined exports and imports for the year 1872 amounting to
£2,721,874 ; since which time these figures have been con-
siderably augmented. In fairness, however, to the sea ports to the
northward, it must be borne in mind that the trade represented by
these figures in some proportion includes that which appertains to
the northern districts ; since in separating the gross returns of the
colonial trade into two divisions, viz.: that of Brisbane and the north-
ern ports, the former show the imports exceeding the exports by
£208,000 ; the latter the exports exceeding the imports by over
one million sterling. This peculiarity is to be accounted for by the
Capital securing the major portion of the direct trade with Europe,
thereby receiving credit for the greater portion of the imports of
the whole colony, distributing them coastwise to other ports, the
value of which does not appear in the Customs Returns of these Ports ;
the same also being applicable to the exports, no port receiving credit
for the same except they are shipped from thence direct to a foreign
country or colony. Statistics compiled to represent the exact import
and export trade, whether coastwise or foreign, of each port in the
colony would be of much greater importance than the present system,
since the statistics in that case would really represent the respective
trade and resources of each particular district. A summary of the exact
trade of each port of the colony, in a tabular form, as represented in
this sketch will more clearly show the relative importance of each par-
ticular disti’ict, taking the exports and imports even as they are now
represented, as a standard of their position.


Ports. Imports. Exports. Total.
Brisbane £1,465,073 £1,256,801 £2,721,874
-Rockhampton 230,965 496,464 727,429
Townsville 198,077 411,053 609,109
Maryborough 150,144 233,682 383,826
St. Lawrence 54,784 79,227 134,011
Powen 29,728 29,669 59,407
Cardwell 1,011 54,715 55,726
Mackay 18,459 37,243 55,702
Sweer’s Island 16,409 6,631 23,146
Gladstone 8,312 13,417 21,729
Baffle Creek 1,275 15,265 16,544
The gross trade of the Colony for the year 1873 is represented as
reaching a sum total of £6,424,239, an extraordinary amount, consi-
dering that the gross population of town and country does not exceed
150,000.
The object for which this brief sketch has been compiled being
now completed, a few pages devoted to a more general description of
the colony and its future prospects, together with its relation to the
Australian group, may not prove uninteresting.
Queensland, the youngest of the Australian colonies, is, neverthe-
less, of gigantic dimensions, having an entire length north and south
of 1,500 miles by a maximum width of 800, including within its
boundaries an area seven and a half times as large as that of Great
Britain, and possessing a coast frontage exceeding 2,500 miles in
length. Compared with that of the other Australian Colonies, as far as
area is concerned, it takes the third rank ; South Australia exceeding
it by about 70,000 square miles, and Western Australia by about
200,000 ; the two latter colonies, however, being represented by im-
mense tracts of desert country amounting to hundreds of thousands of
square miles, totally unfit for any purpose whatever. Regarding one-
fourth of the whole area of Queensland as being similar to that of these
two mentioned colonies, the remaining portion amounting to over
450,000 square miles, is available for all purposes of profitable settle-
ment, and may be divided into the three classes of pastoral, agricul-


Machine & Macdonald Mi,London
SOME R S E




tural, and mineral lands. Accustomed, as in the Mother Country, to
boundaries of moderate limits, the stranger can scarcely comprehend
the great distances that exist between the various centres of commercial
interest in Queensland, and a reference to distances in Europe with
which he is more or less acquainted may afford him some faint idea of
those in the colony. Take for instance the distance between Brisbane
and the northern settlement of Somerset, this may be compared to that
between London and Sebastopol; between Brisbane and Norman Town
to that between London and Constantinople ; between Brisbane and
Cook Town to that between London and St, Petersburg; and between
Brisbane and Townsville to that between London and Madrid. Situ-
ated as Brisbane —the capital and seat of the Government—is, within
fifty miles of the most southern boundary of the colony, wonder and
surprise must naturally be aroused, under such circumstances, how it
is possible to govern so large an area; to maintain order ; to administer
the laws, with anything like efficiency ; to collect all the sources of
Customs revenue from so extensive a seaboard, and all without the aid
of any special force, except that of a few officials scattered over the
whole colony. The general respect for the law so characteristic of the
colonists of Australia supported by a numerous and free press, ever
ready to act in harmony for the public weal, is the means whereby this
has been accomplished. In the highly civilized countries of Europe,
sustained by all the requirements of order, such a remark would cause
but little surprise, but when applied to a vast country like Queens-
land, the greater portion of which but a few years since, was a terra
incognita and blank on the map, it assumes a very different aspect. At
the date of Separation from New South Wales, in 1859, no
white settler had ventured to occupy country for pastoral pur-
poses west of the Maranoa River, or the dividing range between
the eastern and southern waters, or north of the range which
has already been designated as the natural boundary of Northern
Queensland, and even Rockhampton itself was almost regarded as
on the frontier of civilization. A few years afterwards adventurous
pioneers, in search of pastoral country, had explored that unknown
area, braved its dangers, solved its hidden mysteries, marked


it out into numerous squattages, constructed homesteads in localities
■where only the savage roamed, and studded its plains, valleys,
and forests with flocks of sheep and herds of cattle and horses.
Beaten tracks now mark the stranger’s course to the extreme limits of
the colony, and a horseman may travel from the capital to Norman
Town on the Gulf of Carpentaria, a distance of over 1,400 miles,
and meet on this area every night of his wanderings a shelter in a
comfortable hamlet and a welcome hospitality. Notwithstanding this
extraordinary change in so limited a period, and the dispersion of the
sparse population of the colony over so vast an area, combined with
other disturbing causes (hereafter to be explained) the law is respected,
and the statistics of crime per head will compare favourably with any in
civilized Europe. The antagonism between the colonists and the
native is, however, an exception to this state of order ; with regard to
which a few remarks will be made when the subject of the native race
is entered upon. The grazing and breeding of sheep, cattle and horses
embraced under the term of the pastoral interest, formed the only in-
dustry of the young colony during the first few years of its existence, and
wool, tallow, and hides its only exports. This industry during that period
formed the only outlet for employment to the immigrant; special Legis-
lation was ever ready to foster its progress ; every commercial opera-
tion depended on its success; every bank relied upon it to pay its heavy
annual dividend ; wool, tallow, and hides, the breed of stock or class
of country, formed the daily conversation of the colonists, aud droughts
and floods were as eagerly regarded by every member of the com-
munity as a Political Crisis or Coup d’Etat by a London stockbroker.
Fortunately for the well being of Queensland this industry did not
long remain in the ascendant, but soon had to give place to others
more suitable for the support of a numerous population. The discovery
of mineral wealth in the form of gold, copper, tin, and coal, and the
adaptability of the soil in certain localities for the purposes of temper-
ate or tropical agriculture brought about a period of transition. Little
by little as these industries were developed by the yearly increasing
immigration, th eresults became apparent in the increased variety of
exports, and a reference to those of 1873 show the exports of all pro-


duce derived from the pastoral industry as wool, tallow, hides, skins,
and preserved meats amounted to forty-nine per cent., and of minerals
and the produce of agriculture to fifty-one per cent, of the gross ex-
ports, thereby placing the latter on an equality with the former.
The development, however, of these respective industries, work-
ing harmoniously together, affording on the one hand employment
and occupation for a numerous population on the seaboard or within a
reasonable distance of it, and on the other utilising and rendering pro-
ductive the vast and distant areas of the interior is a “ consummation
devoutly to be wished.” A few remarks in reference to these respective
industries will be therefore expedient. Acting upon the experience
obtained by the defects of the land laws in the adjoining colonies in
regard to their operation upon the squatter and selector, Queensland
has been enabled to frame a law more comprehensive in its operation and
recognising the respective rights of the two contending parties. Viewing
the defective land laws of 1860, the Queensland Legislature framed an
Act in 1868 dividing the whole colony into two divisions termed the
settled and unsettled districts. In the former the squatter holds his
estate subject at any time to six months’ notice of resumption, and in
the latter a lease is granted to him for a period of twenty-one } r ears,
at a certain annual rental, increasing every seven years in proportion
to the capabilities of his run, and subject to resumption only under
•certain circumstances. The settled districts being within a given dis-
tance of the seaboard, are invariably occupied by pastoral tenants who
regard the fattening and sale of carcase as the principal object of their
industry, the unsettled districts by those who attend also to the breeding
of stock and the growth of w r ool and hence embrace much larger areas
than those of the former. The pastoral industry as confined to sheep
is liable to many casualties and excessive fluctuations; at one time
everything appears as bright and favourable as the most ardent could
desire, at another as gloomy as the gloomiest pessimist could picture.
The natural conclusion to be drawn from these violent reactions is that
it must be a most profitable industry, and such is undoubtedly the
case ; large profits being realised and often handsome fortunes acquired
in a few years when favoured with a continuance of ordinary seasons.


scale and free altogether from the dangers already pictured,,
forms one of the most interesting employments for a capitalist
to be engaged in, and a long experience has proved it to be
a most lucrative one. The great principles to bear in mind on.
entering into this class of industry are, that the character and
position of country are preferable to area, and the excellence of
the breed of sheep to mere numbers, both of which have been until
lately, from causes already detailed, too much ignored. The vicissitudes
and risks of extraordinary seasons can in a great measure by good
management be removed, and a fair percentage of increase secured
under the most unfavourable conditions. The principle of fencing in
the best part of the squattages by wire fences so as to divide them
into extensive paddocks, has everywhere proved of great value, not
only in the improvement of the stock, and produce of wool, but also in
the economy of labour, and it is only now a question of time for every
proprietor of sheep to adopt this valuable expedient. With the cer-
tainty of tenure secured to the pastoral occupant, and compensation
for improvements in event of resumption, together with a pre-emptive
right to purchase a large tract of the run at a reduced price, oppor-
tunities for the investment of capital for the further development of
sheep farming arc now offered, in advance of the laws of the adjoining-
colonies ; and as the lines of demarcation for the profitable growth of
wool have now been determined, by experience, little risk need be en-
tailed, providing ordinary foresight and prudence are exercised.
Another important point to bear in mind is the probable direction of
the railway lines of the colony, upon which hereafter a few remarks
will be made. Cattle farming and horse breeding has not had to con-
tend with the vicissitudes of the industry just described, although the
same dangers are apparent in regard to it so far as the employment of
borrowed capital from agents or banks as in that of sheep farming. In
cattle farming, however, the proprietor is more the master of his
position, since more limited capital is ordinarily required and the
annual expenses are comparatively nominal. As the sea coast and in-
land towns increase in population, the value of cattle must rise in
proportion, and hence although store stock cannot be purchased at the


prices of past years still the value of the increase is proportionately
enhanced. This class of industry has been found to succeed as well
in the tropical as in the temperate latitudes of the colony, and either
on the coast or far interior, and for those abounding in physical energy
and preferring a roving and independent life no more fascinating oc-
cupation could be chosen, or one where a more certain and profitable
result is likely to be realised.
The mining industry is that which next demands attention, as
it is more intimately associated with the two classes of laboui
and capital. Gold mining, as in the southern colonies of Aus-
tralia, is gradually assuming a more settled form of industry.
The rich alluvial deposits, that gave temporary and independent
employment to large bodies of men are gradually being exhaustc 1
and attention is now being devoted to the sources of these deposits,
by the developement of the rich auriferous reefs scattered through
these areas. In consequence, the efforts of the miner in his individual
capacity is gradually giving place either to co-operative enterprise, or
to the acceptance of a fixed wage from the mining capitalist. Of the
former, when supported by a body of men working harmoniously to-
gether and aided by a certain proportion of capital many good resmts
have been undoubtedly obtained, but owing to the larger outlay
necessary for deep mining and the necessity of a more experienced
method of treatment, it is questionable whether on the average, a better
result may not be obtained by the individual miner in the acceptance
of a fixed and steady wage under the latter system. Attention has
already been drawn to the comparison of the analysis of some of the
Auriferous reefs of the Ravenswood distinct, which may be considered,
as far as is yet known, the richest in the colony, to the result obtained
by the present method of treatment, whereby fifty per cent, and
frequently seventy per cent, of the precious metal has been either lost
in the tailings which are washed away into the water courses or con-
centrated in very few instances for the purposes of export. That
such a reckless system could have prevailed for so lengthened a
period sustains the opinion that the co-operative enterprise ot
the working miner is not sufficient to develop these extraordinary


resources, but that capital and scientific knowledge and experience
combined, are absolutely requisite to aid in the extraction of
the gold from its less valuable impurities, and to put a check
to the reckless waste now everywhere existing on the Queens-
land gold fields. The following extract from Mr. Daintree’s
report on this subject is instructive :—“ Looking at the results obtained
by Mr. Smith, of the School of Mines, and by assayers on the spot,
it seems probable that gold equal in amount to the total revenue of the
colony passed into the tailings of the Ravenswood Mills during 1872,
or about three times as much as that saved by the proprietors of the
reefs.” But how is this much desired object to be obtained ? In a
colony like Queensland, that but a short time since was entirely ab-
sorbed in pastoral occupations, it is unreasonable to suppose that the
requisite knowledge could be obtained from persons engaged in that
class of pursuit; and as the Queensland Government has, much to
the regret of every well wisher of the colony and of the progress
of scientific knowledge, deemed it advisable to abolish the de-
partment of the Geological Survey, the unfortunate possessors of
the auriferous reefs are left without resource or information
to guide them to a better method of manipulation. In reply it
may be asserted, that the requisite knowledge might be obtained from
the experience of the treatment of the auriferous reefs in the colony of
Victoria, but it must be remembered that the composition of those
reefs are essentially different to many of those in Queensland, requiring
a metallurgical treatment of a very different nature. Given a stone in
abundance, comprising as its associated minerals gold, silver, copper,
and iron pyrites, manganese, galena, and quartz, the representative
character of the Ravenswood Reefs, it is plainly to be perceived that
a considerable amount of metallurgical knowledge and experience are
requisite to separate the nobler metal from the inferior, the silver from
the copper, and the copper from the commercially valueless minerals,
so as to render these in their pure state and with but a trifling per-
centage of loss on the actual analysis of the stone. This, however, is
not only possible but practicable, and is carried out in Colorado in
the United States with complete success. In the United States


of America indeed every mining district is represented by a
skilled geologist and metallurgist, under Government pay, whose
business it is to report to the Central Mining commission, at
Washington, the progress of mining and metallurgical operations
in his district, which report is published annually for the guid-
ance of all those interested in mining pursuits. A glance at
this comprehensive and instructive annual report, illustrated by plans,
sections, diagrams and drawings, will at once strike the reader with
the importance of such a department of the State in a country
deriving great wealth from its mineral resources. No stronger proof
could be alleged for the necessity of the establishment of such a de-
partment in Queensland, one half of the annual wealth of which
colony is derived from mineral enterprise, and in plain j ustice to the
miner it would appear quite as feasible that his interest should be
guarded, as that of the pastoral occupant by quarantine and sheep and
cattle inspectors. A department of this nature, however, would have
a much wider range than that of confining itself to the development
of the auriferous areas, since copper, tin, cinnabar, iron, galena,
bismuth, antimony and other metals lie scattered over the whole
colony, independent altogether of the vast beds of coal, and a detailed
survey would no doubt bring to light many other dormant resources.
Indeed, it may be said that the future welfare of the colony and the
responsibility in the outlay of large sums for public works which
posterity is to be called upon to liquidate, depends in a great measure
on a thorough knowledge of the bearing of its latent mineral resources,
so as to arrive 'at a satisfactory solution as to the most suitable
direction to lay down the permanent railway communications of the
colony. With the aid of such a department, test bore holes
be made by the improved boring machines armed with
diamond cutters (now adopted in every civilized country) in
numerous positions to ascertain the depth, thickness, and number of
the various underlying coal beds ; the knowledge of which, combined
with that of the known localities of minerals requiring the aid of coal
to dev elope them, would materially assist to a correct determination
of this most important object, and a few thousands now expended


might be the means of saving hundreds of thousands in the future.
Attention has already been drawn, to the important results the colony
has derived from the geological researches of its past officers in the
discovery and development of certain northern gold fields, and judging
from this it is reasonable to expect that the large tracts of metamor-
phic rocks north of the valley of Lagoons and at the McKinlay
ranges may prove equally productive.
Copper mining is as yet comparatively in its infancy, but judging
from the enormous yield of the only mine yet fairly developed a reason-
able hope may be entertained of its assuming considerable dimensions.
This class of mining being confined to company operations, by reason
of the magnitude of the undertaking, good rates of wages and perma-
nent employment for skilled men may be regarded as the necessities
of this class of industry. Tin mining is for the present confined to the
locality represented by the watersheds of the Severn River, the south-
ern boundary of the colony, but since its discovery, in 1872, it has
assumed extraordinary proportions, the y ield for 1873 having ex-
ceeded 4000 tons, of a value of £360,000, more than equal to the whole
yield of the celebrated tin mines of Cornwall for a period of six months.
This industry may rather be termed tin sluicing, since it consists in
separating the grains of tin from the sandy debris in which it is
embedded, by means of the heavy specific gravity of the ore. The tin
is in the form of peroxide and is the result of the decomposition of
the stanniferous veins in the coarse micaceous granite rocks of that
•district. It has been estimated that the area embraced by
these deposits is not less than 500 square miles, so that years must
elapse before the rich deposits can be worked out, and when that time
arrives the rock in which it is embedded may yet form a source of
profitable manipulation. Tin ore has been found on the boundaries of
the Palmer, in the Cook district, and on the tributaries of the Star, in
the Kennedy district, as well as on the upper forks of the Percy River,
a tributary of the Gilbert, but none of these localities have yet been
extensively worked on account of the cost of transit to the coast. Ore
has also been discovered in the Burnet district, at a place called St,
John’s Creek, lead, bismuth, chrome and other ores in various parts


of the colony, but nothing worthy of the name of mining has yet been
undertaken for their exploitation. Coal —the last of the mining indus-
tries—is asyet confined to the neighbourhood of Ipswich, where several
mines are in operation, and attempts are being made to open the rich
seams lying in the districts of Wide Bay and the Burnet. In this opera-
tion, however, opposition of the most formidable nature is to contend
with the exploited fields of Newcastle, in New South Wales. The
rich deposits in that neighbourhood, being situated close to the sea and
aided by all the appliances of railways and machinery for the rapid
loading of ships, must for some length of time check the development
of the Queensland coal fields for the requirements of steam ship pur-
poses. The demand, therefore, for some time to come must be of a
local character, and,as the consumption of that material is limited in
a country where household fires are the exception, the future of this
industry is more to be regarded than the direct present, As manu-
factures become established, and the smelting of ores a profitable
industry then a rapid development of these resources may be regarded
as certain, and this being merely the question of a limited period, this
dormant wealth must be esteemed as one of the most important
treasures the colony possesses. The mineral is of a highly bitum-
inous character, and the respective carboniferous areas are considered
to be of two distinct geological ages the one Polooozoic and the
other Mesozoic -or secondary, and estimated by Mr. Daintrce to
be about 25,000 square miles in extent. Of gems, diamonds
have been found in tiie tin drift, veins of chatoyant opal near
the Barcoo River, sapphires and garnets in the auriferous drifts,
but none of these have assumed any form of industry, the miner as
yet preferring to develope the materials of utility rather than those of
ornament.
It will now be perceived by this brief description that the min-
ing industry in the colony is in the infancy of its development, and
a probability naturally arises that it may eventually overshadow all
others in importance. That it offers a most eligible field for the
skilled capitalist and "workman cannot be denied, and the attraction
of working the noble and inferior metals are of such a nature, as must


introduce a class of emigrants to the shores of Queensland who would
turn a deaf ear to the charms of a pastoral life. The Legislature has
done all in its power to encourage the enterprise, by the framing of
liberal laws not only for the individual miner but for 00-operative en-
terprise, and has thrown open the whole of the mineral lands, whether
on leased areas or not, for sale, either in blocks of from 20 to 300
acres at 30s. per acre, or on lease for a period of 99 years at ss.
per acre. Until, however, the railway system is developed to a greater
extent many of these mineral lands must remain dormant, as the
cost of carriage and transit would be more than the proceeds of any
mine of the inferior metals could possibly afford.
The next important industry requiring attention is that of the cul-
tivation of tropical, semi-tropical, and temperate products, embraced
under the general term, Agriculture; more especially as this kind of
industry appeals to classes different to those of the pastoral or mining,
embracing not only the capitalist but the man of moderate means and
the agricultural labourer. Reference has already been made to the
suitability of an immense area of the coast and interior lands for this
special purpose, and a few remarks based upon actual results will tend
in a great measure to strengthen this opinion. From the banks of the
Herbert River, near Cardwell at the north, to that of the Brisbane,
Tweed, and Logan, at the extreme south, the cultivation of the
sugar cane has from its commencement (less than nine years
since) assumed important dimensions, as may be adduced from the
circumstance that for the year 1874 the colony produced not only
sufficient sugar to supply the requirements of its own population, but
a surplus for export of at least 5000 tons. The conclusion to be
drawn from this favourable progress and from the raj)id change to
exporting in place of importing this household necessity, is that this
branch of industry must continue to advance in proportionate ratio
to the past, since the demand for sugar in the several Australian
colonies, based on the present population, is not less than 100,000
tons annually ; and which product is now obtained from the distant
countries of Mauritius and Java. Queensland, being the only colony
of Australia capable of producing sugar, possesses on this account ad-


vantages that should enable her, within a limited period, to meet this
colonial demand and to drive her foreign sugar producing rivals out of
the Australian markets and, viewing this, it should be the policy of
the young colony to encourage by every means equitable to her other
interests this important branch of her resources. In her young days
it had, however, been the reverse of this and the peculiar position at
that time then appeared of a colony possessing a soil and climate for the
cultivation of this product, that forbade a rival in the Australian Con-
tinent and with a market within her own boundaries, actually imposing
a heavy and almost prohibitory tax on its progress, in the form of an
ad valorem duty of fifteen per cent, on the value (freight added) of the
machinery imported from abroad requisite to carry out the cultivation
as also on all classes of agricultural implements, and of mining*
machinery. When if is remembered that this extraordinary impost
existed at a time when there were no engineering establishments in
the colony capable of manufacturing such machinery to support the
plea on the ground of a protective policy, that the cultivation of the
cane without machinery was an absurdity, and that the cost of the
machinery is generally estimated at fifty per cent, on the gross outlay
of the plantation for the first two years, it is evident that the cause of
this policy must be attributed to some other source than the mere
error of Legislation in the desire of augmenting the revenue. Fur a
time this suicidal act checked materially the progress of this industry,
and weighted with an unjust burden the pioneers in the cultivation of
the cane. Latterly, however, a more equitable policy has pre-
vailed; this law has been abolished, and the importation of all
classes of machinery for the development of colonial industries
declared free of duty. The question of labour, so important in the
matter of sugar cultivation, has already been discussed, but a few
further remarks will be made when the question of immigration is
entered upon. The cultivation of the sugar cane having expelled
within so short a period the foreign production from the markets of
Queensland, it is but reasonable to expect the cultivation of wheat
to arrive at a similar position as soon as the same industry, perse-
verance, and resource of capital have been applied to that particular


class of industry. For some time a considerable difference of opinion
existed as to whether the southern areas of the colony were capable of
producing wheat so as to compete with the colonies more temperately
situated, but this opinion was entirely of a speculative nature and
not tested by practical results. Experience has now shown that
wheat can not only be cultivated with success on the high lands of
the Darling Downs, but also on the coast lands in the neighbourhood
of Ipswich and Brisbane, some years experience in the latter
having given a result per acre actually in advance of any of the
Australian Colonies; the yield having averaged 18.33 bushels per
acre, as against New South Wales 14.47, and Victoria 13.45, and on
the rich volcanic plains of the Darling Downs the results have exceeded
every expectation and represent the maximum yield per acre of the
cultivation of this cereal in the Australian continent, the average of
thirty farms being 38|- bushels per acre. If such results can be ob-
tained on these high and low lands, there can be no question in regard
to the profitable nature of this branch of agriculture, since in South
Austi’alia, which is regarded as the great wheat producing colony of
the continent, the farmers there consider an average crop of 1 3 bushels
per acre as a profitable return for their labour and outlay. Queens-
land until within a brief period has been compelled to import the
whole of the flour necessary for thp consumption of her population,
from either Adelaide or Sydney and has expended on this account
about a quarter of a million annually, and the slight return in the
way of reciprocity may be evidenced from the fact that South Australia
imported into the colony in the year 1871 flour to the value of
£139,000 and withdrew in the form of exports the paltry sum of £Bl6,
the balance having to be paid in gold. If we bear in mind the
statement of Wallace, that excellent wheat is grown in Timor at an
elevation of 3,000 feet, there seems good reason to believe that on the
higher table lands of the north (for example the volcanic plains on
several western tributaries of the JBurdekin) cereals may, on trial, be
found to thrive. No experiment in this direction has yet been
attempted. Maize, or Indian corn, so important a cereal in the
household economy in consequence of the variety of purposes


to which it is adapted, forms a source of profitable cultivation,
the soil and climate over a considerable area of the eastern sea
coast lands being highly favourable to an abundant yield; the
crops varying from forty to eighty bushels per acre. The cultiva-
tion of the potatoe (about which doubts also had been long enter-
tained) is found to succeed admirably in the south. Arrowroot
and tobacco give favourable results, and the cultivation of the
banana and pine apple for home consumption and export is yearly
assuming increased proportions. Of the various fruits and vegetables
obtainable in the southern part of the colony mention has already
been made. In the northern parts, however, vegetables can only be
grown with success where there is an abundant rainfall, or when the
land is well irrigated, about which there should be little difficulty
since the trade wind blows with steady force for ten months in the
year, the potatoe, however must there give place to the sweeter kind
and to its greater ally the yam. Pumpkins and melons abound in
every part of the colony, and frequently a deserted sheep yard may
be seen actually concealed by the creepers of these plants, with a
superabundance of these cooling and ever welcome fruits. ihe
cultivation of cotton commenced in Queensland during the period
of the great Civil War in the United States when cotton of every
description was forced up to extreme and fabulous I'ates. Encouraged
by the success of the early planters numerous small farmers occupied
themselves with this industry, and it appears to have reached its
maximum about the year 1871, when 13,000 acres were under culti-
vation. The complete re-organisation of the cotton plantations in the
Southern States of America and the great increase of its cultivation in
India and Egypt have caused an enormous decline to take place in the
value of this staple, and in consequence a considerable decrease of the
acreage under cultivation has taken place in the colony, as the farmers
find the present rates incompatible with profitable production. Not-
withstanding the high character, in general, of the Queensland cotton
as compared with that of India and ordinary American, the probability
is that it must cease to be an article of cultivation, since the labour of
the producers could be much more profitably employed in the produc-


'tion of other articles that are consumable in the colony. The last of
the Queensland industries, appealing specially to skilled workmen and
capitalists, is that of the manufacturing, which is gradually extending
itself to meet the ever increasing demands of the population. The
development of mining and agricultural pursuits has given an impetus
to the manufacture of all classes of agricultural implements and
mining machinery, and since many of the engineering establishments
possess efficient appliances a further development has ensued, and
one likely to meet all the demands of the sugar producer, in the form
of machinery for cane crushing, refinery, and distillation. Numerous
manufactories have also been established to utilize the colonial pro-
ducts, as tanneries, breweries, saw mills, wheat and arrowroot mills,
meat preserving, tobacco, cigars, cotton ginning, furniture, drays,
&c., &c., and the Legislature has of late years endeavoured to promote
the development of manufactures by offering to those who are dis-
posed to commence new industries grants of land for the production
of the raw material, and also bonuses varying from £IOOU to £1,500
to those who shall first establish woollen and cotton factories to
work up the raw product grown in the colony. To further develop
the industries to which attention has been thus briefly drawn, it is
necessary that every effort should be made without reference to
class interest, to extend the railway system of the colony upon an
equitable and comprehensive basis, without any attempt being made
to divert the course of trade from its legitimate outlet, in order that
cheap and easy communication may be maintained between the most
important centres of industry and the various sea ports appertaining
to the same and also that a stream of immigration should be maintained
upon an extended scale to meet the wants of the various producers,
whether agricultural, pastoral, mining, or manufacturing. For this
purpose a few remarks upon these two important requirements will
not be out of place. The present railway system of the colony con-
sists of two lines, the southern and the northern, the former having
Brisbane as its coast depot the latter Rockhampton, and embracing a
total of about 250 miles of line completed. The line from Brisbane
to Ipswich (a distance of 25 miles) uniting the capital with the most


important southern township extends to Toowomba (78 miles) a town
situated on the summit of the table land of the Darling Downs, pro-
ceeding from thence in two directions, the one to Dalby (52 miles), a
pastoral town to the westward, the other south to Warwick (65 miles)
the centre of the principal agricultural district of the downs, in all
220 miles. The northern line extends from Rockhampton to West-
wood (30 miles), and a continuation of the same is now being extended
westward to Lurline (120 miles) at the junction of the Comet and the
Mackenzie Rivers, in all 150 miles. Both these lines were projected
before the discovery of the extraordinary mineral riches of the colony
or its suitability for the purposes of tropical and temperate agriculture
the main object at that period being to afford better communication
with the seaboard for the great pastoral interests to the westward of
each terminus. Since that time, however, great changes have occurred,
new interests located nearer the seaboard have stepped in to displace
the single interest that formerly existed, necessitating thereby a com-
plete revision of the project that is now no longer applicable to the
altered condition of the colony. A more extended acquaintance with
the leading characteristics of the colony and a more scientific investi-
gation of the geological features in order to draw a probable conclusion
of the most likely localities to become the seat of future industries arc
now requisite to form a correct opinion as to the direction most suitable
to the further extension of the Railway system. But viewing the
object from the information now obtainable and from the position
and influence of the various existing interests, the observer is led to
conclude that the system in future to be adopted should tend to the
extension of the several lines from the principal sea port towms to the
interior, rather than the extension as originally contemplated of one
or two lines for the special object of giving advantage to only one class
of industry. If the principle is to be taken as indisputable, that railway
lines when constructed at the national expense should be for the pur-
pose of contributing the greatest advantage to the greatest number, then
a departure from the original plan is essential to confer this boon and to
afford a fair and reasonable satisfaction to every existing interest. For
this purpose it is necessary to ascertain the numerical proportion of


the population and the values of the interests likely to be affected by
the non-extension for some time of the railway lines to the far western
interior. Taking the western boundary of the Darling Downs District
as the limit of the railway extension of the lines in the south, and the
dividing range separating the eastern watersheds from the north, west,,
and south as the limit in the northern part of the colony, it will be
seen by a reference to the map that this western interior comprises
the districts of Maranoa, Warrego, Mitchell, Gregory, and Burke,
which districts are separated from the eastern portions of the colony
by a belt of desert country varying in width from GO to 100 miles,
and extending in a northerly and westerly direction from the southern
boundary of the colony to the Gulf of Carpentaria, a distance of 1,100
miles, united only by two narrow bands of comparatively fertile
country, the one about 40 miles in width at the heads of the Flinders
River, in latitude 20°, and the other about 30 miles in width at the
heads of the Barcoo and Nive Rivers, in latitude 25°. Within this
extensive area pastoral pursuits form the only industry, which arc
represented by a sum total of 1,392,000 sheep and 260,000 head of
cattle and horses, and taking the average of two pei'sons to each one
thousand sheep and one person to each one thousand head of cattle
it is found that the gross population, with an allowance of fifty per’
cent, additional for the population of the several townships within the
area, as Surat, St. George, Tambo, Charlesville, &c., engaged in these
pursuits is represented by the comparatively trifling number of 4,566
persons, or in other words one thirty-third part of the gross population
of the colony. With such data then, it may be at once concluded that
to extend the x'aiiway system into these districts without satisfying
the requirements of the industries now existing within reasonable
access of the sea board would be to set aside and sacrifice that which
prudence, common sense, and the welfare of the colony dictates. The
importance, however, of defining some profitable limit to the exten-
sion of the present main lines and the construction of others cannot be
overlooked, as a final determination upon this point must act beneficially
upon the revenue in determining the localities most suitable for the
investment of capital whether in farming, mining, or agriculture. An


•extension of the southern main line to Condamine (77 miles), a town-
ship situated near the western boundary of the Darling Downs district
would afford facilities to the squatters west of that township, and an
extension of the line from Warwick to Stanthorpe (37 miles) would
meet the requirements of the mining interests in the southern portion,
■and eventually enable a junction to be made with the railway system
of the adjoining colony—New South Wales. From the town of Mary-
borough aline extending westward to Gayndah (85 miles) would supply
the wants of the pastoral, mining, snd agricultural interests of the
Burnet district, which might eventually be extended to Taroom (144
miles), the centre of the southern district of the Leichhardt. From a
point on the main line to Gayndah a line could be extended to
Gympie (54 miles), to meet the requirements of the mining industry
in that locality. The northern lino, now in course of construction,
from Westwood to Lurline (120 miles) at the junction of the Mackenzie
and Comet Rivers might reasonably bo extended to Clermont
(90 miles), which would tap the great resources of the Peak Downs,
and eventually a line could be extended from Lurline to Springsure
•(60 miles), and thence to the Mantuan Downs (73 miles), which
■would open up the great pastoral district of the Mitchell. As these
lines approach completion the extension of the line from Rockhamp-
ton to Gladstone (82 miles) may bo regarded as one of the certainties
in the future. From Mackay a line to Nebo (60 miles) would open
up the rich volcanic district of the Northern Leichhardt, and afford
facilities for the transport of the sugar from the plantations to the
westward of that port. The requirements of the northern portion of
the colony would be supplied by a line from either Townsville or
Bowmen to Ravens wood and thence to Dalrymple and the westward.
If from the former port the main line would proceed direct to
Dalrymple (75 miles) with a branch line to Ravenswood (40 miles),
and eventually to be extended to the westward by Avay of the volcanic
strip between the Clarke River and Solworth Creek to the upper
Flinders, thereby opening up the great plains of the Flinders and the
rich lauds and mineral areas north of that line., If from the latter
the length of line would bo increased as well as the expense since it


would be necessary to bridge the Bnrdekin River, the cost of which
would, in some measure, counterbalance the advantages Bowen
possesses in having a more sheltered harbour than Townsville. On
the other hand it must be borne in mind that Bowen possesses the
advantage of large coal deposits lying within a reasonable distance of
the port, which, when developed, might render valuable aid in the
metallurgical operations necessary to be undertaken to secure the
full returns from the auriferous reefs of Ravenswood and Charter
Towers, and to enable the copper mines around Mt. Wyatt to be
worked with advantage. The projection of the railway lines in this
form would aid most materially in developing the great resources
latent and apparent within the area east of the desert belt already
alluded to, and bring the great western prairies within reasonable
distance of railway communication; whilst at the same time it would
render the various sea ports along the coast the centres cf the several
industries within their respective districts, and deal out an equitable
share of the expenditure to every existing interest and locality. When
these more immediately important and probably self supporting lines
were constructed, the great trunk line from Carpentaria to Albury
would be simply a matter of time. What would give this the greatest
impulse w T ould be to ascertain if the coal measures (as is probable)
with workable seams of coal underlaid the whole of the great cre-
taceous plains of Western Queensland, and how far supplies of water,,
by artesian or other w r ells might be depended on.
Were these points ascertained at the expense of the Government,
and were the experiments found successful, all difficulties would
vanish so far as the construction of such a railway on the American
principle, and on far better terms than that lately offered by Messrs.
Collier to the Queensland Government.
To promote, however, the progress of the colony and to aid in the
development of its resources not only the boon of a satisfactory railway
system is required, but the satisfying as far as possible of that greater
necessity—an increase of the population. With this object the
Government of the colony has endeavoured since the period of its in-
dependence to establish a system of emigration from Europe framed
on a liberal and comprehensive basis, and adapted to the special require-


ments of both capital and labour. Situated as Queensland is so many
thousand miles distant from the parent country it has had to contend
with difficulties in that respect and to offer such equivalents to the
emigrant by its Immigration Acts as would in some measure counter-
balance the advantages held out by the less distant fields of the United
States and Canada. For this purpose a system of compensating ad-
vantages has been held out to the emigrant in the form of Land
Warrants to those emigrating at their own expense, Free Passages to
certain other classes, and Assisted Passages to others. By the first,
.each individual over twelve years of age who has not previously resided
in the colony is entitled after twelve months’ residence there to receive
a land order to the value of £2O transferable to whomsoever he pleases,
and available to that .amount for the purchase of any suburban or
country lands sold by the Colonial Government or acceptable in payment
of rent for pastoral or other lands the property of the colony; those under
twelve years of age being entitled to receive land warrants of half the
above amount. By the second system, free passages are granted to
domestic servants and agricultural labourers approved of by the
Agent-General in London; and by the third assisted passages are
granted to certain other classes of labourers and artisans in the form
of requiring only a small proportion of the passage money (valued at
£l6) to be paid before embarking and the balance within one year
after the arrival of the emigrant in the colony, when he is entitled to
the same privileges of the transferable land warrant of £2O as the
person emigrating entirely at his own expense. Since these regula-
tions have been in force a considerable stimulus has been given to
Queensland Emigration, and judging from the favourable reports that
are continually being transmitted to England by the friends of those
who have adopted the new colony as their future home it would appear
to be merely a question of additional grants of money by the Queens-
land Parliament for emigration purposes, with the organization of the
necessary clerical machinery, to supplement the present stream of
emigrants by more than double its volume. For some time past a
ship laden with emigrants has been despatched from London or other
British ports by the Agent-General in London on the average about
once a fortnight, and upon reference to the statistics of emigration


daring the past year it is found that 8500 emigrants have been
despatched during that period, and that the number of deaths upon
the gross number embarked has been less than 20 adults and 120
children, whilst 50 children were born on the voyage, or in other
words a per ceutage of loss of life less than that of the most healthy
towns in the United Kingdom. As the question of labour is one of
the most vital importance in the development of the resources of the
colony, and since reference has been briefly made to the same in cer-
tain remarks upon sugar cultivation it may be advisable to again
draw attention to this most important r-equirement and to suggest as
far as practicable, the most likely means of really settling a thriving
population in all districts in the colony whose resources will afford
them profitable occupation.
South of Mackay it may be assumed that the climate is suited to
European labour, but that British labour could with most advantage
be supplemented by that drawn from the south of Europe, men
acquainted with the details of sereculture vignerons, &c., and in a
country subject to occasional seasons of draught, the Lombardy
farmer and peasant accustomed to the construction of irrigation
works and their practical application would be invaluable.
Already the attention of Italians has been directed to Queens-
land, and pioneers have proceeded to the colony to judge for them-
selves of its capabilities.
Should their report be favourable, it would require the granting
the same facilities for emigration from an Italian Port as formerly
.existed from Hamburg to deflect in great measure to Queensland
the stream of valuable emigrants now proceeding from Italy to
South America.
North of Mackay, whilst admitting the ability of the constitu-
tion of the Northern European to withstand with impunity the effect
of field labour, still it is only reasonable to suppose that Southern
European, Chinese, or coolie labour will be that on which sugar,
coffee and indigo planters will rely for their field work.
Especially will this be found to be the case, on the plantations
which will be formed north of the Herbert River, on the newly
.discovered agricultural districts of the Johnson and Darn tree Rivers.


Males.
Above.
Under.
4,156
998
7,721
468
1,462
1
44
...
19
80
2
157
49
5
34
...
13,679
1,517
The mail line of steamers will be found the most available for the
introduction of this class of labour, and where the country to be
settled is so enormous and so varied in the character of its soil
and climate, there can be no doubt that sooner or later all Queens-
land colonists will be of one mind in this matter, that the carrying
out the old adage is the true policy for the well-being of the whole
state, “ the more the merrier.”
In what favour Queensland stands in the Colonial labour market,,
is shown by the returns of immigration and emigration for 1874,
which is appended.
POPULATION’ RETURN. —Arrivals.—Whence.
F emales.
Total.
Above. Under.
j Great Britain.
2,717 968
1,399 213
8,839
9,801
Australian Colonies
South Sea Islands
New York
61 2
1,525
Singapore
New Caledonia
China
Germany
Batavia .
104 57
Hong Kong
Total
4,294
1,241
20,731
DEPARTURES,
I.—DESTINATION.
Great Britain.
111
4,763
27 i 219
Australian Colonies
South Sea Islands..
Singapore
1,098
27
211 j 6,357
1 1,072
1,042
4 1 72
China.
New Caledonia
Hong Kong ..
3 55
Manilla
U. S. of America
6,027 I 324 1,209
Total
7,806 1
Total Arrivals 20,731
Total Departures 7,805
Excess of Arrivals 12,925


i. fi. HAtill;
HuNfihiiiE
HANDBOOK
OP THE
SINGAPORE ROUTE TO AUSTRALIA
THE STEAMERS OP
THE EASTERN AND AUSTRALIAN MAIL STEAM
COMPANY, LIMITED,
((Unbcr IJcsfnl Contract faith tljc (Sofarnmcnt)
AND THE STEAM LINES IN CORRESPONDENCE.
(ftompanp’s ©tffcw:
34, LEADENHALL STREET, E.C.
©enrral Agents:
GUTHRIE & Co., Singapore.
Agents:
America
Ahoy
Calcutta
Dunedin, N.Z.
Galls . ,
Hong Kong
Java . . .
Manila
Melbourne
Paris
Queensland
Sydney . .
Wellington, N.Z.
Boyd dc Co.
Lyall, Rennie I Co.
Bright Bros. I Co.
Vandespar & Go.
Gibb, Livingston dc Go.
Tidman, Balfour I Co.
Smith, Bell dc Go.
Bright Bros, dc Co.
Maintz dc Co., 41, Rue La.fitte.
Bright Bros, dc Co.
Bright Bi'os. dc Co.
Levin dc Co.


INDEX
Agents, Names of the Company's .. ... ... .. ... 1
Average Length of Passage ... „ ... ... ... ... ... 6
Baggage, General Information Regarding ;.. 10
Bedding ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Cheques and Drafts... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. *
Children ... . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Currency in France, Singapore, China, Java and India ... ... 15
General Conditions’... ... , . ... ... ... .. 7
„ , „ for Specie, Goods, and Parcels .. ... ... II
General Information for Passengers by “ Castle,” “ China,” and
“Ocean” Lines ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
Goods and Merchandize Tariff from London ... ... ... ... 13
Insurance ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 13
Messageries Maritimes of France-
General Information ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Baggage ... ... ; 20
Baggage Allowance and Tariff from Marseilles ... ... ... 21
„ „ „ from London ... ... ... 21,22
General Conditions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
Railway Arrangements ... ... ... .. .. ... 25
Tariff on Packages and Parcels from Marseilles ... .. ... 27
General Conditions relative to ditto... ... ... ... ... 29
Spedie’anct Valuables Tariff ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Native Servants ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Parcels and Packages Tariff from London ... ... ... ... 12
„ „ „ ~ ~ per Messageries Maritimes 28
„ „ ~ „ „ per Peninsular and Oriental
Steam Navigation Company ... ... ... ... ... 39
Passengers, General Information for ... ... .. ... ... 7
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company—
General Information for Passengers... ... ... ... ... 32
Trains from and to Waterloo Station and Southampton ... ... 34
Baggage—General Information ... ... ... ... ... 34
Terms and Conditions for the Conveyance of Packages and Parcels 38
Parcel Rates ... ... ... ... ... 39
Quarantine ... .. ... -v. ... ... ... ... .. 12
Reserved Accommodation . ... ... .. ... ... 7
Steamers of the Company... %.. ... ... .. .. ... 3
„ „ Messageries 1 Maritimes Company in Correspondence ... 3
„ „ Peninsular and Oriental Company „ ... 4
~ „ Holt’s “ Ocean ” Line „ . 5
„ „ “ Castle ” Line „ ... d
„ „ “China” Line „ ... 6
Table of Fares ... ... ... ...- ... ... ... ... 43
Wines, Spirits, &c ... 7
Vs\vnl\ . . . . uvkjey.Xi'jQ


OUTVVARI
D ROUTE.
BRANCH LINE.
I
joudon.
0)
0
e
r-
Venice.
Brin-
disi.
> t....,
Singapore.
Batavia.
| Somerset
Townsville.
Bowen.
ICeppel Bay
_
Sydney.
Mel-
bourue
Singapore to
Xiong Kong.
Mail via
Mail vio
V
Brindisi
P. & O.
P. & O.
Boat
Leaves.
Arrives.
I Loaves.
Arrives.
Leaves.
Arrive?.
Leaves.
Arrives.
Leaves.
Arrives.
Leaves.
Arrives.
Leaves.
Arrives.
Leaves.!
Arrives.!
Leaves.
Arrives.
ampton
Leaves
Brindisi
Leaves
Brat
Leaves
Boat
Leaves
*ik>at
Arrives
Boat
Thurs.
• 2 p. m.
Fri.
8 30 p.m
Fri.
a. in.
Mm.
4 a.m.
Sin .
Tues.
Wed,
i Tues.
I p.m.
Thurs.
Fri.
Sun.
Mon.
Thurs.
12 noon
Thurs.
3 p.m.
Fri.
3 a.m.
Fii.
6 a.m.
Sat.
1 p.m.
Sat.
4 p.m.
Mon.
7 a.m.
Tues.
7 p.m.
Fri.
4 a.m.
Mon.
Wed.
—
1877
2 Feb
1877
2 Feb
1877
5 Feb
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
1877
’ 1877
1877
1877
25 Jan
1877
•28 Jam
6 Mar
1S77
28 Feb
6 Mar
IS Mar
19 Mar
22 Mar
22 Mar
23 Alar
23 Mar
24 Mar
24 Mar
26 Mar
27 Mar
30 Ala--
2 Apr
4 Apr
Mon
{ Mon.
Sat.
Sun.
Wed.
Wed.
Thurs
Thurs.
Fri.
Fri.
Sun.
Mon.
Thurs.
Sun.
Tues.
22 Feb
2 Mar
■s: Keti
2 Mar
5 Mar
'
2 Ap:-
28 Mar
2 Apr
14 Apr
15 Apr
18 Apr
18 Apr
19 Apr
19 Apr
20 Apr
20 Apr
22 Apr
23 Apr
26 Apr
29 Apr
1 May
22 Mar
80 Mar
•23 Ma,
30 Mar
2 Apr
25 Mar
30 Apr
Men.
23 Apr
30 Apr
12 May
13 May
16 May
16 May
17 May
17 May
18 May
18 May
20 May
21 May
24 May
27 May
29 May
19 Apr
27 Apr
20 Apr
27 Apr
30 Apr
22 Apr'
28 May
2) May
28 May
9 June
10 June
13 June
13 June
14 June
14 Junt
15 June
15 June
17 June
18 June
21 June
24 June
26 June
17 May
25 May
s M ay
25 May
28 May
20 May
25 J une
18 June
25 June
7 July
S July
11 July
11 July
12 July
12 JuL
13 July
13 July
15 Julyi
1-6 July
19 July
22 July
24 July
14 June
22 June
' 5 ,! line
22June
25 June
1.7 Jim*
23 July
16 July
23 July
4 Aug
5 Aug
8 Aug
8 Aug
9 Aug
9 Aug
10 Aug
10 Aug
12 Aug
13 Aug
16 Aug
19 Aug
21 Aug
12 July
20 July
20 July
23 July
i 5 .1 uly
20 Aug
13 Aug
20 Aug
1 Sept
2 Sept
5 Sept
5 Sept
6 Sept
6 Sept
7 Sept
7 Sept
9 Sept:
10 Sept
13 Sept
16 Sept
18 Sept
9 Aug
17 Aug
10 An*
17 Aug
20 Aug
12 Aug
17 Sept!
10 Sept
17 Sept
29 Sept
80 Sept
3 Oct
3 Oct
4 Oct
4 Oct
5 Oct
5 Oct
' 7 Oct ;
8 Oct
11 Oct
14 Oct
16 Oct
6 Sep
14 Sept
Sept.
14 Sept
17 Sept
9 Sept
15 Oct
Wed.-
10 Oct
15 Oct
27 Oct
28 Oct
31 Oct
31 Oct
1 Nov
1 Nov
2 Nov
2 Nov
4 Nov
5 Nov
8 Nov
11 Nov
13 Nov
!
Tues.
Tues.
Sun.
Mon.
Thurs.
Thurs.
Fri.
Fri.
Sat.
Sat
Mop.
Tues.
Fri.
Mon.
Wed.
1
4.Oct I
12 Oct
7 Oct
12 Oct
15 Oct
, 7 Oct
13 Nov
7 Nov
13 Nov
25 Nov
26 Nov
29 Nov
29 Nov
30 Nov
30 Nov
1 Dec
1 Dec
3 Dec
4 Dec
1878
7 Dec
1878
10 Dec
1878
12 Dec
1878
1
1 Nov |
9 Nov
2 Nov
9 Nov
12 Nov
4 Nor
11 Dec
1878
5 Dec
11 Dec
1878
23 Dec
1878
24 Dec
1878
27 Dec
1878
27 Dec
1878
28 Dec
1878
28 Dec
1878
29 Dec
1678
29 Dec
1878
31 Dec !
1878 |
1 Jan
4 Jan
7 Jan
9 Jan
29 Nov I
7 Dec
,, \:
7 Dec
10 Dec
8 Jan
1*7^
. ■ :
8 Jan
20 Jan
21 Jan
24 Jan
24 Jan
25 Jan
25 Jan
26 Jan
26 Jan
28 Jan
29 Jan
1 Feb
4 Feb
6 Feb
1
27 Dec ’
■ 1
1878
4 Jan
28 Dec
1878
4 Jan
1878
7 Jan
.99 c*' -,
5 Feb
30 L".«
5 Feb
17 Feb
18 Feb
21 Feb
21 Feb
22 Feb
22 Feb
23 Feb
23 Feb
25 Feb
26 Feb
1 Mar
4 Mar
6 March
* Or s : x hours after arrival of steamer from Galle if before due date, provided that the steamer can leave before 1 p.m.
f These Dates are only approximate.
No. 31—76.]
Cjje Eastern an & Australian Pail Cmupani), fimiteir
T _A_ BLE
Showing the PROPOSED MOVEMENTS of the STEAMERS for the Year 1877.


J V i
OCX«s*ui* 5 -not. ,oJE
■ I
I v
ialftnhfij soinoV . ~ v.\>* jiol/ 1
.«aV«Oj- te(.£[ ,q o A ‘1
aavinA , , i f r .1 i
89VJW J I HSVBOj * H.)Y«SvI
B'jvaaJ
.89 tPt
.ni.q I .-. itiT * 11,1 .i'i'l .*ll
__ .m.« *. .mlB
V,'7 ">' ;i ;«8i r,v.t
da'fi a (ia'*? v rlaV £ iu',l AS
■
• ■
KYI
. r v 1 r
06 -»bAOS yin I. ?.£ xKil.Ot yful. OS iylu
M-iriTl • M viiAo': vrr/. ?f
YIHA M. -in/ if girA T 1 . jjuA *•
Jqeg TI JqaS H Bqa6 M qeg.a
.B>oT ,89« T
yoK fir ilO .;f 'at) SI Job SI ‘ jaO>
; voK si v«k e -rtrA o voxrx
Of .al I V . .fl' T ■ ;rM. «V
.
*"■;.■ ■■—■ 1 .■ - • , - --1 -- , 11 . ;
silli«i'l toMvoiq t s4.;b sirfi aioleid li ailßt) iriont immou to tarSna irtJtc arnoi! x!» iO *
.aJAmiJViqqa yino on. no.t/;Cf w>rfF f
. Ji.a ! aiofad avaal mia


STEAMERS
OF THE
(fastern ani) Australian ?llail Steam
(L timpani), fumiieif.
31 ' •
« - J '>f)‘' / i ] Yf *•
ij ’ ~ " S&'\
J : £
Tons Burden. Commander. H. P. H. P.
Nominal. Effective
“•Bowen” 1700 J. Miller .250 1300
“Brisbane” ...1700... R. Balfour . „ .250 1300
“Normanby” 1100 J. A. Redell 170 850
“Somerset” 1100.. J. Torrance 170 850
> r "
STEAMERS IN CORRESPONDENCE.
t \ ■ sahal
THE MESSAGERIES MARITIMES OF FRANCE FROM MARSEILLES.
Tons % H. P. Nominal.,
“Amazone”. . .... 3144 ... ... 500.
“Anadyr” .... :.. 3642 ••• 600
' Ava” ... ... SI4T - ... 500
“ Djemnah . .... 3642 ... ... 600
“ Hoogly” ..... • .... ■ 2788 .. 500
“Iraouaddy” . 3676 ........ 600
.“ Meikong”..... . ... ■ 6176 ■A; : -500
“ Peiho ” .... 3173 .... 500
“Sindh” - .... 3181.- ... ........ . 500'
“ Tigte ” .... 3063, .......... 500 ' • *
. ... JioolooWTTf TTT3 7. " ni-isT **


PENINSULAR AND ORIENTAL STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
“Adria” 1224..
“Assam” 3033..
“Australia” 3663..
“Avoca” 1482..
“Bangalore” 2342..
“ Baroda” 1874.
“ Bokhara ” 2932.
“ Bombay ” 1327.,
“Cathay” 2982..
“ Ceylon ” 2111
“China” 2016.
“ Columbian ” 2283..
“Deccan” 3429..
“'Geelong” 1835.,
“Golconda” 1909..
“Gwalior” 2725..
“ Hindostan ” 3113
“Hydaspes” 2984.
“ Indus ” 3470.
“Kashgar” .’. 2621.
“Khedive” 3742.,
“ Khiva ” 2609.,
“Lombardy” 2723.
“Malacca” 1709.
“Malwa” 2933.
“ Massilia ” (Paddle) 1640..
“ Mirzapore ” 3763..
“Mongolia” 2833.
“Nepaul” 3536..
“Nizam” 2725..
“Orissa” 1647.
« Pekin ” 3777.
, Horse-
Commander.
power.
W. E. Breeze 110
G. F. Cates 500
J. S. Murray 600
E. G. Stead 250
G. N. Hector 450
W. W. Fentiman 400
W. D. Anderson 450
H. E. Smith 275
R. T. Dundas 450
G. S. Brooks 450
J. C. Almond 400
T. Alderton 500
J. D. Gaby 550
C. Fraser 250
W. Seaton 450
J. C. Babot 450
N. Roskell, R.N.R 600
W. B. Andrews 450
S. D. Shallard 500
E. I. Baker 450
J. D. Steward 600
G. Lee 450
W. B. Hall 450
E. M. Edmond, R.N.R 300
. P. S. Tomlin 450
4OO
A. Parish, R.N.R 600
A. Coleman 530
R. Methven 600
A. E. Barlow 450
W. Pockley 300
W. Woolcott 600


Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company —continued.
Tons. Commander. H.P.
4 ‘Pera” 2119 G. Hyde, R.N.R. ~ 450
“Peshawur” 3781 C. A. White 600
“ Poonah ” 3180 W. G. Angove 550
“Siam” 3033 N. W. Haselwood, R.N.R.. 500
“ Sumatra ” 2488 C. Anderson 450
“ Sunda” 1704 I. Reeves ... 300
“Surat” 3141 G. C. Burne 530
“Tanjore” 2263 J. Orman 450
“Teheran” 2589...... A. H. Johnson 400
“Thibet” 2593 N. Stewart, R.N.R 400
“ Travancore ” 1900 W. Barratt 350
“ Yenetia” 2726 C. G. Perkins 450
“Zambesi” 2431...... A. Symons 370
“Delhi” 2178 400
“Mooltan” 2257 450
“Nubia” 2096 450
FROM LIVERPOOL DIRECT.
HOLT’S “OCEAN” LINE,
Tons. Commander. H.P. Nominal
“Achilles” 2279 T. Russell 300
“Agamemnon” ...... 2279 J. Wilding 300
“Ajai” 2279 A. Kidd .. 300
+ “ Anchises” 2020 C. Butler 250
X ' Antenor ” 2109 H. Jones 250
X'* Deucalion ” 2067 R. J. Brown 250
“Diomed” 1915 M. H. F. Jackson ... 170
+ u Glaucus” 2112 T, S. Jackson 250
i “ Menelaus ” 1992 R. F. Scale 225
“Nestor” 1869 J. K. Webster 150
X“ Patroclus” 2118 ......... W. Courtenay 250
“Priam”...,. 2039 S, H. Butler 200


Holt's “Ocean" Line— continued.
Tons.
Commander. H.P.
...... M. R. White 250
+ ‘ Stentor ” 2020
j“ Ulysses” 1953
+ “ Hector” 2100
J. W. Byrne 225
Building
+ “ Orestes” 2100
do. h. ■—
X “ Sarpedon” 2100
2lOO do.
To i ncrease the comfort of Passengers in the Tropics, the steamers marked +
are constructed with saloon and sleeping accommodation on deck.
FROM LONDON DIRECT.
“CASTLE” LINE.
Tons. Commander. H. P. Nominal
“Braemar Castle ”... 2150 W. J. Ayles ... •• 300
“Gordon Castle ” ... 1980 ... T. Jones ... ... ... 255
'* Glamis Castle ” ... 2380 ... J. Greig ... ... ... 300
“ Fleurs Castle ”.. 2-100 .. li. Thompson ... ... 300
“ Loudoun Castle ” 2470 ... A. Marshall ... ... 450
“CHINA” LINE.
Tons. Commander. H. P. Nomina?
“Nankin” 2423 —Brace... 300
“ Hankow ” 3594 Symington 500
AVERAGE LENGTH OF PASSAGE.
The time occupied between the various ports is about—
,■* Singapore to Somerset ... ... .. 10 days
Somerset „ Cooktown ... ... ... 2■ „
Cooktown „ Townsville ... ... ... 2 ~
Townsville „ Bowen ... ... ... £
. 2 n
, Bowen „ Keppel Bat ... .. .. 2
Keppel Bay „ Brisbane ... ... .... 1 „
Brisbane ,/Sydney ... ... ... 3 ~
Sydney „ Melbourne ... ... ... 2. , r
The Steamer* call at Java only under special arrangement.


GENERAL INFORMATION FOR PASSENGERS
A.nd Conditions under which they are carried by the Eastern <k Australian
Company’s Steamers.
Each first-class passenger is entitled to one berth in a cabin.
Reserved accommodation can be secured by first-class passengers
on application to the Company’s Agents.
Passengers are not allowed to take on board wines, spirits, or
other liquors for use during the voyage.
Children with their parents over three and under ten years of age
are charged half fares. One in a family under three (no berth pro-
vided) free.
Native servants are charged as deck passengers.
Bedding, Linen and all requisite cabin furniture are provided on
the steamer at the expense of the Company, together with the
attendance of experienced male and female servants.
Each of the Company’s steamers carries a qualified surgeon.
Servants soliciting gratuities will be dismissed the Company’s
service.


Cue-half of the passage-money must be paid on securing passage,
and the balance a fortnight before embarkation.
Half the amount of passage-money is forfeited by passengers not
embarking after engaging passage.
Any passenger, however, being prevented by unavoidable circum-
stances from availing himself of a passage at the period for which it
Avas taken, can effect a transfer ot the passage to a subsequent steamer,
provided sufficient notice be given. In such cases there will be no-
forfeituie of any portion of the deposit paid, and accommodation as
similar as circumstances permit will be allotted.
Passengers purchasing their tickets from the Purser on board the-
steamer, will be charged ten per cent, additional.
Cheques or Drafts on England cannot be accepted in payment of
passage-money by the Company’s Agents at Foreign Ports, but it must
be paid in the currency of Ports.
No berth or cabin is to be occupied by a passenger without appli-
cation to the Agent on shore, or the Purser on board. It is to be-
understood that a passenger occupying a cabin of two or more berths,
on the departure of the vessel (unless he shall have paid an additional
sum for its exclusive occupation) is not to object to the vacant berth
or berths being filled up at the intermediate Ports if required.
The ladies’ saloon and baths, «fec., connected therewith, are reserved
exclusively for the use of lady passengers.
Gentlemen will not be admitted into the ladies’ saloon.
Each cabin is reserved for the exclusive use of its occupants.


I)ecic passengers will only be admitted to such portions of the ship
as may be allotted them.
Passengers’ servants will only be admitted into the saloon and
cabins while in attendance on their masters, and they will be allowed
to remain there only while so employed.
Smoking is strictly prohibited in the saloons, cabins, and steerage,
or other parts between decks. It is allowed only in such part of the
vessel as may be especially appropriated for it.
Passengers must comply with the regulations established on
board the steamers for the general comfort and safety.
The passage tickets are delivered on the conditions stipulated
thereon. Passengers are to accept all consequences resulting from the
employment of the steamers in the mail service.
The Company waive all responsibility in the event of the steamers
non-arrival at the point of junction at Singapore, whether arising from
accidents, or circumstances beyond their control, in such cases the
Company undertake only to convey passengers to their destination by
their next steamer ; the expense of such detention at the port of
transhipment, or any other consequences arising from the absence of
such coincidence, will be borne by the passengers.
The dates of departures indicated in the time tables are only
approximate, except those from the European Ports and Brisbane.
From all other ports the dates and hours of departure are subordinate
to the arrival of the steamers.
In case of any advance or delay in the departure from any port,
passengers booked, will not, on account of such advance or delay, be
entitled to any claim whatever upon the Company.


The passage tickets delivered by the agents of the Company must,
in order to be made available, be signed by the passenger to whom they
are delivered.
The passage tickets must be given up on board to the commander,
purser, or officer appointed by the Company to receive them.
The passage tickets are personal, and cannot be transferred without
the permission of the Company.
In case a passenger should desire to change from a general cabin to
a, single cabin, the difference will be charged from the last port
called at to his destination.
Persons dangerously ill, or suffering from contagious diseases, or
from, mental alienation cannot be admitted on board the steamers.
In the event of either of such afflictions declaring itself in the course
of the voyage, the person will be landed at the nearest port at which
the steamer may call. Any detention will be at the passengers own
expense, who will, however, after convalescence be entitled to resume
his journey, without additional expense, on one of the Company’s
steamers.
BAGGAGE.
The attention of passengers by the Company’s and corresponding
steamers is respectfully requested to the undermentioned regulations
in reference to Baggage : much trouble and loss are occasionally
caused by their neglect or non-observance.
All Baggage should be packed in portmanteaux or trunks,
marked with the owner’s name and port of destination in paint, in
full, and fastened securely with case locks. Padlocks and leather
straps are liable to damage or removal. The Company will
not be responsible for the safe conveyance of insecure packages.
Canvas covers to packages or baggage are not recommended as they
are frequently removed and lead to the loss of the packages.


The baggage of passengers must contain only their personal
effects ; packages containing jewellery, plate, and other valuables,
must be especially declared and registered prior to shipment, and
height paid thereon. Any infringement of these regulations will
subject the packages to detention for freight by the Company’s Agents,
or Custom-House authorities.
All baggage must be shipped not later than noon on the day
previous to sailing, except one portmanteau for cabin use, bags,
or hat boxes.
The amount of baggage allowed between Singapore and Australia
to each first-class passenger is three cwt., any excess being charged
for at the rate of fifteen shillings per cwt. Children paying half fare
are entitled to only half the amount of baggage.
The portmanteau for cabin use should not exceed 3 feet in length,
1 foot 3 inches in width, and 1 foot 3 inches in depth.
Deck chairs are received on board at the owner’s risk.
Baggage is frequently placed at the disposal of passengers in the
baggage-room. It can also be occasionally had up from the baggage-
room on application to the Officer in charge.
No trunks or large boxes are allowed in the saloon or cabins, but
only small portmanteaux or bags.
Passengers who may miss any packages on arrival at their desti-
nation, are recommended to apply without delay to the Company’s
Agent, giving full particulars in writing, when application will be at
once made to the Missing Baggage Department.
The Company will not receive on board their vessels any goods of
a dangerous or damaging nature. If any such goods be shipped with-
out notice, the shippers will not only be liable to the penalties imposed
by Statute, but also for all damages sustajned in consequence of such
shipment,


Notice. —The Company will not be responsible for, and shall be
exempt in respect of any detention or delay of passengers arising
from any circumstances whatever, and the Company will not be
responsible for, and shall be exempt from any act, default, or
negligence of the companies’ servants, or from the restrictions
of quarantine wheresoever imposed, or from circumstances arising
out of or connected with the employment of the Company’s
vessels in the mail service.
Passengers personal Baggage (except plate, jewellery, precious stones,
gold or silver of any kind, watches, specie or bullion, trinkets, bank
notes, deeds, papers, or other valuables), can be insured on applica-
tion at the offices of the Company,
In event of the imposition of Quarantine a charge of ten shillings
per day will be payable by each first-class passenger during the con-
tinuance of the restrictions for their maintenance on board during
the detention of the steamer.
RATES OF FREIGHT.
ON PARCELS AND PACKAGES FROM LONDON.
The Eastern and Australian Mail Steam Company, Limited, receive-
at their Offices, 34, Leadenhall Street, E.C., and tax as parcels,
packages for Queensland Ports, Sydney and Melbourne, not exceeding
31 cubic feet measurement, or 112 lbs. weight.
The freight on such packages is always payable in advance, as follows
Eiom London to Australia . . 1/3 per lb., or fraction of a lb.
with a minimum charge of 5/.
A Tax of Is. lid, on each Package per Messageries Maritim.es
route is levied under French law, including the stamping in France
of the book or parcels receipt. This sum must be added to the Freight
and included in the remittance.


Freight will be charged on value, measurement, or weight, at the
option of the Company.
The Company will not be responsible for loss or damage to any
package beyond the value of £5, except when the value is declared and
freight charged accordingly.
All packages are to be carried under the conditions specified in the
Bills of Lading of this Company anc of the Messageries Mari times
and Peninsular and Oriental Companies for cargo.
The name and address of the consignee in full must lie plainly
marked on each package, and its contents and value declared.
Information as to the shipment of packages exceeding the above-
mentioned weight or dimensions can be obtained at the Company’s
offices, 34, Leadenhall Street.
The Company are not responsible for any consequences arising
from sea risks, accidents to machinery, or from other causes enumerated
in the conditions of the Bills of Lading.
The Marine Insurance is at the shipper’s risk, but it can, if
required, be covered under the open policies of the Company.
All parcels will be consigned to the Company’s Agents, to whom
application should be made at the respective ports of destination.
The expenses of customs, clearance, duty, Ac., are to be paid by
consignee.
ON GOODS, MERCHANDISE, &c.
The rates of freight for goods by the Steamers of this Company
are for every ton of 30 cwt. or 40 feet measurement; —
From London to Queensland ... 110/- \
„ „ Sydney ... 110/-] &10 % Fringe.
subject to the general conditions, see page 14.
Freight will be charged on measurement or weight at the option
of the Companies.


ON SPECIE AXD VALUABLES.
Between Australian Ports, Singapore and China, freight will be-
charged on value, measurement, or weight, at the option of the
Company. If on value, the charges will be as follows:
Under £lOOO. Above £lOOO.
Watches, Jewellery, Ac 2 per cent. .. TV per cent.
s P ecie H „ ... i
The Company will not be responsible for loss or damage to any
package beyond the value of £5.
All packages intended for shipment must be delivered alongside
the Companies h essels not less than three days before the date of
sailing.
GENERAL CONDITIONS RELATIVE TO SPECIE, GOODS,
AND PARCELS.
Freight is always payable in advance.
The Companies urgently recommend shippers to have their packages
strongly made and well secured, and to make use of cases lined with
tin for goods susceptible of being injured by the effects of the sea
voyage, climate, Ac.
No goods of an inflammable or combustible nature, such as chemical
products, ether, chloroform, oils, spirits, gunpowder, percussion caps
or powder, oil of vitriol, tar, turpentine, acids, lucifer matches, Ac.,
will be received on board the Company’s steamers, or the steamers of
the Companies in correspondence. Persons infringing this prohibition
will expose themselves to the consequences of any loss or injury arising


fiom such infringement, .also to the penalties enacted by the British.
-Colonial, and French laws, and to any claims from the third parties
or the Companies.
Specie declared under or at an incorrect value will be charged a
double rate of freight on the real value.
Every case, bale, or package must be distinctly port marked on the
package itself.
All shipments made by the Company’s steamers, or by steamers
m correspondence, are subject to the terms and conditions of the
Bills of Lading of the respective Companies.
lire Currency in France is in Francs, in Singapore and China in
Dollars and J aels, in Java in Guilders, in India in Rupees.
The approximate Present Value of 1 Franc ------ o 10
1 Dollar 4 0
” » »
1 Tael - - - ---53
” 33 ,5
1 Guilder ----- 1 g
” 33 33
1 Rupee 1 9
” 33 33
I he values are subject to fluctuations of Exchange from time to
time.
The Agents at the various Ports will furnish the respective values
■of the above coins at date.




ROUTE
to SINGAPORE
STEAMERS OF THE
MESSA.GERIES MARITIMES,
FROM TO AUSTRALIA
STEAMERS OF THE
EASTERN & AUSTRALIAN MAIL ‘STEAM COMPANY.


GENERAL INFORMATION.
The rates of passage money between Marseilles and Singapore are
for the sea passage only (including the Suez Canal dues on pas-
sengers). They include the steward’s fees and food, also table wine
or beer to first or second class passengers, during the voyage from
Marseilles to Singapore, or vice versa.
The Messageries Mari times Company’s London Head Office, 97,
Cannon Street, E.C., issues first class through tickets by the South
Eastern Railway, from London to Marseilles, available for 15 days,
with option for the holders to break the journey by stopping at
Folkestone and Boulogne (or Dover or Calais), Amiens, Paris, Dijon
and Lyons, as follows :
Yia Dover and Calais, £1 ss. Od. Via Folkestone and Boulogne,
£7 Is. 3d.; and also from London to Naples, via Calais and Boulogne,
Paris and Florence, £l2 2s 6d.
All first class passengers between Marseilles and Singapore are
are entitled to one berth in a two berth cabin.
Reserved accommodation for one first class passenger can be
obtained by application to the Company by paying 50 per cent,
additional fare.
Table wines or beer are supplied free to first and second class
passengers; extra wines, spirits, beer, and liquors, can be purchased
on board the steamers.
Passengers are not allowed to take on board wines, spirits, or
other liquors for use during the voyage.


Children (with parent) between three and ten years of age, are
charged half rate of the class of the parent ; those under three years
(no berth provided) free.
One berth will be allowed for one child paying half fare.
In consequence of recent arrangements, special second class accom-
modation has been provided for ladies and gentlemen, who are
entitled each to one berth in a four-berth cabin, and have the use of
a second-class saloon with separate table.
Bedding, linen, and all requisite cabin furniture are provided in
the steamers at the Company’s expense, together with the attendance
of experienced male and female servants.
Servants soliciting gratuities will be dismissed from the Company’s
service.
Each of the Company’s steamers carries a qualified surgeon,
whose attendance, as regulated by the Company’s bye laws, is free of
charge.
Half the passage money, when the amount exceeds £2O, is
required to be paid on securing passage, and the balance a fortnight
before embarkation.
Passengers not embarking after engaging passage, forfeit the
deposit of half the amount of passage money.
In case, however, of a passenger being unavoidably prevented
from availing himself of a passage at the period for which it was
taken, a transfer of the passage to a subsequent steamer can be
effected, on sufficient notice being given, without forfeiture of any
portion of the deposit paid, and accommodation will be allotted as
similar as circumstances will permit.


Cheques, letters of credit, &c ,, remitted by post, to be drawn in
favour of the “ Messageries Maritimes Company’s London Agent, or
Order,” and crossed “London Joint Stock Bank” (the Company’s
Bankers).
Cheques and drafts on England cannot be accepted in payment of
passage money by the Company’s agents in foreign ports.
No berth or cabin is to be occupied by a passenger without
application to the agent on shore, or the purser on board. It is to be
understood that a passenger occupying a cabin of two or more berths
on the departure of the vessel (unless he shall have paid an additional
sum for its exclusive occupation), is not to object to the vacant berth
or berths being filled up at the intermediate ports, if required.
Passengers will have to defray their own expenses for hotels, in
the event of any detention, and in all cases in which the Company’s
steamers may be placed in quarantine, first class passengers will be
charged 10s., second class passengers Bs., third class passengers 3s,
per day for their maintenance on board during the detention of the
steamer.
Passengers must comply with the regulations established on
board the steamers for the general comfort and safety.
BAGGAGE.
The attention of passengers by the Company’s steamers is res-
pectfully requested to the undermentioned regulations in reference
to baggage ; much trouble and loss are occasionally caused by their
neglect or non-observance.
All baggage should be packed in leather portmanteaux or trunks,
marked with the owner’s name and port of destination in paint, in
full, and fastened securely with case locks, padlocks and leather straps
being liable to damage or removal. The Company will not be respon-
sible for the safe conveyance of insecure packages. Canvas covers to
packages or baggage are not recommended, as they are frequently
removed, and lead to the loss of the packages.


The baggage of passengers must contain only their personal
effects, or freight must be paid thereon. Shipment of goods or stores
as baggage is strictly prohibited.
Specie, jewels, plate, and other valaubles (over £l2O for each pas-
senger) are to be specially declared to the Company’s booking agent,
or to the officer in charge of the luggage.
Unless this declaration be made when the luggage is registered,
the liabilit v of the Company is limited to £l2O.
In all cases evidence must be given in support of claims, (if any).
Any infringement of these regulations will subject the packages
to detention for freight by the Company's agents or Custom House
authorities.
BAGGAGE ALLOWANCE AND TARIFF.
FROM MARSEILLES
When embarking at Marseilles, first and second class passengers
are allowed on board the Corapcny’s steamers from Marseilles 150
kilogrammes of personal luggage, free of freight; children paying half
fare, and third class, or deck passengers, are allowed 75 kilogrammes.
A passenger paying for reserved accommodation is allowed 250
kilogrammes of personal luggage free.
FROM LONDON.
When departing from London, first and second-class passengers are
allowed on board the Company’s steamers 3 cwt. of personal luggage,
free of freight, and children from three to ten and third-class passen-
gers cwt.
A passenger taking reserved accommodation will be allowed
5 cwt. of personal luggage free.
Passengers booked in London are entitled to the free conveyance
of luggage from London as above.


Luggage, if forwarded overland, via Boulogne, must be delivered
at the Messageries Maritimes Company’s London head office, 97, Cannon
Street, E.C., or at the Sub-Agency, 51, Pall Mall, S.W., eight days
before the departure of the steamer from Marseilles.
Extra luggage charged for as follows ;
From London, 365. per cwt.; from Marseilles, 20s, per cvvt.-j from
Suez, 10s. per cwt. to Singapore in addition to the charge by the
Eastern and Australian Mail Steam Company to or from Australia of
los, per cwt.
Insurance on luggage can be effected through the Company's
offices in London at moderate rates.
Luggage is also received at the Company’s offices as above men-
tioned sixteen days before the departure of the steamer from Marseilles,
for conveyance to Marseilles, via Gibraltar, by the Company’s steamers
from London.
Extra luggage, exceeding the limits above stated, will then be
charged from London 20s. instead of 365. per cwt.
All baggage must be shipped not later than noon on the day pre-
vious to sailing, except one portmanteau for cabin use, bags or hat
boxes.
The portmanteau for cabin use should not exceed 3 ft, in length,
1 ft. 3 in. in width, and 1 ft. 3 in. in depth.
Deck chairs received on board at owners’ risk.
Baggage is daily placed (when the weather and the necessities of
the service on board permit it) at the disposal of the passengers in
the baggage-room between Suez and the port of destination. It
can be occasionally placed in the between decks or cabins on applica-
tion to the officer in charge.
No trunks or large boxes are allowed in the cabins, but only small
portmanteaux or bags.
Passengers who may miss any package or baggage on arrival at
their destination are recommended to apply, ivithout delay , to the
Company’s agent, giving full particulars, in writing, when application
will at once be made to the Missing Baggage Department.






GOODS OF A DANGEROUS NATURE.
Caution to Passengers,
The Company will not receive on board any of their vessels any
baggage or goods of a dangerous or damaging nature. If any such
goods be shipped without notice, the shippers will not only be liable
to the penalties imposed by statute, but also for all damages sustained
.in consequence of such shipment.
Notice.— The Company will not be responsible for and shall be
exempt from all liability in respect of any detention or delay of pas-
sengers arising from any circumstances whatever, and the Company
will not be responsible for and shall be exempt from any act, default,
or negligence of the Company’s servants, or from the restrictions of
quarantine wheresoever imposed, or from circumstances arising out of
or connected with the employment of the Company’s vessels in the
mail service of the French Government, or any foreign power.
Passengers’ personal baggage (except plate, jewellery, precious
stones, gold or silver of any kind, watches, specie or bullion, trinkets,
bank-notes, deeds, papers, or other valuables) can be insured
on declaration of the value and payment of premium, &c. Such
insurance may be effected at the Company’s offices on special
application to that effect, in writing.
GENERAL CONDITIONS.
The passage tickets are delivered on the conditions stipulated
thereon. Passengers are to accept all consequences resulting from
the employment of the steamers in the mail service. The baggage
tickets are issued under the same conditions.
The Company waive all responsibility in the event of the steamers’
non-arrival at the several points of junction, such as Aden, Point de
Galle, Singapore and Hong Kong, whether arising from accidents or
circumstances beyond their Control • in such cases the Company under-
take only to convey passengers to their destination by their next


steamer; the expense of such detention at the port of transhipment
or any other consequence arising from the absence of such coincidence
will be borne by the passengers.
The dates of departures indicated in the time-table are only
approximative, except those concerning the extreme points of the
lines. From all other ports the dates and hours of departure are
subordinate to the arrival of the steamers.
In case of any advance Or delay in the departure from any port,
passengers booked will not, on account of such advance or delay, be
entitled to any claim whatever upon the Company.
The passage tickets delivered by the agents of the Company must,
in order to be made available, be signed by the passengers to whom
they are delivered.
The passage tickets must be given up on board to the commander,
or to the purser, or to any other appointed Company’s officer.
The passage tickets are personal and cannot be transferred without
permission of the Company.
In case a passenger should desire to change from a general cabin
to a single cabin, or from second to first class, the difference will be
charged from the last port called at to his destination.
Persons dangerously ill, or suffering with a contagious disease, or
those suffering from mental alienation, cannot be admitted on board
the steamers.
In the event of either of such afflictions declaring itself in the
course of the voyage, the persqn will be landed at the nearest port at
which the steamer may call; such detention will be at the passenger’s
own expense, who will, however, after convalescence, be entitled to
resume his journey, without additional expense, on one of the Com-
pany’s steamers.


Passengers must conform to the regulations of the respective-
countries relative to passports.
When that formality is required, passengers should present them-
selves, with their passports duly vises , at the Company’s offices at
least three hours before the departure of the steamer.
N.B,—No passport required at present for embarking on board the
Company’s steamers at Marseilles,
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FOR PASSENGERS,
The after ladies’ saloon and its appurtenances are exclusively
appropriated to the use of lady passengers.
Gentlemen will not be admitted into the ladies’ saloon ; each
cabin is reserved for the exclusive use of its occupants.
No passenger, except those who retain single cabins, will be allowed
the use of a whole cabin as long as other passengers of the same
class require accommodation.
Passengers’ servants will be admitted into the saloon and cabins
whilst attending on their masters, but they will be allowed to
remain there only the time strictly necessary.
Smoking is strictly prohibited in the saloons, cabins, and steerage,
or other parts between decks, and will be tolei’ated only on such parts
of the deck where it may not be inconvenient to other passengers.
RAILWAY ARRANGEMENTS.
The latest time at which Passengers (if provided with first-class
railway tickets) intending to proceed by the Company’s mail steamer,
which leaves Marseilles every alternate Sunday, can start from London,
is by the mail train of the South-Eastern Railway Company, leaving
Cannon Street or Charing Cross on the previous Friday evening.


This train is. duo in Paris about 7 a.m. on Saturday morning.
Passengers must continue the journey by express train from Paris
(Lyons and Mediterranean Railway, Boulevard Mas?as), leaving about
n a.m., arriving in Marseilles about 6.30 a.m. on Sunday. The
mail steamers leave Mai’seilles at 10 a.m. (See table of departures.)
The Company do not hold themselves responsible for the delays
which might occur in the journey from London to Marseilles,
First-class through tickets, via Dover and Calais, are issued for the
above journey by the South-Eastern Railway Company, to be obtained
also at this Company’s Head Office, 97, Cannon Street, E.C., price
£7 ss. They are likewise to be had for the route via Folkestone and
Boulogne, price £7 Is. 3d. These tickets are available for 14 days
from the date of issue, and the holder is entitled to break the journey
during that period by stopping at Folkestone and Boulogne (or Dover
and Calais), Amiens, Paris, Dijon, and Lyons.
Through first-class railway tickets to Naples issued at the same
offices, price £l2 2s. 6d.
The Messageries Maritimes’ London Agent receives at his Office,
97, Cannon Street, E.C., or at the West End Sub Agency, 51, Pall
Mall, S.W., and forwards to Marseilles, luggage, which the
Company undertake to put on board at Marseilles, Luggage mnst be
sent to the above-mentioned offices sixteen or eight days befo v e the
departure of the mail, as explained on page 22. Each first and second-
class passenger is entitled to 3 cwt., free of expense (but at his own
risk) to Marseilles, and each third or fourth-class passenger to cwt.
Extra luggage over the above limits will be charged at the rates men-
tioned on page 22.
On the homeward voyage, passengers landing at Marseilles from
the Company’s mail steamer, may obtain first-class through tickets to
London, via Calais and Dover, price £7 55., or Boulogne and Folke-
stone, price £7 Is. 3d. These tickets are issued by the Lyons and
Mediterranean Railway Company, Rue Cannebiere, and are available
for one mouth. The holders are entitled to stop during that period
at Paris, Boulogne, and Folkestone (or Calais and Dover).


Watches, Jewellery, &c
Under £1000. Above £1000.
2 per cent.... per cent.
Specie
1J ), ... 1 5>
On landing at Marseilles from the Company’s steamers, passengers
intending to proceed to London may consign their luggage to the
Messagerics Maritimes Agents (only) for transmission to London by
the next Company’s steamer, via Gibraltar, or, at their expense, by
grande vitesse via Boulogne. All luggage to be claimed at the London
Head Office of the Messageries Maritimes Company, 97, Cannon
Street, E.C.
TARIFF ON SPECIE, VALUABLES, PARCELS AND PACKAGES.
Freight will be charged on value, measurement, or weight, at the
option of the Company. If on value, the charges will be as follows :
SPECIE AND VALUABLES,
From London or Marseilles per Messageries Maritimes Company’s
steamers to all ports called at by the Eastern and Australian Mail
Steam Company, Limited, and vice versa —
From London to Marseilles per rail, via Boulogne, in transit through
France, from MarseiPes to Singapore per Messageries Maritimes Com-
pany’s steamer, and from Singapore to Australia per Eastern and
Australian Mail Steam Company’s steamer, or' vice versa —
Under £4OOO. Above £4OOO.
Watches and Jewellery per cent.,.. 1| per cent.
Specie „ ... „
N.B. —Valuables can be transmitted by this latter route from
Brisbane to London, or vice versa, in from 54 to 55 days.
Specie declared under or at an incorrect value will be charged at
-a double rate on the real value.


PARCELS AND PACKAGES.
Weight or measurement, at Company’s option, 1/3 per lb. or fraction-
of a lb., with a minimum charge of 5/.
A Tax of Is. lid. on each Package is levied under French law,,
including the stamping in France of the book or parcels receipt.
This sum (except in the case of the minimum charge) must be added
to the Freight and included in the remittance.
The Company will not be responsible for loss or damage to any
parcel beyonl the value of £o, except when the value is declared and
freight paid accordingly.
All parcels to be carried under the conditions specified in the bills
of lading for cargo by this Company’s steamers.
The name and the address of the consignee in full must be plainly
marked on each package, and its contents and value declared.
Parcel receipts will be issued instead of bills of lading.
The Company are not responsible for any consequences arising;
from sea risks, accidents to machinery., or from other causes
enumerated in the conditions of the bills of lading.
All parcels will be consigned to the Company’s agents, to whom,
application should be made, at the respective ports of destination ;
the expenses of Customs, clearance, duty, &c., are to be paid by
consignee.
TARIFF ON MERCHANDISE,
From Marseilles to all the Ports called at by the Eastern and!
Australian Mail Company’s steamers :
Ist class, 130/ per ton ; 2nd class, 120/ per tom
From London :
100/ to 110/ per ton, and 10 °/ 0 primage.


Freight will be charged on measurement or weight at the option
of the Company, and is always payable in advance.
N.B.—This tariff is applicable to the outward voyage only, the
Messageries Maritimes not being able to guarantee room in their
homeward steamers at the Singapore connection.
GENERAL CONDITIONS RELATIVE TO GOODS AND PARCELS..
The Company urgently recommend to shippers to have their-
packages strongly made and well secured, and to make use of cases
lined with tin for goods susceptible of being injured by the effects-
of the sea-voyage, climate, &c.
No goods of an inflammable or combustible nature, such as
chemical products, ether, chloroform, oils, spirits, gunpowder, percus-
sion caps or powder, oil of vitriol, tar, turpentine, acids, lucifer
matches, &c., will be received on board the Company’s steamers..
Persons infringing this prohibition will expose themselves to the con-
sequences of any loss or injury arising of such infringement, also to
the penalties enacted by the British, Colonial, and French laws, and*
any claims from third parties or the Company.
Every case, bale, or package must be distinctly port mai’ked on
the package itself.
All shipments made by the Company’s steamers, are subject to
the terms and conditions of the Company’s bills of lading, which may
be had at the Company’s offices, or their appointed printers, No-
others are acknowledged by the Company.


TABLE OF PASSAGE MONEY.
PER MESSAGERIES MARITIMES.
FIRST CLASS BY BOTH COMPANIES.
TO OR FROM SOMERSET. | TOWNSVILLE BOWEN KEPPEL BAY BRISBANE SYDNEY MELBOURNE
~ £ s. £s. £ ,s. £ s. £ s. £ s. £ s.
Marseilles 76 0 j 78 0 79 0 80 0 84 0 88 0 90 0
29 12 31 12 32 12 34 12 39 12 44 12 49 12
Shanghai 60 12 62 12 63 12 65 12 70 12 75 12 80 12
Yokohama ...... 71 0 73 0 74 0 76 0 81 0 86 0 91 0
» atav ia 29 12 31 12 32 12 Ul2 39 12 44 12 49 12
Oalieor Colombo 43 4 j 45 4 j 46 4 48 4 53 4 58 4 63 4
or Madras } 50 0 52 0 53 0 65 0 60 0 65 0 70 0
Calcutta 60 12 62 12 63 12 65 12 70 12 75 12 80 12
den . 67 8 59 8 60 8 62 8 67 8 72 8 77 8 i
Seychelles 91 8 ,96 8 97 8 98 8 103 8 ! 108 8 113 8 I
fteunion or ) . _ _.
Mauritius] 9/ 8 99 8 100 8 102 8 107 8 112 8 117 8
( I
The Cabins of the Menageries Maritimes have Two Berths, those of the
astern and Australian Mail Steam Company have Four. Passengers desiring the
uBe ° 4 a ca hin will have to pay IJ, Fare for Messageries Maritimes Cabin
of iwo berths, and 3 Fares for Eastern and Australian Mail Steam Company’s
Cabin of Four Berths.
SECOND CLASS MESSAGERIES MARITIMES AND FIRST CLASS
EASTERN AND AUSTRALIAN MAIL STEAM COMPANY.
To OR FROM SOMERSET I TOWNSVILLE BOWEN KEPPEL BAY BRISBANE | SYDNEY MELBOURNE
f »• £ *• £ £ «. £ s. i £ g. I £ «.
Marseilles 06 0 58 0590600640 i 68 0 70 0
Sal g° n 27 4 29 4304324374 42 4 | 47 4
Shan g hai 60 8 52 85385581608 65 8 i 70 8
Yokohama 58 4 60 4614634684 73 4 78 4
Batavia 27 4 29 4304324374 42 4 5 47 4
Galle or Colombo 37 8 39 8408428478 52 8 i 57 8
Pondicherry ) . n „ 1 „
or Madras I 42 12 44 12 45 12 47 12 52 12 57 12 j 62 12
Calcutta 50 8 52 8 53 8 55 8 60 8 65 8 70 8
de “ „ 1 48 0 50 0 51 0 63 0 58 0 , 63 0 1 68 0
Seychelles i 76 4 78 4 79 4 80 4 85 4 90 4i 95 4
Reunion or ( „ j „
Mauritius)’ ' 8 0 80 0 810830880 93 0 j 98 0
The Companies cannot guarantee the exclusive use of a Cabin on board their
respective Steamers to Passengers travelling under these conditions.


ROU T E
FROM SOUTHAMPTON, VENICE, OR BRINDISI
TO SINGAPORE
STF.AMERS OF THE
PENINSULAR & ORIENTAL COMPANY,.
FROM SINGAPORE TO AUSTRALIA
BYT STEAMERS OF THE
EASTERN & AUSTRALIAN MAIL STEAM COMPANY


OVERLAND ROUTE TO AUSTRALIA PER PENINSULAR
& ORIENTAL STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY,
From Southampton, Venice, or Brindisi.
GENERAL INFORMATION FOR PASSENGERS.
For the convenience of passengers, arrangements have been made
by which outward passengers can telegraph their safe arrival to their
friends at home at the following charge :
Brisbane or Sydney ... ... ... £1 10 0
Notice must be given at the Company’s London Office when book-
ing passage, and the charge prepaid.
The Company’s rates of passage money include stewards’ fees and
table, but not wines, spirits, or beer, which can be purchased on board
at moderate prices. Bedding, linen, and all requisite cabin furniture
are provided in the steamers at the Company’s expense, together with
the attendance of experienced male and female servants.
Passengers are not allowed to take on board wines, spirits, or other
liquors for use during the voyage.
Tickets for passengers to or from Venice, Ac., who make the jour-
ney through Egypt by the railway, are issued by the Agents of the
Company on behalf of the Egyptian Government at the following-
rates, viz. :
For first-class passengers, £3 ; for second-class passengers, £2 ;
Children above 3 and under 10 years, half fare.
Servants soliciting gratuities will be dismissed from the Company’s
service.
Each of the Company’s steamers carries a qualified surgeon.


Half the passage money, when the amount exceeds £2O, is required
.to be paid on securing passage, and the balance a fortnight before
embarkation.
Passengers not embarking after engaging passage, forfeit the depo-
sit of half the amount of passage-money.
In case, however, of a passenger being unavoidably prevented
from availing himself of a passage at the period for which it was
•>taken, a transfer of the passage to a subsequent steamer can be
.effected, on sufficient notice being given, without forfeiture of any
;p)ort : on of the deposit paid, and accommodation will be allotted as
similar as circumstances will permit
Passengers purchasing their tickets from the purser on board the
steamer will be charged ten per cent, additional.
Cheques, Letters of Credit, &c., remitted by post, should be in
favour of the “ Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company,
or Order,” and should be crossed with their Bankers names, viz.,
Williams, Deacon & Co.” when forwarded to Leadenhall Street, and
Hansom, Bouverie Co.” w r hen sent to Cockspur Street.
Cheques or drafts on England cannot be accepted in payment of
; passage-money by the Company’s Agents at foreign ports.
Passengers to or from Australia, the Straits, China, or Japan, have
the privilege of proceeding via Bombay, staying a week or fortnight
there, at their own expense, or they can proceed via Madras or Cal-
cutta and Bombay, paying their own expenses across India.
No berth or cabin is to be occupied by a passenger without appli-
cation to the agent on shore or to the purser on board. It is to be
understood that a passenger occupying a cabin of two or more berths
on. the departure of a vessel (unless he shall have paid an additional
sum for its exclusive occupation) is not to object to the vacant berth
or berths being filled up at the intermediate ports, if required.


Passengers will have to defray their own expenses for hotels, in the
event of any detention; and in all cases in which the Company’s ships
may be placed in quarantine, first-class passengers will be charged
10s. and second-class passengers ss. per day for their maintenance on
board during the detention of the ship.
Passengers must comply with the regulations established on board
the steamers for the general comfort and safety.
RAILWAY ARRANGEMENTS
Frequent trains run from and to Waterloo Station and South
mpton.
Southampton from Waterloo, 78| miles. Fares, Isj6a, 11/O L,
6/Gc. Return Ticket available for seven days, 26, '6a, 18 /6b, 11/6c.
Return Ticket, Saturday or Sunday to Monday, 20 /6a, 15/65.
Xote. —The London and South-Western Railway Company have
agreed, that when a steamer arrives at Southampton on Sunday too
late for the passengers to leave for London by the 9.30 a.m. Train,,
they wall put on a Special Train for the convenience of such pas-
sengers, provided they are not less than 30 in number, and that the
train can start not later than 4 p.m.
BAGGAGE.
The attention of passengers by the Company’s steamers is respect-
fully requested to the undermentioned regulations in reference to
Baggage : much trouble and loss are occasionally caused by their
neglect or non-observance. These regulations arc equally important
to passengers performing the land journey between Alexandria and
Suez, for the Egyptian Transit Administration will not accept any
responsibility unless they be strictly complied with.
The baggage of passengers booked by the Company’s steamers will
bo received at their West End Branch, 25, Cockspur Street, S.W., if


“delivered not later than 3 p.m. on the Monday previous to the
steamers sailing from Southampton. Such baggage will be received,
forwarded, and shipped at the passenger’s risk and expense (unless
insured), at the rate of 7s. per cwt.
All baggage should be packed in leather portmanteaux or trunks,
marked with the owner’s name and port of destination in paint, in
lull, and fastened securely with case locks, padlocks and leather straps
being liable to damage or removal. The Transit Administration will
not be responsible for the safe conveyance of insecure packages.
Canvas covers to packages of baggage are not recommended, as they
are frequently removed, and lead to the loss of the packages.
The baggage of passengers must contain only their personal effects;
packages containing jewellery, plate, and other valuables must be
specially declared and registered prior to shipment, and freight paid
thereon. Any infringement of these regulations will subject the
packages to detention for freight by the Company’s Agents, and to
confiscation by the Egyptian Government.
hirst-class passengers are allowed on board 336 lb. of 'Personal
baggage free of freight; children of first-class passengers (over three
and under ten years), second-class passengers and servants, 168 lb.
each.
A passenger taking a reserved cabin is entitled to take in the
steamers, free of freight, cwt. ; and a married couple, paying for
.'reserved accommodation, are entitled to rake 9 cwt.
The charge for the conveyance of Extra Baggage is—
From any port on this side to Singapore, or vice versa, 20s.
per cwt., in addition to the charge by the Eastern and
Australian Mail Steam Company, to or from Australia
of 15/ per cwt.
All baggage must be shipped not later than noon on the day pre-
vious to sailing, except one portmanteau for cabin use, bags or hat
boxes.


The portmanteau for cabin use should not exceed 3 ft. in length,.
1 ft. 3 in. in width, and 1 ft. 3 in. in depth.
Insurance on baggage and personal effects can be effected through
the Company's offices in London and Southampton at the following-
rates, viz.:—From Southampton to the Mediterranean, 14s. 6d. per
cent.; Suez, 17s. per cent.; India, 295. per cent.; Hong Kong or New
Zealand, 3Gs. per cent.; Shanghai or Japan, 435. per cent.; Straits
3ls. per cent.; Queensland, 41, per cent. Insurance with risk to-
commence from the Company’s Office, 25, Cockspur Street, 2s. per-
cent. extra.
Passengers proceeding to or from Australia, via Venice or Brindisi,
can have their heavy baggage conveyed by the corresponding steamer
to or from Southampton free of charge up to the regulated quantity.
Passengers joining the Company’s steamers at Suez can ship their
baggage from Southampton, subject to a charge of 10s. per cwt.
Passengers making their own arrangements for transit through,
Egypt must claim their baggage on the outward route at Alexandria,
on the homeward route at Suez, as it will not be conveyed through
Egypt under the terms of the Company’s contract with the Transit
Administration.
Passengers requiring information respecting their baggage during
the voyage can obtain it by application to the odicer in charge.
Passengers who may miss any package of baggage on arrival at
their destination are recommended to apply, ivithout delay, to the
Company’s agent, giving full particulars, in writing , when application
will at once be made to the Missing Baggage Depots at Bombay or
Southampton.
- Baggage can be occasionally had up from the baggage-room during
the passage by application to the officer in charge.
No trunks or boxes allowed in the saloon or cabins, but only small
portmanteaux or bags. I
Deck chairs received on board at passengers’ risk.-


GOODS OF A DANGEROUS NATURE,
Caution to Passengers.
ihe Company will not receive on board of their vessels any goods
of a dangerous or damaging nature. If any such goods be shipped
without notice, the shippers will not only be liable to the penalties
imposed by statute, but also for all damages sustained in consequence
of such shipment. Shippers will be required to sign a declaration for
parcels, merchandize, specie, &c. (form of which c.an be obtained at
the Company’s offices), that the packages they may offer for shipment
do not contain liquids, oils, spirits, or any articles of a dangerous or
damaging character ; and the attention of shippers and passengers is
specially directed to the following clauses in the “ Merchant Shipping
Act, 1873,” relative to articles of this description :
“If any person sends or attempts to send by, or not being the
“ master or owner of the vessel carries or attempts to carry in any
vessel, British or foreign, any dangerous goods; (that is to say,)
“ aquafortis, vitriol, naphtha, benzine, gunpowder, lucifer matches,
“ nitroglycerine, petroleum, or any other goods of a dangerous nature,
“ without distinctly marking their nature on the outside of the package
“ containing the same, and giving written notice of the nature of such
“ goods and of the name and address of the sender or carrier thereof
“ to the master or owner of the vessel at or before the time of sending
“ the same to be shipped or taking the on board the vessel, he
“ shall for every such offence incur a penalty not exceeding one him-
“ dred pounds .”
“ If any person sends or attempts to send by, or carries
“ or attempts to carry in any vessel, British or foreign, any dangerous
“ goods or goods of a dangerous nature, under a false description, or
“ falsely describes the sender or carrier thereof, he shall incur a penalty
“ not exceeding five hundred pounds .”


“ The master or owner of any vessel, British or foreign, may refuse
“ to take on board any package or parcel which he suspects to contain
“ goods of a dangerous nature, and may require it to be opened to
“ ascertain the fact.”
Notice. —The Company will not bo responsible for and shall be
exempt from all liability in respect of any detention or delay of pas-
sengers arising from any circumstances whatever, and the Company
will not be responsible for and shall be exempt from all liability in
respect of any detention, loss, damage, or injury whatsoever of or to
any luggage, property, goods, effects, articles, matter’s or things be-
longing to or carried by or with any passenger, whether the same
shall arise from or be occasioned by the act of God, or of the Queen s
enemies, dangers of the seas, rivers, or navigation, collision, fire, acci-
dent to or by machinery, boilers or steam, unskilful improper, or
careless navigation, or any act, default, or negligence of the Company’s
servants, or from the restrictions of quarantine wheresoever imposed,
or from circumstances arising out of or connected with the employ-
ment of the Company’s vessels in the mail service of her Majesty or
o f the government of any foreign power.
Passengers’ personal baggage (except plate, jewellery, precious,
stones, gold or silver of any kind, watches, specie or bullion, trinkets,
bank-notes, deeds, papers, or other valuables) can be insured on
declaration of the value and payment of insurance at the rate stated
above, and such insurance may be effected at the Company’s offices
or through the purser on board.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR THE CONVEYANCE OF PACKAGES
AND PARCELS.
Parcels must be delivered at the Company’s offices before tw<>
o’clock, three days prior to the departure of each steamer ; if sent
later, an eitra charge will be made.


Contents and value must be declared at the time of booking. A
wrong description of contents or false declaration of value shall release
the Company from all responsibility in case of loss, seizure, or deten-
tion, and the goods shall be charged double freight on the real value,
which freight shall be paid previous to delivery. (See Caution, p. 37 )
The Company reserve to themselves the right of charging by weight
or value, and will not be accountable for any damage arising through
insufficiency of address or packing.
All charges must be prepaid, and parcel tickets will be given
specifying particulars of risk. Parcels are to be applied for to the
Company’s agents at the port of delivery.
Jewellery, watches, and other valuables must be sealed over tape,
in countersunk holes, and above £2O value are charged at the follow-
ing rate, which includes risk in transit, viz., Australia 3-|- per cent.
PARCEL RATES.
Parcels not taken on value will be charged as follows :
Queensland Ports and Sydney, Is. 3d. per lb. or fraction of a lb.
Freight will be charged on measurement or weight at the option
of the Company.
Packages measuring one cubic foot and upwards must be packed
in wooden boxes, iron hooped at each end.
The port of delivery must be distinctly marked on every package.
Parcels will not be received after two o’clock on Saturdays.
RATES OF PASSAGE-MONEY.
From Southampton to
Keppel Gay ... £B9
Brisbane ... 93
Somerset ... £B5
Townsville ... 87
Bowmen ... 88
Sydney ... 97
From Venice or Brindisi (including transit through Egypt) £5 less
than the above.


For rates for reserved accommodation, see page 43.
Passengers can also book through to or from the undermentioned
Eastern Ports and Queensland or Sydney. The rates per Peninsular
and Oriental Company’s steamers being—To or from Singapore and
Yokohama ... $lBO.
Hong Kong... $lOO.
Shanghai Taels 111.
Calcutta ...R5.270
Madras ... „ 210
Ceylon ... „ 180
... R 5.300
Bombay
to which must be added the fare of the Eastern and Australian Mail
Steam Company between Singapore, Q ueensland, or Sydney. (See
■page 43.)
X.B. —The above rates to be paid in the currency of the Port.


li 0 U T E
FROM LONDON OR LIVERPOOL VIA GIBRALTAR AND
SUEZ CANAL TO SINGAPORE
STEAMERS OF THE
" CASTLE/' “ CHINA/' & OCEAN » LINES, *
FROM SINGAPORE TO AUSTRALIA
STEAMERS OF 1 THE
EASTERN & AUSTRALIAN MAIL STEAM COMPANY.


To any Queensland Port
„ Sydney
(
’ I
22 j- per cwt.
„ Melbourne
1
... j
ROUTE VIA STRAITS OF GIBRALTAR & SUEZ CANAL
FROM LONDON TO SINGAPORE
By Steamers of the “ Castleand “ China ” Lines,
FROM LIVERPOOL TO SINGAPORE
By Steamers of Holt’s “ Ocean ” Line,
And thence by the Steamers of the Eastern and Australian Mail
Steam Company.
Under arrangement with the “Castle,” “China,” and “Ocean”
Lines, this Company is now prepared to issue through tickets for
the Queensland Ports, Sydney, and Melbourne. For rates of Passage
see page 43.
The rates of passage'are inclusive of Canal dues in Egypt, but do
not include Beer, Wine or Spirits, which can be purchased on Board
the Steamers of the Companies at fixed rates.
The steamers leave London frequently. Holt ; s leave Liverpool
every ten d?>ys. The exact date of their sailing can be ascertained
on application at the Offices of the Company, 34, Leadenha 1 ! Street.
BAGGAGE.
Subject to the general regulations regarding Baggage, First-class
Passengers are allowed on Board 3 cwt, of personal luggage free of
freight. Children of First-class Passengers over three and under ten,
and servants 1 i cwt. each.
A Passenger taking a reserved cabin is entitled to take in the
Steamers free of charge 5 cwt,, and a married couple paying for a
separate cabin 15 cwt.
The charge for conveyance of extra luggage from Loudon is—


TABLE OF PASSAGE MONEY.
1
SOMERSET
TOWNSVILLE'
BOWEN
KEPPEL BAY
BRISBANE
SYDNEY
MELBOURNE
From MARSEILLES. By Messageries Maritimes Line.
Single Fares, 1st class both Companies ...
,, „ 2nd class M. M., 1st class E. & A.
Married Couples occupying Reserved Cabin
fa
56
188
£
78
58
144
£
79
59
147
£
80
60
150
£
84
64
162
£
88
68
174
£
90
70
180
From SOUTHAMPTON. By Peninsular d Oriental Line
Single Fares...
Married Couples occupying Reserved Cabin
85
238
87
244
88
247
89
250
93
262
97
274
*
*
From BRINDISI. By Peninsular d Oriental Line.
Single Fares...
Married Couples occupying Reserved Cabin
80
228
82
234
83
237
84
240
88
252
92
262
*
*
From LONDON. By “ Castle," or “ China ” Lines.
Single Fares...
Married Couples occupying Reserved Cabin
70
175
72
180
73
183
75
188
80
200
85
213
87
218
—
From LIVERPOOL. By Holt’s “ Ocean ” Line.
Single Fares...
Married Couples occupying Reserved Cabin
70
175
72
180
78
183
75
188
80
200
85
213
87
218
From SINGAPORE.
By Eastern and Australian Mail Company, Limited.
Single Fares...
20
22
23
25
30
35
40
Children (with Parent) under 10, Half-Fare. Children (with Parent) under 3 (no berth provided) Free.
Passages engaged in Singapore, China, or Java, must be paid in the Currency of the Port at
exchange as regulated by each Agency. Rates will be named on enquiry at the Agencies.
* Passengers cannot be booked through to Melbourne by this route.


CL
£ ®*r-1
t P® PC
; * *
.
i
CD £, } (
i co
CO'Cl* cc esc
; i-r rc
t- -d
' t~ 'X X uz
, PC PC
pc w
~i w ac-
i. r-
; TO
!00 . o o
,9 x
fc . 1C
PC CO
— 3D X '
1 00
*2 *|>. 1 ci
g. CD j£ CO |
( -m -._i~ s *4- X i .
t -< c-4- - tr* •'
X C-« 1,00 C<
Oi X
-a
LU
3-C
w ' : j ~c
I ft
C W, '■’ PC
• si x
pj
-1 X
! $
£l h~5 ft 1
& (t S5 £ I pc
a _ c, is, i pc
; o pc c pc
,-Q0 —j oc
Uj
-
! ft
London ;
IC
Printed by Bonn, Collin and Co.,
OJ
St. Mary Axe, E.C.
i - ■ ■ '£■
ft
“- sT
’
CL, ' Ajg I
o
, w g , cj? 5-
k £
n kLOS! -;_ 57
'" 73 - ;
ft
i— ; .x £:
I* * £.■
>
t~Z .w-, C
H
I C Q
| C£ T>.
■S S i, j x 5
I XT' • l ' w - ■ K — • , ’ v- .
. uq w q : X
tr x :;.; cv Q
• y >X
:V - « ■ W
a o- £. a
| |:
? a :•. 5?S
:v f-


SCALE OF CHARGES
ADVERTISEMENTS
IN THE
jJiwiptiiT Jllu'jtratcd Ijmwltolf.
J J J
Whole Page
Half Page
per annum £5 5 0
„ ~ 2 15 0
Quarter Page
1 10 0
Advertisements must he addressed to the Offices of
The Eastern & Australian Mail Co.,
34, LEADENS ALL STREET, LONDON, E.C.,
Accompanied hj Post Office Order made payable to the Company .


airjmig |lagar Jack Cmnpnj), JimM,
VICTORIA DOCK,
SINGAPORE.
This Granite 13 DOCKI, distant one mile from the
Exchange, is 450 feet in length, with 65 feet width at entrance,
and has 20 feet depth of water on the sill. In the high tides of
the North East Monsoon, there will be a foot to eighteen inches
more water, vessels therefore can he "surveyed and repaired without
discharging.
In connexion with the Dock is a complete range of workshops
fitted with steam machinery, driving all descriptions of engineer’s
tools required in the constructions and repair of vessels and machinery,
and a foundry for iron and brass castings.
The Company’s extensive Wharves and Warehouses immediately
adjoin the Dock.
Having an efficient European staff in each deportment, tl *
Company is now in a position to guarantee the best workmansb p
executed with every possible despatch, as well as low rates of
charges.
LONDON AGENTS :
Messrs. MACTAGGART, TIDMAN & Co.,
34, LEADENHALL STREET, E.C.


STIST OA. 3P O Pt B .
CORY’S COAL DEPOT
SUPPLY THE
BEST STEAM COAL ONLY,
And are open to Contract with Steamship Owners for any quantity
and for a fixed term.
N
Arrangements for the Coaling of Steamers at Signapore may be
made if desired with
Messrs. M ACT AGO ART, TIDMAN & Co.,
84, Leadenhall Street, London, E.C.
THE ASSORTMENT COMPRISES THE
CELEBRATED 'CORY’S' MERTHYR & OTHER WELSH COALS;
WEST HARTLEY AND AUSTRALIAN.
THE DEPOT IS AT THE TAN JONG PAGAR WHARF.
AGENTS :
Singapore ... ... Messrs. GUTHRIE & Co.
Jar a Messrs. TIDMAN, BALFOUR & Co.
Gibraltar ... ... Mr. J. RUGERONI.
Malta Mr. T. G. MICALLEF.
\ The Constantinople and Bosphorus Coal Co.
Constantinople < Mr. T. R. JENKINS Manager.
Sulina and Galatz ... Messrs. WATSON, YOUELL, & Co.
Odessa... ... ... Mr. R. MUNTZ.
Port Said and Suez ... Messrs, BAZIN & Co,
j The Aden Coal Co. —Mr. W. GANSLANDT,
Aden ... ... ... | Manager.
Zanzibar ... ... Messrs. ROUX De FRAISSINET & Co.
Point de Galle ... Messrs. JOHN BLACK & Co.
Monte Video CONCEICAO & Co.


TIDMAN, BALFOUR & Co.,
BATAVIA
iton'cspoiulfuta of the Hinton iktnh
of ££omUru.
CIRCULAR JSTOTES CASHED
AtjrnU for
Thk Eastern ax i) Australian Mail Steam Co,, Limi led.
London Assurance Corporation.
Triton Insurance • ompany.
China Trader's Insurance Company.
Oriental Steam Transit Company, Limited,
Cory's Coal Depot.
SINGAPORE.
GU THRIE Nr Co.,
Merchants .
, iijencies : —
Eastern and Australian Mail Steam Company, Limited.
‘‘ Castle " Line of Steam Ships.
London Assurance Corporation.
Triton Insurance Company.
Coutt’s and Company.— Bankers.
Drummonds. — Bankers.
Kerries, Farquhau, and Company.— Bankers.
Cory's Coal Depot.


TIDMAN, BALFOUR, & Co.,
MERCHANTS, BATAVIA
. UjencicA :—
I Mon Bank of London.
Bank of Montreal.
The Eastern and Australian Mail Steam Co., Limited.
London Assurance Corporation.
Triton Insurance Company.
China Trader’s Insurance Company
Oriental Steam Transit Insurance Company, Limited.
SINGAPORE.
G-UTHRIE & Co.,
iVlmlnmts.
Agencies :—
Eastern and Australian Mail Steam Company, Limited.
“ Castle ” Line of Steam Ships.
London Assurance Corporation.
Triton Insurance Company.
Coutt’s and Company.— Bankers.
Drummonds. — Bankers.
Herries, Farquhak, and Company.— -Bankers.
Singapore Coal Depot.


a-UTHIE^IIE'S
SINGAPORE COAL DEPOT
SUPPLY THE
BEST STEAM COAL ONLY,
And are open to Contract with Steamship Owners for any quantity
and for a fixed term.
Arrangements for the Coaling of Steamers at Singapore may be-
made if desired with
Messrs. COEY BEOS. & Co.,
6, Grosby Square, E.C.;
or Messrs. MAGTAGGAET, TIDMAN & Co.,
34, Leadenhall Street, London, E.C.
THE ASSORTMENT COMPRISES THE
CELEBRATED ‘CORY’S’ MERTHYR <£ OTHER WELSH GOALS.
WEST HARTLEY AND AUSTRALIAN.
THE DEPOT IS AT THE TAXJOXG PAGAR WHARF.
CORY'S
CELEBRATED MERTHYR COALS.
CELEBRATED MERTHYR COALS.
AGENTS :
Singapore Messrs. GUTHRIE & Co,
Java Messrs. TIDMAN, BALFOUR & Co.
Gibraltar Mr. J. RUGERONI.
Malta Mr. T. G. MICALLEF.
('mutant!;,-!,' ( The CONSTANTINOPLE AND BOSPHORUS COAL Co„
' ( Mr. T. R. JENKINS, Manager.
Sulina and hulai: ... Messrs. WATSON, YOUELL, &Co
Odessa Mr. R. MUNTZ.
Port Said and Suez ... Messrs. BAZIN & Co.
j The Aden Coal Co.—Mr. W. GANSLANDT,.
( Manager.
Zanzibar Messrs. ROUX De FEAISSINET, & Co.
Point de Gall ... Messrs. JOHN BLACK & Co.
Monte Video Messrs. CONCEICAO & Co.


THE EXPLORERS’ ROOM.
HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED BY
S. W. SI LV E R A. IST JD Co..
At 68 & 67, CORNHILL, LONDON,
In order that all Travellers. Officers departing on Foreign Service, Explorers, Missionaries, &c., may, without
the expenditure of valuable time, obtain every article of equipment required to meet the exigencies of
Camp Life, Travel or Exploration. Amongst the requisites are
CLOTHING, of every description adapted to all climates (including several
specialites). Underclothing, Hosiery, &c.
THE COLONIST’S SADDLE, with roomy seat, lasso rings, packing D’s raw-
hide girths, and leather cover. BRIDLES, SADDLE BAGS, &c.
GUNS, RIFLES, REVOLVERS, &c., combining all the latest improvements,
including “Silver’s Patent Anti-recoil Heel Plate.”
MEDICINE CHESTS, various. “S.W. S. & Go’s. Pocket Doctor,” &c.
THE EXPLORER’S WATCH, impervious to water, snow, or desert sand.
COLONEL McGWIRE’S HAMMOCK, for use on damp camping grounds.
Ground Sheets, Rugs, &c.
OVERLAND TRUNKS, PORTMANTEAUS, Fitted and other Bags, and every
variety of travelling equipage.
THE EXPLORER’S FILTER, which fits any ordinary bottle, after the
manner of a cork and can be carried in the waistcoat pocket.
COLONEL COCHRANE’S PATENT WATER BOTTLE, all fluids placed in
which remain cool and free from deterioration.
CANTEENS, fitted complete, in Baskets, Buckets &c.
LISTS OF REQUISITES specially prepared for voyage to, and residence in, every
part of the Globe, free on application.
Articles for Barter with Native Tribes furnished.
ENGINEER and TELEGRAPH SERVICES supplied with portable furniture,
and every other necessary.
Baggage warehoused or shipped. Furniture dbc. packed. Passages engaged. Insurances effected.
SING-APOEE.
13 Oil STEAD & Co.,
IllcrcbaUts,
ESTABLISHED 1830
COLLYR QUAY AND AT PENANG.
Agencies
Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.
China Trader’s Insurance Company, Limited.
Thames and Mersey Marine Insurance Company.
Royal Insurance Company (Fire and Life'! of Liverpool.


CTormpii&nils
Scotland.
Australia.
Edinburgh— Messrs. Maclachlan & Rodger, W.S.
The Commercial Banking Company of Sydney,
Glasgow— Messrs. Dick & Stevenson.
The London Chartered Bank of Australia.
Dundee —Messrs. G. Armistead & Co.
The
Union Bank of Australia.
Holland.
New Zealand.
. . . ( Messrs. Hope &; Co.
ji nisterdam <
The Bank of New Zealand.
| Messrs. Wertheim & Gompertz.
New York.
Rotterdam —The Bank of Rotterdam.
The Canadian Bank of Commerce.
Paris.
California. & Pritish Columbia.
The Caisse Comnierciale de Paris.
The Bank of British Columbia.
Cfmtmtr §ank of |nbia, Australia f China,
HATTON COURT, THREADNEEDLE STREET, LONDON.
INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER.
IPAIID-TJIP CAPITAL, £BOO,OOO.
dourt of Directors, 1875-6.
WILLIAM CHRISTIAN, Esq.
FREDERICK W. HEILGERS, Esq.
JOHN JONES, Esq.
EMILE LEV IT A, Esq.
WILLIAM MACNAUGHTAN, Esq.
WILLIAM PATERSON, Esq.
LUDWIG WIESE. Esq.
jfflanager JOHN HOWARD GWYTHER. s>u6=fHanagrr.—JAMES MACDONALD
Srccrctarg.'—WlLLlAM CHARLES MULLINS.
bankers.
T ( THE BANK OF ENGLAND.
° NDON j THE CITY BANK.
Scotland V THE NATIONAL BANK OF SCOTLAND.
Amoy Messrs. Tait & Co.
Marseilles .. Messrs. Estrine & Co.
Mauritius ..Messrs. Scott <fe Co.
Padamj .... Messrs. Purvis & Co.
Bangkok Messrs. A. Markwald <fe Co.
Colombo ....Messrs. Alstons, Scott & Co.
Foochow .... Messrs. Olyphant & Co.
Galle Messrs. Delmege, Reid & Co.
Hankow ... .Messrs. Drysdale, Ringer & Co.
Kurrachee ..The New Bank of Bombay, Limited.
Macassar ..Messrs. M. Ohl & Co.
Reunion Credit Agricole et Commercial de la
Urunion.
Saigon Messrs. Behre. & Co.
Samarang ..Messrs. McXeill <fc Co.
Sourabaya. .Messrs. Fraser, Eaton & Co.
S watow ....Messrs. Bradley and Co.
Madras ....The Bank of Madras.
Mangalore.. Messrs. Alstons & Co.
agencies ank
JSranefjcs.
BOMBAY.
AKYAB.
PENANG.
BATAVIA. I HONGKONG.
CALCUTTA. RANGOON. SINGAPORE. MANILA. j SHANGHAI.
The Corporation receive Deposits; grant Drafts payable at the above
Agencies and Branches ; buy and receive for collection Bills of Exchange;
issue Letters of Credit; undertake the purchase and sale of Indian Govern-
ment and other Securities; hold them for safe custody, and receive Interest
or Dividends as they become due.


agents.
, .Bovd & Co.
.W. G. Hale & Co.
.Pioken pack. Tines &. •
. . Dorrepaal & Co.
. Dummler <fc Co.
,. Bauermann <fc Co.
.. Russell & Sturgis.
.Blvth Bros. <fc Co,
H *nibui
Singapore ISranctj.
Current Deposits.— Accounts are kept on which no interest is allowed, and no cliar.;*
for collecting Bills, Cheques, <fec.
Fixed Deposits are received, viz.: —
Repayable at 12 months 5 P cr cent, pei Annum.
Repayable at 6 months .... - 4 „ ,,
iHxcOnngr,
Cjrartod Hleraintile itianh of |nftva, £onbnu
anti (Thina.
INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER
Capital Paid-Up £750,000, with. Power to Increase t
£1,500,000. Reserve Fund £51,100.
&ead ©ffirp;~6s, OLD BROAD STREET, LONDON, E.C.
tLondcm Banfccrs.
BANK OP ENGLAND. LONDON JOINT STOCK BANK
Brandies.
Itutia-. —BOMBAY. I Straits. —SINGAPORE. j GMiw.-HONGKONG.
CALCUTTA. PENANG. SoOPHOW
MADRAS. iUOCUUU.
i 'eyIoH. —COLOMBO, Java, —BATAVIA. | .
GALLB. SOL RABAT A. j Japan, —YOKOHAM .
MATALE.
KANDY.
(Edinburgh agent.
CHARLES PEARSON, C.A., 128, George Street.
(Correspondents.
Australia
Union Bank of Australia.
Australian Joint Stock Bank
Bank of New South Wales.
Bank of Australasia.
Utility Ul R 1 ,
National Bank of Australasia. 'pY mn, V , T , . . _ a „j n „ v
Englisli, Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank. Commercial Banking Co. oi b.\ dnej.
Paris. —Messrs. Marcnard, Andre & Co. 1 Amsterdam,—Messrs. Hope & Co.
The Bank issues drafts on the London Joint Stock Bank at three and six months sight, als - '.:
Head Office and Branches, Bank of England, and Agents m Scotland, Ireland, Melbourne, bydne,
other Towns in Australia, New Zealand, &c., and grants Circular Notes lor the use of travellers neg-.n,.
in all Towns of importance throughout the world.
Bills payable in F.nrope or in any of the above mentioned places are purchased or romr.iL
collection. _
Office Hours:— lo to 3, Saturdays 10 to 1.
F. C. BISHOP.
Manager.
SINGAPOIM
II th November , 1875.
Baffles Place,


F4MII¥ EiSllij,
Facing the Esplanade,
SIITGAPORE.
ARCTIC SODA FOUHTAIK.
BILLIARD AND READING ROOMS.
The House is replete with every convenience, the Rooms lofty and well furnished
and the Bed-rooms kept scrupulously clean and comfortable.
Sir Travellers and Families would do well to inspect this Hotel before engaging
Apartments elsewhere.
In addition to the Boarders’and Family Hotels a Commodious Building is reserved exclusively
for the Accommodation for Passengers.
CHARGES MODERATE.
(Proprietor .
ROBINSON & Go.,
DRAPERS, MILLINERS, DRESSMAKERS AND OUTFITTERS,
OPPOSITE THE POST OFFICE,
as s: <as- s? h,
Ladies’, Gentlemen’s, and Children’s Clothing' made to order at the
shortest notice.
G. HIEBEK & Co.,
General Warehousemen and Commission Agents,
SINGAPORE AND PENANG.


ESTABLISHED 186 6-
TIFFIN BILLIARD & READING ROOMS
CAVENAGH BRIDGE, SINGAPORE.
Wines , Spirits & Beer guaranteed First Quality
American Drinks of very Description.
PICK-ME-UP & COCKTAIL BITTERS.
AN ORDINARY DAILY AT ONE O’CLOCK
TIFFIN A LA CARTE.
English, Australian, China and American
Newspapers and Periodicals.
ISlHAlli, ffYBASSSBS, & I®®!*
Three First-Class Tables.
JtM 'WW H C 5 m JE
G. Emmerson,
PROPRIILTOR.


Special Appointment
Sir William Jervois, C.E.,
The Governor,
And to His Highness The Maharajah of Johore.
MlllliW & 31ASSII,
CIVIL, NAVAL & MILITARY TAILORS,
HOSIERS, HATTERS,
mmMMmsß, OEEssasxEss.
HAUER, I > ASIIEES
SILK MERGERS & LINEN DRAPERS.
COMMERCIAL SQUARE,
SIISTGAPO RE.
SIiTC3-^.A 3 ORE.
JOHN LITTLE 0 CO.,
Raffles Place,
GENERAL WAREHOUSEMEN & COMMISSION AGENTS,
Wine & Provision Merchants,
IMPORTERS OF ALL DESCRIPTIONS OF ENGLISH AND
FORET ON ALA NUFA CT DDES,
AND OF
CHINESE. INDIAN, JAPANESE & ALL EASTERN GOODS.
Exporters of Manila Cigars, China Preserves, and Indian
Condiments.


Oriental Sanfe Corporation,
(Incorporated by Royal Charter, yoth August, /Kyi.)
Capital £1,500,000. Reserved Funds £5OO 000
HEAD OFFICE:—
7HI IK. 41 >XK KJ >I t E Si I IKK 7’. L ( >NI >U\ ,
SINGrA'I ’< >RE 1 SEANCH:-EA>’FLEH PIiAC T
ESTABLISHED 1846.
The Corporation grant drafts and negooiate or collect hills
payable at Bombay, Calcutta, Colombo, Foochow, lliogo, Hongkong,
Kandy, London, Madras, Mauritius, Melbourne, Point de hallo.
Pondicherry, Port Elizabeth, Shanghai, Sydney, Tellicherry and
Yokohama, on terms that may be ascertained at the office.
They also issue circular notes for the use of Travellers, negoci-
able at all towns of importance throughout the world.
Deposit ,y received for Diced .Periods.
BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Incorporated by Royal Charter, 1847.
(Drafts uj upon _• ceoluid- 0.-ijCU c/ej jpj'injijjul '-J.ojjiv
-ft user alia,, also arc on ICm W astern, fluatraliorn, J^a,u
IBILXiS XBCK/riATBD AM) OOIiLECTED.
MONNY RDCDIYDD ON DEPOSIT.
Avvhi at the Of} ices of the Bant:: —
54, OLD BROAD STREET, E. C. ; or at the
Royal .Rank of Scotland and National Bank of /eland.
WILLIAM PURDY, General Managkk.


C|)e (EueenslantJ Rational &anfe.
LIMITED.
Subscribed Capital, £500,000; Paid-up Capital, £250,000.
Head Office; QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
AGENTS =
London: Inion Bank of London; National Bank of Australasia. India and
China : Oriental Bank Corporation. Australia and New Zealand : National Bank
oj Australasia ; City Bank; Bank of Van Diemen!s Land; and Bank of New Zealand.
BRANCHES
Aramac, Bemleigh, Charters Towers, Cooktown, Dalby, Gympie, Ipswich, Mary-
borough, Maytown, Eockhampton, Roma, Stanthorpe, Toowoomba, Townsville, Tambo.
and Warwick.
Ihe Bank grants Drafts on its Agents and Branches, negociates and
collects Bills, allows Interest on Deposits for fixed periods, and undertakes
the Agency in Queensland-of other Banks on such terms as may be agreed
upon.
BRIGHT BROTHERS & CO.,
MERCHANTS ,
SHIPPING, COMMISSION, AND INSURANCE AGENTS,
EAGLE STREET, BRISBANE.
Bright Brothers & Co., Melbourne, Victoria;
Bright Brothers & Co., Sydney, N. S. Wales;
Bright Brothers & Co., Dunedin, N.Z.;
Gibbs, Bright & Co., Liverpool;
Gibbs, Bright & Co., Bristol.
AGENTS FOR-
ROYAL INSURANCE COMPANY, FIRE AND LIFE.
PACIFIC INSURANCE COMPANY, MARINE BRANCH.
NETHERLANDS JDIA, SEA & FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY, MARINE BRANCH
BATAVIA SEA AND FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY.
THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN INSURANCE COMPANY (Limited), (Fire & Marines
THE BRITISH AND FOREIGN MARINE INSURANCE COMPANY.
TRUST AND AGENCY COMPANY OF AUSTRALASIA (Limited).
THE EASTERN AND AUSTRALIAN MAIL STEAM COMPANY (Limited)


1
V
'






*■
■
■


■


