

SHOULD
STATE AID
BE
ABOLISHED ?
Sglimg:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OP NEW SOUTH WALES.


This Tract is respectfully dedicated by the author, to the
Churchwardens and Members of the Church of England in the
Diocese of Sydney.


INTRODUCTION.
Should State Aid be abolished ? The time has come when
the Members of the Church of England in this colony should
very seriously consider this question. An influential and deter-
mined party have been long endeavouring to procure this
abolition; the leaders of the newspaper press are advocates
for it, and have contrived to impress the public mind with
the idea that it is inevitable ; two administrations have attempted
to forward their views, a third may be even now preparing
to renew the attempt. Should the Members of our Church
remain silent and quiescent with such a change in prospect?
Under the conviction that the serious consideration of this
question should no longer be postponed, the writer of this Tract
offers to his fellow-Churchmen a few reflections that have
passed through his own mind, for which he entreats their
attention.
The whole subject seems to him to comprehend five ques-
tions,
A question of fairness—a question of financial policy—and
three questions of principle. And he proposes to discuss these
five questions severally in the order in which they have been
stated.




CHAPTER I.
1. To begin with the question of fairness. Is the existing
system of State Aid unfair to any Church or any portion of the
community ? It was certainly not so when it was first introduced.
Sir Richard Bourke’s Act included in its operation all the Chris-
tian denominations then known in the colony, and all alike
partook of the benefits it conferred. According to that law,
each denomination received back from the State, for the support
of its ministry and the erection of Church buildings, the
amount which, through the machinery of the public taxes, the
members of such denomination had contributed towards the
general fund for such purposes. I submit, therefore, that what-
ever exceptions may be taken to such an arrangement, on other
grounds, it cannot be considered unfair. The State interferes
merely as a collector, trustee, and disburser. It is a fallacy
to argue that under such a system, the members of one denomi-
nation pay the ministers of another. The principle fairly carried
out would lay the burden of the support of the Anglican
Ministry upon Anglicans, of the support of the Roman Catholic
Priesthood upon Roman Catholics, and so of the other commu-
nions. Under such an arrangement no party has grounds for
complaint. “ Judah cannot justly envy Ephraim, nor should
Ephraim vex Judah.”
But this principle is not now fully applied. All members
of the community contribute to the public funds, but some do
not receive any direct return therefrom for ecclesiastical pur-
poses. However, this merely accidental derangement in a
system, which in its intention and principle is perfectly


equitable, can be easily rectified, if the parties concerned only
desire it.
If the Christian denominations who are excluded from the
benefit of the existing provision will present their claim for the
proportion fairly due to them, that claim, I am persuaded,
would be immediately admitted ; and if the religious scruples
of any denomination debar them from devoting to the support
of the holy ministry money which has passed through
the public treasury, still the amount might be received
as a drawback from the revenue, as so much contributed
by the members of the body over and above their fair
share of the taxes, and therefore to be returned to them as
their own, leaving them to appropriate it to what purpose
they please. And does any one doubt that if the deno-
minations in question will condescend to accept this remedy
of the very trifling wrong of which they now complain, it would
be immediately applied ?
I am not sanguine enough, however, to imagine, that they will
be soon or easily brought to consent to so simple and so satis-
factory a solution of the difficulty. They know too well the
advantage, and have experienced too long the luxury of a griev-
ance, which costs them little (less than two shillings per
head per annum), to part with it lightly. But the knowledge
that there is so simple a remedy within reach, must in the
estimation of reflecting persons take all force and meaning out
of those unreasonable complaints and invectives in which they
are fond of indulging.
And it is time that these gentlemen should be told that the
large religious bodies who receive, and who are contented to
receive, aid from the State in the support of their ministry,
include a vast majority of the inhabitants of this Colony, and
that they feel reasonable dissatisfaction when a far inferior body


(numerically considered), who prefer (as they have every right
to do) the voluntary system, think themselves entitled to
disturb their brethren and impose on them against their
convictions the system which they themselves happen to have
chosen.
Is this attempt to coerce brotherly, is it consistent with
modem notions of toleration, is it fair ? We are content to use
in quiet the arrangements we approve, and desire not to intrude
upon our neighbours who may form their own arrangements as
they please. Why should not the advocates of the voluntary
system follow our example in this ? If that system be of such
unrivalled excellence, then so much the better for them, let
them enjoy it. But should a small minority of religionists, who
can easily obtain all that they can fairly demand, attempt in
this nineteenth century of freedom and enlightenment, to direct
a crusade against the convictions of the majority who have no
desire to coerce or disturb them, or impose upon them any
burden whatsoever ?
CHAPTER II.
It has been shewn that the principle upon which State Aid
is now administered is fair, and if the principle is not fully
carried out in practice, this failure is an accidental circumstance,
and may easily be remedied, if parties are disposed to submit to
a fair adjustment; that the principle itself is perfectly equitable
as between Church and Church, denomination and denomination;
that its effect, if fully carried out, would be to compel every
Christian in the colony to contribute his quota towards the
support of the clergy of his own communion, but not for the
inculcation of the opinions of others; and that, in such a system,
the State merely interposes between the people and the clergy,
to collect and distribute.


Many persons imagine that under the existing arrangement
the clergy who receive stipends from the public funds are stipen-
diaries of the Government. But the Government is not the
proprietor of the public money; that money belongs to the
people, and must he expended exclusively for their benefit. The
relation of the Government of the colony to the public treasury
is merely that of trustee. Moreover, if religious teaching is
to he continued, the clergy must be adequately maintained,
and their stipends be paid out of the purse of the very same
people (collectively considered) who are now the contributors.
If we really understand the advocates of the voluntary system,
we are to anticipate no other important change but this —that
the Government henceforth refuse their aid in matters of
collection and disbursement.
But is it designed by these gentlemen that the ministry of
the Gospel should he continued on its present scale, and in its
present condition ? Or is it their real, though disguised, purpose
to humiliate the clergy—to lower their social position, to thin
their ranks, or to dispense with them altogether ? Such a pur-
pose is disavowed. I accept the disavowal, and argue upon the
assumption that it is sincere. I presume then, that, in the inten-
tion of these gentlemen the ministry of the Gospel is to he
maintained, at least upon its present, if not upon an improved
footing, —and that no reduction is anticipated, either of the
numbers or of the emoluments (admitted to he insufficient) of
those who now serve the sanctuary.
On this assumption, three things would remain unaltered after
the proposed change had taken place. There would still be the
same contributing public, the same body of clergy, and at least
the same amount contributed.
There would he, in fact, no change save in the mode of
collection, and the question arises, would the proposed mode,


as a financial arrangement (I omit now every other considera-
tion) be an improvement on the present one ? I am
unsophisticated enough to imagine that the existing system pos-
sesses many advantages. The expense of collecting the public
revenues is only four per cent, on the sum total, and if the
<£28,000 at present appropriated to religious uses, were with-
drawn from the annual Government expenditure, I question
whether the absence of that or twice that sum, would occasion the
smallest appreciable diminution in the expense of collection,
whilst assuredly the change would entail upon almost every
parish in the Colony, an amount of trouble, vexation, anxiety,
and expense beyond all estimate.
When the advocates of this new system profess their desire
that the clergy should not be sufferers by the change, do they
take into consideration the effect upon small incomes of any un-
certainty as to the amount, or irregularity as to the time of pay-
ment. At present a clergyman’s [so called) Government stipend,
though small, is paid punctually every month, and he can regu-
late his expenditure accordingly. Place him under the voluntary
system—in other words, the system of personal or local collec-
tion —and he knows not when his necessities may come into
remembrance among his people, nor how much their feelings may
move or their power enable them to bestow.
Public favour is proverbially fickle, and public bounty is a
variable quantity: variable from many causes. It varies, for
instance, with public prosperity. The last commercial panic
with which the colony was visited swept away in one year, and
for many subsequent years, nearly the entire income of at least
one society in this city for the propagation of religion; and even
the slightest reverse in the general prosperity of the colony, pro-
duces a sensible effect upon the liberality of the public. It is the
case with many that as soon as they feel the pressure of altered


circumstances, and begin to devise plans of retrenchment, they
deem the amount bestowed on public purposes an extravagance,
and the first to be dispensed with. It varies also, in reference
to any specific object, in inverse proportion to the demand upon
it. The amount which even the generality of wealthy men deem
themselves under obligation to devote to religious and charitable
purposes, is a limited amount, and when at any time the pre-
determined limit is even approached, their so-called bounty is
checked. Whenever therefore an urgent call is made upon the
public for any special purpose, the clergy (under the proposed
system) would feel the effect! If, accordingly, it is intended
that ministers of religion should not be sufferers by the proposed
change ; in a system under which they would be subjected to
such harassing and perplexing uncertainties, their nominal in-
comes should, in fairness, include a margin far exceeding the
present public limit.
There is every prospect, therefore, that this new financial
scheme, should it prove even as effective for the support of the
Ministry as the existing system, must entail greater cost upon
the public. And how may we expect the people generally to
meet this increased taxation ? At present, the burden of Church
support, as administered by the State, is distributed by the con-
venient medium of taxes, in fair proportion over the whole
population—every one contributing his share to the general
revenue. Is the new system likely to work fairly in this respect,
and to lay the burden evenly upon all ? There are men in this
city well qualified to answer this question. The Voluntary
system is, in point of fact, no' novelty among us. Many of our
public institutions are in part maintained by, whilst others are
wholly dependent upon it. Subscription lists for all kinds of
objects, are in daily circulation among the members of our com-
munity ; and gentlemen who are well informed on the subject


can testify that in such lists the same names continually recur ;
and that, whatever may be the gross amount of the annual
collections, the number of those who contribute fairly in propor-
tion to their incomes is very small; and a large proportion of
our population subscribe nothing. Ask any one of the generous
few to whom all who need an alms or subscription continually
resort, and he will tell you, “We have quite enough of the
voluntary system.”
The Church of England has already had much experience of
this system, in providing stipends for many of the clergy and
funds for erecting church buildings; and in most parishes con-
siderable sums are now every year contributed for various church
purposes. The reader can learn from Churchwardens and
others concerned in the collection of these sums, whether the
expenses fall equally and fairly upon the people. I have no
doubt their answer in every case would be, that the contributors
are a small minority, in the midst of a non-contributing popula-
tion, I humbly opine, therefore, that if the ministry of the
Gospel is to be maintained among us in its present condition—
and much more if it is to be extended—we shall not act wisely
if, instead of the present fair, noiseless, inoffensive, and inex-
pensive mode of collection, we attempt to introduce a system
which must prove throughout the Colony a source of endless
trouble, and annoyance, and whereby an unfortunate clergyman
would be exposed to the constant apprehension that at any
time the means of supporting his family may fail him; and
which while' relieving the niggardly and selfish man from all
such charges, would cast the entire burden upon the liberal and
conscientious few, who are already almost overwhelmed by
ever increasing demands upon their bounty.
Note.—This and a part of the previous chapter were published as
letters some months ago in the Sydney Morning Herald.


CHAPTER III.
Having proved tliat State Aid to religion under Sir
Richard Bourke’s Act is not unfair, and that as a financial
arrangement it is inexpensive and equitable, I proceed to
consider the grounds upon which the abolitionists contend that it
is indefensible upon religious or upon political principles.
On this subject we have three questions to encounter: for
there are those in the first place who arguing from Scripture
deny the lawfulness of State Aid : and there are those in the
second place, who arguing on political principles deny the pro-
priety of any interference on the part of a Government with
religious matters which are, they contend, beyond its province :
and there is a third question in reference to the peculiar mode
in which State Aid is administered in this Colony, which many
persons, who are not on any other ground advocates of the
Voluntary System—deem unprincipled and irreligious.
The first question has been so fully treated by Hooker,
Chalmers and many other divines of superior ability, it
has assumed such large dimensions in their hands, and
the duty of every Christian Government to aid in the
promotion of the Saviour’s cause has been so unanswer-
ably proved by them on Scriptural principles, that it is
unnecessary, as it would be impossible, to discuss the
subject fully within the necessarily narrow limits of this brief
Tract. And I will merely say on this question, that, when the
opponents of State Aid (in any form) appeal to Scripture, I know
not whether to wonder most at their hardihood or at their unfair-
ness : at their hardihood in appealing to a book containing the
Old Testament, wherein we learn that a public provision for the
support of religions ordinances was established among the
Children of Israe by a direct command from God ; or at their


unfairness in arguing from the condition of the Christian Church
in the time of Christ and the Apostles, when there was an un-
believing and persecuting government. Because, forsooth,
neither Herod, nor Pilate, nor Nero opened their treasury for the
support of the faith they were labouring to destroy, and because
such support was never expected from them: therefore a
Christian ruler is under no obligation to maintain the Christian
religion, and Christian people are forbidden to avail themselves
of his aid!
2. I pass to the second question. The advocates of the
voluntary system, arguing on political principles deny the pro-
priety of any interference of a Government with religious mat-
ters which are, they contend, entirely beyond its province.
But where did these philosophers find the principles upon
which they have measured out so exactly the province of
Government? Men are united together in communities and
nations for their common good; Government is the type of
union, and the centre of strength, and whatever is conducive to
the common weal, and needs for its accomplishment the whole
collective power of the nation, cannot upon just, or wholesome,
or useful principles be regarded as beyond the province of
Government. If it can be shewn that there is anything which
the State can do for the public advantage, and if that thing
cannot be done at all, or cannot be effectually done, by any power
less than that of the whole collective State—then I conceive we
have a case calling for State interference ; and no sophistry will
ever persuade me that in rendering the aid thus required the
State has transgressed its proper limits.
If there are certain mysterious boundaries beyond which the
operations of a Government should not pass, where I ask are
those boundaries ? who has placed them ? and by whose autho-
rity have they been established ? I know of no limits but those


which, the principles of public utility prescribe, and of no
authority in earth or Heaven, hut One, that has power to appoint
limits on any other principle—but that of public utility—and
that is the Power whose righteous authority is disputed in this
question.
So far from admitting that religion is beyond the province of
Government, I contend earnestly, as I hold every believing
servant of Christ is bound to contend, that it is the first, highest,
and most indispensable duty of every ruler to maintain, by every
means at his command, the honour of God. The powers that
be are ordained of God. By His authority kings reign and
princes decree justice. He is King, King over all, King of
kings, be the world never so unquiet. And on kings and rulers
above all other men, the obligation is laid of paying dutiful
allegiance to Him, whose servants they are. The Heathen
understand this principle and own this obligation, and there is
(I am persuaded) no Heathen Government, that does not evince
a reverence for what they believe to be God. While they honour
their false and worthless deities, men in this enlightened country
argue that a Christian ruler should refuse to honour his God
and Saviour. While the Heathen glory in their shame, Chris-
tians are taught to be ashamed of their glory. And this theory
which attempts to divest the powers of this world of all sense of
reverence to Him who is the source of all power—and to sepa-
rate the authority of the servants from the authority of their
Lord and Master —has been urged among us so long, so loudly,
and so confidently, that the public ear has become familiarized
with it. It is the more needful, therefore, that the great truth
which it attempts to displace should be set clearly before men’s
minds ; and that especially to our rulers, whether they will hear
or whether they will forbear, the solemn warning should be
given that they are God’s servants, and that they cannot neglect


that prime duty they owe to Him without bringing great evil
upon themselves and upon the country over whose destinies they
preside. From irreligious rulers, or an ungodly government, we
can expect only short-sighted counsels, selfish and base aims,
folly and confusion.
Kecommending the last paragraph to the serious and prayerful
consideration of the members of our Church, I now take up the
argument upon lower, and what, I fear, many will consider more
intelligible grounds. I contend that the maintenance of religious
ordinances, and of all that is suited to awaken or support the
religious faith of the people is strictly within the province of the
Government, because without religious faith there can be no
Government among us deserving the name. Without religion
the whole machinery of government, however perfect in other
respects, would soon become either an instrument of tyranny or
else a worthless thing—a sham and a delusion. A just and
patriotic Government should be the conservator of order, the
shield of liberty, the promoter of civilisation, the leader in every
good work, the faithful guardian of the people’s happiness, the
protector of the righteous and the avenger of wrong; and where
there is no religious faith, Government must fail in the per-
formance of such high and arduous duties. To prove this fully
by a careful analysis of all the various objects and functions of
government would require a volume; but a single illustration
will suffice to show how the argument applies.
Let the reader imagine himself in a court of justice. A
Judge pledged by an oath to do right presides there, and by
authority from a Queen who, when crowned Monarch of Great
Britain, swore allegiance to God before His altar, and pledged
her oath to hold all the reins of Government according to His
laws ; and without an oath Monarch is not permitted to reign,
nor Judge to adjudicate in these realms. In that court of justice,


too, there sit as judges twelve jurymen, every man sworn on the
Holy Book of God, to determine righteously in all matters
brought before him —and there, too, every witness is sworn
before he is permitted to utter a word. And in every case tried
in our courts of law, an oath is the seal which imparts validity
to every legal act where strict truth and rigid justice is required.
And what imparts validity to the oath ? What makes an oath
the seal of truth ? What! but the hidden faith within the heart
of him who takes it.
Now “ faith cometh by hearing.” “ How shall they believe
in Him of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear
without a preacher V
The administration of justice is unquestionably within the
province of Government, and one of its most important functions.
And how can justice be administered if there is no religious faith
in the land ? Our Government (as we have seen) permits not
a single step to be taken in her courts without the solemnity and
security of an oath; but what becomes of the security of an oath
if there is no faith ?
It is plain that by making religious faith an indispensable
constituent of all her judicial proceedings, she has placed the
whole administration of the law under the protection of Christian
ordinances : and if there are no Christian ordinances in the land,
what is her administration of justice worth ?
It is the purest absurdity to argue, that what the laws of our
Government have declared indispensable to the due performance
of the highest duties of a Government, is yet beyond the province
of Government and the consideration of the laws. They expect
not justice in a judge, nor righteousness in a jury, nor truth from
a witness, without an oath —and without that hidden faith in the
heart, in the absence of which an oath is but mockery. And
yet with such an example before them, men are found to contend


that the public money is well bestowed in erecting court-houses,
paying judges, and for the support of the multitudinous levites of
our (so-called) temples of justice—hut that it is no part of the
duty of a Government to aid in providing those holy ordinances
which contribute to maintain and diffuse that faith in the unseen
realities of religion, without which the whole costly apparatus of
the law would not, for any good or practical purpose, he worth a
farthing.
This is hut one example, and innumerable others might be
adduced to prove that a Government without religion, ruling
over a nation where there are no religious ordinances, must be,
for every good purpose, powerless.
The labours of the .Minister of religion, therefore, are indispen-
sably requisite not only to the happiness of the people at large,
but in particular to the operations of Government. Is it not,
therefore, the duty of the State to provide for him suitable
maintenance ?
Moreover, I contend that State Aid is consistent with the
principles upon which a Government should be formed because
“ the labourer is worthy of his hire,” and the Government, under
which he labours, is bound to provide that he be not defrauded
of it.
It is often alleged that Clergymen are the only labourers
who require the State to aid them; that, forsooth, “ the
labourer in the field, the tailor, the shoemaker, and all others
who work for hire are content to receive their wages from their
respective employers, and that the Minister of religion alone
considers himself entitled to special favour, and looks for his
support, not to those who employ him but, to the State.”
Now, in point of fact, Clergymen in this colony under the
existing system receive no aid from the Government beyond
that which is confidently claimed for, and freely granted to


every tailor, shoemaker, and labourer in the land, as well as to
judges, ministers of State, and all public servants, viz.;—pro-
tection in the exercise of their lawful and useful calling from
the dishonesty of those, who would avail themselves of their
neighbour’s work and give him nothing for it. If a roguishly-
disposed person receives a pair of shoes and refuses to pay the
shoemaker, the injured tradesman can appeal to the proper
authority and payment is enforced by law. The minister of
religion simply asks that like justice should be extended to him,
that he also should have a legal right to his hire —and that all
who profit by his ministrations should be required to make a fair
contribution towards his support.
“ The labourer is worthy of his hire.” This is the principle
which directs the law in protecting the shoemaker from fraud,
and which should guide it also in the protection of the Clergy-
man. The principle is exactly the same in both cases, but
in its application there is some difference. In the transaction
between the shoemaker and his customer there is a tangible
quid pro quo, and a recognised value of the article furnished—
not so in the matter of religious ordinances. The effects of a
Clergyman’s labours are diffusive, universal, and permanent;
bringing directly or indirectly to one man’s soul a blessing that
is above all price—contributing to instruct, civilise, and
humanise another —and scattering round upon all the seeds of
that religious knowledge, feeling, and sentiment which tend to
form and fix the character of a people, to secure lasting peace
and order in the community, and without which the administra-
tion of justice would be impossible. Eeligious ordinances cannot
be placed in the same category with shoes and garments —things
—the use of which is confined to one person, and which perish in
the using—and protection from fraud in the exercise of his
calling cannot be supplied to the ministering servant of the


Church in exactly the same way as it is supplied to the ordinary
workman. For financial purposes, and in order that the law
and legal protection may be brought to operate upon the Clergy-
man’s case, the public ministrations of religion should be classed
with such things as the public administration of justice, the
affairs of Government, or the like, things which affect the whole
collective community and are always provided for from the
public revenues. The labourer of every class and every kind is
worthy of his hire—but that hire for different classes of
labourers must be obtained in different ways : some men labour
for individuals, some labour for the public—and for their hire
both have a right to look to those who employ them, and who
profit by their labours. The claim of the ordinary workman is
upon his customers, that of the public servant is upon the public.
And that claim is freely recognised by all, in the case of all,
except clergymen. No one imagines that injustice is done when
the judge, the prime minister, or the policeman receives his
stipend from a treasury to which all the people contribute ; even
though the tailor and the shoemaker have no claim there, and
look for their hire to their immediate customers or employers.
Why should not the clergyman, who is also a public servant,
be permitted to receive his just recompense from the same
source ?
Whatever therefore our new philosophy may teach notwith-
standing, we must still cling to the old time-honoured belief that
it is within the province of Government to make provision as it
best can for the public ministrations of religion—at least until it
can be shown that “ righteousness” does not “ exalt a nation
and that a State can perform all the functions requisite for the
protection and happiness of her subjects as well without, as with,
religious faith; or else shewn that a State can justly and
honestly avail herself of the advantages directly arising from


religious faith among her members, and indirectly from the
ministrations of religion, (by which that faith is maintained and
diffused,) but refuse to aid the minister of religion in securing a
fair recompense for his exertions, and conclude that in his case,
though in his case alone, the maxim is inapplicable which says
that “ the labourer is worthy of his hire.”
CHAPTER IV.
I come now to the consideration of the third question.
Many who are not hostile to State aid on general principles feel
strong objections to the mode in which it is administered in this
Colony, whereby they conceive truth and error are confounded,
placed alike and indiscriminately under the sanction and patron-
age of Government.
Upon this subject much misapprehension prevails, a part of
which I have endeavoured to remove in the first and second chap-
ters of this Tract. In the objection referred to, the Government
is held responsible for the opinions taught by all the ministers of
religion who receive stipends from the public treasury, and they
are regarded as stipendiaries of the Government. But is this a
correct view of the case ? Are the Clergymen who receive
salaries from the public revenue (strictly speaking) stipendiaries
of Government ? Surely not, and for this plain reason, because
Government has no money of its own to bestow. Government
itself is but the servant of the people, and the money under its
care is the money of the people. And a Clergyman’s, stipend is
drawn from the people, from that portion of the people and (with
a very slight exception numerically considered) from that portion
only who approve the doctrines he teaches. The Government
interpose in this matter between the people and the Clergy
merely as the Collector, the Trustee, and the Disburser of the
fund from which the pecuniary support of the ordinances of


religion is drawn. The very same people (with the slight exception
referred to in the first chapter) contribute to this fund now that
would, or at least ought to, contribute under the voluntary
system, and contribute too, each of them, for the same purpose.
At present the different religious denominations are kept—in
reference to State aid, and its distribution—carefully apart
from one another. The distribution is so managed that the
Churchman does not contribute towards the support of Wes-
leyan opinions, neither does the Protestant towards the support
cf the Roman Catholic faith. Every man’s contribution goes
towards the maintenance of the ministrations of the Church to
which he belongs.
A Member of Parliament supporting the existing system
does not vote away his own money, or the money of his co-
religionists for the sustentation of doctrines they disapprove.
No ! he simply provides for the ministry of his own Church,
allowing others to make for their own a similar provision.
Deeming it essential even to the secular interests of the commu-
nity that there should he fixed religious principles among us,
deeming the independence of the Clergy an important element
in a well-ordered Church, he desires these advantages for
the body with which he is himself connected, and does not
feel himself constrained by conscience to refuse like advantages to
other religious bodies. On the contrary he is persuaded that he is
in the performance of a public duty when, as far as in him lies,
he provides for every Christian in the community “ the greatest
amount of spiritual good which each individual is willing and
therefore able to receive.”* If there is error among the
recipients of State payments he will not render it more erroneous,
if there is fanaticism he will not deepen its gloom, or excite its
* From a letter of the Bishop of Newcastle, published in the Report of
the Newcastle Church Society, for 1858.


frenzy, by connecting it with the publicity, the quietude and the
freedom from all stimulating influences which he finds in this
arrangement. He believes that in all the various forms of
Christianity there is good, though not always unmixed good,
and he believes that he places the good in an advantageous
position, and imposes some restraint upon the error that may be
blended with it, when he separates both from the influence of
the Voluntary System.
“ But should we pay for the support of the antagonistic creeds
of four different religions ?” How often is this question asked
by persons who know not what they say nor whereof they
affirm ! Antagonistic creeds ! Four different religions! How
extravagantly unjust are such expressions ! how recklessly false
the assertions implied in them! Would not any uninformed
person imagine, when he hears such language, that the opinions
of the several Christian denominations which are recognized in
the Church Act, are in a state of broad, abrupt, and unmixed
contrariety ? of utter repugnance and antagonism ? Would he
suppose that of those four denominations three differ little as to
the doctrines which all deem requisite and necessary to salva-
tion ; and that the same Apostolic creed, the most ancient and
revered summary of our common faith, is received by all the
four ?
But I will encounter the objection fairly, and in my next
chapter I intend to try its force where the antagonism is of a
serious character, as between the Church of England and the
Church of Rome.
Meanwhile, however, I wish quietly to remind the gentlemen
who talk, in this wild and random way, of antagonistic creeds
and opposing religions ; that by their indulgence in such language
they are wounding, and grievously wounding, the free Pro-
testantism they love and the pure Christianity they revere. The


taunt which is ever upon the lips of the infidel is, “ You,
you Christians, bid me believe, but you should first agree
among yourselves what my faith is to be.” And the
most specious argument we find in the books of Roman
Catholic controversialists is based upon the same principle.
“ You Protestants,” they say, “ take the Scriptures as your
guide, and upon the Scriptures you require us to exercise our
private judgment; but what have you gained from your own
principles ? The confusion of tongues at Babel was not more
signal nor horrible than the confusion of opinions and doctrines
among your clamorous sects and divisions. Agree among your-
selves as to what the Bible means, before you invite us to enjoy
with you the liberty you have abused, or to leave the safe
teaching of the one immutable Church.”
Now when such taunts and arguments are tested by a fair
analysis of the faith of the various Christian Churches
and sects, they are found utterly unreasonable. Upon the
most essential principles of our common religion all Christians,
including even the Roman Catholics, are of one faith ; and the
differences that exist between the various sections of the Reformed
Church, relate chiefly to matters of form and government which
are admitted by all, except the most bigoted portions of the
several parties, not to affect vitally the salvation of the soul.
Gentlemen, therefore, should be careful to refrain from the
use of language which is not warranted by the facts of the case,
and which may produce most injurious effects upon unguarded
minds.


CHAPTER V.
The Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, in a sermon on John xii. 32,
having denounced in his peculiar way, what he is pleased to call
“ the patronage of the State,” proceeds to give a picture of the
happy condition of the Christian community, as it is to be when
the Gospel has become self-supporting and “ the entrenchments
of bigotry and narrow-mindedness” have been swept away.
Then we shall hear (he assures us) the Baptist saying to the
Episcopalian “ Brother there is my pulpit for you, preach in it,
you are right welcome to it ” —and the Episcopalian in his turn
saying “ You are a Baptist and my brother, there is the parish
Church for you ” —and after having conjured up this charming
vision, the great orator of the Baptists exclaims, “I just
announce that the first chance I get to preach in a parish
Church, I will do it and risk the consequences.”
Now considering how deeply responsible every Clergyman is
for the doctrine that emanates from his pulpit, there must appear
to be no ordinary amount of confidence implied when he permits
another to take his place there : and inasmuch as Baptists, Pres-
byterians, Independents, and Methodists are even now accus-
tomed to recognize each others orthodoxy by this friendly inter-
change of ministrations, and no small indignation has been
vented against the Church of England because she keeps aloof
from this brotherly compact, I think we may reasonably conclude
that, even in the estimation of the most ardent advocates of the
Voluntary System, there is not such an irreconcileable difference
of opinion as should cause any breach of communion between, at
at all events, three of the denominations that in this Colony avail
themselves of the advantages presented by State Aid.


The fourth indeed, the Church of Eome, stands far apart
from the rest, and it may be questioned whether Clergymen of
the Church of England should consent to be brought within the
operation of the same act for financial purposes with the mem-
bers of the Church of Rome, and whether they should not rather
decline the assistance of the State (in collecting from their people
the funds necessary for the support of their ministry), if the like
service is at the same time to be performed for that Church.
Between the Church of England and the Church of Rome
the antagonism assuredly is of a serious character. This there-
fore is an issue on which we may fairly test the force of the
objection referred to in my last letter (viz., that by Sir Richard
Bourke’s Act the State supports contrary and adverse religions)
and if that objection fails here we need be at no further trouble
about it.
We cannot engage in the discussion of this question without
enquiring what actually is the religion of the Church of Eome,
and how far does it differ from the faith of the Reformed
Churches ?
In the Roman Catholic religion are two elements, Catholicism
arid Romanism. The Catholicism our Church adopts, the Ro-
manism she repudiates.
The Catholicism of that Church includes more than is
generally supposed. Almost every doctrine taught by the
Reformed Churches is professedly held, if not taught, by the
Church of Rome. No doubt the Romanism does in many cases
interpenetrate the Catholicism and weakens and corrupts the
doctrines which it does not wholly nullify. But the two elements
are distinguishable, and the pure Catholic element, which is partly
visible and partly latent in their system, includes (with perhaps
but one exception) all that we hold. The difference is about
doctrines which they affirm and we deny; but they deny little of


what we affirm, though in many cases they alter the character
of the doctrine by not affirming it in the same exclusive sense
that we do. If therefore that Church be true to her own avowed
principles, she must in the Catholic part of her system build
upon the same foundation that we build on and preach the Gospel
that we preach, and many among her priesthood whose memory
is revered, yea some who are canonised saints in her calendar,
actually did so.
Her Romanism (and under this term I include all that we
repudiate) is not a fixed and unalterable thing, it is in some
measure like the x. y. z. of Algebra, an unknown quantity vary-
ing according to circumstances. The Romanism that is avowed
in the writings of Bossuet, of the Port Royalist Authors, of Dean
Hirscher and of many others: the Romanism that appeared in
the characters of Pascal, Fenelon, Arnauld and Quesnel was at
least free from* those grosser features which it has elsewhere
exhibited. And Jesuistry, in many respects the worst develop-
ment of this system has been regarded with as deep abhorrence
in Roman Catholic countries, and cast forth thence with as great
violence as it ever encountered in Protestant England. We
cannot therefore justly reason that the Romish element in their
theology must always, under all circumstances, gain a baneful
ascendancy over their Catholicism, as there have unquestionably
been eminent men in that communion who were more Catholic
than Romanist.
In this Colony the Roman Catholic resides in the midst of a
social system which is saturated all through with the feelings,
the reasoning, the principles and the literature which the
Reformation has produced, and which is intimately connected
with that free and onward movement of the human mind that
commenced three hundred years ago with Luther: and in such a
scene he can no more hinder the ideas that are floating round


him from finding their way into his family than he can shut the
winds of heaven out of his garden. And unless some baneful
influence hinders the natural operation of natural causes, the
effect must be felt in the changed character and spirit of the
Roman Catholic among us, if not in this generation at least in
the next.
There may not be actual conversions to Protestantism ; we must
allow for the force of custom, for family pride, for the difficulties
that embarrass minds which reverence antiquity and cling to an
ideal unity, even after they have received the impulse, which
few Roman Catholics ever receive, to work their way out of
such a system as their religion is. But if the members of that
Church ever cease to be repelled from us by the prejudices and
the passions which they have inherited from the past, I believe
and trust that they will find the great Catholic truths which
form the basis of our common Christianity more congenial with
their improved understandings, than the errors which were
accumulated under the darkness of the middle ages.
If the State could by its fiat expel every false and doubtful
dogma from the land, and by its fiat establish the pure truth in
its rightful supremacy over the hearts and consciences of men,
or if power were given to the Ministers of the Gospel to accom-
plish this great object: the matter would be easily adjusted. But
inasmuch as Romanism will remain in spite of us, we are in no
wise responsible for its presence and we must deal with things
as they are. We cannot annihilate this system, and let us not
ignore it, but rather wisely recognising both its presence and its
power, let us provide the best security we can both for society
at large and for Roman Catholics in particular, against that which
is most baneful and dangerous in its tendencies.
For this end, while we should be careful never to be unjust
to others with a view of conciliating Roman Catholics [an error


into which the Government of this Colony has more than once
i alien) we should be equally careful to secure for that people
their rights, their full rights, all that they are fairly entitled to
as members of a mixed community under a representative
Government: and if any public measure can be devised, which
may tend gently to prevent their estrangement from their fellow
citizens, and to hinder that isolation of feeling, and that
exclusive devotion to peculiar views, which so frequently
prevails among the adherents of Romanism, and which is alike
fraught with injury to them, and with the deepest danger to
society;—w r e should esteem such a measure a great public good.
In estrangement and in hatred is the strength of all that is evil
in Romanism, and if we can by wise and wholesome and generous
means counteract such baneful influences, if w r e can thus hinder
the formation of that secluded “ imperium in imperio ” which in
many other parts of the Queen’s dominions renders the members
of that Church a separate people, and that Church itself a hotbed
of disaffection, we shall have performed a work which vulgar
politicians may denounce, hut which is worth} of a statesman of
the highest order. Now I believe that the Act of Sir
R. Bourke has already operated favourably in this respect, it has
preserved Roman Catholics from the galling injustice of being
compelled to contribute to the support of what they deem heresy,
and it has rescued them from the dangers of the voluntary
system: and if that Bill be now repealed the result must be, that
Romanism left to her own resources, and repelled from her con-
nection w'ith the Government of the country will assume a new
aspect. Forced to employ for financial purposes her peculiar
powers of coercion, she will begin to develop the darker features
and more poisonous elements of her system.
Already is our fair and wholesome arrangement of State Aid
exercising an ameliorating influence over the Roman Catholic


body in this colony,-as will appear manifest to any one who
thoughtfully compares Romanism as it is here, with the Roman-
ism of Ireland or of America. In those countries the Romanist
stands apart, here the most influential members of the body seem
anxious to forget the ancient feud, and to be united for all
great purposes with their fellow-colonists. Is it wise to cast
away a means of improvement which is already working well, and
the full result of which cannot be expected till the next generation ?
Let no one imagine that by the withdrawal of State Aid we
can effectually curtail the pecuniary resources of Romanism, and
thus place the Roman Catholic Church at a disadvantage. She
has means of raising money which no other communion in this
colony possesses, and has already amply proved the efficiency of
those means under a system of voluntary payments. She has
done that in Ireland, on the voluntary system, which its professed
advocates have never succeeded in doing anywhere :* not
confining herself to the chief towns and more prosperous
districts, she has spread the network of her priesthood over the
whole surface of the island, and penetrated every corner and
cranny with her influence. If we contend with her we should
not undervalue her strength or mistake her character, or
imagine that we can subdue her with vulgar weapons. No
earthly thing can endanger her injluercce hut the Bible,
and Christianity in its purest form. But in vain are these
presented to the minds of her people, as long as there is an
impregnable barrier of pride and passion to resist every appeal.
Her strength (this cannot be too often repeated), her strength,
at least the strength of her errors, and of all that is evil in her,
is in her hatred—hatred of all who differ from her —that is
* The Free Church of Scotland may have been enabled to place and
maintain a Minister in every Parish in that Country: but the members
of that Church cannot be numbered among the advocates of the Voluntary
System, for its own sake. Some of the strongest arguments I have ever
seen against that system are in the works of Dr. Chalmers.


the element wherein all that is most baneful in her system, and
most dangerous in her influence, breathes and lives. Take
away that feeling out of the heart of her people, bring them into
a state of kindly sympathy with their fellow citizens, and though
you may not convert them to your own religious views, you will
make the best provision in your power for their spiritual
improvement.
I cannot believe therefore that I am under any obligation of
conscience to refuse State aid (such as it is in this Colony) on
behalf of my own Church, because that aid is extended to the
Roman Catholic body. lam unable to imagine that any good
would accrue from its withdrawal from that body, and I am
convinced that many and great advantages result from its
extension to them.
It may be replied that we should not do evil that good may
come; but is the thing that we here do evil ?
Under the system of State aid Roman Catholics are instructed
in the truths of the Christian religion in the only form in which
they are willing, and therefore the only form in which they
are able to receive them. And suppose our personal
responsibility in the matter to be much more close and direct
than it is—suppose the Roman Catholics to have no means
whatever of meeting the difficulties of the voluntary system—
suppose the withdrawal of State Aid to be followed, as its
inevitable effect, by an entire cessation of the ministrations of their
priests among our Roman Catholic fellow-colonists and thus by
their deprivation of all religious instruction.—suppose, therefore,
the question brought to this simple issue, “ will you refuse to
grant the Roman Catholics the Christian religion or will you
grant them the only form of that religion which, in point of fact,
it is possible for them to receive ?”—suppose that question pro-
posed to me personally and left to my absolute discretion, I
would not hesitate, I would say at once “ give them Christianity.”


CHAPTER VI.
“Give Christianity to Christians,” some one may exclaim.
“is this the extent of your charity ? Are you not prepared to
give also Mormonism to Mormons, and Heathenism to the Asiatic
Heathens who visit us?”
Certainly not. Nor can I imagine how such a question
could be seriously asked by any man, who is not either a sophist
or an infidel.
For if, when reasoning, we intentionally exclude from our
view, or from the argument, any known truth or fact which may
in the least affect the conclusion —much more if we exclude an
important fact or truth, then we intentionally, disingenuously,
and sophistically misdirect the progress of the argument.
But in all arguments where religion is concerned the
Christian truth is the greatest and most important truth of all,
and, what is to the purpose now, is among Christians, and this
is a Christian community, a recognised and acknowledged truth.
And we cannot intentionally ignore it, in such a question as this,
unless we determine to argue upon false principles and arrive at
a false conclusion.
But is Christianity true ? No man but an infidel would ask
that question.
Christianity is true; and it is the truth which has made our
Government and our community what it is, as far as there is any
good thing either in the one or the other. Why are we a
civilized, humane, and (I must use the word, there is no other
word that will express my meaning and include all I wish to
say), Christian people? Why are we not cannibals, like the
inhabitants of many a Pacific Island ? Why are we not sunk in
dark, demoralising, and blood-thirsty superstitions like the people
of India ? Why are the abominations of ancient Greece and


the cruelties of ancient Rome abhorred among us ? Why are
we a race of improved intelligence as well as manners, and why
are we masters in these southern seas, while the heathenism
around us is powerless ? Because we are Christians. And
shame upon the lips of the Christian man who can speak or argue
as if the religion of the Saviour who bought him, and made him
the member of a Christian community, should be classed in the
same category of delusion and infamy with the vilest falsehoods
that have ever cursed the earth.
A sincere and honest-hearted man, after giving my ar-
guments full consideration, may still feel that in this very
complicated subject there are some things not yet quite satisfac-
tory to him —some difficulties which embarrass his judgment
not quite cleared up. To me, indeed, with the exception of one
matter, to which I will presently refer, there does not appear to
be any doubtful question remaining; but other minds may be
unable to adopt the whole of my reasoning, or to arrive with the
same firmness of conviction at my conclusion. But then let it
be considered, in how many cases in our present earthly state, in
cases too where we must choose our side, certainty is unattain-
able, and we have no alternative but to follow the guidance of
probability and go with the preponderance of reasoning; and
when we have large and broad principles to lead us, we should
be satisfied, and not permit every doubtful scruple and trifling
question to impede or embarrass our way. If absolute
certainty, if an entire freedom from all doubt and difficulty
be required—how is a jury, how is a Parliament, ever
to arrive at a decision upon any of the disputed ques-
tions which are submitted for their consideration? We
should not, therefore, on a subject like this, be deterred by
any worthless scruples from using the best light we can find.
And what a miserable scruple for a Christian to feel is the


supposition, that injustice or wrong is done when he
refuses to place Heathenism or Mormonism in the same class
with any form of the Christian faith. Such abominable things
should no more he regarded as religions than the thuggism,
the uncleanness, the murder, and the robbery to which they
have given birth should be esteemed moral virtues.
But how are we to deal with the Jews in this question ?
I at once admit that I deem theirs an exceptional case, and I do
so on Christian principles. The presence of a Jew in any
country is to the ignorant and unenquiring, indeed to all, a stand-
ing evidence of the truth of the Christian religion. He
comes to us out of the depths of antiquity, carrying with him
the signs and symbols of that mysterious past from whence
comes also the Christian faith. He is at once a witness of that
past in which the foundations of the Church are laid, and a
prophetic sign of that future into which the Church is advancing.
Who dreads his testimony against the faith ? He is in every
respect a witness for it. A conscious and believing witness for
the Old Testament, and though it may be unconsciously and
unwillingly, yet with not less force does he bear by his very
presence and his condition, his testimony to all that the New
Testament reveals.
From Christians this people deserve the utmost tenderness
and consideration. We believe that the truth shall yet be known
to them. We have reason to hope that even now their hearts
are moved towards their Saviour, and we should cast no stum-
bling-block in the way of Israel’s repentance. We should take no
step to exasperate the feelings of her people. We should not place
them under any disabilities, nor treat their ancient though now
blinding faith with scorn. We should consider that the Jew has
a conscience, a conscience enlightened by a divinely-bestowed
system of morality; which is second only to the Christian


system, and which, as understood by many Jews among us, is
more deeply saturated with Christian principles than they might
be disposed to admit.
All this should be taken into consideration, before we deter-
mine how they should be dealt with in such a matter as this.
In my humble opinion the Jews should be permitted as a
body to withdraw from the public treasury, in the way of a
drawback, whatever, by a reference to the Census, can be shewn
have been their share of the contribution made through the
public taxes towards the support of religious ordinances.
CHAPTER VII.
Why are the Clergymen of the Church of England so much
opposed to the abolition of State aid ? As far as they are
individually concerned they have no occasion to dread the effect
of any measure, that is likely to find favour with our Colonial
Parliament. In every proposal that has as yet assumed the
form of a Bill their personal claims have been recognised. In
Mr. Foster’s Bill such compensation was contemplated as would
have improved the pecuniary condition of many of the clerical
body ; and there has been so strong and general a manifestation
of public opinion against the summary withdrawal of public
support from men, who have been brought here upon a pledge
from the Colonial Government, and have served a long and
severe service in the discharge of the sacred duties of the
ministry, that no Administration would venture to perpetrate
such an act of injustice. Therefore the Clergy, at all events
the elder Clergy, would not personally be sufferers from the
abolition of State aid ; their dread is for the Church, and their
opposition is an act of faithfulness to her high interests.
But leaving, for the present, out of view the question of com-
pensation, let us enquire what would be the result of the sudden


abolition of State aid, to the Clergy personally and.to the Church
at large ? Suppose all the Clergy, old and young, left at once
to the mercies of the voluntary system : what would be the conse-
quence ? A few would be from the first sufficiently provided
for : others placed in parishes equal, if free from other burdens,
to the support of the ministry, but at present encumbered with
debts or with unfinished buildings, would suffer at first; those
in poor parishes would suffer severely. The condition of the
Clergy generally would, therefore, be for a time one of suffering
and difficulty—but the difficulty, as far as they are concerned,
would soon work its own cure.
At present the ranks of the Clergy are becoming thinned
with portentous rapidity by death and departure to the mother
country ; and I know not any source from which their strength
is likely to be reinforced. None of our Colonial youth are now
seeking admission into holy orders. Parents shrink from incur-
ring the expense of a costly education to fit their children for so
poor a service. Clergymen, whatever their feelings and wishes
may be on the subject, are unable to dedicate their children to
the ministry. It is’idle to imagine that a sufficient number of
men of learning, worth and ability, will, after an expensive
education at home, consent to expatriate themselves, and come
round half the globe, to cast themselves upon the tender mercies
of the voluntary system in New South Wales.
Suppose then State aid abolished, without compensation.
In a few years after the change, all Clergymen then surviving,
of fair attainments and average popularity (having passed in
some cases through an interval of suffering) would probably
find themselves in good Parsonages, and in the receipt, not often
of liberal incomes but, of that which may suffice for their
necessities. Such is the probable result for the Clergy; but
how would the Church be faring ? The ranks of the Clergy


would, by that time, have been greatly thinned, the ministry of
the Gospel have been withdrawn from many parishes, perhaps
from a third of the existing parochial districts, and Church
building w r ould have ceased, with exceptions few and far
between, all over the country parts of New South Wales,
It is easy to show that this is the natural and almost
inevitable result of the abolition of State aid. In one important
respect the Church of England is better prepared to encounter
the difficulties of the voluntary system than any other Denomina-
tion in the Colony; she is well provided with substantial and
valuable Church-buildings of every kind. In our metropolitan
city, in our chief towns, in our most obscure hamlets, as in
many a rural scene, the Churches, and Parsonages, and School-
houses that are the property of our Communion, form the most
striking features in the prospect; and the possession of such
buildings, in most cases judiciously placed and well suited to
their several purposes, must prove of great value to a Church
starting in a new career under the voluntary system.
The Churches will stand where they are for some
years to come, but the Clergy are not formed of such
enduring stuff, and as they diminish in numbers the survivors of
the body would be gradually all withdrawn from the poorer, and
draughted into the more hopeful districts.
Hitherto our Church has been endeavouring to follow
her scattered members into the remote parts of the Colony. In
this work she encounters even now much discouragement and
difficulty, and it is but imperfectly performed; but the aid given
by the State to the Church collective, though appropriated in
the first instance to parishes of long standing, is felt in some
measure through the whole body, as the wealthier parishes are
thus enabled to render some assistance to the distant dwellers in
the thinly populated interior. If State aid be abolished, parishes


will, for the most part, be sufficiently occupied, each with its
own affairs, and have little money to spare for aught beyond its
limits. How then are the less favoured parts of the
Colony to be provided for ? Where shall we find the means,
and where the men, to supply the needs of the sacred ministry
in the less affluent districts ? In such a state of things the
Church must he content to follow the example of the volunta-
ries, to pick her places for religious exertion, and fix her Clergy
only where she finds a large and wealthy population and suffi-
cient means for their support. Hitherto she has laboured in a
different spirit; in all her arrangements she has consulted less for
her ministers and more for the people. And such should her spirit
and her purpose ever be. But with a changed system she will
be compelled in practice to adapt herself to circumstances.
Finding herself in possession of a few choice parishes, and
having but a few Clergymen to fill them, she may eventually
be enabled to make a sufficient provision for her few
surviving servants; but a large portion of her work
shall have been abandoned, and the out-lying districts left, as
the advocates of the voluntary system now leave them, wholly
unministered to.
Meanwhile Church-building will stop.
Heretofore the Clergymen of the Church of England having
a humble provision from the State, and in some cases some
help from their people, though much straitened, have been,
as in duty bound, content; and have labored zealously in
the collection of funds for erecting or enlarging or beautifying
the Houses of God in the land, or for some like purpose.
Hereafter, if placed under the voluntary system, many a Cler-
gyman will be forced to consider every pound devoted to
such objects, as so much taken from his over-tasked wife,
or from his half-fed, half-clothed, and uneducated children.


How then, under such a system, are Churches to be built or
repaired ?
If any man doubts that the foregoing consequences would
follow the abolition of State aid, let him consider what has
already been the effect of the withdrawal of the stipends of the
gold-field chaplains. Three Clergymen were employed in
those districts ; of these one has been recalled and has found
a fixed home and more congenial employment in a parish
vacated by the death of its former Incumbent: a second is
said to be “on the eve of leaving” the colony for England; and
the third will for the present continue in his important scene of
duty—maintained with difficulty by the united efforts of the
friends of the Church in the gold-fields and in Sydney. This
may be taken as a sample of what, if all State aid be withdrawn,
would soon be happening all over the Colony,
The Clergymen, as we have seen, would jsuffer at first
from the abolition, but if fair compensation be given to help
them past immediate difficulties, they personally may have little
to complain of; but how, I ask again, is the Church to fare ?
Let Churchmen calmly consider the question. Is the extension
of the ministrations of religion to be suddenly arrested ? Is the
Church which has hitherto been spreading abroad to the right
hand and to the left, and endeavouriug to reach with her labours
every extremity of the colony, and to penetrate with her influ-
ence every hamlet and every valley within it, to be now com-
pelled to contract her exertions, to recall her servants, to retire
within the wealthier districts, and henceforth to be confined to a
field of labour not much exceeding in its dimensions the very
narrow territory now occupied by the voluntary system ; leaving
all beyond it in a state of unmitigated and hopeless heathenism
and infidelity?
And why should our Church be reduced to this condition ?


Why is this most injurious change required ? Is the support of
religious ordinances, under the existing system, a burden which
the people of this land cannot endure ?
No. The amount of taxation involved is a mere trifle, which
nobody feels. <£28,000 per annum, paid by 300,000 persons,
not two shillings per head, if levied as a poll-tax; and at
present distributed over the various classes of society by a
popular legislature, on, we may presume, fair financial principles.
Or are the public revenues in an impoverished state and
thus unequal to this demand ? Nothing of the kind.
Or is an overwhelming majority of the people clamorous for
abolition ? No, again, no. An attempt has been made to move
the masses on the subject, with singularly little success;
whereas, in the absence of all effort on our part to disseminate
information, or to awaken attention to tbe evils that would
accrue from the proposed change, many petitions have been
presented against it.
Where then is the pressure that renders this sacrifice a
State necessity ? There is none.
In estimating the consequences of the abolition of State Aid,
the members of our Church should not overlook its probable
effect upon the character of the Clergy. Hitherto Clergymen
of the Church of England have been remarkable for the quiet,
unoffending, unobtrusive way in which, amidst the confusion
and bustle of this noisy and restless colony, they have been
pursuing, each within the limits of his own parish, the peaceful
walk of usefulness. Few of them are known beyond the pre-
cincts of their own special field of labour (where they are
well known); their voices are not heard in the streets or amidst
the uproar of popular movements ; and there is not, as there
ought not to be, a single demagogue among them.
Suppose State Aid abolished, and a few years past, what


would be the character of our Clergymen then ? The old Clergy
are now rapidly disappearing from among us—it is idle to
expect that, under the voluntary system, we shall be able to
supply their places with men of fair position and cultivated minds
from England; and at present there is not the least prospect of
seeing the elite of the young intelligence of the colony entering
the Church. It is obvious, therefore, that if the ministry is to
be perpetuated among us under such a change, it must be by the
introduction into its ranks of men of inferior education, habits
and ideas. When a large body of such men have for a few
years been subjected to the bewildering and humiliating influence
of the voluntary system—some may, through God’s grace, pass
unharmed through the ordeal —but there is every probability
that we shall see among them, if we live long enough, two
different classes of character fully developed. We shall see
poor timid, mean men, weak in mind and weak in ministry,
perhaps with sickly wives and sickly children, the veriest slaves
of some tyranical ruler among the laymen of their respective
parishes—and utterly unable to speak out with the controlling
energy and boldness that becomes the soldier of Christ. And
we shall see also a very different class. Bold and adven-
turous spirits will appear among our ministers, who, having
mastered their congregations, and conscious of their power
as orators and popular leaders, feeling the strength derived from
constant and familiar intercourse with the people—and led by
the natural affinity which exists between the voluntary system
and agitation to assume the port and power of tribunes,
will use the organisation of the Church for party purposes,
and eventually become most troublesome and dangerous
demagogues. Studious, for personal reasons, to fill their churches
and please their people, they will soon discover that the politics
of this world when varnished over with a little Scriptural


phraseology, and presented from the pulpits prove to
unsanctified minds a more agreeable, congenial, and exciting
topic for Sunday declamation than the pure Gospel of
the Saviour. They will, in fact, learn the crafty and
unfaithful lesson—that it is more profitable, under such
a system, to preach “ for the times than to preach for
eternity.”
If any man imagines that there is no danger that our pulpits
shall ever be turned to such base uses, I recommend to his con-
sideration a sermon of the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, which he will
find in a volume sold by many of the booksellers of Sydney —
the text is from Psalm cxxv, 2. I make a short extract. He
speaks of the ministrations of his dissenting brethren, the
voluntaries of England.
“ In the midst of our Dissenting Churches especially, there is
a system which does not deserve the name of system, except for
its systematic desire to crush every system. There is a system
springing up that takes out of the Gospel every truth that makes
it precious, plucks every jewel out of the crown of the
Redeemer and tramples it under the foot of man. In a large
number of our pulpits at this time you will not hear the Gospel
preached by a month together. Anything else you like you
may hear preached— Anti-State Churchism, political affairs —
these are the current staple of the day. Politics Jill up the
pulpits and philosophy stands in the way of theology!’
Another result we may anticipate from abolition, which may
seriously affect the character of our ministry—is this. A
Clergyman when taking holy orders under the voluntary system,
must feel that it is uncertain whether in the sacred profession he
has chosen, he is to find subsistence for himself and his family
all his life. He may by some unfortunate circumstance, perhaps
by a manly and honorable performance of duty, expose himself to


the resentment of some influential parishioner, who may have it'in
his power to bring him and his whole house to poverty. He
may be superseded in the favour of his people by some more
fortunate, less scrupulous, and less worthy rival—and what
follows ? He may be content to starve himself, but not to see
his wife and children starving. He may be content to beg (he
may, in fact, have been feeling for years all the humiliation of a
beggar, for Clergymen must be satisfied to take without shame
the chance alms and gifts, the offer of which to other men would
be resented as an affront)— but in his case begging would have
no avail. What is he to do ? He must needs seek for the
means of subsistence in some secular employment.
In the Church of England the rule now is, “ once a priest
always a priest.” Can that rule continue in force under the
voluntary system ? Surely not. Under that system it will be
impossible to preserve the boundaries which now fence in the
clerical order. No man under it can undertake the duties of
the ministry without foreseeing that the time may come for him,
as it must come for many, when those duties must be abandoned.
In conclusion, I wish to say, that in all respects, except the
one referred to in this chapter, our Church is at present unpre-
pared for abolition. Our Cathedral is unfinished, many of our
parishes are engaged in Church-building undertakings, and
many are heavily in debt. No means have as yet been provided
for the education of young Clergymen, of which parents seem
disposed to avail themselves ; there is but little union among us
except within the parishes, we have no Synod, and but little
prospect at present of obtaining one. If the voluntary system
comes suddenly upon us we shall be in a most serious dilemma.
What, under such circumstances, is the duty of a member
of the Church of England in this colony ?


If any man has been convinced by the reasoning in this tract
it is the duty of that man to employ all the influence he possesse;
to frustrate the designs of the abolitionists, and to secure for thi
and coming generations the continuance and, it may be, ex-
tension of State Aid. Our Church is, as we have seen, unpre-
pared for the change, and if we can but postpone the evil daj
until we have set our house in order; if we can gain but a short
respite, and nothing more, even that is worth contending for.
But why should we despair of final victory in so good a
cause ? Why should we not labour for the conservation, at any
rate, upon their present scale, of those religious ordinances which
are of such inestimable value to this young country ? Our oppo-
nents, it is true, have many advantages—they are active, they
are determined, they are experienced popular leaders, they have
at present command of the newspaper press, and they have con-
trived to diffuse the impression that they are supported in their
views by a majority of the people, and that their final success is
inevitable. Let us also be active and determined, and let us not
contend under the discouraging anticipation of defeat. I am
convinced that if town and country could be fairly polled upon
the question, there would be found a large majority against
abolition; and if we can but retard the measure for a few years,
until there is time for the voice of common sense, and just
reasoning and Christian feeling to be heard, and for the opinion
of the people to be known, the result may be most satisfactory.
At all events, and for every reason, let us oppose as much delay
as possible. By petitions, by personal and political influence, by
every honorable and constitutional means, let every member of
our Church, who can perceive the importance of the crisis,
labor to postpone the threatened abolition.
Meanwhile let us prepare for the worst. Let parishes make
haste to complete their Churches and Parsonages, and pay their


debts. Let the now almost-roofed Cathedral be at once furnished
with windows and prepared for Divine Service, and thus let the
unfinished building, which has so long been presented to the
public gaze in the midst of this city as a token of our weakness
and an emblem of our disgrace, and which has been such an
incubus upon our energies, be transmuted at once into what it
was intended to be —a source of usefulness, a centre of union,
and a tower of strength. Let a Theological School for the
education of Clergymen be formed, where the promising youth of
pious families in Sydney can attend without incurring unreason-
able expense. Let pains be taken to improve the internal
organisation of parishes, and for that end let more effect be
given to the office of Churchwarden, and when it is possible
let side-men * be appointed. Let increased efforts be
made to bring together in holy union and Christian inter-
course both the Ministers and the Lay Members of our
Communion. And finally, and above all, let a Synod of the
Diocese be assembled without further delay. Until that is
done the Church of England can never take the place that
pertains to it in this Colony, or perform aright the high duties to
which it is pledged ; but must ever continue to present, as it
now does, the anomalous appearance of a body strong in its
component parts, but weak as a whole—strong in its parishes,
but weak in the Diocese. And why should this measure be
longer delayed ? Why should this, the oldest Diocese in the
Southern Hemisphere, be found in the day of danger, unpro-
vided with the armour she needs, and which her sister Dioceses,
her younger sisters, have long since possessed and been using
to such good purpose ?
* See 90th Canon.


And let us all feel that much is to be done for the
Redeemer’s cause in this young country—and that it behoves all,
young and old, rich and poor, to be up and doing.
Joseph Cook and Co., Printers, 370, George-street, Sydney.
