

fscn i L
33iid THOUSAND.
SHOULD THE
NATIONAL MUSEUMS
BE
Opened on the Lord’s Day?
By SIR THOMAS CHAMBERS, Q.C., M.P.,
Recorder of London.
Hoiiliing Dflps 3tonT» lag Association,
13 BEDFORD ROW, LONDON, W.C.
M. L. HUTCHINSON ,
15 COLLINS ST. W., MELBOURNE.


SHOULD the MTIOML MUSEUMS
OPENED ON THE LORD’S DAY?
Epi tome of an address by Sir Thomas Chart hers, Q.C.,
M.P., Recorder of the City of London , ( revised by
him), on moving the following resolution at \a Meeting
of the Working Men’s Lord’s Day Rest Association
held in Exeter Hall.
“ That every man has a right to, and need of, the Day of
Rest, of which he ought not to be deprived, except to perform
works of necessity, and that in the opinion of this meeting the
Opening of Museums, &c., on Sundays is totally unnecessary,
would inflict a wrong on the staff of attendants, pioneer the
way for the Sunday opening of every exhibition, gallery,
theatre, and other place of amusement throughout the Empire,
and give a sanction and impetus to Sunday labour in many
departments of trade, to the great injury of the working
classes.”
|||| CONCUR in every word of that resolution. It
yy begins with the Day of Rest, and it ends
<s^> with the working classes, and it connects them
together by a series of cogent arguments. This Day
of Rest is God’s earliest gift to every man, given
because our God is a beneficent God. It is therefore
a gift to which every man has a right. This is


the first proposition in this resolution—that in a
Christian country, where the Sabbath is known and
observed, and where we have in our hands God’s
Word—which is the charter and deed of gift by which
we hold it—every man has a right to the Day of Rest,
Man also has need of the Sabbath. It is needful because
God gave it, and God gave it because he knew it was
needful. If it were needful in Paradise, surely in these
busy and overworked days there is vastly more necessity
for a Day of Rest. If a man has a right to the Sab-
bath, and if every man has need of it, then the next
proposition in the resolution cannot be disputed, namely,
that a man ought not to be deprived of it “ except to
perform works of necessity.” Necessity is its ownlaw ;
the exception and the ground of it prove and justifiy
and honour the rule. When Ido a work on Sunday
which would ordinarily be forbidden by my regard to
God and my love to man, and can justify it as a work
of mercy or of necessity, I break the law in a spirit and
with a motive and under circumstances which warrant the
breach, and honour the law itself. If these propositions
are assented to, I may pass on to some things men-
tioned in the resolution which we think do not justify
an invasion of that which is our right. We say that
the opening of Museums, &c., on Sunday is totally un-
necessary. It is not a work of necessity. Is there any
need of proof? We have hitherto had them universally
closed on Sundays : they have been closed up to this
day ; and yet it is an argument commonly urged by
those who differ from us that it is a work of necessity
to educate the working classes of this country by
opening the Museums on Sunday. I say, in reply,
that there never was a time in the history of this
country when the working classes were so well
educated as they are now ; that their education and


well-being lias made a progress during the last quarter
of a century previously unparalleled, and this while our
Museums have been closed on Sunday. In ray judg-
ment education has gone on better and more success-
fully because they were closed. Among the great
agencies of improvement, I point to Sunday Schools,
and to the labours of Christian ministers of all denomi-
nations. I believe in the sanctifying, elevating influ-
ence which comes upon us when we meet together to
offer thanksgiving and prayer to Almighty God. Though
I go with those who oppose us in nearly all that they
say about the advantage of contemplating works of art,
I believe much more in religious worship and the
exercise of the devout affections. Hot that I would
by any process of law, by anything except argument
and persuasion, compel or induce any man to join any
Christian assembly for Christian worship. We are
here on the defensive. We are for maintaining the
law—which has protected us hitherto in the enjoy-
ment of a I)ay of Rest. On the other hand, on grounds
which satisfy a great many conscientious persons, our
opponents are desirous of agitating until the law is
altered in their sense ; and when that is done the legal
protection of the Day of Rest is gone. The next
statement in the resolution is that the opening of these
places would inflict a wrong on the staff of attendants.
When is there Sunday to be— when their Day of
Rest ? Remember that the opening of Museums in
London involves the opening of them in every large town
throughout England, and in every second and third-rate
town where there happens to be one. There is an
enormous number of persons whose Sunday would
be . entirely taken away if the law were altered. The
resolution goes on to say, the opening of Museums on
Sunday would pave the way for a greater wrong—it


“ would pioneer the way for the Sunday opening of
every exhibition, gallery, theatre, and other place of
amusement throughout the Empire.” Of this I am
satisfied ; and our opponents would differ among
themselves as to where the movement would stop if it
once began. They are on a slippery, inclined plane
with no foothold, and they will be pushed to the bottom
directly they begin to move. I should like to hear the
most acute and most moderate member of the Sunday
League, when he has argued with all the skill and
eloquence with which no doubt he would argue in favor
of opening museums and exhibitions and galleries,
attempt to make a stand when assailed by an opponent
because he could not swallow “theatre.” (Hear, hear.)
Why, he would be met in this way, “ Oh, theatre !
what do you say to concert ? There is no harm at
least in music ; there is nothing more elevating and
refining, no enjoyment better for the working classes
than good music, and they have not any opportunities
of hearing it except on Sunday. Well, then, if you
don’t object to music—and what difference can it make
whether music is in a hall or in the open air ?—why
should you object to the theatre ? What is an opera
but music ? There is a little gesture, and the words
are sung, but all that does not make the music less
elevating or refining.” Well, Ido not see how
that argument is to be met by the man who holds
that the opening of museums and exhibitions and
galleries on Sunday should be made a great agency
in education. Why object to the drama ? It
might be said you will let a man look at sculpture
you will let him look at the wonders of art and
science in Museums—all that being silent teaching ;
and yet you refuse to allow him to have the great
moral lessons which the drama has always taught I” I


am not sure that the gentleman whom I have assumed
to be so clever and moderate would be able to answer
such an argument as that. “ And other places of
amusement.” The same class of arguments which
would induce us to open one would be more or less
applicable to all the others. I say more or less, be-
cause some exhibitions are in themselves, apart alto-
gether from the day, objectionable, while others are not
so ; but, subject to those differences, the argument on
this question which would apply to the one would apply
to all the others. It is very much like probing a bank
that keeps out the sea in Holland. You may probe
that bank only to get a bucketful of water, but you
may thereby flood a nation or drown a province. You can-
not keep the hole the size you first made it. You cannot
govern the flood. The “ letting out of water” is pro-
verbial. But I now come to another argument which
is urged in the resolution. We say that it will “ give
a sanction and impetus to Sunday labor in many de-
partments of trade.” Places which have hitherto been
closed are to be opened, not for the purpose of labor,
but for that of recreation. The argument of our oppo-
nents is, that this will not interfere with the Sabbath.
“ Rest,” say they, “ does not mean sluggish .inertness,
or a man’s lying on his back all day. We think men
who work very hard all the week need some bodily re-
pose on Sunday ; but ‘rest’ means recreation ; the
mind will be relieved, the sense of weaiincss and
exhaustion will be actually removed by the kind
of recreation which we advocate.” But they can-
not say this when they consider the clause of the
resolution to which I am referring. It is here
affirmed that the opening of these places will “ give an
impetus to Sunday labour.” Why, who can doubt it?
How many extra vehicles must be employed in the


streets ? How many extra steamboats must ply ?
How many extra railway trains must run ? How many
extra shops must be opened to supply all what the people
will absolutely need to prevent them from being starved ?
A man and his wife may spend four or five hours with-
out refreshment, and many do, but children cannot do
so without injury to their constitution. If you look at
these things in a common-sense way, it is impossible
to deny the cogency of the argument that if all these
places are opened on Sunday, if thousands and tens of
thousands are led to visit them, a gigantic evil will have
been inflicted upon Great Britain. If twenty trades are
obliged to be more or less at work ; if twenty different
forms of labour, in its direct, hard sense, its-work day
sense, are thus set in activity on Sunday, do you think
it will stop at twenty? Homan who looks at the
matter in what I call a common-sense way can suppose
that it will. Ho, it will lead to Sunday labour, and
then the rest is gone. The movement will begin with
furnishing what I must call illegitimate recreation, in
order to make the rest agreeable ; and it will end with
the destruction of the rest which it was intended to
enhance. And now the last statement in the resolution
is that when this great impulse and impetus is given to
Sunday labour in many departments it will be a “ great
injury to the working classes.” That is my conscientious
and deep belief, and that is the reason lam here, I
hold strong opinions as to the observance of the Day of
Rest as a Christian man ; but I have not to treat the
question to-night on that which is the highest ground.
I have not argued the question on that ground, I
have touched the argument, it is true, because this is a
meeting of the Working Mens Lord’s Day Rest
Association. I believe that to do what is now asked
that men should be allowed to do would be a breach of


the Divine law, but I do not press that before you.
What is now asked is power to break through what I
believe to be the sound, excellent, legal protection which
the working classes, and therefore the helpless classes,
now enjoy with reference to one day’s exemption every
week from the toils of labour. I believe that the
welfare of the working classes is deeply involved in this
question. Looking at the working classes as one great
body, they are, I belieVe, on our side of this question,
and not on the other ; and 1 do most firmly believe that
the more this question is investigated by the working
classes, the better they will see that it is their interest
that Museums and other places of the same kind should
not be opened on Sunday ; it is a question for them pre-
eminently. The working man cannot retain his Sabbath
unless the law protects him in its enjoyment. lam
here to move the resolution which I have read. It is a
resolution expressive of the truth on this great and im-
portant question—a resolution which I would have en-
forced had it been in my power with stronger argument
and more forcible appeals, but which I heartily commend
to your adoption.
Rab Bros., “ Onward ” Office, 35 Elizabeth st. North.
