

Shura Cherkassky
TOWN
HALL
SYDNEY
DIRECTION
E. J. GRAVESTOCK LTD.


SHURA
CHERKASSKY
Records Exclusively
for the
Duo Art
pianola
IN choosing to record his playing
exclusively for the “Duo Art” Pianola,
Shura Cherkassky has but followed
the example of his maestro, Josef
Hofmann, and all other distinguished
modern pianists.
It is surely a significant fact that all five
of the famous pianists who have
recently visited Australia—Paderewski,
Grainger, Backhaus, Friedman, and
now Shura Cherkassky—are exclusive
“Duo Art” artists. There can be only
one reason for this, and that is expressed
in the words of Paderewski:
“ Because, in my opinion, the
‘Duo Art ’ is superior to all other
reproducing pianos, I have
agreed to record exclusively for
that instrument.”
There are “Duo Art” models to suit
every purse and moderate monthly pay-
ments may be arranged.
ghg
The AEOLIAN COMPANY
(AUSTRALIA) LIMITED,
416*418 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY
Also Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, and Newcastle.


SECOND RECITAL
TUESDAY, JULY 3rd, 1928
At 8
TOWN HALL - - SYDNEY
Direction : E. J. Gravestock Ltd.
Programme
Annotations by L* de Noskowski
Toccata and Fugue Bach-Tausig
“Carnaval” R. Schumann
Toccata and Fugue in D minor.
A toccata, which is derived from
the Italian word “toccare” (“to
touch”), denotes essentially a dis-
play work in a succession of flowing
and brilliant passages. Bach com-
posed several toccatas, which are
masterpieces of their kind. The D
Minor Toccata and Fugue is one of
his finest works, pervaded by intense
emotion and dramatic feeling, which
are most impressive. Tausig, a
pianistic genius, whose premature
death deprived the world of a very
accomplished musician, made a very
fine piano arrangement of the work,
in which he has very successfully
preserved its organ qualities.


AN E. J. GRAVESTOCK
ATTRACTION FOR 1929.
A New Personality!
A New Entertainment!
“She is simple and utterly un-
affected, keenly artistic, and so
flaming with talent, that her every
effort is dramatic adventure
brought into new directions.”
CORNELIA
OTIS SKINNER
In Her Original
Character Sketches
“She is a Comedienne who favours the
critical and the intelligent audience
with the sort of entertainment which
is of an elegance and
a smartness which
will have an appeal
both universal and
special.”


Carnaval, Op. 9.
Prearnhule - Pierrot - Arlequin - Valse Noble - Eusebius - Florestan -
Coquette - Replique - Sphinx - Papillons - Lettres dansantes - Chiarina -
Chopiniana - Estrella - Reconnaissance - Pantalon et Colombine - V alse
Allemande - Paganini - Valse Allernande ( repetition) - Paganini -
Promenade - Pause - Marche des Davidsbundler contre les Philistins.
Schumann originated the form of
small piano compositions grouped
under one collective title. Of those
the Carnaval is the most beautiful,
consisting of twenty small works of
rare charm and romantic inspiration,
and reflecting his impressions of
friends in the musical world of Leip-
zig in the early ’thirties. Several
titles represent Schumann’s friends,
others imaginary characters at a
masked ball, but as the composer
wrote to Moscheles: I need hardly
tell you, perhaps, that the arrange-
ment of the whole and the inscrip-
tions over the separate pieces were
added after the music was wr’tten.”
The ‘‘Carnaval’’ was dedicated to
Charles Lipinsky, the famous Polish
violinist.
Sonata in B flat minor. Op. 35.
Sonata in B flat minor F. Chopin
1. Grave. Doppic mcvimento.
2. Scherzo.
3. Marcia funebre.
4. Finale (Presto).
Chopin s great Sonata in B Flat
Minor was severely criticised at first.
Mendelssohn could not see any musi-
cal value in it. Even Schumann,
who was one of Chopin’s greatest
admirers, apparently misunderstood
the work, being too far distant from
his conception of the traditional
sonata form. When personal pre-
judice and narrowminded subsided.
the world at large gradually began
to appreciate the matchless beauty
of the themes which Chopin lavished
on this sonata. The “Funeral
March” was composed first, during
Chopin’s stay on the Island of Ma-
jorca, in the Mediterranean. The
other movements were composed a
few months later.


CHAPPELL
A Lasting Repertoire for Teaching and Recreative Use
RESOURCEFUL teachers are quick to discriminate between the works
which serve a fleeting- purpose and those which merit a regular place in
their scheme of work. The following items from the Chappell catalogue
have the definite advantage of making such a strong appeal to students that
their usefulness extends far beyond the stage of actual practice. As each item
is mastered, it will pass into the student’s repertoire of things that give
lasting joy.
For Singing
FOR SOPRANOS AND MEZZOS:
April is a Lady Montague F. Phillips
Sun-Flakes ••••■ Montague F. Phillips
The Time of Roses Roger Quitter
Over the Meadow Molly Carew
FOR BARITONES AND BASSES:
The Happy Man Thomas F. Dunhill
The Little Ships Raymond Loughborough
The Pride of Tipperary A. Lochhead
FOR ALL VOICES:
Bird Songs at Eventide Eric Coates
A Song Remembered Eric Coates
Little Lady of the Moon Eric Coates
I Think of You, My Sweet Haydn Wood
Beloved, I Shall Wait Guy d’Hardelot
Flow’r of the Desert Hermann Lohr
Sunday Molly Carew
Trees Oscar Rasbach
A Garden is a Lovesome Thing
Teresa del Riego
THE MELBA METHOD.
The Melba Method should be in the library
of every vocal teacher and student. It is a
standard work for all who take the art of
singing seriously. And it is of historic inter-
est as an exposition of the methods whereby
Dame Nellie Melba became the great artist
she is.
For Piano
THE SAVOY OPERA SERIES—Albums
containing Excerpts from the Gilbert and
Sullivan Operas, simply and artistically
arranged by Thomas F. Dunhill.
All the world adores the Gilbert and Sulli-
van Operas, but until this new Simplified
Edition was published, their educational pos-
sibilities were restricted. The publication of
T. F. Dunhill’s arrangements of selected airs
from the Savoy Operas enables young people
to revel in Sullivan’s imperishable tunes,
and to know them —no( by listening—but by
playing. Each one of these albums makes
an irresistible appeal to boys and girls, and
teachers will find the arrangements thorough-
ly pianistic—an important point.
The Mikado
The Gondoliers
Princess Ida
Trial by Jury
H.M.S. Pinafore
Patience
lolanthe
Utopia,
Ruddigore
The Sorcerer
The Grand Duke
The Yeomen of the
Guard
The Pirates of
Penzance
Limited
MONTAGUE F. PHILLIPS
DANCE REVELS.—This new suite is par-
ticularly suitable for pupils’ concerts and
home entertainments, where items with
rhythm and sparkle make a special appeal.
Medium grade.
CHAPPELL
Chappell & Co. Ltd., National Building, 250 Pitt Street, Sydney


Tango.
4 'Tango’ ’ Albeniz-Godowsky
'‘Moment Musical’ 1 Schubert-Godowsky
“Minuet” /. J, Paderewski
“Zouave s Drill” Mana-Zucca
“Naila” Waltz E. von Dohnanyi
Tango, with its fast and acceler-
ating tempo, is a dance of Mexican
origin, but very popular in Spain.
Albeniz, a pupil of Brassin and later
of Liszt, was a Spanish pianist of
note, who died twenty years ago.
The brilliant transcription is by Leo-
pold Godowsky, the famous pianist,
whose vast musicianship and unlimit-
ed knowledge of piano resources are
second to none.
Moment Musical
Schubert’s delightfully melodious
and dainty “Moment Musical’ has
been very skilfully arranged by
Godowsky, who recently published
twelve songs of Schubert freely
transcribed for the piano. “A mas-
terpiece is indestructible,” claims
Godowsky, “it remains untarnished
whether transcribed, arranged for
the piano, or paraphrased. Its in-
trinsic value, having the necessary
vitality to sustain its interest, cannot
be impaired.”
Minuet.
Amongst the numerous compo-
sitions by Paderewski, some of
which are of very high musical merit,
this charming Menuet, with its essen-
tially old-world grace, has scored a
popularity second to none.


AN E. J. GRAVESTOCK ATTRACTION FOR 1929
“Dusolina Giannini has within one year appeared three times in Breslau and has three times sold out the house.”
—Breslau Zeitung.
DUSOLINA GIANNINI
“She is more than a singer, she is an artiste of the same rank as Sarah Bernhardt or Duse.”
—Hamburger Correspondent.


AN E. J. GRAVESTOCK ATTRACTION FOR 1929
DUSOLINA GIANNINI
HE story of the triumph achieved by Dusoiina Giannini on
f J March 14, I 923, when she substituted for an indisposed singer
at a Carnegie Hall concert of The Schola Cantorum, is now a
familiar record. Since then she has become enshrined in the esteem
of two continents. Her time is divided between Europe and America
to satisfy the insistent demand for her artistic services. Her name
figures prominently in Associated Press cables and in editorials.
Everywhere she is acclaimed by public and press confirming the
opinion of the Boston “Transcript” that “within memory no rising
singer has disclosed such diversity and sustained such evenness of
ability as Miss Dusoiina Giannini.”
Miss Giannini was born in Philadelphia, of Italian parents, from
whom she received her early musical education. Her father,
a tenor, was associated with Adelina Patti in many
operatic performances. Her later training was received with Marcella Sem-
brich in New York. Within four seasons of her debut Miss Giannini has
appeared with practically all the orchestras in the country, has given numerous
recitals from Canada to Havana and from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and has
made four tours of Europe, where she has sung in recital, with orchestras
and in opera.
During the current season, Miss Giannini has already appeared as guest
artist at the Hamburg Opera House, has appeared with orchestra under Men-
gelberg in Amsterdam and The Hague and has given recitals to sold-out
houses throughout Germany. In April she created the role of Leonora in the
first performance of “La F orza del Destine” ever given at the Hamburg
Opera House. In May she sang at the Berlin Opera House, and in June she
sang the roles of Aida, Butterfly, and Santuzza, at Covent Garden Opera
House, London, creating an astounding furore. These performances were
interspersed with a recital tour extending from Scandinavia to Spain.
AN EDITORIAL TRIBUTE
From The New York “Sun,” Friday, September 10, 1926.
GIANNINI IN EUROPE
“When a singer from this country meets with great success abroad it is
generally a sign of unusual talent. Such was the fate of DUSOLINA GIANNINI
the first time she sang in Berlin. Now she has enjoyed the double honor of re-
turning to the Prussian capital and repeating the experiment with the same success.
The cable reports that she was summoned twenty-five times back to the stage the
other night during a performance of “Aida,” which she sang the title role.
Berlin may roar its applause; so may London and Vienna. New York may
listen in pleasure. It applauded when it heard Dusolina Giannini and, moreover,
its applause came first. Its musical perception was not quickened by the approval
of foreign cities. It was its own judge and decided first just what was due to the
young singer and knows that every pair of clapping hands in Berlin the other night
was doing the right thing.”


SHURA
CHERKASSKY
"Theosophists might call this boy pianist the reincarnation of a Carl Tausig or a Franz Liszt, I call him
the greatest child artist I ever met.’' —New ork “Evening Telegraph.
Shura at the age of Thirteen.
FIVE years ago the amazing artistry of an 11-
year old boy pianist caused a veritable stir in
the musical circles of Baltimore, U.S.A. He
had but lately arrived from war-ridden Russia,
where his parents, after years of privation and
suffering, finally won permission of the Soviet
Government to leave for America.
Mme. Cherkassky, the lad’s mother, was her-
self a concert pianist and teacher at the Odessa
Conservatoire. She had entirely supervised his
musical training, which was firmly and sanely
grounded. No attempt had been made to exploit
his natural precocity.
During two years spent in Baltimore, Shura
Cherkassky appeared in a number of recitals.
Youthful prodigies are not rare in this day and
time, and technical finesse does not provoke un-
usual comment, but Shura’s mastery of his instru-
ment bore the unmistakable stamp of genius.
Musicians and critics alike could but reverently
acknowledge its obvious manifestation. He was
widely acclaimed as the most precocious talent
since the time when Josef Hofmann made his re-
markable debut at the age of nine.
From Baltimore the Cherkassky family moved to New York. In his debut there Shura celebrated a
repetition of his Baltimore triumphs. The capacity audience at Aeolian Hall waxed riotously enthusiastic,
and after the final encore the youthful musician was fairly mobbed in the artists’ room. Even the New
York press, grudging and reluctant toward prodigies, unreservedly conceded his astonishing artistry.
In the spring influential friends, including Paderewski and Rachmaninoff, and Josef Hofmann, decided
that he should continue his studies at the Curtis Institute at Philadelphia, under the famous pianist Josef
Hofmann, who himself created such a sensation as a boy prodigy at the age of nine. His eminent Maestro
sanctioned only a limited number of concert appearances each season as favourable to his growth and
development.
(Continued on page 10).


GOD SAVE THE KING!
Special Matinee Recital,
THURSDAY, JULY 12th, at 2.30.
THE
PIANO IS
A
STEINWAY
STEINWAY GRAND PIANO from NICHOLSON’S
Zouave Drill.
A modern composition by Mana
Zucca who has to her credit many
popular songs and several piano
compositions, and who lives in
Florida.
Naila Waltz.
Ernst von Dohnanyi, the distin-
guished Hungarian composer and
pianist, chose for the subject of his
very difficult piano transcription, thi
very graceful and melodious waltz
from the ballet “Naila” by Leo
Lelibes, a French composer of many
successful ballets and operas.


His subsequent appearances in New ork and
the principal cities of America created a sensation,
and people flocked to hear this young genius of
the keyboard who played amazing programmes in
the fashion of the giants of the piano. Describing
his appearances in New York, an eminent critic
wrote: —
“It is Shura, the boy who waiks out upon the
platform with child-like simplicity of manner and
an engaging naivete that contrasts strangely with
Shura, the artist. At the piano he becomes in-
stantly masterful, authoritative. So enveloping, so
complete it his concentration that he seems trans-
ported to another sphere, far removed from every
material consideration.
His approach is reverent, sincere, restrained.
At his command are lavish resources-astonishing,
virtuosity, youthful impetuosity and fire, glowing
gradations of tonal colour, glowing warmth and
poetic tenderness —but he draws judiciously, care-
fully from them. Ever foremost is the composer’s
mood and intention. And so mature, so masterful
is his grasp that one can only marvel at so phen-
omenal a fund of intuitive power. Even the com-
monplace he invests with rare charm and new
interest.
Through the vista of the years life awaits Shura
—life with its stern actualities and the inevitable
bludgeoning of circumstances, that alone will bring
the ultimate flowering of his genius. What he
gives now intuitively will then be transmitted
through the alchemy of clarified vision and perfect
understanding. And in that day the genius of
the immortals will live on through the genius of
Shura Cherkassky.”
Shura at the age of Eleven.


hura dherkassky I&ecitals
THIRD RECITAL
THURSDAY, JULY sth, at 8.
PROGRAMME.
Aria and Variations in D minor
Etudes Symphoniques
Impromptu in F sharp major . .
Vaises: op. 34, No. 2
op. 34, No. 1
Ballade in G minor
“Fairy Tale”
“Chant sans Paroles”
“Arabesque” in E major
“Rigoletto” (paraphrase) ....
Handel
A. Schumann
• • 1
I
F. Chopin
• J
. . N. Medtnec
T schaikowsky
. . C. Debussy
. . Verdi-Liszt
FOURTH RECITAL
SATURDAY, JULY 7th, at 8.
PROGRAMME.
Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue J. S. Bach
Sonata, Op. 27, No. 2 (“Moonlight”) . L. Van Beethoven
Ballade in A flat major F. Chopin
Nocturne in D flat major F. Chopin
Mazurka in F sharp minor >. F. Chopin
Polonaise in A flat major F. Chopin
“L Orient and TOccident” M.Dvorsky
“Rush Hour in Hong Kong” A. Chasins
Hungarian Rhapsody, No. 12 F. Liszt
FIFTH RECITAL
TUESDAY, JULY 10th, 1928, at 8


An Appreciation by Samuel Chotzinoff in the
“New York World,” December 8th, 1927
Shura Cherkassky, recently a child prodigy, now attained
to manhood by virtue of his sixteen years, gave a piano
recital at Carnegie Hall before a house full of enthusiasts
and his more critical master, Josef Hofmann.
Shura Cherkassky , with his distinguished Maestro, Josef Hofmann
It may be said at once that in this boy is lodged a talent
for playing the piano hardly equalled by any but one or
perhaps two virtuosi now before the public. Notwith-
standing his tender age, Cherkassy communicates first and
foremost a sense of unstinted power, an unlimited reservoir
of strength. This strength, howevei, is never noise, but
always the pressure of a tone with the equality of a silver
trumpet. Cle„r, solid, and brilliant, this tone is the same
from the top to the bottom of the keyboard. In chords,
cantilena, in the swift flights of scales and passages, the
tone is beautifully equalized. As for the mechanics qf the
pianist’s art, the boy’s mastery of his is
prodigious even in these days of super-lechnic. He is a
youthful artist glorying in musical health, revelling in the
sheer beauty of sound and sporting with thunderbolts like
some infant Jove.


SHURA CHERKASSKY joins with
many world famous artists in praising
Shura Cherkassky
writes: —
“Since my arrival in Australia I have had
occasion to use Heenzo, and I am more than
delighted with the speedy way it banished a
cold I contracted through climatic changes
experienced whilst travelling. I shall cer-
tainly carry a supply of Heenzo throughout
my world tour.”
the famous money-saving
family remedy for
COUGHS
COLDS, BRONCHITIS and
INFLUENZA
COSTS 2 1- SAVES £’s
You can save much money by making this wonderful family
remedy for coughs, colds and influenza. Order from your
chemist or store a two-shilling bottle of concentrated HEENZO.
By simply adding the Heenzo to sweetened water you will
have a family supply equal in quantity and superior in quality
to eight ordinary-sized bottles of the usual ready-made-up
cough remedies that would cost up to £l. Of special interest
to parents is the fact that HEENZO does NOT contain any
poisons, and is so pure it can be given to even the youngest
baby without fear of upsetting the digestion. You will be
delighted with the speedy way Heenzo soothes sore throats,
eases the chest, and banishes even the worst attacks of coughing
and influenza.
HEENZO should be used in every home.
BANISH NERVES
The reputation of the chemists who make
HEENZO, the famous cough mixture, is
behind the claim that money cannot buy a
better tonic than HEAN’S TONIC NERVE
NUTS for enriching the blood, nourishing
the nerves, and restoring the physical energy
and nerve force of people who are run down,
nervy, neurotic, or anaemic through over-
work, worry, exhausted nerves, or poorness
of blood. Start to-day on the road to good
health by taking HEAN’S TONIC NERVE
NUTS —they cost only 3/- per box.
Mean’s Tonic Nerve Nuts
STOP SMOKERS’ COUGH!
Smoking often affects the delicate mem-
branes of the throat, causing “smokers’
cough.” To prevent this, take a HEENZO
COUGH DIAMOND occasionally, between
smokes, and let it dissolve slowly in the
mouth.
They cost only 1/- per tin. Always ask for
Heenzo Cough Diamonds


The
STEINW AY
“The Instrument of the Immortals”
vfel
riff
> \
ir
-S
p
h
fcA* i
; it a
I
£
it
m
— -
A*
* /!
»
v.<
Steinway brings to its possessor the Supreme
Pride of Ownership. Once the Steinway is heard
or played, there can be no question of choice. “Steinway”
on the fall-board of a piano stamps its owner as a
competent jud&e of artistic worth.
iiiiiiiimmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMitiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
SOLE AGENTS:
NICHOLSON’S
SfSftf;
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Mortons Ltd.,
182 Chalmers Street, Sydney.
