



SIDNEY’S
EMIGRANT’S JOURNAL
AND
Traveller's Magazine.
SECOND SERIES.
EDITED BY
SAMUEL SIDNEY,
AUTHOR OF THE " AUSTRALIAN HAND-BOOK;” " RAILWAYS AND
AGRICULTURE,” ETC.
UNITED STATES.
CANADA.
NEW BECKSWIOK.
AUSTRALIA.
NEW ZEALAND.
NATAL.
LONDON:
W M. S. ORR AND CO., AMEN CORNER, PATERNOSTER ROW.
1850.


LONDON:
GEORGE WOODFALL AND SON,
ANGEL COORT,SKINNER STREET.


PREFACE.
With this volume I have decided on bringing Sidney’s
Emigrant’s Journal to a conclusion.
The numbers of the class interested in the practical
details of emigration, to which I have peculiarly devoted
myself, are at all times extremely Those who,
after reading and considering, determine to remain, and
those who, convinced of the necessity of transplantation,
determine to depart, are equally lost as subscribers.
The returning prosperity of the manufacturing districts,
week by week, steadily diminishes the number of my cor-
respondents; and, although great distress will long continue
in the agricultural districts, the sufferers are of a class who
read little and write less.”
I may be pardoned for mentioning, that, even while en-
joying a large circulation, this Journal has never 'been
rem unerative in .proportion to the time and labour required
fora conscientious performance of its duties; but I shall
ever rejoice in the opportunities my self-imposed task have
afforded me of becoming acquainted with the generous, self-
denying, solid virtues of the struggling classes of ray fel-
low-countrymen. Cynicism—whether of the polished aristo-
cratic, the calculating commercial, ©r the bilious Byroaks
unbelieving school—could hardly-sur vive a -perusal of letter s,
warm from the heart, in which the undisguised anxieties of
the writers are not for their own fortunes, but for those of


husbands, children, parents, friends. Absentees and place-
hunters might be shamed by the patriotism and indepen-
dent spirit of an Irish miller* and self-satisfied subscribers
to ostentatious charities blush at the alacrity with which I
have known one poor girl literally divide her substance
with another more distressed than herself, although bound
by no ties of friendship, or even previous acquaintance.
I take this occasion, of stating that, with regard to Colo-
nization—that most important part of u the condition of
England Question” —my efforts, on every fitting opportunity,
to amend the unjust vicious principles on which land is
sol cl arid settlements are founded in the booth feeas, will
not be relaxed.
In opposing-—in the teeth of the Colonial Office, and of
the absentee landowners of the New Zealand and South
Australian Companies; that system of protection to colonial
capital which has invariably ruined those it was intended
to foster, while sowing among the labourers the seeds of
present discontent and future disaffection, I feel that I am
supporting the best interests of the mother-country, of
Australia and New Zealand.
AH attempts to regulate the distribution of colonial
capital and labour end in creating evils greater than the
imagined advantages sought. The best security of a pas-
toral and agricultural colony lies in attracting a sterling
class of emigrants-—to pasturage, the capitalists; to agri-
culture, the frugal labourer.
I am no admirer of republican institutions for British
colonies. An aristocracy, that is to say, a refined educated
class, would be an- undoubted advantage among a British
* Page 169, First Series.


mce, instead of the mere Plutocracy, or the plated imita-
tions of nobility, who condescend, while enjoying colonial
salaries, to bestow their tedious insolence on the natives ;
but such an aristocracy can neither be created by backstairs
intrigues with a governor, nor transplanted from England
helpless in ignorance. It must be grown in the soil. In the
meantime the best aristocracy would be an aristocracy of
education.
Establish universities on a scale equal to the best Euro-
pean models; place the professors, by fitting honours, in a
position at least equal to the highest colonial functionaries;
make, after a certain term of years, success in university
examinations a passport to colonial distinction, and you
will do more toward fostering the spirit of refinement, of
integrity, of piety, and of loyalty, than can ever be effected
by the most refined crotchets of Mr. Gibbon Wakefield for
catching stray lordiings, and crushing ambitious cottiers.
These views I propose, at no distant period, to embody in
a volume, containing an historical view of the Colonization
of the last twenty years, written in a tone not less earnest,
hut more grave, and in a form more methodical than the
Essays dispersed through the first and second series of my
Journal.
I take this opportunity of stating that the various
a from Abroad” which have appeared in this and
the previous Series, have been printed word for word from
original letters, for the genuineness of which I pledge
myself.
SAMUEL SIDNEY.
London, 28th Dec. 1849.


SIDNEY’S
EMIGRANT’S JOURNAL,
AND
Traveller's Magazine
SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF A BUSHMAN.
[The following is a Chapter from an unpublished Australian Tale,
fi Raphael Armorer, the Bushman,” by the Authors of “The
Australian. Hand-book/’]
.A, HXJSTT OVER, THE CANNOBILE,
Bo far I had seen very little of the country beyond the
roadside on my journey to the station. But, one morning in
March, while busy in the dairy skimming cream and plan-
ning how, when I had a dairy of my own, whiter and smaller
fingers than mine should skim cream and pat butter, a
series of cracks from stock-whips, like the report of a pla-
toon of pocket pistols, disturbed my innocent occupation,
and dispersed ray dreams of a model dairy and dairymaid.
Out I darted in my shirt sleeves, skimmer in hand, and
saw galloping up on his thoroughbred chestnut my new
Mend Trefusis, with his brothers, Dick, John, and Charier
Vivian, the long Devonian, all working away with their
stock-whips like so many lunatic French postillions. In an
instant they were at the door.
“All right !” cried Trefusis ; “glad we’ve found you in, old
fellow. Master Penn must finish your dairy work, if it is
not all done; we’ve something better for you to do. Let us
have a drink of tea and a smoke, while Stumpy gets your
little nag up. We are all going to try to get in some horses
of ours that have not seen the Inside of a stockyard this five
years. Bo you’ll want something fast and lasting if you are
ssw series—so. i. b


to do any good.. But it will "bo bettor fun than. making
butter, and the horses are well worth some trouble. There s
a black stallion of my father’s well worth a hundred if we
eauoht him in without damage) and he has a mob of jmares
with him from Vivian’s run, some of the best blood
country. There’s a half-bred Arab, with a foal at her root,
that would, suit you, and he’d sell cheap. Long Peter came
up to us last night to say he'd seen the black half-
a-dozen mares as fat as butter near Cannobile Spiings.
4i Hurrah • ” was my answer, shying the cream skimmer oyer
the hut, “Frx your man, anything for a change _ from this
.j molly codling. "W allaby is in slap-up condition, fit to
wallop tor a life, and I’m in the humour to hunt black stal-
Bon, Hack bull, or black lueifer himself, rather than endure
the blue devils and Penn’s serious face. But if one of you
will go down and drive Wallaby up—he s only at the bottom
of the paddock—Stumpy shall have the tea ready for you,
while I get on my boots, spurs, and moleskins.” “ Agreed,
said Trefusis, and away he trotted toward the paddock, while
I went first to the river to wash, and then to my trunk to
rout out something that would suit bush galloping and a
night’s bivouac,
Bushmen’s preparations are soon made. Within half an
hour we were off in high spirits, but riding slowly, for we
bad serious business before us, Trefusis took the command
of the party ♦ tall, fair-haired, with Ms Jong silky mus-
taebioes and auburn beard flowing over his bronzed chest,
and large blue eyes restlessly glancing from side to side,
he looked like some Saxon Sea-king rather than a peaceful
herdsman, if sea kings ever rode thorough-breds in blue
iersevs, cabbage-tree hats, and fustians tucxed into Welling-
ton boots. . .
Vivian was dark as a gipsy, with a flushed colour, and
was one of the tallest men and best horsemen for his
weight, not less than sixteen stone, I ever saw. He wss
very gentlemanly and very silent, which was quite as well,
as he~had nothing to say unless you got him on the subject
of the North Devon stag-hounds, and then his handsome
face lighted up—he could talk, drink, smoke ail niglu.
Some people called Mm the gipsy, and some, from his
wonderful stories about stags, the staggerer. He was
mounted on a half-bred gray Arab, that seemed dwarfed
under him into a pony, but could carry him faster and fur-
ther than any thing else in the colony.-


Dick, little random rollicking Dick, rode a weedy, vicious
brute, of Lawsar’s brown-muzzled breed, with a loose rein, up
and down hill, in a style perfectly wonderful The wretch
was as fond of cattle or horse-hunting as his master, but at
other times was always kicking, bucking, biting and play-
ing the devil, to the annoyance of every one except Dick.
John was on a piebald stockhorse, an ugly brute, but per-
fect for mountain work. Both John and Dick were true
specimens of native Australians, good-tempered, hospitable,
generous, ready to ride anything or fight any one, game to
the backbone, very ignorant, in spite of their father’s care
and their brother s example ; they could scarcely and never
did read, except when I left them Sporting Magazines or
Bells Life, and then I caught them listening to Charley the
Swell, the fcicket-of-leave shepherd, reading for them. Their
desires were bounded by a good run, a good herd of stock,
and some famous mares, which were to be their portion as
soon as old ihefusis could spare them ; and their conversa-
tion turned chiefly on the merits of their nags, races, and
cock-fights.
Our way lay for full seven miles over rolling plains thinly
dotted with trees, where the herbage rose to our horses’ knees;
then came forests of green trees, and then again the ground
Opened until it became clear as far as *we could see, an ocean
of grass land with islands of scrubby thickets.
Birds were more rare than in the shady, leaf-covered woods
ft Europe, and for miles few living things crossed our path.
From time to time large hocks of cockatoos screamed horribly"
at us as we approached the bare-looking lofty gum-trees on
which they clustered, and millions of insects in the air and on
the grass hummed in concert like the murmuring of a Ilyins'
sea. Ail was new, all was strange to me, and X rode on
with kindling imagination in the excitement of expecta-
tion. I did not then feel the monotony of the Australian
desert that has since so often wearied me, and made me long
for the less genial hut more varied climate of hard-working
England, °
. At one moment a mob of kangaroos leaped across our path *
at another two emus, surprised drinking at a water-hole’
thundered away, shaking the dry ground with their hard’
feet; but we had with intention left our dogs behind, and
turned neither to the right nor left,
for the second time quitting a forest. Vivian, whose
<pncii accustomed eyes had detected something unusual in
B 2


a low bash, called to me, and cantered towards it cracking
his whip, when up rose a bird as big as a bam-door cock,
slowly spreading a pair of monstrous wings, and holding
something as large as a rabbit in his talons. Frightened by
our shouts, he dropped at our feet what proved to be a black
flying squirrel, warm and bleeding, but dead.
*The skin of "this bird-baste, as my Irish shepherd used to
call them, formed the first trophy of our day’s sport.
From time to time we passed great herds of cattle feeding
in detached lots under the shade of the green trees, or
marching down in single file to the springs that abound in
these flats ; the cows, calves, and bullocks going first, and
a bull, the head, protector, and patron of the mob, bringing
up the rear, pausing momentarily, and hoarsely bellowing
as our cavalcade came in sight.
At length we reached the scene of our intended hunt,
and the appearance of the ground was anything but
inviting for a helter-skelter gallop. I confess that without
the example of my companions, and the knowledge that
my horse, having been bred on the mountains, was to the
manner born, I should never have dreamed of riding beyond
a foot pace.
Along the lower face of this range, taking advantage of
the cattle paths and watercourses, it was our plan to press
the wild horses so hard that they could not retire to high
rocky plateaus above, but must descend to their other
feeding-ground on the Emu-plains, where we hoped to run
them down.
Our search commenced in a heavily timbered flat which
gradually sloped down to a running stream swollen with
recent rains, beyond which, in a succession of rocky ridges,
rose the Cannobile Mountains, with stony inaccessible peaks,
where the winter snow long rests, the sides by turns bare,
dark with forest and matted brash, and divided by deep
ravines, carved out by floods. It was at a spring in this fiat
that Long Peter, while cutting out some wild honey with a
black, had caught sight of the wild horses.
It had been arranged that Lick, whose nag was a fast but
not a lasting one, should take up the running as soon as be
came in sight of our prey, and keep as close to the best horse
—the black stallion, if possible—as he could. John was to
follow, keeping Lick just in sight, and pushing to the right
or left as occasion might require. Trefusis and Yivian were
to take up the running as soon as the first two were blows,


md I was to act under their orders. Three distinct cracks
of a whip were to be a signal for pushing on, while the
Bsme signal was to be continually repeated when the
thicket closed the view, in order that we might follow the
right track, “ And mind, Armorer,” said Trefusis to me,
‘‘ keep sight of us, but don’t press your horse in going over
difficult ground, trust all to him; and if you get lost, give
Mm his head arid he will take you to some stockman’s hut,
as he knows every one on these mountains ; and now look
to your girths and take up your stirrups two holes, for if
we hud here we shall have to ride like the devil,”
Having thus prepared, we spread in a half circle, and
paced slowly through the forest with our eyes on the
ground. Huge trunks of fallen trees in various stages of
decay, and deep pits, where the roots had been torn up,
crossed our path in every direction. But my horse twisted
hj or leaped over these obstacles with a perfection of
instinct that left me nothing to do but preserve my seat
and keep a look-out worthy of my apprenticeship as a Bush-
mam
Half, an hour had elapsed and no signs of anything,
when a low whistle from Vivian brough tnsto a halt. We
pressed towards him. He bad dismounted, and pointed
to the fresh tracks of several unshod horses, among which
that of a foal was visible. With signs he bade us follow,
and marched on foot, leading his horse, with his eyes on
the ground, noting every sign. At some richer herbage
ho stopped, passed his hand over it, and gathered up "a
tuft of grass, “They are close by,” he whispered, “.this
is fresh cropped and damp from a horse’s mouth.”
“ Mount then,” said Trefusis, “ they will be drinking at
the Black Swan water-hole ; give them a few minutes to
till themselves, and then, Hick, don’t spare your old horse,
the black is worth a hundred of him. Let’s make a circuit
beyond. Faddy Ryan’s Pool, and then rids up the bed of the
creek.”
Dick nodded without answering, for be was just letting
mt lus a hole, thinking he had hauled them too
tight. For my part I was red and pale by turns ;my teeth
chattered as they used to do by the side of the gorse cover,
" Hhea old Wanderer gave tongue and Melody echoed
him, ’ not for fear but for pleasure, for I thought of mj
days on the mountains with Lord Mostyn and Sir Watkiu;
It was only the fallen gum trees that made the difference.


With, that we started, reached the running water, slid
into it at one of the cattle rang, and rode tip, splash, splash,
in Indian file. There had been a good deal of rain the
week before, and the snow had melted on the top of tha Old
Man Oannohile, so that the stream, which since I have seen
scarcely sufficient to chain the water-holes with a thin
thread, rose to our horses’ bellies and rattled past drowning
the sound of our cavalcade We pushed on in this order,
with ducks, cranes, and swans rising before as, until,
rounding a miniature promontory, our leader halted and
held up his hand. Looking through a clump of bush, we
could see the black stallion standing up to Ms knees in a
pool, drinking, snorting, and pawing the water into a foam
—a splendid picture of beauty and strength. As he was
turned from us we could just see his small ears peeping
above a mane that descended on both sides his massive
arching neck down to big knees, as from time, to time he
shook it, and played with two mares, a grey and a chestnut,
which drank and meekly admired their lord from a little dis-
tance, while Vivian’s Arab mare moved slowly up a cattle
path toward the mountains with a yearling colt trotting at
her heels. Dick had to get clear from the spreading branches
of a fallen tree before he could he seen. The stallion
looked up as a bough cracked loudly, and Dick’s horse ap-
peared within twenty yards j then, turning, he stared for
a moment with his fierce, fiery eyes through his damp,
hanging locks, and, with a shrill neigh of warning that re-
echoed from the mountains like the voices of a hundred
steeds, sprang, at one lion-like bound, from the pool to the
hank, and dashed up the breast of a precipitous mountain
track, followed by the Arab mare, the others flying In an
opposite direction. At the same .moment Dick’s spurs were
dashed into Ms horse’s sides, Ms head turned up a shorter
and easier exit from the stream, and, quick as thought,
he wag at speed, thundering and rolling down gravel and
stones upon us. More leisurely, we followed ; the hunted
and the hunter disappeared behind the first Mil to reap-
pear almost immediately on a narrow path worn by wild
cattle along the mountain side—a glorious, frightful sight.
But we neither saw nor felt any danger,
w Hold hard, and sit back, Armorer,” was all I heard from
Trefusis, as wc rushed away, our eyes fixed .on the Hying
stallion. Scarcely did I notice then the broken chasms, the
huge boulders, the narrow crumbling rocks, over which,


goai-like, my horse made his way. Mad with excitement,
tn wo homuied, where a stumble would have been instant
death- At length, at a wave of the hand from Trefusis,
turning to, a more circuitous and safer path, I lost sight
of my companions; cud, pulling on my horse at a slow trot,
1 crowned the heights and came upon a long, Jewel, narrow
green gorge of galloping ground, where I rejoined Vivian
and Trefusis, and could see Dick and John just disappear-
ing round a bend. Pressing on steadily over turf level
its a howling green, no doubt the bed of some primaeval
watercourse, we again caught sight of the stallion, Pick’s
mare at his quarters, seemingly almost within reach of the
glorious beast. Presently the gorge began to close up: a
solid wall of rock higher than a cathedral tower loomed
before us. ee Hurrah, Hurrah,” I shouted, w he’s pounded,”
Hold your tongue,” cried Vivian, u you’ll need breath be-
fore night. There is a road to the bottom that will make us
sweat before we Ve done,” And so on, on we strode, the green
grass hying under us, enveloped in a cloud of misty rain,
leaving the bright hot sun below and behind. Presently
we saw the dark shadow of a horse and horseman appear
for &» instant on a crag above us, m he emerged from a
narrow defile which, under the wall of solid rock, wound
from the gorge along which we had been racing. The mare,
which had a good start, must have passed to the right, as
we saw no more of her this time. As wo turned into the
defile, the smooth ground ceased, like a lake of rock-bound
shores, and we rattled over a mere sheep track against the
breast of the mountain. We saw the stallion, disappearing
far above ns over the crest of the mountain, and could
hear Dick’s signal of distress, Vivian pushed on, crying,
"Save your horse, Armorer, till you get to good ground
and In a few minutes I was alone, but soon overtook Dick,
whose horse had fallen at a tree, and did not seem much
iodised to get up again. He waved his whip, and I trotted
slowly on, doubting if I should ever see any more of the
stallion or the party.
At length I reached the top, and, hearing a cooing, I made
towards a cattle track, and found Trefusis waiting for me.
” I see,” said he, il that the black horse will make for
Bmu Flats ; at the next turn we can see for miles, so you
trill be sure to hit him off, if your Wallaby’s wind will hold
out, and Vivian does not manage him before he gets down,
which I don’t think he will without your help,”


This speech gave me new heart. Gathering myself up
I took a pull at my little horse, touching him with the
spur, and found him strong and full of pace. His hig deep
chest had carried him up the steep hills, arid my eight stone
was but a feather oa Ms broad and powerful quarters.
Straining my eyes to catch the first glimpses of an open
view through the thick scrub that hung over the winding
defile, I remember now seeing two huge rock kangaroos go
bounding down the mountain side ; but, new and strange aa
such game then was to me, I neither turned nor paused to
listen to the re-echoing stamps with which they crashed
along. At length we crowned the crest of the dividing
range, and paused for a moment before descending the
steep gulf that offered the only path downwards. Trefasis
pointed to a vast open plain, that rolled like a map from
the edge of the forest-covered declivity at our feet. From
below rose through the silent air, from time to time, the
distant- reports of the stock-whips, re-echoing from the basalt
rocks louder and louder and then dying away.
These sounds, and the sight of the boundless plain, half
maddened me, I dashed down the steep watercourse, my
horse bounding like a goat from boulder to boulder. “ On,
on,” I cried, “Trofims.” “ Steady, steady,” shouted my Aus-
tralian If lend Jn a clear calm voice of command, “or you’ll kill
your horse if you don’t break your own neck. We are sure
of him now, if you’ll only save your impatience up a little
longer. Pull up, Armorer, this moment, and follow me.”
There was no disobeying common sense and command
united. He then took the lead, and. leaning back on the
saddle until my head nearly touched the horse’s counter,
leaving the reins loose, leaping, standing, now walking, now
gently trotting, and then twisting mid twirling among
brushwood, timber trees, and fallen rocks, and again as we
came on a practicable bit of smooth, ground cantering, I
followed the best bushman in the colony, rejoicing that my
long legs, light weight, and early practice in mountain
hunting, enabled me to hold my own in this grand and
novel sport-.
Trefasis’ consummate bushmamhip led him the true
course- even when we were going fastest; every cattle track
was familiar to him: and hits of stone and grass and broken
twigs, which I should have passed unregarded, were to him
plain proofs of where the black stallion or his daring pur-
suers had passed.


At length we cleared the broken path, and, from a
sort of sroen plateau, caught another glimpse of the plain
iolov? and the open forest growing against the steep hill
side.
How,’" said Trefnsis,“ you can t miss your way; keep to
tho ioft a little, I’ll to the right, and we shall have him
between ns, for Vivian and John must be beat by this time.
Von r path is short and easy, give your horse a moment to
wind, and then don’t spare him. So saying, with a shout and
wave of bis whip, he ,turned sharp to the right, and dashed
down, towards the plain. His calmness now changed to an
eagerness equal to my own. For a moment I was startled
at being left alone in these great woods; I paused to listen
as the dry wood sharply snapped and broke under his horse’s
feet, and* the stones, dislodged by Ms gallop, rolled sound-
ing down below the precipice, alongside of which he took
bis daring course: then awakening, I gave my nag his head,
and started once more. Before I bad cantered a hundred
yards, Wallaby turned sharply, pushed through some thick
brushwood, tearing cue leg of my browsers to tatters, and
came upon a cattle track which soon brought me to a road
of Nature’s making, that saved all further doubt and anxiety
as to my course ; for some pent up torrent of winter snows
or some landslip in past ages had cleared away a broad
green path, smooth shaven as if by a Titan’s spade, down
which, rapidly galloping, I soon reached a belt of forest
that divided me from the plain ; through these my horse,
leaping and winding along, brought me on the glorious
grassy desert just in time to see in the horizon Vivian and
John waving their hats to Trefusls, who, about a quarter
of a mile on my right, was taking up the running.
Hurrah, hurrah I
44 Yoicks, tallyho ! hark forward, away i” Standing up
in my stirrups, my eyes fixed on the speck which instinct
told me was our chase, holding my horse to a measured
stride, I bounded along over sward that scarcely sounded
under my horse’s hoofs. The sun was high and hot now,
hat I did not feed. it. Hunger, and thirst, and weariness,
all were forgotten. The pure delicious atmosphere, the
sweet perfume of wild flowers, the pleasure of swift motion,
the boundless plain unrolled before me, the triumph of
approaching success, filled heart and brain with delicious
maddening excitement. Oh, happy joyous days I Oh,
glorious pleasures of my youth, when the night brought


calm rest, and the morrow no regret! what can wealth,
what can cities offer that can equal yon !
Yery soon the black stallion came in view nearer and
nearer ; he still made a good fight, and straggled on bravely,
but, at three quarters speed, I gained on him at every
stride, Now sure of my prey, I gave way to my pent-up
feelings ; I screamed, and shouted, and waved my cap as
though I had been cheering on a pack of hounds running in
view.
Leaping over cracks and fallen logs, stumbling over
wombat holes, on we raced. Trefusis, to the right, carefully
holding his horse, which was beginning to flag under the
rider’s weight, and the last burst down the mountain side.
At length, nearer and nearer we came, near enough to
distinguish every movement of the black. His proud head
carried low, he still reeled along with desperate strides.
Oh, how changed from the lion-like hounds of the morning!
his late glossy coat and flowing mane gray with sweat and
foam.
Trefusis sparing neither whip nor spur, was seeking to
weary him out by heading him again and again j but his
own steed was done, and he beckoned me on Just as the
good chestnut stumbled, and, without a struggle) rolled over
hke a log. £ ‘ All right,” cried he, standing over his beaten
horse, bridle in hand, as I turned towards him, “push on,
Armorer, now’s your time i ” It was no moment for civili-
ties, so I left him-—a strange spectacle ; his face, hair, and
board black, streaked with sweat, dust, and blood from
scratches of the thicket; his woollen shirt torn open dis-
played his brawny chest, but Ms air, as ever, full of strength
and self-confidence,
lu five minutes I found I could ride round the wild
horse, so I pressed on him constantly; at every wave of my
whip, he doubled like a beaten hare, but showed his teeth
when I headed him, and glared with fiery eyes that showed
it would not be safe to come to close quarters. Thus press-
ing and doubling, we carried on for some miles over ground
as level as the Wiltshire Downs, until the stallion’s pace
fell to a trot, and at times a walk ; but still, whenever
I neared him, he showed dangerous fight. While doubting
how to end the conflict, and thinking that an unlucky
stumble might make me lose all our labour, I saw some-
thing looming in the distance which proved to be a lot of
■ Wses driven by a boy towards a neighbouring


station. The boy, a true Cornstalk, saw ho w the game
stood, pushed on to join me, and together, one on each
side, wo dashed, shouting and lashing at the stallion.
Bis tail shivering, his sides heaving, he vainly tried to
escape a fresh horse and rider; wherever he bounded we
followed, and, before he knew where he was, had him en-
veloped in the mob of tame ones. This done I shouted
« Victory • ” young Cornstalk something more homely and
energetic; and then, dogging, hallooing, hurrying, tramp-
ling, "in a cloud of dust, wo drove the lot pell mell into a
stock-yard. The slip rails were closed in an instant, and
the black stallion, after one fierce despairing leap at the
lofty paling, sank exhausted to the ground.
(To he continued,}
THE USE OF ASSOCIATION.
In a former article * we endeavoured to show the dangers
and difficulties of the gigantic partnership, or joint-stock
companies formed for living, and labouring in common,
which has lately been much the fashion to recommend
among a certain class of well-meaning economists ; we will
now try' to show what the principle of Association can do
for men of narrow means of ail classes, with advantage
and without danger.
Supposing that mechanics and_ others, depending for a
lived! hood upon weekly wages, desire to emigrate, and have
not sufficient funds by them for the cost of the voyage and
the other expenses which must be incurred before either
obtaining employment, or setting up a trade, or settling on
land in a new country, a great difficulty lies in beginning
to save. As in many other undertakings, the first step is
the hardest.
It Is all very easy for those enjoying a regular and ample
income to sayj Bom. Even men who can save by giving up
wins or cigars, by wearing a shabby coat, by discharging a
servant, hy living in a smaller house, by staying at home
constantly instead of enjoying public amusements, by walk-
instead of riding, by refusing a wife half her little re-
quests, or the other score small luxuries of the middle class,
* The f< f>Bc and Abase of Association, ”p. 813, Sidney’s Emigrant’s
First Series.


find great difficulties in making the first saving. The first
saving in all such cases seems so insignificant. They are
like the Spanish grandee, who, reviewing the cost of a house-
hold which swallowed sip a royal revenue, could only find
one item, a hail lamp, that he and his servants could spare.
Then, again, people of uncertain income, whether head-
workers or handworkers, have generally a strong inclina-
tion to reward themselves by extra luxuries in times of
prosperity, for their privations in times of adversity, instead
of hoarding up the whole surplus against a return of hard
times. All these influences work with tenfold effect upon
a labouring man; bis savings so minute, his few luxuries
tempt him at every street corner, his ultimate success from
saving generally seems so remote.
To help the latent spirit of economy, to keep it up to the
mark, and afterwards invest the results in the most advan-
tageous mode, the Association or Club principle may be
advantageously brought into play.
For instance, if the members of one workshop, or trade,
or public office, all determine to save for the purpose of
emigration, and organise a sort of savings bank for that
end, they are much more likely to persevere in their wise
forethought and economy, much more likely to make sacri-
fices in order to keep up their periodical payments, than if
each separately and secretly commenced hoarding his spare
halfpence to make up the passage-money to America or
Australia. When several persons in one establishment have
mutually agreed to commence investing money in the
savings bank, emulation and esprit ds corps have often led
to. extraordinary economical exertions, and considerable
accumulations. The same effect may be seen in the build-
ing societies which are now so common.
This, then, should be the first step towards assisting emi-
gration by Association, In order to ensure success, unless
in very rare instances, the Association should be limited in
members and in time, and be confined to this side the water.
With the embarkation of emigrants its functions should
cease, although it may open communications with a branch
society in the Colonies, or even establish a corresponding
agent there.
Several Associations have been formed for purchasing
and settling estates in America and the Australian Colo-
nies on a joint-stock principle. We ha ve never been able
to find an instance in which Associations, having their


quarters in England, have successfully colonised an
estate on the other side of the ocean. Several, such as the
Liverpool Temperance Emigration Society, have notoriously
failed*. The Potters’ Emigration Society is said to be suc-
cessful, but we strongly doubt it; for, although they are in
possession of a large estate on which several parties are
living, in spite of very pertinacious enquiries, we have never
been"able to hud that any of the sefetlerehave paid back any
part of their debts to the parent association, and we know
that some have positively refused to pay either loan or in-
stalments of purchase money for land, presenting a revolver
by way of receipt in full of all demands. If this impression
of ours, as to nonpayment of rent and instalments, be a
mistake, we shall be "glad to be corrected,' for the idea of
the Potters’ Society is excellent.
The Halifax Association, the Rules of which we printed in
full in Eo. 38 of the First Series of the Journal, seems to have
adopted the simplest and safest plan. They have formed
an Emigration Association simply for the purpose of raising
money to defray the passage of members to any part of the
world. The members of this club consist, first, of intending
emigrants, and, secondly, of parties wishing to assist en:d~
Sts. as, for instance, landlords, manufacturers, and others
>ous of assisting relatives. The funds are raised by an
unlimited number of li. shares, payable by instalments of 2d.
a week and upwards. Twopence a week makes If. in two years
and si u-een weeks : 6d. a week will make If. in forty weeks.
There are no fines or forfeiture for nonpayment, because the
tlrsi; principle of the Halifax Club is merely that- of a savings
bank. But members may take as many shares as they
please, or they may increase the amount of their subscrip-
tions. Meetings are held weekly, and the subscriptions
thou paid over to the treasurer are deposited by him, in
one sum, in a savings or other bank, in the names of two
trustees. The subscriptions of honorary members are kept
in & separate account. When a member has paid up his
subscriptions for as many shares as he has subscribed for,
he may draw out the full amount with the interest and
share of honorary subscriptions to which he is entitled.
Parties desiring to retire from the club are required to give
four weeks’ notice.
Wo revert again to tbis Association, because the plan on
which it has been founded is simple and unpretending ; it
aims at little, but its machinery is sufficient for effecting


its aims. A society on such a plan—lst, encourages frugal
savings among its members; 2nd, brings intending emi-
grants into contact, and thus promotes arrangements for
obtaining information and for plans of mutual assistance ;
3rd, it enables masters, landlords, &c„, to assist the de-
serving distressed in a useful, unostentatious manner. A
rich man may subscribe in order to nominate his poor rela-
tions ; one friend may thus assist another embarrassed with
a large family. Parents may subscribe for infant children,
who, when arrived at the age to earn wages, would find in
a sort of nest egg an encouragement for further savings to
be used for emigration or any other purposes.
Such Associations might be rendered still more effective
by adopting a plan of loans suggested by Mrs, Chisholm,
and which, we believe, she proposes shortly to bring before
the public in a substantive shape. Under Mrs. Chisholm’s
plan, a circle of friends would become bound for each other.
Thus, suppose sis parties from the Halifax Society have
paid up their subscriptions and are about to go to Aus-
tralia, and a second subscriber has paid up enough to pay
his own passage but not his wife’s ; he is a good workman,
likely to be a successful emigrant, and has the confidence
•of the other six, A loan is made him by the gentlemen
who are honorary members to pay his wife’s passage, for re-
payment of part of which the emigrants will become bound
in small instalments, while the whole body of seven emi-
grants join in a note of hand for the loan to be repaid
within a certain time after landing in the colony. This
kind of loan encourages self-dependence, and makes emigra-
tion self-supporting.
How, it seems to us, that if the various trades which now
pay large sums for the support of members out of work
were to originate clubs combining the principle of savings,
on emigration fund, and loans on joint security, they would
prove most efficient instruments for alleviating temporary
distress, and transplanting surplus skill to countries less
thickly populated.
Among the objects of such Associations, the obtaining
authentic information from emigration fields should not be
omitted. At present it is extremely difficult for a working
man to obtain any authentic information as to the state of
the labour market in the United States, or the Australian
colonies. But if the printers, the bookbinders, tbe engineers,
the carpenters, drc., had each an Emigration Savings Banlc


?nK | Loan Fund Society In London, they might club to have
a report monthly from all the labour and land markets, from
York, Boston, Philadelphia, Cincinnati, Baltimore, &c«,
&c- From Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide, the expense
would be little beyond postage, and the information would
he invaluable.
Suppose an Association of this kind formed, and 100
members prepared to emigrate, notice would he given that,
s&y fifty members were about to emigrate to the United
States, twenty-five to Australia, and twenty-five to Fatal,
la the first place, these parties might meet, compare infor-
mation and learn from each other more than any single
individual could from his own inquiries. In the next place,
the secretary would he able to afford the latest information
as to the rates of passage, &c.; and, in the third place, the
numerous and associated bands of emigrants would save
something considerable by taking their passages in numbers.
The probable working of the Emigration Loan Fund sys-
tem must be treated in a future article.
It is only by this kind of cooperation and combination
that emigration can be made a .means of relief for the
masses,
■ ..Association, of females for a limited period-—association
for the purpose of obtaining information and comparing
ideas—may be highly useful ; but we altogether distrust
Utopian schemes for joint-stock partnership of men, women,
and children, and joint-stock purses to he administered by
irresponsible measures for ill-defined objects. Emigration
requires to be considered by the classes from which emi-
grants are recruited ; for this end we need Trades Emigra-
tion Associations, and we have therefore sketched above on
what manciples such should be founded. In our next article
we will consider what association can do in a colony.
POWER’S NEW ZEALAND.
Ms, Towns, a son of the late celebrated actor, served ia
New Zealand, as an officer of the commissariat, during the
late war with the Maories. He has written a work which
is not only interesting as a hook of travels and adventures,
* Sketches in New Zealand, with Pen and Pencil By W,
fysone Power, D.A.C.Q. London, 18411"


but of the greatest possible value to all interested in the
colonization of New Zealand, for it is the only recent full
and impartial account of that singular country. For some
vears we have been dependent on the romantic fictions pub-
lished by agents and clients of the New Zealand Company;
so that a little unvarnished truth from an unimpeachable
authority is both welcome and timely.
Mr. Power’s book is illustrated by some very clever draw-
ings of New Zealand Scenery, and portraits of New Zealand
Chiefs. We shall confine our extracts to passages likely to
be of practical utility to the inquiring emigrant, leaving
the amusing adventures to be read in the original work.
We may observe, that Mr, Power freely comments on the
local government and the New Zealand Company, but a
tone which shows that he is a thoroughly impartial critic,
and not the least of a partisan. It seems that he reached
New Zealand in July, 1846, and sailed thence in June,
1848, and in- that time appears to have traversed almost
every inhabited part of the Northern and Southern Settle-
ments.
DsSCSIPTiOK OP THE CoTJKTKY.
Auoki<a.hi>. —The appearance of the country is barren and uninte-
resting; it consists of low roiling hills, covered with fern. Mount
Eden, and one or two other black, scoria-covered, volcanic hills, are
in the distance, bat their sterile look does not make the landscape
more inviting- How heart chilling to the emigrant mast be the
first glance at his adopted country, where the eye wanders over such
a bleak and dreary expanse, without one pleasant spot to rest upon!
We anchored opposite the town, or rather straggling village, of Auck-
land, which, at first sight, has by so means a prepossessing appear-
ance—an effect that is unluckily confirmed on a closer inspection, I
took a stroll through, it and saw .nothing hut a beggarly collection of
poverty-stricken lints and wooden houses, without any of the hnstle
and briskness that betokens business - and prosperity. This could
hardly be otherwise, as the colony was only just beginning to recover
from six years of blundering experiments and maladministration.
WbIjM»«SOH has scarcely a mere pleasing effect than Auckland, at
first sight, from the bouses being thinly scattered along three miles of
sea shore, with precipitous forest-covered hills overhanging theta.
There are, however, some good wharfs and quays, a capital hotel,
and a good many large brick-built shops and stores, showing that
there is more capital or a more enterprising population than at the
seat of government.
CLIMATE ahp TKAVBLUsn.—Tetj weeks after landing, our D. A.
€5. G. writes: —For the first time since 1 lauded in Hew Zealand, we


Luve Lad three successive days of fee weather, and I must say, when
it, is line, it is the most delicious and invigorating climate that I
know. I set oat this morning on horseback for Wellington, over the
most execrable road that- ever was seen: a days' steeple chasing
WohM not give one so much trouble, nor more risk of fails. Within
the first two miles I nearly lost my horse in a quicksand, and had to
dismount to puli him out ; for ten miles further there was scarcely
any footing; sad it was a succession of plunges. Jumping, slipping,
stumbling, and lading among interlaced roots, fallen trees, deep holes'
begs, streams, and gullies. Tire last few miles by a narrow and
broken path at. the edge of a precipice, with a mountain stream leap-
ing and brawling at the bottom. In spite of the difficulties, I enjoyed
my ride exceedingly—thanks to the free weather, the beauty of the
forest, and the exhilarating songs of the birds.
Waxganih.—This settlement has long figured brilliantly
in Hew Zealand House romances. It seems that in Decem-
ber, 1846, it had only two hundred settlers, women and
children inclusive ; only about sixty acres of land in culti-
vation; and maintained itself only by trading with the
Mamies in pigs and potatoes. These articles sent to Welling-
ion. realised an estimated annual value of 120 C&, giving an
income of &, to each individual.” There has not been a
single death from disease since the first establishment of
the settlement, seven years ago, although the population
has varied from 600 to 200.
The antecedents of Wanganui have not been very encouraging. It
Is one of the unwholesome mushroom settlements engendered by the
Hew Zealand Company for the purpose of removing to a distance a
portion of the clamorous scrip-holders, who, on arriving from England,
looked and looked in vain for their land, A prospectus issued by the
agent of the Company, describing all imaginable advantages in this
hew Eden, and promising a town acre to all who would have their
tides to land in tile Wellington District transferred to Wanganui, was
eagerly caught at by numbers of the gullible adventurers, who, ’with
large families on their hands, and living at great expense in Welling-
ton, without hope of getting possession of the land originally assigned
to them, were, glad enough to see a proposal of settling themselves
anywhere, Ihe titles for Wellington mountain and swamp were
exchanged for an equal quantity at Wanganui, with an addition of a
town acw to every holder of a section of one hundred acres, and the
unfortunates were shipped off to a distance of 120 miles, where, dimme r
aa they might, very little could be heard of them, Wot a single in-
dividual was able to get possession of the land, with the exception
of the towxt acre, which formed the bait. The original number of
settlers has decreased from about 800 to 200, and these, with the
SBW BSUIBS—SO, 1. q


exception of some half-dozen sturdy individuals, are not bond Jide
settlers, but a set of riff-raff, escaped convicts, vendors of whisky, 'and
peddling dealers with Maories.
Mr, Bell, a Scotchman, after having paid the Company
for about 600 acres of land, and having had. his house,
burned down by the natives, was obliged to purchase sixty
acres from the latter, which, at the time Mr. Power wrote,
was the only piece of farmed land in the settlement,
Wanganui has since been duly purchased from the na-
tives ; but the above testimony, from an impartial observer,
is a striking commentary upon the brilliant promises and
ignoble performances of Mr. Gibbon Wakefieid s bchool of
Colonizers and Colonial Reformers.
Nelson is a poor place, sitnateu in the middle of barren mountains,
with a harbour very difficult of access, and scarcely any available land
within a reasonable distance*. Ido not think it is ever likely to be
*. Mr. Power’s opinions on the prospects of Nelson are amply cor-
roborated by the following report on the lots assigned to a list of
landholders in that settlement, who signed a document in April,
1842; this list comprising nearly every land purchaser in the settle-
ment at that time.
The Ist person who appears on the list as owner of only one allot-
ment had his anrburban land in a narrow wooded golly, and was a
heavy loser In culvatmg it.
The 2nd had a good "section of flax land, which he has sold.
The 3rd, a section of which the soil is a stiff barren yellow clay
and little level land.
The 4th, gravelly and heavily timbered.'
The sth, 'heavily timbered/like No, 4, subject to floods, and
worthless Irons various causes, Xt nas been exchanged for one of the
Company’s.
The 6th, a very Mr section of land, partly flax. _
The 7th consists mainly of good land, but part of it is on the side of
a hill, and part, in consequence of the land having been cultivated or
loosened, has been carried away by floods. This is, or has been,
Tcrv common near the streams m and about Nelson,
The Sth is gravel, top and bottom ; the soil seems to have settled
further irons the mountains, and forma part of the flax ratipo swamp.
One of the Nelson settlers said to me, as I was walking with him
over a somewhat similar section, ‘''The owner of the next section bo
low has got the soil I ough t to ’have bad, 1 have nothing but gravel
left for Eiv share,”
The 9th, seme sort of soil as. No. 3, and very broken; exchanged
with the Company,


much more prosperous than at present, although the settlers appear to
expect great things from it when the purchase of the Wairau plains
Is. completed. As, however, the plains are at a distance of at least
thirty miles, and a very mountainous and woody country intervenes,
I -cannot imagine that it will ranch benefit the town of Nelson. The
Wasrau settlers will consult their own convenience and make use of
some point in. Port Underwood or Queen.. Charlotte’s Sound, both of
which are close at hand, and are magnificent harbours, easy of access
at all times. The Wai-mea plain, which, is dose to Nelson, is not
capable of supporting a greater number of settlers, sheep and cattle,
than it bag at present ; there are already more on it than can do any.
good, as it is a poor stony soil, liable to inundations from the melt-
ing of the snow cm. the mountains. The principal produce is barley,
which is used in Nelson for making beer, which, by the way, is be-
ginning to supersede English heer in. the colony, being tolerably good,
well fla voured, ami cheap. The settlers in Nelson, as is the case in
all the New Zealand Company’s settlements, are a superior dass to
that usually found hi new colonies, and, having brought out some-
capital with them, live in very comfortable style, and exercise a great
deal of hospitality, so that a visitor is apt to carry away a better'im-
pression of the place than its own intrinsic merits'would justify. The
gsabhtest advantages this settlement can boast are a fine, warm, equa-
ble Ciimate, and perfect immunity from any danger of being troubled
with, the natives—an advantage that the settlements in the Northern
Island will not possess for some years to come.
■ Aa93E»xxs CoKessTßAsroir. -“-The road through the Hutt to the
Wairarapa is getting on rapidly, and will be of immense benefit to
the colony. One does not see much cultivation along the roadside,
The 10th, part good, swamp land, mostly hilly, and of little value.
Tae 11th, part good, mostly hilly and indifferent. A portion of is
has been sold.
■ The 12th.-—I am not quite clear as to which this section ss.
The 13th, heavily timbered, some good land. Very lair ration laud
on the whole. It has been let to a number of cottagers.
The 14th, same sort of soil as No, 3, has been exchanged with the
Company.
The 15th, a rough broken section, formerly let in lots, but I be-
lieve sow abandoned by all, or all but one family.
The I.6th is, I believe, the same sort of land as Nos. 8 and 14.
The 17th, some fair land, I believe, the rest indifferent. I have
however, never been to this section, 5
The 18th and last (except five, who owned more than one allotment
gash), heavily timbered and gravelly.”
The above are somewhere about a fair average of all other classes
of suburban sections in the settlement of Nelson. —Correspondent
& E. /,
c 2


hut this can hardly be expected, when there is net a single settle?
who has yet got a formal title to his land, when labour is so dear, and
share all, where the bona, fide' settlers are so much scattered by the
intervening lands of speculators. This latter is a subject that re-
quires interference on the part of the government, as nothing can be
more manifestly unjust and injurious to the colony than to give to
the English speculator the same right of pre-empticarwitfe the pioneer,
who opens the country and. gives it a real value, who rass every risk
o; life and fortune, and sets Ms all upon the die. Instead of having
the right of selection, the real settler, perhaps, finds that his section
is tea, twenty, or even fifty miles from the settlement, and he is
jostled out to this distance, not because the intermediate sections are
filled up with real hard-working bond fide settlers like himself, but
that the absentee speculator may have a share in the benefits arising
from his risk and labour, and in the outlay of money in. the colony.
The consequence is, that the settler cannot even occupy the land he
is entitled to by lot; far i t cannot be expected that he is to cut roads
and open, a communication, not only through Ma own section, but
through, perhaps, twenty others, before he arrives at one occupied by
k settler, and this, perhaps, through a heavily timbered country. But
this is not all: if he has pluck to go oil his land, he finds himself per-
fectly isolated, without roads and without neighbours, in the midst of
a country of forest, mountain, and swamp; without an acre of cleared
ground, or a foot-track, that is not his own work. la this wild space
his cattle get astray, he is shut out from ail the conveniences of life,
and is subject to the privations of utter solitude, uueheered by the
society and assistance of neighbours, and passive and unexcited from
the want of emulation and example. There is one more risk that we
have not alluded to, and the greatest,—that of settling, without pro-
tection and without neighbours, among savages. To the settler it is
disheartening to know how utterly isolated he is, while his isolation
is an incitement to his savage neighbour to take advantage of his
weakness. This was particularly the, case at Wanganui, where,
among a dozen out-settlers, there is scarcely one within three miles of
another, and in many instances they were scattered at even greater
distances apart. These difficulties might have been avoided hv a
system of co&ceatrauoa; union would have been strength and wealth
too, for the capital that has been frittered away uselessly in driblets
all over the country, would have made one settlement great and
powerful.
Want of space compels us to conclude our extracts from
this honest and truly practical book ; but we mean to re-
turn to it at an early date.


PICTURES OF AUSTRALIAN EMIGRANTS,
SKETCHED FBROM LIFE IN PEN AND INK,
BY A MATSON.
goxs years ago there was published in Sydney a little book
which” has been long out of print. The title of this pamphlet
we are not permitted to quote, for as it has in a great degree
done its work, -vk., given government protection to female
emigrants, the author is unwilling that those passages
should be exhumed, which, in spite of dashes and asterisks,
earned dismay among so many of the wooing husbands and
Don Juanic bachelors of Sydney. We respect the scruples
of the writer; and, though we have been fortunate enough
to exhume from the sea-chest of a returned colonist a copy of
the Australian Lothario’s Black Book, we will circulate no
scandal, while we cannot refrain from reproducing a few
Daguerreotypes of colonial character, which, although "like
as life,” can do no harm to any one, and may do some
good. . ,
“Bemdy, MeSre”— This song of dear old gossiping
Bepys has been set to ail Australian tune with variations.
Beauty, although there, as an advantage In
getting husbands, is a great drawback in getting places.
Pretty wives prefer plain cooks and housemaids.
Oar author had undertaken to sort out and plant the
female immigrants according to their suitabilities, and a
tough job it seems to have been. As, for instance, in this
sample:—
«I had one ladv, a Mrs. 0., I could not suit. She would go first
to one girl and then another ; and something like the following con-
versation would take place.
Mrs, ().—" Can you make up a room very neat 1 ”
Girl, — a Yes, ma'am,”
Mr*. o. “Can you cook!”
G'i.rl —"Yes ma’am."
Mrs. 0. —“ Can you work well at your needle 1”
lUrL—“ Plain work, ma’anj,"
Mrs, 0. Looking at her very hard from top to toe, after a pause,
"Ah, you won’t do, it’s a thorough servant I want,”
" Day after day did she repeat this ; and when it had oc-
curred for at least the twentieth time, I went into m.y own
room, mustered over in mj mind her different objections to


different girls, and came at last to a conclusion and a deci-
sion.
n hi Tiie same evening I received a cargo of sixty girls, one
of them a parish pauper, her hair not combed, her face not
■washed, her clothes looked as if she had first jumped into
and then slept in tnem, her features and figure quite justi-
fying the name she had earned from her shopmases, Little
Scktj.B, A gentleman who was present at the time, said “ I
suppose you intend her tor the bush,” I answered there is
a place for everybody in this world, and I think I have had
one waiting for her this seven weeks. The following morn-
came the fastidious Mrs. 0., and I saw at once that,
while reviewing the new arrivals, her eyes fell with peculiar
complacency on Little Soextb.
“ Being rather afraid that I could not keep as grave a
countenance as the gravity of the affair required, I thought
it best to call Mrs, O, into my own room, and told her that
I bad a girl that would suit, ‘not a good servant, but a good
girld I then called in Little Scrub, and the, following dia-
logue took place
Mrs. 0,- —“Gan you wash’?”
Link Scrub. —Storing wildly, “ Wash, mam !”
Mrs, o ,—“Gan yon cook?”
Little Scrid).~— (< Cook, marm ! ”
Mrs. (),—•“ Can you make a bed?”
Litlh Scrub,— (t Make a bed, maria !”
Myself. —“ Will yon do all this ladv bids ycm?”
Little Scrub.--" Yes, inarm,”
, Mrs. 0. looked at the poor girl with the scrutinising and pleased
air of a connoisseur in front of a fine dusty picture, her countenance
glowed with satisfaction.
u I will take the girl. I dare say she will sum out a good ser-
vant.”
“Ob, Mrs, 0., votive not been long in this colony—-it lakes years
to know it. Yea will make the agreement for sis months, ( With a
deep sigh.) Oh, its such a comfort to have something a little repul-
sive,”
Our next specimen shall be from the tribe well classed as
Do-nothings,”
E.- was entered as a governess; I was glad of this, for I had
then several applications for governesses, in the country ; she was a
pretty girl, too; and I know, when pretty girls have no money—no
friends—Sydney is a very bad place. There is nothing so unpleasant
■as to question a young lady as to her competency. She could teach


music, French, drawing, &c., &c,; she was satisfied with the salary,
and her testimonials wer e first-rate. “Y ou say you can teach music? ”
“Yes, ma’am,” “You thoroughly understand it?” “Most cer-
tainly.” “ One of your pupils is nine years of age, how long do you
think it will take her to gel through Cramer’s Instruction Book!”
A pause. “ Perhaps yon have not seen it?” “No, ma’am; but I
was very quick myself—l have a good ear for music.” “ What hook
did you study from?” “'I learnt singing and music at the same
time?” Tell me the same of the first piece you played?” “ Cherry
Eipc.” “The second?” “Home, Sweet House, ” “The third?”
“ We’re a’ noddin,” I said no more about music, I gave her a sum
in addition; and she made sixteen pounds five, eighteen pounds four.
Now this girl, I afterwards ascertained, at home, had lived in a family
as nursemaid, and washed the clothes of five children every week.
Eat for another specimen; and really, out of fifty. I am at a loss
hour to select; hut I will give . She was another of the wovid-
be governesses; hut her views were more humble —for the nursery.
Now, she could neither read, write, nor spell correctly. “ Can you
wash your own clothes?” “'Never did such a thing in my life.”
** Oaa you make a dress %'* “ No,” “ Cook ? ” “ No.” “What can
yon do ?” “ Why. ma’am, I could look after servants; I could direct
theta ; I should make an. excellent housekeeper.” “ You are certain? ’
“ Yes, or I would not say so,” “Po yon know the quantity of the
different ingredients wanted for a. beef-steak pie—for that dish —and
a sice pudding for this V’ u Ob, no, sna’am, that’s not what I mean;
I’d see that the servants did it.”
One girl, having health and strength, had refused five situations;
at last I thought I had suited her. She was to live in a settler’s
family, and teach five children to read and write; she was not re-
quired to wash the children; but, as the good and thrifty woman
kept no servants, she was to wash her own clothes (or pay for the
same out of her wages), make her own hed, and clean her own room;
the good woman also said, she would teach her anything she knew,
but ask her to do nothing. I thought there could he no objection to
this; but when I told her, once a week she must scour her own
room (the best in the house) —when I said this she hurst into a
passionate flood of tears; the degradation was more than she could
bear. I thought it then my duty to refuse her the benefit of the
Home, In less than three months from this, this victim of false
pride was living with ; anything rather than work.: I have
since regretted I did not give her one more trial.
"Wites Wasted, —l fed one very beautiful girl; she could read
and. write well, was of au amiable temper, and willing to take advice:
I provided her with a situation; she was returned to rue solely on
account of her good looks. I was at a loss what to do with her; I
was afraid to allow her to go out for exercise, and was obliged to
limit her to church on a Sunday. She was the daughter of a Lieu


tenant, who bad spent twenty-four years in the service of Isis country:
having a large family and limited means, be sent one of his treasures
here; Providence, however, provided for her in an unexpected amn-
nesx A very respectable woman, a settler’s wife, waited on me for
advice; she was one of those sensible, shrewd women, that help to
keep a home together. She told me she had five hoys and a girl,
none of whom could read or write, and that she wanted a teacher.
My eldest hoy, -Jack, Ms. am, is as fine a young man as yen would
wish, to see, only he is too wild : he is past learning; but the others
are willing enough.” At this time, I had three of these helpless
creatures I wished to provide for; bat I told the worthy woman that
- - was so good tempered, that she would suit her best, if she did not
mind her being handsome, <s .Has she any bounce about her 155I 55
5 ' N one,” 1 went into the room with her; ss her eye rested on ,
there was s look of satisfaction, followed directly by one of deep
thought and reflection. There was something so intelligent in her
countenance, I became curious ; she left the room; returned to the
office, when she said, “ I’ll see you again at five o’clock, ma’am ; but
don t let the girl engage, any how : a thought has come into my head
I most think own” At five she came, “ Now, Mrs. s J would
lakes to tell you my plan— * Do you see, 5 says I, £ if any gal would
keep a man at home, it would be the creature I saw this morning;
now, says I, * tho Jack s not takers to drink, yet he’s uncommonly
foxsd of company, and is for going to every horse-race he hears of;
and I expect, some time, he’ll make a very'foolish match, wi’ some one
snore ignorant than he is ; 5 yet, ma’am, tho’ he can neither read no?
write, he’s uncommonly cute, Row, I think, if I take home,
shell tempt him to stay at Inane; and then, when I see he’s taken,
and his heart is touched, I shall call him one side —bounce a bit. and
say, ‘l’ll have no flne ladies living wi’me.’ This opposition will
make him more determined; then, in a day or two, I’M cry a bit
about it—he’s kind-hearted, arid can’t stand that: then he’ll come
coaxing me, and I’ll consent, and talk over the old man; and the
elergynmn shall settle everything, and it will be a good thing for us
all, ma’am.' 5 I consented to arrange with , who should be ready
the next day; she was engaged as teacher for one year, salary IBL
J may here retnarx, that pretty gtrls, no matter what there gualih-
estions or characters were, it was difficult to dispose of them ; they
are not, it appears, liked as servants, though they are preferred as
wives. ”
I received a letter from a man who wanted a wife. I found he
was well known bo several persons as a man of integrity. It, would
foe a serious thing to visit Sydney for a wife ; first, a loss of time;
second, money ; and, after all, perhaps not be suited. His letter, too,
interested me ; and I determined on trying to serve him; I give Ms
letter that the reader may Judge ;
.Reverend madam, I heard you are the heat to send to for a servant,


aa<i I heard oar police magistrate say. it was best to leave all to
y sm; gx-A so I’ll Just do the same, as his honour says it’s the best.
I had a wife once, and. so she was too good for me by the far, and
|t was God's will, ma’am; bat I has a child, ma’am, that I wouldn't
see a straw' touch for the 'world; the boy’s only four year® old ;
aad I has a snag fifty-acre farm and a town ’lotiaeat, and I has
no debts hi the world, and one teem aad four bullocks; and Fse
ten head oh cattle, and a share on eight hundred sheep, so I as a
rite to a desent servant, that can wash and cook and make the place
decant | and I don’t mind what religion, she bey, if she is sober and
goad, only Iso a Protestant myself; and the boy I have, I pro-
raised the mother on her death bed, should he a Catholic, and I
won’t, anyhow, have any interference in this bore matter. That
I do like in writing nothing else, 1 wouldn't, mam, on any ac-
cejmt in the world,'' he bound to marry; bat I dont wish it alto-
gether to he left oat. I’ll gc her foarteea wages, and if she don't
fike me, and I don’t like her, I’ll pay her hack to Sydney. I want
nothing in the world but what is honest, so make the agrexncnt as
yea like, and I’ll hide by it. I sends yon all the papers, and youl
now I’m a man wetVto bo trusted. I sends yon five pounds; she
may get wages first, fur I know' some of the gals, and the best on. nm,
to, are not heavy we hones,; and supposing anything should happen,
I would not like it to he said she come here in rugs. I wants, also,
a man and bis wife; he must be willing to learn to pkmgh, if be don't
now' how, and do a good fair day's work at anything ; bis wife mast
ho a milker, and ha duatrious woman ; I’ll give them as much as they
can eat and drink of tea and milk, and, whatever wages you set my
name down for. I’ll be hound to pay it. With all the boner in. the
world Tse hound to remain your servant till death,”
There was something in. the character of this honest bushman to
admire ; he had gained his freedom, sent home money to his parents,
and, during a long and tedious illness of twenty months, he has!
tended bis sick wife with, patient care. Who would not get up an
hour earlier to serve such a man I —l did, for I knew that early in
the moyaing is the best time to choose a wife. I went first into the go-
verness-room —all asleep; I unlocked the Home-door —some dressed,
others half-dressed, some too very cross ; I have often remarked, that
early in the day is the best time to Judge of a woman’s temper ; bnt
I wish this to he kept a secret. I remained half an-bour in the
Heme; I then, went through the tents, could not suit myself, arid
returned, At the Home-door, I found a girl at the wash-tub; she
was at work with spirit ; she to rather good looking, very neat and
tidy. I went into my office, and ascertained that, on board ship, her
character was good. I desired the matron never to lose sight of her
conduct, and report the same to me. Day after day passed, and I
was at last fully determined to place her within reach, that is, in a
respectable family, in his near neighbourhood ; but I was able to


arrange better, for I found that, amongst the families, there was one
related to Her, I Immediately engaged them as bis servants ; they
were a respectable couple ; the man was a very prudent person, I
told them to take the girl with them, and get her service near them
and on no account allow' her to live with a bachelor, I gave the girl
three letters to respectable ladies, and she was engaged by one the
fonrtn day aider her arrival at , About a fortnight after, the
bnshman wrote to thank me, for sending him the married couple ;
and concluded by saying, “ With regard to that other matter, upon
my word, yon. have suited, me exactly; and, as soon as our month is
up, we Is to be married,”
X received forty-one applications of this kind ; but the above is the
only girl I ever gent into the country with a direct matrimonial in-
tention.
LETTERS FROM ABROAD.
[We hope those who approve of our plan and principles will continue
to forward us genuine Letters from Emigrants^
[ln page 169 of the First Series of the Journal, we referred to the
case of the writer of the following letter, who was refused an assisted
passage by the Park Street Oommisaionera, after he had been invited
to Fort Philip, in a letter from his brother, printed In page 157.
We have to thank Patrick Core's landlord for the Mowing letter :-~~
Pugs a L.vbocbes.
Wisconsin,, Jan. 1, 1849.
BsAaBfiOTHSSS Attn SlOTiSg,—l hope yon will excuse me for
net writing before now. With, a heart overflowing with affection
and good feeling towards you all, I lay pen to paper to let you know
how I am situated in America, and tire disappointments I had to con~
tend, with when we landed in Boston, I did intend to go off to the
western states, only for my* daughter Mary's illness, which caused
my.delay for two months, within thirty miles of Boston, in a place
called Lawrence city, and, in my delay there, unfortunately Edmond
Bobln Lore got a fever,' I had. to keep him in the house with me
until I could pat him into the hospital. He was in she hospital only
a few days when, he came back to me again full of beard and dirt ;
and. no sooner had my sou Cony seen him, than he took fright, and
got sick immediately. He was sick only a few days, when Patey
took to his bed, and died of it (may the Lord have mercy on his soul),
Xl© W3-S attend,fid. by s. «ii:d dorters £ts.i<i* wbeK
home from his funeral, his mother took sick and was lying down for
a month. Together with sickness and my delay, I lost 100 dollars,
which is not what I regret, only the death of my son. Through the
means of that sickness, I had an uamrtonate crew altogether with


Sie, I wish I had nothing to do with them. 3STow, my dear friends,
I raean to let you know how lam situated after Patt’s death. John
went to the state of Wisconsin, that was 1600 miles from where we
were. When he landed there he liked the country well. He wrote
hack io me to follow him, and when I got his letter I went off to him
there. It was on the Ist of November we landed there. He had
been acquainted with the priest before we reached him. He is from
Connaught—the Eev. Father Frank Prendigist; he is the best friend
%o ns that can be. Me has got a situation for Timothy in a hardware,
crockery, grocery, and woollen store, and he has the care of the Post
(Mice besides, at 50t. a year and his board. The priest has taken
Edmond to himself at 11. 4s. per month and his hoard. John is
going into a place of 20 dollars per month. I have a farm of land
iaad"l2 acres fit for being set in spring, John got 20 team one day
ploughing, and no expense, only their hoard and some whisky,
Hear friends, I mean to Set you know how this country rates. _ This
is a good country for ail persons who mind themselves. Provisions
are cheap and wages high ; hour, 16s. per barrel; pork, 10s, per cwt.j
beef, per lb.; wheat, from 60 to 80 cents per bushel; yon can
buy cow's at from 2f, to Sb, and good ones; potatoes, Is. s<?. per
bushel, that is, 60 lbs. 'weight. The regular wages are Bs. in. winter,
and from 4s, to os. in summer, for a labourer per day, but he
must board himself. Women cars do well in this country, since they
can earn cue half and from that to 2j dollars per we§k and their
board. In a word, it is the poor man’s home and the rich maids
dorr. The reason why, my friends, the poor man can support
his family by his own industry, and support them well, and is not
that a blessing, my friends. The reason why it is the rich Hum’s
;—lf there he a rich farmer, he can purchase estates here, ami
he glories and prides in that; on the other hand, a roan need not be
■ovor rich to buy land here, A man can buy 80 acres of government
land for 100 dollars, that is, 20h currency, for ever and ever, where
you do not dread a landlord’s driver, or rate collector. We are all
in good health now, thank God. I hope you and family are well,
fhe 'Revs. Father John Donovan and Father Hogan are well.
Bister Mary and family, brother Maurice and family, Judy Curtain,
and sister Ellen, and Con Curtain of Engollahough and family, Dan
Sullivan and family and all the Dans in that side and their families,
Fatt Fore, of Ballyclovane, and family, I wish they were here, they
would do very well. Edward Kennedy and family, Edmond Barrett
and finally, Mr. Florence O’Connell and -lady, Patt O’Eegan, Mr.
Dan Murphy and family, Mr Thomas Madigan and family, John
Naughten and family, Part Eohin and wife, and my neighbours
in' general. John . Wolfe and family, the Pranleys and families,
William Cotter and family, J ohn Flanagan and family, and- all the
neighbours and inquiring friends which are too numerous to be
mentioned. I hope they are as happy as I would wish them to be,


n&t forgetting Patt M'Carty and wife, Patt Healy and sister, James
and William M'Every, and mother. So I now conclude by hoping
and trusting in God that this will find you all as happy as I would
wish yon to fee, my friends and neighbours. Dear brother, I hope
yon. will let me know how my sister Mary is, and her crops, and the
crops with you all in general, and the state of the country since
I left it. If it be as bad as we hear, it is far worse than when I left
it. Also, 1 expect, you will send this letter down to John Nix until
he sees it, and the Franleys, they took a promise of me to write to
them. Now, my dear friends, I don’t mean to tell you one thing
and think another; I have informed you of the state of this country,
and yon all may judge for yourselves. All persons who intend to
come here, the sooner they come the better.—l remain yours truly,
Patrick Does.
Direct your letter as follows Hamburgh, P. 0,, Washington
County, State of Wisconsin, for Patrick Bore,
IShlb. It will come to the Post Office where my son is,
IS.B. My friends, I wish you were all here, where you could make
a comfortable home for yourselves and a living besides.
Any persons coming to this country, let them write to me, and I
will tell them how to come, and the necessary things requisite,
c hoped that iu fatare parties who quote the Original Letters
will add to them the name of the Journal.]
JoUBSAL OS' A Tor,A«K r i<> ABfiKAtBE.
Shvnd&y, Oct 8 ih t 1848. Weighed anchor about la, m. and got
out to sea, the pilot leaving us soon after we passed Eddystnne light*
house. Previously to aar leaving Plymouth, one of the seamen had
died, and also an infant belonging to one of the emigrants. Our
Sunday service had hut few attendants, for, with few exceptions, all
the emigrants were much too indisposed hr sickness, disaaness, and
suffering to attend. Of my family, only'myself and little Bobert
remained in health. But we got the commissioners’ regulations re-
specting the good order and cleanliness of the ship and "people well
observed; and as the day was hue and. the water calm, many of the
people got out on deck-—the beet thing they could do under the cir-
cumstances, Before leaving Plymouth we had a change of berth, and
my family has now the two best berths in. the ship, roomy, airy, and
agreeable. Lriday, Oct . IBiA, 1848.——The past five days have been
dark, and mock sickness and suffering ; a large number of the women
mere dead than alive, and a great many men nearly so. Children
in large numbers prostrate, and only kept out of their berths by being
borne in the anus of their parents, ill onr family, except myself,
the baby, and Bobert, the younger, laid, up, and my messsnate' Mr,
Lee*, with hfe wife and four cbjsdrenj uxs&blo to move ; conso^ueotlT


all the work required to be done by myself, and involves great an-
xiety,'harassment, and fatigue, Sea voyages, with young children,
very trying, and the care of young children and ixifants demands a
great deal of help. All who mean to follow us with mf&nts should
begin some time beforehand to gather up calicos and linen for nap-
kins for they must go overboard as soon as used ; and fee sure to have
sotae of the delicacies of the season ready to hand for use, till all the
sickness has passed away ; such as jams, marmalades, cheese and
pickles, raisins and nutmegs, eggs and preserved meat, for their chil-
dren are great sufferers. Borne sound apples, too, for baking, and let
them fee “ lavish” in their stock of aromatic vinegar, hartshorn, and
camphor ; unfortunately we were without either of these three last
things, and had no eau-de-Cologne nor other scent, things of great
value and importance too. Supplies of small strong made bags are of
immense convenience, a hammer and some nails, and strings, lines
md clothes, packed in bundles, and their contents noted down for re-
ference ; good boxes and packing are of groat moment as regards all
clothes that are to he put away, tor they have to encounter rough
usage, Monday, Od. %&rd, Noon.— In the locality of the Cape
Ycrd Isle, with a remarkably fme wind: and every likelihood of our
passage being as speedy as ever known, profeahly within ninety days,
Mv Mary Jam- is lying seriously ill, has not unlit to-day taken any
food for a week, has been feverish, and delirious: nearly all the emi-
grants, the ships’ crew, and the cabin passengers, have been very ill
indeed, so that they have been of no benefit whatever to us. Who-
ever mean to follow us with young children must not dilate them-
selves with the idea of getting help for nothing; the girls here don’t
euro to wash or assist'with children except they are paid exor-
bitantly ; everything should be under lock and key, and sound apples
are about as nice a thing as can be brought; treacle also, and cheese,
pickles, and jams. Yet our fare on shipboard is not bad, and for
those who have appetites is abundant; a deal of it however goes over-
hoard, the cooking of it being so imperfect. Yery young infants
should not come out here except their parents have abundant help;
my wife Isas been too week almost to sit up, Emma and myself
almost laid up with labour, for the fatigue is excessive, and yet, after
balancing all the disagreeableness of the voyage, I have not regrets
to offer at leaving England, All the accounts I have received of
Australia- are very encouraging, and, in general, Adelaide is the place
praised most. Much to my annoyance, somebody stole my Portugal
onion as well as my apples. Let all emigrants be sure to bririg a
" lavish” supply of powders to mix with the water, such as ginger beer,
lemonade, and lemons, and lime juice too should not be omitted ; un-
fortunately my stock of these things was very small, and now we
know it- much to our suffering and inconvenience. Preserved milk
and preserved yeast are very valuable for the young people, as bread
or girdle cafls is a genuine treat, and something to modify the tea is


desirable. If Q ■gorge Adcock and family ia coming out lie should
have 5L ia his pocket to devote, it need be, to such assistance as he
will seed on embarking on the voyage, and at landing the labour,
coupled with the sickness, is so trying, that if I am not unusually
eapable of endurance, and did all the drudgery ray self, scarcely any
mortal constitution could hold it out. Nevertheless, on a fine day as
this, the voyage is extremely delightful to ail who have the health to
enjoy it, lam writing on the forecastle ; Mary is lying on the poop
with the other females, canopied with nice tarpauliag, and our cap-
tain one of the most cordial men I have met with. The chief mate
is a nice young man; it was him mother spoke to when she was on
the ship, Onr ship sails well, and has passed all the ships that have
been near her. Yesterday, Sunday, we had service on the poop In
’the morning; in the afternoon I gave an address, arid in the evening
we bad a prayer meeting below. But, as yet, little has been done
in the matter of school; the children have been so ill. Dutton, on
South Australia, says, that a good opening exists there for superior
education, and that its wants are not supplied in this respect. Wed-
nesday, Get. 2Stk. —Yesterday and to-day we are nearly becalmed,
aud the heat is excessive; the labour entailed by bringing out an un-
necessary quantity of bedding and clothing is felt now severely; for
this hot weather, garments all of one, if possible, is desirable; lots of
our men are without stockings and shoes, and most without coats and
waistcoats: in fact, for men, we want now sound but light pumps,
light washing trowgers, strong cheap shirts, good socks and water
jscKets, or waistcoats with sleeves. Children want strong unbleached
overalls, and its much under clothing as possible dispensed with.
W omen with lots of old clothes for the voyage find them such an in-
tolerable nuisance as to wish them, all at the bottom of the ocean.;
in met, osd clothes are old rags here in a fortnight; sound strong eom-
Hi-ojs articles that will hear a haul are wanted. Here of necessity
you must encounter a deal of society that is very disagreeable; almost
every person, male and female, in the ship have been and are plagued
with creeping crawling things in the nead, brought in alive previously-
by some dirty lousy family; we have cropped our young people's
heads pretty closely, and bop with industry and washing to get rid :
Oi this nasty pest. Some of George Adcock’s Scotch rappee, or other
strong snafi, would he valuable in ridding us of the filthy nuisance.
Water is beyond all calculation valuable. The following should be
packed Ju a box ready to get. at altogether, viz., a small stewpan, a
of rag, say two yards square, preserved milk and meat, and six
pirn, mottles of: lime juice, and care to be taken not to throw awav
the, tins or bottles, they are of value to use ; sis: common delf pint
■white-ware mugs, and as many plates, a dozen cheap tea-spoons, some
strong cord, and twine, and waste paper, a rag bag and coarse cloths
for washing and for dishes, over and above the things I told you
were gratuitously supplied; and if yon are without any of the articles


kero mentioned, yon will find the annoyance and inconvenience of it,
not forgetting nails and curtains for your berths. As I don't choose
to be the subject of the annoyance of paying exorbitantly for washing,
and then having the doing of it looked upon as a favour, I have
commenced washing my own shirts, and think of having a clean one
daily while this hot weather continues. If you procure the quarterly
paper for October, 1848, of the Society for the Propagation of the
tlospel, it has the very interesting journals of Nelson Woodcoat. and
Mr/Oooiabes, on South Australia. This day, Nov. Ist, heavy rains
have fallen; we Mud now the necessity of having much diversity of
provisions; one child swallows readily things which another seems
to detest; a cabin passenger with children recommends strongly
various scots of lozenges and confections of that kind. I look with
dismay on the inroads we are making into our private supply of pro-
visions, not knowing how we shall weather it if our voyage holds
eat very long. Hitherto tea lias been nauseous to everybody, and
cocoa and coffee worth their weight in gold, better sugar too
is very valuable, and a good supply wasted, for the ship’s sugar 13
oniv fit for coarse sweetening. People should have camphor and some
chloride c-f lime, besides the other scents 1 mentioned, for disinfecting
thrift Is needed here every day. On Friday, Oct, 'Flth, we came up
with, signalled, and passed a ship supposed to he the Thomas (fkowidig
for Port Philip and Adelaide, Last night a ship homeward bound
passed us bat a snort distance off; had it been daylight, probably
this letter would have been dispatched to you by her, Saturday,
JSfo-v, 4 th. We are now becalmed here for about a week, made little
more than a quarter of a mile per hour progress ; are about six de-
grees from the equator now, and four or five other sail are in sight,
like ourselves becalmed. The moon begins to shew herself beautifully
at night in her first quarter. Some of our people are very ill, and
others in a fright, because it is rumoured a shark is following us ; my
little George has had a bad night or two, but to-day both Mary and
George, and Mary Jane, all exhibit decided symptoms of improved
health. People could hardly pack up anything more valuable than
a nine gallon cask of your despised Thames water; at times, at night,
nearly all the children in the ship are crying simultaneously for
water to drink. Extra sugar for sweetening lime juice, some arrow-
root, tapioca, barley-water, and other drinks, is necessary,
(To be continued,)
LETTERS PROM TEXAS, No. V.
(Continued from the First Series, pp. 283, 243, 267, 298, 814.)
A sTRU-aNG contrast to the aspects of civilised life was
to be observed in the bar-room of the chief hotel of the
city of Austin. In a wide circle round the blazing log-fire


every evening sat a group of wild western men, pictu-
resquely attired in those so often-mentioned variegated
ponchos of Mexico, or in horn-buttoned blanket-coats,
their boots drawn over the pantaloons, the bowie-knife,
and the repeating pistol commonly carried in their belts,
smoking red earthen pipes, with stems of yellow reeds,
wearing above their sallow visages and shaggy imtrimmed
locks the black felt hats, and a certain half-excited, half-
apathetic expression fluctuating across their features, and
exhibited in their speech, and manners, which indicates the
proximity to the character of the savage man. Their
discourse, which was often of much interest, the speech of
strong-minded men speaking of what they had seen and
experienced in the moving adventures of a borderer’s life,
turned chiefly upon the scenes of the Mexican war, the
siege of San Antonio, the storming of the Alamo, the
death of Colonel Crockett and his comrades, skirmishes
with the Cumanchees, and the like. The more peaceful
and useful subjects of agriculture, inland improvement,
pastoral resources, which, now that the state had become
settled and tranquil, should reasonably have drawn the
attention of men who for years had risked tbeir lives in
order to render them available to their industry, had hut
little attraction, and were indolently discussed. Even
hunting, generally an interesting subject to the borderer,
was possessed of little power of excitement to the heroes of
the Texan struggle.
Amongst the American idioms the Yankee phrase, “ I
guess,” and others of that class which are so familiar to
us, were comparatively seldom used.
<s Aint it cool i A mighty bad spell of weather, Squire.”
<£ Well, it is, I reckon. It aint nohow cler to me, but ’t ’ll
hold ’till the moon fulls.”
Through the rudeness of manner, the uncleanly barba-
rian aspect of the outer man, and amidst the practices
which are offensive, and the speech which is so peculiar,
and often, to an English ear, ludicrous, might always be
detected that Inner dignity and mental robustness which
a life of trial, hardship, and danger, seldom fails to confer.
If, in place of judging them by a certain standard taken
from the social, measurement of an old country, we allow to
them, the privilege of being estimated as a people foreign
to us in all external relations, and their mental aptitudes
adapted to a widely different state of society; considering


Total white males
. 57,000
Total white females .
. 45,000
Slaves of both sexes ,
. 38,000
Free coloured people
29S
Total population
. 140,295
them as a race occupying a central position between the
civilized and the savage man, we may arrive at the conclu-
sion that no people possessing so large a share of the bar-
barian disposition could fee compared with these settlers
of the far west. They are most courteous in their
behaviour,- and so self-possessed without undue assurance
or impudent pretensions, uniting such genuine civility
with such absolute independence, that it seems impossible
to deny to them the title of gentlemen. In the society of men
who have distinguished, themselves, and those who have
attained military eminence always hold the first place in
the estimation of backwoodsmen—the poorest former in
the West conducts himself with the same ease and freedom
as in the society of his own family. Yet he entertains
towards such, men the highest respect, and never defiles it
With the slightest taint of servility. The distinguished
general, a candidate for the presidency, sits at table elbow-
ing a poor mechanic; yet, in ail outward tokens of esteem
and observance, the mechanic and the general hold the
same place. The Republican dogma, “ All men are horn
free and equal,” appears to have a social as well as a poli-
tical application. Whilst the American holds in the
highest esteem, even to the degree of <£ hero-worship,” the
political or military leader, he remembers also the second
and third dogmas of the political Trinity, “ All free man
have equal rights,” and “All power is inherent in the
people,”
I obtained, during my stay at Austin, a variety of in-
formation respecting that country and its resources. There
can he no doubt that Texas is capable of supporting a dense
population. It appears, so far, to have received a very
limited addition to the number of inhabitants, in com-
parison with many of the new western states. By the
latest census (1847), the divisions of the people of
stood as follows :
Of the 57,000 white males, 27,000 are returned as under
SEW SERIES —SO, I. £


eighteen years of age, and the number over forty-five years
amounts only to 4899- The number of electors amongst
this limited population was 22,000, .'Notwithstanding the
youth of a large body of the inhabitants, the reckless cha-
racter of the majority, and the warlike condition in which
the people have been compelled to exist, a degree of wis-
dom, justice, and foresight appears to have influenced the
early legislators of the State. The articles of the Consti-
tution of the State of Texas are framed on the best models,
and with the best provisions and properties to be found in
any of the forms adopted by the new states. The deed
commences, in. the usual manner, by a declaration of the
political and religious freedom of every white inhabitant;
thou provisions are made for the protection of the slave.
« They (the legislators) shall have the right to pass laws
to permit the owners of slaves to emancipate them. They
shall have the power to pass laws which will oblige the
owners of slaves to treat them, with humanity, to provide
for their necessary food and clothing; to abstain from all
injuries extending to life and limb, and in ease of neglect,
to have such slave sold.”
« In.prosecutions for crimes, they (the slaves) shall have
an impartial trial by jury/' .
“•Any person, who shall maliciously dismember or deprive
a slave’of life, shall suffer such punishment as would be
inflicted in case the tike offence had been committed upou
a free white person, and on like proof; except in case of
insurrection of such slave."
Manv parts of the Constitution appears to advantage by
comparison, with, the antique laws of older settled coun-
tries ; thus - _ _ „
<( J|o nerson:shall be imprisoned for debt,
« shall have power to protect from forced
salo n portion, of the property of heads of families.'’ Pro-
visions are made for exempting the homestead and AM
acres of land from sale for debt. o ,
A danse is inserted against duelling: “Any citizen who
fights a duel shall be prevented bolding ot trust
Provision is made for state interference in education ihe
legislature shall establish .tree scuools t&rougu the State*
By one article, the Louisianian law which protects, without
especial settlement, the property of the wile, is adopted;
“ All property, real or personal, ox the wife, shall be her
separate property, 15 All lotteries are prohibited ; ami what


seems an irrational and injurious application of the same
principle—banking is illegal. All bills, notes, and papers
intended to circulate as money, or as representing money,
are Illegal, These last regulations make the banks of
Louisiana the banks also of Texas, and, their notes are the
chief circulating medium of the state.
One evening, whilst sitting in the public room, the door
opened, and a low-set, fair-haired man stealthily glided in,
attired in fall Rocky Mountain costume; his dress was
composed entirely of deer skin, the leggings elaborately
ornamented and fringed, the mocassins worked over the
instep in the most approved style of fashion; bis bowie-
knife, as long as Toby Lumpkin’s pistol, was carried in a
gaudily ornamented sheath, and a large-bored heavy rifle
such as arc found in the hands of the old Kentuckians,
completed his equipment. He walked with the step, and
glanced with the furtive eye of the savage. He was fol-
lowed hy several comrades, partially or wholly in Indian
costume, who brought in several hales of furs, and amongst
the rest, the skin of a gristly bear, as large as that of
a goodly-sized ox. Haring soon these disposed in a
comer of the room, and his companions having retired to
some neighbouring bar-room, no doubt with the fullest in-
tention of consuming as much whisky as rocky-mountain
traders are able to do, the leader of the party took a vacan t
chair next to me, and commenced smoking “ kimilkinnee ”
out- of a red stone pipe. When he had concluded he entered
into conversation, or rather commenced talking, for he was
almost the sole speaker for several hours. Speaking with
the accent and expression of an intelligent and cultivated
man, he discoursed upon his experiences during the last
fourteen years, which he had passed in the life of an Indian
trader. During this period he had but once visited the
settlements. When a young man, he had started -with a
party of trappers from the Missouri river, intending to pass
a- winter on the western plains for the recovery of his health,
ami afterwards return to a professional life in one of the
eastern cities. His health was restored by the invigorating
atmosphere of the elevated plateau where the hunters
passed the winter season, and by the exposure and vigorous
exercises of a hunter’s life, and he returned to the east, to
follow the profession in which be had been educated, she
following year business brought him to St. Louis, and whilst
there he arranged to accompany a friend on a hunting ex-
n 2 *


pedition up the Missouri, Again he. looked upon the west-
ern plains, and the strange, insatiable longing which fills
men’s minds when they have once tasted of the savage life,
came over him. Hs struggled against this wild, mystic
feeling, pictured to himself the advantages he would sacri-
fice by indulging it; the society, the intellectual life, the
friends of his youth, the luxuries of civilization, the pro-
spools of a successful and useful career, all to be re-
linquished ; his friend remonstrated with him, entreated
him ; wished him at least to postpone the step until time
had been afforded for fuller consideration ; but the tempta-
tion was too strong ; a power that seemed stronger than his
will drew him on : he threw behind him all that men have
accumulated and acquired by long centuries of mental and
physical toil, and went forth to live the life of the savage.
He spoke of the fertile valleys of California, ricftij
grassed, adorned with cypress, white oak, and with cedars of
from 12 to 20 feet in girth, attaining sometimes the height
of 250 feet; well-watered, with a fertile soil, and a climate
unsurpassed in salubrity. Of the invigorating atmosphere
of that part of California which articulates with the moun-
tains, he spoke with a degree of enthusiasm. He spoke of
Spaniards, far. advanced in years, who preserved all the
elasticity and limberness of youth, riding wild horses, and
wielding: the lariei as actively as boys. Cattle were so
abundant that they were slaughtered only for their hides,
and the grain and fndts —produced chiefly at the old Mis-
sions—were of the finest quality. He concluded his de-
scriptions by producing a specimen of gold from the new
“ diggings/’
This general outline of the country accords with the
statements of Captain Fremont, who represents the climate,
the productions, the verdant pastures, the immense size of
the timber, and advantages for commerce, as being, each
superior to what the world can elsewhere produce, here in-
tensified and united together. And, finally, there seems
reason to believe it Is the richest mineral country of which
we have any knowledge.
He had many tales to tell of wars with Indians and
grizzly bears; of fi hair-breadth 'scapes,” of buffaloes and
of prairie fires, of the inspiring character of the upper
air, where men seem intoxicated and joyous with-,
out cause ; of the customs and habits of savage tribes yet
but little known to white men. These subjects he gilded


is?it-h. a strong imagination until they appeared like romantic
fables, or stories from a new world, even to those.who had
been familiar with such, questions, and had visited the coun-
tries he described. But the glowing description of Cali-
fornia most interested the Texans, who, like most western
men, are always inquiring what there is “farther west,”
and always disposed to move to some newer El Dorado
where the soil is more fertile, the climate more healthy, and
oven a free citizen of the States more free, than ever soil,
climate, and men were before.
The is imeness of my horse, owing to an accident in the
stable, and a sharp attack of illness, detained me at Austin
until Sunday, the 10th of December. On that day I started
alone on niy journey to San Antonio, fording the Colorado
river close to the town. The day was bright, sunny, and
very clear, with a cool north wind. I rode through open
meadows, beautifully diversified with groves of timber of
post oak, elm, a few live oaks, and. some small cedars. On
the right were the hill ranges, covered with small timber.
The general aspect of the country like a beautiful wild
park. Over these open fields were scattered herds of deer.
1 crossed several streams of pare water, and passed a few
log-huts, grouped near the margin of the watercourses, and
around which some rude attempt at cultivation was being
made. The soil is a rich dark loam, the grass very luxuri-
ant, . About twenty miles from Austin the country becomes
more open, and the timber towards the south like a dim,
dark, ridge against the horizon.
Upon the wide plain was a small patch of oat woodland,
an acre or more in extent, where a settler had planted his
log-hut, his cattle and sheep grazing upon the boundless
pastures round his homestead. This was the only house I
passed in a distance of twenty miles, A few miles beyond
I entered a rich woody bottom, the soil a black alluvial,
the timber of moderate dimensions, two or three feet
through, and woven and matted together with a thick
undergrowth of shrubs and vines. Through this a road
was cleared by the settler’s axe, sufficiently broad for
wagons to pass. Having passed three miles through the
woodland, I arrived at the dusk of evening at a bright
glancing river, twenty or thirty yards across, and rushing
with wonderful rapidity, so that it seemed in that dim
light, amongst the dark woods, like a swollen impassable
torrent, I hesitated for some time on the banks, for, hav


mg no knowledge of the obstacle, I was quite unaware of
its depth. After ineffectually endeavouring to form some
conception of its probable depth, and the chances of a firm
footing below, I decided on the stability of some wagon
tracks which appeared, so far as the light would enable me
to distinguish them, to be recently formed upon attempt-
ing the ford. My horse, who was as ready to climb bill
sides covered with logs of fallen timber, and tangled
creepers, walk over a broken flank, or swim the Mississippi,
as any backwoodsman of them all, quietly entered the
water; and I found, to my great satisfaction, that the
formidable looking river was not more than three feet
deep, Biding up the opposing hill side, I passed a few-
scattered -houses, and halted before a swinging sign board,
which denoted the * Bt. Mark’s Hotel,” a log building
divided into two parts by a pole right through the middle.
Mere I learned that I had crossed the stream not a- rifle-
shot distance from the spring where it rises. The springs
of Ban Marco, like several others of the same powerful
character in Western Texas, supply water sufficient to
form what in the driest season may well be termed a river,
I have met with few natural objects which strike the mind
at once with such an impression, of novelty as these foun-
tains, from which, welling up by one effort from bidden
reservoirs and caverns in the hollow limestone, broad,
bright rivers rush away with great velocity to the sea.
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COMPANY’S COLONY.
im OmmoJM on Fobs Stscsksss. —Smalt, Farms th Atts-
-T-urna. —Who will B«co®sd,~~Bfsh Pastk.ershi?,
Dsab Bia* —J feel an interest beyond what I can describe
in the present proposal of the Australian Agricultural
Company -to people their -extensive estate. It loots like aa
earnest beginning for making room for children as well as
sheep, -Still the best intentions may fell, if the details aye
not closely watched as a matter of business,
Humorous parties who think of proceeding to this new
Colony have writ-top to pe; among others, a gentleman
who came from Yorkshire to consult me on thus point.
He informed me that upwards of seventy respectable
formers wore arranging to proceed to Port Stephens this
autumn. I recommended this party to delay 'until the


surveyor, who proceeds in the ship Artemisia with the first
paxtv, has had time to survey a number of farms ready for
Immediate location. It appears to me most desirable that
the surveyor should make some progress in his work before
a second ship is despatched. If there is to he delay, it
■would be better it should take place here than there.
I trust the Company will see the propriety of allowing
their numerous servants to purchase land on the same
terms as it is offered in England, as they will naturally
feel that, after having spent their yoiing days in their ser-
vice, they have some claim to the advantages now open to
the public: The high character the Company bears as-
sures me that it was mere oversight on their part, and
that, as liberal-minded masters, they will meet the wishes
of their old servants. From what I have seen of the
parties anxious to proceed to that settlement, such m ar-
rangement would, I feel convinced, be equally agreeable
to them, for, to use a favourite expression in the. Colonies,
a they are made of good eld English stuff/'
It will he observed, that the Company offer their tenantry
and purchasers supplies from their stores at cost price, in-
terest only added. This is liberal on their part, and I
believe it to be a genuine and disinterested offer ; but I had
been only a short time in the colony before I saw the ad-
vantage of requiring the men to avoid getting into their
employers’ debt; and it would be a very bad beginning for
the class of farmers now about to emigrate to Port Stephens
to commence by getting goods on credit from the Company.
They now stand forward as the leaders in a grand moral
movement; to preserve their credit they must shut tip
ghop. It is a mistaken notion to suppose that they can
sell cheaper than the regular trader; the principles of free-
trade have not had fair play in the colony. The adsto-
cratical flockmasters there have not been content wish the
profits on wool, but they must needs become shop-keepers,
and establish a truck system.
If the Company wish their tenantry to have supplies at
a cheap rate, they have only to announce that they are
about to close their store, when, they will have men of
capital open shops there; and the natural competition of
trade Will do more to give their tenantry cheap articles
than the Company can do, even by making cash purchases
in London.
For location to go on with advantage and satisfaction, the


surveys of a certain number of farms should be complete,
with a small hut built in each, so that each purchaser
souk! at once move his family and baggage to his farm.
Cheap as the land undoubtedly is, no man must go upon
land expecting to get on without work. For a settler to
thrive he must labour, A very Intelligent class of young
men have made enquiries of me regarding this settlement
who have never done a day’s work here, and are too proud
to commence in this country, but seem to think that they
would shake off' this feeling at Port Stephens, and make,
with a- hundred pounds or two, a fortune. It is a melan-
choly fact, that old habits and feelings of this kind cling to
a man with stubborn tenacity. A long sea voyage and a
warm climate seldom do much for this class of men-—un-
fortunately, their renovation of character is rarely accom-
plished until .they have suffered much—until their last six-
pence is expended—their last coat sold—necessity is a stern
master, but a safe and wonderful reformer of the evils of
the present system of training young men for the colonies,
I repeat that, to do well on a farm, a man must, with axe on
Ms shoulder, be ready for work. Small capitalists, who
have never been accustomed to labour, should not buy land
at Port Stephens, but put their cash in the bank, engage-
in a sheep-farm, where the occupation would not be of the
same laborious character that it must be in a farm, and
■where they may, with prudence, become men of property, if
they will only commence at the beginning.
In answer to the oft-repeated question. — u Would it not
be an advantage to enter into partnership with my neigh-
bour?” my reply is, Let no present advantage induce you
to enter hurriedly into an arrangemen .of this kind. What
I would particularly recommend to new settlers is <s Busk
Partnership ” Let two friends or neighbours agree to work
together, until three acres are cropped, dividing the work,
the expense, and the produce—this partnership will grow
apace; I have made numerous bush agreements of'this
kind. One settler’s wife was an excellent milker; her
next-door neighbour could not manage a cow. An agree-
ment was made, much to the advantage of both.—Settler
A. was to hail up and milk B,’s cows—while 8,, in return,
agreed to give one hour’s instruction, daily, in reading and
writing, to JB,’g children.
G, was an excellent gardener, hut not equal to I), at saw-
ing ; lb agreed to take CVs place at the saw, while he worked


in Ik’s garden. A., 8., C., ,D. were neighbours. A. had a large
family, but little money—they agreed to buy a bullock and
'water-cart for their domestic use—-8., 0., D. found the money,
A. agreeing that bis son should take charge of the bullock,
and go for the water for 12 months, as his amount of the
contribution. At the close of the year, 8., 0., I), had horses;
the bullock and dray were valued; they drew lots who should
take it at the price named ; it was A.’s draw ; but he had
no money ; Ik, 0., D. were glad to agree that A.’s son should
give them labour as payment. I was present the day the
sou had paid the last day’s labour. 8., C., D. said. “it has
done us all good, and A. has behaved so punctual, the boy
has worked so well—never been any excuse j”—the four
fanners talked the matter over, shook hands, wished the
boy luck, and the same evening entered into a bush agree-
ment respecting the joint management of their cows.
I never knew any quarrel or bad feeling result from these
partnerships : on the contrary. I believe them calculated to
promote much neighbourly good-will: but in the associa-
tion of a large number of strangers, for an 'indefinite pe-
riod, I have no-confidence.
Much has been said against agriculture as a profitable
pursuit in blew South Wales ; those squatters who wish to
keep the land for their sheep say farming won’t pay; but—
although it may not pay the large absentee capitalists-
from, my own personal experience, in hundreds of eases, I
know that it does pay the working farmer. I have seen
English, Irish, and Scotch improve their circumstances by
getting on a farm, and I have evidence to prove it from the
people :-~tme, my experience has been chiefly confined to
the working man; and I never visited their farms or saw
them without observing some proof of improved circum-
stances. I am, therefore, quite certain that any man of in-
dustrious habits can do well on .a farm, improve his condi-
tion, and rear his children in respectability and comfort.
I send you some statements which prove this ; and of which
I have several hundreds that I am anxious to give publi-
city-to, but only that lam circumscribed by my means'*'.
Yours very truly, Gakomw*! Chisholm.
8, Charlian Crescent, Mington.
To the Editor of Sidney’s Emigrant's Journal.
Want of space compels ns to, defer these illustrations of -success
among small farmers until next month.


EMIGRANTS’ QUESTIONS.
Communications for the .Editors must be addressed “ Van of
Mjkssss. G. Woobvam, anb Sow, Angel Court, Skinner Street, Lon-
don f
Inquiries of any importance are expected to be verified by name
and address, not for publication, hut as a guarantee of good faith*
It is requested that letters requiring answers he sent not later than
the 2bih of each month* Brevity and clearness in writing* and
■phraseology mil oblige.
%* In answer to several letters , parties requiring this Journal can
obtain it best through the nearest Bookseller; or, in remote country
districts, by inclosing Red Postage Stamps to the Publishers, Messrs.
O&a, Amen Corner, Paternoster lime,
F.ajg® Passages.- —According to the last accounts from the Park
Street Commissioners!, forms tor free or assisted passages are no longer
issued, because they are overwhelmed by the number of applications
that have already been sent in. This is the last zig-zag of the Goto-
notation 'Commissioners, and affords one more proof that the present
system wants a thorough overhauling. As long as the Commissioners
have funds m hand they have no more business to fall into arrear
with their emigrants than the Post Office has with its letters. If
money is wanting, the public ought to know it; if clerks are wanting,
more should he set to work. At present, the whole system is a mystery,
something between a jumble and a Job.
FisitAti® BmsßAJrag.—To female emigrants a word;—For re-
spectable domestic servants, for dairy-maids and girls accustomed to
fern-work, the demand in Australia is almost unlimited. Young
women capable of teaching reading, writing, and arithmetic, plain
sewing, &e,, and willing to taste situations as nursery-maids, may
place them selves very comfortably and marry well; but an introduc-
tion to some lady in one of the colonies is desirable.
Airs. ’Chisholm, 3, Charlton Terrace, Islington, is always ready to
answer inquiries : inclose, for reply, a stamped envelope.
For accomplished governesses at high salaries there are very fe w va-
cancies. Accomplishments hold a secondary place at present in the
education of the voting corn-stalks.
Labourers, mechanics, shepherds, hat-keepers, stockmen, bullock-
drivers, small settlers, small squatters, and great squatters, working
men and gentlemen, are all In want of wives, blow, in England, if
yon have plenty of mosey, it Is not necessary that a wife should be
anything but ornamental. It Is not so in the colonies. In all coun-
tries the happiness of married life depends very much on a well
managed house, and, above all, m a comfortable dinner. The love and


affection that commenced in the excitement of a polka, and &>arisbed
under the dulcet influences of the romantic harp and multi-fingered
piano, sire best consolidated by the mealy potatoes and roast mutton,
iniey. not raw. The singing of a Lind or a Sontag, or the impossible
performance of a Dolcken or an Anderson, wold not consols a hun-
gry husband, vexed by failing markets, half so well as a nicely
cooked steak, or an unexpected dish of sweetbreads, No bravura can
drown that horror of husbands, a rebellion in the kitchen, and an ex-
plosion in the nursery. Now, in England, money will enable the
coarsest vulgarian to hire aristocratic servants as well as entertain
aristocratic guests; and for some 10/, a year and board, even the
government clerk, who indulges in a wife poor, pretty, and proud,
redolent of accomplishments and ignorant of ail useful arts, may
engage a series of maids-of-all-work, experienced in all the wife ought
to know, and willing to stay for the sake of the profits of ignorance.
In the colonies, a wife, although her husband have ten thousand a
year, -must be ready, if she wants peace and comfort, to lead the way
in ail the domestic- operations, great and small. For servants are
both ignorant and independent. Therefore, ladies thinking of Aus-
tralia or the western suites of America, -and the bounteous crops of
husbands there, must understead that, although a fine voice is not to
be despised, although a knack at writing verses has a charm in, the
honeymoon, and a piano in the bush is a very agreeable resource (and
there are pianos in the hush}, still, the salt of happy colonial life lies
in the my stics of the pie and padding, the roast and boiled ♦ in the
whole art of washing and ironing, in the secret of training a raw-
country girl into a light handy servant, of pulling down insolence and
encouraging good humour.
Tertm, "Glasgow H Has a great desire to become a farmer in
Australia ; is 17 years of age.” [Me had better consult Ms fathers
We cannot say whether he is fit for a shepherd or not, but presume
his friends intend him for something better.]
W. J- M. will find that, in a previous number, we considered St,
Paul’s, in the Brazils, a proper colony for Portuguese, and for no others.
Language, religion, and customs would never suit Englishmen, The
man who cannot suit himself in the United Status, Canada, Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, or Natal, will go farther and fare worse. His
other questions will be answered when he complies with eur con-
ditions.
Australian Papers may be seen at 55, Crawford Street, Bryan-
stone Square: 4, Macclesfield Terrace, City Road; and BateM
Mouse, Goswell Road.
Cl B. 0. " I have been in a highly respectable business, hut the
air is : s& damp, and has so affected my chest, as well as my genera!
health, that my medical man has ordered me to reside in the country
and fee oat of doors as ranch as possible. lam quite at a lose what
to -do t® got a living and-be able to enjoy that out-door exercise which.


my health requires, anil bave thought of emigrating to Australia. I
haw a general knowledge of farming operations, and have frequently
taken an active part in them, I have been accustomed to horses, and
can ride well, can dig and manage a garden, can mow, and, with a
little practice, could'plough. Am a good amateur joiner, and could
build a. wooden house, and make chairs and tables, &c., with any one
who was not brought up to the trade, and I have a little practical
knowledge of most other manual trades, such as bricklaying, smith’s
-work, &e. I could raise about 200 A, and though single now, should
marry before I went out. If I go, my brother-in-law, age 46, wife
and. three children, eldest 7. with a capital of between 200-i. and
300 b, would go too. He is a first-rate practical farmer, with a
thorough knowledge of stock and sheep, but has been unable to make
faming pay here. His eldest son, hy a former wife, is in Port Philip
district, doing well as a sheep farmer, and his second son, aged 2.2,
would go with him. Our plan is this: to buy two 50-acre lots
at Pori Stephens, and begin with a small dairy and a good garden,
and send butter, eggs, fruit and vegetables, pigs and poultry, &c., to
Sydney, not meddling with sheep, but, by degrees, as our means
allowed, getting a mixed herd together, and breeding a few horses, of
•■which my brother-in-law is a good judge. Would Port Stephens be
too far from Sydney for this, or would you recommend going to Port
Philip, and renting some land, there near Melbourne {until we could
purchase, as a favourable opportunity offered), sad carry on tbs same
plan there? Is the * Port Stephens Guide 5 out yeti I have made
several inquiries of the booksellers, and the replies have been ‘not
out,’” [lf your brother-in-lg-w accompanies you. Port Stephens will
form an opening fa every respect most advantageous to your health
and -to your fortunes, the climate exceedingly healthy, and land for
sale admirably fertile, the distance from a market convenient; but, if
he -does .root, as you arc in delicate health and not fit for labour,
you had bettor abandon any idea of agriculture, and go and live with
your friend at Port Philip as a squatter, that is to say, if he is to be
depended on,]
. Phawnaeogma, —Oar guess would he Natal. It is but a guess ;
certainly not Adelaide, which is too healthy and overdone.
.A'Seeker cf.Staihim. -“I have read the £ Hand-Book/ and wish.
for a little more statistical , information. What is the population
of each principal town in Australia 1 How- many in each, town are
English? 'What is the relative proportion of male and female of the
Jlngiish population in each principal town? What is the general pro-
portion in each principal town, including all inhabitants? ’What is
the -average summer heat of Sydney, 3?ort Philip, or Adelaide?
What is the greatest heat? Is it injurious to Englishmen, or does it
shortext their lives if temperate? Are there wild beasts or venomous
reptiles in Australia?” [Some of these questions will be found in
the volume of • the .first series of this Journal, hut it is not our


business to answer such questions as these, which show that the
writer has not read, as he says, either the ** Hand-Book’” or Journal.
Very fall statistics will be found in the “Port Stephens Guide/'"]
Walter. The only objection to leaving .England for Australia is
November and December lies in the unpleasant weather in the
British Channel.
W. 11. I), —“Aged 18, in a Manchester warehouse, thinks of
going to Australia, with 50 1” [Cannot advise at all; so much
depends on personal character. A piano-forte maker became a
brewer on arrival in Sydney, a wine merchant's clerk a shepherd.
These are recent instances. Perhaps best to go out with a fanners
family; many would take you, as you pay your own expenses, and
teach you something useful.]
X. Y. Z. —A Government Pensioner of 150 La year. —The propriety
of your emigrating depends on the number and quality of your faintly
—on the mode of raising money, and on insurance offices. We can-
not advise. You can try ; but it would not be prudent to part with
all your pension, • On hearing farther we can better ad vise.
Ihlykion. !< Will you bo so kind in. your next Journal to state
the best way to pack seeds for Australia, or will the following
method do I—To pack small parcels in brown paper, well dried, and
then to put them ia a tin canister, soldered down, and made quite air
and water tight Will that do 1 ” [Perhaps some gardening corns-,
spoudent will answer this.]
Men-Servants. —>“ I wish to ask your opinion whether men-servants,
accustomed to nothing else, are likely to succeed as servants or
waiters in any of the towns of Australia; or whether America
is preferable for servants; as lam sorry to say there are a great
many more servants here than there are places for.” [A few rich
persons ia the United States give good wages ; but we hear it is not
pleasant, as house-servants are rather despised, so many free negroes
are servants. In Australia, wages are good, with opportunities
of advancement in trade; but a man must do everything he is told
feed the pigs or fetch homo stuff from market; sober servants grow
rich.]
A Draper's Assistant, Bath. Cannot recommend persons of that
class to emigrate unless they are prepared, in default of a situation, to
saw wood, dig, drive a team, shepherd, cook, or do anything useful,
and so we answer to all clerks and gentlemen without capital,
although suitable situations occur,
Ashby-de-ta-Zouch. —Same answer except —the Miller. Expense
about 20k each. No better time than the present. It is presumed
those parties have no capital,
A. B.> Maeciesjieid. —A list of vessels for Hew York from any
Liverpool paper. Ohio is very cold, in winter, and not a good climate,
although a very thriving state.
/. if., TorksMre.~zyfe are unable to give any useful information


to schoolmasters of a superior class. There are in Ireland, and some
parts of England, schoolmasters in country villages well acquainted
with, and not above, actual agricultural employment; such may
succeed, We should not advise the Cape without positive personal
comsmsication front scene friend of the intending emigrant.
M. 1). i). Newcastle . —The cost of a steerage passage to New
Zealand is 18L The Auckland Islands are private property, and no
passages are open except by favour of the Company, Free and
assisted passages to Australia are, in reality, only to be obtained by
interest in high quarters. Halifax men have the best chance, for Sir
Charles-Wood is brother-in-law to Earl Grey.
J, C ,—Money may he remitted from Australia through any bank.
We quite agree in the following observations ; —“ Having seen in two
of your Journals that a circular has been issued by the Emigration
Commissioners sa which it states, that many may get a passage to
Australia for BL, I addressed a letter to them, and, in reply, they
say they cannot grunt me a passage on those conditions. It seems to
me perfectly useless for them to issue circulars of that description,
when they do not moan what they say in them. Sir, will you please
to - inform me which is the safest way money can he sent from Australia
to England.”
I. hi 8.,, Deptford. —This letter has been answered privately ; it
seems almost too extraordinary to be true,
J. AT. MvMaM. —The Emigration Agent for Macclesfield is Mr,
A. Harris, You cannot expect us to write and pay the postage of an
answer to such a question.
0. AT., Cambmedls —Prince Edward's Island is described in Nos.
10 and 28. We do not know of any recent work on that Island.
/. if,, Ayrshire, {whose letter is rather too long,) with the neces-
sary capital, and the aid and advice of his friend’s ancle, may cer-
tainly- do well at Port Philip, in stock and cultivation, if he has work
as well as prudence, hut he dees not say what capital he can com-
mand, aor whether he can work,
Trowsers strapped inside for bush riding mean doubled so as to
stand the rubbing.
Enptore, in the cavalry, is caused by the weight of accoutrements
in mounting and dismounting—by riding without stirrups, and the stiff
military style. It is not the complaint of fox-hunters or bush horsemen.
M&tUusw, Mmcastk-on-Tyne. —There are no free, passages at
present to any colony. To Australia, 151.; to New Zealand, 18 1.; to
A uckland Islands, by applying to the Company only.
Jf. A. T. —As to your chance of a free passage, see a paragraph-
ia last page. Ho not take straw-plat for your wife to Fort Philip.
An Anxims Mother, North Wales, —Privately answered.
E, T., Norfolk. —An engineer, able "to work as a smith; married,
two children, no savings. Net having the means to settle, and being
a skilled mechanic of a superior class, we rather think he would not


find sufficient employment, at competent wages, either in Adelaide or
the mines , or at steam-boat work in Sydney. The United States
offer a better opening, and it would be well to correspond with
Thorley, the blacksmith, from Crewe, whose letter we published soma
time since. Assisted passages to Australia are not likely to be ob-
tained without some private and strong recommendation.
The Emigration Commissioners have just published their report,
which demands a more elaborate dissection than we have, as yet,
time to give. Next month it shall form the text of an article.
Outfit for Voyage. —" The Journal of a passenger to Adelaide”
affords valuable hints on this subject,
%*' The next number will contain a register of colonial intelligence
and a list of emigrant ships with their passengers, to be continued
monthly.
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
1, The Setikr’s New Moms — British, America, — The United States,
2. Whether to go — Whither- The Cape—The Great South, Lmde.
Kendrick, 4, Charlotte How, Mansion House,
Thus® two cheap little books have been compiled with. a. good deal
of care and judgment by Mr, Sidney Smith, laie of the Anti-Cora
Law League, As compilations they are well done, with, conscientious
impartiality. The account of Canada is the best short modern de-
scription extant. We differ from a great many of Mr. Smith's con-
clusions, and coaid pick a great many holes in statements he has
taken on trust, but, as a -whole, and at the price, we do not know
better emigrants' reading. We think better authorities might have
been collected about the United States. Too much stress is laid on
the impressions of Mr. Prentis in his hasty pleasure trip through the
States. Mr. Prentis, with time and opportunity, is capable, no doubt,
of writing a very instructive book according to Ms own peculiar
views, but he has not. After spending years among an industrious,
energetic, ingenious, intellectual, but pale-faced, rude, inhospitable,
grasping, money-adoring population, among gloomy brick warehouses,
under a perpetually drizzling sky, it is not at all extraordinary that
Mr. Prentis should be specially charmed with what, though rare in
Manchester, is the “ small change ” freely offered to any well behaved
stranger in any other pari of England. A Picnic in a Northumbrian
coal mine would have been a change for the better, and the colliers
models of politeness in comparison. For instance, he was quite sur-
prised whan a gentleman said, courteously, " You are strangers ; you
would like to sit together, I will find another seat for myself.”' Nov/,
in Manchester, such an incident would be surprising. The admirable
domestic qualities of the Americans and their superiority as men of
action to all other nations of the earth are patent. But to single out
Yankee politeness or “ aristocratic demeanour ” for commendation is


simply absurd. In. the nest edition, we advise Mr Smith to rewrite
his New Zealand chapter with the help of Mr, Power’s capital book,
DieSbabacb. and Terry, and to leave out Mr. Ward’s romances about
profits anti cows. He may be assured that there is no opening for
emigrants at Nelson, but there are other sites where suitable settlers
might do well ; for we hold with him that, under a good system, and
freed from the incubus of a monopolising absentee company, the
middle island would become a fine settlement for the only class that
can succeed as agriculturists in. any new country, be it the Western
States of America., or the South Sea Colonies — Cottier Earmers. We
observe that the most valuable and original part of oar Journal, the
« Letters from Abroad,” have afforded Mr. Smith some of his best
examples of successful colonization.
■Emigration, to the Australian Settlements, by Arthur Hodgson, Esq.
Trelawney Saunders, Charing Cross, London.
Mr, Hodgson is a squatter, and an educated gentleman; he has taken
the opportunity of a temporary visit to England to lecture on a subject
he perfectly understands. We strongly recommend, this lively rela-
tion of his experience and collection of statistics bearing on Australia,
to readers who care about that colony. Mr, Hodgson is a genuine
specimen of his class, and does that class credit.
Isish EkresAiioir. —House of Cormioni, IS-hf July, 1849.--In
answer to a question from Mr. Monsell, relative to the disproportion
in the number of emigrants sent out, from Ireland aud England, and
with regard also to the truth of the statement in the newspapers rela-
tive to "the treatment of certain- female emigrants, Mr. Hawes
said he assumed that the proportion of the emigrating population
between Great Britain and Ireland was as Bto 10. He found
that, np to the end of August, 88,800 emigrants had been sent out
altogether. Of that number, 25,500 were from Great Britain, and
8200 from Ireland. Three-tenths of 88,800 would, amount to 10,000,
and only 8000'had been sent out, so that to that extent a dispropor-
tion did exist. The government, however, were taking active
measures to restore the disproportion, and, whereas only 1786 had
been sent out from Ireland in ISIS, no tewer than 2558 had been
sent out in the six mouths eliding Jane last, which would be at the
.rate of 5000 a year. He could assure his htm. friend that the matter
was under the serious consideration of the colonial department, and
that, though, there were at this moment 5000 applications from Great
Britain now waiting for decision, the whole of them had been post-
poned until the disproportion could be made up. W ith regard to the
second question, lie would observe that grievous complaints had been
made of the treatment of certain females by an officer on board the
Sohraon emigrant ship. The whole circumstances had been brought
under the notice of Earl Grey and the authorities at Sydney, and tae
consequence was that the owners of the ship had been fined 500 L


SIDNEY’S
EMIGRANT ’S JOURNAL,
AND
Traveller's Magazine.
LETTERS DESCRIBING A RIDE THROUGH TEXAS.
No. YL
{Cmilnmd from our lasi Sfmiher, page 88.)
country in the neighbourhood of St. Mark’s is well
adapted for settlement. The hill ranges and the dry sloping
meadows at the foot of the mountains are well suited for
sneep pastures. The soil in the bottom is very fertile, and
it was asserted had produced on one farm eighty bushels of
Indian corn, to the acre. The great fall of the land from
the hills southward, and the constant supply of water, emi-
nently adapt this neighbourhood for the establishment of
mills and manufactories. The experience of the few settlers
was all in favour of the salubrity of the climate. Deer,
bears, and wolves are very numerous.
The 11th was a cold, dry, cloudy day, with a strong wind
from the north-north-west. Thewagon-fcrack towards the Ger-
man settlement of Hew Braunfels passed, at a little distance
from the hills, through a wide extent of prairie, diversified
by a little scattered timber of inferior dimensions. The soil
and grass both very good. Towards the south appeared a
boundless plain, unmarked by tree or shrub, and slightly
undulating. The only living objects I saw during the ride
were the deer hounding away over the grassy slopes, and
three wolves slinking on the track of one of the herds. A
little after mid-day I forded the Guadaloupe, a stream about
forty yards wide, the waters bright, sparkling, and rushing
with great rapidity oyer a bed of limestone. On the oppo~
KBW SESIES— -SiO 11.


site, bank was the German town, containing about 2000 in-
habitants, mixed Germans and Americans. The town is
built chiefly in one long street, the houses scattered wide
apart. A few were frame-buildings, chiefly the dwellings
of American settlers. The Germans, who were mostly of
the poorest class of emigrants, were lodged in cottages built
of compressed earth, or of mud or unbaked bricks, but
haring a degree of comfort and neatness about them not
always seen amongst the Americans, Extensive fields, in-
closed with rail fences, were visible for some miles along the
course of the river, and scattered cattle-groups dotted the
prairie on the opposite side. The hills, covered with timber,
were not more than a mile distant from the settlement, and
afforded a plentiful supply of cedar, I was pleasingly im-
pressed by the broad, full, healthy-looking faces and ro-
bust frames of the German peasants, and somewhat even by
the stolid countenance and unmoved sleepiness of manner,
as a refreshing contrast to the sharp features, gaunt frames,
harassed expression, and anxious greedy excitement, which
prevail amongst Americans.
Upon the edge of the town, amidst a grove of fine timber,
a beautifully clear stream poured down from a gorge in the
hills, called the Comal Creek. Emerging from an overhang-
ing grow th of woodland, it rippled over a bed of pebbles—
reminding me- of the Scottish mountain rivulets—and dis-
appeared again amongst the green arches. It was exceed-
ingly refreshing to an English eye thus to meet with pure
bright streams, after being long accustomed to see and to
consume nothing clearer than the diluted mud of the Yellow
Bfcone, The force of habit, h owever, was differently displayed
in the taste of my horse, who, having been for some years a
drinker of muddy water—the thick puddle of the Missouri,
and the various dark streams which flow into it-—indignantly
rejected the sparkling liquid of Western Texas; but when-
ever he met with some pool by the road-side, where the
passage of wagons or the trampling of horses had stirred
up the soil into a palatable consistency, drank with the
utmost eagerness.
Two saw-mills had been established upon the stream, and
water-power sufficient to work extensive manufactories is
available in the neighbourhood. 1 found la Hew Braunfels
a luxury seldom attained in the West—a reading-room sup-
plied with periodicals and newspapers, belonging to a Ger-
man tobacco-dealer, and open to the public without charge.


The German emigrants, although not very industrious nor
very enterprising, yet, by slow plodding labour, and regular
economical habits, gradually establish themselves in com-
fort and abundance. A. recently arrived settler, one of the
few educated men amongst them, comtemplated the cultiva-
tion of the vine, believing the climate to be eminently
adapted for the production of wine of a superior quality.
Others proposed the growth of tobacco suitable for the
manufacture of the finer qualities of cigars. Some dissatis-
faction was experienced at the different crops of wheat ob-
tained during the past season, bat the corn had yielded a
full harvest. Upon the whole, it seems evident that, when
the difficulties of first establishing themselves are once over-
come, settlers of the class to which the majority belonged
largely better their condition by removal to a new country.
In the evening I continued my journey to wards San An-
tonio. For the first three miles rough farms lay on my
right, with houses of logs or mud-walled. The appearance
of the country beyond was very beautiful. Above the
Guadeloupe river rose a high bank fringed with trees, some
two miles distant from the road. After leaving the farms,
I entered upon open meadows, sprinkled with little patches
of timber. The soil mostly of good quality, but this por-
tion of country somewhat deficient in water-courses. The
timber became more scarce as I proceeded, and consisted
chiefly of the small tree called mvisqu.it, of no value except
for fuel and fencing. A little after nightfall I arrived at
a homestead on the Cibolo creek, belonging to a Mr. Allen.
The usual accommodation to travellers was afforded, abund-
ant provision for my horse, a simple supper, and a- bed,
which had the unusual advantage of being clean. The
charge made was about the same as I commonly paid the
farmers in Texas; one dollar and a half for supper, lodg-
ing, breakfast, and com for my horse. Mr, Allen had been
settled on the Cibolo two years, and was the first settler on
the creek. The climate he represented as somewhat dry
for successful cultivation, although he had succeeded iu
raising an average crop of corn. The deficiency of large
timber was also an objection. But these evils he considered
fully compensated by the salubrity of the climate, and the
abundant pasturage. The Cumanchees had often passed
his farm upon predatory expeditions, but never attacked or
molested him., A fortnight previously, two white men were
found slain with arrows, about three miles from his home.
B 2


I'hey were seeking stray cattle under the kills, and were
supposed to have encountered an outlying party of Indians.
These plundering expeditions of ike Camauchees are be-
coming comparatively rare, the Texans proving too formid-
able antagonists to de rashly met; .and the un warlike timid.
Mexicans, who remain an easy and luxurious prey on the
west of the Rio Grande, are far more tenanting than the re-
ception they encounter from American rifles. ’
The Cumancuees are the only Indians now remaining’, or
verging upon the line of western settlements, who are not in
some degree under the influence of the American government.
Having no fixed place of residence, but roaming over a vast
tract of country, abundantly supplied with horses and mules,
they are enemies to be met only by their own will. When
they proceed upon an expedition, each warrior has a led horse,
to be used only in war or rapid flight. Thus they appear
sudaemy within the settlements, drive off as many horses
as they can meet with, take a few scalps, and often, before
means of resistance can be organized, disappear in the track-
less wilderness of the great plains. But when encountered
in thoir retreat, although they fight boldly, th.ev are far
from being a match for the Texans, and, often suffer severely.
A good horse and a good ride, the knowledge how to use
the one and to ride the ocher, are the necessary acquisitions
for safe travelling on the frontier. If a party of travellers
encounter Indians on their route, they ride for the nearest
patch of timber; and, once under that shelter, the Ouxnan-
cbees have seldom sufficient courage to charge horns in the
face long rides, and wuu the certainty of death to
the leaders of the party.
On the ixth I rose before ** sun-up,” as the western people
term it, and went out in the clear iiosty atmoimheve, to a
little _ eminence in the rear of the house. The sky was
cloudless, and the east filled with a broad bright light, fust
before the appearance of the sun. A more tranquil and
peaceful scene it were impossible to picture, fitted rather
foi a gentle shepherd or Arcadia to flute soft measures in,
than for the discord most likely to be heard in the mad
whooping of savage Indians. The country to the north
appeared slightly rolling and broken, diversified with small
green meadows encircled by thickets of musquit. Beyond,
and to the westward, a range of Mils and a belt of timber!
On the eastern aspect, a level country of mixed woodland
and prairie, whilst towards the south was seen a wide


verdant plain rising in the distance into gently-swelling
hills,
From the crossing of the Cibolo to San Antonio is a dis-
tance of fifteen miles. The land consists of undulating
prairie, sprinkled with small timber. To the west lay a
wide sea of meadow land, with belts of woodland beyond,
and rising peaks in the far distance. The soil in general of
good quality, but too arid for successful cultivation. About
half way to the town I crossed the Lalow, a small creek of
pure water running through a narrow of timber.
Several new settlers had just commenced erecting log-huts,
and fencing in patches of land for cultivation. Amongst the
American settlers generally there appeared much ignorance
of the value of the country for pastoral purposes, and a
want of enterprise in making it available. Accustomed
chiefly to agriculture, their attention seemed directed to-
wards the cultivation of the soil in a. country which possesses
capabilities for successful production far less than any por-
tion. of that vast tract of land west of the Aheghanies. On the
other hand, it is totally and altogether without equal for
pastoral purposes in any portion of the States, and it is
probable is capable of raising the finest qualities of stock to
an extent surpassing any similar space elsewhere in the
world. The beautiful musquit grass which prevails through
the western part of Texas, and appears to possess the power
of resisting drought and preserving its succulent qualities
when the ordinary grasses are withered and deprived of
their nutritive qualities, gives a pre-eminence to this tract
of country for raising that stock which thrives the best in
a dry climate, and the fine breeds of horses, and sheep of
the pure Merino bread, are the most suitable and appro-
priate productions of the country. There exists a large
demand for mules upon the sugar plantations of the Missis-
sippi, which might here be produced to any conceivable
extent. Land adapted for such purposes, commanding a
larger tract of pastoral country than that purchased, cars,
be bought for two shillings an acre.
Four miles from the town, where the springs which pro-
duce the San Antonio river have their rise, commences a
belt- of small timber which continues as far as the town.
The town is chiefly surrounded by a plain covered with
grass and scrubby bushes intermixed with, diminutive trees,
often ornamented with hanging vines. Upon approaching
the town, the Mexican church, and the ruins of Alamo,


are the objects which first strike the attention. The Alamo
is a picturesque min of an oblong form, haying a somewhat
abbey-like physiognomy, and refreshing to the mind after
so long con templating the very unsubstantial erections of a
new country. A portion of it has been converted into pub-
lic offices. Passing round the corner of the ruin. I entered
the town on the eastern side*, between mud-huts, inhabited
by the bastard Mexican race, a mixture of the half-reclaimed
Indian and the half-savage descendants of the Spanish. I
crossed the San Antonio by a bridge of some twenty yards’
span—the water below bright, limpid, and running with
great Telocity—and rode up through, the principal street
of the town. The Mexican houses presented a very novel
aspect, by their more substantial and somewhat antiquated
look, as compared with American cities in the west,
■which. seem like the wooden structures of strolling placers,
always ready to be moved to a new locality. The street
was crowded with a mixed population—bronzed Mexicans
in a bandit-looking costume, descendants of the Indians
of unmixed race, and much darker than their northern
brethren; Mexican girls, many of them having consider-
able pretensions to beauty, and more or less tinged with
Indian blood; several negroes; and, congregated about
tnc doors of bar-rooms and drinking shoos, were Texan
rangers, returned Mexican, volunteers, Mississippi gamblers,
and others oi the scum of American society, carrying rifles,
pistols, and bowie-knives, and attired in costume partly
military, partly Mexican, partly in the skins and accoutre-
ments of the savage. Passing from the street into the
public square, I halted at a most wretched-looking inn,
filled with a most unpalatable modicum of western vaga-
bonds, Here I found my Virginian friends in a state of
inexpressible disgust at the moral condition of San Antonio.
Ail that we had ever heard or met with in the administra-
tion of the ** wild justice ” of the bowie-knife and repeatiag-
pistol appeared to be here intensified and concentrated.
Murders were so common that they were scarcely subjects of
comment. The latest amusement of this nature was shoot-
ing tnree bullets througnt.be hat of a dissenting minister,
as he walked down the street, because the Texan did not
as he declared with many oaths—admire the shape of it.
Fortunately the marksman was good, and the hat only suf-
fered. One *• gentleman " was said to have slain three men
in the course of a year. The last was of recent occurrence.


and originated in a quarrel which took place in a store
close, where an officer of the returned volunteers from
Mexico—a notorious scoundrel, and the leader of a gang of
desperadoes —rode in on horseback and presented his pistol
amidst a group assembled there. A scuffle ensued, which
resulted in his own death, being stabbed through the heart,
with a bowie-knife. The successful combatant, witl^the
Etdent intention of preventing any further danger from
adversary, stabbed Lira six several times after he had
fallen. The victor was “ bound over to keep the peace.”
My comrades and myself had been sufficiently familiar with
the darker features of the Far West, but here we found a
lower deep our imaginations had ventured to picture
somewhat of this remote corner of the Union, hut we found
the colouring paled before the reality. They determined to
shake the dust of this Iniquitous city off their feet, and the
next morning saw them on. their way to Lavarra, leaving
me to make my comments at my leisure upon this strange
state of society,
I should not readily be persuaded that any town in the
universe, of like extent, could have furnished forth so many
utterly depraved and absolutely reckless scoundrels as Ban
Antonio exhibited every day in her streets. The waole place
was in the hands of these desperadoes, and every iniquity
practised with the utmost impunity. They were the Jaw,
and they were the public opinion. It- was with a similar
interest to that with which we inspect a menagerie of wild
beasts that I strolled through the town amongst those white
savages, as they drank, swore, quarrelled, and gambled to-
gether. Amidst them might be seen, almost daily, in
horribly ludicrous contrast, some religious procession, or
other ceremonies of the Mexican priests. Following the
sound of bells into the public square, I perceived a proces-
sion of girls in. white dresses, carrying flowers, walking be-
hind a coffin ornamented with garlands ; several villanous-
looking priests walked in front. The church into which I
followed the funeral procession is built in the shape of a
cross, with a dome at the north end, and a- pierced belfry
at one extremity of the southern aspect. It is built oi stone,
covered with stucco—now somewhat in a dilapidated Siam
■■—but when these deficiencies are gilded over by the soft
moonlight of the south, it presents a picturesque Moorish
appearance. The walls in she interior are covered with
cement, and whitewashed ; the altar of wood, ornamented


with some wretched tinsel ; above it a small wooden image
of the Virgin and child. Round the altar were hung some
poor cotton prints, _ with checked cotton handkerchiefs
pinned upon them in a diamond shane. Ou the western
side is a small altar, over which is a figure of Christ, three
feet high, carved in wood, painted of a leaden brown colour,
dressed in a short tunic of white satin. Below were two
statues of the size of life, one in a monk’s dress, the other
a waxen image of the mother of Christ, la the mark of a
nun. c
AJe w days previously, a festi val had been held—the
greatest feast of the year amongst the Mexican population
ot baa Antonio—to commemorate the appearance of the
virgin sor no especial object that was ever discovered™to
some shepherds near the rise of the Guadaloups, being the
only (well authenticated) instance in which « Our Lady of
Ouadaloupe” ever visited Texas.
1 eospsci’B, —Aew Zealand is essentially the country of the poor
man. The soil is productive, food and rainiest cheap, the grasses
are jiemjxiial, and potatoes and cabbages are literally weeds. ~ Pig*,
cattle, and sheep find food in all parts of the country, and breed ami
thrive Vvitnom watcumg, as tnero are no wild dogs or other animals
to destroy them, and no risk from droughts or eonilagratloxm, Above
all, tsere is but nttie physical suffering where there are neither hot
summers nor cold winters. Pigs may be purchased from, the Maories
for a trilie, and I have myself seen a sow and nine pig-a-ninnies bought
for a pound ; and boneens, too large to pass for sucking-pigs, at from
sixpence to a shilling each. 111 English vegetables and fruits grow
exceedingly well, and require but little looking after, as there are no
frosts, blights, slugs, or snails of any kind. Bees make honey all the
year round, and increase and multiply at an extraordinary rats, Prom
tne number oi swarms that toko to the bush, there is promise of an
abundance of wild horsey and wax': in a few year*. With, all these
sources of comfort and independence, X cannot- imagine a country
better adapted for a thriving peasantry; and tins is not only theoreti-
cally the case, but k practically true, as far as I could see. The
only fault at. present i.% that there is too much temptation to with-
draw labourers from their regular business : they arc too apt to be-
come small shopkeepers, and to depend on' tricky dealing with the
Maories hi tobacco, blankets, and rum, This is an evil that will
very soon cure itself, by being overdone, and hr the Maories becom-
ing too “ ’cate.’'—.Poor’s Mm Zealand.


FACTS AND FIGURES ABOUT EMIGRATION.
Thk Emigration Commissioners hare lately published, in
a neat Bvo volume, all that they think fit to communicate
on the subject of emigration and colonisation that has been
oning on in the twelve months preceding May, 1849. The
Report is neatly written and neatly printed, but that is all ;
the information is meagre and unsatisfactory. Matters of
no manner of importance, such as the blight and rats of
Ceylon, occupy undue space, while, on important points, no
information is given. Facts which ought to have been
included in, the body of the work are tacked on in an
appendix. Indeed, the book, is thoroughly official and red-
tapisfa, ; it looks well, but will not bear examination.
Several useless tables are printed, but the valuable analysis
of 6tn.igrat.io& obfeiiood froixi Mr v Mo&s&b s motion is
omitted.
■These errors of omission and commission we can more
usefully mark in their proper places in the following
abridged Facts and Figures ;
Shmm Amkuxca.—-The emigration during the year Ib4o
amounted to 219,298. Of these, 182,233 proceeded to the
United States, and only 31,066 to the British Colonies. The
Irish formed 129,576 of this emigration of whom 59,675
proceeded direct from Ireland, and .129,676 from Liverpool.
“ It has been ascertained, that the amount paid in. the
United States for passages, or remitted through houses at
Liverpool and in Ireland for intending emigrants (not
including the house of Baring, Brothers, at Liverpool), was,
during the year 1848, upwards of 460,000£ ”
We would call attention to the strong e vidence which this
remittance of nearly half a million sterling—from the em-
ployed in America to the destitute in Ireland—-affords against
two favourite prejudices of our Colonial Office—the prejudice
against Irishmen as emigrants, and against cheap land.
The warm domestic affections of the Irish who have emi-
grated in former years, have led them to defray three-
fourths of the Irish emigration of 1848, In the face of this
* Math General Report of the Colonial Land and Emigration
Commissioners (1849).


Canada.—The total immigration iato Canada dunns- the
year 1848; was 27,039, &
From England g 034
Ireland, , Ifi'582
„ Scotland...... 3,086
Germany , 1,39a
» the Lower Ports . *842
Of these there proceeded-—
To the United States , 7,35.5
To Few' Brunswick , 56
27,939
7,411
20,528
Eernained in Canada—.
East of Kingston . . 2.534
West of Kingston . , 174194
27,939
circumstance, the Colonial Commissioners not long since
issued instructions to their country agents for Australian
emigration, which were coarsely but truthfully translated
by one ot them into a conspicuous notice on the door of his
oihee, that “ No Irish Need Apply,”
Again there can be no doubt that the United States is
enabled to absorb, year after year, hundreds of thousands of
emigrants, chiefly through the facilities afforded
tor acquiring land, the cultivation of land constantly afford-
ing an investment for savings; and affording, at the same
time, a pront to r the cultivator, and a vacant place for the
newly-arrived emigrant. In our American Colonies, we
alienated our lands, by square miles at a time, to noa-
culuvators; and in our Australian Colonies we impede
am much as possible the purchase of land by those who
would cultivate it, and, as in America, send for their rela-
tives to assist them in cultivating it.
The emigration into New York in 1848 was, Irish, 93,061:
English, 23,062; Scotch, 6,415. The emigrants have arrived
in better condition than formerly in consequence of regula-
tions by Acts of Congress for better ventilation
a ? d , di f t h ori ! ; : oard American ships, and also in consequence
of tne ;.hner' packet ships having been compelled, by the
competition of steam vessels, to rely much' on steerage
passengers. ' &


Ships.
Adults,
CHILDREN.
Total,
—
M.
F.
M,
F.
Sydney . . .
Port Philip . .
Adelaide . .
Clapeof Good Hope
40*
37
34
4
8,227
3,103
2,808
888
8,746
3,4o8
8,164
240
1,420
1,295
1,410
106
1,263
1,225
1,249
111
9,656
9,076
8,681
795
Total . ,
115
9,476
10,603
4,281
8,848
28,158
The oreat falling-off of the immigration into Canada Mr,
Buchanan attributes to the provisions of the Colonial Act of
last year, and to the -uncertainty, even more-than to the
amount, of the taxes imposed by it. In their present Ses-
sion. the Legislature of Canada have felt justified in re-
ducing the heavy charges imposed by the Act of 1848.
By the Act recently passed, the Emigrant Tart is reduced
to 7 s, 6 d. a head on adults, and 6 s, a head on children from
5 to 15, if embarked under the sanction of her Majesty s
Government and certified, by the officer of customs at the
port of embarkation, and to 10s. a head on passengers em-
barked without such sanction. No tax is payable for chil-
dren under five years of age ; but the additional rate oi 40s.
for every passenger not included in the Passengers List is
retained. , , . ~ ,
Mr. Buchanan, although he states that the agricultural
districts are in a healthv and thriving condition, and that
the improvement in waste lands proceeds with some spirit,
yet adds that, for unskilled labour there is at present little
or no demand, and that for arfck-ans and mechanics the
prospects of employment are less encouraging chan they
have been for some years. He therefore declares iumseif
unable to hold out inducements for the immigration of any
considerable number of labourers during the present season,
“although the circumstances are peculiarly favourable, to
small capitalists who contemplate buying land, and set-
tling.” ,
Australia anj> the Cape oio Goon Hope. —Between the
7th November, 1847, and the 17th May, 1849, there have
been despatched 116 ships, filled with free or assisted emi-
grants, as shown in the following table ; —•
■* One of these ships landed 120 emigrants ai Port Philip,


To Sydney .
To Melbourne
667
887
J2,50S 10
3.740 0
0
0
To Adelaide .
896
3.318
0
0
To Gape of Good Hope .
442
'773
10
0
Total .
2992
£10,340
0
0
Of these persons, 18.611 were despatched in 1848.
In 1845, the number of emigrants who pro-
ceeded to Australia was .... 830
In 1846 ] 2000
In 1847 . . ' . . . . . 5000
Under the regulations adopted in 184 S for granting pas-
sages to parties who were not formerly considered eligible
for a free passage, on their paying a certain sum in addition
to the usual contribution, the number of persons contri-
buting money set down in the following table were
forwarded to the four Colonies named ;
From the Bagged Schools 150 scholars 'have been de-
spatched at an expense of 10.?, a head, the surplus expense
being defrayed by private contribution.
From Workhouses, 71 young women have been sent out
oa payment by the respective Unions of 41 each, in addition
to the usual, deposits.
Of Calais Emigrants, a number not stated—why, we are at
a loss to conceive—were sent out on the same terms.
Orphans.—According to the Report, 219 female
Insh orphans were seat by the ship Jskrl Grey to Sydney.
Turning to appendix 8, we find the number stated at 205. Of
these girls, 37 had been despatched to More ton Bay, and 12
to Maitland, and 110 had obtained places in Sydney, It is
certainly not wise policy to place these girls in Svclncv:
they are of a class well calculated to make good wives for
ought to have been distributed according to
Mrs. Chisholm’s principle, as servants among the married
agricultural settlers of the interior.
By the latest accounts from Sydney and Fort Philip, it
would not be prudent to despatch more than three ships a
month to the former, and two ships a month to the latter.
Since the commencement of 1848, ships have been de-
spatched at the rate of rather more than two a month to
each of these districts.
We look in vain for any statement of the amount of funds
expended since the last Report on emigration to New South
Wales, or of the balance now available for that purpose.


Yfe have, however, some remarkably useless statistics.
For instance, a comparison between the increase of popula-
tion and cultivated land in Canada and New South Wales—
two countries haying nothing in common. It seems that,
“while the increase of cultivated land' since 1839 is in
Upper Canada 69 per cent,, that in Hew South Wales is 72
per cent, during toe same period. The proportion of the
cultivated land' to the population, in Canada, being about
three, acres and four-fifths, but In New South Wales no more
than four-fifths of an acre to each inhabitant.” The latter
figures show that the comparison is about as apt as i luel-
len’s between Monmouth and Macedon.
" South Australia .—-Since the Ist of January 1848, there
have been despatched to this colony 8082 emigrants, and
since 1846, when the population was 22,390 souls, 13,499
have been despatched at tn.e ex pence ot the laud lands,
besides voluntary emigration. The mortality on this large
number was under 2 per cent., and of this three-fourths
were children. This k the best possible evidence of the
excellence of the shipping arrangements of the commission'-
—on& of the few matters deserving praise,
OitBHAS liiiSH Gxxils, — Two hundred and thirty Irish
orphan girls, all upwards of fourteen years of age. and eight
children, arrived at Port Adelaide in October, 1848, after a
voyage of ninety-one days, without one death, “At the,end
of "fourteen days from the date of arrival, not one orphan
at for service was unemployed ; seventy applicants could
not be supplied, and 200 more girls would readily have met
with situations.” It is recommended that 300 or 400 young
females should be sent to the colony in the ensuing year
(1843) of whom English and Scotch girls should form a due
proportion. The applicants were not, of course, aware that
the orphans found in Irish workhouses, from the fact of the
very recent introduction of a poor law into that country,
•are usually of a superior class, and receive a superior edu-
cation to these of England, where they are too often chil-
dren of a pauper Tace. In some unions an excellent and
useful education is given ; in others the girls are not fit for
any sort of service. They can neither cook, nor scrub a room,
make a bed, wash a blanket, read or write fluently, nor do
anything except eat.
Or van Calais 'Work-people. —2ol. statute adults (that
Is, taking two children under fourteen years old, and three-
children under seven as one adult) were sent to South Aus


adults.
Children a n der 1 4
Total.
M.
F.
M,
F.
Sydney, 1847 , . . .
199
223
100
48
573
1848. to 5 th Jan,1
1848 . .
2118
2437
919
881
6335*
—— 25th Jan, to 12th 1
May . . .f
910
1058
401
384
2748
To which must be added 1
emigrants nominated (_
by land purchasers in f
Moretoxi Bay . . J
33
s%
20
26
110
Total
8260
3778
1440
1238
9766
Port Philip, 1847 , ,
104
412
63
57
336
-——— 1848 . .
2173
2081
868
880
6952
- —- 1849,tol7th |
May . ,J
826
1280
§64
338
2788
Nominated by land-1
parcliasera , , j
53
41
18
18
130
Total .
3163
8794
1313
1248
S20G
South Australia, 1848 ,
1813
2173
988
842
5922
1849 . {
810
918
376
358
2460
Total .
2723
3089
1364 j
1200
8382
The above table gives
us a view of the character of the
total emigration, to Australia up to the latest returns, and is
useful, because there is
a constant re-emigration between
the three colonies.
traiia. It is an instance of the slovenly mode in which
this Report is drawn, that no distinct statement is given of
the number or destination of the other Calais Emigrants, or
of the young girls sent from Irish, workhouses.
Total Emigration to Australia, —By turning to the
Appendices we are enabled to compile the following sum-
mary of “ Emigrants sent to Australian. Colonies by public
* 240 sent to Homos Bay, and 184 to Twofold Bav.


Assisted Passages.—The following trades, to the num-
ber of 834, have received assisted passages, and 300 more
s£ of the labouring class, difficult to classify.”
L Workers in Metal—(Smith and Brass-workers,
29; Blacksmiths, 18; Tinmen, 14). , . 61
2. Workers in wood and Stone, &c<—(Carpenters,
128; Joiners, 10; Sawyers, 3; Wheelwrights,
18; Coopers, 7; Millwrights, 3; Bricklayers,
38; Plasterers, 7; Masons, 11) . . . 225
3. Persons employed in Agriculture—(Farmers,
12; Agricultural labourers, 156; Shepherds,
10; Gardeners, 25; Dairymen, 3) . . 206
4. Servants—-(Domestic Servants, 27 male; 140
female) . . . . . . .167
5. Clothing—(Hatters, 3; Boot and Shoemakers,
32; Tailors, 36) . .71
6. Miscellaneous—(Painters and Glaziers, 30 ;
Engineers, 6; .Labourers and others, 9; Print-
ers," 9; Bakers, 27; Butchers, .13; Harness-
makers, 15) , . . . . - . 109
7. Others of the labouring class difficult to classify 300
Total . . .1139
Fobjbkmt Three ships have been despatched
from Hamburgh with 450 emigrants on board for Port
Philip. The Commissioners remark, £< as this was done
before the emigrants had been approved by this Board, or
any definitive arrangements sanctioned, it is uncertain
what amount of bounty the authorities will feel justified in
pay ing on their introduction,”
Here, again, for any useful purpose, the circumstance of
foreign emigration might as well have been left out of the
Report. We know that the Australian colonists are very
desirous of obtaining a large body of German vine-dressers,
in order to develop the ■wine-growing resources of their
country. There are thousands of acres fit for vineyards,
and at for nothing else. German emigration, from the
deeply national character of the people, is unsatisfactory,
unless numerous. Thousands of respectable Germans on
the Rhine are anxious to emigrate, and so now are Hun-
garians ; but the torpid inefficiency of our Colonial office,
with its almost Austrian impediments of rules and regula-
tions, will prevent our deriving much advantage from this
movement.


_Nsw' Zealand.—Between November 184-7 and November
1848, there sailed of passengers of ail classes for New
Zealand 1005. Of these 219 ■were cabin or intermediate,
and 1 88 steerage. Of the whole number, seventy-three pro-
ceeded to Wellington, 135 to Nelson, 5 to New Plymouth,
/57 to Otago, and 35 destination not known. Considering
the extensive and expensive machinery in operation for
colonizing Zealand, the results are insignificant, espe-
cially as powerful religious intruences were brought to bear
on colonizing Otago. But no doubt she high price of land
has been a great drawback. Two companies of pensioners
hare been forwarded by government to Auckland, in the
N ortliern hi addition to the six companies already
established there. One consisting of 88 men with, their
families, 2b2 persons; and the other 75 men with their
families, 259 persons. These raise the pensioners’ force in
tne colony to 643 men. The expense of sending these
pensioners is to be charged on the land revenue of the
colony. At the first sale of land in the neighbourhood of
one of the pensioner villages, the sum of 2721 was realised
as the price of a little more than two acres of land, which
the governor states wou;d nog a few months previously,
realised 51. The Commissioners cite this fact as a
proof of the commercial wisdom of this expensive kind of
immigration.
We must know who bought the land; in what sized lots,
and what they realised trom them in the following twelve
mosulis, besore we can take this conclusion for granted.
The price seems too enormous to be profitable to the pur-
caasers, and. we cannot forget, as the (iommissionerg seem to
do, that, in South .Australia and Port Philip, similar pur-
chases, cited as proofs of prosperity at the time, led to the
nan of the landholders.
Sr Averabb® .EsionAN'TS.—Tvc constantly meet with cases
of excellent emigrants rejected, because they do not come
wifeoin the description of the printed rules : and yet we
hnd exceptions made m favour of Calais workmen, ragged
scnool. boys, rmuuuiug, under that head, grown men, with
WiVe, b children, and large cloaks of hypocrisy, two
shop-cads of Dorset and Wilts paupers, and 300 men whose
trades could not be specified. The exceptions certainly do
not prove the rule right which rejected such men as Patrick
Dore \p. 3.69,15 t series).
An appendix, containing a return of the emigration from


th« Halted Kingdom, from 1825 to 18-18, shows during
that period, 1,985,686 persons have emigrated,
yearly average of 82,736. It is, however, incomplete. We
are not furnished with the materials for ascertaining the
emigration to South Australia in 1847. • We should also be
ghid to know from what parts of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, whether agricultural or manufacturing, whether
inland or coast, the emigrants were chiefly drawn. But on
these important points the volume tells us nothing.
The Emigration of the first four months of 1847, 1848,
and 1819, was-1847, 90,714 ; 1848, 74,929 ; 1849, 401,701.
Emigration Fund.— We look in vain throughout this
Report and the bulky appendices for any distinct informa-
tion as to the funds in hand from land-sales, for defraying
the cost of emigration to Kew South Wales. A studied
mjsterv is observed on this subject, into which we shall
venture to penetrate in our next article.
We are only told that " Lord Grey ” has directed &r
Charles Fitzroy to raise 100,000?. on the security of the
land revenue, for the purpose of emigration ; and authorised
him to consent to any measure for creating a funded debt
to the extent of 300,0001., chargeable on the general revenue,
applicable to the same purpose.
And we are also informed that the balance remaining
in the hands of the Commissioners for emigration to South
Australia on the Ist of January, 1849, amounted to 54,0007.
Bines that date, ships have been despatched at the rate of
two a month,” _
A Warning to Land-Purchasers, —On looking at a map «f
Otago, it cannot fail, to strike the eye of any unprejudiced observer,
that our prosperity as a town must entirely depend on flocks of sheep
and. herds of‘cattle. In fact, we do not possess, in any part of the
district, land suitable for the success of agricultural pursuits. The
suburban sections, in nine cases out of ten, will be worthless as farms
for years to come, and then only after an immense outlay in the shape
of clearing, draining, and fencing. While for grazing we have a
wide field only waiting to be filled with stock, —Otago News, .Feb*
17, 184,9.
Yaw Diemen’s Land.—A thousand bushels of malt have been ex-
ported to England, The mercantile result does not appear.
■Hydropathy for Snake Bites.— A correspondent of the Sydney
Herald, 10th Feb. 1849, relates how a bull terrier, bitten by a snake
of the most venomous kind, voluntarily immersed himself in the river,
and after severe illness entirely recovered.
NSW SEMES—NO. 11. F


SKETCHES OF CANADIAN LIFE*.
CisTDEEt the form of a Canadian tale, the author has given
his experience of career of a gentleman emigrant in
that country. His ‘‘scenes” are evidently painted from
nature, and compensate, by their truthfulness, for their
want of artistic finisn. It is certainly the book that gen-
tlemen emigrants should read. Canada has long been a
favourite resort for our better-educated emigrants, and for
retired officers of botn services. The facility with which
it may be reached the healthiness of its climate, and the
large Jbritisn. population of a superior class already settled
tnere—the cheapness of living and education, and the ab-
sence ol taxation— render it in many respects a most desir-
ab;e emigration field, and outbalance the length of" the
winters, and the want of a few easily-cultivabie waste lands.
_ But nine-tenths of the parties who emigrate have pre-
viously fixed their minds upon becoming owners of landed
estates, and by far the majority desire to engage in agricul-
tural or pastoral pursuits. It may be unwise, but such is
undoubtedly the case according to our experience, and that
we believe is of more than the ordinary range. The question
tnen arises—Oan. gcntieman-farmers, performing the chief
work of their rarmo with hired labour, make a profit in
(..•anacta on wild land, or on cleared land ? We think not,
as we have often stated, except under exceptionable cir-
We know of no new country in which a pure
gentleman-farmer can make money; and the author of
rneso sketches agrees witn ns as to Canada, and gives his
reasons. We quote, reversing the author’s order, putting
toe practical conclusions nrst, and producing the pic-
turesque bits afterwards.
m ras Bxojnvoons.—" Well Drayton,”
said Tom Nichol. addressing the host, “how did poor wheat turn out
llo.s year? Are you going to make your fortune by it?’"
Fortune ; echoed Drayton, ° make, our fortune 1 I wish with
ah i»y heart we could make our dread by it—and. that's what we’ve
never done yet,”
“ I'm surprised at that,” replied .Nlchol «I saw your
Ssetdxos of Canadian Life, Lay and Ecclesiastical, illustrative
of Canada and the Canadian Church, by- a Preabyterof he Diocese of
Toronto.” Loudon, David Bogun.


wheat a few weeks before harvest, and it looked uncommonly well;
I thought you would have had a glorious crop.”
' l So it would have been ; but before the ears were half filled, the
‘.rust ’ struck it, and shrivelled up the grain, so that it was scarcely
worth cutting. ’’
“ You are no worse off than your neighbours,- if that is any conso-
lation," observed Captain Conway. “My wheat escaped the rust, it
is irue, but hands were so scarce, that before I could get it cut a
great deal shed on the ground, and then the wet weather came on,
and what was not shed, sprouted in the ear, and so what bread we
have is regular ‘ stick-jaw in fact, it is more like very stiff paste
than anything else that I'm acquainted with.”
{< We axe a remarkably successful set of farmers,” said 0 Heil, in a
dolorous tone. “ I could'nt get any new land cleared last year for
fall wheat in consequence of house-building 1 , and therefore I sowed
upon the stubble and harrowed it till I was half dead. Indeed, my
feelings were almost as much harrowed as the field, and the return
was a most magnificent crop of eh&ss, I verily believe I won t get
the seed hack.”
* >- -> jr
“ I shall apply to my friend &t. Harry, for I bear he aas oeen
selling ■ lots of wheat, and consequently must be revelling ns. rids
world’s wealth,”
** You never made a greater mistake m your life,” replied Harry :
“it is true that I did not suffer much from the rust, except round the
edges of the field, or where the log heaps were burnt; and I was
fortunate enough to get the crops under cover before the wet set in,
Bui what of that 1 Though I sold some fifty bushels to factions, the
storekeeper, he would’nt give me more than three-and-sixpence a
bushel for it, and then the rascal made me take it out in ‘ store pa}',’
though I don’t want a thing out of his trumpery shop. The only
thing I could do was to give some of the men an order on the store
for the amount of their wages; and it was lucky that amount was
nos great, or I should have been bankrupt.”
« You’re a remarkably lucky fellow,” said Morris; “ for yon are
the first gentleman-farmer in the settlement that I have heard of who
has ever sold anything. For my part, lam so accustomed to pay two
or three great hulking fellows ten dollars a month to do me the favour
of eating up everything tbs farm produces, and sundry barrels of pork
and hour produced by some other farm, that the idea of selling any
thing appears absurd.”
“ifo.fhow in the world is it,” asked Drayton, “that the common
people about us seem to begetting on so well 1 ? Some of their clearings
are almost as large as curs j and they seem to have plenty to sen
whenever m want anything. There are plenty of families aumit ns
here who, when they came, hadn t a shilling, who now seem to want
for nothing.”
5? 2


“ I don’t think it is very difficult to account for/’ said Harry; “ ia
the first place they have been accustomed to labour from their child-
hood ; and what seems privation to us is comfort; to them, " For
iu& sauce, w ® have pigs, and they hare pigs; we fatten our pigs and
eat them; they fatten their pigs and sell them to as, and live upon
potatoes themselves. So with eggs, butter, poultry, flour, and every-
thing we need, and they can do without; and vet they don’t do
without them entirely either, for after we hare bought these things
from them, we, as Morris says, pay them handsome'wages to come
and herp us to eat them. They do all their own work, and then for
‘ a consideration ’ they coxae and help as to do ours, during which
operation they mast be well fed, Now, the result of this state of
things is, that in consequence of oar consuming their produce and
labour, our money is being transferred into their pockets, and we are
becoming poorer, and they are becoming richer.”
, Humph! sara Captain Conway, an extremely pleasing view
or our position and prospects in these delectable backwoods. ’ I can
tel! you that I for one feel myself to be in very different circumstances
from those in which I expected to have been by this time, I’ve get
rid of some 1500/. since I came here, and upon my honour I’ve got
very little to shew for it,” °
Without wishing to undervalue your property. Captain Conway,”
said Harry, «I'm sure you might advertise it in all the papers in
Canada, and you would not get 500/. for it j consequently, you. have
expended, during the five years you hare been here, the sum of 200/.
per annum, in order that you and your family might encounter every
possible hareship, sailer all manner of inconvenience, and place vour
children in a position of the utmost possible disadvantage.”
Unpromising as were the returns, according to the above
quoted dialogue of farming in the backwoods, towards the
end of the volume we find that cleared farms are not much
more remxinerafclye to the non-working class. The talkers
are the hero turned into a Oanadiaxx missionary, and an ex-
lawyer settled on a farm near the chief town of Western
Canada,
You have one comfort, however, for which not only you, but the
country at largo, ought to be thankful, and that is that there is a fine
promseol au abundant wheat crop this year. I think I never saw
rn« hinds loos more beautnul than they are doing past now.”
- indeed, look splendidly/’ retnmel Osborne. « But I
teb you what, parson, I am beginning to have doubts as to famine
m Canada being so profitable an employment as I once thought it,” °
lou mean I suppose? ”
“ 0f co « r ?« 1 dit ; can be no doubt whatever of its proving
Hj.ost prontable to :.bo Tccou<i.xi °
What you represent as doubts in your mind are certainties in


mine/’ observed Vernon. “ I have now been many years in Canada,
and have watched things closely; and the result to which I have
coxae is this, that the gentleman-forming which we usually have here
wili, in. nine cases out of ten, prov e a losing concern.”
«And yet,” said Osborne, “ when I first came here I felt very
sanguine. We are near Toronto ; the land and the roads are good ;
we can send everything our farms produce to market, and generally
can get the money for it; and it is undeniable that the yeomen
fanners about us are getting rich, and are able to purchase land for
their children.”
“ Very true,” replied Yemen, <s And when I gave up the mad
scheme of farming in the backwoods, so impressed was I with the
certainty and success that would attend the same occupation, in such
a locality as this, that 1 had fully resolved to devote myself to it. I
have sees abundant reason since then, however, to change my
opinion. He not only has skill, strength, and knowledge of the calling
to which he has been trained, but he does all his own work, keeps no
servants, and has no appearance to make. Now, you can’t do this—
vou have only your own pair of hands, which are not, owing to your
previous habits, very efficient, either as regards skill or strength; and
therefore, if yea don’t keep servants, you most give up fanning.
Sow, the result of the difference which exists between you is simply
this,—when the yeoman farmer has sold his produce, the money is
his own, and is probably put in the savings bank to buy a farm for
his son ; when you have done the same thing with your crops, the
money is not your own, for it has to be put into the pockets of your
labourers, in the shape of wages. Now, I for one do not look upon
this as very astonishing. If the yeoman farmer forsook his plough,
and, taking up your calling, undertook to conduct a case before a
court of justice, would you be surprised if he utterly failed ? Then
why should, it occasion so m uch surprise and disappointment, if, when
you forsake the occupation to which you have been bred, and take
up his trade, of winch you know nothing, and for which you are
unfitted, want of success should, to a great extent, attend your
efforts V’
ie It is certainly not very much, to be wondered at,” said Osborne,
shrugging Ms shoulders; « but still I think that I have learnt a good
deal about fanning, and could manage pretty well if it was not, as I
said just now, for the wages, which run away with all the profit one
can. make. By the time one has hired men to plough the laud, put
in. the seed, cut and carry the crops to the barn, thrash, mean, and
bag up the grain, take it" to market, and paid tolls, market-fees, and
the tear and wear of horses, harness, and wagons, all that the pro-
duce brings will scarcely do more than pay their wages.”
«I am quite sure of that,’ answered Yemen ; « and hence I feel
assured that no omtleman in Canada, if he U destitute of other


sources of income, mn live, upon a farm, if all the operations of that
farm a,re to he carried on ly hired labour.”
What a Middle-class Man can do in Canada, —That it is an
admirable country for.the farmer, mechanic, and labourer, is admitted
cts ail hands, for they immediately betake themselves to the several
employments to which they have been accustomed ; and as there is
generally abundant demand for their skill and strength, they are
almost sure to prosper, though, of course tfairy may expect some diffi-
culties, perhaps, at the outset. If a family of respectability comes
here with only four, five, or six hundred pounds in the world (and
man’, 1 ' nave come with much less), it cannot tail hut they will have a
great deal to contend with; though, even in such circumstances, they
are more likely to do well here than elsewhere. By the mere fact of
bringing it to this country, your 2501 per annum becomes 800 h If
tins sum arises from money vested in the funds, or other securities,
end if you have the power of removing it to this colony, the legal rate
of interest here, being double what yon. can obtain in England, makes
your oQiIL into 800 b, while there are many safe and honourable in-
vestments which annually yield seven and eight per cent. The loose
money with which you spoke of purchasing a farm, might still be ex-
pended in that manner, not, however, that you might lose money by
fanning it yourself, but simply as at! investment; and good land is
one of the best, because safest investments, in the country. If the
farm is well situated, the rent will generally pay you six per cent,
upon the purchase-money, and the principal is always increasing,
owing to the rapid rise which takes place In the value of property in
this country. “Do you see that firm on the opposite hilll” said" he,
pointing to some beautiful roUiag fields on the neighbouring rise.;
“ Rot more than two years ago the owner offered it for sale for about
8001., ami could not find a purchaser; at this moment he would not
accept IgOOh, though it only consists of one hundred acres.’ 5 Were
I in your position, I should he inclined to purchase a small quantity
oi laud la the neighbourhood of some of our larger towns, on some of
the main, roads leading into Toronto, for Instance. There you could
build according to your own taste, keep year horses and carriage, and
enjoy the society which is generally to be found in each localities.
You ought to hn.vo nothing more to do with forming than allowing
your mint to cut hay, and raise oats for your horses, and such, other
things as were within his unaided power. You might thus, by good
management and his exertions, enjoy many of the comforts of a form,
Ten might have your own poultry, eggs, milk, butter, and so forth,
whde most oi the work would be done by the man, whom you would
have to keep even if you had no land at ail. Of course I have
spoiten on the supposition of your being able to bring the capital
which produces your 250 t, sterling per annum, to this country, as, by
so doing, you would more than double your income. On the first


named sum yon could live in a very comfortable stylo.—give your
children a first-rate education—save money, and be a person of much
greater consequence than you would be at home with six times the
amount.
An appendix to this volume shows that a first-rate edu-
cation may be obtained in Toronto at from 61. for day-
scholars, to 30 1, for boarders, at the Upper Canada College.
LETTERS FROM ABROAD.
[ We hope those -who approve of our plan and-principles will continue
to forward us genuine Letters from Emigrants.—A large number
of letters from America and Australia are in type, but delayed
for ward of space.]
Journal of a voyAGE to adelaxbe —continued from page'6l-
-v> Now 1 9th. —We are about twenty degrees past the equator;
the past fortnight has tired, all the people exceedingly; we have lost
Mrmfattts and one adult female during that time. It is a great error
to suppose that the scale of provisions hud down is sufficient. It is not
so; because, after paring off what is nauseous, and taking waste from
cooking, and what from "want of room to husband any leavings, people
hnd themselves almost without any supply at all when meal time
comes. Persons with young children who came oat unprovided are
nmnino- all over the ship/often to beg, bay, or steal, from the more
fortunate who have comforts for their children. In fact, people with
several children to attend to, as in my case, mast not expect to reach
A ustralia with all their family, unless they do take care to have sup-
plies to which they can have access in case of need. The sickness
has been very severe and long continued, and numbers are stil■ as
weak as they well can he. My wife has been thrown back again fey-
taking medicine after eating the indigestible hard biscuit, and she is
now Tying too weak to get up and dress. You would be astonished
if you could see my Robert; he only of us all eats the biscuit and salt
hatter, the hard beef and the fat pork, and thrives upon it ; he has
mow a fine, open, fat, full face, with eyes like stars, and sleeps gar-
priaingly well, and is on deck all the day long as merry as any lark
tha- ever sang in spring. Henry finds very few things to his mind.
Mary Jane is getting round, and not particular now about her food.
Baby, too, looking like himself again, and eats baked flour and pre-
served milk and gruel with enjoyment; Emma and .myself are both
it! health, with relish for the pork and preserved potatoes, but sadly
done up through excessive fatigue. By all means recommend your
emigrating friends to have a barrel of flour with them, and preserved
veok and baking powders, carbonate of soda, and rim; of all the dry
goods supplied to us, three times the quantity would not be a wh.it


too much; flour, raisins, and jams, everybody loves in some form <w
other; oar pickles have kept good thus far, but the jams would not
safely pass the line. The almost universal feeling among the neonle
on board is, that Adelaide ought to be a rare place to compensate for
all the suffering and labour of the voyage. The fact is, many people
are here with very exaggerated and absurd ideas of what they are to
be and to do m South Australia; and lots of them, who probably did
not get meat food to eat once in a week on land' have made them-
selves Ul by their piggish behaviour on board. I have mud) regretted
we omitted to bring some of Pursell’s arrowroot biscuits; I think they
would have saved us a deal of suffering. We consider the progress
we have made is very satisfactory, and the captain holds out to as
the hope that we shall eat oar new year’s dinner in Adelaide. Fri-
. & ec * aw about forty degrees south latitude and
«t?ht degrees west longitude; therefore rounding the Cape of Good
Hope, at a distance of about 800 miles. 'We shall not put in there,
aud, as our course now is nearly east, and the wind right aft of the
ship, we are in a fair way of being at Adelaide on the first of the new
year. It is now very cold all the day long, like s sunny December
fine frosty day in England, only we have daylight from four in the
morning till eight o’clock at night My wife and ail the children
are improving in health wonderfully, and getting up their appetites
with a vengeance; in fact, we begin now to find'" the biscuit eatable,
and if we did not, the allowance of food would not half satisfy us!
We feel as if a nice hour s walk on land would be a great treat; and
nearly everybody is picturing to themselves the enjoyment to be had
on. at Adelaide over a good dinner of fresh meat and soft
bread. Tne steward here charges only S d. per pound, for soft bread;
but you must see my letter to Mr. Leaver. Hatter, of London Wall,
.or more particulars of this sort; as yet we have had no suitable op'-
imrtumty of sending letters to England, and therefore I expect- I
shall hear from you long before this comes to your hand., Satvrdm,
Abu. Ifth, We have made rapid sail during the past week, with
strong wesmriy winds and the snip rolling from side to side trenien-
dously, capsking lots of things, and telling of accidents by hood
v ioagh not by field; some severs mils have been met with in conse-
quence, but to-day all is right again, and we are going on at a good
3»te, about forty-one degrees south latitude, and tweutv-ooe degrees
longitude east of the meridian of Greenwich, Thursday? Bee. 1 iik—
If George Adcock or other friends with children are coming out, be
sure advise them, above all things, io fee supplied with a barrel of
good waeaten flour bread; soft bread is the best tiling of all others
taai young and old long after ; and if an emigrant wants to know the
two nest, things to bring with him, they are dour and water, with
baking powder or yeast, or milk for the former, and a filter for the
latter. Ail my family are wonderfully improving in health now,
and I hope we shall find our stock of provisions hold us out to the


end of the voyage. Only note the age of some of the people here,
A widow, aged 65, with her son, who has been two years off and
on without work, a eoachmaker m London, and three daughters;
another widow, 49, with large numbers of sons and daughters, ana
an old dame, aged 72, with descendants too numerous to mention.
There are young men who month after month have tried to get em-
ployment without avail in England, till their hearts sickened, and
married people who have found the ship’s provusioxis so much better
than they were used to as to make themselves ill by eating. By no
means let people come here who want drawing rooms and boudoirs,
who cannot accommodate themselves to circumstances oi fatigue, suf-
fering, weariness and privation, who cannot make beds, scrub decks,
cook "victuals, and it all under very disagreeable and disadvantageous
circumstances; and, finally, cannot by the anticipation of the benefit
to follow, bear up under the trials and exertions that now exist. An
emigrant ship is not the place for them. <e Sidney s Australian Hand-
Book,” price One Shilling, has some useful remarks in it, especially
about provisions and the mode of packing eggs. Any one laying out
a guinea or two at Hemming and Burton’s auction rooms, §, Broad-
way, Ludgate Kill, upon a cheap lot of needles, pins, thready sewing
silk, and Irish linen, may do very well selling them out to the emi-
grants on board. Benmanta of silks ond of doth may also he sold
to &dv<i3atag6 > but it is to be jiotod that everything gboel rusts if
once exposed to the sea air. If a party here had hair-pins, and knit-
ting aiid netting needles, he might sell some to a profit. _ Lots of
people have worn out all their shoes, and are nearly bare in. conse-
quence ] and several who expected to find one or two old dresses do
for the voyage, have found nearer half-a-dozen requisite. Every thing
washed aboard seems spoiled, so that wo have had as little washed as
possible. There is a rumour here, that at Adelaide we get the deposit-
money we paid in London returned to us, and I heartily wish it may
torn out to be true, for according to ail accounts the item of washing
alone on land will be no small matter, as the charges are said to be
very high. Let your emigrants all bring their feather beds mid pillows
boxes. .Friday. Dec. 2 2 ad. —Our few last days have been
boisterous, and the ship has tossed us about tremendously, so that
fails and braises and breakages have been abundant; the open batches
ami step ladders are very dangerous with so many young children.
I'esterdav was aunt Coombe’s birthday, and our young people bad a
capital small plum cake made in honour of the day, with fruit hus-
banded through the voyage for the occasion. We are to-day about
She longitude of St. Paul’s and Amsterdam, and about forty-two south
latitude, so fourteen days' good sail will bring us to anchor at Ade-
laide. On one of the boisterous days we sailed 245 miles in. twenty-
four hones, being’ an excess of ten knots per hour average. no
homeward ship had been seen ST.n.ce my last notices. .Bread, bread,
mere soft broad, is the all-absorbing mod desired here now. Seme


people here are anticipating the delight of a carouse on landing, others
the joys of Australian mutton chops, ethers good tea with good milk
and my young ones are promised a whole penny roll apiece. We
have daylight now from half past three o'clock in the morning till
had past eight o’clock at night; but the cold has been very severe,
Jamiary, have had several reports and documents to
get ready, and am still busy about them, so must, as we expect to be
at anchor to-morrow., simply gay that another death has been added
° 1 j nU i a >6r P rev ? cus b' recorded; that Christmas day was merrily
passed ; that the old year out and the neve one in was* sang with all
honours; that contrary winds have delayed us latterly; that we are
employed upon a thorough clean up ; that several lectures I delivered
ta.st week were accepted by the emigrants ; that the captain and sur-
geon are on tire nest terms with me ; that another letter shall follow
this with all conveniens despatch, and a full, true, and canicular ac-
eoimi of my doixigs and whereabouts, be despatched to von, God
fciess you; farewell.
ROBBERT
FROM AN IRISH FARMER.
Sdwharie, Slate of New Fork, July Bih 1849.
LEAK AND MOTHBK, EfiOTKKKS AJTD SISMBS I take
tais.favourable opportunity of writing these few lines to you, hoping
to and you all m good health, as this leaves me at nresent. thanks be
to (fod foe all his blessings towards ns. Bear father and mother’
before 1 say any more I hope Mr. Daniel Bremace and Mrs. Etmace
are au in good Health; I dreamt as I came from New York to Al-
oaoy that Mr, Bremace was very sick, but I hope he was well at
that toe, which was about the Bth of May. Bear father and mother.
k will let you know how we got along in the voyage, and indeed it
was dreadful for a part of the time; the rholera was in the ship
between ten and twelve days, by which we lost eighteen passengers,
and amongst them we lost J ohn Barry; we had. been only one'dav
on sea when we ah got sea sick; John Barry did not get sea sick
but he was very cowardly Mace he lost sight of land; then he took
tae cramps, and I oaihed aim in warm water every half hour for a day
and a night, until I got him well of the cramp, and then, for the want
proper nourishment, and having no doctor on board, he died afror
seven or eight days’ sickness; 1 did not sleep daring the time he was
sick more, than two hours until he died: may the Lord have mercy
on ms soul Bear father and mother, we had a verv favourable
voyage omy for tae sickness. We were on the banks of Newfound-
iand, which was in mse days, halfway to New York, though we had
a tog ana calm weataer; there was no case of cholera until we reached
tnere, then it continued for ten or twelve days very brief, so as we
thought there womd nor one of us live; but thanks be to God that
brought us safe. We had a speedy passage, and reached Guarreuteere


Island in twenty-four days, which is about seventeen miles and a half
from .New York, and we had to stay there for three days, and the
reason, we were delayed on account of the sickness. It is very easy
for a man to say at home il I will go to America/’ but it is the other
wav ; as for my part, I would as leave to be on sea as on land, bid
others differ from me, and only for Mary being with me I would see
the West Indies. The captain and mate did want me to go with
them, for when I got rid of the sea sickness I worked along with the
sailors. I tell you that America is not the place at all that we think
at home; as for a young man or young woman, they can do very
well here, or a man that would have money, and take a farm of land,
and having some capital to go through it, would do very well here.
It is quite a different way to till laud here as they do at home; they
do not set half the labour with it. May God bless the good gentle-
man, that is Mr. Goold, that sent us here; we are in a good place ; I
am in a better place here than at home ; I would not go home if I got
the upner part of Robt. Brian's house free from rent, poor rates, and
taxes; * May God bless the man that sent as to this place, and that is
Mr. Wyndham Goold; I return him sincere thanks. Bear father and
mother, I hope von are in good health, and I hope Mr. in
good health, and all inquiring friends and neighbours. Bear father
and mother, we took the boat for Albany, a distance of 200 tunes
from New York, which cost Mary and me erne dollar each, and Cap-
tain Thomas Daniel gave Pegg Griffm a half dollar, when I told him
how she was situated". We left Aew York at six o'clock on Tlmrsday
evening, and Were la Albany an the following morning; we walked
from Albany to Schoharie, a distance of thirty-five miles, and it being
a .warm day, we stopped at an Irishman’s house here, and indeed
there is not many of them in it; there is not many Catholics here,
there is no chapel nearer to us than Alsany, and that is thirty-five
miles from us. We stopped here on Friday night, and I walked
about the village on Saturday to see could I get anything to do, and
I.was not long out when I got a place for Mary at 265. a month of
this money, with the county clerk, and about an hour after I got a
place for myself at ten dollars a month. I am now nearly two months
with him. working on a small farm of land he has, and he likes me
well himself; he keeps a hardware shop, and is a very rich mam I
will he leaving him next Saturday. The three of us are within a
pistol shot of each other. I went with Mary’s master twenty-two
afflcs, where he has a farm of land. Write to me as soon as you get
this letter, and let me knowhow you all are, and I hope I will
shortly be able, with God’s help, to send you something.— I reman/,
PAT. BARRY.
dear father and mother, your affectionate son,
Melbourne xsr 1848.—Exports, 675,000?. ; imports, 878,000?, A
party of reapers paid off near Geelong, spent 90?. at a public bouse
the-following day.


FIFTY-ACRE FARMS IN AUSTRALIA.
Ik illustration of Mrs. Chisholm’s opinion that hardworking
men, with small capital, may do well oa land in Australia,
we publish the following cases referred, to in the article in
our last number, which, were taken down by that lady in
the very words of the parties. It will be observed that one
party pays^ Qd. } and another As. an acre on a clearing
lease. It is plain that if tnese men could make a living
thrive on a. mere tenancy, freeholders of the same
abilities must do Better ; it is worth noting, that Thomas
Baker began with little or nothing, but*' ii: having four
children,'’ found he could do better on a farm.
With such eases as the following before our eyes, authen-
ticated by the personal testimony of Mrs. Chisholm, we feel
that we are conferring a practical benefit on hardworking
emigrants to Australia by affording them all the informa-
tion we can collect about Port Stephens, where land may
be purchased in freehold lots at little more than these
parties paid as rent on clearing leases.
Thomas Bams, from Sussex.—l am from a place four miles from
Sye-Oddimore; mj lather, George Baker, was in the service of Mr.
Thomas Longford ; brothers William and George. I arrived in this
country eight years ago; was four years in wages; had at one time
IL a week, and no rations; then worked for Mr. 0. Cowper at 20b a
year and rations. Haring four children, found I would do ranch
hotter on u farm, I began on the farm with nothing, as the saying is;
had two cows and very little money ; did well by jobs ; took a cleared
farm, nine acres, from Mr, Has-ml, at 5b a year; I now rent a sec-
tion, 640 acres; it belongs to Mrs, Hancox, m England; pay 151. a
year resit; I shall cultivate forty of it, I have fifteen head of cattle;
four working bullocks: three pigs; ten docks; plenty fowls, at least
teajaymg hens, 100 chickens: sold poultry the other day for 2L
Wife kelps to burn off; she also works with tire hoe: sets potatoes
and Indian corn; helps me to cut the wheat. Use half pound of tea
a week; six pounds of sugar; buy half a- bullock at a time. My
mother’s maiden saute ms Foster; next door neighbour, Mrs. Butler:
as a token she will remember the pitchers of milk.
Jakss Brccb, from Ayrehire.™Lauded in. this country in 1886,
wir.h & vv;.■£ aad two daiictea; I have bow five children; first wife
died; cultivate forty acres; pay for my farm 1 51; have a run for my
cattle; have fifty head; six pigs, and plenty of poultry. Have two
teams of bullocks, sixteen, in number; all farming implements. The
Illness and death of my wife, at least, was a loss of 60.1, to me, I
grow good potatoes; Xam from Kilmare, near Kilmarnock; tell them


exactly how I am situated, and let me know how they are getting on.
My father is a pensioner, named John Bruce; left five sisters at home;
as a iokm I stole away without saying good bye, because I coaid not
bear it. Wife’s maiden name, Busan McDaie, from William Street,
Belfast; has a brother named William, and sister Mary; they emi-
grated in 1844. Let Miss Burnside know lam married ; she lives
in Brunswick Street, close to the House of Correction.
Jakes Reed, from Wiltshire.—l arrived in 1840, with seven
children; my wife died on the passage, I was engaged by Mr. Gutter
as a smith; my three daughters were in the service of Mrs. Cutter;
two are now well married. I get 80/. wages, and rations. lam well
oil'; have several privileges. I can tell you one thing of Mr. Gutter,
be is particularly upright; I have watched him closely, but never
saw self interest drive his will ; he has no paltry marks, hejs a
pretty sensible man; he never stops from a poor man it he is so
unfortunate as to lose a few sheep. Mr. Gutter is the man they
should have for m overlooker amongst emigrants, I have thirty
head of cattle, one horse and cart, and a very good .garden. lam
from Trowbridge, Wilts. lam well known, so the parish authorities;
jnv son keeps an inn in Paradise Row.
Patrick Fx&xmh from Limerick, —I arrived by the Comet in
1841; went into country service, myself and wife, at 80/. a year, to
arrange a dairy; remained in service only six months: then went on
a farm, cleared land, paid 20s, per acre : my rent is now 15/. a year
fin' fiftv acres, on clearing lease. Have a set of ten working bullocks
and a good dray; fifty head of good cattle, and plenty of poultry and
everything of that sort. lam from county Limerick, six miles from
the city; was on Captain Wilson’s estate. I left three children at
home. In care of my mother, Widow Fleming, near Mr. Wilson's house;
their names are Mary Ann, Margaret, and John, ages 12, 10, and 7.
I wish to have them out; have a good home for them, and if my
mother were here I could keep her finely. If my brother Dan was
here ’tie well he would do; a fine place I would get him; wages are
about 20/. where I live; girls get 12/. and 15/. lam very glad I
came hero—it’s well I have done, thanks be to God. I send a sample
of my wheat to my old landlord. This year is not a good year; I
got only 3-5 bushels to the acre, it weighs 64 lbs. to the bushel: I
get 4s. 6d. per bushel, Ido hope you will give a piece of the damper
jfDjT mother; mention to her that we are all well, happy and
perous in this country. As a token to be depended upon, I send you
a letter received from home, and sign this statement in my own writ-
ing : now there is nothing here but the truth.
'' Signed, Patrick Flbmiss.
“ Hinton, Feb. 25, 1846.
* l The bearer, Patrick Fleming, and his wife Margaret U'kming,


hereby earnestly solicit the kind efforts of Mrs. Chisholm to bring
out to this country three of their children; one girl, now twelve
years old, another girl ten years, and one boy in his seventh year
whom they left in the care of their relatives on leaving Ireland',
county Limerick, Aug. 4,1841. And I hereby certify, that the said
Patrick Fleming and his wife are sober, industrious, and frugal, both
total abstainers from all intoxicating liquors, ami that they have been
correspondingly successful in their occupation of a farm in this neigh-
bourhood. « Soebst Blais, Minister?
s ‘ Osterip, Hunter's River, 20 tk Feb. 1840.
. “I hereby certify, that Patrick Fleming and his wifi; have been
living on a part of my property, which they rent, f>r the past twenty
months; that I have had daily opportunities of seeing the manner in
wine-! they live, and also of knowing taeir means for supporting a
family . I can hear the fullest testimony both to the rectitude and
propriety of their conduct, and of their means to support their children,
if they should be so successful as to get them out to this country.
And to this end I beg strongly to recommend their case to the bene-
volence of Mrs. Chisholm. “ Edwin Hickey;’
Those of our readers who are inclined and able to do a
beneficent action, will, perhaps, give some assistance in
sending out Patrick. .Fleming’s children.
dp Thompson, irons Norfolk. I came to New South Wales in
1837; ]. am from Carlton, seven or eight miles from Norfolk, My
father's mme is John, well known to Etchard Tuck. I have a wife
and six children.: 1 rent a firm of twenty acres, pay rent 20ft; have
ako a run for my cattle; have about fifty bead; one mare: thirty
pigs, and plenty poultry; nave fifty bushels of wheat in store: use
one chest of tea, four bags of sugar. Thank God, don’t wans for any-
tuing; moat three times a day, butter, milk, and eggs. Have a team
or ten bedioeiis, and a c.ray ; go to Sydney four times a year. I job
a little in dealing; -want for nothing. As a token, I used to work
will: William Twites,
Pout fcrEPKESs,—The map on the other side will give an
idea of trie position of Port- Stephens, where Fifty-aero farms
are to be bad without auction, at a fixed price; and the fol-
lowing extract from the work of a naval, officer,, employed
bv Government- to survey the coast of Australia, affords a
correct account of t&e aspect of the first estate which has
been thrown open to the in vestment of frugal, industrious,
hardworking -neu.
May 22, iV e again, bane adieu to our friends at Sydney, and
sailed to explore the nortix-westem part- of the continent, from which
the number of openings still uuexarnined possessed the interest that
invariably attaches to whatever is unknown. We submitted accord


ngly with impatience to the delay caused by the light north-westerly
•winds, and a southerly current of nearly a knot per hour, which pre-
vented us from reaching the parallel of Port Macquarie before the 29th,
When about forty miles from it we experienced a gale from N.E.
and E.N.E, that lasted till the evening of next day, when we found
ourselves about 140 miles south-east of Port Stephens. .....
This delay rendered it necessary to obtain a fresh chronometrical
departure, and, as the winds presented our returning to Port Jackson,
we proceeded to Port Stephens, where we anchored on June sth.
We found the admiralty chart of the coast very defective, some
islands being completely omitted, while others were much misplaced.
I have before spoken of the change in the features of this portion
of the eastern coast. Here a number of conical hills, from four to six
hundred feet in height, suddenly presented themselves to our view ;
two of them, vary remarkable headlands, and preserving the aboriginal
names of Wacaba and Tom-are, constitute the entrance points of Port
Stephens. The sea face of Tomare is a high line of cliffs, from which
projects a sand spit heaving oruy a narrow entrance. When in tais,
1 noticed that a round bill at the south, end of a distant range was
over the opening between toe first island and the northern shore
of the harbour."" Within the entrance are extensive sand-banks,
leaving between them and the south shore a narrow, and in some
parts deep, channel, subject to ft rapid stream of tine. Tort
Stephens may he considered a large estuary, about fifteen miles
in length, contracted near the centre to a width of about a inue,
which" is" further lessened by a woody islet, the same I have
before alluded to. Nearly two miles within this narrow the Beagle
anchored off the settlement of the Australian Agricultural Company,
a straggling village called Carrington, on the western shore of the
harbour. On the side of a hill half a mile to the westward is the
residence of the superintendent, a situation which, to enhance the
pleasure of our visit, was held 'by Captain P, P. King, S,N. Tahlee,
the mime of this spot, surpassed in beauty all I have ever seen in
Australia.. It stands on the crest of a steep grassy slope, over which
are scattered numerous small bushy lemon trees, the deep verdure of
their foliage interspersed with golden fruit, contrasting charmingly
wit]), the light green carpet from which they spring. At the foot
of this declivity a screen of trees, rising to a considerable height,
almost shuts out the view of the water, though breaks here and there
allow small patches to be seen, athwart which a native canoe occa-
sionally glides to and from the fishing grounds. These fairy boats
stealing along the water on a fine calm morning, greatly enhance
the beamy of the scene. They belong to a party of natives who
have taken v:p their quarters near Tahlee, and who, though ny no
means a fine race, have always been well disposed towards Europeans.
Unfortunately, they are much addicted to the use of ardent spirits,
having acquired the habit from the whalers who frequent the place.


A young woman and her husband form part of the domestic establish-
ment at Tahlee.
We were as much delighted as surprised with the richness of the
vegetation when compared with its dry parched appearance at Syd-
ney—another of the striking contrasts characteristic of Australia.
At Captain King’s table I tasted the Wonga Wonga pigeon; it is
the largest of any of the Australian kinds, and the flesh is very white
and rich. It is a difficult bird to shoot, as it always keeps in the
thickest foliage, and is strong and quick on the wing.
Through the kindness of the same Mend, I was also enabled to
enjoy a ride into the country during the interval between the obser-
vations for rating the chronometers. I had to ascend the llaruah
River, flowing into the north-'west comer of Port Stephens, for twelve
miles'to a place called Booral, the furthest point at which it is navi-
gable, and where all goods are landed for the Company’s stations op
the country. Mr. Elsworth, the treasurer, resides there in a charming
cottage almost covered with roses and honey suckle, and commanding
two picturesque reaches of the Karoahu About two miles within the
entrance the river winds between high and steep banks, densely
covered with creepers, acacias, and other vegetation of a tropical
character, all quite matted together raid hanging in festoons, the ends
of which, are immersed in the water, Mr, White, who had charge
of the Company’s stock, met me at Booral with horses, and we were
not long in reaching Stroud, about seven miles higher up the eastern
bank of the river. It is the head quarters of the Company, and has
the appearance of a truly English village, each cottage having its neat
little garden. I was very mocb pleased with the whole arrangement
of the place as 1 strolled through it in the evening, and was delighted
to And the inhabitants of a remote part of Australia retaining such
vivid recollections of tastes so characteristic of Englishmen. Several
experiments have been tried in clearing the land in the neighbourhood
of Stroud, one of which was what they call ringing the trees, that
i» to say, they cat off a large circular bead of bark, which, destroying
the trees, renders them easier to be felled. But the danger of the
practice was, that in stormy weather they were blown down, thereby
endangering tho lives of parsons or stock passing .—Discoveries in,
A mU-alia,) by Capladn .Sioxes, ,R.N. f vol. 1, chap, 10.
New Zeax-astu- —Otago. —This little settlement is flourishing,
although not in the way the projectors intended. The following- ex-
tracts {ire from the Otago Nmz; —“ We have two hotels, a church, a
school, a wharf, small though it be. We have boats plying on the
bay and river.' Our population in. town is nearly 500, including 18
land proprietors, 20 storekeepers, 2d carpenters and sawyers, and
about 100 labourers. .At Pert Chalmers, Anderson’s Bay -The
'Taei.ri and Molyneux, about 100 colonists, including 16 landed pro-
prietors, 8 carpenters, and 16 shepherds and labourers,”


SCENES IN THE LIFE OF RAPHAEL ARMORER.
THE BUSHMAN,
The stallion safe —A chorus of live stock and children-—An old friend
and warm welcome—The soldier settler and his hut—Curious
dreams and pleasant wakenings—A rare garden—My friends re-
join me—How we supped and slept—An oasis in the desert
A council of war.
{Continued from page 11,)
When the mob of tame horses, with our chase in the middle
of them, rushed trampling iato the stock-yard, I slipped off
ray nag and ran to help) the young stockman to close the
entrance, and then, after throwing my hat up, and giving
one more who-whoop of triumph, I leaned my hot head
against the bars of the stock-yard, and, drawing a long
breath, began to peer through the clouds of dust at my
captive. The tame ones had drawn round him snorting in a,
half circle ; he lay hair on his knees, just where the strong
top rail had hung him back, exhausted, raging, breathing
hard through his thin red nostrils, and throwing up his head
with grinning teeth, whenever the others moved towards
him, but showing no signs of dangerous distress.
With a sort of calm, dreamy, languid feeling I stood, I
know not how long, surveying him, until the young stock-
man touched me on the shoulder.
“i think, master, you’d better leave him now to sulk a
bit; I'll come presently and give him. some water and oaten
hay, but now you may as well put your nag to feed in our
little paddock, have a wash at the creek, find come up
to the hut, for I fancy you’ve had nearly enough for to-
day, and mother will be rare and glad to see you ; she
loves to see any one from, old England,”
I started out of my dreams at these words of welcome,
and, turning round, saw that the evening was closing in,
Wallaby, recovering from the last burst, was whinnying at;
my elbow, searching in vain for a tuft of grass on the bare
ground,
“With all my heart,” I answered, “for my month and
throat are like a furnace, and my face feels masqued with
dust and sweat. But tell me how you knew I was lately
from England 1”
.NSW SBaißS —HO. 11, G


“Oh!” answered the young centaur, as he half jumped
half clambered on his long-tailed colt, “ I knew by the red
colour in your face, and your double bridle, and your dandy
boots, that you must be the young swell that bald-faced
Dick told us, when he came up with the dray, was stopping
at Spring Hill, to learn the colonial, touches.”
With this explanation my companion, who was a lathy
lad of thirteen, with straw-coloured elf locks, hanging from
under a battered straw hat round a brown-burned, fair-coin-
plexioned face, blue, dare-devil eyes, and merry mouth
full of white teeth, kicked his half-broken brute with his one
spur, and set off towards & water-hole in sight, at a singular
pace, between bucking, kicking’, and cantering, sitting all
the time as close and as calmly as if he had been riding a
rocking-horse. I followed, leading Wallaby, and we all in-
dulged'in a delicious bathe and drink at the same time,
la Europe this sort of indulgence ought to have killed both
horse and man, but the sun had taken the chill off the
water before we went into it.
After thus refreshing, Bill Donovan, or Spider Legs—his
two names, the latter oeing the more current, as he in-
formed me—turned Wallaby into a small paddock, proposing
to let- him feed there for an. hour or two before hobbling him
out, ami then, pointing to the fiut which stood on a hiiiock
beside the creek, within a gunshot of where I had been
bathing, .he left me to feed his own horses, and give some
water to the black stallion as well as got him into a smaller
stock-vard by himself. The mob of norses which Lad so
much assisted me had been driven up to mount a party
about to drive some cattle down she country.
Carrying my saddle on my head, I walked up towards the
hut. It was a long low building of slabs, like a wooden
barn, with a sharply-peaked roof, extending on both sides
forward, so as to form, a large verandah, supported by un-
car ved stumps ; creepers, green, rod, and purple, almost
covered the colour ox the wood in front; at the back it was
shaded by throe large cabbage palms, growing on the spur
of a rockv rouge which pushed m upon and bounded.the
plain. On one side, under the shade of one of the palms,
was a dairy, half sunk in the ground: and next to it,
carefully fenced in, with rails ’wattled, a garaen;
I could hear some calves mooing behimi the bouse in a
yard ■whore their dams were being milked. Poultry and
ducts were luxuriating over a few curds thrown outside the


dairy; a sow, with a litter of half-grown piglings, was mak-
ing her way from the bed of the creek to join the repast;
.» shepherd bitch and her half dozen pups, with three or
four kangaroo dogs, rushed out, fiercely barking at me,
hut were drivery back by two fat, sun-burnt, bare-footed
little children, with miniature stock-whips, dressed in little
shirts, and nothing else, ‘The noise of the dogs and the shrill
scoldings of the children brought out the mother and mis-
tress of the station from the far end of the verandah a rosy
sonsy dame, of good old English stuff—her bare arms covered
with soap-suds, for I had caught her in the middle of a
grand wash, followed by two little girls, her partners in
the domestic business, who hung behind her skirts, peeping
out at the stranger with curious rolling hazel eyes, like
frightened hares, while an elder graceful beauty of the deli-
cate Australian type came out of the dairy with her as-
sistant, a squat red-headed Irishwoman.
4< I wish you kindly welcome, Sir, my heart warms to see
you,' 5 were her first words, as she wiped her hands hastily
on her apron and came forward to take mine in both hers
and shake it, «I heard we had got a new neighbour from
England. 55
My station, was only seventy miles from this hut,
‘" And you do know Gloucestershire ?”
“ Indeed I do.”
- And B n?”
" I have been there a hundred times.”
a God bless my soul, you must excuse me, young gentle-
man and here the good woman put her arms round ray
neck and kissed me heartily ; “ why, I was the gardener’s
daughter there, old Job Pernely, that lived at Swangrove
Lodge, and went as maid with the Colonel’s wife when he
went to the Cape, and there I met with Patrick my hns-
. oand, Sir, as was scrjeant in the tb dragoons ; and' when
Pat got his discharge and pension we agreed to go with
Captain h and his lady to Sydney afore we went home
ami there Captain took in his head to take to breeding-
horses and cattle, and persuaded me and Patrick, that he
could depend upon, he said, to take the superintend-
ence, and we was near Bathurst a long time ; and then he
bought this place from an old grantee, and we’ve been here
tour years. Come here, children, this gentleman com.es
from Gloucestershire ; he knows dear Swangrove, vou've
heard me talk of so often.”
o 2


With, that they all came crowding round me ; their shy-
ness vanished, I was in a momeiß ..an old friend. I sat
clown with the good woman on a bench in the verandah
the little ones took hold of my hands and clambered on my
knees; —the elder ones stood apart gazing on me with cu-
rious friendly faces ; —my heart beat thick ;• —my eyes filled
with tears. These kind voices were the first echoes of my
native land that had fallen on my ears since I had been in
the Colony. It is only after suffering much and travelling
far that we learn the magic of a friendly familiar voice in
a distant land—even the twang of the provincial dialect
sounded sweet upon my ears.
My hostess had a thousand questions to ask, which she
poured fourth in breathless haste, scarcely waiting for an-
swers ; —about the noble family under whom she and her
forefathers had lived go long ; —about names, some known,
many unknown, to me; about children, whom she had
dandled in her arms, forgetting that they were now men ;
—about the big oak, the glory of the Park ; —and the
thickets of fern where the fawns lay. She told me how
pleased she was when a child to hold the gate open for the
scarlet-coated horsemen 8.3 they came trooping in to the
Lawn Meets. She asked me if I remembered her, forget-
ting that she must have left England while I was quite a
child, I answered as well as I could, until at length, per-
haps a little out of breath, the good woman suddenly re-
membered her hospitable duties, and, stopping short in the
midst of au enquiry about the Princess Victoria, exclaimed,
u But, Lord forgive me, dear young gentleman, all this
time you must be tired to death and famished while I am
talking my nonsense; come inside, pray, and sit' down.
Patsy, you little villain, go and catch one of the white pul-
lets this minute; you catch them fast enough when they
are not wanted. Jane, get done with the dairy; and. Bora,
never mind the washing ; see how the fire is in the kitchen,
and get the pots on for tea. Oh, Sir. they live most of ’em
like nigs in this country;—no garden—no cream—no no-
thing, but salt beef and damper; but I do like things com-
fortable, so does iny good. man. Yon shall have as good a
hit of supper as you could have at the B Arms.”
u Nay ”' ; .s&ld I, u pray make no fuss for me; give me a
drink of milk-or cold tea, and I will rest until some of my
companions come up, so we will all sup together.”
The good woman would have debated the point a little,


but a battle royal among the pigs and children, in which
her washing was likely to suffer, called her off in a hurry.
One of the little girls soon came, bringing me a bowl of
delicious milk. As my eyes became accustomed to the dark-
ness of the long room, the shutters of which had been closed
for coolness, I espied ia one comer a sort of couch of oaten
bay, covered with kangaroo skins. Sun-blistered, parched,
braised, and weary, yet glowing -with that pleasing languor
which usually follows the hot excitement of a long, sharp,
.successful chase, I threw myself upon this bush ottoman,
determined not to sleep, but wait the arrival of my friends,
as I felt sure that Trefusis and Vivian, and probably Dick,
if not John, would make for this station before night. But
goon the flowing tongue of my hostess, the shouts of the
playing children, the yelping of the pups, the screaming of
the parrots, the cooing of tbs pigeons on the house-top,
dissolved in a murmuring sleep-provpMng hum; insensibly
I glided into the land of dreams. Then passed before my eyes
a .whole panorama of scenes of horsemanship.- Black stallion,
wild stags, foxes, kangaroos, were mingled with a crowd of
all I had ever known—the mountain-passes, and streams of
Flintshire, the broad pastures of Cheshire, the rocky ranges,
the evergreen forests, and the prairie plains of Australia,
seemed mingled in inextricable confusion with the fertile
vales of Badmintonand Berkeley, and strange and old familiar
faces in scarlet hunting garb, and in rough bush costume,
danced like will-o’-the-wisps before me as I galloped down
the steep cattle tracks of the Gaxmobile, across the brown
heaths of Bulvertoa, and was pursued by an angry tide over
the splashing sands where Flint Castle crumbles into the
Dee, I was lost in mistf; then I was dragged by my stirrup,
and chased by red deer, bulls, and angry stallions. I was
parched with thirst, and devoured by hunger; at length I
sri nggled, shrieked out, and awakened to one of the pleasant-
est sights I ever fell upon in all my life.
She room, lately empty, was almost full. Trefusis and
Yiviaxv were standing over me; a table of boards laid on
trestles was covered with a white cloth. A strong smell of
hot meat and vegetables pervaded the apartment. The two
little girls were coming in from the detached kitchen, one
with a dish of potatoes, and the other with vegetable marrows
and cucumbers. A huge pie (of parrots it turned out to be) was
on the table; my late assistant, Spider Legs, and a younger
brother, brought in large dishes of fried mutton and fried


pork ; half a dozen young ones followed, rejoicing oyer such
an unusual feast. Then came my host, a handsome, soldier-*
like looking man, of some fifty years of age, carrying an
armful of quart pots, full of tea ; my hostess followed,
with a very red face, some monstrous dampers, and a howl
of milk. Besides all this there were eggs, pots of the black
wild honey, and some tame too, of purest yellow, bushels of
peaches, water melons, and other dainties too numerous to
describe. I rubbed my eyes, not quite sure whether I was
dreaming now' or not. IWfusis came towards me saying,
“Coxae, Armorer, rouse up ; in spite of the awful groan you
gave just now after snoring so musically, you must own
that there are good things to be had in this country; and
I must say you deserve them, for you rode to-day like a
good hushman, and ought to be better employed than fag-
ging at the dairy for Old Penn.,”
“ Donovan, now you have settled those quart pots, let me
make known to you our new recruit, Mr. Raphael Armorer,
who has to-day hurst the bands of new chummery, and is
going to be one of us, —Is it not so, old fellow %—you have
done with the cream-skimmer, and mean to take to the
stock-whip. He’s a Mend of your wife’s, I find ; that is to
say, what makes an old friend here, he has often passed
the cottage where she w'as bora,”
4< Faith, Master Trefasis,” replied Donovan, with a slightly
Irish accent, “ I’m happy to sec atiy gentleman like your-
self; thanks be to the Captain and the managing of my
jewel of a.- wife, we have enough and to spare here, if it’s
twenty children I had. You’re kindly welcome, Mr. Armorer,
rny son Will tells me it’s you that are a. bould rider, but it's
hungry you’ll all be, and so am I, and my heart almost
broken with them young bullocks tVe been joking. But
the good wife’s waiting, so with your leave, gentlemen, we’ll
go to supper,”
Little Patsy, the rising scholar of the family, asked a bless-
ing, and pulling out our pocket knives, to work we set with
famous appetites, in amauuer that would have sent any siiver-
foridan into fits, unless he had had a bush ride to prepare
Mrn for the spectacle,
’ How we polished off* mutton, and pork, fried onions, fresh
water cod, parrot pie, honey, peaches, and cucumbers, and
melons, damper, butter and cheese, was, as the Yankees
would say, a caution, I never Was a good hand at describ-
ing eating, am! should not have remembered this, if it had


not boon the first repast that gave me a notion how comfort-
able people could he in. the bush if they tried, and also an
era- in my life, as the close of my first day of bush horse-
rnanship," Supper finished, in which, by the by, besides
ten of the twelve children of our hosts, two,travellers joined,
we adjourned to the verandah, to smoke our pipes by the
light of the moon.
From Mrs. Donovan, who seemed to consider me under
her special care, and almost a relation, 1 learned that Cap-
tain, Eds original intention had been to live at the e ’ Palms-
Sve,"' so he named the place himself, and with this view
i gone to considerable expense in building a superior
kind of cottage, with garden, &c.; but, three years after Ms
arrival in the colony, having, by the death of a relation,
succeeded to a considerable estate in England, he had found
it best, in the then depressed state of the colony, to transfer
his stock, lease, and the whole affair to his superintendent, on
terms that proved very advantageous to both parties, and
our host growing rich, and taking rank among the neigh-
bouring squatters, combined in Ms address something of
the disciplined soldier with the wit of the Irishman, and
the frank manners of the bush, which was extremely pleas-
ing.
The house was very long, and comprised, in addition to
the large room in which we supped, a store and several
sleeping rooms. It was all built of wood except the fire-
place, which was of stone, rough laid, and fixed with lime,
made from fresh-water shells. The kitchen was a detached
building at the back, and there was also a hut where a
ploughman, and bullock-driver, both prisoners, slept, near
the stock-yard. There were three sons, two older than my
friend W ill, so that my host managed his dairy farm,
with a herd of cattle, and a lot of good brood mares, with
very little assistance out of his own family. The arrange-
ments of the house showed the character of the owners. It
had been well built at first, chiefly with Donovan’s own
bauds, having had much experience in the same kind of
work at the Gape. There was plenty of useful home-made
furniture, such as tea-chests turned into chairs, trunks of
trees for stools, and cupboards of native cedar, so that the
habitation had not the naked comfortless appearance of most
of the stations I had seen previously,
A carbine, a broadsword, and a pair of holster pistols
wore tokens of the owner’s old profession, and formed an


ornamental figure, ready for use at a moment’s notice, with
a pair of fowling-pieces. In like manner some tomahawks,
broad axes, adzes, and saws were neatly arranged on the
opposite wall. The skins of kangaroos, opossums, flying
squirrels, and wombats, devoted to various purposes, and
the plumes of different birds, displayed the sporting tastes of
the family, sexless than some very fine dogs, that returned
with the two' elder sons late at night. They had been
riding over the run to pick out a lot of cattle for sale, and
had turned oft' on their way home to run down an emu,
which bad beaten them after a long chase, whereat their
father joked them a good deal.
If melancholy home-sick thoughts had been aroused upon
ray arrival, I must confess I never passed a pleasanter
evening. We all seemed to be old friends, and in anecdotes
of hunting life, the kangaroo and the lion in Africa, of
skirmishes with Kafirs and Australian blacks, accounts and
comparisons of English and Colonial fanning, we quite
forgot our fatigues,
3)ick came in soon after supper, having got his horse
again going after some hours’, rest, but John never showed ;
and we felt assured, as it afterwards turned out, he had
camped on the mountains.
At length we retired to rest in a room papered over with
newspapers, and. adorned with some remarkably gay por-
traits of St. Patrick, the King, Queen, and other .notabili-
ties, as well as a kangaroo hunt, in charcoal, performed by
the genius of the family, in a style that left which was the
kangaroo, and which the dogs, a matter of some doubt.
The next morning I explored the premises; the garden was
formed in a bay under a hill, where a spring had created a
sort of swamp, until the simple process of cutting one small
trench, and blowing away a boulder with gunpowder, had
drained It and produced a stream of water that flowed to
and through the dairy, except in the driest seasons. The
laying out of this garden, in which all the young ones of
this family were expected to work, did credit to my hostess
as a gardener’s daughter. Tines ' grew in crevices on. the
rocks above, peach, trees were planted in rows as standards,
while orange trees, lemons, and many other trees and plants
which Captain, E, had brought with him from the Cape,
flourished luxuriantly under the advantage of Australian
sun, moisture, and shade ; while the humming of an army
of bees from a dozen hi ves, all nicely protected from the


heat by a miniature bark verandah, sang in my ears songs
of Old England,
While admiring these pleasing scenes, such a contrast to
the bare neglected ground round Spring Hill, Trefusis joined
me;“ I've been thinking. Armorer,” said he, “ that yon would
perhaps like to buy the black stallion. He was broke when
he was three years old, and intended to be sent down to
Sydney for some Indian officer, but one day last year Dick
took him to drive cattle down to Bathurst, and stopping on
the road to help-a dray that had stuck fast, he gave him to
Cobo, one of our tame blacks, to hold. Master Cobo, a few
minutes after, met his brother black. Lame Jackey, mounted
on his master Dr. Bryan’s mare, on his way to Bathurst with
a letter for the post-office. What do these two young black-
guards do, but turn off and make the best of their way into
the plains to hunt emus. When Dick came back and found
bis horse gone, he almost went mad, Slothing was heard of
either blacks or horses for a month, when some stockmen saw
the stallion running wild with a mob of mares. Soon after,
master Coho made b.is appearance, half starved, and owned
that they had hunted emus all day, and, for fear of not
being able to catch them again, tied up the horses all night,
without food or water: the stallion broke away, and the
mare, after another day’s work, ‘went dead.’ In return
for this candid confession, master Cobo got two dozen well
laid on with a stirrup leather. Now, as the horse will want
breaking over again, if, you will give me 51., one of the
brace of pistols you have, a set of Scott’s Novels that you
must; have read a hundred times, and your ragged coat, you
shall have him.”
“ Agreed,” said I, “ and let ns go and look at him; I’ll
make a beginning at breaking him in to-day.” Accordingly
we walked to the stock-yard. John and Vivian, who had
arrived after we were in bed, had borrowed two horses
from Donovan, and set out by daybreak, with young Mick,
after the mares we left on the mountain, expecting to get
them in easily now' they had lost their chief; and I may as
well mention hero that they succeeded in getting in the
three mares and the yearling without much difficulty.
Donovan joined us on our way. The horse had been twice
supplied with water, and a very little oaten hay. We held
a council of war on the tactics to be adopted.
(To be continued.)


DR. LANG’S EMIGRATION SCHEMES.
These Schemes have turned out the miserable deceptions we an-
ticipated in our remarks in March last. (First Series, p. 189.)
By letters from Moreton Bay (Oooksland) of the 27th January ,
it seems that the Doctor’s ship, the Fortitude, had arrived: no pre-
paration for the reception or employment of the emigrants had been
made by him. The party whom Dr. Lang deputed by letter to act
as agent, but without remitting funds, very naturally refused to act.
The Uovernment has had to take the poor people in hand as if they
had been tree-passage emigrants.
The Moreton Bay Courier of February 24 observes:
“ Th® Few Settlers. -No instructions have yet been received
upon the subject of the claims made by i>r. Lang on behalf of the
passengers by the Fortitude, and we scarcely anticipate anything
satisfactory until ad vices are received from England.”
And the Sydney Morning Herald, of March 6 devotes a leader to
the subject, from which the following are extracts, and which leave
us nothing to add. We here knew and stated that he had no au-
thority from the Colonial Office for making the promises he did to his
dupes, but we hoped that he had the estate of some true-blue Protes-
tant in Moreton Bay to soil. In Australia they know now that he
has no estate, but hope that he has authority from the Colonial Secre-
tary. Having neither, and having pocketed the people’s money,
Dr. Lang, who has spared no opponent in his eloquent abuse, must
now take his choice between two harsh terms,
f< Of his (Dr. Lang’s) 'wisdom is is evident that great doubts have
begun to prevail. The practical evils — of delay — and of expenditure
for board and lodging, &c., in Brisbane—for an indefinite time ere
'their land can be selected the uncertainty mihout the express
authority of the Secretary of State, it can U <t 4 without ike usual
competition at. auction -ike uncertainty 'hop, die emigrants , not
having lean sv.hniitied to the Land and Eh >j, dion Commissioners’
agents previous to embarkation, mil f< i l entitled legally to
passages at the expense of the land fund, —the further delay of
erecting habitations and making clearings of the land after it is
purchased are calculated to shake confidence in the projector who
failed to include these probable contingencies and unavoidable certain-
ties in hi» calculations. What is it to these three hundred adventurers
that Dr. Lang was sincere and disinterested, if he has been ignorant
and reckless, and if their means are melting away * like snow off a
dikes'” " *


Since these remarks were written, despatches from Earl Grey have
arrived; the Doctor’s scheme is plainly disallowed and repudiated ;
the emigrants are not to have land for their passage, because they
were shipped in defiance of existing regulations; the captain and
surgeon are not to have the accustomed gratuities. And the Herald
of the 9th July follows up its remarks' as follows :■ —
“ It never cost the doctor a thought what they (the emigrants) are
to do on arrival. No doubt, when the money is got, an application
will he made to have the land surveyed; and after the land is sur-
veyed, it will be advertised for sale ; and after it has been not less
than one or more than three months advertised for sale, it may be
bought, provided nobody else wants it; and after it has been actually
bought, "Dr, Lang’s emigrants may be set to work erecting houses,
digging wells. See., and they may commence the cultivation of cotton.”
EMIGRANTS’ QUESTIONS.
OommumcaMms for the Editor 'must he addressed “ Care of
MESSRS, a. WooMALt AND Sos, Ang4 Court, Skinner Street, Lon-
don.”
Inquiries of any importance are expected to be verified by name
and address,not for publication, hut as a guarantee of good faith.
It is reauested that letters requiring answers be sent not later than
the 26 ih of each month. Brevity and clearness in writing and
phraseology will oblige.
* m * In answer to several letters, parties requiring this Journal can
obtain it best through the nearest Bookseller; or, in remote country
districts, by inclosing ten Red Postage Stamps to the Publishers,
Msssfig. Give, Amen Corner, Paternoster Row.
A Farmer and Corn~Bealer.-~XJgwaxis, of 50 years of age; wife
37. and eight children ranging from 2 years to 14. Earned. Has
a relative doing well in Australia. Has been rejected for a free
passage. Can have employment on arrival, "Wishes to know how
to defray the expense of voyage. [There are no means unless some
friends will advance a loan for father, mother, and three eldest to go
out. leaving the younger ones behind. Three, probably four, of the
children could earn wages, and with father could soon remit balance.
■About 701 would send out three children and parents, Belatives
could not do better, and might, if our correspondent be an honest
man, make sure of being repaid, && he would have the means.]
4 Brother. Goods,for Australia*—“ Has pot been accustomed to


agriculture or mechanism of any kind ; and would therefore wish to
know what description of goods, to commence a business with, be
bad best take out with him. Say from SOL to 100 Lto lay out. He
would also like to know which would be the most advantageous,
Adelaide or Melbourne, or any other locality you might name. But
my chief inquiry is to know, if he should take goods with him, what
description they should be of: or take Ida cash with him only. I
have a stock of sailors’ caps-—south-wester?; would that be of any
service to him?” [We have published this information repeatedly
in our First Series, which he ought to read in detail. Briefly—cash,
not goods, unless stock in baud. Buy nothing for sale in any colony,
but take what you have,]
A. M, —Married, both under 40, no children, A travelling linen-
draper and clothier. Wife can cook, sew, &c. Capital 400 L
“ Should I lay out 2001. in goods for Port Philip.” [Certainly not.]
“ Both of us are of active habits, and inclined to turn our hands to
anything, even to service, to learn the management of cattle, &c., if
necessary.” [Such emigrants will do well.]
The Auckland Islands Company. Address, 34, Comhill.
T. Ti., a Pump Maher and Joiner. — We are not sure that
there is not much scope for you in the United States. But if you
prefer Australia, you are sure to get on there. We believe the
Artesian principle has not been adopted yet. Wells are found
at from twelve to forty feet—often at eighteen feet. The sheet iron
used is .all imported, and copper has not yet been wrought in the
colony. The only duty on imports is 5 per cent, on the custom-house
value a mere trifle. If you have the things you mention, you had
better take them. Perhaps Adelaide would be the best port for you ;
but with your abilities you cannot do wrong. We observe an adver-
tisement freon a pump maker in the Sydney Morning Herald. We
shall have some farther information on these points next month.
A Clerk io a Merchard, with 500 1. —“ I am 23 years of age, 5 ft,
7 in. in height, healthy, rather nervous.- X see no opening in my
business, and am desirous of going to Australia, lam willing to do
anything for a- beginning, even to mending roads, so that I have some
prospect of advancing myself by diligence and attention, though,
might I choose. I should prefer the town to the bush, I have
no knowledge whatever of agriculture, having been born and bred in
town, still lam willing to learn anything; I have some knowledge
of book-keeping arid of the general routine of office business. I can
play the piano-forte, sing, know a little French, German, and am
rather quick with my hands. All I want is to be able to gain a
livelihood by industry, honesty, and perseverance in that state of life
which, it shall please the Almighty to call me to.” [Certainly this
is not at first sight a good emigrant, except his spirit; that is healthy.
Town employments are very uncertain. If determined to go, the
advice in Handbook” is best. Spend SOL and two years at some


xoarcied squatter’s in gaining experience. Colonies always offer
openings to the industrious and prudent, which is more than home
countries do. Port Stephens will be a pleasant residence for young
men during part of their early colonial career,]
G. li. W. —No duty on boots or shoes, but should not advise your
taking any unless of your own making.
A Coacltmaker. “lam by trade a coachmaker, 40 years of age;
have worked for one employer seventeen years, but have not done
anything at my business for the last year and three quarters, my em-
ployer having given up business for want of work, I cannot get
steady employment to my mind; should like to go to Adelaide; am
tired of this uncertain state of things; can build omnibuses, stages,
gentlemen’s carriages, and railway carriages, having built a great
many, and had the control cf a great many men; am steady, having
never been intoxicated. Are there any coach factories, and ia
there any probability of getting employment! Is there, or is there
likely to be, a railway, as I could manage the carriage department.”
[There is only a modes.'t* d murid for coach-builders: a very few
Isaxsds would overstock tine trade. There is little chance of a railroad
at ['resent. The Unite. >v *>» sfrord a much better opening for
skilled mechanics. See Tla i,is > £ jorley’s (the coadtmaker of Crewe)
letter from Ohio in first se<o - of.l carnal, p. 260.]
Figs and Rcmim. The lasi Australian, papers contain much cor-
respondence on the best mode of drying and packing these fruits.
Labour at Morelon Bay. Advices of April, 1849, state that every
one is crying out for labour. Shepherds, 22 L; married couples, 35'.;
hut-keepers. 16t.; ail with rations, of course.
.1 Scotch Tailor. "Married; wife, and three children under seven
years of age. Wishes to go to Australia, Would not work as jour-
neyman, but prefer a trade in some small town. Asks to name one
or two towns in the interior ; whether to take out materials to make
up, or for persons going out, and what materials used.” [Three chil-
dren under seven years of age are a great charge on a voyage and in
travelling, therefore, yon and your wife must think of that as you are
in a business now. Tailors, settling in rising townships, do very
well when steady ; although, in the chief towns, ready-made clothes
ar« chiefly worn. The bush wear is fustian and moleskin. When
tailors have been too plentiful in Sydney and Melbourne, others have
made a good living in the bush. We cannot recommend a town,
because, with an emigration of 20,000 souls a year, so many changes
are taking place. Unless you {save a chance of a small lot of fustians
cheap to take as baggage, should not take any. They manufacture
very nice tweed in the colony. You might do something for fellow-
passengers, The company referred to is most respectable and might
suit you.]
IL T. 8,. Tradesmen. —" Family party, viz,, master tailor, married,
•with three infant children, and 300 h: a brewer with 2000;,; married.


with two children; wife consumptive ; a draper, single, with small
capital. Mother and daughter with a small income. Desire to live
in or near Melbourne, and engage in business, not to go into the
bush.’’ [Without some honest friend in the colony who could give
time to direct them, these parties should not, without experience,
embark in any colonial trade. A year or two's experience is indis-
pensable without such help. The mother and daughter would be
better off than in England in every respect. The consumptive wife
would derive benefit from the climate. The young draper would, if
wise, take service in some way before going into business. We
hesitate to advise the tailor to emigrate at all, unless prepared to be
humble and steady—to creep in order to rise. The brewer, with his
capital, is able to do much, perhaps not at erewing ; perhaps his
money, out at 5 per cent,, on sate security, at short notice, will give
him time to look round. There are several good openings, but to
mention them would send too many,]
C. W. P., Draper, United Blake. —Mackay’a is the last work; on
America. It is very able, but expensive; three large volumes.
Sidney Smith’s “Settler’s New Home,” is a useful compilation, but
there "are no hooks that can be of any use as guides to town trades
in any country. A good cheap American map may be had of
Chapman, American bookseller, Strand. We have no idea of the
wages and prospects ot drapers in the towns of the Union, but see
constant complainings from the hiow T urk newspapers of the hard
lot of the gentlemen in dry good stores. Perhaps this query may
elicit some information from one of oar readers.
An- Officers Son.—" W., under age, educated thoroughly as an Eng-
lish gentleman. No knowledge of rural affairs. Capital 1000/.
Has been accustomed to a life of ease and comfort, but would
prefer the life of a colonist in Australia, provided that, in the course
of a few years, I should be able to realise a fortune. Do you think
I should prosper as an emigrant 1 It so, in what capacity I
[We feel sure that you have not read oar “Hand-book.” We
can hold-out no expectation that m any capacity you can realise a
fortune in a few wans. Certainly not by sheep or cattle. Fortunes
are aekmm * r sal * jth small capitals by gentlemen in a few years.
Sharp i n' v ri u a (red men brought up to trade make them some-
times in ,'n .Wt’ou Prudent men make fortunes by saving. Some
by luck The cnestton is, what can you. do with 1000/. in Eng-
land. da. .ot,nd dress cost 100 k a year, in Australia 1 51.1
You a* * y ng mm h, educated enough, rich enough to do well in
Australia, live comfortably, in a, year or two marry to please your-
self, without looking to fortune. But we cannot say from your
description, whether you would make a good emigrant —-tender, wo
rather think. A squatter is the only pursuit such a young gentleman
can follow with prudence and profit.]
Railways in Australia. — A provisional committee has been


formed for promoting railways in New South Wales, under the title
of the Sydney Tram Road and Eailway Company. They have
applied for an act of incorporation, and are proceeding with prelimi-
nary surveys. The colonial government has determined on recom-
mending to the legislature a guarantee of 6/. per cent, per annum
on all sums actually expended for preliminary surveys, as well as
works. It seems probable that the first section will be laid out
between Sydney, Paramatta, and Wellington, with aa idea of
eventually extending to Gouibura.
CORRESPONDENCE NATAL.
Planter. a I have heard as well as read that indigo grows wild in
Natal, and I presume it is the same species from whence the dye is
extracted in the East Indies, Java, &c. Now, Sir, I have just
returned from Bengal, where I have been employed in the manufac-
turing of indigo for the last eight years. But the ruinously low
prices obtained the past few years obliged me, as well as many others,
to shut up shop, as the expense of making cost, in moat cases, con-
siderably more than the price realized in the Calcutta market. Now,
in India, the great expense is the land rent, which amounts to about
one half of the entire expenses of a factory. Labour is certainly
cheap in India; what it may be at Natal, and in what quantity
procurable, I know not. Another great advantage would be in
hating all the lands near; whereas, in India, we are obliged to go very
long distances in order to obtain good land, and in very small quan-
tities ;an acre here, another acre half a mile off, and so on. This of
course increases the expense of ploughing, so wing, weeding, &c. The
weeding is another very heavy item of expense, as the grass in India,
during the rainy season, grows up in two or three days, and the
young plant requires weeding two and often three times before its
head out-tops the grass around, I think a person with some capital
might make a successful speculation, combined with farming operations,
provided lie began first on a small scale, and gradually felt his way on;
or there might be a company formed, to be called ‘ The Natal Indigo
Association,’ In this case, the shares being small, nobody could lose
considerably should the project not prove profitable. lam thinking
of proceeding out there at the end of the present year, and on
arrival should be able to make a further report c:n the subject. I
should feel obliged to you for your opinion on this subject, as also by
your giving this a place in your valuable and impartial Journal,
should you consider it worthy of a place. lam anxious to know all
respecting Natal. Gould you inform me what books are published on
the subject, and where procurable! Should this meet the eye of any-
body desirous of promoting the culture of Indigo, I shall be most
happy to afford any information on the subject in my power; and,
should a company be formed, I would be happy to go out on their


part, and there, on the spot, make out for them a report of par-
ticulars,’'" [We must leave to others more experienced among our
readers to answer the question about the probable profits of growing
indigo in Natal. Perhaps by publishing the writer’s letter and the
extract given below we may serve our correspondent better than in any
other way. Information about Natal will be found in p. 116, &€,,
of First Series. We received a pamphlet and circular from Mr. W.
Irons, Jua,, of St. Albans, containing the prospectus of an Associa-
tion of Wesleyan Methodists for emigrating to that colon}', from which
we extract the following passage, from a letter written by the ilev, W.
Shaw, and dated Graham's 'fown, Jan, 1.3, 18-19.]
“ Natal is better adapted to agriculture, but less tit for grazing
purposes, than the other colonics. On my late visit there, I certainly
formed a very high, opinion of that country. The soil is fertile ; water
everywhere abundant and good; the climate, though rather warm,
is nevertheless considered by ail Europeans there to be quite healthy.
There can be no doubt but cotton-growing will succeed and pay well
in that country, if vigorously carried on by the settlers. Cotton will
be their great article of export, as sheep’s wool is from the Cape and
Algoa Bay colonies. If several young persons, as you _ mention,
should go out to Natal, and invest a small part of their limited
capital in the purchase of small allotments adapted for cotton-growing,
and would settle near each other, so as to form the nucleus of a
village or hamlet, they would had such a plan highly conducive to
their comfort and success!, especially if they have the good sense not
to quarrel with each other, either on their way out or after their
arrival. In order to prevent this, they should not form a company or
joint-stock at all, but each go out quite unfettered, hut with the
understanding they should settle together and help each other as far
*s.g csrcuiustancss will allow. Neither you nor your friends should
b U y aav land offered in England. Get first to the colony and look
about you, and then purchase land, if you wish, to do so, at the
government land-sales. Do not invest your capital in goods, with an
idea of making something by the transaction: the probability is, from
not knowing the kind of goods in demand, you would lose money by
that plan. ” Brine; what money you can with you, after providing
yourselves well with clothes and bedding, and a very small supply of
necessary furniture. But I am. writing as if yen had made up your
mind to go to Natal. If yon go there, you, will find "Wesleyan and
other missionaries will render you any assistance or advice in then-
power, They will be glad of the help of any who are disposed to
assist them in the workof the Lord; hut, owing to the circumstances
of the eonntry.it is not much a settler can do, in that respect, for
rnanv years after lea arriv:-:.!. I mention tuis to prevent diaapaoio
xaent to any who might think of emigrating very much under the in-
fluence of that good motive.'’


SUNEY'S
EMIG REANT'S JOURNAL,
AND
Traveller's Magazine
A FAMILY COLONIZATION LOAN SOCIETY.
are thousands ia this. eouatxy plniag in compara-*
tke or ■ actual indigence, who, if removed "to a. amiable
colony, would be able to attain decent independence, if not
fortune, while conferring, by their industrious labour, in-
estimable benefits on the colony in which they settled.
There. is a eery considerable number of persons in the
various British colonies anxious to defray the aassao-e-
-rnoney of relatives in this country., but unable, fo/waniof
trustworthy agents, to effect so desirable a union.
There are many philanthropic and wealthy individuals
able- and willing to relieve individual and general distress
fey promoting emigration, if any plain practical plan' for
that end were prepared ready to their hands,
A plan that would in a very large measure achieve the
ends and unite the sympathies of all the three parties
above-mentioned has been placed in our hands by Mrs.
Caroline Chisholm,
Mrs, Chisholm proposes that persons desirous, either from
benevolent or prudential motives, to forward emigration,,
shall fom a fund to be advanced ia the mode about to be
deseribed, in various gams, for limited periods, without
Interest. Such a society might consist of parties acting on
purely benevolent motives; or. of manufacturers or land'
lords in times of distress among their operatives and la-
homers; or of the members of a trade desirous of trans-
planting other members of that trade, who, hein#* out of
ssw ul ‘ ' B


work, are dependent on the weekly allowances from trades 5
union funds, .
A fond haying been formed of from 100?, to 10,000?., either
sum would make a beginning, the next step would be for
the parties desirious of emigrating to form themselves into
groups, consisting of not less than three, and not more than
twenty, families, all willing to go to the same colony. See
illustration of families and groups in first table in page 103.
The following calculations are all based upon Australia,
because in that country there is the greatest certainty of
obtaining largo money wages, and because the aushot of
the plan baa there agents on whom she could depend.
Each intending emigrant on enrolling to pay 1?., and 2s.
a quarter until despatchd. Then each family in each group
must muster its funds, and raise the utmost sum it can
towards the required passage-money. For instance, in the
five families composing the group in page 103, M‘Pherson’s
contributes 20?., Smith’s 12?., and so on, until 80 1, has been
raised. It is presumed that each of these five families be-
longs to the same parish, or the same street, or have a per-
sonal knowledge of each other, _ _ , , .
To the 80 L raised by the joint exertions of the five iami-
lies, the Loan Society"add 80?., making a gross sum of 160?.
The emigration committee of the Loan Society then, pro-
eeeds first, to take- Joint and several security from members
of the five families of ago, and then to pick out the parties
who shall have their passage-money paid out- ot this sum
of 160?. In making this selection they will be guided
chiefly by the ability of the parties chosen to earn wages.
Supposing, then, that for 160?. they obtain passages for the
thirteen adults marked by stars in tse tables; these emi-
grants are received by the agent of the company, say at
Port Philip ; he knows where to place each shepherd, black-
smith, carpenter, printer, housemaid, and so on. He also
holds their notes of hand, and duly collects from them such
portion of their wages as they eau spare towards the loan
due to the Society, and to their mm-families, It is assumed,
see table No, 3, page 104, that the 13 earn altogether (and
this is a low calculation for Australia) 200?. a year, and
that they each pay back to the agent 7 L 10& pj<?« > that
is to say. in all, 9*B?. The families at home add to this
10?., and the produce, 108?,, is devoted to sending out nine
more adults. These twenty-two emigrants in the third
year would bs able, by & remittance oi about 82?., to bring


out the regaining families ; and hr the fourth year, by re-
mitting on an average 31. 9s. Id. from the wages of each of
twenty-three adults, to pay off the loan of the Society.
By-this plan a loan of SQL enables thirty-seven souls to
emigrate, not having to begin with 31, each among them all.
If the Society thought fit to anticipate the remittance of
the 9§l from the colonies, and send out nine adults, the
whole debt would be sooner repaid,
it is presumed that many parties residing in the colonies
would make use of the. agency of such Society in order to
bring over relatives and friends from Europe, either by a
whole payment, or partly by way. of loan,.
The security for the repayment of, the loans would be,
Ist, legal; Sad, self-interest; 3rd, the force of family and
friendly opinion.
The nomination of friends and relations would go on
dmtmi. and a philanthropic fund of 10,000 b miglm become
an endless chum of colonization.
Mrs, Chisholm, while conducting the Emigrant Homes
in Sidney, lent some hundred pounds in small sums to la-
bouring people. She only lost, as stated in evidence before
the House of Lords, about ICC
The agents would constantly communicate to the Society
the sort of demand for labour. They would fee able to
place mechanics as well as unskilled labourers.
Having received the following tables and plan very
late in the month, we are compelled to content ourselves
with the above brief recapitulation, and to reserve our ob-
servations on the important uses of the plan until next
month. The following' is Mrs, Chisholm’s plan, in her own
words.
SUGGESTIONS FOR THE FORMATION
OF
A FAMILY COLONIZATION LOAN SOCIETY.
BY MRS. CHISHOIM,
L That the Society fee based upon the principle of
friendly patties or groups from the same locality, acquainted
with, eacn others’ character, becoming Jointly and severally
responsible for loans granted to for two years or more,
without interest thereon,
B<. That parent and branch or local Societies be formed,
b. 2


3. That branch Societies or committees which undertake
the management of these family groups shall be required
to communicate direct with the central Society, as to the
wants, the means, <fec., of the parties desiring to emigrate.
4. That agents be appointed in the colonies for the pur-
pose of receiving advances made by the Society, remitting
the same, aiding' emigrants by getting them employment,
and affording them advice, &c-
--5. That agents at the ports of disembarkation keep a
registry-office, where shall be duly entered ail agreements,
the district, to which the emigrant may proceed; and that
they shall attend to other' points which, may facilitate the
settlement of the people, as well as receive and forward all
letters addressed to the parties by their relatives at home.
6. That contributors advancing loans shall be privileged
•to nominate for a passage persons in their own locality or
elsewhere, on .condition that a party or group be made up.
[Note, The Society cannot undertake to recognise the
advancing of loans to, or recovering the same from,
isolated individuals.]
7. That directors of local or charitable institutions be
entitled to similar privileges.
8. That all loans he effected through the parent Society.
9. That all family groups be numbered.
10. That influential parties in Australia be invited to co-
operate with the parent Society in England, bv,forming
themselves into parent or branch, committees, aiding the
agents in tbs recovery of loans, and acting for the parent
Society at home, in case of need,
XL That some of the most intelligent of the family group,
who may first proceed to the colony, oe requested to unite
themselves, for the time being, to the local or district com-
mittee, and aid the agent in the recovery of loans made to
the family party with which they are connected.
12. That family parties consist of a limited number, each
group not to contain more than twenty families, nor less than
three families,
13, That losses incurred by accident, such as deaths, to be
borne by the Society. *
14, That, to meet such and similar exceptional expenses,
a reserve fund be formed distinct from the loans ' of the
general run of contributors.
15. That, on contributors desiring to resume their loans,
•due notice shall be given to the parent Society, and that,


as soon as the sum so advanced has been received from the
individuals for whose benefit it had been applied, it shall
ho duly reimbursed to the original lenders.
16. That groups be required to raise as large a sum as
their circumstances can possibly admit, as the Society only
undertakes to help them in some proportion to their own
contributions, and in conformity to Rule 23.
[lTcom. It will be difficult to determine how much each in-
dividual should contribute towards his or her passage,
.as groups must be necessarily constituted differently,
some of weak, some of strong families, and single indi-
viduals, and as the system is one of mutual co-opera-
tion ; a neighbour for a time contributing his quota to
the passage of his neighbour, the same being in due
course .repaid, as shown in group No. I.]
I?- That such as do not emigrate in the first instance be
necessitated to pay 2.?. each quarterly; the same for children,
until such individuals are nominated for a passage.
18. That individual contributors be privileged to nomi-
nate one or more groups.
, 19. That in the event of death or other casualty which
may occur previous to embarkation, such payments as may
bo made to the Society shall be paid Into the reserve fund ;
that the same rule be applicable to payments made by in-
dividuals who may after such payments change their minds,
and not proceed to .Australia, unless the Society should see
good cause to act otherwise.
20. That family groups shall consider themselves bound
to abide by the decision of the parent and local Society as
to which families or what portion of them are most eligible
to emigrate first.
[Note. It must be understood that it will not follow as
a matter of right that the relatives of those who had
first emigrated and made a remittance are to follow
them in succession ; that on this point Rule 20 shall
be adhered to.j
21. That all adults benefiting by the Loan Society pay a
foe of Ik. each, aad children under fourteen years of age
«aeh,m addition to their passage-money ; this sum to be
paid with their last instalment to the Loan Society, and to
ho added to the reserve fund.
22. That family groups be at liberty to choose the colony
they prefer, so that they confine themselves to one colony.
1 Fom This may be deviated from when some members


of the same group have relatives settled in different
colonies.]
[Hotb. As the success of the Society will much depend
upon the character of individuals forming the family
groujjs, inquiries as to the integrity of such parties
must be instituted by the Society aad"others interested
in its prosperity, and persons constituting the group
shall pledge themselves not to admit into their body
individuals of exceptionable character.]
23. That no sums be advanced to parties beyond what
they can easily repay within two years from the date of
their arrival in the colony,
[Eote, The re-union of families now separated, some at
present in Australia, some in different parts of the
United Kingdom, should be specially encouraged by
this Society, Parties in the colonies might make their
remittances, in aid of their relatives, through the
medium of the Society ; at present large sums are lost,
misapplied, and frittered away.]
24. That benevolent parties in the colonies assisting the
Society, he at liberty to name persons from the same coun-
try aad locality from which they themselves may have, emi-
grated, provided a group from such place can be made up,
26. That, in relation to this last Rule, individuals wish-
ing to make such remittances for their relatives or friends
at home, be required to give to the agent in the colony a
satisfactory security for the repayment of such sums as
the Society in England may find it necessary to advance
on account of such parties,
26, Agents in the colonics to grant receipts in duplicate
to the emigrant for all sums received on account of loans,
such emigrant transmitting the duplicate to the local com-
mittee, and retaining the original,
27. That a list be published quarterly of the Society for
circulation in this country and the colonies, showing the
number of committees, the names of contributors and donors
(unless specified to the contrary), and amount; the number
of family groups, and the names and ages of individuals
composing them, where from, where settled, sums advanced,
sums remitted, and sums due, &c.


FamtxjY Gaotrp, No. I.
Aee and Number
*' of FaffiUy.
Relationship.
Name.
No. I- 44
Husband
Ewen M'Pierson.
43
Wife
Margaret „
22
Sort
*John „
20
Daughter
*Mary ,,
19
Bon
*Hector
18
* Ronald „ 1
18
Daughter
*Jane ,,
18
‘
Catherine „
11
Son
Angus „
9
Daughter
Flora „
7
»
Bally „
No. XL §8
Husband
John Smith.
82
0
Wife
Bon
Mary „
William „
4
Daughter
Eliza „
No. III. S3
Husband
Martin Macdonald.
85
Wife
Flora „
17
Bon
* J oitn „
13
Daughter
Susan „
11
Son
Angus „
'9
»
Allen
No. IV. 40
Father
Peter Grant.
20
Sou
* Alexander „ !
19
*John „
17
Daughter
*Ellen }1
16
Son
William „
38
Daughter
Jane „
Bo. V, .42
Husband
Angus Macdonald.
SB
Wife
Flora „
20
Daughter
* Martha ,,
1 19
Son
*Ronald „
1 . 18
-}
*' James „
1 16
Daughter
*Sarah
i 18
Margaret „
11
Son
John
9
William
7
j Daughter
Mary


Say, Family
No. I.
contributes £20
0
0
3>
No. II.
J! 12
0
0
)9
No. III.
14
0
0
3J
No. IV.
5, lb
0
0
}>
No, V.
» is
0
0
Total
. . £80
0
0
Say that the society
contributes SO
0
0
£160
0
0
No. I.
gets i H.'„
16?., 18?, 16?., IS
2?, Total of wages 80?,
No. Ill, gets 14?.
“ ??
„ 14?.
No. IV. gets 18?., 16?.. 12?. .
„ 46?.
No. V.
gets 16?., 18?., 16?., 10?. .
» 60?.
£200
Remitted to England
98
Balance of wages
£102
.Five Adults remit each £7 10
~ <£37
13
10J
One do. , . . .
'n
10
9
Three do. do. 7 10
4 =
™ 22
12
Sf
Four do. do, 7 10
4 *
~ 30
3
1 ‘
♦£98
0
0
Bay fee families at homo contribute 10
0
0
£108
O'
0
Mo.
L
remits
, £28
6
If
Mo,
II.
0
6
0
0
Mo.
III.
14
9
2|
Mo,
IV.
?>
3
7
8 i
Mo.
V.
. . 23
16
ll
Total
. :£8.1
19
Ilf
This, 160?. gives a passage at 12?. each to 13 adults, as
marked thus * opposite their names, leaving 4?, over.
Say that they arrive in the colony in January 1860.
. This 108?. gives in December, 1850, (say the Society an-
ticipates the remittance of 98?.,) passages to Families Nos.
I<. 11,, and 111., in. all nine adults; so that the first and se-
cond lot of emigrants are by the end of the year 1861, or
earlier, in a position to remit the total sum now due by
each family, vie,,


0-4
? 1
■ffo. of Faini-I
j
< .
X
f* I
lies. - |
05
%n
OS
Ct
02
Total passage.
O
10
to
to
tit 1 2 1- each.
i— <
5— <
!— s
!*-•■*
Each family
o
00
OS
to
ci fb
contributes.
>
Society eontri-
OC
t~s
K- o.
‘ &
o
oo
o
to
o
butes.
ttf
P*
:
on
OS
: W
; C-
CO
».
K)
OC
OS .,
oo to
Balance.
U
i
Paid by Farnl-
I5g
: O
to
fcO
to
Ki
fcS fb
lies at home.
K3
fee
:
S3
1 ®
O?
So
to
to
o
£
66
Balance.
: ix':
to
05
to
O
i cc
o
to
°^T
j O
■
to
o
M .
05 >
h-*
Remitted by
1st Lot.
! O
o
• *><
>UiW
»
*H- 9
1
: 00
to
h-i
g>
: i-*
ot
Os
' i
Remitted by
1
OS
o
o
ov«*
1st and 2nd
i
I
Lot.
OC
to
o
M o
Meo
>10)
X-iCO
Total Sums Paid,
Contributed
. £80
0
0
HoKiitted
98
0
0*
Paid at home .
10
0
0
Second remittance
81
19
111
Advance remitted
to the Society
80
0
0
Total
£1350
0
0
This 81i. and odd will now give a passage to the remain-
ing: two families, Nos. IV. and V.. being four adults and five
children.
It -ysrill be observed, that after the second remittance of
Bib life: li|dL the families would only have to remit in due
proportions" the 80 1. advanced by the Society, and which,
bn. an average, there being twenty-three adults, would only
bo for' each 31. 9s. 7 d.
It may be also noticed, that men. in general get in Aus-
tralia, weekly, .1.0 lb, meat; 19 lb. flour; 2 lb. sugar, J lb. tea,
and a bat to live in. Women get their board and lodging,
and a certain allowance of food is made to children,
F.uar,s Emigration Loan Association. —Letters on this im-
portant and hjteresthig subject, may be addressed to Mrs. Chisholm,
IS, Charlton Terrace, Islington, enclosing a stamped envelope for


MY FIRST VISIT TO A LUMBER-CAMP.
“ II faat pear mon aarasement
JBien Dioias d’esprit que d’enjoiaement”
Okimson a bom.
Ih Few Brunswick, the month of March is decidedly the
pleasantest in the whole year. The heat of summer is only
equalled in intensity fay the cold of mid-winter; and the
autumn, with the exception of its short Unit delightful
Indian summer, is often damp, chill, and gloomy. For is it
the appearance, or oven the promise, of spring that makes
the charm of this month; for spring, as we know it in Eng-
land, does not exist here. There is no early flower peeping
timidly out to herald the first infancy of the season; no
gradual development of leaf, and bud, and blossom, to cheer
us with hope, or tantalize ns with delay. The change,
when it comes, is sudden and almost instantaneous. The
ice breaks, the snow melts from the hills, the swollen rivers
pour down their freshets, and summer bursts upon us.
But this never occurs so early as March, which, in every
respect, must be reckoned as one of the winter months.
Still, to my fancy, no season can be more agreeable: the
bright- sunshine overhead, the hard, crisp, and scarcely less
dazzling snow under your feet, the blear dry atmosphere-
all combine to raise the spirits, and to impart a sense of
keen enjoyment to every out-of-doors occupation, such as I
never elsewhere experienced.
It was, then, In the month of March, and in such weather
as X have described, that I received an invitation from
Hardwaj to pay Mm a visit at his lumber-camp, about
twenty miles higher up the river Fashwaak, which flowed
through my little farm. I had now been settled five
months: and, spite of the severity of the season, which put a
stop to all agricultural labour, I as yet u no holiday had
seen. 55 Hauling and chopping fire-wood, splitting cedar
poles for fences, and swamping roads through the snow for
my horse and sled, had kept me so fully occupied, that the
idea of mere profitless amusement had never once occurred
to me.
The winter’s work, however, was now over ; and I looked
forward to my first expedition with great glee—the more so
as I had a guest in my house, who, though a colonist from


'childhood, jet always having lived in Fredericton, was still
less of a backwoodsman than myself; and who, being of a
highly poetic temperament, would, I anticipated, derive
great pleasure from the novelty and wildness of the
scene.
My nearest neighbour, Wthe magistrate or “ squire ”
(as he was familiarly called) of the settlement, volunteered
to accompany us; and Hardway, who had come down in
search of provisions for Ms men, made oar party complete.
Altogether, we could not have started on such a trip
under better auspices. W-- was an English gentleman,
and made of the right stuff for a colonist; strong, hardy,
and active, of simple tastes and habits, ever ready for hard
work, while none more enjoyed a spree; and, to sum up all,
a thorough, sportsman. Hardway was the beau-ideal of a
.Bos, or master lumberer. Upwards of six feet high, with
scarce an ounce of flesh on his large bony frame, his limbs
long and covered with muscles, which showed like cords
beneath the tanned skin, he seemed formed for activity and
endurance, while his quick piercing eye, Ms overhanging
brow, and s nose hooked like the eagle h beak, denoted Ms
mind to be full as restless as his body- His youth, by all
accounts, had been one of adventure; though his Yankee
fondness for a- bam ”or ei hoax ” made it impossible to
know whether the wild and extraordinary stories he would
sometimes relate were to be taken in jest or earnest. Since
his return to the colony, he had speculated in various ways
wish little or no capital, but always with more or less
success; and bad lately made "an excellent hit by taking to
himself a canny Scotch widow, with a snug farm of 600
acres for her jointure.
He had now undertaken a task which many believed im-
possible—to drive Ms logs through u the narrows,” a set of
rapids in the river JHashwaak, said to be impassable to
canoes, and In the attempt to navigate which, more than
one man had lost his life; and it was there that the camp
which we were going to visit was situated.
It was arranged that I should drive them in my {£ pung,”
which, for the benefit of the uninitiated, I may as well
describe. It is a shallow oblong deal box, placed upon
wooden runners, shod with iron; the said box being fur-
nished with a cross board to serve as a seat, and occasion-
ally, as in the present case, with, the additional luxury of a
hack. It is drawn by one horse, and ranks between the


aristocratic sleigh and the plebeian sled, to which latter,
however, it is most closely allied.
, Owing to the delay of a blacksmith, in making some
wedges required by. Hard way for blasting rocks in the
river, we were detained the whole morning at the “ hotel,”
as the house of entertainment at S was ostentatiously
called ; a period which we employ ed in the Intellectual
recreation.of “chamber gymnastics,” such as chalking on
the floor, vaulting chairs, breaking pokers, and other
scientific amusements.
It was nearly 4 o'clock before we made a start; and,
with 'a smack of the whip and the universal e( Go lang,”
which I had long ago adopted, turned out of the yard, and
glided down the village hill to the merry jingling of our
sleigh-bells. At the bottom of the hill the road turned
abort to the left, and that corner passed, the path seemed,
to my unpractised eye, to lie right ahead ; in which opinion
I was confirmed by the squire’s cry of “ Straight on !” “ All
light! ” loudly echoed by Hard way, who sat beside him in
the bottom of the pung, behind the driving seat, which was
occupied by yonag A and myself. The next moment
we were distributed in various attitudes upon a snow-drift,
about six feet in depth, which blocked up the whole road,
straight into which I had unconsciously driven ; the winter
track, as our friends behind well knew, leading through an,
open, gateway on our right, across the fields, the usual and
only safe road in that season. After a hearty laugh,
matters were soon set to rights, and in. a few minutes more
we had reached the bank of the river, along whose frozen
surface our route lay, and a splendid, high-road it was. For
the first mile or two, charred stumps, and fences, and fields
•partially cleared, with here and there a log-hut and
smoking'chimney, marked, on either side, the outposts of
civilization ; but these soon disappeared, and the wild soli-
tary forest closed around us. The scenery was gloomy and
■solemn, as is always the case where firs and pines are the
principal growth ; yet it was pleasing, and sometimes even
beautiful. " The frequent bends of the river, too, served to
vary the monotony of the view, now glittering before us like
a long narrow streak of white through, the dark green fringe
of the spruce boughs; now widening out and presenting the
appearance of a small.inland lake, till a sudden turn round
some projecting rock would change the scene, and bring
some new feature into the landscape,


Hardway was not the man, however, to leave ns long to
a quiet contemplation of Mature : no other employment
being at- hand, mischief to him was a necessity; and this he
was not long in devising. First, by a dexterous jerk, he
wrenched off the back of our driving seat; and having
passed it off as an accident, added that it was a superfluity
quite unworthy of a backwoodsman, and therefore better
destroyed,; whereupon, after- having failed to make a com-
fortable scat of it for himself-, he threw it aside on the snow.
His next exploit was to unseat us, which he accomplished
by removing the pegs which attached our seat to the sides,
and bringing as all, as he said, to the same level. Poor
A—was disposed to rebel, but I managed to soothe him ;
for, besides that I saw the folly of appearing annoyed, I
enjoyed the fun, rude as it was, and at my expense. Our
Bos being now in the vein, set himself seriously at work to
demolish the pung; which, after a scuffle in which more
than one of us were several times sprawling on the snow (a
very harmless accident), was so completely effected, that
nothing was left but the bottom boards, on which, with
some difficulty, we continued to huddle together ourselves
and the various articles we were- carrying,
{To U concluded in oar next)
How to Peßssbvb Sbb»s. —The length of time during which
seeds retain their vitality is exceedingly different in different kinds,
'flic seeds of raspberries have grown lately after being buried deep in
Cornwall from the third or fourth century of the Ghistian era. Some
will; keep a thousand years ; others, not so many days ; bat for ail
practical purposes, and especially in reference to emigration, they
will retain their vitality long enough; and may be removed freon one
country to another, and keep well for a year or two after arrival. By
sh means, take ns many kinds of our best fruit, vegetable, and
ffowm' sends to Australia as you can find room for. We packed
seeds for the first settlers of Adelaide, which went safe. They were
well dried, and put- in dry brown-paper packets. The peas, beans,
and other heavy seeds were put in stout cotton bags, and the whole
Worn put in thru layers between the folds of blankets, in a rough box,
and never looked at- till after the voyage. The grand secret is, to
have them and. the paper completely dry, and not to exclude the air
Altogether from them., except when in the tropics. After you are
beyond the Cape of Good Hope, they ought to have abundance of air,
if yon could give it them. Many seeds will perish, soon if hermetically
elosmh as In bottles, jars, &c,~~ Cottage Gar demit


LETTERS DESCRIBING A RIDE THROUGH TEXAS.
No. ¥ll.
{Continued from our last Nm&er f page 58.)
I propose in this letter to give you a general outline of the
divisions of Texas, and to enumerate some of the advantages
and drawbacks it presents as an emigration held,-
The country may be considered in four divisions; the
coast line ; the undulating country from Louisiana to the
Guadeloupe; the mountainous country to the north; and
the purely pastoral country from the Guadaloupe to the
Rio Grande,
Along the line of coast there extends a tract or lowland
marsh v country, of varying depth, hut averaging perhaps
sixtv miles. On the banks of the rivers the soil is most
commonly of great fertility, and a plentiful supply of timber
is there invariably met with, although of less dimensions,
and (with the exception of the live oak) of less utility than
that of any other state of the union. Between rivers
and their tributary streams are wide fiats of prairie, clothed
with long coarse grass, without a shrub upon them, and
converted in the rainy season into impassable marshes.
This tract of country is suitable only for the settlement of
southern slave-owners, and is best adapted for the cultiva-
tion of tropical products. The -climate is dangerous and
destructive to northern constitutions; although the summer-
heats are tempered by the sea breezes which blow steadily
from the Gulp yet the fatal diseases of the south are far
from rare. A considerable degree of danger attends even
the transit of the newly-arrived immigrant through tills
district 5 the settlers of the German village of Fredericks-
burgh, shortly after landing at Fort Layacca, were attacked
hy a disease which assumed a choleraic form, and carried
off numbers of them. For many years the Texan settlers
boasted of a total indemnity from yellow fever, but the
summer of 1848 has-shown the fallacy of that opinion. It
is somewhat difficult to ascertain with any degree of accu-
racy the effects of this southern climate upon, health and
life: the majority of its inhabitants have been accustomed
to contemplate the most dangerous and deadly diseases as
portions of the common occurrences of their lives, and are


as indifferent as old campaigners to the numbers who fall
around them. Less fatal, 'undoubtedly, than many portions
of the southern country, the climate of the coast line of
Texas is jet a fatal one. Even where the resident is exempt
from the more acute class of diseases, it- cannot fail to lower
the -general tone of health. The capability of some tracts
of soil for the production of sugar is said to exceed even
the deep alluvial;; of the Mississippi, and planters are now
moving from Louisiana to tho Brazos and Colorado, at-
tracted by the comparative cheapness of the land, and its
exhaust-less fertility. The value of sugar lands is usually
estimated at from two to five dollars per acre.
Above the level tract is a rolling country, possessing a
proportion of good soil, intermingled with some very infe-
rior, The chief productions of this region are cotton and
Indian com; easterly, on the Trinity, some fine wheat has
been ‘''raised,” and it is in general well adapted for u raising”
stock. Wide prairies are also found in this division, but in
general slightly rolling, (not.with the wave-like swell of
the plains west of the Missouri river, but with long and
s {regular undulations,) and comparatively dry. The climate
is not so unhealthy as the level country j fevers are rare,
and the moot serious diseases are those which arise from
sudden decrease of temperature in the winter season, and
which are common to the whole of Texas, The farther we
proceed west the more healthy we find the climate. The
roads -in this division are dry and hard everywhere west of
the Bravos, The price of good agricultural laud, fit for the
growth of corn and cotton, may probably range from one
dollar (45,) to two dollars per acre.
The third division is usually termed the mountain coun-
try, and commences about 150 miles from the Port of
Galveston, or fiOO from the nearest part of the coast. The
hilly character of this region prevents the accumulation of
.surface water, and provides an abundance of small streams
invaluable for the uses of the settler, A moderate supply
of timber, and an abundant pasturage, are to be met with
throughout- the whole extent. It is adapted for the culti-
vation of tho -grams of the north, as well as corn and cotton,
and for the raising of cattle, and production of fine wool.
It Is at least as healthy as the healthiest portion of Horth
America, being exempt from fevers or malarious diseases,
and subject- only to tho inflammatory diseases of the winter,
Tho price of good land in. this region, at the close of the


year 1848, would bo estimated high at half a dollar (SJs./
per acre. _, . . . '
A fourth division includes the wide undulating prames
from the Guadaloupe river to the B,io“ Grande. This coun-
try- is pre-eminently pastoral, possessing a thickly grassed
surface, and a climate of great dryness. It is on an average
of seasons much too arid for successful cultivation, and the
crops not artificially supplied with moisture are
deficient, and sometimes- fall altogether. In favourable
seasons, or where irrigation is practised) the land in some
spots is capable of producing abundantly. It is very indif-
ferently supplied with timber, excepting th e tmi-squic, whichis
available only for fencing and fuel. This region possesses
the advantage of being’exceedingly salubrious, approxi-
mating to the climates of Australia and the Cape Polony.
It hag howuver, in common with every portion of this line
of coast, the drawback of northern gales in winter. By far
the largest portion of this country is entirely unoccupied:
a few settlers are established between the Guadaloupe and
the San Antonio,.and further south on the Nueces ; but to
the west for 200 miles is an untenanted country, seldom
visited now even by the wandering savage. JThere can be
no question whatever that this tract is cruelty adaptea for
the production of fine wool, and the pure Merino and Saxon
sheep would doubtless thrive, and increase m rapidly as in
our southern colonies. A few settlers who are new esta-
blishing themselves near the Nueces propose directing their
attention solely to'this branch of industry, fineir plan is
to procure sheep from the BiO Grande of she coarse Mexican
kind (descendants of the sheep of Barhary), and cross them
with the finer woolled breeds. By removing a few Mexican
families from, the frontier, and providing them with suit-
able houses on the form, labour may be had at small cost.
The Mexican herdsmen are generally esteemed careful and
trustworthy. The value of land adapted for wool-farming is
from ten cents (6d.) to half a dollar per acre. This would
command a. range of pasture-laud back from the stream upon
which the -settler, fronts his farm, of search greater extent
than the land purchased, and of no value to any hut him-
self. The titles to such land are by no means very clear,
except in some few cases; and, unless the purchaser exercises
extreme caution, he is liable to have his title disputed. The
grants of the Texan Government at the first estahlismnent
of the republic, the old Spanish, grants, and the head rights .


or private citizen’s claims, do not infrequently all meet
together at the same spot, and the only safe plan is to
purchase from every claimant. The grass of this western
country is shorter than, that of Australia, when stock has
not been fed upon eitner, hut much thicker and closer. In
the more luxuriant pastures of our southern colonies, before
it is eaten down by stock, the grass is as tall as in an
English meadow ; the high plains of San Antonio resembled
In the winter season an unstoeked upland pasture burnt
np by summer drought. After the spring rains the country
Fj’v on rn aspect of extreme the grass becomes
hi ** blight green, and flowers of the gayest tints carpet
ow-- the whole prairie.
The dimate of Texas, it is not difficult to discover, is
healthiest where it is least available for cultivation; and
tbe moms available for agricultural purposes, or the more
fertile and productive the soil, the more dangerous does the
climate become. lipon the open, uuwooded, un watered,
arid prairies of the west, the settler |.s as likely to enjoy
heal.tn as in the karoo of South Africa, or the plains of
Australia Felix, whilst the rich sugar lauds of the lower
Brazos approximate to the jungles of India, Some portions
of the mountain country, however, are exceptions to this
nde, and salubrity and fertility appear there to be com-
bined.
Between the Clibolo creek and Ban Antonio is an undu-
lating country, in some open spots thickly grassed. But
extensive tracts are covered with musquit trees, closely set
together, in some places congregating so closely, with
pricklv shrubs in ter filling, as to form Impassable thickets.
There is much stony soil amongst the timber, and the grass
is there very inferior. The only animals met with in these
Wastes are deer, and a few wild horses or mustangs, Hear
the Oihoio are fine luxuriant pastures, sprinkled'-with live
oaks. The settlers there have fine large fat cattle, and on
one farm I, saw a drove of 400 mules, The land from tire
soUtneru pars oi the Oiboxo creek upwards towards the
mountains consists of open well grassed prairies, with
thickets, - and, a few groves of timber. It is somewhat
deficient in water. There is an admixture of good with
etony sod, but somewhat too arid for cultivation. .From
the mountains down the course of the Guadaloups river,
on each side, are fertile pastures, sprinkled with post oaks
a foot in diameter. The river bottom is a wide deep hollow,
msw sEiu®s—-so. in, y


well wooded. The soil is generally good, bxdp too dry.
Fifteen miles from the German settlement is the little town
of fSeguin, containing about 100 inhabitants, and pleasantly
situated on the edge of the river. The fine tract of pastoral
country between the Guadaloupc and the higher Coloraod
is worth from Is . to 4s. per acre. Some of the richer bottom
lauds might be valued at from one to two dollars. Many
of the titles iu this pari of the country are esteemed un-
sound, Although the clime is not at so arid as farther
west, it is still somewhat too dry for successful culture.
But with skilful cultivation and proper attention to the
time of planting, good crops of Indian corn may be ob-
tained. In the low swampy bottoms some degree of fever
is. not- nufreguent iu the autumn.
(To be continued.)
THE PROGRESS OF NATAL.
Ermrs new colony is a Paradise, if we believe the first
descriptions made public in this country. These are usually
from the pens of parties having a warn pecuniary interest
in the immigration of hands of moneyed colonists. .Natal
is the last emigrantV Paradise, and not without some
more solid reasons than the florid descriptions of climate,
pastures, fruits, and- Bowers which, in turn, do duty for
every fresh field settled by the persevering energy of
the ’Anglo-Saxon race, .Since our last notes upon Hatal
(p, 206, First series,) that colony has made considerable
progress. The company represented by Mr, Byrue has
scut out 650 emigrants of various classes, and the govern-
ment having announced the terms on which it is willing
to sanction the purchase of land, and the emigration of laud
purchasers, efforts are being made by several other indivi-
duals to form Colonizing Companies.
We have not yet any accounts of the progress of the
emigrants sent out by Messrs. Byrne, who are to be located
on government land; indeed, some time must elapse before
those parties will be able to afford any information. We
sincerely trust that nothing will ‘interrupt the success of
a scheme for selling land to a class who have hitherto been
excluded from freeholds in the Southern British Colonies.
W e have been able to collect since last we wrote gome


original and valuable details respecting Natal, and espe-
cially two letters, one of ■which has only lately reached this
f*ouutry. From the other some extracts appeared in the
Time*; hat several very important passages now given at
length were omitted.
Having daily experience of the ignorance which prevails
on colonial geography, we venture to repeat that the New
Province of Natal lies on the eastern coast of South Africa,
between Algoa Bay in the Cape Province, and Delagoa Bay,
the ancient Portuguese Colony, and nearly opposite the
Inlands of Mauritius and Madagascar, The port is ob-
structed by a bar, and is not at present safe for vessels
drawing more than twelve feet water; but it is the opinion
of the late harbour master, Mr, Morewood, that at a mode-
rate expense the bar may be materially, if not entirely,
lowered. Bn Andrew Smith, author of a work on the
Zoology of South Africain an official report described
*the there western portion 515 as consisting of (i numerous
extensive Pats, thicMy covered with luxuriant grass, and
abounding in rivers and rivulets, the waters of which could
be led over thousands of acres at comparatively little ex-
pense, The middle and eastern divisions exhibit a broken
undulating surface, and abound with low knolls, in some
places clustered together, in others separate and connected
by rich meadow, covered with abundant vegetation. Here
the rivers are numerous, and some, whose sources are far in
the interior, are very large, the more considerable ones
Commonly run in deep channels j and, from the banks being
generally' precipitous, their waters could not be made avail-
able for irrigation, which, however, is of no importance, as
there are numerous small rills and powerful springs.
- Trues fit for timber exist everywhere in sufficiency, but
they are most abundant towards the eastern and western
extremities, where forests of considerable magnitude are
found, but without the great proportion of underwood which
exists in those of the Cape Colony.”
K Although there was such an abundant supply of pasture,
(Mr oxen lost desk Our farmer explained to ran that in
ali countrm where ike grass is not burned from time to time ,
the same occurrence almost invariably happens where cattle are
pastured upon -if:. The natives to a man affirmed that a
move healthy country for cattle could not he found.’*
* Tags 44, African Exporter.
i 2


In the published accounts of Natal a long list of veg'd*.
table productions is generally given, but these only mis-
lead ; as for any profitable purpose on a large scale, wild
indigo, wild cotton, and the like are useless.
Tire first colonists of Natal were the Dutch farmers or
Boers, who, dissatisfied (not without reason) with the Cape
Government, migrated across the Drakenberg mountains,
a dreadful pilgrimage of full 1000 miles When they ar-
rived in the country it had been almost depopulated by a
murderous native monarch, Chaka. Again tormented by
the vexatious meddling of the local Colonial Government,
the Dutch retreated to the interior, and sold most of their
farms around Port Natal, and the town of Pieter-Maritz-
burgh, which they had founded, for trifling sums, to specula-!
tire Englishmen, chiefly traders and Cape merchants.
Therefore all the most available If not the best land is
in private hands.
Hitherto the colonists have lived on pastoral and agri-
cultural pursuits, on a trade with the Mauritius in cattle,
which will be important as long as Madagascar is dosed to
trade ; and on a barter trade" with the native
tribes, of doth, gunpowder, metals, and toys, for cattle,
ivory, skins, and other African, raw produce. The number
of colonists has been small; and they have flourished not a
little perhaps on the excellent- bargains they obtained from,
the Dutch,
We have yet to learn what will be the staple article of
export on which Natal will depend, if it is to flourish as a
great British colony. The means of existence are evidently
ample ; but the means of maintaining an export trade, on
which the importance of a colony greatly depends, remain to
be created.
There is much talk of Natal cotton. The soil, the climate,
the distance from a port and from England, are all favour-
able, but hitherto labour has been found wanting. After
the statements in Mr, Maxwell’s letter, we should be loth
to leave England with the view of cultivating cotton. The
great difficulty and drawback of Natal lies in the large
native population, which, since the safety of British rule
has been introduced, have flowed in to the number of
§OO,OOO-r~savages who will only work when and how they
please. It is proposed to make them work by taxing them.
The question is, can it be done ? Earl Grey is favourable
to the idea, therefore it will probably be tried, But the


iaanfcgement of semi-barbarous black races by white agri-
cultural colonists is too large a subject to be included in
this brief introduction to our Natal colonists'' letters.
If the black immigrants can be managed and made
useful, Natal will in a few years be an important colony ;
at present it is evidently in embryo. We should have been
all for a few villages of military pensioners, if Sir Harry
Smith had not disapproved, of that step.
The. following account of D’Urban and Pieter-Matits-
burgh, is abridged from Letters in the Natal Paper, by Mr.
PMpson, a schoolmaster lately settled in the colony;—
«The port of Natal is a picturesque sheet of water, with,
•an island in the middle, surrounded by wooden steeps and
verdant slopes, The wood is, ho wever, not usually of a size
available for building purposes, but affords a supply of fuel
bn the inhabitants of D'Urban. The village (of D’Urban) is
two miles distant through the Bush, reached by -a path
ankl e-deep in sand.
■"John Eustace, a good-natured soldier of the 45th, car-
ried some of the children ; and, after piloting ns across some
watercourses, bushes, and briars, brought us to a kind of
rustic inn, where we found accommodation for the night,
the silence of which was broken by the songs and dances of
the Gaffers, and the shrill sounds of frogs from the neigh-
bouring swamps. As to I)’Urban, picture to yourself an
extensive common, resembling those of England, stretching
down the side of a declivity until it meets the waters of the
bav, Besprinkled with bushes, and dotted over with cottages
ami bouses of various shape, style, and size, almost all.
composed of * wattle and dab,’ white-washed and thatched.
That in which we, slept, comprising three rooms and an
enclosed verandah, cost more than IOOt., wood and labour
being the principal items of expense. The outhouses,
stables. or native servants’ offices, appended to these dwell-
ings, are Uaffer huts, hemispherical erections five or six
leet in height, formed of rude thatch, supported by bent
sticks.
;s Menial work is here usually performed by the natives,
.Most of the men are without clothing, wearing only a girdle
round the hips, from which depends in frost a square piece of
skin-—behind, a kind of fringe formed of the same materials.
Seme, however, have garments of various descriptions,Man


kets, counterpanes, jackets--—aaytMng but browsers, On the
whole, they are a fine athletic race, and are considered at
present honest, yet shrewd, perfectly sensible of the value
of money. The roads are merely cut out by the wagons
from the sandy soli, which extends for some miles around
the neighbourhood. In several cases wagons without wheels
are drawn like sledges by oxen over the loose quicksand.
Gentlemen and ladies seldom venture out exception horse-
back. Yet it was smprising to witness the fertility of the
gardens ; vegetables, fruits, and flowers, thriving where an
Englishman would despair of rearing a furze-bush. The
grass on the waste lauds was everywhere long and rank.
The water of the hay Is brackish and unwholesome, and
should be avoided. That brought from the ITmgeni River
Is pleasant and salubrious. This .stream abounds with alii”
gators, and has no bridge over it, so that accidents not
infrequently occur,
“ Our first view of Pisrsn-MABirznoiiGH was impeded
by a slight mist that hung in the morning air : soon
the white bouses were descried, scattered at intervals over
a ridge occupying the centra of a valley. It consists of
about two hundred houses, built of bricks unburned, or
of stone which is found in the immediate neighbourhood.
The bricks are whitened, and the roofs either thatched or
tiled-, Brlchmaking is a profitable business* Most of. the
soil is suitable. The clay is trampled by the feet of Oaffers
or oxem The Mocks of laud bounded by the streets are
divided into 'erven/ each 4 erf ’containing between one and
two acres. The lowest government price of an erf is 1001.;
font in tbo less favourable localities they may he purchased
from private, holders for considerably less. An erf has
seldom more than one house erected upon it, and many are
unoccupied and uninclosedy others are formed into fields
and gardens. The Court House and Dutch Reformed Church
are built of stone and thatched, Hb Episcopalian church
has been erected. Divine service; is performed in the Govern-
ment School Room, The Wesleyan Chapel is similar to
those in country towns at home," A comfortable-looking
cottage is the trunk or prison ; there being no prisoner, the
gaoler occupies himself In keeping cows and cultivating
oat-hay, Mountains surround this town, which is insulated
by the divided forks of the Bushman’s River, streams from
which are led through the town, in watercourses. The
weeping willow overhangs the watercourse before my door,


’g-'MIe other fruitful or ornamental trees display tit-eir pro-
duce and blossoms by the road side.
«ii; i s row (June 21st) midwinter bore (Pieter-Mante-
hnr-vb.) The weather is like that of May in England,
Bail rarely falls. Ike day is usually bright with warm
sunshine, and chilly mornings and evenings ; the former
occasionally accompanied by slight hoar frost. The houses,
on "the Capo Model, have no fireplaces except for cooking ;
But the deficiency having been, ascertained, is being sup-
plied in new erections. .., , , , ~
“The Dutch Boers have nearly all withdrawn into the
interior, and agricultural produce has become entirely defi-
cient. 'Meat and flour, and oats, and oaten hay for horns,
arc frequently imported from Cape Town. White bread is
worth ocl, a pound, and brown about 3d. Milk, butter, and
groceries are about the same prices as ia Englandcheese
and vegetables fully double the English price. We were
more plentifully supplied with bread and potatoes during
owe voyage than here, in the midst of millions oi acres of
fertile sod, where there Is not a man. to till them. Agri-
culturists, therefore, in every branch are what are most
wanted here. Of professions and storekeepers wo have
more than enough,”
My mm Fbebh»V-In taking up my pen, to answer
yours, dated January 2, of the present year, you must ex-
cuse me if I do not enter go fully into the subject as you
would wish; hut, being in business, I have many things to
engage my attention at the present moment. 1 shall, now-
oyeiy answer your queries to the best oi my ability
Ist. I am not aware of any country in Europe that re-
aetchles Natal in regard to climate, I believe it resembles
v&oxQ t]b&& oilier in t*u6 woridj &tolu 1 bciiovo
nearly all that is produced in that country could he here.
Our dry and cool weather commences now, having scarcely
an v min in winter; but, during the summer, we have abund-
ance of rain, chiefly during the night,
2nd, The climate does not occasion the languor so much
* Copy of a.letter from Balph Clarence, Esq,, of Port Fatal, South
Africa, t« Mr, William Irons, Jan,, St. Peter’s Street, St. .Mbaiis,
Herts,, Manager of the Protestant Co-operative Emigration and Ulo-
mmtim. Society, dated May 18th, 1849.


complained of in the Bast, excepting that new corners
sometimes complain just oa their first arrival; this never
lasts more than two or three days.
3rd, Laborious manual labour can be performed tea or
twelve hours out of the twenty-four, without inconvenience*
there being almost always a fine breeze: the sun is hot'
Natal is within the limits of the trade winds during the
summer months,
4th, Excellent wheat is grown in the upper district of
Natal, that is, where most of the .Dutch are settled-—the
country there being also admirably adapted for cattle. The
farmers calculate upon rearing 93 out of 100 on an average,
this is in the Klip Elver District; but to state whether
wheat, will pay to cultivate near the coast, I cannot, as I d$
not believe any one has yet tried It. It is thought by many
it will grow, as the soil is adapted for it. Wild bucks some-
times annoy the crops, as well as pigs anti elephants; but
all these, are more in imagination than reality. WiM
animals are very timid, and are easily kept off", as maybe
proved by the natives having their gardens generally close
to, in fact part of, the jungles, only cleared, and they very,
rarely suffer loss from these intruders. We are never with-
out potatoes; the natives grow a great many of the kidney
kind sweet potatoes also grow well, which are very much
liked by most persons, and a,re cultivated with very little
labour, it being a creeping plant, and soon covering a large
surface of ground,
sth, Cows and qxen vary from, two to three pounds each..
Meat, in towns, 2|- per lb.; fowls very abundant, 2s. %Id, per
dozen; there is a great demand for them by the shipping.
6th. An export trade has been steadily carried oa for the
last two years, with cattle for the Mauritius, Sheep could,
in my opinion, also he bred for this trade, as the native
sheep thrive well, and only want to be crossed by European
stock, when a superior race of sheep would be the result,
that would live as well as the small hairy creatures that
the natives now possess; but, observe, a flock of sheep from
England, could not he introduced, they must be bred on the
spot to live from native sheep : two or three rams could be
kept without- being allowed to run, and perhaps brought to
the climate by degrees. The same remarks are applicable
to goats ; they invariably die when lauded from the vessels,
though only brought from, the Gape,
7th. With regard to our imports from England, they 000-


gist, of every article that is required by an European popu-
lation, besides many European manufactured goods that
are rapidly finding a market among the natives, not only of
those living within our borders, but the natives are groat-
traders. A man with his subordinates will frequently
come with from 205. or 30-s., to sometimes nearly ten pounds,
and purchase goods, which they carry to a distant tribe,
where they purchase cattle, about one-third cheaper than
they could in the colony.. Many English hunters make this
also pari of their employment. The goods taken by these
traders and natives are chiefly eleven-fourth blanket, long-
haired baize two yards wide, both white and black; blue
calico, wide—the wider the better; brass wire for orna-
ments; also beads this article is a dangerous one to bring,
unless acquainted with the market—the natives having
their peculiar fancies, and, although beads are ever so
beautiful, if not the right kind, they would give nothing
for them. Pure dead white are very saleable; the whole-
sale prices here, original package, containing from two to
three cwt.. are generally from 2.?. to 2s. 6«, per lb.; red
heads, with white inside, 2.?. ikl to 3a, wholesale; large blue
heads' and aW white,'very saleable, but I am happy to
s£s,te that the great '‘demand tor these trinkets is rapidly
changing for more useful articles, that is to say, among the
one hundred thousand natives living within our settlement,
who. are British subjects. I think the natural antipathy to
clothing is giving way. As an, example of how trade Is
opening here, about three or four years ago I had four
Kaffir picks, British manufacture, that I purchased from a
person who had sent one, made by themselves, home ; these
remained in my shop several months, the Kaffirs frequently
inquiring the price, but would not purchase, preferring to
give 2-?. for twelve inches of three-inch tire iron, to 3,a for
a pick ready made. I have lately been expecting two
thousand direct from England, and have one-half bespoke
by traders, who will, take them immediately into the Kolo
country, I believe no Kaffirs in tb.e colony now make,
their own; immense quantities are imported by different
persons.. I wish I had five or six tons at the present mo-
ment; they should be eighteen or twenty inches in length,
and about live pounds weight. No English hoes have been
found so well adapted for the soil as these; the Kaffirs
always break, the English garden, hoe. I have found them
answer on my cotton plantation better than any I could
procure here.


Bth. The demaud for English manufactured goods is
rapidly increasing among the natives.
9th. The same idea has often struck me, that no country
could he better adapted for the cultivation of silk. The
mulberry tree grows more luxuriantly here than I have
seen it anywhere else, so much so that I have several times
not known the tree, but after examining the tree have been
obliged to inquire if it was really a mulberry tree.
10th. I certainly think that no country in the world
could be found where so many advantages are available in
so, small a space j consequently, in. my opinion. Natal is
well adapted for a company such as you name, It is cer-
tain that cotton will grow well. I have a plantation of
fifteen acres j this is now the third year ; the produce has
increased every year. It is thought that a plantation will
last from five to seven years, though this plantation I do
not intend to continue, for two reasons; first, because I
have land much nearer the town, and, consequently, more
convenient ; and, secondly, because I have, during the last
two years, been raising a superior description of cotton,
both better quality and more productive than the indige-
nous. cotton with which my plantation was first planted,
having at that time no other sort. I have one tree of fine
white long stapled cotton, that yielded last year six pounds
of raw cotton, and this year the same tree has yielded
nearly seven pounds. Then indigo could he made here in
krge\|uantities; a small quantity I sent to Manchester by
Dr. Elans, which was exhibited at the Chamber of Com-
merce (this was only made by way of experiment), hut it
was valued fey the ferokers at 3s, 4d, per pound. Beans are
an article that are very productive here, and greatly in de-
mand in Mauritixis; they do well between the rows of
cotton, that is the first year of a plantation. As I have
written thus far very badly, I think I had better not cross
my letter, as I find I have not got through your list of in-
quiries : I thought I had done when I came to the 10th
query. Indigo is indigenous and very abundant; I had
enough seed collected last year to sow several acres, and
intended to have tried it on something like a proper system
if I had been joined by a relative whom I rather expected;
but I have been disappointed, and having a good business,
do not think it prudent to give up a certainty to gratify
my natural inclinations. Coffee trees, imported two years
ago from Bourbon, are now thick with fruit, quite ripe, so
that trees can no w be raised from seed, grown on the spot.


Pine apples gtowwltb.no more care than is bestowed on
cabbages; the fruit is very fee, larger than I remember to
have seen them at the Mauritius.
11th. I do not think it necessary for any of your party
to take any trouble respecting the cultivation of cotton, as
the cultivation here must be quite different to what it. is
in America, here it being a perennial ; but I should cer-
tainly advise a machine of the beat and most approved
construction to be brought out, one that could be worked
by water or horse power, both a saw-gin and a roller-gin , I
have read that in America there are roUer-gim that will
clear eight or ten hundred pounds per day. How, there is
no one here acquainted with any machine, on the roller
principle, that will clear more than t wenty pounds per day;
the consequence is, that several, parties have given up the
cultivation 055 account of the immense trouble in clearing
—'the saw-gin, of course, spoiling so long a staple. Agri-
cultural implements of all kinds I should recommend to be
brought out; they can be procured here, but often very
expensive, and not always the kind required. As this isk
billy country, I should advise to bring a few of the shifting
cldc hill ploughs: scarifiers or horse hoes; a few doeen of
the best spades, Ho, 4—all that are imported are great
rubbish—4o or 50 dozen strong hoes for field work'; brown
calico, one yard and two yards wide; cotton blankets, one
and a quarter and tan-fourths; also woof blankets, face on
both sides, but coarse, for natives, I should hardly recom-
mend bonnets or straw-plait, the quantity must* be very
small. Bonnets come out in eases every season, and the
ladies are particular about the fashion, though living among
uncivilized mm,
1 fith, I think it would be very prudent to send one or
two intelligent persons to prepare the way, and make ar-
rangements with the government for land, or purchase
from private parties.
13tin flood building materials can be had almost any-
where: sneh as stone and brick, timber not in all parts,
but It can be purchased at a very fair price.
14th. The camel would be doubtless a great blessing to
the colonists on the west coast of South Africa, to trade
between Oape Town and Hamaynu Land, and the Bamara
Land beyond Walwick Bay; but, in a fertile country like
Fatal, with such abundance of water in every direction, I
almost doubt whether the camel would live.


15th. I have never yet heard of any accident or loss be-
tween Natal and Cape Town, The trading vessels make
about six voyages in the year. The passage .is sometimes
done in five days, but generally ten to fourteen days, it
depends on the time of year. People here think, nothing of
going backwards and forwards on business. An overland
route is never attempted but for amusement; persons
sometimes wish to see the country ; it- is perfectly safe and
often done, but, the distance being about 1000 miles, it
requires time, Freight- from Cape Town to Natal is %L per
ton, and passage 30& in the cabin. Every description of
fanning can he carried on at Natal; but the country in the
interior, about Klip and Bushman River, being so admir-
ably adapted for cattle and corn, the 1 Dutch have preferred
to settle there. The land along the coast is more tropical,
and ail tropical productions that have been tried succeed;
and yet persons direct from England feel no inconvenience
from the heat, there being generally a fine breeze.
In conclusion, I should be sorry to lead persons to .Natal
who would be afterwards discontented. Persons coming
from England t-o any new colony are apt to be dissatisfied,
they find so many things different to what they see in an
old country. I was four years in Weate.ru Australia, and
travelled far into the interior; now I ca-n state, without- the
least fear of contradiction, that where there is one acre of
bad or uncult-ivab.le land (( in Natal,''' measuring from the
coast to 100 miles inland, there are at least 1000 acres of
land in Australia that never could be cultivated.
I trust you will excuse all imperfections in this letter,
but having just, finished mj business letters, I determined
not to , let the first opportunity pass without answering your
letter,
{To be mntimmi m our ’Utexl.)
. Thk ■UHis'oaJt Price os Wasw Laud. —The idea of applying any
uniform price to the waste lands of this kaleidoscope colony (Aus-
tralia) appears to the practical settler very absurd; but he is not
allowed, to form any opinion of the value of the land which lies trader
Ms nose, and on which rains the sweat of his brow, but strangers hi
another hemisphere, squinting at hire through an inverted telescope,
kindly .sends him word what it is—not i and, if he remonstrate, are
apt to think him both, stupid and pert, Towiuend’s Hambies,
Oottoc,—The emigrant requires little else than bedding, three
dozen shirts, a shooting Jacket or two, and s great coat.— lbid.


RAILWAYS FOR AUSTRALIA.
Sons short time since, it was a current, delusion that a
stream of golden commerce—of passengers and merchaa-
dize—coukl be created by the simple process of intersect-'
|»g a desert or swamp with two parallel iron bars. Grave
xaexx on ’Change spoke, wrote, and invested, as if the rail-
way had been the Magician’s pointing, not only to the
hidden, riches, Vat turning all it touched to gold. Enter-
prising surveyors and avid attormes, with all the fecundity
of crocodiles, laid project after project on the floors of Stock
Exchanges, to he* hatched by'the warm hopes of greedy
speculators. Many gentlemen % Act of I'arUament realised
handsome fortunes, and rained their first anci last clients—
directors of direct lines-—with no other instruments than a
map, a ruler, a hard pen, and a bottle of red ink. At no
small cost of cash, credit, and character, the commercial pub-
lic have learned that a well-made.railway will no more create
traffic than awd 1-built dock will create trade, without certain
solid primary elements; there must be something to carry
In order to All either trucks or ships; there must be some
reason for travelling to attract travellers. A railway costs
net only a great deal of money to make, but a great deal
of money to maintain; and, unless something can be found
for it to do every hour in the day, the expenses eat its head
oC Mow, if you can unite a rising inland manufacturing
town with a- good port, or if you can intersect a country of
mines, nnwerked for want of cheap certain conveyance,
yon may create traffic; you can cause to be carried mer-
chandize, and yon can indues to travel passengers, which,
under the old system, would never have been stirred. But
there arc limits to this kind of development, and very
narrow limits. There are scores of little railways in this
coins try which do not produce traffic enough to pay the
wages of the station clerks and policemen, leaving out ail
other expenses.
By the last accounts from, .Australia, the echoes of our
lunatic rejoicings over imaginary profits have reached and
inspired our A ustralian brethren. The Sydney journals last,
received are filled with visions of railway glories and hot dis-
cessions on the share that each district claims to hold in
this presumed source of untold wealth.
A provisional committee has-been formed in Sydney, with


Mr, diaries Cowper, a highly respectable member of the
Legislative Council, at its head, for forming a railway or
tramway from Sydney through Paramatta and Wellington
to Cffiulbnrn, a . great Squatting district, distant from
Sydney about seventy miles. The 'Colonial Government -will
support a guarantee of five per cent, for twenty-five years
on the capital expended in executing any part of this line.
We regret that practical experience, gathered in a per-
sonal examination of the frame of the principal lines of
England and the Con.tiu.ent—combined with our know-
ledge of the actual resources of Australia—prevents us
from taking a favourable view of a project which reflects
so much credit on the patriotism and enterprise of its pro-
moters, It would be a much easier and much more agree-
able task to pen flowing periods on the golden transmuta-
tions to be effected by Australian railroads than to enter
into a dry analysis of the cost of construction, cost of
working, and expenses of maintenance of way, or a calcu-
lation of the number of travelling shepherds and emigrants,
the bales of wool, casks of tallow,, and return cargoes of
slops, tea, Hour, and tobacco, on which the hopes of divi-
dends from the Sydney and Goulburn Railway must rest.
Unpleasant as it is to damp the ardour of colonial enter-
prise, we cannot help stating our firm belief that the
cheapest description of railway would be too dear for the
present traffic of Now South Wales.
Few South Wales is the richest and most densely popu-
lated of onr South Sea settlements; but Hew South Wales
has not one town of the slightest commercial importance, ex-
cept Sydney, The wealth of the province is pastoral; that
is to say, it is distributed over the country on the backs of
sheep and cattle, and never collected into centres until it
meets 'once a year, in the Port of Sydney, The population
does not lie in well-defined tracks, or in a succession of towns
or even villages, as in Canada and the United States; it is
scattered all over the country as in the Highlands of Scot-
land, or the non-mineral counties of Wales. Sydney forms
the centre of a circle, one half of which is land and the
other half water. The water half brings to the port ships
from all points of the compass: and in the same way inland
travellers and merchandize reach the Australian metropolis
from all points of the. compass of the laud half—not stream-
ing along any great north road, not hastening from any
great river, port, or rich coal district—'but riding, Arab like,


&&ph la bis own conveyance, from east and west and north,
and south.
It is Just possible that a railway, very economically con-
structed, and very carefully worked, between Sydney and
Paramatta, might pay. It would have to encounter the
opposition of the steam boats; and, according to European
experience, short pleasure lines, with expensive termini,
have seldom paid—where competing with steam boats,
mmr* But the success or failure of a mere pleasure line
of ten miles can never he of the slightest general interest.
More than a- pleasure- line it could scarcely be, because it
would not pay to transfer dray-loads of wool, which had
traveilep from the interior as far as Paramatta on trucks, for
themko of the ten miles of railway to Sydney. Passing beyond
Paramatta, we come to Wellington, a place of no sort of
importance in a railway traffic point- of view; and thence
to Oeulhurn j a railway would traverse a pastoral desert-
dotted over with—not villages—lust sheep and cattle sta-
tions, It u true that Few South Wales—indeed, each of the
throe great- Australian settlements —produces valuable bulky
experts; but there is a peculiarity about all these exports,
with the exception of the copper of South Australia, which,
would render" the inevitable daily cost of railway convey-
ance Impossible. When yon turn your team to graze in the
bush, when yon sell them, in town, and put- your dray under
a shod, your expenses are ended; but when once a railway
is opened, its expenses commence and never end, night or
day, unless it be totally abandoned. The main inland
trafno of Few South Wales consists, and will consist for
years to oome, of wool, and wool only grows once a year.
Once a year, and all at the same season, the flocks are
sheared; soon afterwards the drays are loaded and set out
on their way to Sydney or its tributary ports, and to Mel-
bourne from the Port Philip district. Paring these months
the roads into Sydney and Melbourne are crowded up with
wool drays. These drays are filled up with stores of tea,
sugar, tobacco, salt, soap, and slops for the Bush, and
thowo, In nine cases out of ten, the travels of the Squatter
and his servants end for the year. Therefore, in consider-
ing the mass of merchandize to be conveyed from any
pastoral district, we must remember that the bulk of it
must be conveyed all at once, rendering a railway busy
for a month, and grass-grown for the rest of the year.
Wo have soon, on a grand occasion, ninety drays assem


bled at. Gouiburn. But ninety drays, where the teams
are fed on natural grass, show a very small amount of
movement compared with the same number in
where each carrier s and farmer’s horse eats from -ss. to 7a.
a week, and must earn his living every day. Soma san-
guine enthusiasts may point to the United States, where
railways of the cheapest kind have been constructed with
most beneficial, if not profitable, results, through dense
forests, and over dreary unpopulated wastes. These lines
have been, usually constructed by the federal governments,
uot by individuals, and they have united great centres of
popidation, or led the way to some great lake or river port
from a seaport or manufacturing district. In the' United
natural advantages have created nuclei of popula-
tion; in Australia there is nothing inland but grassy plains
and sheep and cattle. In the United States, the popula-
tion. is a nation of commercial travellers ; they live on the
steam boat and the rail, trading, bartering, calculating-,
and swopping; in Australia, two-thirds of the population
are pastoral, the .other third vibrates between the store ami
the counter; therefore, comparison does not hold between
the two countries. The physical conformation of Aus-
tralia must render the horse and the ox team the cheapest
mode of conveyance over the greater part of its surface for
a century to come. The discovery of rich inland mines,
especially of coal, not cut off like the Burra by a rocky
mountain range, but within reach of a port, may, at some
future time, alter these conditions.
We have entered at length into this railway question, be-
cause a delusive hobby of the kind stands in the way of more
humble, but more useful and more practicable public works.
The cheapest railways that have ever been talked of
constructed of wood, are calculated to cost from oOOh to
iOOO£. a mile. Railways so cheap have never yet been,
made. The American lines cost on an average 5000 b a mile,
Row, there is a great need at the present mom cut in
Australia of common roads, of bridges, of cuttings through
certain rocky ranges, and embankments through certain
swamps, of wells to be sunk on plains, and tanks to be built
on. mountains. The roads needed are not such, as would
delight the heart of an engineer, military or civil, but, for
the present, just- something practicable, over which a team
with a loaded, dray could in all weathers be sure of com*
plating from ten to fifteen miles a day. There are many


spots on beaten tracts, in good pastoral districts in the
Ilnal'Jt where the expenditure of a hundred pounds would
save *a circuit of miles. There are others where a littxe
bridge or a punt would save days of delay. Such works
confer no immortality on the engineer—-they scarcely afford
room for a single job ; but their value, when executed unaer
the direction of an able honest man, can scarcely be calcu-
lated in monev. Not unfrequently ,1000 b judiciously ex-
pended would* double the value of a district 100 miles
square. nil these improvements have been suggested years
#.To hv Sir Thomas Mitchell, whose ideas and plans on puolic
works, if sometimes too splendid, are always sound ; the envy
nf Ms inferiors, and his own _ ungovernable temper, nave
hitherto prevented him from enjoy ing the position his talents
deserve, and the Colony from reaping the advantage of his
great a»d useful abilities.
” We cannot imagine that, under any circumstances, loco-
motive power could pay in Australia. Speed is of no value
for such articles as wool ami tallow, and passengers cannot
he sufficient! y numerous to demand more than Horse speed.
Tramway swifch horse power-horses and horse-keep being
chviip would be much more likely to be the
little line of seven miles planned from the port to the city
of Adelaide, than the handsome perfect description of rail-
way which will of course be executed, if _ the affair be con-
ducted by an English committee and engineer.
The Americans have a kind of road, called a plank road,
constructed entirely of timber, but open at a toil for the
use of every kind of vehicle, which seems much more suit-
able for Australia than any kind of exclusive road; but it
would require an investigation into the quality of the Aus-
tralian timber available for the purpose, and the cost of
laying it down, before we could form any sort of estimate
of the cost of such a road. The best Australian trees are
so hard as to he costly to work on a large scale; many other
kinds fly like horn when dry. The evidence before a
Committee of the House of Lords on this subject is loose
and unsatisfactory.
.."'.We would observe, that it would be well that those who
fake an interest in our Colonies should not turn their minds
toward schemes of impossible and useless perfection, hut
rather assist in carrying out common utilities for the com-
mon people of whom colonists are chiefly composed. Wheel-
barrows in new countries must precede sedan chairs.
sx;w sssxvs—so, .ra, K


LETTER FROM ABROAD.
[We hope those who approve of our plan and principles mil eonHnm
to forward us genuine Letters from Mmigrants.]
From a Wot,
Melbourne, Port Philip, Feb. Uih, 1849.
My Dear Moths®.-—I hope and trust in God you are still alive
and well in this sad -winter, and that you are provided for, so that
you do not want for anything, God will raise up friends to take care
of you, tnai is all the comfort I have got My dear Brother, I have
been here one month to-morrow; I seat you a letter the second day,
which I hope yon have received safe; lam anxiously looking for one
from you, God bless you. I went to a very handsome Wesleyan
chapel the fern Sunday, heard a very nice sermon on the 6th chapter
of Ephesians, 14 th verse. " Awake, thou that sleepest,” &c. The third
Sunday I found the Baptist chapel, went in the evening, beard the
same chapter and the same text. Do not yon think that was very
remarkable? Ido. Dear mother, I have now been to take Laura to
the Baptist Sunday School; the minister is a very nice man ; I only-
wish you was here to hear him, so perhaps our wish may be accom-
plished in time; we have four very large chapels in Melbourne, three
churches, very fine, one large Scotch, one Boman Catholic; but as to
public houses, you pass very few houses without seeing- one : 1 do
not tnink there are half so many in England, comparatively' speaking.
Melbourne is nr will be a very fine colony in time, the city is built on
the sines of two steep sills, so that the middle lays quite in a valley.
There is not a bit of garden anywhere near the town : the streets run
from one hill to another ; I live on the brow of East Hill, can stand at
the foout door and see straight to the top of West Hill, which is about
a mile and a half ; and very pleasant it is to stand in the evening and
see the glorious mu going round to England ; I ofteuer look at it now
than I did in England. Laura and me stand and look till it is out of
sight, when she says “the sun is gone to call up her dear grand-
mother, she wishes she could get there aa soon.” But to proceed; we
can stand at the back of our cottage and see miles round the bush.
Tsere is no fields here, it is ail hxtsh.; and there is such a number of
litxle huts and cottages, it is quite amusing to see them; everything
is kept out of-doors, wood, and water, saucepans, and kettles. There
are no thieves here hut the dogs and goats, and they will steal what-
ever they can get at; the place is swarmed with them ; when I go out
in the back sometimes six or seven goats will mu up to me for a bit
of bread or anything else, they are not particular what ; they will
follow rue anywhere; time there is the parrots and the cockatoos are
quite as friendly, they will come on my finger and let me carrv them
about. Laura xg quite delighted, I can. assure you; she is quite at


Imßti ; she Isas made friends with all the neighbours, and they are
very respectable, for our landlord is very particular who he takes in.
We are the poorest people he has got in his tea cottages, and the
cheapest# for the rest are 11-?. per week, oars, two rooms, 10s. My
dear "mother, I left off writing j I could not rest, and went to the
post-office to see if there was a latter for me ; thank God I did not go
this time la vain, I opened it in the street and read part, but could
net go on for tears; it was February 14th that it crime to my hand,
and be sure you send me word in all your letters how you are; you
hare not told me in this, which inakes my heart sad amid the joy of
receiving it I hope the Lord will spare you to see me again in this
world- Bear mother,, I cannot write any more, the tears blind my
eyes so. Laura is at a neighbour’s; poor child, she would break her
heart to see mo ccv ; she has been, as anxious to have a letter from
dear grandmother ns I have. 15th. She says hertprayers and prays
to €bd to bless her dear grandmother and poor Emily, and keep_them
safe from all harm till we see them again, and all our English friends.
.Ilo&r mother, I know by your letter you are not very comfortable,
which truly grieves me. Oh, I wish I had the money to send for you,
but-1 hope in time I shall, for lam sure the Lord will prosper me in
such a cause ; arid when I can send, you will say as the good patriarch.
Umii said, “Mv »oor child is still alive; I will go and ace her before
J dim" God’s will be done, for lam sure it was his good, providence
that brought me out safe, and it is for wise purposes no doubt. Bear
mother, 1 have began at your trade; it was a long while before the
landlord would let the house to have any business carried on, and he
will have ao children, so I am obliged to give up the school for the
present. I have had three bonnets to clean, at 2s. each, one hat to
turn for a captain’s family, for which I charged 2s. Bd., and suited
very well; this week I have got another fancy to clean, and have had
two coloured shirts brought, for which I an) to have 2s, each: this is
quite common work, so you see I turn nothing away ; it will all help
to fetch poor grandmother, as Laura says. We have got the person
that was in the next berth to ns, that I told you came from New-
berry; he knows the Hodges’s of Buckelbury very well, and his wife
knows Andover very well, and all the Wagers’s family, so I have got
company. He has taken one room in our large house, but he brought
money with him, and very kindly lent William some, or I do not
know what we shoold have done; so you see God raised us up friends
when we least expect; they have bought some things, but we have
not, William’s master do not settle with him every week ; he has
had B’, this last three weeks. The first week he had 125., out of that
w a bad to pay 7s. for wood and water tub, for we cannot have less
than a load, of wood at a time, and that is 75., so our lodger had half,
which was very fortunate; there is no coals here. Bear mother, I
almost fancy lam talking to you. I was not much used to hard work
when I was is England, but you will think I am now when I tell
k 2


you I have nearly got through nineteen weeks’ washing for us. The
first week I could do nothing, I was so had with the bowel complaint;
since then I have been better in my health than ever I remember.
The air is so pure, that is the reason I long for you to be with me,
for I know you would be quite well, and here is plenty of work in
the dairy for you; we cannot get butter half our time for want of
dairy-maids. There is no teams here but osen; it looks so strange to
see carts with their eight bullocks drawing a load that one horse could
fly away with; they do not overwork their animals ; the horses are
much finer than at home. I must leave off again, for I have just had
some more shirts brought in must be done this week. It is eight
o clock m the morning with us, it is about eleven e clock in the even-
ing with you, so good night, God bless you, I have just heard that
a ship sails to-morrow, I cannot let it slip; the weather is beautiful
here. You are dreary, sad. and cold ; all is smiling summer here,
fruit of every description is here, but scarcely any of it grow here ; it
is a barren soil, nothing is cultivated, nothing is done for comfort, all
are for making of money. There is no distinction here, a man that
has got thousands is thought no more of than we that have got
nothing. Houses are hard things to get; one like yours without a
bit of ground will fetch 75 1, per annum; living is very cheap, but
some things are very dear. Milk, they are so independent you must
have Id. or none, half a pint. Yery best meat, shoulder of mutton
6lbs,. Is,; chops out of the loin. 11b., 2d.; leg of mutton, 8 lbs., Is. ;
beef steak, 1 lb., ).\d.; best bread. 4lbs., 6d.: sugar, 4lbs.. Is.; tea,
best mixed, 11b., Is. (sd. ; starch, lib., Li.; soap, 4ibs., Is-.; candles,
lib,, off, ; potatoes, 8 lbs., 6d. ; apples, lib., Sd.; plumbs, lib., Bd.;
pears, each, 2d.; cabbages, each, 2d. ; porter, per quart. Is. ; half and
half, tod. ; g\n, per quartern, tod. ; rum, per quartern, 6d,; brandy,
9d,; ginger beer, pet- bottle, Sd.; port wine and sherry, per quart,
2#.; penny bottle ink, tiff.; salt, per lb., l|ff. Bonnet wire I cannot
get, nor a bit of straw; what to do I do not know; the galloon I
cover the wire is 2d. per yard, and thread is just double the price it
is at home, Whiting we use for the bonnets, the one ounce I paid
eight pence, for sheep's heart one penny. Dear mother, you must give
my love to Mrs. Carter and Miss, hope she is better this winter ; to
Mr. and Mrs. Harriss, hoping they are well; Mr. and Mrs. Thomas,
toll him I knew his writing directly I saw it : hope he will keep his
word ; Mrs, Brown, hope she is well. I cannot be thankful enough
to those who try to comfort the mourner in her affliction; but, dear
mother, do not grieve, it is the Lord’s doings; it is wonderful in our
eyes. Tell Miss Holland she would be obliged to put her spectacles
on at meats, for the liys are such b torment, they will blow maggots
on your plate while yon are eating off it. Laura has been very bad
for three weeks in her bowels, but she. is getting quite well, and is
wonderfully improved, you would hardly know her. Father has been
bad but is better, and is quite on altered man; he is so much healthier


than lie was at home. Dear mother, I wish you could get rid of
the school and get a quiet lodger, for I am sure it is enough to
distract your poor head. Give, my love to Emily, I hope she grows
a good girl and useful, to you, she shall not go unrewarded. Laura
often talks about her ; tell her Laura says she must take care of that
nlusa stone she planted among the violets. William sends word that
you are to be sure and look after the garden and poplar trees. I hope
the next time I write we shall have a few things ; as for grate I have
none, for my fire is on the ground; as for chairs I have none to seat
myself down, but a few old boxes is the chiefest of ray store, and a
cottage on the hill with the ground for the floor. I have not time to
say much more at present or the post will close, and I will close this
letter: with ail our loves to you, wishing you every blessing this world
•can afford you—l remain your affectionate daughter till death,
M. LANCASTER
SnnDER is 'xhs Backwoods. — The, next operation of interest was
fixe preparation for supper. Smith filled the kettle and set it on the
fire, while his wife, patting some flour into the large tin dish afore-
said, made a couple of most- substantial cakes, each of -which exactly
covered the bottom of the frying-pan. One after the other they were
placed is this most useful utensil, and set up at a very acute angle
before the fire, a quantity of live charcoal being placed behind it. In
a short time they were beautifully baked.. The frying-pan having
do tie duty as an oven, next appeared in a new character as a pot,
for soxae slices of salt pork being put into it, it was immediately
filled to the brim with water, and the pork boiled therein, until a
certain proportion of the superabundant salt was extracted. The
water being then poured off it resumed its legitimate office as a frying-
pan, and the rashers kept hissing and crackling away in a most en-
livening manner, until they were “ done brown.” Tea having been
previously made, the frying-pan was lifted off the fire, and with a
versatility of character that can surely only belong to Canadian
frying-pans, it now discharged the functions of a gravy dish. Eesorting
to their pocket knives, and using a piece of the new-made bread in-
stead of a plate, they managed to do ample justice to their evening
meal- —Blceicltes of Canadian Life.
A Riot on Colonizing. —Colonists have no business with mining,
ship-building, canvass-faetories, fisheries, rope-walks, breweries and
other rubbishing speculations, while they have no roads, few farms,
limited and a very deficient supply of the first necessary of life.
A. Kkat; BiiSSSiifO.—The most acceptable, present that could be
made to any friend already in the Bush would be a cask of English
bear; the next, a copy of “ Pickwick,”


Adelaide- Miking Shake List, Feb. 14, 1849.
Name of Mine or Company.
Number ol
Shares.
Capita!.
Paid up.
Present
Price.
£
£
£
S'
(1
Burra Burra , . , ,
2464
12.S20-
12.320
150
0
0
Princess Eoyal . . .
400
20,000
16,400
25
0
0
Meant iie-narkable .
1000
25,000
22.500
9
0
0
Adelaide , . , . .
2000
10.000
10,000
1
0
0
J&orth Kapunda . , ,
4440
22.200
22,200
1
10
0
Eoyal Mining Company.
5000
50,000
2,500
0
9
0
Enterprise . . , . .
1000
3,000
2.000
2
0
0
Greenock Creek . . .
800
1,000
1,000
Montacute .....
100
5,500
5,500
Paringa Property,per acre
Port Lincoln Mine . .
8000
600
10,000
3,000
3,200
10,000
2,100
2
5
2
10
0
0
Belvidere .....
640
2,240
9
0
0
Wheal Gawler , . .
1280
12,800
18
0
0
Prince Albert ....
1000
5,000
2,000
2
0
0
FACTS AND SCRAPS FROM COLONIAL PAPERS.
A OoLOKiAfc Labobb Omcs, after the model of the emigrants
homes established and conducted gratuitously by Mrs, Chisholm in
New Sooth Wales, has been projected in Adelaide. The promoters
Include the Protestant and Eo-nan Catholic bishops, the colonial
chaplains, and i( all the ministers of religion of every
This move appears to have excited suspicion among some of the
■working classes. If conducted on the fair discreet principles en-
forced by Mrs. Chisholm, without attempting to draw any distinction
between British, Irish, Australians, or Emancipists, so long as the
registered are honest, industrious men, it will be an instrument of
great good to men and masters,
'Corusiß-SstsKmfa Wobks, ---Three smelting works have been es-
tablished in South Australia, which now boasts to be independent
of Swansea. Two of these are worked under different patents, for,
among other advantages, economising fuel. The Tala, works employ
Dr. liavys’a patextt. “ Four tons of seventy-five per cent, are smelted
with eighty bushels, or little mors than one ton, of charcoal. The
copper run is intended to be refined, but several of the bars contain
ninety-five per cent, of copper. The engine, winch was constructed
by Mr. Bmiih of Sydney, is snfiiciexit to work four or five furnaces.
Hitherto, upon every ton .of South Australian copper refined at Swansea,
and sold in India or China, 40h or SOL has been paid in freight The
Apoinga smelting works, under the patent of Messrs. Penny and


Owen, have also sent a dray procession with 304 ingots of refined
copper through Adelaide, At the Burra Burra works, Messrs.
Schneider have very extensive smelting works.
Colonial Pbddlingtoniana.—Wanting anything else to fight
about, the Adelaidiaos are carrying on a furious paper war on the
question whether railroad from the present port shall he extended
five miles ferther, to a convenient harbour called the North Arm.
Horses continue to be brought from the other non-mining settle-
ments, Three hundred and fifty are advertised as having arrived in
one mob, besides several smaller lots, chiefly of the cart and Cieaveland
Bay style.
This ClathoxjPS of Adelaide have held a bazaar, by which they
realised 50b towards their intended cathedral.
Land,—Lota of land of all sizes, both building and agricultural,
are offered for sale is great profusion; terms, generally, any credit,
and instalments.
The South Australia!? Railway Company advertised, on the
'2ml. February last, that they were ready to receive plans, specifica-
tions, and estimates'for the undertaking; and that surveyors are
appointed at their office, who would be furnished, with information as
to the goveraxaent lamia that will probably bo granted for roads and
terminus, and also with the amount of remuneration &r the successful
and' ansueeessM plans, &«. Tills looks like a cheap railway system.
The South Australian Agricultural and Horticultural Society
offer prizes for the following products: Wheat, barley, oats, pota-
toes, onions, peas, tobacco, manufactured. Butter salted in keg, cheese,
bacon, hams, malt, hops, ale, grapes, table and wine. Oranges, citrons
or lemons, apricots, nectarines, peaches, apples, pears, plums, figs,
raisins, dried rusts, honey, soap, starch, wool, wine, silk.
American Furniture, consisting of bureaus of mahogany and
pine. Walnut sofas, chairs of various American shapes, writing desks
and washing steads, are announced for sale by auction. The repeal
of the navigation laws will probably increase these transactions.
Western Australia. It is believed that an extensive coal
field has been discovered, in the vicinity of Doubtful Island Bay.
The Westers Australians are unanimous in desiring a convict estab-
lishment, and the assignment system; and, as the Cape men are
equally auaoimeus in repelling that kind of labour. Lord Grey has
aa easy escape irons his present dilemma.
Oarrtases have been imported by si Singapore firm from Manilla,
where they are built by an Englishman, who boasts that he can
compete with any manufacturer, either in Europe or America,
Almanacks.—Two South Australian Almanacks are advertised by
rival newspapers, each containing apparently a fund of useful informa-
tion.
South Australia.—Miners. —The directors of the Burra Burra
Mi nes, on the 16th March, advertised a number of tutwork bargains,


and tribute pitches for two months, ending 27th May. 1849, That
pnces would he fixed as near as possible to enable miners to earn
thirty shillings per week, and that “miners, labourers, and carters
may find constant employment during the winter,”
.Memel Planks appear to be one of the South A ostralian imports
The Prospectus of a South Australian Sport) uMdhronicle, in imita-
tion of the Sydney Bell’s Life, appears in all theTAdelaide Journals ;
and, at the same time, the particulars of a match for 200 h a side
between the South Australian bred horse Highflyer, and the Sydney
fiorse iimerald, four miles across the country, at eleven stone to each:
gentleman jocks.
Dean and Chapter op Adelaide, —This important ecclesiastical
body has been thus constituted by his lordship, the bishop of the
diocese Dean, the Very Key, James Farrell. A.M., Trinity College,
Dublin , Oolooml Chaplain, and incumbent of Trinity Cathedral Church;
Archdeacon, the Venerable M. B. Hale, Trinity College, Cambridge'
incumbent of Kensington church : these to hold canonries of the first
order. The Rev. W. J. Woodcock, incumbent of St. John’s, to hold
a canonry of the second order; and the SIV. Theodore Percivai
Wilsonj A.M., Brazenose College, Oxon, Incumbent of WalkervilV
and Macgill churches, and head master of the Collegiate School to
hold a canonry of the third order. *
The Vine at Camden, near Sydney— After a severe drought in
February last, no fruits were doing well, except grapes, which were in
spienaut condition. A tew ship-loads of emigrants from wine-rnakimy
countries, such as the lihme .Provinces, the Bourdeaux; district, and
Madeira, would establish Australia as a wine-growing country.
Already, a common wine of good body is sold cheap enough to be
superseding beer m the neighbourhood of Camden, besides superior
bock andLacbryma Chriaii. [We tasted the other day some red Aus-
tralian ome which cost 4»ct, 0, bottle, retail; it had been four years
in bottle, wag sound, and equal to Bordeaux ordinaire, which it
resembled very much ; the defect was a woody taste.]
C'LAsnrtßD Butter, —Some settlers at Kiami, New South Wales,
have been exhibiting, at an agricultural show, 'fine specimens of a
substance like salad oil in colour, made from sooiled butter,
“Tnov SHALT NOT Muzzle the Ox,”—Some of the small settlers
in New Bouth Wales nave begun to tread out their coni with horses
driven by children, labour being dear, and horses cheap,
Pgb/1’ Philip. —Out of the ship of Herman immigrants from Ham-
burgh, \vhich touched at this port on its wav to Adelaide, 100 were
immediately engaged at 14d a year and rations.
A Idst Natal Agricultural and Horticultural Society has been
formed, of which Mr, Edward More wood is president, which offers
prizes to be awarded in July or August, 1850, for specimens of cotton
indigo, coffee, sugar, tobacco, wheat, barley, oats, butter, cheese, hams!
bacon, potatoes, bams, onions; also for the best essay on the cultiva


tion of cotton and on the agriculture of the district. To the introducer
of the greatest number of useful plants and seeds not previously
introduced. For the best kiln for drying grain. For the best horse-
hoe or ox-hoe for weeding cotton. The best drill machine for sowing
beans and other seeds.
A subscription is being raised towards an episcopal church at
B’Urhan,
The Amateurs of the garrison of Port Natal, announce in the
N'liai Witness a representation of “ Wallace, the Hero of Scotland,”
and the farce of the “ First Floor,”
' Fox-Hunting in South Africa.—" Legging/’ a correspondent
of Sam Sly’s, reports, among a series of runs with the Union hounds,
nue ending with a kill after an hour and a quarter’s ran without a
check, including a clamber over one mountain and half way up the
face of another. This pack, after an existence of eleven years, is
about to he discontinued, for want of funds.
Cost of Living at the Cate. Sam Sly gives, among other
reasons &>sr the small size and high price of his amusing journal,
■as'compared with tMOeUesAead Observer, that, " where one man is
fond of reading in Africa,, thirty may be fount! on the lyne, because
horse room and cart room, warehouses and dormitories, are about ha.it
the price upon the Tyne to what they axe near Table Bay and Table
Mountain, whore, also, fresh eggs cost twopence eaca in the cool
season; butter, 2c. M. per lb.; good Stilton or Cheshire is worth
Is (id per 3b,; no sweet fat ham under a rxx-dollar per lb,; no house
in a good situation (where no small fry of Malays run up and down
a court or alley near) under 50L”
AN AFRICAN HUNTING SONG.
Corns to our bunting-
in African glades,
Blythe are our meetings
That sorrow ne’er shades,
Gaily we follow
The stately koodoo,
Eland or (Jauna
O’er wild and karroo.
Springboks are leaping
In herds on the plain,
Boscb.bok and Panther
Will stain ns in vain.
Lordly Khinoster
Shall bow to our sight,
And e'en the gaunt Lion
Succumb in the fight!
Ourebis playful
And klip-springers there,
Steenbok and Grysbok
Shall furnish our fare,
Gensboks so warlike,
And Buffalos too.
Shall yield us rare sport
With the dark brindled gmi!
Sam Sly's A /n’ccwi JmrruaL


SCENES IN THE LIFE OF RAPHAEL ARMORER,
THE BUSHMAN.
BY THE EDITOR.
ush Landscape Noosing tie Captive and putting him in Leading
Strings- A short ride to a Bush Hut—Dirt and Plenty—-Humpy
Joe and bs Partner-A turn at Eorse-imkiag-An alarm-To
tne Kescue'away.
(Continued from page 39,)
Ws stood upon a little knoll and looked down nr,on theim-
proremeats ; paddocks and. ploughed fields neatly- fenced in,
J* °^ d Pa /n re unfe ? C€ A where the lon g grass had
be-n first burned down, and then carefully watched by the
f y f f i' en io kee P off the stoc h so as to have
some first-rate feeding near the station for any special
purpose. Donovan’s might be called a model station. Well
chosen on a creek where the water never failed—well planned
ami worked out with capital and all the industry of an in
gemoris man and his large famliy-I have seldom seen any’
hfeS ® X Tf - b m J h ? same scak - B «*> & the landscape,
Urn principal object that continually forced itself upon the
S^tfA b T d br ° Wn uaduia6in 8' P ]ai fo from which the
emu ana the kangaroo were then beginning to be driven by
jheep and herds of half wild cattle, and huts few and fa?
hawemi; ail is so altered now, that my picture cannot be
ivco^ised— covered with terms and stations as the plain
m w is, _ In the horizon I could see the smoke of a settle-
ment rising from a patch of forest. Behind me, close at
and were the results of industry and civilization,the gems
or a hearty, healthy, vigorous, virtuous British race.
W W !t r6C! S ed irom musia 8 s on the problem of howto
nng the willing starving labour of old countries to popu-
““f cuWe Ito, wikle-a problem that al w ayE tffl
itself upon a. thinking man when fresh from Europe— by a
discussion between Master Dick and Patrick on the best
S otctlw tbe c& ? ti P‘ Y xck was for masfceri »g him
Jfit !! 7 p i ? lerCe> - a f ? fie?ed t 0 take him in hand there
quite OU ***** ™> far


« I think, Master Armorer,” said lie, ’ £ that this Mack is
too o-ood to be knocked about like our horses; he has
beeif broken in once, I believe it’s your notion to take him
to Sydney the first time you go down there, and seil him. as
a made horse. Now, if you’ll take my advice, you’ll just
sret him into breaking tackle, and lead him home as quietly
as yon can ; then starve him, feed him, and coax him; and,
with kindness and bold riding, you’ll break him without
spoiling his temper. But as you are out for a frolic, ifjou
like, we’ll ride over to Humpy Joe’s station, over there
where you see the smoke; he has got a lot of colts tor
breaking. I have promised him this week past to let
my Willy there go up and help him, for he’s almost too old
for riding colts now, is Humpy.” _ . .
And pray who is Humpy Joe?” I inquired; for there
seems something droll in his name, something odd la a
man’s going to live far away there over the plain., instead of
getting near you,”
{i Why, as to what’s Joe’s other name, that g more than 1
can. tell you ; every one almost in these parts goes by gome
ruck-name or other among the bushmen. Humpy was one
of the first Ifleeters, and came out a lAf&t' to the colony,
when there was, as they tell me, neither law nor gospel in
the country, and the prisoners were treated like wild beasts;
go that the gallows was always ready strung, and the cat-o’-
nine-tails going night and day. It makes one s blood run
cold to hear of "the wickedness of the men and the cruelty
of the officers in those times. I ’ve a man that can tell you
something about it if you care about such things. Well,
Joe was lagged (transported) for some manslaughter case—a
very strange business —and had a very narrow squeak for it.
He’s a good-hearted fellow, but an awful temper, and was
often in trouble and iron gangs. They do say he’s worth
money, and he’s giving his eldest son a good education
down at Sydney. He’s had his liberty about eleven years;
but he lives in a strdnge miserable way, with a dozen mares
and a few hundred cattle, ail the increase of a few head
given him, by his master during his servitude. Some people
say that he has shares in cattle in different parts of the
colony, hut, being distrustful, won’t own it, and that he has
heaps of golden guineas buried in iron pots. Any how, he s
a very strange man, and has always kept moving away back
as the colony gets settled, and.hates most gentlefolks, only
he likes Mr, Trefusis’ father, who did him a good turn once


when he was a prisoner, and I had the luck to pick up his
second son, when a colt he was breaking had crushed his
leg against a tree, and left him ten miles away from home;
so we are very good friends. He is very learned in all cattle
diseases. But sometimes he’ll not answer a stranger at all,
or speak for a day or two. His stock runs on the land at
the back of the hut where he’s squatted : he’s married to a
regular chatterbox of a wife, who cares no more for decent
living than he does himself. How, I know it would be a
kindness to help him with his colts, for his son Peter is still
sick from his accident; and, depend upon it, if you go
roughly to work with that black, you ’ll spoil him.”
This plan of Patrick’s jumped very much with my own
humour. I wanted some fun, and I did not want to spoil my
horse ; so we walked up to the yard and found the black
crouched in a corner, with his back up, and his coat staring
on end, the picture of misery ; but as soon as he caught sight
of us, he began to trot grandly round the stockyard, proudly-
waving his great bushy tail. We could then see that he
was well worth all our trouble; some inches above the
average height of the Colonial horses, with powerful quarters,
a broad deep chest, fine shoulders, a small Arab-like head,
and a thin shin, all corded with starting veins. The mo-
ment that he was excited all signs of fatigue and distress
vanished, he snorted through his blood-red nostrils and
pmmded round in a form we should look for in vain in the
best trained hors© under the most accomplished horseman.
As a first experiment, Young Donovan nut a bowl of water
through the rails. The horse bounded towards it, but started
back as we approached. On, our retiring, he drank it up
greedily, and whinnied rejoicingly, Willy Donovan armed
himself with a forked pole and a green hide rope about
thirty feet long, with an iron ring; at one end. The stock-
man carried a headstall and a snaffle bridle. I)ick and Tre-
fnsls took charge of a surcingle, and tied a stiff rod to the
point of the strap. We then all got over into the yard, and
set to work to drive the horses slowly round. Patrick made
a slip noose of the hide rope, fixed it in a notch on the pole,
which he then held in his two hands like a trolling rod, the
line passing through his handswhile Willy took fast hold
of the end of the rope and followed his father step by step.
As soon as they were well crowded together. Donovan passed
the pole over the backs of the tame horses, and tried to drop
the noose over the wild one’s head ; but the creature was


wary, and dashed off the moment the shadow of the pole fell
upon his quarters.
We stood in the centre of the yard, smothered in the dust
that lay a foot deep, and. it was,
Whisht —there now—just drive the old piebald up a bit
closer ■ wo, wo, horse ! Don’t hurry them, ha, ha ! The
d.ml reave the cunning black divil, I’ve missed him.”
Now, then, quietly. Billy, you little villain, don’t twitch
the rope. Master Dick, heave the laste taste of a pebble at the
brown pony {sotto voce). I ’ve got him, so, so, so, I ’ve got
him, by jabers.”
u Now, Patrick, now , Oh ! ten thousand divils, he’s over
the yard. Now, all right. At him again, Patrick ! ”
And near half an hour was spent, Pat Donovan getting
more Irish as he grew hotter. At length, the stallion, tired
of our nonsense, and mad at being driven into a corner,
made a rush at the palings, half cleared the fence, and hung
for a moment; but Patrick had covered him as he rose, and
the next moment down he Crime, the top rail with him,
and the rope chock-a-Mock round his throat.
We first rushed to the rope, hauled away round a baling
post. Spider Legs flung himself on his head ; I followed
over his'ears out of reach of his teeth; Patrick took a t urn
round the post, and then put his foot on his neck. The
stockman slipped the headstall and bridle over his head at
the same moment that Dick and Trefusis thrust the wand
with the surcingle under his back as he lay on the soft dust,
and buckled it tight under his belly, with the reins of the
snaffles knotted short, so as to bring his head close to his
chest. Then we passed the rope through the ring of the
headstall and the rings of the snaffle, with a double turn,
and took firm hold, Donovan gave the signal, the noose
round his throat was slacked, we all sprang aside, and the
horse, after gasping once or twice, rose slowly, and found
himself, as it were, in leading strings between Trefusis and
Dick.
We led him out with very little trouble to a piece of deep
sand, and by turns lounged him in a circle for about an hour.
After this exertion he walked away very quietly between
two stockmen, who were going on some bullock-buying
business near to Spring Hill, and undertook, for a few figs of
tobacco, to deliver him safely into the hands of my faithful
Hampshire John,
This tough business ended, and ha ving refreshed with a


bit of beef and damper, a drink of tea and a smoke, -we
mounted our horses, and trotted across the ford of the creek
on to Humpy Joe’s,
Trefusis staid behind ; he wanted to see a tribe of tame
blacks who had arrived the night before on one of their mi-
gratory expeditions, and were encamped behind the spur of
the range that backed Patrick Donovan’s cottage. Two of
the young blacks had been busy while we were away horse-
breaking helping to kill and cut up a bullock, and had
received the head and offal as payment for their services, as
well as gome Sour. Trefusis told” me that there was often a
good deal of useful information—as to the state of grass and
water in the interior, the intentions of hostile tribes, and
other miscellaneous news of interest to a squatter—to he had
from the blacks on their arrival on new camping ground.
Accordingly, our party consisted of our host, his son
Master Spider-Legs, Dick, and myself, attended by a small
army of dogs. After a short slow ride, partly through an
open and partly through a scrub country—during which our
dogs had the mortification of continually starting and losing
kangaroos, which, after half a dozen inviting leaps, in-
variably disappeared in hollow logs, from which we, on
other thoughts intent, had no time to dislodge them—the
.answering bark of some other dogs, and a sound something
between the bellowing of a hull and what might have
been the growls of a eentanp, which at last shaped it-
self into a string of colonial imprecations on the eyes,
limbs, body, soul, liver, and lights of something or other,
warned us that Humpy’s dwelling could not be far off;
an opening in the white gum tree forest brought ns to it.
On a bare piece of ground—hoof-trodden until, on a broad
space of many hundred yards, there was not a vestige
of herbage--ornamented only by a few huge stumps,
stood a hovel that seemed like the aged hoarding some-
times to be seen round neglected building ground near
large towns in England, roofed over with a sort of lean-
to. A door and hole for a window were evidences that
the warped tumbledown looking object was meant for
a dwelling. No luxuries of glass or verandahs, or even
shady trees, intruded on its unpretending ugliness. A
crowd of dirty, fat, happy children, some pigs rooting
among an apology for a garden, gave life to the scene;
while at the door a carious, but not altogether unfamiliar
creature, evidently the mother of the young unfeathered


bipeds, -with a quantity of sandy hair streaming over her
half-naked shoulders; a. pair L of small twinkling good-
humoured eyes, a cock-up nose, an endless mouth full of
good teeth, with a figure shapely as a tar barrel, enveloped
in red and yellow cotton gown, long unacquainted with
soap and water, stood smoking a black cutty pipe. I ex-
claimed to myself, even before a warm welcome in the rich-
est, raciest brogue had.been poured forth to ns, “Tipperary,
for a thousand!” As her bulky person moved from the
doorway, one glance let ns into the whole domestic economy
of her establishment.
One apartment was bedroom and parlour and all; a
barrel of salt beef stood in one corner; a chest of tea and
a barrel of flour in another, an iron pot near it. Some
strips of green hide were extended across to hang clothes on;
a few stumps and horses’ skulls supplied the place of seats;
a string of onions and a flitch of bacon hung from the roof;
bones were strewed about iu every direction, wherever appa-
rently a tribe of dogs chose to leave them. In fact, it was
a perfect palace of dirt and plenty; everybody was fat, from
the sow to the mistress, and nobody was clean.
After a dialogue, to which I can do no manner of justice,
Donovan, asked “and where’s the master?”
“ Sure, you’ll hear him—the Lord forgive him for that
same i—cursin’ the coult he’s breaking down by the stock-
yard.”
Declining Mrs. Humpy’s invitation to stop and take a
bit of something, we passed on to the stock-yard, which,
unlike the owner’s hut, was substantially built on a good
plan. We found Joe hard at work on a goose-rumped, ewe-
necked, bay, well-bred filly, which had just burst his only
set of girths and surcingle.
Humpy Joe stood about 5 ft. 4 in,, with no neck and
scarcely any body; a pair of long, thin, wiry legs and arms,
and hands like a bird’s claws ; an immense head thinly
covered with frizly black hair, a long whiskerless face burned
to a colour between parchment and brickdust, and a nose
of the flat prize-fighter’s cut. He had got hold of the
colt by the jaw, when we came up, and shaking it again
and again, until the creature seemed fairly frightened at
him.
“ Hollo, Joe,” cried Patrick, “ don’t kill your colt. We Ve
come to try our hands and help to break a. few in, you’ve
half a dozen in the stock-yard I sec.”


“ Why then, it’s a kind neighbourly action, Master
Donovan, for this here colt’s enough to break a fellow’s heart.
I find I’m not as young as I used to be when I could ran
down the fat bullocks on cow-pastures afore horses came
into the colony. There was few could beat Little Joe then
at anything; hut now I’m wore out, that’s what I
am. I gav two nice young bullocks as you’d wish to
see for this here, and he ’» gone and thrown red-headed
Charley and broke his leg, and then I got Bobby-Bobby, our
lame black, to try him, and he rubbed him off against an
iron bark tree; and now, what’s worst of all, bio wed if ha
am’t gone and busted the last set of girths as I’ve got, and
my surcingle, a-bucking like mad, with his head between
his legs, and coming down with a jolt enough to break
every bone in a fellow's body/'
a Never mind about the girths, Joe, I’ll give you a spare
set I’ve got with me ; but bring the filly down to the dry-
bed of the creek below, and one of us will have a tug at
her, and the grey colt, too, if you like.”
We all turned to, put a twitch on the nose of the filly,
then a powerful heavy bit, clapped on a saddle with fresh
girths, buckled on a leather girth over that, strapped a
couple of blankets over the pommel, and led her down to
the creek, where the loose sand came up to her hocks. Dick
caught fast hold of the reins, and sprang into the saddle;
the twitch was unloosed, are;! away went the filly along the
bed of the creek for about 200 yards, in a series of bounds,
something between a rear and a kick out, descending each
time on all fours with every limb as stiff as marble. This
trick, common with Australian horses, lost half of its effect-
in the soft sand; then she tried to climb up the sides of the
creek, hut a sharp jerk of the bridle, and dig with the oppo-
site spur, stopped her there. Firmly glued to his saddle, the
young stockman was ready at all points ; when she reared
the spurs were pressed in. A steady pull of the rein made
her turn and lose her balance, when she kicked the stock-
whip played into her ears, while the sharp bit brought her
head right up. After some minutes’ play, she turned sulky,
and stood still, until forced on. There was no tiring out
Dick ; supple as an eel, with, muscles of iron, be could hold
with one hand, and punish with the other. Talk of Arabs,
Cossacks, and Tartars, 111 back the horsemen bred on the
Australian plains against the whole world !
After the first round of fighting. Dick turned her head


swards a cattle path, and brought her out on open ground,
pressed her at full speed for a mile, brought her back again
all but blown, and said, * Now for the gray; Armorer, you
hike the filly,”
We soon had the half-broken colt out. Humpy mounted a
stock-horse; and, in spite of two rather awkward falls, one
through my nag’ dashing among a thicket of scrub, and one
through breaking a stirrup leather, 1 grew in the good
graces of the old Lag, while he and Patrick rode with us,
and every now and then gave a hand when mj steed
rushed into any very awkward place.
in this exercise the day passed pleasantly. Evening was
closing as we returned on our horses to Joe’s hut. We had
scarcely reached it, when a little boy and a man came gal-
loping toward us at full speed, without their hats. 5 It
was Donovan's little son Patsy, and the stockman. a Oh
hither,” cried the little one, out of breath, “ come back
directly,’' “ Oh, master,” cried the stockman, “ they’re
coming at last, those rascally Brandons; they’ve got 2000
head of cattle, and say they 5 !; eat every little settler out of
the country. They won’t leave, a blade of grass for young
heifers and camels. Oh Lord, master, there are thirty of
them all armed to the teeth.”
“ Ride back directly,” said Donovan, “and you, Patsy, go
and help get all my cattle into camp.”
“ I know you’ll stand by me, Master Dick, and your friend
too. You must not spare spurs.”
And we dug in the spurs, and followed him back to Palm
drove too fast to speak a word.
(To he continued ,)
Adstkaham Beef amx> Sugar. By last accounts from Mauritius,
Sydney beef was selling at 19 to 20 dollar per tierce, only 3 dollars
lower than best Irish. American fetched 14 to 15 dollars. A parcel
ol loaf sugar, made by the Australian Sugar Company, fetched 4 o- l d.
per lb. [A correspondent of the Sydney Morning Herald*hi.
reference to this paragraph, states that he would only get from 11 to
16 debars for his beef in Mauritius.]
Dr. Lenehardt, the Australia!! traveller, has fine expressive features
and is in manner as unassuming as in heart bold, enterprising and
enthusiastic. ”
Nothing struck me more in the colony than the good behaviour of
men who had been convicts; and I' was continually inclined to ask
tc Why have these men been transported.” Townsend.
saw SERIES mo. in.


PROSPECTS OF EMIGRATION.
United States. — A large emigration of all countries and classes
continues to be absorbed by the States, ■without apparently producing
any depressing effect on the labour market there. We expect, under
the operation of the repeal of the navigation laws, the influx of Cali-
fornian gold, and reaction of the revolutions of Europe, to see this
emigration largely increased. We continually hear of success achieved
by English and labourers settled on the cheap easily-acquired lands
of the "W estern States. Stilled, artisans in metals are always in good
demand. We are trying to obtain some more precise reports on the
prospects of skilled mechanics in the various States.
A statement, which appeared some time since in the Eastern
Counties Herald, conveys a very pleasing picture of the rewards
offered for agricultural industry in Wisconsin. A labouring man
who settled there with three stout sons and 30/., by hiring out at
first has in three years earned a well-stocked farm.
With respect to California, from all the information we can gather,
the reports of the gold to be gathered there have not been exaggerated.
To give any advice on emigration to California would be absurd.
Men bent on so desperate an enterprise as to east their lot among
the most lawless population in. the world, neither desire nor lake
advice.
Wooden and iron houses seem the best export ; but probably the
hire of .labour for drawing them out of the ship and setting them up
would exceed far the first cost and freight. We should say that
sharp fellows, with good muscles and longs, and no superfluous cash
or scruples, would be the roost likely io succeed- But at digging and
trading the true Yankees will be found to beat all the world,
Biui'isn North; America.-—-Canadian politics and other unpopular
circumstances have seriously diminished emigration to British Horth
America, The season Is now almost too late for it.
The Cate and Natal, —Many labourers who had applied for free
passages to A ustralia were refused, but were offered and accepted
passages to the Capo. We*wait with some curiosity to see how Earl
Grey will treat the fierce opposition of the Gape Colonists to the iin-
porsathm of colonial labour, backed as "it is by the mild remonstrances
of Governor Sir Harry Smith.
Hatau is in great favour just at present as an emigration field.
The low price of land is one great temptation. We give a very MI
account of It in another place. A public meeting was held early in
September, in Loudon, for the purpose of forming a Protestant Co-
operative Mutual Emigration Association for Natal, projected by
Mr, Irons, of St, Alban’s, to whom the interesting letter from Mr.
Ralph Clarence is addressed. At this meeting, after much testi-
mony had been brought forward in-favour of the fertility of the soil


and salubrity of the climate of Natal, it was suggested that, under
the existing law, there was no legal mode of organizing or carrying
out the plan of a Colonial Land Purchasing Company. We ad-
verted to this fact some time since in an article on Emigration Clubs,
Under these circumstances, the St. Alban’s Society, which is com-
posed almost entirely of Wesleyan Methodists, most confine its
operations to this country as a standing committee for assisting the
emigration of its friends by collecting information and arranging
friendly partnerships. In this way committees, winch we have
several times suggested, might be extremely useful.
Austkaha. —Emigration to the three great Australian colonies
proceeds vigorously. The passenger ships for the most part sail full,
arid the Government Commissioners continue to send off about six
ships of free and assisted passengers per month. The improvement
in the pries of wool, with general amendment in our trade and manu-
factures, will reach favourably upon Australia. There will be no
fear of emigration to Australia being overdone as long as grass and
woo! grows, and Hew Boutb. Wales coal and South Australian copper
are' unexhausted, if the Land Regulations are once placed in the
reforming hands of the Provincial Legislators. A correspondent
of the Sydney Morning Jleraid, under date April 10, contphnns
of the difficulties and delays in the way of the respectable
monied class of emigrants, who are compelled to watt twelve
months before they can obtain from five to twenty acres of land,
for which they axe ready to pay from 21. to 51. an acre. It is
very much to be regretted that Lord Grey will obstinately con-
tinue to refuse to apply those principles of common sense to the
sale of land in Australia that he lays down so clearly in the following
instructions to the Governor of Ceylon. Certainly, what is good for
a black Cingalese cannot be bad for a white English emigrant. <( In
order to afford to the natives greater facilities in the acquisition of
land, your lordship has instructed the Governor that laud should be
offered for sale in small allotments, especially in the neighbourhood of
native villagesthat care should be taken to have always land on sale,
which parties desirous of purchasing it can obtain at the shortest pos-
sible notice ; and that, with this view, the surveys ought to be kept
well in advance of the demand in the districts where land is likely to
be purchased; that more land than there is a prospect of selling ought
to be offered, at the periodical sales, and that which has been once put
up to auction, and not bought, should be purchaseable by the first
applicant ; and also that in each district where land is hi demand,
there should be an office constantly open where land of which the
value has been tested by being put up to auction, may always
be obtainable without trouble or delay by persons desiring to pur-
chase it,”— Ninth General Report of the Colonial Land and .Mmigm-
iim G<yssmmi<y&m,
Pout Pkiup.—With respect to the Labour Market , the following
i, 2


letter from a Member of the Legislative Council of Port Philip
perfectly explains the present and future prospects of that Colony :
Melbourne, 2 QUi March, 1849.
You ask how many emigrants Port Philip e<m take without
reducing wages below 180 lam really glad that 18?. is the
precise rate you have stated, for it is the very rate which I have
for some years specified when 1 have professed to be an advo-
cate for encouraging immigration, by not reducing wages to the
lowest, but allowing them to stand at an encouraging rate.
Still I must toil you that my theory is severely tried just
now. My wool of the shearing of 1847, on which I took
an advance of Is. per lb., did not fetch 8c?. The shearing of
1848. reckoned at 9d. per lb., did not pay the expenses of the year
1848. Wages were very 'nigh, indeed, most extravagant, and quite
beyond what the squatter could afford. .Wove shepherds are hiring
at 18b, and the squatter needs this cheapness for a time. But if
trade has recovered a healthy tone in England, you may safely ad-
vise that the emigration of the next twelve months may exceed that
of the twelve months just terminated by 25 per cent, and still the
labourer will find employment and remuneration. But 1 dread a
superabundance of labour, now that we have so many thousand exiles,
and Yan .Diemen’s Land expires in Port Philip. They will be
the first to be thrown out of work, and they will not starve, depend
upon, if. If average wool is quoting Ls, 2d. per ib. in London, you
may perfectly maintain 18?. as the minimum rate of a shepherd’s
wages, hut if it is below that, 16?,, and even 14?, mast be submitted
to. We received three; or four months ago a ship load (the Lady
Wentlaway) of Irish orphans—females, I am. one of the Board of
Guardians, and have taken great interest in them, and I am highly
pleased with the result. They were very moral good girls indeed ;
ignorant, I have uo doubt, but willing and active. From amongst them,
humble tradesmen, who themselves were servants probably a year or
two ago, got servant girls at 8?,, 9?., and 10?. Out of families of this
class, marriages are more easily made up than from higher families;
and, I sue told that near fifty of the number are already married. I
have one in my house, a most exemplary girl. During the last six
weeks we have hud two ships with German immigrants. They hire
at a disadvantage, because master and servant are ignorant of each
other’s language, but they are a very good class of people : this tends
to lower wages. Boiling down sheep and cattle is carried on this
year to an extent equivalent to the year’s increase of sheep. This
also tends to lower wages. But all this rights itself again. When
wages are very low, we shall begin growing grain for export, and we
shall introduce the coarser manufactures. This demands labour, and
wages rise again, whilst the field for immigration is permanently
evidenced.”


Sooth Australia has taken an important step in advance Iby the
establishment of several copper-smelting and refining establishments.
An immense loss has hitherto been incurred, both in time and money,
by having to remit ail the ore to Swansea, The South Australians
now hope to export copper in bars or ingots to India and China
direct. Charcoal is at present used there for smelting. The dis-
covery of coal mines of value equal to those now open in New South
Wales would give an enormous impetus to South Australia. We
observe that large numbers of cart and nag horses continue to be sent,
overland, from New South Wales and Port Philip.
Port Stephens.—The Artemisia, sailed from the Thames on the
Ist of Sept., carrying the Company's surveyor, Mr. Ralfe, (charged
to lay out a largo number of fifty-acre farms ready for the choice of
the next batch of emigrants,) a few land purchasers, several pas-
sengers, and a party of colliers. Among her cargo was a mile of iron
rails for connecting with the .river the valuable coal mine lately dis-
covered. It is the intention of the Company to allow future land
purchasers in this country a remission of 21 1, on e very 50 L, and to
allow them to proceed to Sydney by any ship they choose, We find
from the report of a gentleman unconnected with the Australian Agri-
cultural Company, who visited the site of the new colony just before
sailing for England, that, the choicest laud for agricultural purposes
lies above Stroud, extending up the valley of the Gloucester for nearly
twenty miles. Our informant pronounces this part one of the finest
in the whole colony, “ rich enough to bear a dozen crops in succes-
sion without manure,” and well supplied with water; “ in fact, land,
where any industrious hard-working farmer may make a fortune in
a few years.” This information is important, because, even in coun-
tries of well-known fertility, such as Port Philip and the Western
States, an emigrant has to lose time and spend money in finding a
suitable site. At Port Stephens, not an hour need be lost, or a pound
wasted; the emigrant will go straight to the chain of pools up the
valley, along which the first 500 will certainly settle. He will be
sure of a market and of success, if he be able and willing to work.
We may here observe, for the instruction of those who have not
thought much on Colonization-, that we generally advise emigrants to
proceed either to the United States, or to one of the Australian
colonies, because in those countries there is a population—-there is
some capital—and there are certain pursuits which, if industriously
followed by suitable parties, will ensure competence ; while in embryo
colonies, like Natal, Otago, and New Plymouth, the field is so narrow
that one cargo of labourers may be too much for the capital, or the
importation of a few thousand pounds may temporarily disorganize the
commerce of the colony. To new colonies, and very small colonies like
New Plymouth and Natal, we send very clever young men, arid young
couples without incumbrances, just as a clever young surgeon or
lawyer is sometimes sent down to settle in a large town, by friends


who see a vacancy. Families and the jog-trot class of emigrants must
go where a few plain pursuits are open to them.
New Zealand. —No recent news of any importance. The organ
of the New Zealand Company, the Otago Journal, published ixt
Edinburgh, has not appeared for some time: it would not stand the
test of its romances compared with the realities of the Otago News,
published at Otago. The theory of the colony, as propounded in the
prospectus, has already disappeared. It is now dear that it is to he
a dispersed sheep-feeding colony, and the people who have bought
town, suburban, and country lots, find two oat of the three useless
and worthless. The long-disputed Squatting system of Australia,
after the mountains of pamphlets against it, published, by the Wake-
field School, is now adopted in New Zealand, and the model theory of
concentration and due proportion of capital and labour abandoned in
practice and only retained in advertisements. A fine copper and
lead mine is reported to have been discovered near Auckland, in the
Northern Island,
New York, July 11.—A steamer is getting ready in this port, as
fast as practicable, to proceed to the river San Juan de Nicaragua,
Let me see if I can give you some idea of this Nicaragua route:
some mouths ago, an adventurous New Yorker got up an expedition
to proceed to California by the Nicaragua route. He built a small
portable steamer, and set off with a trusting and goodly company,
advising them, however, that they might have to walk some part of
the distance. He and his party arrived out safely; hut after his
steamer was put together, it was found to be useless. The machinery
proved to be imperfect, and the boiler burst. The party had then to
proceed up the river in bongos. These are boats, or rather canoes,
§0 feet long, with about 7 feet beam, and a thatched cabin over the
stern. The natives who propel these are represented as drunken,
treacherous, end ugly. The river, in the dry season, has in many places,
only about 30 inches’ water. The Americans were seven days in as-
cending the river for a'distance of 90 miles. A n animal, called by
the natives the JDcmte, was observed. It fed upon the marginal
grass, was something in figure like a large hog, black in colour, and
had a proboscis, or trunk, like an elephant, hut much shorter. Lake
Nicaragua is described as a beautiful sheet of water, surrounded with
mountains, among which are at least two volcanoes in a state of
activity. Borne travellers assert that there is an island on a volcano
in the lalce. Grenada, the principal town upon the shores, contains
about 10,000 inhabitants, and is regularly laid out. The houses axe
all of one story in height, having an elevation of 20 to 25 feet,
are floored with brick, arid rudely furnished. The churches are nu-
merous and ancient, the inhabitants are quiet and inoffensive.—Corre-
spondent 'DaUy News.


THE WAKEFIELD SYSTEM ABANDONED BY THE
GOVERNMENT.
A's the moment of going to press, we Lave the satisfaction
of learning that the principles of Colonisation we have so
long advocated have been adopted by the Government, as a
remedy for the ruin which has fallen on Van Diemen’s
Land. Parties paying 60 1, for a cabin, 30?. for an inter-
mediate, or 20& for a steerage passage, will receive credit
for that amount in land, and also assistance in materials
and convict labour, to the extent of from 20 1, to 50?. The
Governor has been directed to prepare immediately fifty-
acre farms, with huts for the reception of the above class of
emigrants. Hurrah for common sense against Wakefield’s
cant and quackery I
EMIGRANTS’ QUESTIONS.
Suggestions. —We are always obliged for hints <m the xn&nagexaent
of this Journal. It is oar wish and our interest to make it useful
and popular. Suggestions are rather contradictory of coarse, but we
can take the balance. As precepts are better than practice, so com-
Biimications are even more pleasing to ns than ad vice, especially good
extracts of information from American and Colonial Papers, as in
our various duties we may often pass over important paragraphs.
We prefer fact, and don’t care much for the opinions of transmarine
editors, unless on local points. Y. complains that neither Mackay’s
work on America, nor Mr, Byrne’s on Australia, have been noticed.
The former has several times been recommended in answers to cor-
respondents, and in our new form we can extract from it. The latter
has been favourably reviewed months ago. Extracts from Australian
papers are now given. He objects to fiction, while two ladies in
Ireland, and several gentlemen in England, have asked for a tale of
Australia long sines. Seeds, see extract from “ Cottage Gardenin'.”
A Minor of 18.--“ I wish to have your opinion concerning
my case. I have had a good education (that is, I have been sent to
very good schools, indeed), but have made very bad use of my time;
so much so. that after having been three years in an office, I find that
1 am of no use and never can be, and therefore shall become a
burden on my relations, which I am determined shall not be. There-
fore I wish to know if I should, by taking a bush servant’s situation
Tor a few years, be able to save enough by industry and sobriety
(Slaving a dislike to spirits and malt liquors and tobacco) to commence
for myself either on a small farm or as a small stockholder, 2nd,


What situation it would be best for me to take, being 18, good health,
s«d rather strong, good pedestrian and equestrian, °3rd. Whether to
go to Fort Philip or Sydney, and how to proceed on arrival there ;
would prefer being on a cattle-station, if possible, '4 th. Whether the
provision served out on board ship is sufficient to subsist on without
anything else. sth. What do you, as near as possible, think would
be sufficient for a steerage passage, outfit, and every expense till I
was settled in the bush, as 1 could not raise above 2 SH” [lst.
Many men have saved and. become independent. Whether you
would is a question no one eaa answer. 2nd, Take any situation
that offers, 3rd. Perhaps .Fort Philip, 4 th. Provisions are suffi-
cient for health oa board sb ip, its witness government emigrants,
who reaca the colonies m excellent condition. sth. 254 might be
enough if you. had no expenses except passage-money and outfit, but
you, have to travel to London or Plymouth." Altogether, we advise
yon nor. to think of going except with some farmer's, family, and with
the consent of your own,]
Pharmacopoeia , if desirous of proceeding to Fatal, had better apply
to Messrs. Byrne, Pail Mall East; but we have no information as to
the prospects of an assistant druggist in that colony. We expect to
have a trustworthy correspondent in that country soon.
Oincinnatus, Liverpool, who inquires about Port Stephens, bad
belter look in our ad vertising pages and purchase the Guide.
..4 Cierlc in «■ Public Company; Engineer. Wife and four infant
children. No capital. Promotion hopeless. Borne little knowledge
in agriculture* and of shoemaking; a good musician. Should not
object to. hard work, .having done it, “ Would the American colonies
he a good, place, and what do you think of Port Hated?” [lf yon
emigrate at all, which we cannot recommend, with suds ties to a man
of your class, and so. little money, the United States would be the
best, with Use view' of working at some manual trade. Clerks are not
is demand there or anywhere, unless in California. Natal, in its
present early state is more promising for young married men without
children, and with 1004, able to rough it,
A Shoemaker, Preston., would he eligible for an assisted passage to
Australia, paying 'll. for himself, the same- for his wife; even this is-
not at all certain.
A Shopkeeper. — B. It would do no harm in taking SOL of drapery
goods he baa on hand to Port Philip, as he has other monies (300 k)
to depend, on.
(hardener, Whilly, Yorkshire. —Situations at a salary, with passage-
money paid, are not to be had. A writer to an. attorney would be-
ord of place in a eolouv. A cook accustomed to sea would be all
right. _ _
Edtn.hn.rgh, —"l propose tfo borrow 5004 on personal security,
and an assignation to a- policy of insurance, For the purpose of enabling
me either to commence agricultural operations in the State of Illinois,,,
or a sheep farm in South Australia. B ut, before taking such a step.


I am anxious to have your opinion whether you consider I will? j, e
able regularly to pay both the premium on the policy, and the interest
on the money borrowed, out of the yearly return which 1 may have
from the 5001., besides obtaining a comfortable subsistence, and
whether there will be any likelihood of goon being able to pay off
the 5001. borrowed.” jit Is impossible for ns, knowing nothing of
your talents, habits, and pursuits, to tell 'whether you will make
a good, farmer or not. Sheep-forming with 5005. is cits of the
question, except to a man who thoroughly understands it. Men
who can work with their hands, with a capital of of?;, in the
United States, in Australia, and other countries, do well and accumu-
late fortunes; but to undertake to in,-die a cash remittance of 40 1, or
505 yearly, for the first year or two, is an engagement we should, be
sorry to make, unless we were about to join some honest experienced,
colonist in a lucrative business.]
A Coal Mining Engineer. w I understand mining, boring, and
sinking, the manufacture of coke and fire bricks; am. a good draughts-
man ; can rise tools roughly. Can do anything about working a steam-
engine, or ia a steam vessel. Am a pretty good sailor, and know'
how to rough it. lam 24 years of age, and not able to obtain au
engagement here, coir profession being overloaded. lam without
capital, but could pay my passage to any put- of the world. I suppose
speculators would be excluded from the neighbourhood of Sydney or
Newcastle by the Australian Agricultural Company.” [The new
mining and, smelting works now opening in South Australia and
New South Wales, and the coal-pits constantly discovered in the
latter province, in Western Australia, and New Zealand, would,
sooner or later, afford room for such an emigrant, although hundreds
have gone on the same errand; but as you have no funds, you want
immediate employment, therefore you should, associate with some
other, young man without your abilities and with a little money.
The Australian Agricultural Company have no exclusive privileges ;
but as they can afford to sell coal at from ss, to 6s, a ton at the pifis
mouth, it would be difficult to compete with them.]
Half Pag, —A gentleman; married; about 40 ; with a govern-
ment income of about 1251. per annum, and 4005 in cash. Has four
children from 7to 14 years of age. Of hardworking industrious dis-
position, desirous to secure a better chance of providing for the chil-
dren, by making them useful members of society, than England can
afford. Would be entitled to a considerable sum as remission money
in. any land he might purchase. Thinks of Port Philip. [This is a
clear case. The party can. live as cheaply, obtain better interest for
his money, and obtain 4005 of land by going to a British colony,
Fort Philip would do very well. Building land, unless he could
plough a field, would be the- best land to select for his remission land.
Money out at interest on very safe security and moderate interest for
a year. Ho should join himself with a young map of experience?


whose letter appeared in the Journal a short time since. Does he
understand agriculture or gardening ?]
A Leather Bresser; Alexis. —“Age 33; wife 33; five children; three
eldest are boys, and I think, by emigrating to one or other of the Ana*
traiian Colonies, I might put my family in tie way of doing much better
in life than I see any prospect of here. For myself, I can write well
or draw a truck ; like luxuries very well, and can live hard if neces-
sary ; know nothing of agriculture or cattle, hut have the reputation
of being able to learn quick. My wife can make a shirt and wash it
afterwards; can make good bread, and healthy enough to eat it with
enjoyment ; in feet she, (hod bless her, is Just what a working mao’s
wife ought to be._ My three boys, aged 18, 11, gad 9, areiappy,
robust, go-aloug little fellows, that 1 think might push their fortune
by perseverance it an opportunity offered, of which 1 despair in this
country; the two girls, aged 5 and 8, I can. only say are healthy.
Now, am, I conia get out to Sydney and land with 20 1, in xny pocket,
and that Is all, I see ito prospect here for my hoys but hard work
and had pay. Would you advise me to go, and, if so, where? My
children have been reared in the principles of strict sobriety; they
cannot play on the piano, but they can all {the boys at least) read
well, and do an ordinary sum in arithmetic,” [With 20/. it would be
necessary that you obtained immediate employment. You could not
move so large a family into the interior unless you would be pretty
sure of employment and. good prospects. We should be inclined to
try the Western States of America, where people of your spirit get on
well, or Fatal, the passage-money being cheap, skins plentiful, a current
of men with, some money, and no handicraft or ideas now going there,
lon. axe sure to do better in a colony than at home,]
Engineer; Limolmkirs. —The Potters’ Emigration Society,
address f. Evans, Examiner Office, Shelton, Staffordshire
Potteries. If you can afford it, you will find it cheaper to join the
Society in Wisconsin than here, and hatter.
A man, aged. 28, a good musician, organist, and
violist player, A brother, a painter; married, with one child. Think
of Illinois or lowa, Capital I2Gh [Bad time of the y ear for painters,
who are most needed in the spring, ‘ Eastern Tennessee, described in
a senes of papers in First Senes by a Cumberland farmer, seems a very
desimhie location, and many English there. How far music and paint-
ing would do we know not. If you mean to farm, perhaps that is your
best rente; the pamphlet describing it is called “A Trip to Canada,
and the United States, by Robert James,” You bad better read it.
Tvjq J.ovAhs; iidmerater. —lß and 19 ; food of fanning, and can
handle a gun; would have, on landing at Hew York, about 80f.;
mean to work a twelvemonth on a farm; would then receive remit-
tances, and would wish to go west and settle on a farm of forty or
hfty acres, <> Canid we rent from government ? Could we purchase
afterwards 1 Gould we be sure of employment? Could we easily


dispose of produce of farm?” [You may squat: you cannot rent
from government. You are not bard enough for squatters. Cleared
fanes may be rented at a bushel of wheat per acre in the far worst.
Side of produce depends upon where your farm is. As we say above,
join some people who have daughters about your age, and capital
(oOGL), and no agricultural experience.]
An Officer. —21 years of age, with ‘i.OOOh; has lived long on the
continent; thinks of New Zealand, should he go alone! [This gen-
tleman has everything to learn to make a good colonist. New Zea-
land is only fit for small hardworking fanners. In cattle brooding
and sheep there are rims to he had in the Middle Island, off Otago,
Those of Nelson are filled up, bnt he has first to learn the business
which he cannot do well, there, as there are not herds enough, then buy
stock imported from Australia at a high price, and then sell wool and
tallow at Australian prices. Let him go to Port Philip for a yeans
experience, or exchange into the 45th, now quartered at h ata-, hee
what may be done in that fine colony without risking anything.
Such emigrants, when they take to it, make the best cohmmts, out it
requires time. Above all, buy no land, and risk no money. The
best companion In A ustralia, or New Zealand, is a sensible, healthy,
courageous wife a lady, not a, hoe lady --—a gone, horsewoman, with
plenty of conversation, and some love of adventure, j
Co/xmwt JgriwMure. The best works that we know are “ The
Farmer s and Emigrants Hand-book, by ,1. Marshall, New York:
“Fanning and Grazing in New South Wales. Cross, Holborn;"
and “ The Port Stephens Guide,” Stephen’s book of the farm is an
excellent work, hat too good for the colonies.
Illinois. —The best way of proceeding in the winter is through
New Orleans, although it is a route rather dreaded, now in conse-
quence of the cholera. The expense from England will scarcely be
nader 9 L a head. Keep together: as to whether you should buy land
or hire out as labourers, you must decide on the spot. A complete
knowledge of farming is not requisite for America.
•i Shoemaker. The passage to the United States can scarcely be
counted under 5 1, } all expenses included. There are vessels irons
Liverpool which take passengers at from 21, 2s. to 21. 10a,, but this
only includes bread and water. The whiter season is a bad time for
agricultural labourers to arrive in Canada or the States. The cheapest
vessels, and the worst, are return, timber ships in Canada, You are
taken up to the interior by steam vessels cheaply; hut the United
States offer better chance of employment, pushing west. Hew York,
Philadelphia, Boston, and similar towns, will be found as much over-
crowded with mechanics as this country, although touters interested
ip lodgings hoard, every emigrant ship, and tell quite a different tale.
A London Tradesman—E. W., middle-aged ; not
accustomed to hard labour; three children, the shiest -oar years eld.
Capital 1000 L « Would you advise to follow advice given in Fort


Stephens Guide to an unskilled man with 2002.] We are both fond
of agricultural pursuits, and should go with the intention of working
with a labourer at building the but, clearing, &c,; my wife of garden-
ing, cropping, and attending io dairy without assistance.’"' [ You have
never probably done a day’s work in your life ; at twenty-five yon
might learn. At your age it is too late, therefore, unless strong reasons
drive you, as a mere matter of fancy, we should not recommend you
to emigrate at all. If yon do, it would be indispensable to success
that yon associated yourself with some honest man, able to work,
experienced in agriculture, without capital beyond his passage-money;
then y our purchase of land might be for both. His services to be
paid in hind and stock after so many years. For further particulars
of land at Port Stephens, see above. Have you not some young
relation you could send cut to prepare the way tor you] We have
found London tradesmen more unfitted for colonial country pursuits
than rained country gentlemen, officers, and the like, while, on the
other hand, town-bred wives, if under 40, soon adapt themselves to
their new position.
American Papers may be seen at Deacon’s Coffee House, Bucklers-
bury; the North American Coffee House, opposite the 'Royal 'Exchange ;
and some others in the city.
Hardworking Shopmen. —"We are two young men (single, and
intend to remain so), assistants in a drug, oil and colour and seed
retail shop, utterly tired of the many cares and anxieties attendant
upon trade, and desirous of attaining peace and comfort. We have
abon.t 2002. at our command. We care not how great, the amount of
work may be, or the number of the privations, so long as we can
breathe pure air, and earn our daily bread. We can cook or bake,
fatten pigs, or pickle pork, but have no great relish either for the bowse
or the scalping knife, and are nearly ignorant of the rifle. We are
well used to work, and could handle an axe as well as a pestle, and
at present stand behind the coaster ninety hours in a week.” [Port
Stephens, see above, would exactly suit you. Your idea of remain-
ing single is net very wise for colonists, if there are any good tempered
hardworking lasses in your neighbourhood.]
Clerk, JVb JB. " I have been accustomed to keep accounts, and
am presently employed as a junior clerk; have no prospect of
promotion ; have been thinking of emigrating to Australia, but
having no capital I suppose my plan would be to accept of
employment as a shepherd. lam twenty-six years of age; have
been familiar with country occupations (although not accustomed
to heavy labour), and am get the strongest certificates of charac-
ter, &e. [Should strongly recommend you not to think of emigration
until you have acquired some useful mechanical trade to fit you for
earning a living in the bush. A man like you may fall back on a
shepherd’s life when in the colony, but for you to leave a situation to
become a shepherd would be n-adness.l


OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
Alexander Harris, having passed sixteen years in Aus-
tralia, the greater part of that time as a cedar sawyer, and
being author of one of the best and most popular books on
the Colony, as well as other works of considerable power
and interest*, has claims to be read whenever he writes.
The “ Guide to Port Stephens” is rather a Guide to Aus-
tralia—the advice and opinions being general rather than
special—-it might have been called the “ Result of the Co-
lonial Experience of Alexander Harris.” It is most meagre
in its account of Port Stephens, the fast being, we suspect,
that the estate of the Australian Agricultural Company
has been for many years managed as the estates of most
absentee landlords are, chiefly for the benefit of the resident
agents. The English Directors know very little of their
estate, except from early reports by MfArthnr, who chose it,
and the descriptions of travellers like Captain Btokes, The
parties who, having long resided there, could have given.
Mr. Harris a full description, of Port Stephens, appear to
have rendered him no material assistance; but it could not
he expected that those- who have long enjoyed the -snug
sinecure of a model farm and breeding station, would view
with pleasure plans for settling an energetic yeomanry
where hitherto, as in a nobleman’s park, only the purest of
short-horns and the finest of merinoes have been allowed to
roam.
The following extracts are better than the sham of a
criticism:—■
SUMMARY LIST OF VEGETABLE PRODUCTIONS MORE PECULIARLY
FLOURISHING IN CLIMATE.
Almonds flourish remarkably in Australia, ripening in February,
Apples, in all the cooler parts of the colony. Apricot tree, chiefly as
a standard, produces abundantly everywhere. Asparagus grows well
on all soils. Artichokes grow very large, and of very fine flavour.
Banana, on the seacoast: flourishes at Port Stephens, but requires a
sheltered situation. Beans, beet, brocoli, all grow more luxuriantly
than in England. Celery and cucumber : these two vegetables
flourish anywhere throughout the colony, the most arid districts ex-
* <Y A Giiide to Port Stephens, in New South Wales, the Colony
of the Australian Agricultural Company. By Alexander Korns.
Author of * Convicts and Settlers,’ ‘ The Emigrant Family,’ See., &c.
With a Map,”


cepted. The iatter is often sown between the row's of maize. Cherry,
chestnut, currant: the two former succeed best; the latter runs too
ranch to wood, except on high grounds. Cotton flourishes highly
under cultivation. A wild species is found growing very luxuriantly
in some parts. Cabbages grow well throughout the colony, and are
found very hardy. Carrots, suited to the climate, but not so product-
ive, Figs grow throughout the colony, with no further attention than,
that of planting, producing' two crops per year. The fruit is of the
finest flavour, abundant in quantity, and presses well. It is expected
to become an article of export, Gooseberries grow, but not encourag-
ingly, except on the higher grounds, Grapes, of every variety, are
now' produced in great plenty ; and wine and brandy are becoming
valuable exports. Herbs; the common culinary herbs grow well; so
also does water-cress in the proper situations, together with garden-
cress, lettuce, &e., &e. Hop : this plant is now growing with a rapi-
dity and luxuriance unknown in Europe; the flavour is excellent:
the latest accounts from Illawarra speak, of its success on the brash
lands of that district ia the highest terms. Loquats flourish well in
gardens. Lemons flourish remarkably, either in hedge-row bushes
or standards. They have long been a very common tree in the colony;
some orchards have even become worn out for some years, through
neglect, after having arrived at perfection. Mulberries are now be-
coming a most important article of plantation produce, as will be
noticed in connexion with silk. The tree will succeed well at- Port
Stephens ; the model plantation Bear Sydney feeing in a very similar
climate in that of the grounds about floors!. It is, however, found
that the tree flourishes everywhere throughout the colony. Melons ;
this rich fruit is produced in the greatest abundance, oven in the
hottest parts, with no further attention than that of depositing the
seeds in, the ground under the open sky. Melons sometimes reach
20 ibs, and 24 lbs. in weight, and sell at freon Qd. to :2s. each. About
the more populous arid long settled districts their price is smallest,
for scarcely any little cultivator neglects to throw iu a few clusters
of seed, amongst his corn. Mushrooms plentiful in South Australia;
not so much, so in, the elder colony. Tee traveller, however, is some-
times surprised by coming on a damp morning upon some solitary spot,
especially where horses frequent, and hading thousands, in their various
stages, rising before him. Maize and millet flourish luxuriantly its all
ordinary -seasons. There is generally a double crop to be brought in
by the settler. The <l for’ard cons,” as it is called, is planted early,
on land especially devoted to it for the y ear: —the “ late com,’ or
“ stubbie corn/' as it is also called, ia maize planted, after the wheat
is reaped, amidst its stubbie; sometimes without even burning the
stubbie. A single furrow is struck with the plough, or a single hole
made with the hoe, and the seed just cast in and covered up. The
stubble crop is of course not so good, as the crop of “ for’ard corn.”
Olive grows very well at Fort Stephens, and indeed, generally, in


all the milder districts. It is considered to be a tree of great promise.
The attention of the colonists has lately been turned to the com-
mercial value of the tree for the sake of its oil. Orange grows very
well everywhere. Near Paramatta there are some very valuable
plantations, furnishing large quantities of fruit to Sydney market.
An original owner and planter (a Mr. Mobbs) is said to have made
a very considerable fortune from the fruit in the course of a few
years. Onions grow very well whenever the ground affords an
average quantity of moisture. About the Hawkesbury, and in
Illawarra and the Curryjong, some splendid beds are often to be met
with; as also at Bathurst, and in various parts of the new country.
The alluvial lands of Port Stephens are well suited to them. Pea
grows freely and produces abundantly throughout the colony. Peach,
chiefly met with as a standard. Its yield is immense; so also is the
comparative size of the fruit. The little settlers make intoxicating
liquors (cider, brandy) from the produce of their peach-orchards : many
bring home whole dray-loads together of the ripe windfalls to feed
their pigs. Potatoes grow freely throughout the colony ; but not so
well in the middle and northern districts as they do in. the southern
and interim'. The Hawkesbury, Bathurst, Argyle, Illawarra produce
this vegetable in perfection ; and the potato disease, which has made
such havoc elsewhere, is unknown. Pine-apples, pomegranates, plan-
tains, pears, plums, all flourish in various localities; parsnips grow
well exiougb in the less arid soils. Quince is met with flourishing
wherever it has been planted, but that is by no means extensively.
Bhubarb grows to an enormous size in the parts suitable to it
Hadishes, ditto, blasphemes, on the hilly southern districts, are pro-
duced freely. Strawberries, ditto. Spinach, sea-kale, sweet potatoes,
grow well on the soils and in the situations suitable to them. Tobacco
grows very well throughout the colony. It is a plant which requires,
however, good soli and a sufficiency of moisture, as well as a tolerably
genial climate. All the sea-coast brushes, and all the interior alluvial
soil on the river -banks, and the sides of the mountains where brushes
originally grew, are most suitable for it. It also is said to be likely
now to become an article of export; but I doubt whether the cost of
production by free labour, along with the cost of freight, will ever
allow it to become an important one. Turnip : abundant during
whiter and spring, in favourable situations, but very little cultivated.
No field cultivation. Walnut: but lately introduced; growing lux-
uriantly, but does not appear suited for all localities. Wheat; no
finer wheat is grown in the world than some produced in Australia :
samples shown at Mark Lane lately have been pronounced equal to
any ever seen. Generally it is very good. It is a grain, however,
which, requires to be looked after, to save it from the attacks of
insects after ripening. Yams : this very fine and productive vegetable
requires good soil, but is well worth any such charge upon the culti-
vator's sneans and care.


Outfits fok Voyage. —As there are two main classes of voyagers,
so there will be two main styles of outfit. The habits of persons arc,
however, so different, that I could never see the propriety of specific
inventories for them. It appears a much better plan to give each
class a general notion of the demand that its circumstances will make,
and leave individuals to apply that notion in their own way. 1. All
ought to take clean under linen sufficient for the whole voyage, say
for sixteen weeks, 2. No male ought to go to sea for such a period
without providing for a couple of caps or hats being blown overboard:
he ought also to have one extra pair of hoots; for they also sometimes
sail off by the scuppers, if left where a sea can get at them, 3. A
thoroughly good over-garment is absolutely necessary for both men,
women, and children. If a male means to keep on deck in heavy
weather, he must have' a couple, as well as corresponding trowsers.
4. An extra pair of blankets is an indescribable convenience:— a
port, may be left open, and a sea break into one’s berth. It may
all bap-pen very innocently, but will nevertheless be just as unpleas-
ant, I recollect, in my outward-bound voyage, being seated one fine
summer morning in my berth, witii my back to the open port, enjoy-
ing a basin of capital tea, when a sea came in over my shoulder and
was into the basin, and a quantity of it down my throat in the
twinkling of an eye. Just in some similar manner, or perhaps by
leakage overhead, one's bedding may get wet. It is very true, salt
water does no injury, but it is a very disagreeable bedfellow, 5, The
landsman, modifying his usual land, clothing by the above directions,
seeds, so far as I can see, to do no more. For females, the farther
direction is of importance. Have a few pairs of warm stockings, in
case of having to sit below in cold-blowing; weather. The voyage
itself, properly timed, is. meantime, one of the most agreeable the ocean,
affords. In a fe w days the warm latitudes are reached ; then to this is
superadded the steady course and easy motion of the ship in the trade
winds for a considerable time; and, after rounding the Cape of Good
Hope, there is a remarkable uniformity of temperature till the voyage
terminates. A few squalls may occur about the line, but the sun shines
brightly almost throughout the voyage, the seas are not heavy, and it
is rarely that a severe gale is encountered on the track.
The above extracts will answer the questions of several
correspondents. Much, practical information is given on
minutire of farming, tobacco -growing, and colonial pursuits.
We can consequently .recommend it as a useful book to an
emigrant to any Southern Colony.
Hursthouse’s “ Sew Plymouth in New Zealand,” and several other
books, will be noticed at length next month. We are again obliged
to emit several interest lug articles.


SIDNEY’S
EMIGRANT'S JOURNAL,
AND
Traveller's Magazine.
THE PROGRESS OF NATAL.
{Concluded from page 124,)
Th® history of Natal is a history of the baneful effect- of
the Wakefield fallacies on the Colonial Office. In the blue
book presented to Parliament in 1848 are five long de-
spatches from. Lord Stanley, containing his views on the
value of African land. It would be no exaggeration to as-
sert that these despatches have cost the country hundreds
of thousands of pounds, and the lives of scores of English-
men, good soldiers, and of Dutchmen whom more judicious
treatment would have rendered good subjects. His lord-
ship, in England and Ireland, is a good farmer and a good
landlord; but to Cape colonists his views appear like the
emanations of a lunatic. Natal was a fertile desert, de-
populated by the barbarity of Chaka, until the Dutch
emigrant farmers marched in, settled there, and conquered
possession by defeating the African king in a great pitched
battle. Natal, worth nothing before, became in their
hands the site of towns, with farms and flocks and herds;
Lord Stanley, following the traditions of the Colonial Office,'
looked on all the land with the eye of an English laud
agent. He grudged to every Dutchman every acre. The
emigrant farmers were harassed by official interference,
by regulations as to the size of farms, by details of regis-
tration and a hundred red-tape nuisances (all well enough
in abstract theory), into two insurrections and. a rs-emi-
NEW SSKIfiS—SO, IV. M


gration. Sitting in Downing Street, the Colonial Minister
tried to settle land claims and fix boundaries and prices ; the
result was doubt, distrust, despair throughout the Colony.
His lordship raised the price of town-lots, from the nominal
price fixed by the Boers, to 100/'. an acre, because that was
the sum “ fixed on town-lots in the Falkland Islands:’ The
barren Falkland Islands, where, to this day, trie years hav-
ing elapsed since that despatch (May, 1844), not a single
lot has been sold, were the fulcrum for raising the price of
land and rebellion. In. the following October, his lordship
declined to accede to the recommendation of the local com-
missioner, and insisted on reducing the farms to 3000 acres
instead of 6000—the Dutch idea of a farm. He also de-
clined to admit claims in favour of two orphans and two
widows, because, "whatever may be the private feelings
raised by such cases, the waste lands of the Crown are not
proper means of providing for charitable objects
Lord Stanley evidently thought the land worth 100£ an
acre, so he saved a few thousand acres, and, by so doimr,
dispersed and drove out the white Dutchmen, upon which
the black Zooloos marched in. We are now spending a large
sum in managing preliminaries to colonization, which would
have required no" management with the Dutch settled as
pioneers at Marifeburgh; and we are put to our wits’ end
for devices for managing: the black squatters who now
wander over the land the Dutch would have cultivated,
pastured, and protected, if we would have only let them.
The present upset price of Government Land at Hatal is
4s, an acre. It is under this arrangement that Mr. Byrne
has sent out his emigrants, and that the St. Alban’s Com-
pany are proceeding.
These are favourable terms as compared with our Aus-
tralian Colonies. They are quite inconsistent with the.
principles maintained by Lord Grey and his predecessors
in dealing with Australia; but they were extorted by the
pressing necessity for balancing and overawing the Dutch
and black population.
A passage in. the following letter affords some idea of
what the emigrant Boers must have suffered in trying to
obtain registration, seeing that English gentlemen have m
much trouble.—After mentioning that the Gwalior , in spite
of favourable winds, made a tedious passage of seventy-
eight days, rendered more uncomfortable by the deficiency
and inferior quality of the provisions, he says :


u my most sanguine anticipations in the
ipeauty of its scenery and the uninterrupted fertility of
its soil, and the salubrity of its climate. The vicinity
of the sea ■within a of twenty mlies is considered
tne most suitable for cotton, more especially the finer
staples of it. The native Natal cotton-tree, as well as
the American upland, has been found to do well up the
country as far as Pleter-Maritzburgh. During grimmer and
winter there is plenty of water for all purposes. Winter
being the dry season here, and also the best time for put-
ting in root and pulse crops, it is found beneficial and ne-
cessary to irrigate the land whilst the seed is germinating ;
and, from the gently undulating character of the country,
it is an operation easily performed. Comparatively little
advantage has as yet been taken of the natural capabilities
of the soil; indeed, 1 can scarcely say that any has, Unless
we except tne cultivators of cotton, who, however, are
labouring under serious disadvantages, and such as will
eventually ruin them if not speedily removed-—with the
exception of the Dutch, who mostly follow the occupation
of their forefathers, via., as graziers, and cattle-breeders,
and who, by the way, are mostly removed out of the country
to the other side of the mountains. There are here no men
of energetic or go-ahead principles, and still fewer with any
money. The difficulty of getting native labour here is
very great; and until some means are taken not only to
induce the natives to work, but also to punish them for all
breaches of contract, which they are daily in the habit of
doing without let or hindrance, the cotton-planters, more
especially, may at once leave off cotton cultivation. It is
tlxe cotton-planter that this state of matters most seriously
affects, for the loss is very great when his cotton is dead
ripe, and he unable to pick it. I know a farmer at this
moment so situated ; he has about 170 acres of Sea Island
cotton, most of it commencing to burst the pod, and yet he
cannot get a single labourer for love or money, although
there are thousands around him. He (Mr. Davidson), lam
sorry to say, is only one out of a number similarly situated,
I have no doubt that he will lose this season betwixt 700?. and
1000?,, and he has no means of remedying it; let him offer
*.better from P. J. Maxwell, Esq., formerly of the Hon, East
India Company’s Mercantile Marine; addressed to W. J. 0. Young,
Esq., of Saa Court, CornMll, dated 23rd February, 18-19.
x 2


any wages he likes, the natives will not work, they prefer
ease and idleness; they are becoming very independent,
and I have no doubt some fine day they will attempt to
drive us out of the country. They are becoming rich in
cattle, &e., which is all they care about besides having
a dozen wives to wort for them. You must understand
that the natives we have here, or rather, I ought to say, tlm
coloured population, have no more right to the country of
hiatal than we have ; they have come in here for protection
from the tyranny of Panda, the king of the Julee nations ;
they have been, pouring in by thousands ever since the
British established a government here : they are permitted
to squat wherever they choose, and occupy any quantity of
ground, when they have exhausted which, by continuous
crops of Indian corn, they remove to another spot. Whilst
enjoying, therefore, the protection of our government and
making rich on the fat of the land, they do not pay one
farthing towards the maintenance of the government, whilst
the meagre and thinly scattered white inhabitants have to
hear the whole brunt. Despite all these, we would not
even now have complained, not, probably, had we been able
to get labour from the natives at a fair rate, or indeed at
any"rate at all. The Dutch farmers managed them much
better than we do ; in the first place, they allowed no more
to come in than they actually wanted for servants, and
these were few, the rearing of cattle not requiring many, I
believe there were about 5000 under the Dutch, and when
the English first took possession, they were generally
apprenticed to the Dutch, for seven, years ; and these people ,
witere they aw to he vmt with, are always found to he good
servants. The bulk of the natives generally have much
more respect for a Dutchman than an Englishman: the
former treated them well when they behaved well, but
punished them severely otherwise; whereas our govern-
ment will neither let us punish them (which is all right,
perhaps) nor do so themselves. I do not know when this
state of things is to end, not, I am afraid, until we get more
efficient government men than those nowhere; from the
Lieutenant Governor downwards are complete old women
and will stick to their miserable salaries until they ruin the
colony totally, which they are doing as fast as they possibly
can. They throw obstacles in the way of every man having
any business with, them, excepting when Ire is proposing to
buy a little government land, and they have the prospect of


■getting a little of his money into their coffers for the same';
then they will facilitate matters a little. But it is a very
different state of matters when a man buys a private pro-
perty, and wishes to have his title to it ratified by govern-
ment as soon, as possible, or, perhaps, it has to be surveyed
and the transfer locally made ; then every obstacle is
thrown in his way, and he will be fortunate if lie gets
things settled for a twelvemonth at least. I would tax
the natives, say ss. for himself per annum, 2s. for e very wife
above one, ss. for every 30 acres he holds, and ss. for every
30 head of cattle ho keeps on the common ground of the
locations which it is meant or proposed to form. At several
public meetings we have proposed that the Caffres should
be gathered into convenient locations, say ten in number,
in the most suitable situations for affording labour to Euro-
pean farmers, <fec.; each location to be placed under the
superintendence of a magistrate and an efficient police
force ; each Caffre to be taxed as above. The extent of
ground allotted to the Caffres not to exceed one-fifth part
of the whole colony. Further, every Caffre of each location,
as well as those residing on private property, to be regularly
registered, and to receive a brass badge or ticket to be worn
round his neck, for which he will pay Is.; and in the event
of his wishing to change his location, he must purchase a
transfer ticket at 55. ; this last is with a view to prevent, as
much as possible, their wandering habits, &c. The ex-
pense of such a system fully carried out, i. e., with a resi-
dent magistrate at 250 1, per annum, and efficient police
force at each station, it is supposed, would cost about
12,0006 per annum. The tax proposed would amount to
upwards of 20,000 1. It has been stated that there are only
150,000 Caffres in .Natal, but there are good grounds for
believing that there are upwards of 200,000. They are
coming over the Tugela into the colony, from Panda, bv
hundreds, and unless our government adopts some suclr
means with them as the one proposed, they will very soon
be strong enough to drive us out of the country, * After
seeing a good deal of the country, I have at length fixed on
a farm about two hours’ ride from Pieter-Maritzburgb, lying
upon the Fngani river; it is nearly 6000 acres in extent,
with much valuable wood on it. The place 1 have bought
is very beautiful, and remarkably rich in pasture. It
is situated at the confluence of the Ungani and the
Karkloof rivers, the former forming its southern boundary


down to the mouth of the Karkloof, or, as it is called in the
Ordnance map, the Karklous, from which point it runs
direct north. There is a pretty good house upon it, and
a mill for grinding flour. The price is to he 265 1, jit is
about the cheapest farm that has been bought for some
time. I mean to take up my abode on it nest month,
and commence operations immediately. We have good and
pleasant neighbours around us. The government upset
price is 4s. per acre: a real good government farm seldom
fetches less, in the neighbourhood I speak of, than 55., and
cotton lands, near the quay, about 10.?., but nobody ever
thinks of buying government land. Send me two tons of
lead in 7 lb. bars, one ton of hoop-iron 3|- in. by | in., with
half a ton of square bars of different sizes for working into
Cape wagon fittings. The proper size is very material; also
gunpowder from Watling (Rostein gunpowder), half in
canisters, fine, the rest best glazed elephant powder : also
some ploughs, a brick and tile machine. Send us out
plenty of emigrants and a few decent married farmers,
either Scotch or north of England men ; they will do well
and get cheap farms if they come soon. Ask my brother to
look out for a good ploughman, for a decent sober indus-
trious man, married recently, at 35 1 per annum from the
time of Ills landing. The agreement to be signed here
before a magistrate, to serve me for not less than three
bears, but he must be a real good man and well principled.
His wife to know something.of milking, and making butter,
cheese,
{Some extremely valuable information respecting hiatal
is to be found in a modest well-written pamphlet just pub-
lished by Mr. Erasmus Methky, of Leeds (see Library
Td'k ), from which we abridge information on points not
already touched.
The forest in the neighbourhood of HTJrban is o verrun
with elephants, which occasionally take moonlight walks in
the streets —good news this for sportsmen. Oats, barley,
beans, and peas do very well near the town. Wheat does
not do so well, .and the district is not adapted for cattle;
sheep will not livethe horse disease, which prevails more
or less throughout the colony. Is generally most virulent in
the vicinity of the coast. Around Fieter-Maritzburgh there
is an extensive commonage, enabling the townsfolks to
keep horses and cows without expense. Beyond the Drakea-
feorg mountains the emigrant .Boers have established a


republic, and built a town called Origstadt. They bring
down to Maritzburgh the skins and horns of animals killed
in the chase, and take back supplies of coffee, sugar, cloth'
lug, <fcc. On the Ungani river are falls of 275 feet deep,
surrounded by romantic scenery, the resort of pic-nics and
travellers.
<( The division of Impafane , including Moi and Bushman’s
Rivers, extending to the base of the Drakeuburg, contains
a tract of land which was the most thickly peopled by the
Boers before they re-emigrated. It is healthier for cattle
than the other three divisions; sheep have thriven well In
some parts of it. The soil at the village of Weenar suits
the vine, fruit trees, vegetables, wheat, and oats. The river
Tugela is a fine stream, running between steep banks, in
some places as broad as the Thames at Richmond, There
are several fine waterfalls.
ie The .Dutch Boers are, generally speaking, brave, honest,
and hospitable; in remote districts they gladly welcome the
traveller to their habitations, giving him .a warm-hearted
reception, without expecting any remuneration.”
Farming Stock.-— A wagon now costs 70?,, which, with
a span of oxen (twelve) at 3?, each, will make 106?. A
second-hand wagon may frequently be had for half this
amount. An English-built wagon would be totally useless
for, African purposes. Horses, which are well bred, hardy,
and servicable, cost from 10?. to 26?. The broad-tailed
Cape sheep is the only breed reared in the colony. The
pasturage is supposed to be too rich, for the Cape merino.
Goats are found of a superior breed, crossed with the long-
haired Angora. Goat’s milk in hot climates is more whole-
some than that of the cow. It is an animal not sufficiently
5:1 by British colonists. Pigs, turkeys, geese, ducks,
are reared as in England; fowls from the natives
cost M-d, or 3c?. Ploughs should he imported; Messrs,
Ransom and May, of Ipswich, know the kind. A good as-
sortment of carpenters’ tools, wheels for wagons, and a
small three-poled tent will be found useful, as well as a
collection of garden seeds, carefully packed.
Plenty of eatable game is to be found on farms; several
varieties of the antelope ; the wild peacock, as large as a
turkey ; and pheasants, partridges, quail, guinea fowl, hares,
and' porcupines.
Windo wb and doors should be taken out. A military
saddle and accoutrements will not be amiss for young


gentlemen of sufficient means. A yeomanry corps has been
formed; the settlers finding the horses and uniforms, the
Government rifles and sabres.
The exports of Natal in 1849 amounted to only 10,866?.
Ivory formed of this 6477?; cotton, 13,931 lbs., valued at
433?. The imports amounted to 46,204?.
Having now presented the most complete account of
Natal that has jet appeared, we will add, as our private
opinion, that, in spite of the many state reasons for pro-
moting the cultivation of cotton, it appears to us, after
perusing all the evidence, that British agricultural emi-
grants will act more wisely in resorting to the temperate
regions on the higher ground, and embarking in the farm-
ing and graving, to which they have been accustomed,
rather than in tropical cultivation* of which they know
nothing.
FmisiSHiNG of Bush Huts.—Bedding, iron pots for boiling meat,
tin quart pots and pannikins (flat pints) for tea. Frying-pan, tin
dishes, knives (pocket are generally used). But the settler can refine
as, much as he pleases. Cask for salting meat, tables and stools (made
on the spot). Backets, a couple should be taken, matches, tinder-
box, flint ami steel. The above is what a bushma» can do with,
live, and make himself a home. It not a single man, he can, easily
take better counsel than mine as to the rest, The above is also an
account bow the settler of some capital must furnish his men’s huts
(save fa the article of bedding, which every man provides for himself).
It will also be sufficient for himself to be in possession of such an
equipment for Mg own hut until the arrival and domestication of his
family at the farm. On that occasion, of course, he must resort to
higher counsel than mine. Keeping the style in mind, the further
items suggest themselves. Besides, it belongs to every man to deter-
mine for '’himself by how much he will exceed bare necessity, and
indulge in superfluities. — Guide to Port Stephens,
SsoSKS m'& Farm.—Flour or wheat. The wheat involves a steel
mill and sieves. Meat; either salted and conveyed to the farm, or
purchased standing and slaughtered. Sait, tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco,
soap. All these are indispensable, and required for the weekly ra-
tions of the men. Each settler must adapt his farther stock of stores
to his circumstances. Large settlers will require slop clothing for
their men; little settlers will not; ami so forth generally. On the
spot plenty of respectable informants will be met. As a general
rale, don’t ask the" shopkeeper himself what goods you ought to give
him an order for.— Jbid,


NEW PLYMOUTH IN NEW ZEALAND*.
New Plymouth, or, according to the native name, Taranaki,
was one of the minor settlements formed by the agent
of the New Zealand Company when he found that the
Company had sold more land in the Wellington Settlement
than they were able to deliver without constructing ex-
pensive roads. When Dr. Dieffenbach wrote his account of
New Zealand, he considered that Wellington must be
dependent on Taranaki for its wheat and principal agricul-
tural supplies. Since the publication of the Doctor’s book,
the government, for the purpose of employing the natives
after the cessation of the Maori war, has employed them in
constructing military roads, at an expense of from five to
seven hundred pounds a mile; the natives being paid about
double the wages of labourers in England, and superintended
ably and carefully by officers of engineers. These roads,
although only practicable for any distance -by horses, have
opened up a fertile district to the town of Wellington ; and
if they had been made earlier, would no doubt have pre-
vented the foundation of New Plymouth.
Mr, Hursthouse’s book has been published by subscription,
the New Zealand Company taking a hundred copies, for the
purpose of drawing attention to the intrinsic merits of a
settlement which, founded under the most magnificent aus-
pices, and capable of supporting a large and flourishing
body of small fawners, seems likely, under the fallacious
colonizing principles of the New Zealand Company, to
remain, what it is at present, after the expenditure of tens
of thousands of pounds—an insignificant village.
Mr. Hursthouse’s volume is honestly and impartially drawn
up. Indeed, it contradicts, on several important particulars,
the absurd puffs under the name of “ Guides,” &c., previously
published under the patronage of Mr. W akefield’s friends,
and fully corroborates the opinions we have from time to
time expressed on the theory and the practice of the “ Suffi-
cient Price Theorist.”
New Plymouth lies on the north-west of the northern
*■ “An Account of the Settlement of New Plymouth in
land; from Personal Observation during a .Residence of Five kcars,' 5
By Charles Hursthouse, Jun.; with a Plan and Views.


Island, 120 miles by sea from the harbour of Manukau,
whence there is an excellent road of only six miles to Auck-
land, 180 miles from Wellington, and 160 from Nelson, and
forms part of the northern or government division of the
Colony. Within 1300 miles lie Sydney, Port Philip, and Van
Diemen’s Land. The climate is one of the healthiest in the
world. “ Emigrants may fail to realize all they read in the
early and glowing accounts of the country, but an excellent
climate will assuredly be found.” Prom the remarkable
equality, it is difficult to define the seasons of New Plymouth
accurately. The coldest and wettest months are June, July,
and August; the warmest and driest, January, February,
and March. Snow is never seen except around Mount
Egmont: sheets of ice are occasionally observed in July
mornings. There are no hurricanes, fogs, or mists. January
is the harvest month.
New Plymouth has at present no harbour, nothing but
an open roadstead, which bears with ship-captains and
underwriters a dangerous character, our author contends,
undeservedly. But the Admiralty have lately given instruc-
tions for a survey, with the view of constructing a small
harbour and laying down moorings ; and this, when done,
will be an attraction for shipping more effective than all
the writing power—no small quantity—at the disposal of
the New Zealanders.
The following passage corroborates an opinion we have
several times heard expressed by travellers and colonists
not connected with the Compaxiy--that New Zealand could
not for centuries be a great, although it might be a pleasant
country. t( Could the noble harbour of Auckland be com-
bined with the fertile plains of Taranaki, the result would
he a ‘ site/ position, and climate unequalled in the colo-
nies ; hut in New Zealand it appears impossible to find a
first-rale port, combined with a district pre-eminent for fertility
and other agricultural advantages The pre-eminent is a
gentle softening of the barren inaccessible hills around
Nelson and Wellington.
“On approaching the sea, the village is seen snugly si-
tuated near the beach ; behind are the near cultivations.
Almost to the water’s edge, and for some considerable
distance back, the country is covered with a luxuriant
grovrih of fern, joining a fores t ever fresh and green, and of
the richest foliage. Sixteen miles from the coast is seen a
range of wooded mils, from which rises Mount Egmont, 9000


feet high, of a cone-like shape, thickly wooded round its
base, and capped with snow.” The country is undulating,
and so interspersed with small dells that almost every sec-
tion possesses one, varying in size from half an acre to
two or three, and generally containing a small spring.
The soil is divided locally into three sorts, each marked
by a different vegetation. The first is but a strip, extend-
ing along the coast, covered with light fern interspersed
with tufts of grass. Almost on the beach, within sixty
yards of high-water mark, some early emigrants formed
rough gardens, which produced ex cellent crops of vegetables.
The second division, adjoining this, is a tract of great extent-
covered with fern, six to eight feet high, interspersed with
a small bush, called “ tutu,” and a species of tall grass,
called “toe-toe.” The surface is a vegetable decomposition
of from seven to ten inches, matted together with fern-root,
with a light yellow subsoil of many feet in depth, entirely
free from stones, shells, gravel, or clay. The principal
farms are on this land. The third division is the bush or
forest land, which joins the fern, and extends along the
country in an irregular line two to five miles from the coast.
This soil, unlike fern land, turns quite mellow and fit for
cropping at once. The settlement possesses a variety of
what Mr. Hursthouse calls “valuable timber treesthey
are valuable when found on the settler’s ground, or close to
a stream, for building or making implements; but the idea
that an extensive timber trade may be carried on, either with
England or New South Wales, is a perfect delusion. There is
no timber that can rival mahogany and rosewood in the
British market; other timber trees are most cheaply ob-
tained from countries where the melting of winter snows,
swelling the rivers, affords a cheap mode of transport. A few
return cargoes to Sydney will be made up with spars ; bus
beyond a settler’s personal wants, the trees on his land will he
a nuisance until labour is much cheaper than we hope to see
it in onx time. In direct contradiction of most works from the
New Zealand mint, our author states that “Even the best
wild tree berries cannot be fairly called fruit.” The kie-kie,
a creeping thing, fruits every third year. Some little in-
terest was at first excited by this vegetable impostor, called
by the “ Guides” the New Zealand pine-apple, but tasting
at once dispelled the illusion ; it has a medicated street
flavor, earthy, and rather hitter. This, in recently pub-
lished “Notes on New Zealand,” is called a singular and


very delicious fruit. Water melons of fair quality, all flourish-
ing best on the black sandy soil, are raised in considerable
quantities by the natives. They believe that this, with
potatoes and pigs, were introduced by Captain Cook. New
Zealand flax (Phormium Tenax) grows luxuriantly in the
district. Before the colonization of the Island the natives
prepared it to barter for European goods. They also made,
and still make of it, although not to the same extent, ropes,
fishing nets, mats of great beauty, and baskets ; but since
the foundation of the British Colonies, the natives, finding
that they could more easily supply their wants by rearing
pigs, potatoes, and wheat, have entirely abandoned the trade
in the raw material, and the native mats are almost super-
seded by blankets. The preparation of a ton would occupy
five or six individuals a month. This same PhormiumT&mx
lias occupied attention for half a century. It grows luxu-
riantly in Norfolk Island; and one of the inducements for
forming a convict settlement there was the manufacture of
this flax. It formed a prominent subject in the declama-
tory puffs of the New Zealand Company’s agents—valuable
staples of export were to bo found in timber and New Zea-
land flax; and even in Guides and Hand-books to New Zea-
land, published within the last two years, the writers have
the audacity to reckon as an export, and recommend for the
investment gi emigrants, this other “ vegetable impostor.”
Although volumes "have been written, in the New Zealand
newspapers on the subject, although committees have been
formed, prizes offered, machines without number con-
structed, all efforts to discover an efficient economical mode
of superseding the thmnh-naM knack of the natives have
totally failed, and the manufacture of native flax is of no'
more value to New Zealand than Tunbridge ware or Scotch
snuff-boxes to this country. A reference to the export
returns of Now Zealand ports will establish the fact.
We advert seriously to this, because flourishes about New
Zealand flax, dye-woods, furniture woods, &c. } are mere
baits to catch emigrants. For the next fifty years no sen-
sible man ought to emigrate to New Zealand with any other
view" than farming, trading, or stock-feeding. Phormium
Tenax may be something at some future time ; at present
it is merely a text for colonial Bousters-wivels to talk and
write about. Nothing is more baneful to healthy emigra-
tion than these ''‘ingenious devices,”
New Plymouth probably contains minerals of value; iron


stone sand of considerable richness is said to be found there.
To render it available, cheap coal and cheap labour are in-
dispensable. Even in America, iron-works only flourish
under protective duties ; and in Van Diemen’s land, which
exhibits the same indications of universal wealth as New
Zealand, it has not yet been profitable to commence metal
manufacture even with the aid of convict labour,
Taranaki, like the rest of New Zealand, has no native
animals. Birds are numerous, but rather silent; with the
exception of the pigeon and wild-fowl, which are not
numerous, there is nothing for the sportsman. Fish, both
fresh and salt water, are tolerably plentiful.
The author suggests the introduction of the pheasant and
partridge—a speculation well worth the consideration of
those great capitalists who are advised by the magistrate
author of the New Zealand Handbook to invest in tandem
harness and dog-carts, subsoil ploughs, liquid manure-carts,
and fifty-guinea rams!
There a,re no native wiki animals or poisonous reptiles,
“ Musquitoes and sand flies are troublesome at first, yet even
these are innoecuoua as compared with those of America and
Australia.' 5
NATIVES.
The number of natives now dwelling in the settlement is
about 700. They live in settled habitations or pahs. One
of these, containing about a hundred inhabitants, occupies
an acre of ground, with a Wesleyan chapel. These 700
natives cultivate between four and five hundred acres of
land, of which three-fourths may be devoted to the growth
of wheat and potatoes, the remainder to maize, onions,
kumeras, melons, and other garden produce. They subsist
chiefly on potatoes, but are becoming large consumers of
fiour s and are very fond of tea and sugar. They dislike
spirits, preferring wine or beer, but are inveterate smokers.
Before there was much European cultivation, they entirely
supplied the settlers with potatoes and other vegetables.
Now their chief article of sale is pigs, self fed, principally'
on fern root: these they drive round and sell from house to
house; also, bundles of firewood, baskets of potatoes, wheat,
maize, melons, pigeons, parrots, and fish, flax lines, mats,
plaited kie-kie hats, and flax baskets. The proceeds are
invested in blankets, calico, and tobacco. The blanket is
fast superseding the handsome flax mat, which is now rarely
seen. The Taranaki tribe, inhabiting the country south of


tile New Plymouth settlement, contracted with millwrights
for the erection of three small grist mills, two of which,
lately completed at a cost of 300?,, have been paid for entirely
in pigs. “ Hitherto it has been found difficult to induce natives
to work steadily for hire." The author hopes that they will
improve in this particular as they advance in civilization.
It seems to us that as they can have land for nothing, and
are exempt from all taxation, civilization is most likely to
teach them the advantage of working for themselves, unless
in such cases as the government roads at Wellington, where
they are paid high wages for very little work.
The European population of New Plymouth consists of 566
adults, and 671 children not above fourteen years of age.
This handful of colonists is settled on 31,000 acres of land in
and round the village of New Plymouth, of which they have
in cultivation exactly 2103 J acres. Under the original plan
of the settlement it consisted of 68,500 acres, of which one-
tenth, 6850 acres, were to be reserved for the natives. The
town-land consisted of 660 acres, divided into 2200 quarter-
acre sections; in fact, on a scale sufficient for half a million
of inhabitants. It was to be surrounded by 10,460 acres of
suburban land, divided into 209 sections of 50 acres each,
surrounded by 57,500 rural acres, divided into 1180 sections.
The force of folly could no further go. On the strength of
a fertile soil and a fine climate, a settlement was planned,
at the distance of a six months’ voyage from England, on a
coast without a harbour, in a country without an export, in
the midst of brave warlike savages, on a scale exceeding the
present dimensions of Liverpool, -Glasgow, or Dublin!
But it looked well on paper, in water-colour drawings, and
on surveyors’ plans, and lunatics were found to purchase
14,000. acres. At present, 800 town sections, containing 200
acres, are unsold; of the 350 acres sold, four-fifths are either
waste or: used, as pasture and garden ground. The greater
part- was purchased by land-jobbers, from the plan } and will
never bo valued as building land again. This 'paper town
system is the leading feature of all the New Zealand Com-
pany’s arrangements—a system ruinous to confiding colo-
nists, and, although productive of cash in the commencement,
not favourable to the permanent interests of the Company.
Mr, Hurst-house remarks : “Much of the rural land is worth,
more per acre than a great portion of the town tract-; yet-
the first sells for 2?, and the other is offered at 50?. per acre.
The present village may remain the seat of business for


some years, but Tillages will eventually arise from which
produce will be shipped on the Muturoa and Waitua.
'Under new arrangements the size of rural sections has been
reduced to 25 acres at 21. per acre. The price of a quarter-
acre town section is fixed at about 12/. IQs.”
The purchaser of a rural section would receive for 50/. a
free passage for a labourer, 8/. 6s. towards his own passage,
and 26 acres of land.
The Company’s land, Mr. Hursthouse informs us, is brush,
via., heavily timbered, and also covered with thick under-
wood, Such land cannot be rendered fit for a rough crop
under 51. an acre; to clear it would cost at least five times
that sum. The labourer imported by the land purchaser
would leave him the moment hej landed. Where, then, are
the advantages of New Plymouth over countries where land
does not cost 21. an acre ?
We -observe that firewood costs 4s. for ten days; working
bullocks, 30 1, a pair: baiters, each, 8/. to 15/, Compare these
prices with those of the adjoining colonies. .
Mr. Hursthouse gives an. estimate for a married farmer
without children and a capital of 400/,, making the least
possible use of hired labour, “ the husband to plough, and do
the lighter work, the wife to manage without a servant.”—
P, .05, At the end of three years, he shows a 60-acre farm
worth 27 51., and building stock, implements, and outfit
worth 210/. more. The figures will not hear investigation.
Such items as 70/, for a furnished cottage, 16s. a week, for
labour, viz., as low as in Lincolnshire; 10s. a week for house-
keeping expenses, and several omissions, if put down at
actual cost, would sadly swell his expense ; but the climax
is' capped by a candid note ; In a young agricultural settle-
ment like this, if a few farms were in the market on sale
for cash, they would probably not fetch 275/. each.”
The soil and climate exactly suit a hardy industrious
agricultural population, such as north of England, Scotch,
and Welsh farmers of small means. But the Wakefield
system fears the way to the pioneers of colonization. The
system about to be adopted in Van Diemen’s Land would
soon people Taranaki, and make it, if not a wealthy, a happy
and prosperous colony.
We ask for no stronger testimony against the blunders of
the land-jobbing system and the creed of the Wakefield
school of colonizers from South Australia to Otago than is
to ho found in Mr. Hursthouse’s volume.


He, with us, declares that, “a grave error in the coloniza-
tion of New Zealand has been committed in the hasty plant-
ing of so many scattered settlements —Wellington, Nelson,
New Plymouth, Wanganui, Manawata, Otago— powerless to
afford each other assistance , some of them almost unconscious of
each other s existence At p. 54 he claims compensation for
the first colonists for the long delay they endured before
obtaining possession of the land they had paid for in Eng-
land. He says: “Our losses have been heavy, our unfortunate
situation excited such sympathy in England as to pro-
mote your late profitable arrangement with her Majesty’s
Government. You have now plenty of land at your disposal,
award us a portion of your superfluity. If the great body
of settlers ever come to regard the Company as hard and
grasping, as profuse of soft words, but chary of good deeds,
as a distant monopoly with separate interests; it is easy to
foresee that the scheme of New Zealand colonization by the
Company will be virtually marred. The stream of emigra-
tion would he diverted into the northern or government
division, where natural advantages are as great, where there
is a larger government expenditure , and, best of all, where
there is" the assurance that no new settlements will be
planted until the old ones, having taken firm root, are
making a flourishing growth.”
Our author concludes by suggesting for reviving and pro-
moting the prosperity of the colony; “ Ist, improvements
in the roadstead.” These the government has undertaken.
“ 2nd, the establishment of a newspaper.” A newspaper for
250 men sounds like a joke. It has been the bane of the
New Zealand Colonists that they have depended more on
printing puffing machinery in New Zealand and in London
than oa the spade, the axe, and the plough. “ 3rd, a share
in the government expenditure,” This sounds still more
strange. It used to he the boast of the "W akefield School of
colonizers, that they established self-supporting colonies. But
here we find it stated and proved that the customs receipts
of Wellington depend, entirely on government expenditures;
and the advocate of a model colony, founded by a brother
of the author of the (i Art of Colonisation,” without being
in the least abashed, asks for a share of the plunder.
He shows that (p, 74) in 1846 nearly 6000?. was expended,
on public works in Wellington, besides an extraordinary
war expenditure of 60001 more on militia, works of defence,
(fee., and 8000?, for the ordinary civil .and judicial service :


and argues that, if the government were to concentrate the
troops and the official corps on the barren isl Mid of Kapiti,
and there commence a large outlay on public works, Kapiti
would produce the customs revenue now drawn from
Wellington.”
it would be well that our financial reformers studied
this paragraph, and learned how the model colonies of
Wakefield, Molesworth and Co, are supported, and what
they cost under this Colonial Protective System. It seems
then, that the tables of imports and exports, which figure
so grandly in the New Zealand Guides, Hand-Books, & id
gems om/ne of Broad Street Puffs, only represent the con-
sumption of soldiers and the allowance made to Maories
under a labour test to keep the few hundred quiet, Mr.
Hu3-gth.ou.se also begs for military pensioners, in order to
•protect the colony and supply labour: here he differs from
the -organs of Few Zealand House, which are in the habit
of throwing much dirt on soldier-colonists.
4th. Out anti; > {»/'><• its a system of loans to small far-
mers on the secmrw * their land; “ eases frequently .oceur.
when the small < s '£ ' <r suffers much from the want of a
little ready mon >y at, die commencement.” We have no
objection to the loans, if the lenders can be found; but
would submit, that the simpler and honester process would
be to leave some money in the settlers’ pockets, by selling
the land at a reasonable rate, instead of first extracting the
uttermost farthing on the plea of supplying labour that is not
supplied, and then lending She money back again at 10 per
cent. sth. Mr, Hursthouse suggests a renewal of emigration,
end calls for 3400 male adults, including 50 capitalists, and
200 small farmers. How these emigrants are to be collected
he does not- specify. There is certainly nothing in Mr.
Sursthouse’s description of a very pleasant country to in-
duce emigrants of small means to place themselves in the
bauds of such arrant bunglers in the art of colonization as
the New Zealand Company have proved themselves, and to
give 24 mi acre- for laud not better than may be bought on
so -much bel ter terms in Australia, Yan Diemen’s Laud,
Natal, and the healthy parts of the United States.
In a word, the end of this vaunted art of colonisation
has been to found a few straggling settlements—to ruin all
the first comers—to give berths to officials, and employ ment
for soldiers.
It-we want .to people Few Zealand, we must graft the
SEW SBEIES —KO. XT. M


American che.ap land system on British institutions. Make
its fine soil and climate a refuge for the mined, for the dis-
contented, for the energetic—-a field where the unfortunate
may start again for fortune’s goal, not a hotbed for a spu-
rious aristocracy. Infant colonies thatrequiredto be nursed by
soldiers may as well die in their infancy; if we have money
to spare, let us spend it in extending the protection of
religion, of education, and of justice to communities not
surrounded by semi-barbarians—communities prepared to
feed themselves. One example is worth a volume of argu-
ments. Wellington, the first model colony founded in 1836,
draws half its supply of flour from Sydney, distant 1300
miles, and the greater part of the remainder from Hew
Plymouth, distant 180 miles, and exports, speaking com-
mercially, nothing. We will conclude by extracting one
example of the effect of the American system, which, with,
practical men, will outweigh a thousand imaginary argu-
ments. All that may be done in Wisconsin may be done
in Few Zealand, if the taxpaying classes chose to substi-
tute Common sense for the Quackery of Colonization.
An intelligent labourer, in 1845, emigrated from Barm-
ston, near Bridlington, in this county, to Wisconsin,
United States. He had resided for twenty years at Barm-
stem, where he worked as a farm-labourer, and rented a small
cottage with two acres of land, which enabled him to keep
a cow and a pig or two. In his letter he remarks : “ I had,
when I emigrated, a wife and eleven children, ail of whom,
I thank God, I am blessed with yet. To support this family,
I had, in addition to my land, to work out as a farm-labourer,
and by strict attention to economy and industry, I reared
my family, the youngest not being more than six months
old, and saved sufficient to bring me and them to my new
home 5 but I must own that it left me pretty bare of means
to make and open ray farm (then a claim of 200 acres), not
having more left than 30 1. ; but I also had four fine and
willing hoys, from ten to twenty-three years old, which in
this country, in farm-making and farming, is better than
gold. Previous to emigration, I determined to send two of
my sons to America, to look out a place, as I had a very
large family to transport. We got hold of one of the British
Temperance Emigration Society’s Reports, which informed
us there was such a place as Wisconsin, and my sons de-
termined to go and see what sort of a country it was. They
took the route through Canada, and, when at Toronto, liked


the country very well, it being very much like the one they
had left, but still came forward. The settlement chosen is
situated at Reeveville, in lowa County, and there, ( up a
beautiful valley or ravine, with a never-freezing spring
creek running through it,’ they selected 200 acres of good
land, with a black loam soil and a'clay bottom. The whole
family arrived there in October, 1845, As my means were
small, we were compelled to work out for others on wages,
in order to keep ourselves and enable us to go on with our
improvements. The following account will show what we
have done since our arrival. We are now the owners of the
following property.
Dollars.
Two hundred acres of land at five dollars an acre . 1000
Field improvements—ls,ooo rails set up in fence
at 20 dollars ....... 300
Fire thousand rails not in fence, 60 dollars; 47 acres
ploughed, 106 dollars; 15 acres fall wheat, 75
dollars , , , . , , 231
Homestead improvements—one log house, with good
stone cellar, five rooms, original cabin, barn," sta-
bles, cattle-sheds, root-house, pigsties, <fec. , . 355
Live stock —2 horses, 120 dollars; 3 pairs of cattle,
ISO dollars; 3 cows, 45 dollars; 2 steers, 15 dol-
lars ; 3 calves, 12 dollars; 15 pigs, 45 dollars; 6
sheep, 12 dollars, besides fowls .... 379
Implements—One wagon, 60 dollars; horse harness,
20 dollars; ploughs, 36 dollars; three sleighs, one
pair of harrows, and sundry other small farming
implements ....... 180
Household effects and dairy utensils ... 30
Provisions about 160 bushels of wheat, 75 dollars,
flour, and pork, dre, . . , . . <IOO
Total, amount of property . ,2605
Deduct amount in hand, on arrival, 150 dollars.
Owing on land 150 dollars ..... 300
Amount realised in two years and three months
since our arrival ....... 2306
It will be seen by the foregoing statement that we ac-
tually remised since our arrival here, in less than three
years, the sum of 2305 dollars; or 476?. sterling, nearly five
times the amount I was able to save in England during the
N 2


whole of my lifetime, a term of more than fifty years. It is
not every one that can do this, not having the four hoys to
assist them.” *
LETTERS DESCRIBING A RIDE THROUGH TEXAS.
(Concluded from page 114.)
From Seguin, down the course of the river, to Gonzales, is
a distance of thirty-six miles. The country is undulating,
with a good black soil in many places. In some parts the
soil is poor and sandy, covered with a growth of post oak.
Upon the bank of the river, during one of my rides, I met
with an old settler, who had been located there for eighteen
years, and outlived all the troubles of his adopted land
without loss to person or property. A woman who owned
a farm in the same neighbourhood had suffered more from
the unsettled state of the country, having lost three hus-
bands in succession by Indian forays, and was now quietly
settled down with a fourth. This farmer boasted of having
produced sixty bushels of corn from the acre ; but such
statements, when the land and the corn are both, un-
measured, and the speaker perchance not to be credited, are
very unsatisfactory data for assuming a fertility of soil.
For the .last two years, which had proved more arid than
usual, the crops'had been very light. The stream from St,
Mark’s springs joins the Quadalonpe a little above Gonzales :
this small settlement is situated in a fertile tract of level
bottom land, close ..to the river. In wet seasons fevers are
often very fatal. South from Gonzales along the course of
the river is some rich bottom land, with elm, oak, hachberry,.
and several other .varieties of timber. On the high 1 amis
are oak openings, bounded by open prairies. Twelve miles
south .of. Gonzales are some roiling, thickly grassed prairies
with a fertile soil. Settlers are established at intervals
along, the course of the river,, and large crops of cotton had
been produced on some farms. One of the farmers had tried
the experiment of growing sugar on half an acre of his land,
and even in this upland country .a rich crop had resulted.
Oak openings are very frequently met with in this range of
country, and are well adapted for rearing droves of hogs.
Eastern Counties, fferaM


There is also sufficient grass for feeding cattle, and some
degree of shade is thus afforded during the heats of summer;
but for sheep they are unfitted, owing to the undergrowth
of bushes. On the road to the town, of Victoria, these groves
of oak are intermingled with small beautiful prairies richly
grassed. About fifteen miles from Victoria is a wide rich
bottom of deep black soil, covered with rank grass from three
to five feet high, and encircled with a belt of timber. The
country round this rich meadow is undulating, and covered
with a thick sward, well watered by many small streams. Oak
openings and wide prairies intervene between this bottom and
the settlement. Through this tract of country, 120 miles in
length, from the hill region at New Bramfels to Victoria,
which is situated at the termination of the undulating
country, and thirty miles from the coast, land of good
quality for agricultural and pastoral purposes was to be
had at from 2s. to 4.5, per acre. The titles, however, are often
open to objection.
From. Victoria westward to the San Antonio river, and
northward to the town of San Antonio, are extensive fields
for grazing purposes, partaking throughout of the character
of extreme dryness, and not one acre in a thousand proba-
bly is susceptible of successful cultivation.
There are certain general outlines of some portion of
Upper and Western Texas which are very attractive to the
emigrant. Present to his mind a picture of gently undu-
lating verdant pastures, enriched with the gay flowers of
Mexico, embosomed in groves of oak and elm, with hanging
vines, and the deep blue sky of the south, and the bright
glancing streams from the mountains ; describe such scenes
as having also a soil capable of growing corn, cotton, sugar,
tobacco ; the climate as salubrious, and thousands of such
earthly Edens to be bought for 25, per acre ; the description
■would be quite true, and the dream quite capable of being
realised, "But the emigrant, we may reasonably suppose,
does not quit his native land in search of flowers and
rivulets, cool groves and wood-pigeons, but in most sad and
sober reality to better his worldly condition, and to give
independence to his children. To the poor emigrant who
sighs for a spot -of land he can claim absolutely as his o wn,
and who desires some more adequate reward for his daily
labour, the hard climate of Canada and its fertile soil are
far more likely to realise his hopes than the cheaper land
under the enervating sun of Texas,. The voyage to Texas


occupies from five to seven weeks; when landed there,, a
barrier of sickly country intervenes between him and Ms
place of settlement; he is on a foreign soil } amongst a people
who hold immigrants of his rank in general dislike and
contempt: he is in a country where, from the gradual influx
of slaves, the dignity of labour becomes a disgrace in men’s
eyes; he will find the men amongst whom he is cast
“ mighty sharp ” in taking advantage of his less cultivated
capacities ; the climate will gradually render him indisposed
to labour j under the most favourable circumstances there
is a greater risk to life than in any British colony; and,
should he succeed in establishing himself successfully, it is
probable he will always feel himself an alien In the land of
his adoption. Settlement in large bodies, as is the custom
with the German immigrants, would prevent many of these
objections; but the risks are on the whole greater, the
advantages much less, than accompany emigration to
British colonies. Amongst the several groups of our colo-
nies suitable for the emigrant, some are much nearer
than Texas, some more fertile, some with climates even
more pleasant to the senses ; all more favourable to healthy
vigour and longevity, all more prosperous, and all afford
protection to life and to property.
To the middle-class settler the objection to removing from
under the protection of the British flag is a still more
serious one. It is very rarely that an Englishman can
consent to forego the hold his country has upon him, or to
relinquish the genuine freedom he possesses for the mock
mouth-liberty, but, in reality, social despotism, of the Ame-
rican Union, Another evil to the settler of this class lies
in the low moral tone, and uncultivated character and
manners, of the majority of western men. In all our colo-
nies such description of emigrant will meet with men with
whose feelings, opinions, and habits he can accord ; hut in
the west he will find them all in antagonism with his own.
Then his labourers will he slaves, for it is impossible to
secure white labour with any degree of permanence ; and,
regarding the question in an economical point of view only,
from being totally unacquainted with the mode of governing
negroes, he is likely to find them a constant source of diffi-
culty, and of much disgust. The want of a sound banking
system throws difficulties in his way in the transmission and
safe lodgment of capital. The insecurity of the largest
proportion of land titles might involve much painful ua


certainty, and perhaps legal disputes. As the distance of a
few thousand miles more or less is of little moment to an
emigrant of this class, the advantages which the whole
of our southern colonies possess in climate, nationality, and
developed resources, throw Texas entirely into the back-
ground as an emigration field.
To a man who has a preference for slave-holding, and for
tropical agriculture, Texas seems to proffer many induce-
ments, To one who has a relish for an indolent half-bar-
barian life, in a country abounding with game, I should
confidently recommend Texas. To those who would enjoy
the dissipation of adventure, and animal excitement, to
whom It would he a pleasing zest to know their own quick
eyes, stout hearts, and ready rifles are their only safeguards
---who would sympathise with a state of society where “ every
man is for his own band”—l should assume the responsibility
of advising them to “go to Texas.” To a man fond of
republicanism, who thinks the political and social institu-
tions of his own country objectionable, I can assure him he
will find quite a different state of things in Texas pbnt I
•cannot warrant him against the danger of the spirit of
dissatisfaction emigrating with him.
Tasot&kx. —Small detached settlements are the bane of Kew
Zealand; they will be fruitful in troubles, expense, and annoyance,
and hamper the Governor in every movement he makes; while, for
years to come, it is questionable whether they,will be of any real
value to the colony. They are before their time, and should only
have been planted as offshoots from the larger settlements when op-
pressed with a redundance of population and requiring more space,
instead of, as now, taking away from their strength, and being the
chief cause of embarrassment and expense. It appears to ms also to
have been, a mistaken and injudicious policy to have extended Eng-
lish law and government to the whole island at once; and it would
have been better to have imitated our Yankee friends, in advancing
our frontier only as we required more room and verge. .Beyond a de-
clared line, the natives might have been left to their own manage-
ment • and then, if settlers, or pioneers, attracted by good soil or
convenient situations, chose to cross the boundary and squat among
them, it ought to have been at their own risk, so as not to have
drawn the government into the dilemmas we have seen at Manawatu,
Wanganui, and Taranaki, and which, under less judicious manage-
■meat than that of Governor Grey, might have ended in the destine-
tion of the colony.— Power's JSm Zealand.
183
BETTERS DESCRIBING A RIDE THROUGH TEXAS.


NANCE KENNEDY.
(An Australian Legend.)
In the early days of the colony of New South Wales, there lived on
the Hawkesbury River an old Dungaree settler, by name Tim Ken-
nedy. He was one of those military pensioners to whom little grants
of land were made on their discharge from the service, and determin-
ing to settle in the new colony. His family consisted of his wife,
a steady pursy dams about his own age, one son, and two daughters.
The son, at the period to which this tale belongs, was stock-keeping
at one of the out-stations of the colony for a neighbour of considerable
substance, having also along with him a little herd of his own, and
father a ana sisters’. The daughters, Nance and Helen, yyere at home,
sometimes helping in the ground, sometimes sleeping away the sum-
mer noon in the shade of the trees on the river bank, and sometimes,
hut rarely, merry-making for half a day in the neighbouring town-
ship of Richmond, Helen, who was the youngest, was now about
fifteen, gay and laughter-loving; with a face so perfectly Grecian that
I have many' a time looked at her for minutes together unable to
connect her countenance with any other than the classic age, Nance,
on the other hand, was a pure Australian in every lineament and
gesture; tall, active, graceful, serious; frank to all, free with none ;
followed by ad eyes, herself alone unconscious of it, or, if conscious,
too maidenly: to allow herself to recognise it. And this was the more
remarkable inasmuch as she had, been her father’s fellow-traveller now
for some months back to and from Sydney on about every other mar-
feet day. For, old .soldier-like, Tim Kennedy was a heavy drinker,
;md, if trusted to take a load of farm prodace to market by himself,
always left the. chief part of the proceeds bn the road side as he came
back; Mrs, Kennedy had been purse-bearer on these journeys, till
age had negan to render them too toilsome ; from that period Nance
had gradually become her successor.
At the same period a convict, an English youth of about twenty
years of age, was assigned to a miller in Parramatta as clerk. He
was of good extraction, and had been for some years a midshipman in
the East India Company's service. How he came to be transported
I never heard ; but it appeared from letters that preceded him to the
colony, from a merchant at. .Bristol, who befriended his mother and
sister, that he was considered untainted by low vices, and that he
had got; into his present position more from want of a father’s control
and counsels; than aught else. These letters were to solicit from the
.government his assignment to some respectable person in a capacity
.more fit for him than one involving the manual labour to which tbs
generality of convicts were pnt- And the result was as stated.


Formerly it was a common custom with the little settlers on the
Hawkesbury to leave a bag of wheat as they went to market at one
of the mills on the road, and take up the flour as they returned.
.The mill at Parramatta, where Charles Howard was placed as clerk,
was that at which old Kennedy always dropped his bag of wheat in
his trips to Sydney. The proprietor was but little at the mill; and
less and less as he found how fully his new clerk might be trusted
both as to cash accounts, the conduct of the business, and that con-
trol of inferiors which is so successfully learnt at sea. The young
man, in short, had ample intellect, energy, and tact, without selfish-
ness ; and was bidding fair to take a valuable lesson from his fall ;
whilst his master was one of those few judicious and generous ones by
whom such a fact was adequately appreciated.
Meantime, it was not always that even Nance could keep her father
quite steady ; and when she failed there was a long smoke of the
pipe before he could set forward from the mill on his road home; and
this smoke was in a hut beside the mill, whilst Nance sat in the dray
at the door. Put by degrees it came to be the custom for the young
girl to alight ami sit for shelter from the hot noonday sun in the
counting-house. Towards the end of autumn a heavy thunder shower
overtook the travellers just before they reached the mill; and whilst
Tim Kennedy betook himself to the hut. to dry his drenched clothing,
his daughter had a fire kindled for her in hot haste in the counting-
house, and the key very indicatively placed for her, inside the door,
as the young midshipman retired from the room. When Nance got
home late that night, and went into her little chamber to take off
her shawl, instead of the common pin which she had handed to Mr.
Howard when he offered to fasten it, there was a beautiful trinket.
Nance had never inquired whether the clerk at the mill was free or
felon; much less did she now. For nothing was then more general
than the marriage of prisoners of the better sort into the families of
the lower order of settlers. For the present her journey to Sydney
Terminated; but- merely through the rainy, season having- come on.
Her lover, uneasy at the circumstance, but ignorant of the reason, at
length aired a horse of a person in the township, and spurred off by
night on a journey of nearly fifty miles to visit her. It was the turn-
ing point of their destinies. On the morrow, she told him, he would
see her at the mill; but he must hurry back, or he would not he
home in time to avoid detection. Howard had no pass or even per-
mission for his journey, and convicts are severely punished if detected
ih leaving the estate of their assignee without leave. They parted,
and in another hour the young man was in the hands of the police
and a party of military, who were lying in wait for bushrangers in
the thick gprab on either side of the road, about half way betwixt
old -Kennedy’s farm, and the mill. The party kept hint in .the bush,
■some distance, off the road, till rooming terminated their watch, and
then . marched Mm in to the, mill to ascertain what authority he had


for being where lie was met with. There the man who had rented
him the horse, knowing the serious fine that could be inflicted by the
magistrates upon him for dealing with a prisoner of the Crown, denied
■having provided the horse, declared that it had been taken surrep-
titioasly, and left Howard to bear the consequences. As they, were
inarching him away from the mill to the court-house in band-cuffs.
Old Kennedy and .Nance went past in the dray . That day Nance
saw nothing as they toiled slowly on to Sydney but the trees and
the houses—the clear ground and the people that passed them all danc -
ing like the things in a dying -nan's dream. As they came back, for
the first time in her life, she was wearing a veil. About half way
between Sydney and Parramatta, as the dray stood at a public-house
door. Old Kennedy, now utterly neglected, drinking within, and Nance
sitting motionless on the dray, Howard passed by towards Sydney
along with a ruffianly crew of twelve or fifteen others on the chain, -
a constable with firearms on cither side. That night it was very
late indeed before the old settler and his daughter got home, and
the old man as gloriously drunk as ever he had been in his life.
Many weeks passed on, Nance still went to Sydney whenever
the dray went, but Tim Kennedy and the old strawberry bullock
were now always waiting for her, after market, instead of Nance for
them. She had always wandered somewhere away about the town
and failed to get back in time ; there was a good deal of scolding
and, threatening about it at home j but neither the old woman nor
Helen -seemed to care to support paternal authority and discontent
in the matter, A very quiet and self-respectful reserve was the only
part that the women chose to take in the matter, only that now and
then Nance cried and they comforted her. Old Tim” in short, if we
mast tell all the truth, was an obstinate old -brute, and they knew
that the less there was said to him at present the easier it would bo
mended | for, being a soldier, he held all convicts, but especially con-
vict sailors, in, dread and abhorrence.
At length, by the interest of his former master, who looked at his
offence, on hearing all the circumstances candidly acknowledged, as
&r from a grave one, Charles Howard was removed from the gang
in Sydney to which he had been sent, and assigned to a settler on
the Hawkesbury, some short distance from Kennedy’s farm. This
settler had a cattle station on the opposite side of the river, in the
thick of the forest under the mountains bat still close to the stream,
right opposite the old. soldier's. To this station the young midship-
man was sent by his new master as hutkeeper.
And now all went well for a time, only that the Kennedy's were
still kept poor by the old man’s grog-drinking. On the farm he
worked hard enough and was steady enough j but, whenever he got
on the road, away went four, - five, or six dollars---just the very
money that would have kept plenty of meat on the table. The
hutkeeper, meantime, had very little to do, so he used often to paddle


over in the boat he had for coming across to his masters, and help the
girls on the ground when the work was heavy, in corn season and
reaping time. Then both of them, or sometimes only Nance, would
go back, with him and have a good fry of beefsteaks and a pot of to.
And this, if it could have stopped at this, would have done very'well,
for Howard was only a seven years’ man and his time fast passing.
In the meantime, a gang of bushrangers had established themselves
in the mountains behind the stock station, and were seen at times to
go to and fro at Howard’s hut. At length, information of the cir-
cumstance reached the adjacent police office ; and iate one night,
though the river was running high from late rains, the first of a police
party reached Kennedy’s on an expedition for capturing them. The
fellow was not one of the brightest, and told that several more of the
constabulary were on the road, and that they know of the outlaws
being on this side of the river, and expected they 'would have the use
of the boat at the station opposite to get back by. The young girl,
now indeed in but a sad slate for such a task, crept out of the hut
and hastened down through the wet fields to the river, and in a few
moments was in the middle buffeting its rapid rolling waves: and in
s. few moments more drenched and dripping entered her lover s hut,
A. few words sufficed to warn him of his perilous predicament
caution him not to ans wer the outlaws’ signal. Eat how could he
see her, in the situation she was i», plunge in again and stem that
volume of roaring water lit the dark ! her little foot, too —for she had
thrown off her shoes to swim—was cut by the broken roots of tue
bank, and bleeding. In spite of her remonstrances, he snatched her
up in his arms, and hurrying with her into the boat, pulled rapidly
and silently to the other landing-place. The landing-place is reached,
and the young girl springs away up the hank, but only in time to
meet the police party on the top. Her hysterical laugh of triumph
and derision confirms their suspicions, and a whole volley of shots
crashes after the boat. But the midshipman, who had expected as
roach, as soon as he heard their voices on meeting her, had turned
the nose of his boat and shot away at the full speed of current and
oar down the stream, and the shots fell far astern. The night was
so dark; and the noise of the wind and water so high, that when no
cry of human agony followed their first volley, the police party gave
up their effort to arrest their victim, and fired no more.
But, though escaped for the time, Howard knew the law for felons
too well to doubt what would be his doom if he returned. The very
least result would be his consignment to a distant iron-gang making
the mountain road, if not even to a penal settlement; and suen was
the constitution. of things at these places, that bad inevitably became
worse at them in exact proportion to the manliness and spirit oi the
prisoner. It was a standing and definitely axiomatic doctrine with
both high and low in authority at them, that their chief use was to
make the prisoner know “ that he had net a soul of his As


the young man felt that he should never be convinced to that effect,
after a little deliberation, he concluded on taking the bush at once.
To this was quickly added the determination to land on the same
.side again a good bit lower down, endeavour to meet with the bush-
.rangers, convey them across in the boat, and join in their fortunes,
Fat€> seconded his resolve. B\ r daybreak he and they had visited
their haunt in the mountains, and having gathered the most neces-
sary articles, were far away on the bush tract through the grim
fastnesses of 0010 to the Plains of Oomnaroy.
Again weeks passed by before Howard' could venture to revisit
the Hawkeabury, By that time one of his comrades had done a
deed which., though not shared ixi by him, would nevertheless involve
him in its penalty. In one of their excursions in search of food,
they had met with a traveller with well-stocked saddle-bags, after
having been unsuccessful in every other quarter; about to return to
their rock gunyah even hungrier than they set out, morose with
fear of arrest and punishment most certain (as they knew) in the long
run, however long evaded, every man's hand against them as theirs
against every man, this traveller was summoned to surrender in a tone
too grating for the ear of a new comer to the colony. Whilst he
pretended to be undoing his saddle-bags he was getting out a pistol,
which was no sooner out, than it was snapped in the face of one of
the gang. Unluckily for him, it merely burnt the powder in the
pan ; the next instant he rolled a dying man from his horse, shot bv
the outlaw he had intended to bring down. The body was found, the
malefactors correctly guessed at, and, as they bad been often seen by
several of the scattered, residents in-that wild district, a full descrip-
tion <if their persons was circulated through the colony, and every
incentive put torta by tne government to. free and bond to effect their
capture. The young midshipman, however, horrified at the outrage,
which to his comrades seemed even meritorious, had meantime sepa-
■ rated himself front tirmm, and had been ever since wandering alone
among the mountains. When he appeared before Nance one morn-
ing as she. went down through the tall corn to the river for water, he
was, like a haggard spectre.
Poor Nance was now within a few weeks of becoming a mother,
sad her father was persecuting her as, on such occasions, only fathers
can persecute.- When she heard Howard’s tale, and understood that
he was with the gang for whose apprehension the large reward was
offered, she concluded that whenever they parted next it would be
for the last time ; that the next tidings she heard of him would be
that he was captured ; then would come the dread suspense preceding
trial, its foreknown result, and the horrible experiences of the end.
Hops whispered that it might yet be all avoided if only he could be
long enough concealed—that they might even escape from the colony.
There were ravines .far on its the Blue Mountains near to where her
brother was stock-keeping that no white man’s foot ever traversed.


If they could reach but so far together she could secure all the rest,
"Whatever Harry might say at first, however he might rage, still at
last, for her sake, all would be well. Night came, and in defiance of
the young man's protest, Nance passed the river, now shallow enough
to be waded, along with him. Meantime, they had a plentiful supply
of provisions, and the outlaw’s wanderings in the mountains had made
him well enough acquainted with the road, or rather bye-path through
the Curryjong Ranges. In nine or ten days they were within sight
of the smoke of Harry Kennedy’s hut chimney.
Nance told her tale, and described her purpose, and was finally
successful. A low overhanging rock, a couple of miles down one of
the gullies fenced up at its mouth by a tangled thicket and masses of
holders, was found, and by day the stockman, when he could get ins.
hulkseper out of the way, brought them provisions, A little stream
of ice-cold water oozing from insurmountable precipices dashed along
the valley, and coursing on, lost itself in unfathomable chasms-
beyond. The rock-hut itself was some way up the steep hill side,
arid the path to it so craggy that it could be ascended only on foot.
The only human beings entrusted with -the secret by Harry were
an old aboriginal chief mad lbs gin. who were retained at some ex~
pease of food and tobacco to keep all otner blacks away. One nsg-U,
the old gin keeping Nance company, Howard hod been smoking his
pipe wiib Toomberra, down in the low ground where the old chief
camped, till long after nightfall; that night, as he sprang up the rocky
tract into the colder atmosphere on the level of the cave, the feeble
wail of an infant suddenly thrilled on his ear. Nance was nursing a
little daughter.
Dav», weeks, and months again rolled on. Harry Kennedy was
gone to Sydney, with the whole of his sisters’, and the chief part of
his .own cattle, intending to turn them into money, and, with the
handsome sum so procured, assure some foreign skipper of ample, com-
pensation for the risk of conveying the young couple to a more
auspicious land. It had been considered the most prudent plan
now to trust the hutkeeper with the secret, lest he.should find it
out himself in the meantime : but it was supposed he knew nothing of
the reward already mentioned, and so, for the short period of
Harry's absence, need cause no apprehension. ■
And now again the anxious hour was hastening to overtake the
young mother. It was the winter time of the .year, and, as night
came on, they had freshened up the fire in front of the rock more than
ordinarily. Howard sat nursing his sleeping daughter and leaning,
agaksat the hack of the cavern. Nance, chill with the night air.
had put on bis; monkey-jacket and reclined against her husband.
Suddenly the old gin rushed' up the rock crying in her broken English
that the soldiers were coming. One instant of bewilderment, and
then the young white woman sprang and seized the bucket or water
and emptied, it as suddenly on the fire; then there was the sputter


and hiss of the fiercely conflicting elements, and then, ringing clear
through their confused noise, came the low, plaintive, wail-like hum
of a carbine ball up from the depth below, and the young mother
spun round in the steam, and dust, and darkness, and fell forward
upon her husband and infant, covering them with blood. One sen-
tence only could she force forth—“ Away, away ! for the babe’s sake,
away ! ” Yainly he strove to revive her : the ball had passed through
her heart. The marksman, misled by the garment, had mistaken his
victim, hut had only too truly hit his aim.
The soldiers were some time finding their way up the rock ; when
they succeeded and ventured into the gunyah, there was nothing
human there but a female corpse lovely even in death, and it, alas,
not all dead. Horrified, and shamestricken, and bewildered, they
found not the track that led yet onward to the crown of the rock
by which the young man had escaped; bat returned to their horses
and rode away.
Three nights afterwards the old gin sat at midnight by a few
faint cautious embers on the crown of the rocks, lulling little Nance
with her barbarian lullaby, sung with many a tear; the old chief
lay moody and silent on the edge of the precipice, with his keen eye
and ear directed along the glen towards the only entrance, and his
boomerangs and spears at his side, whilst Charles Howard delved
out a grave in the dry sand of the spot where they had so often sat
together, for the wife who had bought his life with her own. Then
for many a day the four journeyed on together towards a harbour
far down the southern coast, where Howard knew' that American
winders sometimes pat in. For many a day, to bury his wife and,
to save his child was all he knew. He carried the infant- girl by
day, and kept her warm by night, till her little eyes sparkled heck
again into his the very presence of her mother. It was the one clue
that led back his mind from the terrible labyrinth of maddened
musing into which for many days it seemed tending to be involved.
Through the ground of hostile or unknown native tribes, for their
own sake, the two aborigines stole with caution and stealth; and
for his sake, nigh to wheresoever the white men had settlements,
their care was redoubled. But to him there seemed nothing to fear
anywhere. Excited purpose swallowed up all discrimination ,■ and
at once annulled suffering and, furnished power. Here and there,
very far out, the old chief ventured to call at stock stations, but he and
his gin were the sole interlocutors on the part of the travellers and
told what tale they chose. Their companion for a long time possessed
only just sufficient of self guidance to yield to their judgment. Here
they got milk for little Nance ; there they got some flour and sugar
to make food for her when the stage was too long a one without a
hut. At length the long desired bay is seen, blue and broad, and
placid far down below, as they surmount tie ridge of the coast
mountain; and—can it be? Yes! yes! There is a tall-masted


Yankee whaler lying rocking to and fro at anchor, within hail of the
beach. Twenty-four hours more and the young midshipman and
little Nance are safe on hoard, and the vessel’s stem is seaward,
and the sails are all full ; whilst the old chief and his gin, over-
burdened with gifts from the admiring white-men, pursue their way
back up the mountain side, turning every few paces' to look once
more, and yet once more, at the departing barque.
And now years pass on. On a bright sunny morning—the sea
breeze coming fresh and cheery up off the waters that lave the
eastern margin of the American continent, and fluttering and ruffling
along through the principal streets of one of its chief cities—-a superior
officer of the American navy with hair grey seemingly rather with
sorrow than with age, consigns a very young and beautiful girl to the
care of her husband, one of the most intelligent and fortunate of the
junior merchants of the city. Presently the officer is on board a
whaling vessel, hound for the South Seas. From Atlantic to Pacific,
from Western to Eastern hemisphere, s weeps on the steady ship, and
once more drops her anchor into Australian earth. A few days
afterwards the American officer and a blunt middle-aged Australian
farmer, and a very handsome Grecian-faced woman, are engaged in
deep consultation on some heart-touching theme in a parlour of one
of the hotels of Sydney. Next day the two males are off for the
mountains with a long lead-coloured travelling chest, such as one
might carry arms and fishing instruments in,
ft-*****
The calcareous sand had kept the form almost as perfect as if
life still dwelt within it. The colour, indeed, was somewhat changed ;
but wa'S not that form her very form, nay, her very substance itself !
The masses of her golden hair are just as he wound them ; the parting
of the lips is a smile ; and every ivory tooth is seen once more. Nor
has the little ring of platted silk rotted from her linger: and the
old, monkey-jacket swathes her still, perfect, save at one small spot
which they dare not look upon. Over such things women weep;
but men grind their teeth.
»*»«•**
Sweetest peace be the portion of thy manes, Australian girl, at
once so lovely, so true, and so brave. Fit, indeed, it is that she who
died as thou didst, but to be buried in dishonour in the felons’ land,
should be reinhumed with gorgeous obsequies in the land of the free.
And let poet and fatalist say what they may of hapless destinies of
men, never yet was it otherwise ; never yet died the true-hearted in
their bravery, but Resurgam might be written on their tomb; whilst
the fickle, the fearful, and the false, with all their deeds, shall pass
like a fog-wraith with the night


PICTURES OF AUSTRALIAN EMIGRANTS.
Next come the men—and here too we extract—
“ The Do-nothings” or “ Black-riband (tentby.” —Amongst
this class, which I regret to say is a numerous one, men are to be
found, who enter themselves as clerks and tutors, who are as ignorant
of the duties of one as they are incapable of filling the office of the other.
This class seems to me to be manufactured on board ship : as soon as
they land in Sydney, they go to a clrn per’s shop, and purchase two yards,
and a quarter of black riband ; this is put round their necks—sometimes
a spy-glass is suspended ; this is, however, rare—a dressing-case key,
with a silver top, is the favourite of these fashionables. I expose this
foppery and vanity, as it proves that there is as much vanity in one
sex as the other, finger rings are much worn by this class, and if
they can meet with a cheap signet ring, they are delighted. The
wife of one of these told me, that her heart was nearly broken bv her
husband’s crank ways; that, at home, he was obliged to work hard
for nine shillings per week, and keep his family out of the same.
“ He can plough, ma'am, and delve, and do all kinds of work ; but
he seems to think the .government will .make him a something out of
the common way." She begged me to try and persuade him to take
a place where they might, do well, and urged me to keep her applica-
tion a secret; “ For I know, ma’am, he'd be the death of me, if he
knew I told you he was a poor mao at home,” A passenger or. board
ship, with a kind intention, cave this man bis cast-off’ship clothing,
and I believe he had received three Rounds, a few days beforeJhe left
Lome, for some services at an <l><it 11 the fine clothes and money
did him harm. It is a.; most it k i )lt to servo a. man if he has two
shillings in his pocket. The following morning I sent for him, told
him I bat; s, situation that would suit him ; thankful to hear it
what was it? “An oversee? at a bachelor's station ; you will have
tv t it -five pounds per annum, and full rations for your wife and
tufOe children.” “W hat, should I have to do'!” “Work; there are
i v (ow» ; two mem are on. the station—these you must look after ;
J 11 me is a small farm and garden—as the latter is near a tovvn-
soip, tee vegetables sell well; you are allowed what you require for
your own family ; yonr principal work will be in the garden and on
the farm. You can plough, I should say, judging from your looks ;
you have w'orked hard, and will find this place easy.” “ Yes, ma’am,
I can p-l-o-u-g-h ; but I don’t intend it in this country.” “ Why,
you are only required to grow enough fur the station—only for three
individuals more than your own family,” “1 don’t think I would
mind taking a situation as head superintendent, if you have one on
* See page 26,


your books.” The settlers of this country are clever, shrewd men ;
they seldom engage a newly arrived immigrant, for they require men
of colonial experience, and they generally take them from their work-
ing overseers. “So, you do not intend taking the situation I have
offered you 1 ?” “ Certainly not”
Paupers. —Here is a specimen of one of your bad bargains,
who, baving been a burthen on the parish all his life, had been
fortunate enough to have his passage paid, to give him an
opportunity of eating government rations.
He never appeared in the office until he had been three months in
the colony; nor would he then, but that he was struck off rations
and turned out of the tents; he then came to me, looking as idle,
miserable, and wretched as he could make himself.
Pauper. —lf you please ma’am, I want relief.
Myself. —What relief?
P, —l am turned out, and I have four children, and nothing to
eat.
if.— Where are you going to stay ?
P. —With a shipmate.
M.—~ Come to roe every morning at seven, and I will give you
rations for your family until you get work.
P.« —Oh, ma’am, I can’t get work !
M. —l will find you work in two days.
P. —Thank you ! Heaven bless you ! but I am not well enough
to work. I was thinking of going to the hospital ; but lam a little
afraid of the doctors here not understanding my complaint.
M. —What is it ?
P. —lt’s called a compleraeation.
M. —Dr. Harnett would cure you in a week.
F. —Would he though, really : you see, ma’am, I am very weak,
M. —Very?
P. —'Very; I require something strength’ing.
M. —Dr. H. has great faith in blisters ; they are said to be the
best things in your complaint.
P Ah ! but I could not bear them : you see, ma’am, they would
throw me into a fever —that is the worst of my complaint, what does
me good one way, does me harm another.
M. —But with low diet there would fee no fear of a fever. I will
write you a note to Dr. ,
P. —Why, no ma’am; I’ll wait a day or two, thank you. Are
there any parishes in this town ?
M. —Several.
p. —Will you please to tell me where the parish officer lives %
M. —There are no parish officers.
P. —Do you say so, ma’am? (A long pause.) Where is there
a vestry i for you see, ma’am, I’ll never be able to do without a little
relief. Have you a benevolent society here ?
HEW SERIES—HO. IV. 0


M.-les,
P, —Do'they give relief 1
J/.-Yo*.
P. —Will you please to give me aa order ?
M. —Yon are not old enough by twenty years.
P. —Oh, ma’am, cannot you do something for me 1 Do you sot
know any kind people who will help me with a trifle 1
After trying his patience for sense time longer, I gave him
two days’ provision for his family, and told hits I would try and find
an easy place for Min. A few days after he came, and renewed Ms
demands in the following maimer ;™
P.— -If you. would only give me six shillings for a pair of shoes.
M. —l will the day you are engaged. Now here is a little coffee
for you, and here is a needle, cotton, and thimble for your wife, to
mend your coat ; you must come to mg to-morrow, at Bine, and I will
give you a waistcoat and shirt.
I then spoke to him about a shepherd’s life • told him of the flocks
that belonged to men who came here, without a sixpence, I gave
him a sheet of paper and pencil, and told him to go home and calcu-
late what he could save in five years. 1 was glad to observe his
step was quickened : the following morning he was punctual. I had
a new loaf, quite hot, some tea, sugar, a beef steak, a few pounds of
potatoes-—these were in a basket,
M.~~ That's fine beef, John—it is for your breakfast.
P—Be yop say so, ma’am ] Well, Ism lucky.
M. —You will get a good place Ht-daj, Now here is sixpence jgo
and get shaved and your hair cat ; and here is twopence —you are
obliged to bay water here ; arid, as soon as you come back, you cars
take the basket, for I have something else for you. yet,
la less than haifan-hour he returned, quite another man; and, as
1 reminded him of my promise to give him the six: shillings, he went
off in high spirits ; and at half-past ten Joins Baldwin sat in the office
as a candidate for work, -if hough the improvement was very great,
still he had an idle look ; I therefore sent to Thorp’s for one of
their cheap neckerchiefs, and I must confess I never laid out one
shilling gnd threepence, better. The office was crowded, when Num-
ber Five entered ; in a lend voice, he talked of the dreadful times :
cheap labour; still he wanted a few shepherds ; but he was on the
look out for a bargain—a cheap bargain, I could perceive J ohn view
him attentively, and then cast a wistful eye at the money that lay on
the office desk. At last, Number Five praised John for his apparent
anxiety for work : he blushed at the compliment; and, as I saw
it was likely to be a bargain, I went into my room —(whether it
was that I felt guilty of using a little starch, or my dread of the ridi-
culous, that made me retreat to where I could see and hear without
being observed). My success pleased me, for I was certain Number
Five would make John earn. Ma wages: and I, at the same time,


knew he had half a lawyer to deal with. I returned to the office,
entered the agreement at 18i. per annum—a man and his wife for 18L!
I could see Number Five was delighted ; so was I, for methought
what a change, what a Messing for his family, that he has come to a
country where we have no home for the idle: what an advantage to
his children ! This man lias been now some months with his master,
and if he turns out well, I shall he bound to acknowledge that even
grinders may do good. I may also remark, with reference to these
idlers, that when the men in barracks were ordered by the immigra-
tion agent to work in the domain, nine came to me very sick—
Would I give them a ticket to Mr. Me Lean, to say they were unable
to work? “No; hut I will to the doctor.”
They were not quite ill enough for that, and went accordingly to
work.
Canadian Farmer's Advice. — “ Well,” replied the farmer, begin-
ning his sentence, as usual, with that almost invariable monosyllable,
“ I moan, that if old country folks, instead of ’temptin’ to do what
they don’t know nothin’ about, would spend their dollars in the front
settlements, they could get as good land as ever was ploughed, and as
good crops as ever was raised, and as good horses as ever was foaled,
and as good meat as ever was eaten, and no hardship nor nothin’ o’
that sort. .But if sich folks as the like o’ you go into the hush, a
pretty fix you make on’t. You’ve got to live in a shanty, or a brush
wigwam, like enough ; and you don’t know enough to split a bit of
wood, and put a chink in if it’s out, and then you catch cold, (for it
don’t take a very smart chap to catch a cold in sich places, I tell you,)
and you get sick with the agy, and lose your health and money with
hard times and hard work (if you ain’t too lazy for that), and then
you’ve nothing to live on but salt pork, not as much as molasses with
it, —no chicken points,-—no sass, (sauce,) nothin’; then up goes the
steam agin, an’ you go to work on the old hook—a runnin’ down the
country. Now, according to the way I make that ar’ out, it’s not
the country’s fa.nlt, its ycram.” —Shetehes of Canadian Life.
Canadian Coach Springs. —lt was a common, strong, country
wagon, but the jarring which might be expected from travelling in
such a vehicle was much alleviated by a contrivance which, though a
novelty to Harry at that time, was one with which he became suffi-
ciently acquainted afterwards. Two young iron-wood or elm saplings,
from an inch and a half to two inches in diameter, were suspended
at each end by an iron hook not unlike a boot-hook, just inside the
top of the wagon-box: on these poles the cross seats rested, and
the ease afforded to the traveller by the natural spring of the sapling,
particularly if he were fortunate enough to secure the middle seat,
was by no means to be despised,— lbid.
o 2


MY FIRST VISIT TO A LUMBER-CAMP.
{Concluded from page 109.)
To keep Hardway quiet, I how yielded him the reins, and
taking my gun (a double, with Manfcon’s name on the locks,
■which I had bought for Al, at St. John's), I loaded both
barrels with ball, and began to look out for game, of which,
since my arrival in the country, I had heard a great deal,
but seen little or nothing. We went on quietly enough for
some miles, and were approaching the end of our journey,
when the Sqxiire, after looking attentively for a moment
ahead, called to Hardway in an eager whisper to stop.
“ What is it ! ” exclaimed I, as the Bos pulled up and
pointed with his whip in the same direction.
“ Keep steady,” whispered the Squire; “ he’s moving.” •
“What is moving?” said I. “What on earth is it?”
murmured poor A , who was dreaming of panthers and
wild Indians.
“ Steady 1 don’t make such a noise ; 'tis a lucifee
“ A kudfee ! Where ? where, my dear fellow ?”
“ There, on the snow, in a straight line with that large
pine tree.”
“I see him!” (I did see something dark on the snow,
where he pointed.)
“ All right, then ; creep on till yon get within shot, and
have at him ; we will wait till you fire.”
Thus encouraged, I crept stealthily on, with hands and
knees on the snow, till I arrived within about thirty yards
of the object, on which I had kept my eye fixed from the
first moment. I then brought the gun to my shoulder, still
kneeling, took a steady aim, and fired. Snap ! a flash in the
pan! The other trigger is pulled with the same result. A
fresh cap is tried on each barrel with no better success.
Still the creature does not appear to move. Trembling
with eagerness, I puli out my flask, and shake some powder
over the nipples. Two more caps are again applied, and
once more the gun is raised to my shoulder.
Bang! Bang! goes each barrel. I hear a shriek close
behind me, and turning round, behold Hardway rolling
over and over in the snow, in convulsions of ~—
laughter!!!
I sprang to my feet, and stood gazing at him in mute


astonishment. There he lay, plunging and kicking like
a porpoise, his huge lumber-boots ever and anon flying into
the air, and scattering a shower of fine white powder, that
enveloped him as if in a mist; while his mirth found vent-
in a succession of the most unearthly yells that ever issued
from human throat. At a little distance, by the side of
the pung, which he had cautiously driven up, stood W~~—,
his ruddy good-humoured face appearing actually on fire
to the very roots of his decidedly auburn hair, and looking
altogether as if nothing but immediate bleeding could save
him from a fit of apoplexy ; his laughter was one continual
shout, not a bit less boisterous, though rather more natural,
than Hardway’s. How long I should have gaaed I know
not; but an exclamation of A , whose bewildered aspect,
doubtless the reflection of my own, closed the background
of the scene, at length recalled me to my senses. “Ho you
think he is dead V asked he, in a plaintive voice, of W~ ,
whose laughter had come to a momentary pause, hut im-
mediately burst out again with redoubled violence. The
spell was broken; I turned, and rushed forward in the
direction of my shot; not without a horrid suspicion, too
soon, alas I to he confirmed. On reaching the spot where
the Xvxifet ha.d stood, no trace of the creature was to be
seen; but exactly where it should have been was—-what
think you ? Nothing but a crooked spruce-bough, which
had dropped from an over-hanging tree in the early part- of
the winter, and one end of which was rooted in the ice,
while the other bent beneath a thick coat of snow, uniformly
spread over its surface, except in one spot, where it had
been displaced, and a piece of bark cut away as if by a
recent wound. There was no escape from such conclusive
evidence ; and I was obliged to admit, however reluctantly,
Ist, that I had been most* unmercifully hoaxed ; 2nd, that
my reputation as a sportsman was gone for ever; and, lastly,
that I was likely to furnish amusement to the whole settle-
ment for a year to come at least. "What I said or did on.
the occasion, shall be passed over in silence, I think it
would hardly bear repetition ; hut, by the time my stock
of invectives against guns, Imifees , boughs, lumberers, and
magistrates was pretty nearly exhausted, I had sufficiently
recovered to listen with composure to Hardway’s consolatory
address, li Gome along, old fellow,” said Ire, slapping me
on the shoulder, “ we can’t stop to skin him now ; night is
coming on, and there is a mile of ground yet that will


astonish, you, and your old horse too, I’m thinking. We
won’t leave the game behind, anyhow! ” and so saying,
he threw the confounded branch on the pung; and with
another burst of laughter, in which we all joined, we pro-
ceeded on our way. “Hurrah for the lumber!” shouted
W—as we turned the nest angle of the river, and be-
held it’s entire surface covered with logs, or trunks of
spruce trees, eat in lengths of from twelve to twenty feet,
through which it required some nicety to guide our run-
ners without a shock. “ There are Clayton’s logs,” added
he, “ and a flne drive he will have, if luck holds ; and there
is his camp/’ pointing to a low log hut, on the edge of the
steep bank above ns, “ And np that bank,” said Hardway,
“ where you see the sleigh tracks, Clayton and Ridout, the
other day, carried the one a barrel of flour, the other a bar-
rel of pork, from the river to the camp, A barrel of flour
weighs 2 cwt.; and the pork, which was carried by Clayton,
weighs, with the pickle in, full 3 cwt.” I confess I was
rather inclined to set this down as another of friend Hard-
way’s attempts at hoaxing, and treated it accordingly; but
a single glance at the man himself, whom onr shouts soon
summoned to the spot, almost cured me of incredulity. I
afterwards found it to he strictly true. Clayton was a few
inches shorter than Sardway, to whom he presented, in
every respect, a - most perfect contrast. His figure, which
was stout evert to corpulency, would have conveyed the idea
of unwieldy bulk, did not the massive mould of his well-
rounded limbs, his deep chest, and broad shoulders denote
a frame of large but symmetrical proportions; while Ms
graceful carriage, and light and easy motions, gave promise
of activity fully equal to his strength. A high open fore-
head. surmounted by short curls of flaxen hair, gave an
intellectual character to a round merry-looking face, which
a short snub nose failed to render ugly. The eyes were
Mus, small, and deep set; and though"they appeared to
twinkle with glee at Hard way’s relation of my adventure,
yet I fancied I could read in them a spirit which it would
be dangerous to rouse. In short, to use Ingoldsby’s excel-
lent description,
“ He was jast snch a emu as you’d say at first sight,
You’d much rather dine or shake hands with than fight,”
While were chatting, one of the men brought in a
real which he had Just killed ; the creature some


resembles our pole-oat. but is more than twee its
size; and, with its long claws and tiger-like countenance,
looked as if it would be a very “ugly customer” to as
unarmed man. Luckily, these vermin are as cowardly as
they are ferocious, and will seldom attack a man. who has
the’courage to face them. We had yet someway to go;
and after making arrangements with Clayton for a fishing
expedition to Hapidangan Lake, for the. following morning,
ws wished him. good Eight, and soon left all signs of human
habitation behind. In less than a quarter of a mile we
reached a large pool, which at first sight seemed to be com-
pletely land-locked; till Hardway pointed to a narrow pass
between the rocks and trees on our left, which he told us
was the mouth of “ the narrow's.” From this point the
river was no longer available for a carriage road; but a
track had been cleared through the forest, into which we
had scarcely dived, when the squire called a halt, u 3— —
said he to me, “ how much drink have you brought with
you?” “ Three bottles of rum, besides what remains of
this gin;” said I, shaking a fimk to which wo had more
than once made application during the vicissitudes of our
drive, a Out with them, then; if they have survived all the
dangers they have this day encountered they don’t deserve
to be wasted, and liquor is a scarce article in these dig-
gings,” A opened his eyes. “ Bufely,” whispered he,
“you are not. going to sit here, within a mile of our jour-
ney’s end, to finish ail that rum?” “Hot quite,” said,
■Hardway, who had overheard him, «though we might spend
a very comfortable evening here, under the circumstances;
bat we are going to “cache” two of the bottles, as it will not
do to take more than one to the camp, if we mean to have
any left for to-morrow; and we shall want something to
keep the cold ■ out, on that lake, or I am much mistaken,
Those fellows of mine would be sure to smell them out, if
we hid them nearer the camp.” So saying, he took one of the
bottles, and leaning cautiously over the side of the path, pro-
ceeded to bury it in the snow', taking care that the orifice was
concealed from view by a small branch of ground hemlock.
When the same operation had been repeated with the other
bottle, at a few yards’ distance, Hardway expressed his
opinion that they were tolerably safe. For my part, I only-
doubted whether we should ever find them ourselves ; but
I was under orders, and made no remonstrance. Our road
was now a succession of short but steep pitches, up and


dowa which our tired horse with difficulty dragged the
shattered remains of my pung, while we, finding it impos-
sible to keep our seats any longer upon a surface so for
from horizontal, trudged on behind as well as we could, one
of our party desperately hanging on by the reins. In this
way we at length gained the edge of a lofty aud precipitous
bank, more formidable than any we had yet encountered,
at the bottom of which, far beneath us, through the par-
tially cleared forest, Hardway pointed to a column of thick
smoke that rose steadily upwards in the calm clear evening
air, but was dispersed long before reaching the height on
which we stood, “ There is the camp,” said he, “ right
below us ; and those sparks, dancing in the smoke, promise
us a blazing fire and a hot supper ; they can hear our bells
by this time, and ‘ Old Driscoll ’ has the pork and beans in
the frying-pan; go push on, boys, we’ll be there in five
minutes.” “On foot you may, certainly, and in less time.”
said I, “but to judge by the nature of the ground, the
sleigh road must make a circuit of a mile or two to reach
the bottom of yon precipice.” “It would take you some
time to find It, I reckon,” said Hardway, coolly; “ the only
road I know is the one straight before you, and no man
need wish for a better; I ’ve driven down this precipice, as
you call it, full twenty times this winter, and never with a
less load than fourteen-cw t,” ' *'
“ But surely you had a drag?” “ Yes, and so may yon, if
you like ; take that chain and pass it once or twice round
the fore end of your runner, I suppose you brought it for
that purpose.” “I have often done that,” said I, “but
hardly think it would answer the purpose in the present
instance.” “No, for your horse requires none with this
light sled at his back ; hut, since you must have the regular
thing, it is easily furnished,” and seizing an axe, with which
no traveller in Hew Brunswick is ever unprovided, in less
time than it takes to relate it, Hardway had felled a white
Mrch tree, which grew a few yards from the track: then
taking hold of it by the butt end, he dragged it, with our
assistance, up to the pung, to which we made it fast by
means of the aforesaid chain.,
Hardway then seated himself upon the dilapidated
vehicle, his feet firmly proped against the toe of each runner,
to keep himself from, slipping forward, the reins and whip
in one hand, while the other grasped the reeve, or side-bar ;
and bidding us follow his example, and hold on tight behind,


he drew the lash smartly across “ Old Tom’s ” shoulders,
and shouted the well known “go Tang” in his ear. Down
we spun, swifter than, to use a Yankee simile, greased
lightning down a rainbow ; the old horse never once picked
up his legs, hut squatting down, with his haunches on the
breeching, after a peculiar fashion of his own, and his fore
feet stuck firmly forward in the snow, managed to glide
along with miraculous rapidity and precision ; while the
huge tree followed, ploughing a broad deep furrow in our
wake, swaying slowly round awkward comers, and regulat-
ing our progress down the slippery descent quite as well,
perhaps rather better, than Tongue’s patent drag could
have done.
Having reached the bottom in safety, we cast oft’ onx tree
by the side of many others which had evidently served the
same purpose ; and after waiting to pick up A * *, who
had preferred following us on foot down the hill, we trotted
briskly on, and in another minute drew up before the camp,
right glad to have arrived at the end of our journey, and
already more than half revived by the prospect of a. rest,
food, and fire, ail which our afternoon’s drive had by no
means disposed us to undervalue.
Amsmcajst Volunteers.—" How are yer, strangers? Whur are you
going, and where are you from?” said a fellow who came trotting up
with an old straw hat on his head, dressed in the coarsest brown
homespun cloth, his face rather sallow from fever and ague, his figure
tall and thin, and his seat on horseback boorish. Plenty more of
the same stamp were close behind him. This company was raised in
one of the frontier counties; dozens of them came crowding round,
staring at us. “ Are you the captain?” asked one fellow. ** What's
your business out here?” asked another. “Wbar do you live when
you’re at home ?” said a third. “ I reckon you ’re traders,” surmised,
a fourth; and one came alongside, and inquired in a low voice,
“ What’s your partner’s name?” A little while after, we saw a large
cannon with four horses come lumbering up behind the crowd; and
the driver, who was perched on one of the animals, stretching Ms
head so as to look over the rest of the men, called cut, “ Where arc
you from, and what’s your business?” The captain of one of the
companies was among our visitors. “ Well, men,” said he, lazuy ris-
ing from the ground where he had been lounging, “ it’s getting late,
I reckon, we had better be moving. ” “ I shan’t start yet any how,”
said one fellow who was lying half asleep; “Don’t be in a hurry,
captain," added the lieutenant. “ Well, have it your own way, well
wait a while longer,” replied the captain.— Farkman’s Californian.


A REVOLUTION IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
A RECANTATION IN THE COLONIAL OFFICE.
Ten years ago. Sir John Franklin, who is now frozen up
somewhere in the Arctic Seas, being’ Governor of Yan
Diemen’s Land, wrote to Lord Stanley, then Colonial Secre-
tary, in reply to a despatch from that nobleman instructing
him to raise the minimum price of the waste lands of Tan
Diemen’s Land from ss. to 12#. per acre, as follows ; u There
is every reason to believe thoi there does not remain any con-
siderable portion of land in the territory of a higher value than
6s. or Is. per acre. Your Lordship will therefore perceive that
this instruction is, in effect, an instruction virtually abolishing
sales of land in Van Diemen's 'Land, and must accordingly
put an end, to the already declining land-sales'' Sir John
Franklin’s opinion, formed in the colony from evidence
before his eyes, was disregarded. Colonial opinions always
are disregarded. But Sir John proved a true prophet. The
land-sales did cease; Mr. Gibbon Wakefield’s philosopher’s
stone failed to turn to gold the waste lands of Tasmania, as
it failed hi Australia and Few Zealand. The Tasmanians
had not even the good fortune of a Burra Burra mine to
prop up the reputation of the colonizing quack in the same
manner that the u Search Fo. .1” chest of ingots discovered
hy the divining rod of Boosters vvivel, to his own great astonish-
ment, re-established the character of that astrological quack
with Sir Arthur Wardour *. Tasmania (V an Diemen’s Land),
as if fated to foe doubly cursed, has not only been cut off
from the colonization of the small farmer class for whom, its
physical characteristics, like those of Few Zealand, render it
peculiarly suited, but has been saturated with a convict
population, which, have been shovelled into it out of sight of
tender-hearted trading philanthropists, without thought,
care, or system. The free population of Tasmania have been
deteriorated, and no great public works, no roads, bridges,
canals, or aqueducts exhibit the results of well-directed
convict- labour.
What large reckless grants of land began the torrent of
* The " Antiquary.”


felonry finished. Tasmania, with one of the finest climates
in the world, with a soil of great fertility, intersected with
fine rivers, ample water-power, refreshed by constant co-
pious showers, possessing forests of timber trees, mines of
coal, and, there is little doubt, minerals of value, has been sta-
tionary for years.
The government at length sees the danger of continually
adding to the prisoner-population; they see that men of
capital will not resort to such a place, and that for that
reason, and also because of the number of freed prisoners,
labouring emigrants cannot obtain a rate of wages sufficient
to induce them to seek or remain in Tasmania. In order,
therefore, to attract a number of free emigrants to counter-
balance in some degree the masses of felons, they have
determined on bringing the freehold passion into play. They
have said, “gentlemen of capital will not emigrate to Tas-
mania ; let us attract frugal labourers and small farmers to
do this; let us reduce the price of land to a selling scale;
for Sir John Franklin was right after all; no one will buy
our land,” At this stage, as we are informed, some emigra-
tion commissioner objected “ that, putting on one side all
the despatches and speeches for the last eight years, of a
series of Colonial ministers, on the necessity of keeping up
the price of waste land, there was in existence Lord Stan-
ley’s Act of Parliament, the result of the celebrated South
Australian Job, (for the origin of which see Colonel Torrens’
letter to Lord Gienelg, dated 12th October, 1836,) by which
the minimum price of waste land throughout the Australian
Colonies was fixed at li. an acre.” But an Act of Parlia-
ment, although a tough and effectual cordon for restraining
distant, feeble, complaining colonists, is a feeble barrier be-
fore an obstinate and audacious minister. All Acts of Par-
liament are Delphic oracles; they read at least two ways.
Lord Grey put down the captious objector, gave us a new
reading of Lord Stanley’s Colonial Waste Lands Act, and
once more illustrated the truth of the vulgar proverb, “there
are more ways of killing a dog besides hanging him,” “ You
cannot,” said the noble Secretary, “ reduce the price of the
land in V an Diemen's Land, but you can give the purchaser
in England what you have so often refused emigrants to
the three great Australian Colonies—a passage to the full
amount of Ms purchase-money, and then, as an additional
bonus, you can employ spare convicts in clearing and fenc-
ing in land, and building habitations to half the amount of


the cash paid, and these two items will surely outbalance
the li. an acre as compared with the American 55.”
Well, we own it looks well on paper, as thus :
Father, mother, two sons, and one daughter, all
farming folks. Passage-money 20 1, each . . £IOO
Labour and materials equal to ... 50
Land charged at It,, say worth ss. an acre . . 20
£175
which shows that for 100£ paid 175 1, value is received.
Compared with the terms under which land is sold in any
part of Australia, that is to say, at 1 1. an acre —none eligible
for nomination, except mere labouring hinds—these terms
are tempting. Theoretically, they bear comparison with the
price of land in the Western States of America; for passage
by sea and inland to the western states would cost at least
9 1, each, in all 46 1.; add 20 1. for 100 acres of land, and 501.
for labour and materials, and the total w'ould be 116/., viz..
151. more than the government price in Tasmania.
But colonization is something too practical to be decided
by a paper plan.
Before we can say whether this new colonizing scheme is
worth anything, except as a wedge to split the abominable land
monopoly in .Australia and New Zealand , we must know the
quantity and quality of the Government Land for sale in
Van .Diemen’s Land, where situated, how watered, how
timbered, near what towns, roads, ports, or rivers, whether
capable of growing grain crops, and all the other particu-
lars that a farmer would ascertain before taking a farm in
England,
Our information on this subject Is so very contradictory
that we advise correspondents not to stir a step until time
has been allowed for investigating the resources of a colony
which has been oxrt of the track of English enterprise for
nearly ten years.
But, although all the government land of Tasmania be a
hopeless desert, covered with an impenetrable forest of use-
less timber, we will take an early opportunity of showing that
this invitation to the frugal hard-handed small capitalist is a
great step in the advance. The Colonial Office has said A,
they must go on and say not only B, but all Sidney’s alpha-
bet of the “ Common Sense of Colonization.” If it be good to
give 20, 50, and 100-acre farms to English farmer emigrants


on terms equal to 6s. an acre, colonial born husbandmen
have a right to invest their savings on the same terms.
We have now the advantage, inestimable to Englishmen,
of a precedent, and it is our own fault if we do not use it;.-.
•''"The land disposed of in Tan Diemen's Land, during the
year 1847, consisted of 1636 acres of country land, selling
for 1366 b 4s. 9cb, and 26 acres of town land, selling for
1440 b 6s. 9 d. The total land revenue, however, amounted
to IB 187 b Os. B d. ; the pasture and timber licences realizing
as much as 14,988 b 19s. 4 d.
“The exports increased from 682,585 b in 1846, to
600,876 bin 1847. Of these 338,609 b were seat to England,
and the remainder principally to the colonies in the southern
hemisphere. The increase was upon oil and wood. On
flour and grain there was a decrease; but the export of
timber and bark had increased. Much - progress also had
been made in ship-building, especially at Hobart: Town, and
on the banka of the Huoxx. Vessels of every description,
from the small river craft of 10 to 20 tons, to vessels lor
the English trade of 400 ions and upwards, are described
as constantly in progress, and the. timber is said to be ad-
mirably adapted for ship-building. The price for building
does not exceed 8b per ton.
“ The cultivation of land had not increased; but, on the
contrary, had rather fallen off. There were, in 1847, 6339
fewer acres in cultivation than in 1846. The decrease was
principally in the wheat land, attributed partly to. the low
price obtained for the crop of 1846 ; but, as remarked last
year, the system of agriculture is slovenly, and the average
yield per acre very small. These causes, with low prices,
make the wheat crop unremunerative, and. Bir William
Denison considers that probably less still will be culti-
vated.”—Sir William Denison's Beport, 1847.
The, following letter is from a gentleman holding high office in Van
Diemen's Land. The writer refers to an emigrant about to be cent
oat bt/ his correspondent.
Hobart Town, April 3rd, 1848,
My Dear Madam, With regard to emigration, me-
chanics generally, particularly in the building line, are
wanted in ail new colonies. I therefore think Mary 8- ’s


brother would find employment either here or at Mel-
bourne ; but, in consequence of our receiving the ticket-
of-leave convicts from Bermuda and Gibraltar, Melbourne
or Geelong (a new place lower down the estuary) are better
places to go to than Hobart Town. Let them not imagine
that wages are so extravagant as five guineas per week,
but they are very liberal. They will find that the same
qualities which recommend a man at home are quite as
necessary here. We are less tied together, and there are
great changes of place among the workpeople. The masters
oftentimes are exceptionable, for they have not learnt their
place, ami the workman is treated well or ill solely for what
he is worth. Still, if people have their health, and will
be steady and persevering, they may do very well. For
such persons a colony is a very good place. If your friends
therefore are determined on emigrating, Geelong is the best
place to go to at present. It is very thriving ; and being
lower down the water, is likely to be a better situation for
trade than Melbourne, which is badly placed for shipping.
We are also thriving, but in a different and smaller way.
Houses are multiplying, ships are increasing, trade extends
its branches, yet the artisans and labourers are much worse
paid than in the adjacent colonies. Inculcate upon your
Mends the desirableness of keeping to one colony. They
will hear of wages being higher at this or that place, at
Bew Zealand, or at Sydney. The land of promise is always
afar off. They must be slow to believe all reports. We
have our designs in. propagating the report of high wages.
If they were disposed to come here, I would give him. what
help I could, but the struggle for place, and for keeping it
when got, must be his own. The expense of living at first,
before they know the ways of the inhabitants, will be great,
but these will be reduced as they make acquaintance.
Exroars os' Msvals. —The exports of metalliferous minerals or
metals from South Australia, during twelve months, ended on the
30th September, are valued at 261,270 b, namely, 13,528 tons copper
ores, valued at 262,3707, or about 187 13s. per ton; 471 tons of
silver-lead ores, valued at 77701, or about 167 10s. per ton; 103
tons emery, valued at 10507; and 4 tons pig-lead, valued at 807
Smbmiss Works. —There are four sets of smelting works, and
others are in contemplation—the Patent Copper Works, near the
Burra Burra, will cost 70,0007 ; the Yalalak, near Port Adelaide;
those of the Messrs, Penny, near the Burra; and of Messrs. Thomas,
in the Mount Barker District,


LETTERS FROM ABROAD
[We Iwpe those who approve of our plan and principles will continue
to forward- ns genuine Letters from Bmifrante.}
FliOM A f fKA3>.-!3Sai.AS'-
Bindley Street, Adelaide, Msmh 9 %nd } 1840,
Dbae Sib, — According to my promise when I left England, I
wrote ta yon by the first ship eat, aud I trast yon have received my
letter. I despatched it on the 18th of February, hut .In case it should
not hare come to hand, I will 'briefly recapitulate the contents, I
stated that I had arrived here in excellent health, after a very fins
passage of ninety-seven days from ’Plymouth ; that I had immediately
waited on Mr. S with yonr letter, that ho received me very
kindly, and said he would instantly writs to yon in reply. See.; that
through his further kindness, I had been introduced to first-rate
houses, &c,, that ray prospects were good, &c, A few days after,
from observation arid reflection, I thought it would he most prudent-
to decide on. follo wing ray own business, I therefore made an en-
gagement with one of the most respectable houses in town ; I am
having a salary, subject to an advance at three and six months, and
I calculate that I shall be able in twelve months to save, clear of all
expenses, certainly not less than 50b, which is a very great improve-
ment on my previous position in London. It requires but a -small,
capital to begin business here, in my trade, and as soon as I have the
confidence of wholesale men, and have acquired a good knowledge of
colonial business, I shall most certainly try what I can do for myself.
All goods are sold here at high profits, therefore a small trade will
give as good returns as a large trade in England: in fact, I am per-
fectly satisfied, that I shall in a few years hold a position here which
I. never could, by any possibility, have aspired to, had I remained in
England. lam in hopes that an uncle of mine will coxae out; I have
written to him, strongly urging him to do so. I send this by the
overland mail; I pay part postage, but am not allowed to pay the
whole. I kept up my log during the whole of the voyage, as you
suggested ; on another occasion I will forward you a copy of it.
When you write to Australia, do not let your letters exceed the half
ounce in weight, end always use a wafer in preference to wax, which,
they tell me, is very likely to be melted in crossing the line, dive
my best respects to Mrs. and Mr. H , and remember me kindly
to Mrs. and Mr. S ; tell them I will write to them shortly.
When I left England, a very kind friend foretold my certain ruin,
in consequence of the step I was taking; but I am not rained yet,
as be would see, if he were to come to this delightful happy place,
I have formed a very respectable circle of acquaintances among the


tradesmen in town ; and at the time I am writing I have invitations
to spend the Sunday at the pretty towns of Kensington, Mitcham,
Brighton &c. I have met with many persons I had previously
kmrwn, and many others, whose relatives I had known in London.
lam told that any person coming here with 2000?., and laying it
out judiciously in building, would make it proditoe him 500 1, a year.
House rent is very dear, but every careful man, after being here a
few months, is able to procure a little cottage of his own.—l remain,
dear Sir, yours very truly, _ W. A. W.
P. S.—We have some splendid shops in Adelaide, and among
them the drapers are. particularly, conspicuous. We have theatres,
concert rooms,. &c., just like London. You will smile when I tell
you lam 18lbs. heavier than when I came here, and I daresay I
shall remain so.
From an Irishman.
Gopake, Columbia Country, Stale New York,
May 2m, 1847.
Dear Father and Mother, —I have been a long time impatient
without hearing from you, but situated as I was I could not venture
to write to you much sooner. A person can t calculate to remain
steady in a place so as to get an answer until he gets well acquainted.
I send you the enclosed bills, one for 10?., the other for 21., as a token
of gratitude and affection. The accounts we hear from Ireland is
dreadful, which gives me much trouble, fearing any disappointment
or misfortune may happen to you since I left. I don’t want to make
much observation to you about this country nntill I hear how you
are getting along, for if I had the first situation in this country, I
would not feel happy if I thought yon were in any trouble, or the
rest of dear brothers and sisters, so I hope you will send me an
answer as soon as yon receive the money, as I expect there won t be
much delay in getting it cashed in any of the hanks. I have a du-
plicate to these bills to secure against loss, in case these were mislaid,
so I hope you will mention to me the prospects there is ; and if any-
thing ill has happened, I hope you won’t conceal it from me. I like
this "country very well; I had good luck in everything since I left
home. lam in excellent health and spirits, thank Grod. I had not
a minute’s sickness since X came to the country. If you wished to
send Jobana out here I would send her the passage-money, but I
don’t want to encourage no person out here ; let them do as they think
proper, and then they will have no person to blame if they are disap-
pointed, Some of the Irish has hard times of it in this country as
well as at home. Honey is earned hard in this country, and a great
many walking about idle : can’t get work in winter. One man out
of twenty is not employed. A man will have to pay Bs. or 9s. a
week for his hoard, so it keeps some people hard at work in winter


to .earn their board, I expect to hare 201. spared after all ex-
penses irt. one year. I don’t want to boast of anything, dear parents,
as you know I never enlarged, on anything... I can find employment
wherever I go, 1 would like to live in this country always, but as
I cant expect yon out here, I shall go home whenever you have a
mine., Ireland might be a good country yet, you have a good bene-
volent landlord who will never oppress you; so I hope, my dear
brothers and will learn to be industrious, and make you as
happy- as they can. I had no occasion to look for friends; theonlv
friend I would wish to see or hear from is Catherine Cummis, so I
hope you will send me her address, I should not wonder that she
would do well in this country. Some girls have a good life of it
T'h|s part of the country a smart girl can get from a dollar to two
dollars a week. There is-no hard work required-of girls; so I hope,
dear parents, you will make your mind easy about me, as I know you
have been in trouble concerning me. I never suffered the least incon-
venience in anything since I left home. I would feel as happy as
any one in the world if I hear that you are all well Give my best
s/f Ve fX> “ y de&r hmt^ers alld to my unde James, and aunt
Mary, and to Edmond Commano, to Patrick and Mrs. .Broader,
Anbeypeal, and to the rest of the friends and neighbours around. So
uo mors at present from your affectionate, faithful son.
BARTHOLOMEW WHITE.
Extract of a letter received from a Doctor in Australia , to Ms-brother
in Yorkshire .
cannot do a better thing than come out when he has finished
bis business or profession, and ■ the same, but leave their money
ia England till they return or send for it. The profits are so larg'e
that anybody can do well in any business that they enter, after study-
ixig it well, without serving an apprenticeship, and there are numbers
ol people who have little independencies, two or three times over, and
even at fifty they do not seem disheartened, but turn to with fresh
energies. Sheep and cattle, the great things in the colonies, must not
be touched until two or three years’ experience; even now, work and
Cattle (the surplus being boiled down) pay well to those buying at
present reduced prices. The only thing against sheep is shepherds’
wages being so high. A cattle station which includes horses, is a
highly exhilarating employment, herding the cattle into stock-yards
to brand and kill j It is as exciting as fox-hunting, and accompanied
with enough, danger to make it interesting ; but much depends on the
horse. A cattle station is often combined with a dairy farm, and if
a swamp is near, a few acres of wheat and maize is profitable and
amusing. Ifay is often made from long grass .which cattle cannot
keep’dcwn. Whatever you do it is a good plan to begin in a small
n» SEBIKS —SO, IV. p


way, and a little store, with 200 1, of goods, will often go on (enlarging
and making a fortune, where large stores with goods on credit ruin.
you. If comes out he must first come and stop for two years
with me, hut never begin to lay out money under two years ; every-
hing depends on judgment, and that is only bought by experience.
From Labourers.
Part FMlipr May 1th } 1849.
Bear Fam» astd Mother, —I take the pleasure of
writing a letter to you. and 1 hope this will find you all
quite well, and as comfortable as we expected. We had a
fine voyage over, and we had a kind captain. We east
anchor Saturday night about 12, March 3rd, at Melbourne.
The commissioners came on board en Monday to see there
was no illness on board; and there was plenty came to hire
us. On Tuesday every one was hired as thought proper.
We was not confined ; we all went to shore on Tuesday as
thought proper; and Susan and John Nash went to Melbourne
on the steamer and remained there all night, and then took
the steamer the next morning, and called for our boxes
at the vessel, and then went on to Geelong ; and then we
got to mr situation the Tuesday following; and that is about
seventy miles from Geelong, and, we have got a good master
and mistress. We live well and we are not hurt with work.
There is another man and his wife : the man is one of the
shepherds, and; the woman does the cooking; but Susan
waits in the house, and we are very comfortable at present.
In fact, I never was so comfortable in my life, thank God
for it; and all I have repented of yet, is that I didnot come
years ago. ©nr wages are IQs., a week, and everything found,
and"house and "firing found ns, and we have nothing to
buy out of our wages hut our clothes and it was winter
when we came and wages were low, but in summer they
will he a great deal higher, John, Charles, and Wallis is
at work at one station together. I wrote to John hut I have
not had any answer. I expect he' has wrote home before
this. I received a letter from John and Charles, and they
like their place -well, and are very comfortable. I received
a letter from John. Nash, and he is very happy and com-
fortable, This is a very pleasant country, and we are not
troubled with our neighbours, for the nearest is about three
or four miles from us; and the nearest ale-house is about
twenty miles off; and if any man could settle himself -no


the bush, for a few years ho could soon purchase a Louse of
his own. But a great part of the people like drink here ;
lor men that take their years’ wages go and spend it all in
a day, or sometimes to the amount of 201. or 30L If my
brother Wm. Pink, had been here he would have got 31. a
week, and glad to have got him for that, as a carpenter is a
good trade. He would do excellent well here ; and ghoe-
masting is a good trade here, and it would not cost no man
much for living, for you may buy the best beef for M. per
lb,, and a leg of mutton where we are-for { kl, as good as
ever yon wish to see, and as many of them as you like.
Please to send in the letter W. Arnold’s and Bichard’s
direction, and please to send me word how you are getting
op with your land, and send me word how the club is get-
ting on, and all the news you can. We send our kind love
to our fathers and mothers, and to all our brothers and
sisters, all relations, and all enquiring friends. This is ail
at this time from your loving son and daughter,
WILLIAM and SUSAN ILETT
Capitalists.— For settlers who embark capital and employ labour
in agriculture, there is but little chance at present; and it has hitherto
generally proved a losing speculation. Land is too dear, wa»es too
high, and, except in years of drought, wheat, in sufficient quantities
and at a cheaper rate, can be procured from Yan Diemen’s Land
than it can be procured by the English farmer in blew Zealand!
There is another competitor, too, coming into the field, against whom
there will be no contending, as he gets the pick of the land for
nothing, and has plenty of cheap labour at command. This is the
Maori, who is rapidly becoming a producer, as well as a consumer, of
certain produce. It is said that there are 500 acres of wheat in "the
ground, belonging to the Maories, this year, in the Southern district
alone. Supposing this to be the case, and that they merely reap 80
Smshels to the acre, it will leave 15,000 bushels; and which, at the
rate of 14'. per ton, will give the value of 6300/., —a pretty sum to
spend in the settlements, in addition to the average weekly sum of
800 L, which they receive for labour on the roads, &c,, and which all
finds its way into the pockets of Wellington shopkeepers. To the
farmer with capital, the best opening is in stock-keeping in the
Southern Island; the only drawback at present is the price of land,
per acre, which is out of the question for sheep runs; but I believe
it is the intention of the local government and of the New Zealand
Company to establish a system of leasing tracts of land for pastoral
purposes,-- Tyrone Power's Mm Zealand.
.v 2


OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
1. New South Wales, its Past, Present, and Future condition,
Noth Notes upon its Resources and Capabilities, by a Resi-
dent of Twelve Years, Johnston and Hunter.
2. The New Colony of Port Natal- , -with information for Emi-
grants, by Janies E, Methley. Houlston and Stonemaa.
3. Service in New Zealand, by Lieutenant 11. J, M l Killop, R. N,
Bentlej,
4. Ilurstlmise''s Account of New Plymouth, Smith, Elder
•and Co.
5. The Royal South A ustralian Almanack for 1849. Trelawnej
Saunders, Charing Cross.
6. Descriptions of the Barossa Range and its Neighbourhood,
in South Australia, illustrated with Maps and coloured
Plates, from Drawings made on the spot by George French
Angas. Smith, Elder and Co.
7. Sketches in Australia , from Drawings by Captain R. M,
Westrnacott. drawn on Stone by W. Spread, Exeter. Tre-
lawnej Saunders. Parts I. and 11.
The author of the first work on. our list has made a great mis-
take in printing iris crude ideas, vague recollections, strange
English and Latin quotations. In his preface he claims
44 no other merit than truth.” There may be some doubts
whether even that negative merit can be allowed him, but.
certainly no other. He has managed to produce the very
worst Australian book, of the year. His facts are stale, his
opinions -worthless, and his style English run mad, dotted
over with quotations from the Eton grammar. All that be
attempts to relate, as, for instance, the stories of the Mer-
chant Rogues of Hew South Wales, is much better done in
the Rev. Pavid Mackenzie's Book ; bis descriptions of Basil
Life cannot compare with Hay-garth's graphic volume in
“Murray’s 'Ool-oMal Library;” Ms..professed history of the
colony .is a mere jumble; as for the value of his opinions,
he approve;-; of hanging malefactors in chains, and of the
importation of East Indian Coolies ! He objects to emi-
grants from the north of Ireland, because, with less than
300/., they desire to quit service and become freeholders.
It .is with regret that we speak harshly of a -colonial
author ; but useless books on such a subject are a nuisance


which will increase every year, and become a serious tax on
intending emigrants, if every man who has passed a few years
la a colony, without making a note or keeping a journal,
hastily thrusts his recollections into a neat half-crown
volume. A man may write an excellent and valuable de-
scription of a country in halting grammar and uncouth
orthography, but then he must serve up his ideas as steaks
ought to be served, hot and hot.
The author, with amusing self-conceit, distributes his
opinions on all subjects broadcast. The only suggestion
worth noting is one for leasing flocks of sheep to responsible
.married shepherds with sons, instead of conducting wool-
growing through hired shepherds and an overseer.
Among other.eccentricities, he presents us with a- speci-
men, of Colonial poetry which he pronounces equal to Byron.
He must be thinking of the Byron of the “Eejecied Ad-
dresses,”
The following five stanzas, being translated into plain
English, mean that the poet, having wandered into the
Australian woods, there script stark naked, painted his
face with white and yellow ochre, rubbed his skin over with
oil and charcoal, danced the obscene corrohbery with black
savages, and took to himself a black gin or two, by whom
fed on half raw opossums, worms, lizards, and other native
delicacies, he had full time for poetic meditations, undis-
turbed by the labours or the duties of civilized life.
“ And then,l left my fatherland.
And pass’d the pathless ocean’s foam,
To where fair Sydney’s Coves expand—
There sought me a remoter home.
Where I was loved, adored, revered.
By savages the white men fear’d,
4e The rock, the glen, the forest dear.—
The heaving, sullen, shipless sea—
The savage with his shield and spear.
His rites of dark sublimity.
And the wild tones of that strange tongue—
Enchantment o’er my spirit firing.
is I reck’d, not what the world might say.
But made me friends with that fierce race;
And many a calm, unclouded day.
Pass’d o’er me in that pleasant place;
Spent ’mid the mountain solitudes, *
With those wild people, of the woods.


“ Bat aour ■•with wither’d passions weak,
I sit and feed those inystrs springs
That prompt the restless soul to-seek
Excitement in forbidden things.
And brood in metaphysic dreams
O’er life, that is not what it seems,”
There are white Hies who have been beasts enough to do
all this, but fortunately these Byrons, who turn down the
whole shirt instead of the collar, do not write poetry.
Mr. Methlsy’s account of Batal we have noticed in another
place, as also Mr, Himfehouse’s Sew Plymouth. They are
both excellent in their way, Mr. Metbley’s account of a
journey to the interior will be of special interest to our more
youthful, enterprising, and sporting correspondents, as the
following extracts will show
January 17.—-On the evening of the following day we
reached Mooi River. On the way we rode to a Dutch farm-
house, which, like many others, had been deserted by the
occupants ; the gardens were very extensive, and contained
a great variety of choice fruit-trees, which were In full
hearing. We filled a pillow-case, which we had brought,
for the purpose, with peaches, nectarines, almonds, figs, ,&c.
Bushels of delicious fruit were rotting on the garden walks,
which were almost grown over by the long grass,
£ Ist,—Halted for three days at the house of an hospitable
Dutchman, named Piet Kemp. Early in the morning v/e
despatched one of the servants to ascertain the depth of the
river Tugela, which is within a few miles ; en bis return we
learnt that it would not he fordable for some days. To
while away the time, we took our hatchets and went into
the bush to cut wood, of which to make slippers for the
wagons. We left the natives to cut the timber, whilst we
enjoyed a most delightful cold hath in % natural basin
formed in the rock, Here, for the first time, we met with
the beautiful pendant cradle-like nests of the Pensile
Grosbeak, which fringe the trees in the recesses of these
fairy groves. In the evening we visited the Boer’s residence
again, and inspected his cattle kraals. They were rude
enclosures of thorn bushes, in which we found he had
between fifty and sixty cows tied up milking, an operation
at which the natives are very expert. The proceeds of his
dairy amount to about 100 k per annum. We observed
here a yery fine breed of staghound, which, from their size
and strength, appear well adapted to the country. On


walking to the top of a neighbouring hill, from which there
was a very extensive view, I was surprised to find the
remains of a number of stone kraals or villages scattered
over the face of the land. Os. inf sky:, I learnt that this
country was originally in the possession of the Amapondas,
hut that Chaka, during his desolating 'reign, had swept it
of its inhabitants. These memorials of hrs barbarity are
found throughout the extent of the land, and are an
abundant proof of Ms cruel and sanguinary disposition,
,29th.—Passed through a very beautiful and fertile coun-
try, prairie and forest land interspersed, the grass in some
places as high as the wagon tent. Saw quantities of wild
flax growing, with many rare bulbous plants, which, as the
wheels crushed in passing, gave out a most aromatic and
delightful -perfume. At the bottom of the MM we emerged
into a beautiful grove of trees and .shrubs, ornamentally
situated in clumps, through which a pretty stream of water
was running, la some planes forming cascades of several
feet. Mi this spot-, which rivalled for beauty anything we
had yet seen, we determined to unyoke for breakfast, and
under the airy foliage of the parasol tree,, which afforded m
a constant- and delicious shade, we spread our repast, watch-
ing with pleasant emotions, ths smoke curling up into the
trees from the fere where our venison, steaks, and eoflee
were in preparation, to which we seldom failed to do ample
justice. On gaming the summit of a ridge of hills before
us, we were delighted to behold troops of Hartebsests and
Stands, feeding in the plains below, On descending the
MU, we had our horses saddled up and went in pursuit. In
about an hour we succeeded in killing the largest Eland in
the troop. He proved to be an animal of tremendous pro-
portions, being ten feet long, and standing near seventeen
hands high, and could not weigh less than ISOOlbs, The
flesh we found delicious | in grain and colour it resembles
beef, but is much better flavoured and more tender.
31st. —Tins morning our coloured friends were with ns by
daylight, and were incessant in their applications for snuff,
of which they are passionately fond. I thought to rid my-
self of their importunity by disbursing a box amongst
them, hut this only made them more clamorous, and I was
followed and pestered by them like a swarm of wasps;. all
endeavours to escape were futile. Irritated by their perse-
vering annoyance, I repaired to our condiment chest and
produced a mixture which I thought would, excite very


satisfactory tit-illations in their olfactory nerves, its princi-
pal ingredients being peppers and ground ginger. I watched
its administration with some interest, offering it to the one
most eager, who was not aware of the strength of this
substitute. As usual, he took as nmch as he could hold
between his finger and thumb, and boldly carried it to his
nose;, the stinging pain caused the, tears "to roll down his
sable countenance, and forthwith commenced such con-
tinued fits of sneezing and gasping.as I had never witnessed
before. It will scarcely be credited that this pungent and
fiery composition was infinitely preferred to the bond fide
mixture. I distributed the rest of my compound, and in
every case it excited their admiration, causing tears to flow
for hours after,
March 3rd.—-For the .last twelve days we have been
detained here; our watery barrier, during our stay, had
risen as much as sis feet; but, within the last few days, it
has very rapidly decreased. Upon trying the drift., this
morning, we found the water up to our necks ; after a few
yards the depth gradually decreased, until it terminated in
a sand bank in the middle of the stream ; we then intended
to pull down in the shallo w water until we arrived at a spot
where the bank was less precipitous. Having packed the
wagon and attached twenty oxen to the jokes, we cut
away as much of the bank as was necessary, placing three
Kaffirs at the fore tow, doing everything, as we thought, to
render the passage feasible. As each pair of oxen plunged
into the swollen stream, treading away the soft soil, and
making it more steep and dangerous for the wagon, we
began to fear we should not altogether escape without
accident. As our lumbering vehicle was launched into the
water, the front oxen, unable to gain footing, became un-
manageable, turned and made for the shore again, dragging
their leaders alter them. All control was now lost, over
either oxen or wagon : the latter for a few moments was
stationary, until with the force of the stream, and strug-
gling of the after oxen who were under water, it began to
roil heavily from side to side, sinking deeper at each motion,
and finally settled, with a few inches of the tent visible above
the water.- Then followed a scene of indescribable confusion;
such a melee of Kaffirs and cattle, —many of the oxen were
drowning; our only chance was to. cut them loose ;■ and soon
our knives were actively employed, severing reins and straps
innumerable. In /five minutes after our entrance, every


thiug was a complete wreck; the articles in the wagon
began to wash out, and we had to swim after boxes, and
dive for the things which had sunk on the spot. After
about four hours’ work in the water,-we managed to secure
all the movables, and had fished up saddles, guns, blankets,
and other items of domestic economy,
15th,- —A little after daylight crossed the river with two
horses, leaving the wagons to follow. At a kraal on the
road-side I got a bowl of milk, and allowed the horses an
hours feed. After five or six hours’ riding, I arrived at
Westhead Manor, where I was heartily welcomed, and con-
gratulated on my improved appearance, I had left pale
and sickly, and had returned brown, robust, and healthy;
ray beard* and moustaches were of a most luxuriant growth,
and had not been invaded by the razor since my depar-
ture; altogether, myself and accoutrements presented a
very strange appearance, being a strong contrast to the
half-dandified figure I made on my first arrival in the
colony. And now, having terminated our juurneyings, and
once more settled amidst the comforts and luxuries of civi-
lized life, we almost felt sorry that all our hardships were
over, and felt a strong desire again to turn our backs upon
the whites, and live over the same life of wild, unrestrained
freedom, which we had so much enjoyed for the last two
months.
“The Royal South Australian Almanack” does infinite
credit to the Copper Mining Colony. It is modelled after
Knight’s invaluable Annual, and affords a fund of informa-
tion on various subjects of importance, especially on the
Mining prospects of the Colony. We have condensed the more
interesting items of information.
Mims ahb Mmtm Compasxes in South Austbalta. —-There
are tMrtyfohree mines in the hands of-private individuals or com-
panies; nine of these arc silver-lead, one gold, and all the rest copper.
The gold, after blazing- brilliantly for a short time, only produced
twenty-four ounces. The celebrated Burra Burra have produced, up to
October, 1848, since the commencement of operations, 83,386 tons of
ore, calculated to yield 10.000 tons of copper, within fifteen months;
seven dividends, amounting to 123,2002., were paid, making one thou-
sand per cent, upon the capital invested. In eighteen months, the
payments in the colony amounted to 200,0005 A temporary check
to production took place in October, 1848, from a strike among the
miners. Although a majority of the other thirty-two mines are at
work, gome on a very extensive scale, and with good prospects, we can


not discover that any have paid a remunerative dividend yet, ex-
cept the Barra Burra.
Scumi Axmm.UA« Clixatb.-—Asthma, deputized lungs, chrome
femxcbiiig, eruptions, and scrofulous complaints, of old standing,
gpsgraiiy disappear shortly after arrival; but phthisis, although its
progress* may be retarded, must here as elsewhere terminate fatally;
it however appears to run a milder course, the difficulty of breathing
is less distressing, the paroxysm of pain less severe, the night per-
spiration less excessive, but the disease still runs its course, baffling
alike the skill of the practitioner, and the health-inspiring breezes of
our climate. The ailments incident to the climate are diseases of the
skin, opthalmia, and summer rheumatism—the two latter are produced
By exposure to the hot winds; and all are easy of removal, and en-
tirely devoid of danger. -Our population has lor the last few years
Been afflicted with more than the average number of cases of insanity,
and irritable heart; hut..these, with the autumnal fevers and bowel
complaints, arise almost entirely from the .puttdd exhalations from the
accumulations of filth and stagnant water, to be found around and
under the majority of the habitations of the settlers in both town and
country- It behoves therefore all who wish for length of days, or
desire to diminish the probabilities of sickness, to adopt the following
precautions;—
1. Eschew bloodletting as yon would the greatest physical evil
(short of dissolution) to which your bodily frame can be subjected,
and let nothing Bat the conviction that without loss of blood, death
must speedily ensue, induce yen to allow yourself to be deprived of a
single ounce. Every citizen should enjoy oat-door exercise at least
once adhvy, while the gas is abroad- Without this necessary of life
it is m vain to seek health in any climate. Horse exercise is of course
to Be prefenced when attainable,
2. t your dwellings and surrounding neighbour-
hood im oarefull|' purified, filth of every kind be removed, and chlo-
ride of lime sprinkled liberally, frequent ablation, and let bathing,
and frequent changes of bed and body linen be strictly attended to.
i< ‘Pmi.pemnm m .&&£.—Eat animal food once a day only, let it
he well cooked at first, and .never dressed a seeded time; and always,
especially in warm weather, eaten with some condiments, as carry,
or mustard; few citizens can consume more than, eight ounces of
animal food daily without injury to their health. The moderate
sue of sound wine or malt liqaer is highly useful. Food should be
taken frequently and in moderate quantities, long fasting being perhaps
more inpmioas in this climate «smn in any other. These remarks
apply still more strongly to the dietary of children—-their food should
fee light, uutritiutm, and give® in small quantities, and at short inter-
ns ; solid animal food should fee given seldom and boiled flour ueyer.
Por?JiiAEto»,-~-|a 1840, .the total number of inhabitants wm
14,000, of whom a large proportion arrived during the previous year.


AI this period considerably more than one half the colonists, vis;,,
8489 souls, were located within the boundaries of what has since
been known as the Municipal District. Is the three following years,
the increase of population was 2706, hat the tide «f immigration
having ceased to flow, and the affairs of the colony being worse than
at a standstill, population, may be said to have ebbed: for many
colonists, then, migrated to the neighbouring colonies. In the year
1810 the Land Fund of the colony increased considerably, and free:
emigration recommenced; a considerable migration from the other
soloaies also took place, and the total increase of population sahse-
quant to 1843 was found to be 5024, including an excess of births as
compared with deaths, amounting to 470. From 1845 to 1847 the
increase of population was considerable, the prosperous state of the
colony having attracted large numbers from Great Britain, Germany,
and the neighbowring colonies; the additions to oar numbers, during
a -period of about two years, having been 8000 to 8000. Gf these,
4728 were free emigrants from the mother-country, at the expense of
our colonial Land Fund .: §592 .arrived here at their own cost; and
1876 souls were added by the excess of births as compared with
deaths, ■within the colony j so that, before the close of J 847, the total
number was stated with unquestionable accuracy, at §1,153, in the
following proportionsmales, 17,531; females, 13,622. Long be-
fore tbs expiration of the third quarter of 1848, to which only our
ofleial returns extended, when this notice was penned—the popnla-
sion had reached 33,000 to §4,000, The number of inhabitants in
the city of Adelaide is now reckoned at above 8000,
Climate.—The climate of South Australia, and its vegetable pro-
ductions, may be said to hold an intermediate rank between those of
the more temperate and the strictly tropical regions of the earth. For
example, the plants, natives of this colony, require, in order to their
being grown to perfection in Britain, the protection of a glass cover-
ing, or what is usually termed a green-house. Tropical plants, such
as the pine apple, in this colony, would require precisely the sadm
treatment as the indigenous plants of this country in Britain, in order
that they may enjoy a temperature approximating to that of their
native country.
Eoutioultues.—-The vegetables commonly cultivated in Britain
attain perfection here during our spring months. Turnips so wn in
March and April arrive at maturity in July, August, and September.
Green peas sown in May and June are ready for the table by tire
esid of September, and in October and November; and when sown
in September in moist localities, their season is prolonged till the
latter end of January. Brocoli {the heads often measuring more
than a .foot in diameter) and cauliflower are in perfection from May
till the end of September; carrots are to be had throughout the year.
Botatoes are principally grown in the hill country, and usually yield
from three to eight (and I ha ve heard of as much as ten) toss to the


acre, without manure, The season for planting the main crop is from
the beginning- of August till the end of October, according to soil
and situation : a very good second crop is often obtained in favour-
able seasons, when planted in February. Cabbages, beans, asparagus,
sea-kale, and rhubarb, together with others I could enumerate, are to
be had in perfection. I can safely say, that during eight years’ ex-
perience in this colony in the practice of my profession, that I have
.never yet been disappointed in my expectations of a good crop of
vegetables when sown or planted at the proper season, and in well-
prepared ground. The rapid growth and early bearing of all the
varieties of European fruit-trees 'in this colony is truly astonishing.
Tender fruits, whi ch require the aid of a south wall in England, suc-
ceed here in open standards, and attain a degree of size and perfec-
tion, not surpassed in any country.
Wasse Lakds.—Every purchaser of waste lands of the crown may,
at the. time of payment of his purchase-money, nominate for free
passage in the emigrant ships, three statute emigrants for every 80L
so paid, reckoning two children under 14 yeiirs of age as one statute
emigrant. Provided that the persons so named shall be eligible, in
all respects, for free passage under the regulations of the Colonial
Land and Emigration Commissioners; and provided that, if such
nominees he ineligible, unable, or unwilling to embark when and
where the Cormdssioners may direct, the appointment of others m
their stead shall rest with the Commissioners, (This proviso entirely
destroys ail the benefit intended by ibis provision; no man in his
senses will trust to a government board’s discrimination at the distance
of 18,000 miles.]
In 1847 there were 993 acres in gardens, and*l9B acres in vine-
yards* ;
lieutenant. M'Kiliop’s adventures are amusing, but of no
great value to an intending emigrant.
Agricola’s description of the Barrossa Range, &c., is in
fact an admirable artistic prospectus of certain extensive
estates, comprising some the finest land in the colony, the
property of Mr, Angus, sen.; in all, upwards of 50,000 acres.
Mr. Angas was a, purchaser of special surveys during the
South Australian mania, and would have suffered severely
for his enterprise, had not the discovery of copper mines
placed the prosperity of the colony on a firm basis, at a
time when, after the bursting of the gorgeous Wakefield
bubble, it was rapidly sinking to the condition of Swan
River—a village surrounded by a few straggling peasant
cultivations. Mr. 6, F. Augas, a son we believe of the
landed proprietor, well known by his representations of
natives and landscapes iu Jtfew Zealand and South Africa, has


contributed a series of pleasing coloured views, representing
scenes on bis father’s estate, no doubt truthful and marked
by the peculiar characteristics of Australian scenery, the
strange foliage, and the gorgeous skies. We more particu-
larly admire the sheep-shearing scene In the Barossa ;
sunset; Salem Valley, and Terra Worta on the Gwalior
River, The colours that seem so gay here are sober as com-
pared with the brilliant reality of that bright clime. There
are one or two not very judicious exaggerations in the
letter-press. Such as calling the water-holes composing
the Torrens a river ; a. child may step across it in .dry
weather— at no time navigable; but we remember, in the
days when the South Australian projectors sat in the
Adelphi, where, too, the New Zealand scheme was hatched,
seeing in the ante-room a picture of the city of Adelaide
and a 400-toa ship moored in the Torrens opposite the city
cjuays I Again, iron foundries are recommended to supply
the Indian and China trade—coal must .be found first, and
cheaper labour than we are likely to see in this century.
Captain Westmacott, son of the celebrated sculptor,
formerly aid-de-camp to Bir Richard Eourke, one of Aus-
tralia's most deservedly, popular governors, has given us, in
the lithographs named above, a series of interesting views
around Sydney and the romantic district of Illawarra. We
would .particularly note a view of the Talley of lamberoc,
intersected by a stream —• the level land reclaimed and
cultivated -bounded by a semicircle of lofty mountains.
But the gem of the work is the Blow Hole at Kiaaa, a
beautiful representation of a very curious natural phenome-
non. At this spot the tide of the Pacific ocean rolling up to
the foot of a rock-bound coast, finds its way to a -save
which communicates by a perpendicular shaft with the
summit of the cliffs; up this shaft, tide-driven, a column of
water rises in a cupola-like form, often .150 feet high, with,
a roar that may be beard for miles around, and so on, as-
cending and disappearing according to the state of wind
and tide, in a fountain of singular beauty and magnificence.
We may take this opportunity of mentioning, that Mr. J.
Skinner Proud- has brought with him from New South
Wales and Yan Diemen’s Land an immense collection of
pictures and sketches of scenes in those countries, as re-
markable for their fidelity as for their artistic merit-.


NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
The chapter of “ Raphael Armorer ” is adjourned to next month,
when a double quantity will be given, in order to complete the articles
on Sew Zealand, Natal, and Yan Diemen's Land, The number for
December will also contain the Life and Labours of Mrs. Caroline
Cnisholm in Australia ; the Resources of New Brunswick, by an
Oxonian; a batch of books about America; a Description of Yan
Diemen’s Land, &c.
EMIGRANTS’ QUESTIONS.
A Farmers Son.— Young, strong, a good scholar; can do a day's
work, though never worked ranch at faming; wife can milk and
snake butter; 100 T.; one little one; thinks of Tan Diemen's Land—
Natal.” [Our opinion on Yan Dxeuxexx’s Land see in separate article.
Ail our information on .Natal in pj>. 114 and 161, With 100 L only to
pay passage and outfit to buy land, there must be no mistake. One
thousand emigrants will have gone to Natal by the end of this year.
Except single young' men, we wait, before advising others, to see what
the thousand will do. Eastern Teuuesse would seem to suit your
small capital and hardworking talents. If with another friend of
like means sad abilities, 58 acres between you at Tort Stephens would
suit you,]
pitmen’# L<md<~irA young married man. Inquiries about
Sana must be. directed to Stephen Waicot, Esq,, Secretary to the Co*
lonial GommisionerSj Park Street, Westininsster,
Stratford. Yan Diemen's Land, see other answers. The learning
carpentering, wheelwrights’ and smiths’ work, &c, is wise.
Mumda'ii. —There is not sufficient opening in either Sydney, Ade-
laide, or Melbourne, to tempt an accomplished organ-player and
musical instructor to emigrate on his merits. As to an agency busi-
ness, it depends so entirely on private connection that we cannot
advise.
A. Gierh —" Am 20 years old; have been brought up in an office,
but do not mind work; can find 50L; do not get more than enough
to keep me in fond and clothing; do not smoke or drink. Have I
likelihood so bettor myself by emigrating!” [We have answered
such questions a hundred times; it depends on what you are fit for.
In theory, clerks ere the worst possible emigrants; but a man who goes
to a new country which is rising has a chance of rising with it if he
can turn bis hand to anything—digging, shepherding, bullock-driving,
carpentering,]
Prince Ed-mrtfs Island. —Mr. Canard may be addressed through
the Royal Atlantic Steam Company’s Office, Liverpool. Should not
start for North America before latter end of April: the route is by
Halifax, from Liverpool, Some notes by a traveller, on British
North America are in preparation.


Eafdtmrling Men. —Such men, with very narrow means, will do
best in small partnerships of friends in the Western States of America.
We do not believe in joint-stock labour-in-common communities.
Numbers are a source of strength, and also of 'weakness. For what
such men can do in Australia, see examples by Mrs. Chisholm, ia No.-
2 of this J ournal.
A Tradesman.—-Has been accustomed to country life, and is tired
of town life-; is strong,, healthy; married; one child; understands
something of building; can cut hay, corn, shoe a horse, turn Ms hand
to anything; capital 5001. : will be ready to start in six months.
[You."are a good emigrant, but write to ns again in six months,
because in that time we shall have accounts-of the progress af the
late emigrants to Fort Stephens, to Natal, and. to Otago. The
Western States of America are more for men of less means. A man
of your ability with 500 L has no need to renounce his country and
Ms queen,]
Churchman. —“ Whether the climate of Yan Diemen’s Land and.
New Zealand would be beneficial to a man with a constitution of a
consumptive tendency'] 5 ’ [Both very healthy, but probably the dryer
climate of South Australia would he more beneficial.]
**■ What chance: of success would a clergyman of the Established
CMirck have in the Australian Colonies'][This- question had better
be-put to the “Colonial Church Magazine” published by Bivingtons,
Luggage ia allowed to be brought from the hold on deck about once a
month.]
A Farmer’s Son, 25 years of age,, although thoroughly competent,
will find great difficulty in obtaining a passage and engagement from
a capitalist proceeding to a c010ny,..-
The Climate of Australia. —The works referred to by Mr. Town-
send, “The Prisoners of Australia,” by .Miss Anley, and “Adventures
of a Guardsman,” we have not: been able to find, although we have
inquired of all our Australian friends. The heat of a district must
be judged by its results. There is no healthier district than the Hunter’s
Elver and Fort Stephens, or more productive. Therefore, although
Mias Auley found it hot, people live to old age, and work out of doors
all the year round- that is the best test. Abstractedly, England.
has a detestable climate ; in its results it is very healthy.
A Newcastle .Party-. —A party of ten friends with from 2000], to
5000 b, ail actastomed to mechanical employments—-gardening, fam-
ing, See. —would, as friends and relations, he able to emigrate os
very advantageous terms; but it would be very foolish to attempt to
form an entirely new settlement' without an infusion of experienced
colonists. The first part of the land in South Australia alluded to
has long since been appropriated, and the opinions of the early colo-
nists on that colony, who were all mad with speculation, are quite
worthless. South Australia, Fort Philip, Fort Stephens, are ail very
suitable for such a band of emigrant®. It does not pay for emigrant*


to purchase a ship. It is much cheaper to pay 2 01, for an interme-
diate passage; hut every large party, say of from 100 to 150, might
perhaps get a ship laid down at their own port The Australian emi-
grant ships depend much on return cargo. Test such able men as de-
scribed, with an experienced colonist at their head, might do wonders.
An Australian Sheep Farmer.—“ I have been many years in the.
Australian Colonies, as a sheep farmer, upon a very large scale; but,
like many others in 1840, became a very great loser, and returned to
England, thinking the colonies would become overstocked. Since
that period, the boiling-down system Isas catised a reaction, and
sheep-farming, upon strictly economical plans, can be made to pay a
very handsome percentage, even if wool keeps at Is. per lb. I
would either give or would accept of a percentage from the increase,
of stock for three years, payable in sheep, for superintending the
selection of three sheep runs, the purchase of stock, &c.
A Saddler.—“ In the prime of life ; married to a farmer’s daugh-
ter ; two infant children; means enough to pay passage to America
or .Natal, and no more, A good amateur carpenter, can mend shoes,
can sing sacred music; a phrenologist; have a decided literary
turn,” [Natal 1 would not suit you. A man, not a mere labourer,
with two infant children, must not land in a small colony, where there
is no trade or pursuit as yet established, without a shilling. Your
place, without a question, is in one of the rising towns of the
Wester!). States. The passage and inland journey will cost about 9L
each, but you can travel cheaply : working at your trades, giving
lectures on phrenology, &c., as you go on. Australia, New Zealand,
and Natal would not offer near so good a field for you. Torn*
brother, the draper, should go with you, and learn to handle tools and
an axe,]
Canadian Outfit —Plenty of good flannel shirts and drawers ; shirts
red or blue: trowsers and great coat of best pilot cloth. For the husn,
broad ribbed best corduroy, such as is used for cover shooting; thick
clump boots ; a great coat, made like a soldier’s, of blue pea ; strong
hoots, large enough to wear two or three pair of worsted land-kitted
stockings; a welsh wig or two that will cover yotir ears. Furs yon
will get 10 per cent cheaper in London, than m Canada. Home spun
does for a shooting jacket,
A Bankers Clerk—S. P. All our latest information about Natal is
included in the present number. There is reason in your observation
“ afraid I might live cheaply and enjoy myself, but not make any
money.” We do not yet know what is to be the staple. The idea
of taking out a labourer who may be an incumbrance if wages are
low, and who may leave you if they are high, is rank folly. If yon
go independently” or with only a wife, you may safely wait another
year before starting.
W&rhing Men, G. If these parties will forward their address,
we will render any assistance in our power.


SIDNEY'S
EMIGRANT’S JOURNAL,
AND
Traveller's Magazine
MT FIRST VISIT TO A LUMBER-CAMP.
(Concluded from page SOL)
Fms? impressions are proverbially ill-grounded and falla-
cious, Still they are often worth recording, not so much
as a warning to those who, in similar situations, may be
exposed to their illusive influence, as because they frequently
contain the germ of some important truth, and lead the
mind, by their analyzation, to results which, but for the clue
thus unconsciously given, it would, in all probability, never
have discovered. Thus the recollection of a thought, ridi-
culous enough at the time, which occupied our minds for a
moment while standing at the camp door, has insensibly led
me into a long speculation on colonial character, which I am
numb too considerate to inflict upon the patience of the
reader. In a sketch like the present, it is quite sufficient
for us to describe our ideas as they arose ; let those who list
build theories upon them.
The first thing that struck both A aud myself, I
well remember, was the total absence, on the part of our
rude hosts, of anything like u empressement ” in the recep-
tion of their august visitors.
An expedition of mere amusement to these wild regions
was such a complete novelty, that we had, to tell the truth,
rather calculated on creating a sensation among the natives.
Had we made the experiment at home, accoutred as we
were, and driven up Regent Street, we should most certainly
have succeeded to admiration.
MSW SiSXIES —NO. V, q


What shouting of boys ! what throwing up of windows !
what stoppage of omnibuses ! what witticisms from the by-
standers ! what giggling of housemaids ! what astonish-
ment on all sides would not have greeted us ! The war-
dance of the Ojibbeways would have been a mere “ circum-
stance,” compared with our appearance ! But here we were
doomed to disappointment. We had yet to learn how uni-
versally among the hard-working class of colonists, and, in-
deed, throughout the whole continent of America, prevails
the “ nil admirarV' philosophy, so emphatically pronounced
by Horace to be the only true source of happiness. Whether
this be owing to their self-dependence, or their self-conceit,
or to any other cause, I leave wiser heads to determine ; but
certain it is, that an American seldom allows himself to be
discomposed, or appears to be taken by surprise, by any
event, however extraordinary or unexpected. We had pic-
tured to ourselves the whole crew pouring round us with
uncouth gestures of welcome, and exclamations of astonish-
ment ; and had anticipated the torrent of questions as to
the cause of our journey, and its various accidents, by which
we should be overwhelmed on our arrival. We were never
more mistaken in our lives. The sound of our bells had
ceased some minutes ere a low door was opened in what
appeared a pile of logs opposite, and two figures emerged
into the open space before it, and advanced leisurely towards
us. While one of them, a powerful looking young negro, pro-
ceeded to unharness our steed, his companion, a tali sharp-
visaged man, whose grey locks and furrowed countenance
spoke of many a toilsome winter, stood contemplating us in
silence, an occupation materially aided by a short black
pipe, at which he puffed with the steady deliberation that,
marks the habitual smoker, u Well, Yean,” said Hardway,
at last, when he had sufficiently enjoyed our discomfiture,
“ I’ve brought you some fresh hands, you see ; you can find
out what they’re good for to-morrow morning ; meanwhile,
I suppose you can give them their feed to night.”
“ No fear about finding them work, Mr. Hardway, though
I suppose we shall have to set them at snow-digging; but
if they’ve come up the river with you and the Squire,
they 11 have earned their supper to-day, no doubt.”
By this time “ Old Tom” had been extricated from the
shafts, and was comfortably bestowed in the stable, which,
surmounted by a lofty and well-shingled roof, presented
something like the appearance of a tenaatable building;


we were therefore at liberty to consult our own wants, and
hastened to follow our contemplative guide to the door from
which we had first seen him make his appearance.
“ Stoop jour head, old fellows,” cried Hardway, as the
door opened ; and, diving forward, one after the other, we
entered the camp. At first the dim. light and smoky atmo-
sphere prevented us from distinguishing the various objects
with any certainty ; but as the eye became accustomed to
this shadowy medium, each feature of the scene gradually
revealed itself, till the whole tableau could be comprehended
in a glance. If I fail in conveying a very vivid idea of the
interior of a Lumber Camp by the following description, it
is because it requires the pencil of an artist rather than the
pea of a simple narrator to do it justice.
However, if the reader will kindly take his stand with
me for a moment, with his back against the door by which
we have just entered, I will try to give, at least, the outline
of the picture, the details of which his own imagination
will readily supply.
The form of the camp Is an oblong, the door being in one
corner of the front wall, which is about seven or eight feet
high. From, the top of this wall the roof, instead of rising:,
falls gradually, till it meets the opposite side, at about two
feet from the ground.
To your right, against the centre of the higher wall,,
which is protected in that spot by a rough pile of stones,
is the fire-place, whence a roaring flame is now ascending,
a hole in the roof above, and a couple of boards nailed
together, doing duty for a chimney, and allowing free egress
to the smoke at ail times, wind and weather permitting.
In front of the fire, and reaching from end to end of the
camp, which is thus longitudinally bisected, stands a strong
immovable form or bench, termed the “Deacon-seat.” At
a little distance from the further end a similar bench meets
it at right angles, and connects it with the front wall. The
space between this division and the back of the hut is called
the bed, and, indeed, serves no other purpose, with the ex-
ception of that part immediately opposite the door, which
is occupied first by a huge square chest, containing a supply
of tea, tobacco, clothing, and other necessary stores, and
then by sundry barrels of flour, pork, beans, and molasses.
The feed is thickly strewn with the small branches of the
silver fir, which, when fresh, make a soft and even couch.
Behind the cross-bench mentioned above, at the end of the
q 2


camp, is a raised berth, called the “ cock-loft,” which is
generally appropriated by the Bos } and on which Hardway
has been long ago comfortably settled ; while, on your left,
the wall is hung with kettles, pots, and frying-pans, and all
the simple but sufficient apparatus of our Chef de Cuisine..
Prom every rafter are dangling socks and mittens of various
ages and colours, mingled with hats and caps of all sizes,
patterns, and materials. Olose by the fire, which from
October till April is never wholly extinguished, is suspended
the yeast pot, an object of peculiar care to Mr. Driscoll,
who prides himself, and with reason, on the excellence of
his bread. The old fellow himself is well worth your notice.
Observe him, as he bends his emaciated form over that
frying-pan, from which such a delicious odour greets your
nostrils ! Mark how, ever and anon, when seemingly intent
upon Ms cookery, his hollow eye wanders furtively round
the camp, with a glance of unmistakable contempt i Has
he not, with his long bony hands, gaunt visage, and the red
flannel cap on the top of his head, a wild, almost an un-
earthly, appearance ? You might fancy him the genius of
misanthropy, indignant at being disturbed in his chosen
retreat by the intrusion of mankind. An Irishman by birth,
Driscoll has been nearly forty years in the province, the
greater part of which time has been spent in the woods,
JVom time to time, he has been possessed of considerable
gums of money ; but with his countrymen’s usual reckless-
ness, he has never saved a farthing, and is now, in his old
age, reduced to his present menial occupation. “ The boys”
regard him with some respect, but with very little affection ;
for the old man stands on his dignity, and will not allow
his authority to be questioned ; while, for a real or imaginary
affront, his office gives him ample means of indulging his re-
sentment.
But supper is now announced, and the crew, some four-
teen or fifteen in number, who have been lying stretched
about in all the attitudes of unstudied ease, and who, with
one or two exceptions, scarcely noticed our arrival, start up
at the sound, and arrange themselves for the welcome meal.
Let us join them.
The “ Deacon-seat” makes a capital table ; and for chairs,
we recline luxuriously on the soft fir boughs. Each man’s
portion is served to him : a tin plate, and a pint cup of
the same material : but there is no stint, and therefore none
of that eagerness and voracity which too often marks the


feeding of the lower classes in England. The salt-fish,
fried in pork fat, was excellent; the tea, boiled in the
kettle and sweetened with molasses, was quite a cordial;
and the bread, which passed rapidly from hand to hand,
was really perfect. By dint of a little flattery, I managed
to secure from old Driscoll the only fork in the camp, though
not without some sneers at my “ flue-gentleman habits,”
as he called them. Supper over, the remains of our gin
was produced, and as quickly exhausted ; a sly hint from
the mischief-loving Hardway, that there was more on the
road, passing unnoticed at the time. The conversation now
became general, and, from the variety of the characters en-
gaged, highly amusing. The keen sharpness of the Yankee,
the off-hand wit of the Irishman, the fiery impetuosity of
the Highlander, the dry, caustic humour of his Lowland
countryman, and the half-shrewdness, half-simplicity of the
genuine Blue-nose, afraid of none, but jealous of all; these
apparently incongruous elements, at once stimulated and
slightly restrained by our presence, mingled admirably ;
and though the play was often rough, and hard hits and
home thrusts were interchanged, yet the good humour of
tire party was not for a moment interrupted. While thus
pleasantly engaged, we were suddenly startled by a loud
cheer from without; and it was at the same time discovered
that two of the oldest hands were missing. That shout
announced their triumphant return; and in another moment
they rushed in, bearing aloft, as yet untasted, one of the
identical bottles that our host had so scientifically, and, as
we thought, so effectually, concealed. I need scarcely say
that they were received with a roar of congratulation, in
which we heartily joined ; the squire observing, in a hoarse
whisper to me, “ There’s another bottle left yet though, my
lads • and if we let them get that, we deserve to drink water
all the rest of our lives, and that’s a punishment I wouldn’t
wish my worst enemy. How the devil did you find it,
Archie V’ added he aloud, addressing a tail, handsome High-
lander, who was eagerly attempting to extract the cork
with his teeth. “ Sure,” replied Archie, smiling, “it "would
na be the Bos, nor yet the Squire, that would leave the mark
o’ his fwa fingers in the snow, to tell the thirsty man where
the drink was puttit ; I’m thinking it was one o’ the new
hands that made that cache.” “ Fairly caught, McDougal,”
cried Hardway, laughing ; “so now, boys, pass the grog


round, and let us have a song or two before we turn in.
Yean, suppose you make a start with ‘The Lumberers
After the usual amount of pressing, our taciturn friend
cleared his throat, and commenced a song, of which, luckily
for the reader, I can remember but the first verse. Here
it is ; the air may yet be heard at any harvest-home supper
in England
if Come, all yon jolly Lumberers,
From out the State of Maine,
Attend unto mj story,
I quickly will -explain;
’Tis on tl-e banks of the Penobscot,
Where the limpid waters flow,
We’ll range the wild woods over,
And a lumbering we will go,”
Scotch ballads, Irish melodies, love ditties, and Nigger-
songs followed in rapid succession ; and it v/as not till a late
hour that the word was given to “ clear away, that the bed
might be made.” A couple of blankets were soon spread
upon our leafy couch ; our boots kicked off; our coats rolled
up, and put under our heads ; and in another minute we
were lying side by side, our feet turned up towards the hot
embers, on which a fresh back-log had been thrown, a sound
roof over our heads, and altogether as warm and as comfort-
able as if we were buried in half an acre of feathers, with
a four-post bed, and “ all appliances and means to boot.”
At grey dawn, I was aroused from a refreshing sleep by
the impatient call of our host, and, starting up, found the
whole camp already astir. Our toilette was made by the
side of a rapid little stream which the frost, with all its
keenness, had been unable to bind up ; and, after a hearty
breakfast, my friend A—™ and myself, accompanied by
Hardway, his first-lieutenant, Yean, and one or two of the
men, set out on a visit to the upper camp, which was at the
head of “the Narrows,” and where our Bos’s partner, Arnold,
had another crew at work. The Squire, for once in his
life, pleaded fatigue, or laziness, and remained behind, A
winding path soon brought us to the river, which was
here so slightly frozen that it was only by keeping in the
track, where the snow was firmly pressed together, that we
were able to walk upon it. The scenery was truly magnifi-
cent, though the universal dress of winter’s livery "eon


cealed seme of its boldest features, and imparted a melan-
choly sameness to the landscape. At any other season, it
must have been a splendid sight. The Nashwaak, -which
above “ the Narrows ” is about the width of the Thames at
Oxford, suddenly contracts its channel to a few feet, and
for two miles rushes with impetuosity through a gloomy
and tortuous passage, between high and o verhanging banks,
thickly clothed with the dark spruce and stately pine tree
down to the water’s edge. Here and there huge recks are
piled in the middle of the stream, around which, in summer
time, the chafed waters foam and fret, but which now lift
their uncouth forms, like tumours on the still white bosom
of the waveless snow.
It was in this wild spot that Hardway’s operations were
vigorously carried on, and at each turn .we came in sight
of a brow, as it is called, where, a space having been cleared
on the bank, the logs, properly marked and surveyed, were
piled in even layers, one above the other, ready, on. the
breaking up of the ice, to be launched on the -freshet, and
floated down to St. John, But the most extraordinary sight
was what Yean, not inaptly called u the Pitch pole Landing.”
The- bank was here at least a hundred feet high, and the
men, finding it impossible to construct a regular brow, had
contented themselves with cutting away the trees, and
shooting the logs over the side.
More than 2000 had been thus disposed of, until the top-
most logs were on a level with the surface of the bank,
while those at the bottom were firmly bedded in the ice,
which, as the current formed a deep pool in that spot, was
of unusual thickness. Partly by their own weight, partly
by the snow that had since fallen, they werejoined together
into a seemingly inextricable mass of confusion ; some
standing upright, like pillars of an unfinished building;
others projecting horizontally, like huge cranes, over the
pool below; while others, again, appeared to have been
arrested in mid career by some unseen power, whilst sliding
down the precipitous descent, and to he ready to continue
their headlong course as soon as the mysterious agency by
which they were thus suspended should be withdrawn.
“ I could almost fancy,” said A——, in a tone half-smiling,
half-serious, as we turned unwillingly away, "'‘that yon
stupendous avalanche of wood was the work of no mortal
hands, but that the Spirits of the Flood and Fell, whom
your beloved Scott has immortalized, had been playing- at


Jack Straws with the trees, and had left their game unfinished
at our approach.”
“ They’ll oblige me extremely by resuming it, then, as
soon as possible,” said Hard way; “ for unless a hot sun
melts the ice in that pool, and loosens the bottom logs, that
puzzle will take many a hard day’s work to undo; and if an
early freshet should come, I fear we shall have to leave
them behind us, after all. But come, lend a hand, and
shovel the snow from this rock ; we’ll see If we can’t send
him flying presently. We shall never get a log down while
such as he are in the way.” To work we went with a will,
and having laid bare the dark surface of the stone, pro-
ceeded, with the chisels he had brought, to bore a hole suf-
ficiently deeps to render the charge of blasting powder effec-
tive. W e then laid the train, set the match, and running
to the bank, watched the result from behind the neigh-
bouring trees, in breathless expectation. A tremendous
explosion followed ; the huge stone was shivered from its
base, and one large fragment was thrown some feet into the
air, and fell with a splash, through ice and snow, into the
rushing water beneath.
“ WeVe cleared the channel of this impediment, at any
rate,” said Hardway ; “ and there will be no difficulty about
the rest of them, now that you’ve shown the men how to do
it; so let us gat on to old Amos, for I must have a word or
two with him about the supplies, and it is high time we were
starting; down stream again. Hark!” exclaimed he, sud-
denly. when we had continued our walk for some minutes
in silence, each cautiously treading in the footsteps of the
man before him ; “that was Arnold’s voice, I’ll bet a dollar.
Follow me, lads and so saying he sprang aside out of the
path, scrambled up the bank, and plunged into the untrod-
den forest, sinking knee-deep at every step. We kept up as
well as we could, A ’s long legs and heavy great-coat not
a little impeding his progress ; the voice, however, which
Hardway’s keen ear had at once detected, every moment
became more distinct; and we could soon hear its deep full
tones raised angrily, and at no great distance from us,
“ That’s not the way to handle a shovel, when horses are
in a difficulty, as if you were digging a potato garden in the
old country, for a shilling a day, and no grub ! Here ! give
it me, and I’ll show you how to use it!” In another mo-
ment we were in the midst of a scene so peculiar to the
country, that I must pause to describe it.


A spaa of young horses, harnessed to a “ bog-shed” *, had
been endeavouring to haul out a large pine-log, just felled ;
but stumbling in the deep snow, after one or two frantic
struggles, had sunk down, and now lay nearly motionless,
unable' to make the slightest effort to extricate themselves
from their dangerous position, A stout, grey-headed man,
with an activity far beyond his years, was engaged in clear-
ing the obstructed passage ; and the energy of his move-
ments, and the ease and rapidity with which he lifted and
threw aside enormous blocks of the frozen element, excited
our utmost astonishment. His arms appeared to move with
the force and untiring regularity of a steam-engine. Around
him stood a group of lumberers, in their red flannel shirts
and homespun trousers, looking on with a curious mixture
of shame and admiration in their countenances. “ Hallo,
Arnold,” shouted Hardway, as we approached, “you’re
taking a spell at hard work this morning, 1 reckon !”
“ Just so, Hardway,” replied the old man, without inter-
rupting his labour for a second ; u when the men are in a
fix the Bos must work.” “ I shall write that down, ’
whispered A in my ear ; “it will make an excellent
‘■pendant" to the classical maxim
“ Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi—
but as he is in a fix, I suppose our assistance will be re-
quired, like that of the ‘ Dens ex machina,’ to get him out
of it!’’ “ With all my heart,” said I ; and throwing off our
coats, we fell to with all the zeal of amateurs ; and after
half-an-hour of strenuous exertion, had the satisfaction, of
seeing both horses and pine-log safely landed on the well-
trodden lumber-road, where all difficulties of draft ceased,
At Arnold’s invitation, we gladly accompanied him to his
camp, which in every point bore an exact resemblance to
Hardway’s j nor did we require much pressing to partake of
a cup of tea and a slice of pork, which our morning’s work
had rendered doubly acceptable. We found Amos Arnold
a shrewd, sensible man, though, like many others, whose
range of ideas is limited, rather a bigot to his peculiar
opinions. He was of a true Loyalistf family, and retained
* A bog-shed is merely a strong square frame, fixed upon runners,
and. fitted •with a tongue or pole. It is used expressly lor hauling
logs and square timber.
f The Loyalists were those who, at the time of the America;!. T.U -


many of the habits, and all the prejudices, brought over by
the Pilgrim Fathers. A stern and rigid Puritan, he never
allowed an oath nor an improper expression to be used in
his presence, nor a pack of cards to be seen in his camp ;
and though the men, who are generally inveterate gam-
blers, sometimes grumbled a good deal, they never dared
openly to resist; for Amos was at all times ready to enforce
his decrees with his own arm, and that they well knew was
not a light one. In the prime of bis life there must have been
very few to cope with him; and Iris crew, who were very
proud of their Bos, delighted to relate how, after a terrible
combat, he had humbled the pride of a celebrated English
prize-fighter, who had expected to carry all before him, but
who found that he had at length met his match. Having
rested our,selves, we returned by the sleigh road, which was
always kept open between the two camps ; when, just as we
gained the top of the last hill, we were met by the Squire,
who rushed up, “ fiery hot with haste.”
“ B shouted he, “ those infernal fellows are off
after the other bottle ; I stayed behind on purpose to watch
them, for I saw by Archie’s eye that mischief was brewing.
There’s not a moment to lose ; run on, put your horse in the
pung (you’ll find him ready harnessed), and drive for your
life up the road ; I shall go down the river, and meet you
ou the pool.” While speaking, the Squire had fastened his
snow-shoes, and now, bidding ns make all the haste we
could, he strode off at a pace few men could have equalled
even on firm ground.
We did not stand long watching him: for in. loss than five
minutes A and I were in the pung, pressing “ Old Tom”
up the steep mountain side which we had descended so
rapidly the night before, and which be now gallantly
breasted, and soon, placed us on the summit. Then, giving
.him a moment to catch his wind, we started him into a
gallop, which, spite of the rough and hilly nature of the
road, he continued, without intermission, till we reached the
bank of the river, and could see doss before us the wide,
lake-like pool in which the .Narrows terminate.
But the fray had already begun. Guided by an unerring
instinct, Archie and his comrade had just, discovered and
■volution, emigrated from the States to 2few Brunswick, rather than
resign their allegiance. Their families are highly respected, arid are
soaie of the best in the province.


secured the remaining bottle, when W came suddenly
upon them, snatched the prize from their hands, and
darted off for the deep snow of the pool, right across which,
as the reader will remember, lay our homeward track. At
first, as he had calculated, his snow-shoes gave him a de-
cided advantage over his heavily-booted pursuers ; and had
his route been up “ the Narrows,” where there was no road,
he might easily have distanced them; but as that would
have led him back to the camp, while in the opposite direc-
tion was a hard road, which would turn the scale in his
adversaries’ favour, he was compelled to dodge them round
the pool, which, as they were two to one, was no easy mat-
ter ; and it was very evident, as we came up, that the race
would soon be decided. That stumble does it! No ! Yes !
down he goes, and both of them upon Mm ; but he holds
the bottle like grim death, and they’re not going to get it so
very easily !
u Here, A , take the reins, and drive across the pool,
and wait at the comer till I join you. It ’s high time to
strike in, for the play begins to look mighty like earnest.”
80 saying, I sprang from the pnng, and running quickly
forward, threw myself, with a loud shout, head foremost into
the melee. The suddenness of the attack was its success ;
one of the men was hurled backwards on the snow', and be-
fore he had recovered his feet, I had seized the bottle, which
the Squire readily relinquished, and was off at full speed
towards the pnng. Only one of the two gave chase (the
other being safe in the Squire’s iron grip); but that one was
the Highlander; and I soon perceived that my chance of
escape was a very slight one. My resolution was taken at
once. Shouting loudly to A ,to attract his attention,
I swung the bottle in the air, and, as soon as I perceived that,
he understood me, threw it with all my remaining force.
Well caught, by Jove 1 At the same moment I stooped sud-
denly down, and Archie, unable to stop himself, was pitched
forward on his head, turning a complete summerset as he fell.
The victory was fairly ours ; and the “ causa belli” being
removed, peace was soon re-established, each article being
ratified by a hearty pull at the obnoxious bottle, which passed
amicably" round, and we drove on to Clayton’s in great
merriment and good humour.
Here we found Hardway, who had arrived by a short out
through the woods, with Clayton, and four or five of his
crew, anxiously waiting to accompany us on the proposed


fishing excursion, which, for my own part, I had entirely
forgotten. The lateness of the hour at first inclined us to
put it off, but finding that the Eapidaugan Lake lay in our
direct homeward line, and unwilling to disappoint our kind
entertainers, we withdrew our faint opposition, and prepared
for a fresh start. The only question was, how to convey so
large a party to the scene of action; for there were no
less than twelve of us, all determined to go, and equally
resolved not to walk.
However, “ where there ’s a will there ’s a way and the
whole dozen managed, somehow or other, to secure a footing
on the pung, with which, the road being for most of the
distance glare ice, the old horse trotted along as easily as
with a feather-weight. We soon reached the lake, which,
when its sides are clothed in the verdure of spring, or, still
better, in the mellow tints of autumn, must be lovely indeed;
it was not without its beauty even now. The first operation
was to cut holes in its frozen surface, for which the men had
purposely brought their axes; and this, a.s the ice was
several feet in thickness, was a work of considerable time
and labour. Our fishing-tackle was simple enough ; one
end of a line terminating in a coarse hook, baited with salt
pork, was thrown into the water, while the other was at-
tached to the centre of a stick laid across the hole. By
occasionally raising the stick, it was ascertained whether a
fish had hooked himself, in which case he was unceremo-
niously dragged into upper air; for of the mysteries of
striking and playing our friends were as profoundly igno-
rant, as they ware guiltless of click reels and patent trolling
lines.. This method is frequently practised on the “ St.
John,” where the disk, a most delicious fish, is caught in
great numbers, and sold for a high price to the
at Fredericton. We caught a few small trout, and several
•“ suckers 5 ' (a coarse, bony fish, with leather lips, somewhat
resembling the barbel, but considered at this season of the
year good eating;) ; the sport, however, had very few attrac-
tions for a true disciple of the “ gentle art,” and poor A ,
who till now had borne up wonderfully, began to complain
of cold and fatigue. We hastened, therefore, to rehamess
our horse, who had been tied to a tree on the border of the
lake, and bidding adieu to our rough but light-hearted com-
panions, and to Hard way, whose business detained him in
the woods, set off at a brisk pace ; and in about a couple of
hours had reached the infant settlement of S , which,


with its saw-mill, bridge, and quaint wooden church, its
scattered huts, and tiny clearings, had, nevertheless, to us
the over-welcome appearance of home. As to the Lucifee*,
I shall never hear the end of him ; our Doctor has per-
petuated the story in a poem, which is read and admired
from, the St. John to the Miramiehi ; and were I not joke-
proof, I had scarcely survived to make the reader of the
Emigrant Journal laugh, which I trust I have succeeded in
doing, at this o’er true tale of “ My First Visit to a Lumber
Gamp.”
THE DEAR LAND SYSTEM.
(From 1837 to 1849.)
Hating an intense desire to know the real condition and
the prevailing feelings of the emigrating classes, and not
being titled, or acred, or surrounded by obsequious com-
missioners and secretaries, we have made use of our position
during the last eighteen months to investigate, ease by case,
the condition and expectations of many hundred emigrants.
We have been admitted behind the scenes, and seen the
candidates for Colonies without the varnish or costume
which is so often needed to pass muster before Government
Officers and Colonization Committees.
We have seen all classes, from the mechanic to the many-
son’d curate. We have been admitted to the confidence of
the carpenter, who, being rejected as a carpenter, changed
his coat, and passed as a gardener. We have had the
pleasure of hearing, from an indefatigable town-bred Jack-
of-all-Trades, thirty years of age, with four children, (and
who, among other accomplishments, wrote a capital hand,)
how, having been rejected by the Colonization Commission-
ers more than once, as well as by Mr. Boyd’s Colonization
Committee, the lucky thought occurred to him of becoming
a Bagged School Boy; of how he permitted them to teach
him his reading from the alphabet upwards, and put him
through a course of pothooks; and how the good people
were so much gratified by his rapid progress, and devout
demeanour, that they gave him a free passage for seif and
family. We have been edified by learning how an exexu-
* The word Luci/ee is a corruption of " Loup Oervicav"


plary widow, the protegee of a bishop, being candidate for
the office of matron in an emigrant ship, was rejected by
a Committee of Pious Ladies (an offshoot from the late
Charing Cross Colonization Society), because unable to give
a satisfactory explanation of the spiritual signification of
the Brazen Serpent in the Desert; and how another was
dismissed because, proposing to take charge of emigrant
single girls, her answers on the subject of Infant Baptism
were unsatisfactory.
Our experience, then, being more wide, as to numbers,
and more extensive, as to rank of life, as regards the emi-
grating classes than that of any one in this country, unless
it be that of Mrs. Chisholm, leads us to the conclusion that,
in ninety-nine eases out of a hundred, emigrants emigrate
in order “ To Live and hays Land,”
In the United States, this wholesome instinct can have
fair play. The happy results were seen in 1847, in the
transmission of half a million of money from successful
emigrants in America to defray the passage from Ireland of
relatives and friends.
During the past year, the greatest year of emigration
ever known, the United States, the country reached at the
least expense, where land is cheap (ss, an acre), labour in
demand, and investments for small as well as large capital-
ists are easily to be obtained, has received our tens of
thousands.
The Australian Colonies have absorbed our thousands.
Xu two of them the passage of large numbers has been de-
frayed by the rents paid for sheep pastures: in the third,
the sale of mines and land for feeding miners has answered
the same purpose.
In Australia land costs four times more than in America.
Free passages and shepherds' wages tempted the majority of
the emigrants—trading or pastoral pursuits the rest.
F'ev/ Zealand attracted some hundreds. .Religious zeal,
joined with the love of speculation, settled Otago; the other
settlements had a few arrivals. But still, although aided
by more numerous friends, orators, authors, and better
organized machinery for pushing colonization than, any
other country, .New Zealand, which, in climate, is the
pleasantest of all our Colonies, except Tasmania, attracted
less than 1000 emigrants, of whom 75 per cent, were seat
as free passengers. In Kew Zealand, the minimum price
of land is 2A an acre.


South Africa, viz., Natal, a colony which, twelve months
ago, was unknown to the emigrating classes, —which has
X 5.0 mines to dazzle speculators, no powerful Company to
trumpet forth its merits, a name Africa—that sounds to
unenquiring ears of tropical heat; neighbours as warlike
and more barbarous than the Maories has attracted nearly
one thousand emigrants; that is to say, mors than the
long settled, much praised, powerfully-backed Southern
Settlements of New Zealand; and the current of emigration
to that Colony still flows more rapidly than ever.
But ICtf. entitles a man to a passage to Natal and twenty
acres of land ; and 4s. an acre is the price of the Govern”
merit Land. This one fact about Natal should convince our
colonial rulers that any large emigration must turn on the
civilized man’s passion for land, if they were not blinded
by prejudice, and blinded by interest. The men who rale
are men of acres, and they do not feel for the landless.
Acre by acre, the freeholds of our forefathers have been
absorbed in. great entails. Our native country, inhabited by
sixteen millions, is owned by less than a quarter of a
million of Land-Lords. A cancerous system of law helps
on the monopoly. If a fifty-acre farm freehold be for sale,
who dare buy it but the great man who owns half the
county 1 Who dare buy five acres of it, when, the cost of
the conveyance would double the purchase-money 1 And
so year after year, as fast as freeholds come into the market,
“ The lawyer and the peer divide the prize.”
That is to say, the lawyer takes the profit, and the peer the
glory of owning the land.
Blind as beetles, deaf as adders, liberal lords see naught in this.’ 5
But, nevertheless, in spite of the grand display of Special
Middle Class Constables’ Staves on the great 10th of April—>
the monopoly of land—the diminution of landowners—
the increase of workers living by wages alone, blasted by
every breath of commercial misma these are incentives to
Chartism, to perpetual discontent, in fact, to levelling re-
bellion, which, growing out of sight, will arise when most
to be feared, amid the blackest storms of national diffi-
culties.
What saved this country when all Europe was convulsed
by revolutionary throes'?


Not least the annual emigration of our discontented
spirits. Our position had been more critical if men like
Thomas Thorley*, the Methodist preacher, Chartist orator,
sportsman, and blacksmith, of the Crewe workshop, had not
found in America a kindred soil and language to proceed to
with their bibles, and guns, and discontent.
But the climate, the institutions, the severing of British
ties, incident to becoming a citizen of the Great Republic,
are not agreeable to the feelings of some of our best and
poorest emigrants-—needy farmers and ambitious plough-
men.
Australia is in favour; the climate, although inferior to
New Zealand and Van Diemen’s Land, is superior to that
of the Western States of America, and decidedly healthy;
the pastoral plains create capital and constant demand for
•well-paid labour; the necessaries of life are cheap; life and
property are safe; a number of towns and villages afford all
the comforts and most of the luxuries of civilization. But
these advantages are all counterbalanced by the price—
ll. an acre—and the impediments which, on principle, and in
order to protect Colonial capital, are thrown in the way of
the acquisition of land in quantities suitable to those who
would cultivate with the help of their families.
And thus Australia, which might become the means of
converting the discontented depressed into loyal successful
subjects, is closed to many of those who desire not only to
live , out to have land.
Colonial ministers, whose ancestors and political tutors
upheld the Americans in their anti-tea-tax revolution,
obstinately persist in upholding the practical tyranny of
the High Price Crotchet, in spite of the failure of all its
promised benefits, and in spite of the annual remonstrances
of the aggrieved Colonists, We do not propose to reargue
the High Price question here, but to trace its history from
documents issued either by the Legislative Council of New
South Wales or by the British Colonial Office, and thus
complete the evidence we furnished in the last Chapter of
our u Australian Hand-Book.”
In the year 1837, the minimum price of waste land
put up for auction in New South Wales, was ss. an acre;
and, if the lots had been fixed at the American mea-
sure of from 50 to 80 acres, the system could not have been
* No, 20, Old Series*


mended. But at that time, for want of railroads, a band of
speculators, assisted by a band of political adventurers, hot
■from the triumphs of the Reform Bill, had established the
Colony of South Australia, with the view of carrying out
Mr. 'Wakefield’s principles of dear land and cheap labour.
There were honest enthusiasts and unscrupulous adven-
turers in the speculation; there was Grote, the learned
republican banker, and there was Gouger, who lent his
name to Gibbon Wakefield’s first and best book*.
The active parties in this Colonizing Scheme at first pro-
fessed themselves so well satisfied with the merits of their
plan that they only asked leave to try it. Having obtained
leave to sell land at a high price, and not having obtained
any of the advantages they had calculated on, they com-
menced an intrigue to force on the older Colony of New
South Wales their own prices—the old story of the fox
who had lost his tail.
The Colonial Minister, Lord Glenelg, was well prepared
to second their designs, for he had had his imagination in-
flamed by the reports of the high prices given, for land in
South Australia by dupes who afterwards expiated their
folly in the insolvent court and in the madhouse, who
bleached their bones in South America, or returned to
vegetate as dependents in England.
On the 16th February, 1837, Lord Glenelg forwarded a de-
spatch to Sir Richard Bourke, one of Australia’s best gover-
nors, in which he asked the Governor’s opinion “ whether
the price of ss. an acre might not be advantageously raised,”
in which he enclosed an ingenious and curious, and, in
effect, extremely impudent, letter from Colonel Torrens, one
of the Commissioners in the South Australian bubble, con-
taining the following passages:—
“ The south-east coast of New Holland, adjoining the pro-
vince of South Australia (Port Philip), has been opened to
settlers not only at the inadequate minimum price of ss. per
acre,, but at any lower price which the Governor may choose
to fix; while it does not appear, as far at least as the com-
missioners have been able to ascertain, that any provision,
has been made for supplying those settlers -with, convict
labour. The consequence of this change must be, that, in
the settlements upon the coast adjoining South Australia,
there will be an intense demand for free labour, with a pro-
* A Letter frora Sydxtey,
saw SESIES—NO. V.
R


portionably high rate of wages; and that the desire on the
part of the emigrant labourers sent out to South Australia
to participate in those high wages will not be counteracted
by the dread of con vict association- The Commissioners are-
therefore apprehensive that, under these altered circum-
stances, it may be found impracticable to retain within the
colony that supply of labour, for the sake of securing which
the lands were purchased at 12s. per acre, * * * Deeply
impressed with the importance of the considerations now
submitted, the Commissioners would request that, should
their representations be found conformable to fact and to
principle, your lordship may be pleased to adopt such means
as to your lordship may seem most expedient for establish-
ing, throughout the southern coast of New Holland, that
uniformity with respect to the price of land, and to the
supply of labour, which may be necessary to give effect to
the system which the legislature has prescribed for the
Colonization of South Australia.; and that, in order to avert
the danger which has been, already created, a supply of
labour proportionate to that which has been furnished by
its emigration fund to South Australia, may be furnished
to the settlements on the south-east coast; either by means
of loans raised on the security of their unsold lands, or by
such other means as in the judgment of your lordship may
appear more expedient,”
To this letter of Colonel 'Torrens was annexed Lord
Glenelg’s reply, signed James Stephen; and it will be seen
from the following extracts that, if the colonial minister had
had the power, he would, in the interest of the South Aus-
tralian Commissioners, ha ve crushed in the bud Port Philip,
the only Colony that has never cost the country one shilling
—a Colony, too, which held its, ground on the pastoral pur-
suits Lord Glenelg was anxious to crush, when the land
purchasers were all insolvent.
“ In the remoter part of the vast regions comprised within
the range of the Australian Colonies, the power of the law
is unavoidably feeble, when opposed by the predominant
inclinations of any large body of the people. In such a
country, unpopular regulations, unless supported by a force,
either of police or soldiery, irresistible and overwhelming,
must become little more than a dead letter,
“Thus, in New South Wales the squatters (to employ the
significant local term) find, in the high upset price of land,


some of those advantages which a smuggler, in other coun-
tries, derives from a high rate of duty,
“ The case of Port Philip is but an example and illustra-
tion of this prevailing triumph of popular feelings over
positive law; in the commencement of the year 183 S, a
large body of persona appeared in that vicinity, and having
formed themselves into an organized association, took pos-
session of considerable tracts of land. Within a very short
space of time, Port Philip assumed the appearance of an
established settlement, with extensive and Valuable flocks
and herds. Such has been the progress of this adventure,
that it seems not unreasonable to infer, that before any
instructions from this country could arrive at the place,
the populatio n would have become so numerous, as io render
hopeless any attempt to dislodge them, either by authority or
hy force.
When the intelligence of these proceedings reached
Lord Gienelg, from, the respective Governors of New South
Wales and Yan Diemen’s Land, Ms lordship felt the indis-
pensable necessity of adopting the earliest and most effec-
tive measures for arresting the progress of these unautho-
rized settlements; he was peculiarly anxious to interpose
the authority of the law on shat subject, for the protection
of the settlers in South Australia against the consequences
to he apprehended from the facility of obtaining land gra-
tuitously in a neighbouring settlement.
“ It would have been easy to publish, at Port Philip, a
regulation fixing the same upset price of 12s, which had
been fixed in South Australia; but to have made such a- rule
would have been to insure the disappointing of every at-
tempt to repress the growing evil. Port Philip is part of
the colony of New South Wales,. a3id therefore fell naturally
within the operation of the existing rule of that colony,
which had fixed the price at ds, ; but even that price had.
afforded an irresistible temptation, to the unauthorized
occupation of the soil. If Sir Richard Bonrke had been in-
structed to consider that rule as applying, peremptorily
and inflexibly, to the case of Port Philip,Vie would have
been destitute of any resource, in the highly probable con-
tingency of the general refusal of the new community to
acquiesce in those terms.
_ “ If it be answered, that the Governor should have been
directed to coerce this lawless invasion, of the lands of the
crown by force, it might be-replied, that there is not, in the
B 2


Australian Colonies, any power, civil or military, available
for such a service. The troops and the police in New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s Land are not more than adequate
to the ordinary demands upon them. Further, Lord Glenelg
could not contemplate, without insuperable repugnance, the
employment of hostile measures against the king’s subjects
for such a purpose,”
Sir Richard'-jE>ourke replied to the despatch and enclosures
by a despatch, dated 6th Sept. 1837. He disapproved of
raising the minimipn price in terms which experience has
proved to have displayed singular foresight;—
“ By declining in future to dispose of them at this rate,
it by no means follows that they will be sold at a higher.
The result may be to retain them for an indefinite time
unsold; such a result, as your lordship appears fully aware,
is the more likely, or rather certain, in consequence of the
alternative at the settler’s command, of wandering without
authority or restraint with his flocks and herds over the
vast tracts of the interior. A facility in acquiring the
actual property in land at a low price, is the safest check
to this practice; and it may here be observed, that the
unauthorised occupiers of remote crown lands do not wholly
consist of small, flock-owners of slender means, but of the
agents and shepherds of the wealthier colonists residing
within the limits of location, who are continually balancing
between the opposite motives presented by the cheapness
of unauthorized occupation on the one hand, and the desire
of adding to their permanent property in land on the other.
The extent of their purchases at the government sales cor-
responds with the prevalence of the latter motive; and it
is easy to see that its influence must be weakened in pro-
portion to the augmentation of the upset price,
l( But though I am convinced that in almost every case
the present value of land Is obtained by means of the com-
petition excited by public sales, yet it is possible that an
augmentation of the minimum price would have the inju-
rious effect of checking the immigration of persons possessed
of small capital desirous of establishing themselves upon
land of their own. There are very few new comers who
possess sufficient means to purchase at a price much above
bs. the large tract of land which in this country is abso-
lutely necessary, even for the commencement of an ordinary
grazing establishment. Again, the inducement offered to


retired officers to settle in the Colony, by obtaining land at
the minimum, price, would be much diminished if that price
were raised. These officers, both as regards number and
character, are no small acquisition to the rural population
of the Colony.”
Of course no attention was paid to the opinion of a Co-
lonial Governor. In the following ex tract from a despatch
addressed to Sir George Gipps, Sir E. Bourke’s successor, we
learn that the Colonial Office expected, by raising the price
of land, to check dispersion.
i! So far as regards the encouragement of emigration, the
measure has to a considerable degree succeeded; but the
extent of land which has been sold, and the increasing
want of labour, afford decisive proof that the cheek which
it was intended to impose on the undue dispersion of the
inhabitants of the Colony has not been sufficient. It is
only by raising the minimum price of land, or by restrict-
ing the quantity offered for sale, that the end in view can
be obtained; because in the present circumstances of the
Colony, though competition may determine the relative
value of different allotments of land, while more is offered
for sale than can be profitably occupied, it is obvious that
the minimum price demanded by the government will de-
termine the saleable value of land which has no peculiar
advantages, either from its neighbourhood to a market, or
from its natural fertility.
“ I have, therefore, to instruct you forthwith to substitute
12s. for 65., as the upset price of land of ordinary quality,
I have, at the same time, to desire that you will closely
watch the effects produced by this enhancement of the
price, with a view of ascertaining whether it may not be
necessary to carry it still higher, in order to accomplish, the
purpose for which the measure is intended. If you should
perceive that the extension of the population into the un-
settled districts should still proceed with a rapidity beyond
what is desirable, and that the want of labour still con-
tinues to be seriously felt; or if you should have reason, to
believe that large purchases are made on speculation; you
will, without waiting for further instructions from me, take
measures for checking the sale of land even at the price of
12.?. an acre.
w I have little doubt that, in the yet unsold districts of
the Colony, the imposition of a considerably higher price,


at least up to 20s. an acre, would not check the purchase of
land ; and, if not, would tend, of course, materially to in-
crease the amount realized for the land fund, on the ex-
tension and application of which, at this juncture, so much
of the prosperity of New South Wales may probably de-
pend.”
The fact is, that at this time, the Colonial Office was com-
pletely under the influence of the money-making hopes in-
spired by Mr, Gibbon Wakefield’s House of Commons Com-
mittee of 1836. Like the author of the “ Letter from Sydney,”
and unlike Sir R, Eour.ke, all the sympathies of the House of
Commons and the Governor were for the capitalist, compelled
to plough his own land, and black his own shoes. They had
no thoughts for the Hunter’s River settler, whom Mr,
Wakefield made a flunkey, bat who might have been a
cottier farmer. Mr. Wakefield’s extraordinary success in
imprinting his views on the Government and on the House
of Commons may be traced to very obvious causes.
His scheme promised to bring money into the Govern-
ment chest, and to create patronage. Nothing can equal
the avidity with which Government Boards embrace any
scheme for making money, except the liberality with which
they dispense it among their friends and dependents the
Woods and Forests for instance. It flattered the preju-
dices of landowning aristocratic legislators by promising to
transplant to new colonies that cheap, respectful, depend-
ent class of touch-my-hat chawbacons who form one of the
luxuries of English country gentleman life (alloyed only
by poor rates and Swing fires). In fact, it promised to
perpetuate what half .our poorer emigrants expatriate them-
selves to avoid. In this last point of view it was not un-
popular with the great Squatter of Australia,
1841. —-The next event connected with the land of Aus-
tralia was the Committee on South Australian Bankruptcy.
This was a packed committee—not corruptly packed, but
composed either of followers of the Wakefield School, or
of parties both ignorant and indifferent to the views of the
Sew South Wales colonists-—all the witnesses examined were
in the interest of the South Australian Company, which had
a large pecuniary stake in permanently raising the price of
land. In fact, the only interest represented was that of
political theorists and land Jobbers ; no working class emi-
grants, or representatives of that class, were examined.
The Committee reported in favour of an Act of Parlia


meat permanently fixing the mininmm upset price of
laud at 1?. an acre, in a paragraph which was in the spirit
of the following amendment, proposed by the present Earl
Grey, then lord Howiek, but rejected merely because 2 1. an
acre was considered premature.
“ That one minimum price for land in all the Australian
Colonies, and in New Zealand, ought to be established; that
this price ought not now to be lower than 2L per acre, and
that it ought to be progressively increased until it is found
that the great scarcity of labour now complained of in these
Colonies no longer exists,”
There is no doubt that at that time the Committee, Lord
Stanley, and Mr. Wakefield, felt as sure that they could
regulate the price of land, insure sales of land, and secure
labour at moderate wages in the Australian Colonies, as did
the legislators on the Corn Laws, after the war, that they
could secure 80s. a quarter for wheat by a prohibitive duty.
What Earl Grey intended is clear, by the words “ li ought
to he progressively increased until it- is found that the great
scarcity of labour now complained of in these Colonies m
longer exists”
There is no doubt that many people in the Colonies were
imposed on by the grave earnestness of British legislators,
and infatuated by the example of the South Australian
dupes. The colonists went mad on land, and universal in-
solvency followed.
As we are not writing a history, but only supplying docu-
ments for that purpose, we cannot follo w the course of the
Land Mania further.
1843. —In this year, a Committee of the Legislative
Council of New South Wales on Emigration reported, <l The
measure of her Majesty’s government for raising the upset
price of land from 6s. to 125., and subsequently from 12s, to
20s. an acre, —the adoption of this scale of augmented upset-
prices has been a complete annihilation of the laud fund;
neither the profits of sheep farming, nor agrixmlture, can
ever justify the investment of capital in land at these
prices; nor do your Committee believe that any capitalists
will ever be induced to emigrate from, the mother country
whilst such a system regulating land sales is in force,
“ Your Committee regard a reduction in the upset price
of land as an indispensable preliminary to any laud sales


being effected. Were such a reduction to take place, your
Committee have no doubt that capitalists would again be
attracted to the Colony, and that the crown lands would
find purchasers ; a fund would thus be created for the
interest and final extinction of any loan that might be
raised in England for purposes of immigration; capital and
labour would find their way to the Colony ; and your Com-
mittee hesitate not to express their unanimous belief, that
prosperity would once more be restored to the community,
“ As an additional means for effecting the combined in-
troduction of labour and capital, your Committee would
recommend the enactment of regulations for allowing a
remission in the purchase of land to all persons on their
arrival in the Colony, equivalent to the amount of passage-
money they may have actually paid, whether such outlay
has been incurred for their own conveyance to the Colony,
or for that of their families and servants/’
In the same year Mrs, Chisholm having proved, by actual
experiment, that labouring men with large families, rejected
on that account by the squatters as servants, could support
themselves and become independent by being placed upon
from ten to twenty acres of good land, made an offer to Sir
George Gipps to locate a number of families who were being
supported in Sydney at the expense of the government, if
he would grant on lease government land for the purpose,
and thus save a large expense, and escape the then preg-
nant danger of a serious riot.
Sir George’s answer was “ Mrs. Chisholm, I may entirely
approve of your plan ; I may see its beneficial effects now
and in future; bat I am sent here to carry out the Wake-
field system, and I must carry it out, come what may.”
1844. —A Select Committee of the Legislative Council on
the Crown Land Grievances, reported that “ Your Committee
feel that an enquiry into the land grievances of the colony
would be very defective if it did not assign a prominent
place to this, one of the main grievances under which the
colony is suffering. They feel, indeed, that the time has
arrived when a bold effort must be made to effect a com-
plete change in the system of administering the Crown
Lands of the Colony,
“ Your Committee are fully of opinion with one of the
witnesses who appeared before them, that ‘ under the pre-
sent system, this community must either continue for many


years to struggle with the difficulties of its position—diffi-
cult! es which have been greatly exaggerated by the mis-
taken policy of the government, or it must be compelled to
seek relief from the burthen of debt under which it is
bound down, by an almost general bankruptcy, which would
involve the sacrifice of a large amount of British capital,’
“ The testimony both taken before your Committee, and
by letter, is all but unanimous as to the injurious operation
of a high minimum price of land,”
1845.—The Select Committee reported, “The source from
whence the cost of immigration has hitherto been borne has
been exclusively from the land fund. Since the imposition
of an upset price of one pound an acre on the waste lands
of the Crown, the revenue derivable from this source has
been virtually annihilated—or at all events has not been
more than sufficient to defray the expenses connected with
their survey and management.
h The following table exhibits the proceeds derivable
from the sales of land for the last "five years:—lß4o,
316,626?. 7s. 5d ; 1841, 90,3870 16s. 10 d.\ 1842, 14,674?. 10s.
4 d.] 1843, 11,297?. 3s. 9d.; 1844, 7402?. 18s. 6d.
“ The practical evils resulting from the augmentation in
the upset price of land have been already fully developed
in the Report on Immigration, 1843, —in the Report on the
sale of Waste Lands, 1843, —and in the Land Grievance
Report of 1844, and the opinions of your Honourable Coun-
cil, distinctly pronounced on the same subject, in the reso-
lutions of the whole Council of the 17th of Sept. 1844,”
We have not at hand the proceedings of the Legislative
Council of 1846; but, in
1847. —The Select Committee reported, “That the colony
possesses within itself ample and superabundant resources
for the importation of labour, is undeniable. These have,
however, been kept in abeyance, fettered, and in a great
measure destroyed, either by the peculiar policy of the
home government, or by the Acts of the imperial legisla-
ture. For a series of years the growth of the colony was
uniform, progressive, and uninterrupted. From .1833 to
1840 the sum realized by the sale of the Waste Lands was
upwards of a million, and by the expenditure of this amount
30,000 souls were introduced. Under this system the popu-
lation became more than doubled in a period of eight years.


In 1839 it- was the policy of the imperial government to
raise the upset minimum price of land from ss. to 125., and
subsequently to 11. an acre. This act may be regarded as
one of tfie chief causes of the disasters with, which the
colony has since been visited, and of its present depressed
condition. From 300,00(F. a year the land revenue fell to
SO OOI., immigration ceased; the sources from whence it had
been defrayed having been thus suddenly arrested. The
measure here adverted to may be said to have obstructed
the prosperity of the colony in a twofold wav.
“Ist, In deterring capitalists from proceeding to it, the
price of land being, by the fiat of the imperial legislature,
suddenly raised to four times its intrinsic worth; and the
rate at which it was henceforth to be sold being rendered
from four to twelve times greater than that prevailing in
other British colonies, it was a consequence that might
have been predicted with the greatest confidence, that the
establishment of the augmented price would be equivalent
to a prohibition against the sale of land altogether. That
such has been its effect is incontestable. Any exception
that may appear to have occurred does not affect this con-
clusion, The small patches of suburban land that have
recently been sold are .insignificant In extent, and have
been the purchases, it is believed, of residents in towns, for
the purpose of gardens, small dairy farms, or paddocks,
A r o druyte example, it is believed, can■ he quoted in which , since
the establishment of the high upset price, any capitalist has
purchased land- for 'pastoral purposes.
a If any exception is to be found, at the present moment,
in the all but universal concurrence of opinions as to the
impolicy of the high upset price, such an exception will be
found with those who now occupy the waste lands under
licence from the crown. That occupation must remain for
ever uninterrupted, so long as the minimum upset price at
present fixed for the fee-simple of the lands is preserved.”
In support of this strong opinion we will quote one ex-
tract from the evidence of Mr, J. MiArthur.
u I would, however, beg to repeat xny conviction as to the
impolicy of attempting to continue the twenty shillings an
acre minimum price on the crown lands of this colony, It
puts a stop to the immigration, both of capitalists and
labourers, to this country ; and so long; as it is maintained,
I see no means of introducing labour, but by raising loans


for the purpose. W ifchout this, I fear the colony will retro-
grade almost as rapidly as it has advanced; nor, unless the
price of the crown lauds be greatly reduced, can I see in
what- .way there is any probability of the proprietary class,
whether immigrant or native born, extending. The pro-
posed system of fourteen years’ grazing leases, subject to
renewals, appears to me calculated to repress, if not to
render impossible, the settlement of bond fide proprietors,
having a direct interest in the soil, and" looking to the
colony as their own home, and that of their children. I
cannot but fear, that the tendency of the leasing system
■will be to raise up, on the ruin of the proprietary "class,
another class, whose chief object will be, that their flocks
and herds should roam over vast tracts of country, to
the exclusion of all permanent improvement, with no
other object than personal advantage and aggrandizement,
careless of the injurious consequences to the community at
large. There can scarcely be a dissentient opinion as to the
importance of the pastoral interests of this colony. They
have strong claims upon the government for support, and
for indulgent concession; but there cannot he a greater
fallacy than to attempt a settlement of the question of our
crown lands administration; as if this fine country had no
higher destiny than to continue a sheepwalk for ever; as
if the question involved no interests but of a selfish and
pecuniary kind, and no considerations of more exalted and
lasting character, than the conditions of a seven or fourteen
years’ grazing occupancy. Freehold tenure is essential, in
my opinion, to ensure the continued advancement of this
colony, and raise its moral and social character. It will be
the most conducive to really national immigration—the
best means of rendering the colony a source of strength and
renewed energy to the parent state.”
(To be concluded in our next.)
Pastoral Pursuits. —At the dose of 1847 the ascertained num-
ber of horses in the colony was 2814 ; of horned cattle, 60,240;
and of sheep, 912,680 ; but the overland introductions of cattle
have since been so considerable, and the general increase so touch in
excess of the slaying and consumption for food and for export, that
the next official statistics can scarcely fail to exhibit a very large
augmentation in each aggregate. Cashmere goats have been intro-
duced, as also animals of less valuable breed. They usually thrive
well and increase rapidly when in careful hands, but. we have no
means of ascertaining the numbers, —South Australian Almumaek,


BLIND GUIDES TO NEW ZEALAND:
A CAUTION TO CANTERBURY COUONISTS.
If paper were fertile land, and types were cattle, and sheep
colonists, then would the Wakefield System of dear land
and cheap labour have long since been carried out in fabu-
lous perfection, and half-a-dozen fine ports, crowded with
shipping-—a dozen stately cities adorned with public build-
ings, rivalling the finest edifices in the capitals of Europe
• —whole counties of vast farms, excelling in cultivation the
best of Norfolk, Lincolnshire, or the Lothians —would have
ennobled and enriched the chosen site of the Sufficient Price
theory; for year after year reams of paper and oceans of ink
are expended, not only in proving that colonists who have
failed ought to have succeeded, but in levelling mountains,
in draining swamps, and in clearing forests, which still re-
main, in sober sad reality, uncultivated, undrained, un-
cleared.
Ne w Zealand is the site on which Mr, Wakefield’s scholars
have undertaken to prove that it is good to transplant the
European social system of dear land and cheap labour—
the system under which, at not unfrequent intervals, the
capitalist and the landowner tremble, while the workman
and labourer threaten and groan.
Journals, subsidized in each of the principal settlements,
play a game at battledore and shuttlecock in quoting each
other’s mortgaged paragraphs, with another journal which is
published in London, and, on special occasions, distributed la
select quarters gratuitously. Thus, for instance, The .Nelson
Examiner quotes the (London) New Zealand Journal, and the
New Zealand Journal,- quotes back the Nelson Examiner , to
be again quoted by the Wellington Independent.
In addition to these periodical puffing machines, the
“ dear land and cheap labour settlements ” are the subject
of a series of soi-disant Guides* and Hand-Books, written as
* A Guide to New Zealand, by a late Resident,
A Hand-Book to New Zealand , by a Magistrate.
A Hand-Book to the Southern Settlements of New Zealand, by
G. B . Harp, late Senior Magistrate .


honestly as the little boots distributed by enterprising
tailors at the principal railway stations of London. In
iactj as we shall prove by extracts from the New Zealand
Journals and New Zealand Hand-Books, nothing written
■under the influence of the Wakefield school of colonizers-
(to use the words of the editor of one of them, in speaking
of Guides to New South Wales),can be relied on for
fidelity.” “ While professing to supply the emigrant with
counsel and information, they are written with the view
of puffing a particular party and district.”
Description of the Country. —No one could imagine, from
the description of New Zealand in “ Guide/’ No, 1, or The
Magistrate’s “Hand-Book,” No. 2, or Mr. Earp’s “ Hand-
Book,” No. 3, that in all the existing settlements level fertile
land was extremely rare—that the mountains were so nume-
rous, so precipitous, and so thickly timbered, that it was
necessary to travel a hundred miles to afford a hundred
settlers a few thousand acres. For instance, Mr, Barp,
who, as editor of the Neve Zealand Jimrrud, is the very Cato
of colonial critics, when summing up the contents of New
Zealand in his oracular Hand-Book, gives an “ aggregate
of 95,000 square miles, or about 62,000,000 square acres—
a surface somewhat larger than Great Britain.” Of course
the inference from this statement would be, that thexw
is as much available land in New Zealand as in Great
Britain; but Mr.Barp does not mention that mountains
and swamps occupy three-fourths of the country. In no
one of these descriptions of New Zealand is the fact stated,
that, for want of available land, the settlers of Wellington
had to seek their rural sections a hundred miles from the
port, and that the small settlement of Nelson straggles .150
miles along- the coast. “I dined,” said John, “on a fine
piece of roast beef and potatoes.” “ The same dinner as
mine,” quoth Paddy, “barrin’ the beef.” Mr. Earp forgot
to bar the inaccessible mountains. In all the pretences of
elaborate descriptions, the distances of the rural and
suburban lots from the ports are never mentioned; and
none of the three Guides venture to quote the exact de-
scription which their patrons could have furnished from
a Report too voluminous to be overlooked ; for the Secre-
tary of the New Zealand Company, writing to Lord Stanley,
18th September, 1841, to obtain some concessions from the
government (five years after the company had begun to


sell land in. New Zealand), says,—■“ The country in -which,
the selection is to he made is extremely hilly and densely
wooded, and therefore very difficult of examination and survey . 5
And lie proceeds: “One peculiar feature of New Zealand
demands notice. As far as the country is yet known, there
are no good harbours in the immediate vicinity of any consi-
derable extent of flat land , s-idtable for the sort of agriculture
to which emigrants from Great Britain are habituated, and the
country surrounding all the. best harbours is remarkably
mountainous and rugged. In such situations, generally
speaking, detached and. narrow Talleys alone offer any pre-
sent inducements to colonists to undertake the very expen-
sive process of clearing heavily-timbered land. * * * *
There seems to be no choke but that of fiat land without a
harbour, or of a harbour without flat land.”* And Captain
Bussell, reporting on roads contracted under Ids superin-
tendence by the natives, says ; “The road from Wellington,
through the district of Poiraa, —carried through a country
unequalled in difficulty by anything I have seen, except
the cockpits of the West India Islands. The expense has
exceeded 700£. a mile (for a military road not wide enough,
for a wheeled carriage), nor do I think it safe to estimate
any future road-making in the district in this division below
that sum.”
New Zealand is a damp as well as a mountainous country,.
Roads expensive to make, —and expensive, in consequence of
the winter’s rains, to keep in repair, will long form a severe
tax on settlers in the interior ; but there is no hint of this
in the New Zealand Guides. Is this honest in these oracles?
Soil —New Zealand has districts containing very rich soil,
others very barren, and others that may be rendered pro-
ductive by expenditure of time and money. The scarcity
of available soil is proved by the wide dispersion of the
settlements ; but as it is part of “ the system” to sell land
by 1 ot, on the pig-in-poke principle, it is necessary to prove
that bad land, is good land. Hence such passages as the
following, which are penned for the comfort of absentee
landholders :
“ The soil varies extremely; that which is thickly tim-
bered is best; that covered with fern and shrub is found to
produce excellent crops as soon as the fern roots are
* 39 c. Appendix to Twelfth Report of the New Zealand Com-
pany.


thoroughly rotted,” And Mr, Earp says, “Even the lands
which are said to be bad lands are fertile. Pern land is often
called bad land, but it is, in fact, the most valuable land m
the colony, or may he made so. You will not get a good crop
off it the first year, but that arises from two causes, —that
it is an argillaceous marl, and nest the mode of clearing, by
burning off the fern, whereas the argillaceous marl contains
too much alkaline salts, and by burning the plants you add
to them ; but if that land is ploughed up and suffered to
lie fallow for a year or two, I have seen enormous crops pro*
duced from it.”
All this sounds very pretty, supposing it to be true, which
some doubt *. At any rate, the colonist who has bought land
at 21, an. acre, to live on it, and by it. finds poor consolation
for a heavy expense in clearing, and then a year’s fallow,
during which time his stomach must fallow too, by receiv-
ing a lecture on agricultural chemistry. A man. who has
to wait two years for bis first crop will be apt to move off
to some country where corn grows more ranldly and less
scientifically,
Sam Weller only made one trial of the Bath water.
“ How do you like our springs ?” said his friend the Bath,
flunkey. “ Strong taste of warm flat-irons,” replied tSann
“ That’s the kalibeate,” was the answer of the flunkey. But
the scientific information did not induce Sam to repeat the
dose.
Exports and Investments.- — All New Zealand Guides con-
tain a list of exports and investments, for the instruction- of
emigrants of capital, which are almost entirely fictitious.
Among these figure u Timber for house and ship-building—
spars and flax—wool, oil, whalebone, copper ores, manganese,
furniture and dye-woods—native flax, pork, bacon, butter
and cheese, and beer.”
We find, on inquiry, that the only cargoes of timber im-
ported into London from New Zealand caused a heavy loss
"V ery little of this it-ari has fallen under my notice. The crops
generally grow best where the fern roots have been 'burned. Gene-
rally the laud, which appears almost barren, is what it appears.
The greater proportion of the heavily-timbered land, and land
covered with, fern and scrub, is good for nothing for agricultural pur-
poses. There is certainly some excellent soil In the Huddle island,
but the average is decidedly inferior to England. —Note by a Nelson
Settler .


to the importer. The Norfolk Island pine, so valuable for
spars, is not found in any quantity on the Company’s settle-
ments ■ and since the natives have learned the value of
labour, the cost of cutting and hauling to the waters con-
sumes the profit formerly derived from this trade. The ex-
portation of timber to New South Wales has sometimes
proved remunerative as a return cargo for live stock ; but it
has also frequently caused loss to the speculators. Although
trees are plentiful, good timber, near enough to water
to be easily moved, is scarce ; the most common timber tree,
black birch, is valueless. Mr, Hursthouse, of New Ply-
mouth, and Mr. Gledbill, a correspondent of the New Zea-
land Journal, agree that New Zealand does not produce any
furniture wood which, in quantity and quality, can com-
pete with rosewood and mahogany. Mr. Lievea, the New
Zealand House chair-maker, and the editor of Jns New Zea-
land Journal , are very indignant at this ; but they do not
tell us when last a cargo was imported, or what it fetched.
India and many other countries, also, have beautiful fur-
niture woods, but it does not pay to export them. ii The
•dye-woods” stand in the same category. They do not reach
the British market, except as curiosities.
Although Mr. Earp’s hook contains what looks like, until
examined, elaborate statistical tables of the exports and
imports of the Southern Settlements, we look in vain among
the list of exports for the quantities, or even names, of
timber, copper ore, manganese, dye-woods. We find whale
oil , of which fishery Mr. Earp claims “ a monopoly for New
Zealand,” but the return does not support his prophecy;
for the export steadily declines from 12S8 tons in 1843,
1.130 tons in 1844, 970 tons in 1845,818 J tons in 1846, after
which date he gives no returns, although the Hand-Book was
published, in 1849 ; but in the other Hand-Book, published
in 1848, the oil taken in 1847 is returned at 467 tons.
Therefore, it is evident that the New Zealand monopoly of
the whale fishery has not yet begun. In like maimer, native
fiasc, or Phormium Tenax, figures largely among the invest-
'meats recommended to emigrants. Pages of the Guides are
devoted to the subject of its cultivation; and whenever
the New Zealand Journal is short of colonial intelligence,
it contains a new project for the manufacture of it.
On turning to Mr, Earp’s statistical tables, we find that
in 1846 the joint exports of flax from, Wellington and
Nelson (why lumped together, the two towns being a week’s


sail apart, and having no interest in common, it would be
difficult to say) amounted in 1846t0 100 tons; value 1345 b
Since that date, no returns. But we find in. the Hand-
Book, No. 2, these words, As now prepared for the Lon-
don market, small quantities of Phormium Teua>: have
obtained prices varying from 20b to 28b a ton, a price which
hardly pays the expenses of preparation, packing, and
freight.” How is it Mr. Earp has not included this com-
mercial with his scientific facts 1
Nest comes Wool . The early plans of the Wakefield
colony disclaimed the barbarous practice of squatting and
wool-growing; but times are changed, and so are the authors
and editors attached to New Zealand House. The statistics
(which seem handed about among the New Zealand Guide
makers like the savages’ single pipe) inform us that in 1846
Wellington and Nelson together exported wool to the value
of 3399 b Since that time there has been a considerable
importation of sheep from New South Wales, which is likely
to continue, since they are worth about 6s, in Sydney, and.
from lb to lb Ss. in all the ports of New Zealand. Mr. Earp’s
imagination seems well calculated to supply the deficiency
of his statistics ; he is the very Alnascbar of wool-growing.
Starting with 30,000 sheep, in ten years, and half a page,
he arrives in a manner perfectly satisfactory to himself”at
1,746,643 sheep, with wool worth 305,662 b, and enormous
profits. The half page of figures (page 265) looks very
imposing. The New Zealand sheep are to go on lambing
without scab, foot-rot, or bites from the wild dogs. To make
out his statement he takes the wool at Is, 2 d. per lb. (page
265), and also asserts that the wool of New Zealand is far
superior in quality to that of Australia. Both statements
seem rather imaginative, seeing that Messrs. J. T. Simea and
Co,, wool-brokers, in their two last circulars give as fol-
lows : In July, Sydney wool, average to good. Is, -id, to
Is. Id. ; superior, Is. B d, to 2s. Zd. Port Philip, average
Is. 3 d, to Is. s cb; superior, Is. 7d. to 2s, New Zealand
fleece. Is. to Is. sd. In October, the average of Sydney and
Port Philip is from Is. 2d, to Is. 7d,; while New Zealand
is 10-gcb to Is. 2d,
The New Zealand Journal , drawing apparently its in-
spirations from the same source, informs us that the Now
Zealand fleece weighs twice as much as the Australian.
Quite true : a Leicester fleece is double the weight of a
merino; but then it is worth just half as march per pound,
HEW SEMES —NO. V. g


Tested then, by the market price, the New Zealand
wool is inferior to that of the New South Wales; but, in
fact, any comparison at present is absurd; it is a_ cottage
o-a-rden "to a county of farms. The sale of Australian wool
in July was about 32,000 packs, of New Zealand 465 ;in
October, 30,000 of the former, and 62 of the. latter. A few
fine flocks, such as those of Messrs. Clifford, may produce
the finest quality of wool; and at some future time, when
the price of sheep has been equalized. New Zealand may
become a great wool-growing country; but at the present
time (at the present price of sheep and shepherds) those
who invest their money on the faith of Mr, Earp’s calcula-
tions will find, we fear, as sad a difference between paper
calculations and market prices, as the dairy-maid did when
she counted her chickens,
Mr, Tuckett, formerly in the Company’s service, estimated
that one good acre would feed a sheep. Mr, Earp insists
on fattening five sheep on an acre, and that to the extent
of 30,000 sheep—he might just as well say so while he is
about it. We would rather take his advice in cramming
emigrants than in. fattening sheep,
Mr, Earp (page 268) considers “ the improved Leicester
and Tees water the animals to make New Zealand flourish
(where, then, is the concentration of Mr, Wakefield?) while
the Magistrate author of the “ Hand-Book,” p. 249, says,
as to the Leicester cross, I must strongly condemn it—the
wool is of the worst quality—-the sheep are not adapted for
the wild runs of this country.”
“ Who shall decide when doctors disagree? w
There is also a variation in the figures on which Mr. Earp
calculates the profits of an emigrant, which requires
explanation. At p. 58, the settler is to get sheep at 12 s,
a head; at page 94 they are quoted at a head ;at
page 277, at from 15s. to 18s, a head. A difference of
40 a per cent, would be serious in purchasing a flock, whether
merinoes or Leicesters. Then, again, with respect to cows,
they are quoted at 12?., and at page 94, they are 5 L a head.
In the calculations of the expenses of wheat-growing, the
variations are equally striking. At p. 34, Mr. Earp asserts
that u land in New Zealand will, with: ordinary cultivation,
produce forty bushels of wheat, worth 4s. a bushel:” but
Mr. Fox, whose Report is- adopted by Mr. Earp, at p. 113
gives the average produce per acre at twenty-four bushels-


Mr. Hursthouse averages'the produce at twenty-five bushels.
At page 66 of the “ New Zealand Guide/’ it is stated that
the natives pay attention to the cultivation of wheat, which
they dispose of at 2a a bushel, taking payment in manu-
factured goods.’ Tyrone Power corroborates this opinion,
saying “ that there are 500 acres of wheat in the ground
belonging to the Maories this year, in the Southern district
alone.
Copper Ore has been found in the Southern Settlements ;
but the small quantity which was experimentally shipped
did not pay freight. If any business has been done in Mew
Zealand copper during the past year, we shall be glad to
see the quotation in the Swansea List: we cannot find it.
Some copper has very lately been raised, with what profit-
does not appear, near Auckland ; but that has nothing to
do with Mr. Karp’s Southern Settlements. The Auckland
mine employs just sixteen miners j some of them have loft
for Australia,
i?e®r.-~-Belson beer is very nice; but, according to the
report of a relative of the principal brewer there, cannot
find a remunerative market price in Sydney. It is not
mentioned in the Sydney price currents. « Bathurst cheese
is imported from Sydney to New Zealandtherefore cheese
is not a New Zealand export. Beef, alive and dead, is con»-
stantly imported into New Zealand, and cannot, therefore,,
be an export. The same may be said of butter. Pork ami
potatoes,, chiefly native produce, are the New Zealand ex-
ports grown on land not costing 21. per acre.
But, perhaps, as strong a case as any of stereotyped
blundering is to be found in a batch of letters, quoted By
Mr, Earp, at page 126, from the “New Zealand Guide/ 5
professing to give calculations for the guidance of an emi-
grant. In the first place, all expenses for clearing the
land are omitted; then the writer gives six more bushels
than the average Mr. Pox takes credit for, ss, a Bushel
instead of the price current, 3s. 6d. to 45., and claims' the
sale of the straw to pay expenses, although it must be used
as manure, if the land is to be kept in heart. At page 1.26
he makes one cow give him a calf; and 61. worth of butter and
milk in a year. At page 129,. a cow lets for <k a week, and
at page 130, a cow brings in 10s. or 12s. a week. By this
mode of mating out calculations, the profits of an’ emi-
grant, on, paper, are optional, like Mr, Hudson’s railway
balances. The fact, is, that cows were worth any money
B 2


years ago, when Nelson was full of Mr. Wakefield’s calves,
hut for the last few years the best might be hired at %.
a head.
There is another fact with respect to wheat-growing ,
worth noting. Wellington is the roost flourishing town
of New Zealand, with troops and a large government ex-
penditure. We read in these Guides and Sign Pests a great
deal of the fertility of the Valley of the Hutt, &c., and of
the profits to be made by great growing ; but an agricul-
tural return in the Magistrate’s w Hand-Book ” speaks
volumes. In December, 1847, the land in crop by the
settlers only amounted to 1676 acres, of which 340 were
wheat, 159 oats, 91 barley, 194 potatoes, 172 gardens, and
the rest pasture. Wellington Imports wheat largely; why
do not the settlers grow it 1 Tyrone Power, who admires
New Zealand, yet exposes the Wakefield System, and is
therefore never quoted or noticed, gives the true reason.
“ For settlers who embark capital and employ labour in
agriculture, there is but little chance at present; and it has
hitherto generally proved a losing speculation. Land is
too dear, wages too high, and, except in years of drought,
wheat in sufficient quantities, and at a cheaper rate, can
be procured from Van Diemeu’s Land than it can be pro-
cured by the Engish fanner in New Zealand. There is
another competitor, too, coming into the field, against whom,
there will be no contending, as he gets the pick of the land
for nothing, and has plenty of cheap labour at command.
This is the Maori.”
Bold assertions make part of the stock in trade of the
Wakefield School; for instance, the “'New Zealand Guide”
savs of New Plymouth, * This settlement is attached to the
Nort hem Province, but its interests, habits, and feelings
are identified with the other settlements; in all probability
it will shortly be included in the Southern Province.” And
Mr, Earp (page 30), with his usual decision when he has to
support a paradox, says. “ New Plymouth was unjustly an-
nexed to the Northern Province by Captain Fitzroy, but
will ultimately regain its position in connection with the
other settlements, of which it forms one.” But in the
Nelson .Exam. imr of Ist April, 1848, we find that “the depu-
tation (of New Plymouth settlers) gave it as their opinion
that the settlers generally were in favour of Taranaki (New
Plymouth) being included in the Northern Province, * *
la the evening, the deputation reported themselves to the


settlers, who all appeared to favour the arrangement that
Taranaki should be in the Northern Province.” And Mr.
Fox, in his last despatch, in the New Zealand Journal, of the
3rd November, says, “ they would prefer being united to
the principal seat of government 'wherever that may be
fixed” (viz. in Auckland).
Mr. Hurst-house, it will be remembered, hinted at the
same opinion, and gave a table of distances, showing that
Mew Plymouth was sixty miles nearer Auckland' than
Wellington.
Contradiction seems the rule, and correctness the excep-
tion, in the Hand-Book of the senior magistrate. At p. 31—
“ Twenty-five acre allotments may be obtained in the set-
tlement of Wellington, entitling the purchaser to draw-
back for passage-money.” At page 82 we are informed,
“that the emigrant who is desirous of becoming an agri-
culturist- at Wellington must purchase a section from the
proprietor of it. In no other way can he obtain land in the
settlement,” And again, at page 134, he says, “at Nelson
there is a branch of the Union Bank of Australia.” This
branch had been withdrawn a year before his boot was
published.
The Magistrate’s (not the senior magistrate’s) Hand-
Book, No. 2, is more remarkable for its omissions and recom-
mendations than for mistaken assertions. Whitten pro-
fessedly to forward the views of the Canterbury colonizers,
the cr&m-de-la-crSme of the Wakefield system, it is impos-
sible to gather from 500 closely-printed pages of professed
history and description the faintest idea of the real cha-
racter or past state of New Zealand. For instance, no
one could imagine, after reading the closely-printed pages
of Mr. Wakefield’s project, that a project for establishing
concentrated agricultural self-supporting colonies, divided
into capitalists and labourers, had ended as it has ended,
in the foundation of half-a-dozen straggling settlements,
dependent on military expenditure for existence, importing
two-thirds of their food; in which the only opening for
capitalists is as store-keepers and pastoral squatters; and
where the only successful farmers are the labouring cottiers
whom the system was intended to retain as serfs. The his-
torical part has been written like the Bourbonist History
of France prepared for schools, in which the revolution and
the reign of Napoleon were omitted. Not one word of the
failure and total change of the Company’s plans—not- one


word of the reasons that led to reducing lots from 150 acres
to 25, But the funniest part is the conclusion. “ The
intending colonist (we quote literally) is to learn French,
German, Spanish, mathematics, land surveying, civil engi-
neering, mechanics, with a knowledge of machinery, archi-
tecture, navigation, geology, botany, chemistry, surgery,
agriculture in general, veterinary surgery, music, cookery,
carpentering, and turning, drawing and painting, ship-
building and rigging, curing and smoking beef, pork, hams,
and fish; tanning; the art of self-defence in all Its
branches, including fencing, broad-sword, boxing, wrestling;
shooting with the fowling-piece, rifle pistol; \%f he returns
to England , -with the long-bow , lessons will be found in the
Guides and Hand-Books ;] sailing, steering; swimming is
indispensable; [drowning is the usued accident in New
Zealandf\ riding and driving* [the driving refers to pigs,
we presume, as there are no roads], and political economy.”
The outfit is on the same scale. u Take a good stock of
saddlery, harness, whips, and spurs ; a pack-saddle or two,
cart harness, and gig harness. They can always be sold at
a profit; [<? Nelson settler wanting one strap , bought in 1848
as much saddlery for os. as cost originally 6/L]: a good strong
dog-cart ; a first-rate Durham bull, which only costs
82£ 'IS,?. two rams (Saxony), and four ewes, only 168(1;
two stallions, one blood, and one Clydesdale; say 400?.
Dogs, vis., terrier, .Newfoundland, water-spaniel, boar-
hound, bloodhound, Scotch deer-hound, pointer, sheep-dog.
[Except pigs of a tame breed, there is no game in New
Zealand; but, never mind, that deficiency is to be supplied,]
Iron gates, fences, and guards for young trees; double-
barrelled gun; bolster and pocket pistols, and a good rifle ;
sabre and infantry sword; sheath-knife; boar-spears. Agri-
cultural implements [ too numerous to mention] ; chaff-
cutters; turnip-cutters; drain-tiles; marlines and draining
tools. [ This last recommendation seems quite unnecessary.
If he follows the other directions of this Handbook, he
would not need any draining tools.] A horse-drill;
a farm-engine for liquid manure; a threshing-machine;
mathematical instruments ; a telescope; bugle and cornet-
a-piston ; cricket apparatus; quoits. Birds: viz,, phea-
sants, partridges [query Game Laws'], rooks, pea-fowl,
swans, and Guinea fowls; red deer, and fallow deer; hares.
* The only gig or carriage the bishop hag is a boat.


The last recommendation, is very important: “ Take
goldbut there is one more we will venture to add,-
“ a strait jacket and a keeper,”
There is meaning in ail this madness. This list of useless
luxuries is meant to bait a trap for catching credulous
cadets of noble families, and sons of country gentlemen.
To conjure up a dream of a mansion house, a park and
manor in New Zealand—a dream which will end in ruin.
Dogs, guns, and spears, and not a head of game beyond a rat
in the Islands 1 Without the real Chawbacon, warranted to
stand the climate, and still touch his hat—without a Mark
Lane within a hundred miles, these implements will rot and
rust within a quarter of a mile of Port Cowper, They be
“ springes to catch woodcocks.” When we look at” the
learned, respectable, intelligent names attached to the
Canterbury scheme, we are amazed that they can permit
such tricks to be played under their patronage. People
are in England who remember grand pianos Iving cm the
beach of Port Adelaide.
The fact is, that the advocates of New Zealand are put to
their wits’ end in order to show cause for the 21. an acre
system. Hence these Romances. Trading and store keeping,
—sheep, cattle and pig feeding,—whale or other fishing,-
coasting and mining,—have no possible connection with
the Wakefield system of “dear land and cheap labour”
The only person who buys land beyond the space wanted for
a house and garden is the agriculturist. Let us see what,
according to the results of the last ten years’ experience,
and what, according to the price currents quoted in the
Hand-Books, the New Zealand colonist gains by paying
four times the American price for his land, Mr. Earp
commences by telling us, pp. 32-33, that—“ The introduc-
tion of labour into a new colony could not with safety
be entrusted to the colonists themselves.” After this
assumption, he proceeds—“ The only way to organise a
sufficient supply of labour is to demand of the land pur-
chaser such a price for his land as shall ensure a sufficient
price of labour,” Of this price (viz., 2 L an acre), 15s, in the
pound goes for the supply of labour, and 5-s, in the pound
as the remuneration for those who “organize the means for
a requisite supply of labour.” And “ This ss. is, in fact, the
only price 'which the land parchaser pays for hi? land, for it
■would be absurd to say that the fifteen skiilinys in the pounds
which he pays for labour, is not amply returned to him in the
labour which it provides


Thi* admirable explanation is worthy of the lecturer ou
argillaceous day, and would answer perfectly if the author
on%~ proved that’tie labour paid for -was, or ever had been, sup-
plied : but. unfortunately, ne does nothing of the kind. His
price'currents contradict him—his Journal contradicts him
l~Mr, Fox’s Report contradicts him.
At Wellington (p. 94), farm labourers’ wages, ll Is. per
week, or 30?. to 36?. per annum, with board and lodging ; and
40?, to 60?,, with food and lodging, for superior servants.
At Nelson (p. 162), mechanics earn 45., labourers 3#, 6d,,
a day. These parties (see Fox’s Report, p. 18), for the most
part) lire on their own land, and only labour occasionally;
at harvest time, labour is very much higher.
If we turn from Mr. Earp’s Hand-Book to his New Zea-
land Journal, from a leading article of the Ist October last,
we learn that “ Communications from Otago all agree in
the want of agricultural labour, the little that was supplied
at the outset of the colony having been absorbed.” The editor
modestly suggests that “ the Home Government should send
a few ship-loads of agricultural emigrants to New Zealand,
and distribute them at each settlement”—a suggestion which,
translated into plain English, means, the English govern-
ment shall do that at its own expense which the New Zea-
land and Otago Companies have received 80s. an acre for
doing, but have not done. Such being the case, to ordinary
understandings it would seem the 30#. an acre might much
better have remained In the hands of hardworking land
purchasers.
If John Smith and Tom Brown, plain farmers, with large
families, buy a few acres of land on the strength of Mr,
Earp’s advice, they will find no labourers to be had under
1?. Is, a week, and they may see the result of their 30s. an
acre marching off in the shape of shepherds to flocks on
land rented atl(?.an acre by the Hon. Peter Pigjobber. They
will not be a wit better off for ploughmen and reapers than
if they had settled on cheap land in Wisconsin or Illinois.
In truth, the Sufficient Price system is merely another
version of—
“ Good people, give your money at the door,
And. if I like, I ’ll give it to the poor,”
The more we examine the Nev: Zealand Journal the more
we are struck by the unconscious candour with which the
editor supplies with his scissors materials for contradicting
the productions of his 'pen, or vice vemi. His paragraphs


contradict Ms leaders—-his leaders contradict his paragraphs.
One instance is afforded in the contrast between the passage
last q uoted and the speech reported on the Ist October, in
which a promoter of Otago Colonization, following Mr, Barp’a
footsteps, excuses the price of the land. Indeed Mr, Joseph
Jenkins, in the “ Vicar of Wakefield,” was not more pat
with his “Cosmogony of the World,” than the Wakefield
School in their parrot-like declamation on capital, concen-
tration, and labour.
On the Bth September, the New Zealand Journal's pen in-
forms ns that “New South Wales has only one export—wool;
and, from the arid nature of the soil, can have no other
while the scissors , with a female spirit of contradiction, gives
the following extract from Anning and Cobb's Colonial Cir-
cular Throughout the month, we have experienced a
lively demand for New South, Wales Aides for exportation,
and the whole brought forward, comprising 4521 hides, sold
readily at an advance of one-eighth per lb. * * New South
Wales leather has also been more in request for export, and
an advance of one-fourth per lb, has been realised, * *
Notwithstanding the large stock of foreign tallov; on hand,
and the expectation of a further increase, there has been a
fair amount of business transacted in New South Wales
tallow Then follow quotations of the price of New South
Wales cured mutton and beef \ running; from 30s. to 395. per
cwt*
We need not pursue the question further. We have
shown pretty clearly how little dependence is to be placed
on the facts, the figures, the prophecies, the promises, and
the assumptions issued under the patronage of the New
Zealand Company.
Comparisons between New South Wales and New Zealand
are absurd. It is Lancashire to the Isle- of Wight, The
rivalry is between two systems. The absentee monopolisers
of New Zealand are the advocates of dear land. They desire
to make New Zealand a model colony, for the reception of
noble and gentle emigrants : all their sympathies are for
capital—-all their endeavours are to protect their own invest-
ments and the funds of gentlemen of quality from the en-
croachments of labour.
In New South Wales, by the intrigues of these same
“ Speculating Theorists,” the price of land was raised to
* See the Resources of Australia, in No. 6.


fson4f!£ price” ’Tbe class of emigrants who have lately
proceedEecl there are not of the stuff to remain serfs to
squatters, A movement h going on, which will open the
land to the purchase of small settlers, by reducing the size
■of lots and price of land. Is Auckland, in the north of New
Zealand, the same feeling is entertained; in Otago the
settlers complain that land is too dear.
The libels on New South Wales, and the fictions in favour
of the high-priced system, all originate in fears lest New
South Wales should return to common-sense principles of
colonization, when, even with the advantage of the beautiful
climate and romantic scenery of New Zealand, paper calcu-
lations and fine-drawn arguments would be found powerless
to attract capitalists or retain labourers, unless the whole-
some example were followed, and then, for cottier farmers,
.New Zealand would have no rival in the world.
New Zealand is the battle-field of protection to colonial
capital. We think Capital has chances enough and land
enough in the Old 'World ; and would render our colonies, if
we could, caves of Adullam, where the distressed and in-
debted, uniting, might lay the foundations of kingdoms as
great as King .'David’s.
Wheat. —In 1817 the exportation rose to 169,490 bushels,
valued at 4s. 7d. per bushel, and the cultivation increased to 86,440
acres, of which 25,920 were under wheat. In the first half of the
year 1848, the exportation amounted to 106,088 bushels, valued at
4s, s d. per bushel. There is an estimate of the wheat crops of South
Australia, for the years 1842 3-4, in Mr. Collison’s “South Australia
in 1844-5,” in which the produce is calculated at only 15 bushels to
the acre; the quantity required for home consumption is calculated at
8 bushels per head ..of the population; and for seed at 2 bushels per
acre, the remainder being considered the surplus for exportation. Low
as this estimate is of the average produce of wheat land in this colony,
it seems to have been pretty correct for the time it was made, for
when wheat was selling at 2s. a bushel, much of it was allowed to
waste; but the quantity of wheat and flour exported since June, 1845,
proves that the average produce gathered in has been above 15 bushels
per acre, allowing the above rate for home consumption—and this,
notwithstanding much was lost on the ground last year, by not having
been reaped at the proper time,- — South, Australian Almanack.
Goer o» (Jotbrsmxns. —The civil and judicial departments in
South Australia cost nearly 80s, ahead; in New Brunswick, 2s. (id,;
ia Prince Edward's Island, 9s,


A SKETCH OF THE COLONIAL LIFE
OF
MRS. CHISHOLM.
In February, 1846, a committee was formed in Sydney for the
purpose of presenting to Mrs. Chisholm, then on the eve of
departing for England, a testimonial of the estimation in
which her services on behalf of the emigrant population
were held by the colonists.
Among the committee were eight members of the Legis-
lative Council, the mayor of Sydney, and other leading
magistrates and merchants, without distinction of politics
or religion.
In a very short time 160 guineas were raised, and pre-
sented to her with the following address; —.
“We, the undersigned members of council, magistrates,
landholders, merchants, and others, inhabitants of New
South Wales, beg to offer you, on the occasion of jour de-
parture from this colony, the expression of our thanks for
your active and zealous exertions on behalf of the emigran t
population during the last seven years.
“We feel assured that the extraordinary efforts which you
have made have been dictated by a spirit of the most en-
lightened benevolence. In the establishment of an .Emigrants
Home in Sydney, and in procuring the ad vantageous settle-
ment of great numbers of the emigrant population in the
interior, as servants, and occupants of small farms, your exer-
tions have proved of signal advantage to the community,
“In. the large collection of statistical facts and ‘voluntary
information ’ which you have derived from the labouring
classes, you have accumulated materials for establishing
the great advantages which. New South Wales possesses as
a favourable field for the emigration of British Settlers,”
Mrs. Chisholm accepted the testimonial, in order to expend
it in further promoting emigration, in restoring wives to
husbands, and children to parents. In the course of her
answer, she said “It is my intention, if supported- bp pour
cooperation , to attempt more, than I have hith&rto perfo-roied.”
All who have marked Mrs. Chisholm's course since her arri-
val in England—all who have been engaged within the circle
of her influence in relieving distress and promo ting emigra


tioa—know that this pledge has been amply redeemed ; but
although blessed and prayed for in almost every emigrant
ship bound for the southern seas, there are yet many who,
if knowing her past life, would be ready to follow in the
footsteps of her sagacious philanthropy, but who, not know-
ing of it, enquire “ Who is Mrs. Chisholm
We will answer the question with a simple relation of
facts and dates.
Mrs. Chisholm, the wife of Captain A. Chisholm, late of
the Madras army, passed some years in India, where she first-
began her works of active and practical charity. At the
presidency of Madras, she established a “ School of Industry,”
or boarding-house, with the view of withdrawing from the
contaminations of the barracks the daughters of poor
soldiers. Her system worked so well, that several of the
soldiers became anxious to place their young inexperienced
wives under her control for some months, in order to learn
domestic economy and other useful knowledge. The then
chief secretary, Mr. Chamier, took an active part in for-
warding this good work ; Sir Frederick Adams, the governor,
subscribed 20L, and in five days 2000 rupees were raised by
a few gentlemen, in order to carry out Mrs, Chisholm’s plan.
Bhs thus laid the foundation of what is now an extensive
orphanage. We Slave referred to this portion of her labours
because we have heard that it is her intention to establish
a colonial training school in this country upon similar prin-
ciples.
■ In 1838, for the benefit of Captain Chisholm’s health, she
left India, with her infant family, and visited the more
favourable climates of South Australia and Van Diemen’s
Land.
She lauded at Sydney towards the close of that year. In
January, 1840, Captain Chisholm had to leave her to join
his regiment in India, not, however, before, in the first in-
stance, she had begun her labours by relieving some desti-
tute Highland emigrants, helpless and unable to speak
English, by lending them money to buy tools and wheel-
barrows, in order to cut and sell firewood. Thus she went
on for a time, gaining the confidence of the working classes.
In 1841 she appealed to the Governor, Sir George Gipps,
and to the clergy and gentry of Sydney, on behalf of the
young single girls who were being imported under the
bounty system. The evils she attempted to remedy, and the
means she adopted for that purpose, are described by her in


the following evidence before a committee of the House of
Lords in 1847. The whole evidence illustrates, in a most
striking manner, the state of the colony, as well as the
personal character of the witness*.
u When the Bounty System was going on (1S41), there
were neither sufficient arrangements made for removing
emigrants into the interior, nor for protecting females on
their arrival. A few only were properly protected, while
hundreds were wandering about Sydney without friends or
protection,—great numbers of these young creatures were
thrown out of employment by new arrivals. I received many
into the Home, who, I found, had slept out for nights in the
government domain, —seeking the sheltered recesses of the
rocks rather than encounter the danger of the streets. It
was estimated that there were 600 females at the time I
commenced. I made an offer to the government of gratui-
tously devoting my time to the superintendence of a Homs
of Protection for them in the town to protect them for a
time, and also to exert myself to procure situations for them
in the country,”
Sir George Gipps, the governor, looked on the plan with
doubt and suspicion. He thought Mrs. Chisholm was some
wild enthusiast, and paid the least possible attention to her
letters. The newspapers, wondering, doubting, and hesi-
tating, discussed the proposition. The extreme Protestant
* i! My first attempt at colonization was carried on in a wash-hand
basin, before I was six years old, I made boats of broad beans, ex-
pended all my money in touchwood dolls—removed families—located
them in the bed-quilt, and sent the boats, filled with wheat, back to
their friends, of which I kept a store, in a thimble-case. At length
I upset the basin, which I judged to be a fac-simile of the sea, spoilt
a new bed, got punished, and afterwards carried out my plan in a
dark cellar, with a rushlight stuck upon a tin-kettle; and, strange as
it may seem, many of the ideas which I have since carried out, first
gained possession of my mind at that period ; and, singular as it may
appear, I had a Wesleyan minister and a Catholic priest in the same
boat. Two of my dolls were very refractory, and would not be
obedient; this made me name them after two persons T. knew who
were constantly quarrelling, and I spent hours in listening to their
supposed debates, to try and find out how I could manage them ; at
length I put the two into a boat, and told them if they were not
careful they would be drowned; and having landed them alive, I
knelt down to pray to God to make them love each other,” -.Extract
from a letter to a friend in Sydney.


part?, finding that Mrs. Chisholm was a Roman Catholic,
suspected a <? Popish Plot,” and raised a formidable opposi-
tioTi, while certain influential Roman, Catholics, as soon as
they found that Mrs, Chisholm determined to work for all
andt through all, -without distinction of, or interference with,
religions opinions, withdrew their subscriptions, and threw
every possible obstacle in her way. One of the ecclesiastical
dignitaries of that church addressed a letter to a Sydney
paper, in which he described her as “ a lady labouring under
amiable delusions.” The higher classes, strangers to Mrs.
Chisholm —the poor knew her well—concluded, from this
description, that the projector of au “Emigrant’s Home”
was a~“ Lunatic.” Bet ween Protestant suspicion and Roman
Catholic opposition, her path was no easy one. She says, in
a pamphlet*, published in Sydney,—
“ I wrote in January, 1841, to lady Gipps, and from that
time newer ceased my exertions, I knew that every ship’s
arrival would increase the necessity of such an institution,
I prepared my plan ; for three weeks I hesitated :as a
woman, and almost a stranger in the colony, I naturally felt
deficient, I was impressed with the idea that God had in a
peculiar manner fitted me for this work, and yet I hesitated,,
•if «■ *■ I did all I could to aid young women who applied
to me but the number increased, and I saw that my plan,
if carried into effect, would serve all. On Easter Sunday,.
I was enabled, at the altar of our Lord, to make an offering
of ray talents to the God who gave them,-—/ promised to
hio'w neither country nor creed\ but to try md serve all impart
tiolly.
a Things were wearing a most favourable aspect when
even some of my first promised supporters withdrew their
pledges. It is a remarkable fact, that at the very time the
Protestants were afraid of my Popish Plot, several of the
leading Catholics had withdrawn their support. I could
have done without help, but this continued opposition
wearied me. Two gentlemen, one a Roman Catholic clergy-
man, called on me, and begged me to give it up.
“ From the hand of a friend came a missile of great strength.
I felt it deeply—no other person in the colony could have
thrown more serious obstacles in my path,”
At the moment when, wearied in body and mind,. Mrs.
Chisholm was about to seek rest at her cottage at Paramatta*
* " Female Emigration Considered.”


she was nailed to her self-imposed duties in Sydney, and
driven on to persevere in her Home for the destitute, by
meeting a “ frail beauty,” a Highland girl, whom she had
known in all the bloom of virtue, fresh from her native hills,
but then a wretched creature, bent on suicide, Mrs.
Chisholm, first by dogged resolution, then, by pitying,,
heaven-breathing words, saved her. Here is the picture—
“ I was determined to overtake her,
I laid my hand on her arm, and the wreck of the High-
land beauty stood before me,
«'• Tell me where you are going ? ’
‘“To hell !’
“ I continued to walk by her side : she became insolent;
but I was determined not to leave her.
***** ****
“ I did not leave the place until, with subdued feelings,
I heard her vow not to attempt self-destruction. I procured
her lodgings,.
“My spirits returned. I felt Clod’s blessing was on every
work. From this time I never thought of human, help. I
neglected no steps to conciliate ; I increased my exertions ;.
but from the hour I was on the beach with Flora, fear left
me.”
In the mean time, the governor was piqued into granting
as. interview with the “ Lady labouring mider amiable
dons” A philanthropic lunatic was a rarity, perhaps an ex-
citement.
“ I expected,” said Sir George Gipps, when relating the
story to an English friend, “ to have seen an old lady in
white cap and spectacles, who would have talked to me
about my soul. I was amazed when my aide introduced a
handsome stately young woman, who proceeded to reason
the question, as if she thought her reason, and experience,,
too, worth as much as mine.”
At one of these interviews, after Mrs. Chisholm had ex-
plained what she wished and intended to effect by her
Emigrants’ Home, Sir George remarked, “I believe you
have overrated the powers of your own mind, and believing
so, and also in your disinterested views, I think it right to
tell you so.” But the stubbornness of facts triumphed, and
Sir George Gipps, long afterwards, observed in council—“ I
cannot give a stronger evidence of the economy of the
people working for themselves, than by referring to what
has been done by Mrs. Chisholm, and I am glad of this op


rr-rbrnit" <rf dosn<' justice to that lady’s exertions, and do
fc'-sA much «-realer and satisfaction, from having
at thecommsnceinent of her labours thrown cold water upon
at len S tb ’ on receivin S’ a written guaranies
against the' government being put to any expense, granted
tV use of a government building. It consisted of a low
vmodon erection. The room appropriated to her own occu-
pation was not more than seven feet square, without a fire-
place, She was compelled, whenever she required a cup of
*ea to send for water to a public boiler, in which hundreds
of kettles had been dipped. At length a prisoner, engaged
in the" Government printing office, brought her a kettle of
boiling water every morning.
In the work already quoted, we find; —“ At length consent
was given that I should take possession of part of the immi-
grants’ barrack. On closing the door, I reflected on what I
had been, compelled to endure for fourteen feet square ;my
first feelings were those of indignation that such a trifle should
have been so long withheld; but better feelings followed. I
determined on trusting to Providence to increase its size, and
prove my usefulness. I soon observed, to do any good, I
must sleep on the premises ; and, as soon as Mr. Mere wether
was aware of my determination, he gave me the best room
then vacant. I cannot say vacant, for it was used as a store-
room ; this was cleared for my accommodation ; and having
been busy all day, I retired wearied to rest. But I was put
to the proof at starting ; scarce was the light out, when I
fancied a few dogs must be in the room, and, in some terror,
I got a light; what I experienced on seeing rats in all di-
rections, I cannot explain. My first act was to throw on
a cloak, and get at the door with the intent to leave the
building ; I knew if I did this my desertion would cause
much amusement, and ruin my plan ; I therefore lighted a
second candle, and seating myself on the bed, kept there
until three rats, descending from the roof, alighted, on my
shoulders. I knew that I was getting into a fever; in fact,
that I should be very ill before morning; but to be out-
voce railed by rats was too much. I got up with some reso-
lution ; I had two loaves and some butter (for my office,
bed-room, and pantry, were one) ; I cut it into slices, placed
the whole in the middle of the room, put a dish of water
convenient, and. with a light by my side, I kept my seat on
the bed, reading ‘Abercrombie,’ and watching the rats until


fouf in the morning: I at one time counted thirteen and
never less than seven did I observe at the disk during the
night. The following night I gave them a similar treat
wiih the addition of arsenic : and thus passed my four first
nights at the Home.
“My plan was to have apartments near the office for my
children, but this did not answer—at night I must m the
Home. I gave up one child, although I could .keep two
mth me ; but I found the elder a source of m much
that I consented, to part with him, I know, under the
honest care of Miss Halvin, of Windsor, they would be well
fed, and kindly treated, and I could still keep one my
youngest. Some sickness among the children in thelwuts
told me plainly my duty, still I would not, could not give
him up. A lady, whose esteem I value, told me I could not
must not, risk my child’s life ; that 'l must give np my
Home, or my selfish feeling for my child; I was aware of
the truth, of the observation, but refused. us wag
usual with me I saw the girls, after they retired to rest.
.Wmety-four were in that dwelling. I asked if they had any
place to go to if I turned them out ; not one had a place of
shelter, On mj return to the office, I found a poor woman
waiting for a white gown, to make her dead bairn decent. I
went into my room, packed up my little fellow’s wardrobe
and the next day he was at Windsor, This was the last
sacrifice it was God’s will to demand.
“After obtaining possession of the building*, which I
named the ‘Female Emigrant’s Home,’ I appealed to the
public for support; after a time, this appeal was liberally
met. The Home becoming crowded, the majority of the
inmates being most fit for rough country work, I proceeded
into the interior to form committees, and to establish country
Homes, taking, in some _ cases, parties of females with me.
When I commenced taking them up the country, I had to
meet, in the first instance, their travelling expenses, which
were afterwardsjefunded. The inhabitants of the district
cheerfully supplied them with food. The committees afforded
them protection and advice. * * * J took them to
Campbell Town, Maitland, Liverpool, Paramatta, Ooss
Roads, and Port Macquarie. _ The first parties of young
women varied from fifteen to sixty in number. I went from
farm to farm, getting them places in service, I disposed of
* Evidence, Committee on Irish Coioaization—Lords, 1 SdT<
HE W SERIES—HO. T,
x


the first venture almost immediately. I then returned to
Sydney, after having made arrangements for the establish-
ment of country depdts. [ also got married families to pro-
mise shelter and protection to such young females as might
require it. _
“ At the time labourers were required in the interior
there was an excess in Sydney, supported at Government
expense. I undertook journeys of 300 miles into the in-
terior with, families ; the further I went the more satisfac-
tory was my settlement,
« When the public had had an opportunity of judging of
the effect of my system, they came forward and enabled mo
to go on. The Government contributed, in various ways, to
the*amount of about 100/. I met with great assistance from
the country committees. The squatters and settlers were
always willing to give me conveyance for the people. _ The
country people always supplied provisions. Mr. William
Bradley, a native of the colony, authorized me to draw
upon him for money, provisions, horses, or anything I might
require. The people met my efforts so readily that X had
no necessity to draw upon him for a sixpence. At public
inns the females were sheltered, and I was provisioned
myself without charge; my personal expanses during my
seven years’ service amounted to only \L IBs. 6d.
“ ffumbers of the masters were afraid, if they advanced
the money for their conveyance by the steamers, they
would never reach the stations. I met this difficulty—-
advanced the money, confiding in the good feeling of the
man that he would keep to his agreement, and to the prin-
ciple of the master that he would repay me. Although in
hundreds of cases the masters were then strangers to me, I
only lost 1&. by casualties. Borne nights I have paid as
much as 40/. for steamers and land conveyance. <■
« From first to last 1 have been the means of settling
11,000 souls. The largest number that ever left Sydney
under my charge, at one time, was 147, but trom accessions
on the road they increased considerably. The longest
journey would be five weeks; three weeks passed on the
road.
“ I established an office in Sydney where all persons that
required service used to attend in the morning, from ten till
four. My object was always to get one placed. Having
succeeded in getting ores female servant in a neighbourhood,
I used to leave the feeling to spread. With some persua


doB, I induced a man to take a servant, who said that it
would be making a fine lady of his wife. The following
morning a neighbouring settler said, ‘ You are quite
setting 1 the settlement, Mrs. Chisholm ; mj wife is uncom-
monly cross this morning', and she says she must have a
servant, and I think she has as much right to one.’ It was
among this class that the girls married best. If they
married one of the sons, the father and mother would be
thankful; if not, they would be protected as members of
the family. They slept in the same room with their own
daughters. I have been able to learn the subsequent pro-
gress in life of many hundreds of these emigrants. Girls
that I have taken up the country, in such a destitute state
that I have been obliged to get a decent dress to put upon
them, have come again, having every comfort about them,
and wanting servants. They are constantly writing home
to get out their friends and relatives.
u I should not feel the interest I do in female emigration,
if I did not look, beyond providing families with female
servants— if 1 did not know how much they are recurred as
wives, and how much moral good they may do as wives.
When I saw his Excellency regarding the establishment
of ‘The Home/ I observed that there were many hundred
snore females in Sydney than were registered, and that if
they were protected on their arrival, and sent into the inte-
rior, in six months, many would be married. His Excellency
exclaimed with some astonishment. 4 Am I to find the settlers
wives * ? ’
* Yms, Vith December, 1844.
Dear Madam, —Matrimonial engagements, at all times, require
and demand mature deliberation, and should not heedlessly and
thoughtlessly be entered upon, even with a prior knowledge of the
party —how much more then does it call for when coupled with a
perfect ignorance of the person and qualifications of your future com-
panion through life. Such then is the present case, and I hesitate
not, with the most perfect confidence, and a firm reliance on your ex-
perience and discriminating judgment, to throw my fate ia your hands,
and entreat your kind offices in the obtaining for me a suitable com-
panion for life, in other and plainer words—“a wife,” With re-
ference to my character, position, and prospects, I respectfully beg
leave to refer you to Mrs. H , to whom I have the honour of
being known, and I trust they will prove satisfactory. If, dear 1
Madam, you will be pleased so far to oblige me, I doubt not my hap-
piness will be accomplished, as there must be many worthy young
x 2


Tiie following circular will give an idea of the 'business-
like style in which Mrs, Chisholm went to work: —
“ Jamieson Street, Sydney , October 21 st, 1841,
“ Sir—l am endeavouring to establish a ‘ Home for Femals
Immigrants,’ and have little doubt but funds will soon be raised to
enable me to accomplish this; and, as my first object is to facilitate
their obtaining employment in the country, I shall feel obliged if you.
will favour my intention (should you approve of the same) by giving
me the information I require regarding your district; and any sug-
gestion you may think useful will he considered a favour.
“ Ist. Whether girls who at home have merely been accustomed to
milk cows, wash, and the common household work about a farm,
would readily get places] at what wages] and how many do you
think would in the course of the next two years be required]
“ 2nd. Good servants, such as housemaids and cooks, the rate of
wages] and the probable number required for the same period]
“ 3rd, Married couples with small families, say two or three chil-
dren, ditto]
“4th, Could employment and protection be found for boys and
girls from seven to fourteen years of age]
“ sth. Have you had opportunities of observing if the young women
can save any part of their wages] for they are generally of opinion
that nothing can be saved in the country, every article of wearing
apparel being so much dearer than in town,
“ 6th, What would be the cheapest and best way of conveying
the young women to your district]
“ I have to observe that the servants will be classed according to,,
their qualifications, and distributed fairly, so that those who are
absent will have an equal chance of getting a good servant with those
who are present. Subscribers of one pound will have servants selected
and sent to them without any trouble; it will, however, be necessary
that an order should be sent to cover the expense of their conveyance,
“ I require, by donations, to raise what will furnish a house; and,
by subscriptions, I expect to support the institution, lam of opinion
women in Sydney, in every way qualified to render connubial ties
■what it is intended to he—a perfect blessing. The kind of person I
•would most desire would be a young woman, between the years of 25
and 35, English, clean in person, neat in habit, mild in manners, and
an accomplished needlewoman, my late wife being a most excellent
sempstress. With renewed apologies, and a request that yon will
favour me with an answer, I am, dear Madam, your most obedient
servant, * <
Endorsement —Managed to send a clergyman's sister, as needle*
woman, to Mrs. H—, This arrangement terminated satisfactorily.
a c.


that, when families in the interior can get servants sent them, we shall
not hear of young women suffering distress and losing character for
the want of a situation. I shall feel obliged if you will favour me
with a reply by the 10th of November next.
i( I have taken the liberty to annex a subscription list, and I shall
feel obliged if you would leave it in the hands of some person to re-
ceive subscriptions, and acquaint me with the name, that it may ap-
pear in the papers.”
It was in reply to one of these circulars, that the Rev,
Henry Styles, of Windsor, wrote : “ I fully" appreciate the
zeal and charity in your endeavours to establish the ‘ Home
for Female Immigrants.’ My only reason for declining to
cooperate in a design which at the first view appears so
entirely laudable, is that it is natural to suppose that an
institution established by a lady who is a devoted member
of that part of the Catholic Church which renders allegiance
to Rome, should prove rather an instrument for augment-
ing the number of the members of that communion, than
merely what its name imports—a home for ail destitute
female immigrants, without respect to their religious pro-
fessions. The result would be that the immigrants in your
home would be advised , restrained , and protected by the
clergy of the Church of Rome,” While thus expressing
himself, the reverend gentleman replied minutely to all the
questions in the circular.
Mrs. Chisholm’s answer to this plain, and proper question
produced a second letter from Mr. Styles, in which he said ;
“ Your frank and straightforward avowal of the objects you
aim at, and the means you will use for the attainment of
those objects, disarm suspicion. The assurance in your
note that you will not follow or be led by the agents of an
ecclesiastical party, but that you will pursue steadily the
good of the whole of the emigrants who may come under
your care, referring in matters of religion to their respective
clergy and teachers, induces me to offer you very cordially
whatever support I am able to afford, I beg to inclose 2 L
as a donation.”
We have given space to this correspondence because it
answers a question with respect to Mrs. Chisholm’s colo-
nizing career not unfrequently asked by conscientious Pro-
testants.
By Mrs. Chisholm’s exertions, the captain and surgeon of
an emigrant ship were prosecuted and convicted for assaults
on a female passenger, and an important precedent was


established for the treatment of free emigrants. Facts col-
lecied and given in evidence by her put an end to the abuses
of the bounty system.
In 1842 we find in one of the Sydney Journals: “Mrs.
Chisholm, the undaunted and enterprising bush pioneer,
writes: £ I wish you would use your interest to try and
borrow a horse and covered cart for me. I require the cart
to sleep in at night and carry little children by day; I have
a saddle-horse for my own use. I have now' provided for
seventy families; the weather is, however, very changeable,
and I require a covered cart to enable me to continue my
exertions,’ ”
It was during one of these journeys that a gentleman tra-
velling came up to a party of emigrants camped on the side
of a swampy ford. He found Mrs. Chisholm employed in
effecting the passage of the women and children ; she made
her docile horse cross alone with two children at a time,
slung across his back hammock-like, encouraging him with
her voice each time until all were safely landed. She had
previously ridden thirty miles in search of employment for
the parties.
Arriving on a location and finding the surveyor’s work in-
complete, she at once took the chain in hand and divided
off the plots as well, for ail practical purposes, as if she had
been bred to the business.
At another time she writes, “When, we landed from the
steamer and entered into the bush, we found there was no
water. I had thirty women and children in the party, all
tired, hungry, and thirsty, the children crying. Without
saying a word, I sent one of my old botshmen off on horse-
back three miles to get enough of milk or water for the
children. In the meantime, some of the immigrants came
up and said, in a discontented tone, £ Mrs. Ohisholm, this is
a pretty job, what must we do ? there is no water.’ I knew
it would not do for them to be idle; anything was better
than that in their frame of mind ; so partly Judging from
the locality, I said to them without hesitation, £ If you will
dig here, I think you will find water,’ Directing the tools
to be got out, they immediately set to work, and by a good
Providence, they had not dug many feet when they came
to water. This had such an exhilarating effect upon their
spirits, that they instantly threw off their coats, began to
dig two other fresh holes, and did not leave off till moon-


On one of her first journeys she was met by a discon-
tented party of emancipists, shepherds and shearers of the
district, who said, “we believe you are a very good sort of
«, person, Mrs. Chisholm, and have great respect for you ;
but we cannot allow emigrants here to lower our wages.”
Her answer was, “ I hear yon want wives, is that true ?”
The reply was a universal “ Yes.” “ Then don’t you see
I can’t send single girls into a district where there are only
bachelors. Let me fix a few married families down on the
different stations, and I will send to them decent single lasses
that you can marry.”
This settled the question: a government officer on the
same errand would have been mobbed, Mrs. Chisholm
brought about marriages exactly in the way stated.
Although she received hundreds of applications for wives,
she would not make matches ; but she placed single girls as
servants with families, in districts where wives were most
wanted*.
* When travelling with a large party of emigrants—as Mrs,
Chisholm entirely depended upon the settlers for food for her party —
while they were sleeping in camp, she was to he seen at the dim
break of day in her gig, driven by a prisoner from Hyde Park Bar-
racks, going about to collect from the settlers food for their breakfast.
On one occasion, just as she came to a solitary part of the road, near
a valley, she was greeted with a bushranger’s salutation. A stout,
rough bushman, clearing a few bushes at a leap, held out his hand to
the horse’s head, and said, “ Stop, stop ! Are you Mrs. Chisholm f'
e - Yes ; what do you want!” “ Want—want—why, what every man
wants when he sees Mrs. Chisholm. Come now, do look up that hill,
and see that nice cottage and 40 acres under crop ; and I have in it
20 haras and flitches of bacon, and a chest of tea and a bag of sugar ;
the land is paid for, and the three cows ! Oh, it would do you good
to see the cowsand then pulling out a roll of papers, said, “ Bee,
what a character 1 have got from the magistrates in charge of the
district ; and look here, ma’m, at this roll of notes-—-these are the
things to hasten the matter and get over difficulties with the clergy-
man—come now, Mrs, Chisholm, do be a mother to me, and give
me a wife; the smile of a woman has never welcomed me home after
a hard day’s work-—you’ll have pity on me—you don 't mean to say
no; you’ll never be so cruel as to say no. It makes a xuan’s heart
light to look at your camp. Now, you don't mean, to say you have
not got a nice girl from Tipperary. Never mind the breakfast;
I could sleep the whole party for a week ; and what a peace of mind
it would he to you to know what a kind husband 1 should stake one
of your girls.”— CowmmdccUed.


la 1843 there was a good deal of distress in Sydney. The
effects of over-speculation, and of the Wakefield system,
which prevented small capitalists from getting on the land,
were beginning to be felt. A Committee of the Legislative
Council was appointed to consider a petition from tbs
distressed mechanics and labourers, sent in by Mrs. Chis-
holm in the following terms :
Mrs. Chisholm was examined as a witness before this
committee. “ I think it practicable to dispose of a consider-
able number of the unemployed up the country, on clearing
leases, or as servants. For 1000?., I think the whole distress
might be relieved. They might be removed to where they
could obtain a living; hut every day’s delay adds to the
difficulty, and will increase the expense. Already 2500?.
has been paid by those who are employed by Government.
I would rather not give information as to the number of
the unemployed, for I think the statements that have
already appeared will injure the colony, and that the dis-
tress, if promptly met, will soon be removed. There are
several trades mentioned in ‘the list ’ that are not required,
and therefore the mechanics of those trades must be in
distress. For instance, during the last three months I
have had only two applications for shoemakers, for tailors
only four. The number stated here as being unemployed
is forty-seven. About twenty month since, forty tailors
came to me who were out of employ. The flockmasters
refused to take them as shepherds: with a great deal of
trouble, I scattered them through different parts of the
country, as domestic servants, and in other capacities;
and it is remarkable that nearly all those who were
thus scattered have been able to find work at their own
trade; so that I think if tradesmen were distributed in
small parties, many of them would meet with employ-
ment at their own trades. With respect to tradesmen and
labourers who have 'large families , Ido not think any thing
is so desirable for them, as to obtain a piece of land , There is
no way in which they could provide for their families so
well.
“My first arrangement would be, to select from fifty families
one man who was a good Judge of laud, and one of the
women, as the women would require to know what kind of
place they were going to ; whether the children would be
comfortable, and whether the native dogs would bite or
run away with them. I should also require two or three


good bush hands (prisoners) from Hy de-Park Barracks; with
these I should proceed to the land, and as soon as I arrived
upon it I would set the men to work upon, the land to dear
half an acre, in order that the people might see what could
be done within a given time. The advantage to gentlemen
who will come forward and lease land for the purpose, on
liberal terms, will be, that their land will be improved and
yield them a return for their capital. They icill also have
the advantage of a respectable tenantry, which will, on an
emergency , place at the landlord's disposal a considerable
amount of valuable labour *.
“ There must be some assistance to commence. In the
first place, there must be tents provided until, some sub-
stantial dwellings can be erected ; then, in laud, one allot-
ment shall be set apart, which must be first cleared and
cultivated, to provide a supply of food for the whole com-
munity ; and then the land must be divided and appor-
tioned to the different families.
“ I have worked this plan on a small scale for the last
three years: where there has been a large family, the
eldest girl has in some instances gone to service, and given
up a portion of her earnings to her family to support them.
Upwards of 100 families have thus received relief from
their relations.
“I should limit them to from ten to twenty acres: in many
instances, the settlers referred to have only ten ; they have
cleared about one half the land on which they are located;
it takes some time to clear it. I should require ten or
fifteen years’ lease : where a man takes a seven years’ lease
he works for the landed proprietor, not for himself, I do net
ezpect them to pay more than nominal rent for the first
three years.”
It was asked by the committee—“Do you expect this
committee or the government to have confidence in you. to
place 10001'. at your disposal 1 ” Mrs, C.—“ Ido not: all I
ask is, if you approve the plan, let me work it out my own
* Oaf tain Dumaresque. — ! ‘l think Mrs, Chisholm overrates the ad«
vantage ; during the harvest, my tenants have never shown a diaposx*
tion to assist; on the contrary, my superintendent writes, they were ran
willing to render any assistance.” Mrs. Chisholm—■ “May Ibe allowed
to ask. Captain Dumaresque,—.Did yoar assistant say, f lf you will
lend me a hand in getting in my crops, I will lead a hand in getting
in yours]”' Captain D, —" I cannot-say*”


wav. I should like Mr. Merewether (the Colonial Emigra-
tion Agent) to act as treasurer, a.nd a committee of two
gentlemen to examine and control the expenditure.
« Mine is not a plan of to-day ; the working it out will
cost me much trouble and responsibility. At the same time,
I am certain the people will work with me—the distress will
be removed; and those persons who are now suffering in
Sydney will, if my plan is carried out, within three years
become the employers of labour,”
One of the Committee—" I am. afraid we should find that
these people, becoming employers of labour, would do us &
mischief.” Mrs. G. —“ Ido not think so ; but rather that
you would be able to obtain a most valuable description, of
labourers ; for their children would be brought up with in-
dustrious frugal habits ; and this class of persons generally
prefer, when their children have arrived at a proper age, to
send them as servants to respectable families, with the view
of their gaining some knowledge of the world, and they
engage servants in their stead.”
In evidence, when before this same committee, there is a
statement by Mr, Merewether, which is extremely curious,
as exhibiting the manner in which official personages take
to themselves the merit of successful plans executed in spite
of their opposition. He says, (( 1 do not think a better plan
could be adopted than that one pursued about the end of
the year 1841 and beginning of 1.842, during a great influx
of emigrants. Advantage was taken, of return drays, by
means of which they were removed, in small numbers at
a time, and at a very moderate expense, into the inland
districts. To districts on the coast they were sent by
steamers, and were in the first instance committed to the
care of the police magistrates, and subsequently received
into ‘ Homes/ specially provided for the purpose, and sup-
ported partly at the expense of the districts, and partly %
contributions from thjs government.”
Who would imagine, from the official evidence, that these
Homes had been established, and the emigrants distributed
from the arrangements,by the personal labour, and 'pecuniary
risk of a Mrs, Chisholm, and that the only assistance from
government was a tardy contribution of 50/,, or about one-
tenth of the iota! expenses 1
The committee, in their report, “ desire to record their
grateful sense of ike valuable services of a lady, to whose
benevolent exertions on behalf of the unemployed, as well


as free _ immigrants of the humbler classes generally, this
colony is under the highest obligations— Mrs. Ghuholm—
whose name is so well known in the colony for her- disin-
terested benevolence. ’■ The report, from which this pas-
sage is extracted, is signed bvtlm chairman. John Daaxaoxe
Lang, D.D.* ' '
Before a similar committee, appointed August, 1844, Mrs.
Chisholm stated that, considering the many difficulties en-
countered, the parties settled on land the previous year had
succeeded remarkably well. There had been some "failures.
She said, “ I have satisfied myself that the people were
industrious, and could subsist upon the land ; and thous'h I
believe a gentleman would lose a large fortune, if he were
to commence as a farmer, yet, where the family are all
workers, an industrious man with a family cannot do better.
The great difficulty with me has been that I have never had
an opportunity of putting a sufficient number of people
together, with a complete set of garden and farm imple-
ments among them ; where there are only a few they have
no team, no set of tools, and there is a constant struggle for
two or three years, jet they do succeed.”
Mrs. Chisholm was again examined, in 1845, before the
Committee of the Legislative Council on Emigration!",, and
then made several suggestions on female and other emigra-
tion, and on the colonization of land, which she has since
published in a more matured shape.
After the establishment of “ Homes,” one of her import-
ant works was the collection of the “ Voluntary Information
* The same Dr. Lang, who, having applied for the office of Emi-
gration Agent for Port Philip, at a salary of 1000 b a year, and
having been rejected, has rendered himself notorious by several an-
fortunate and very foolish schemes of colonization,-—See Mdhoun ■«;
Daily News, April 30, 1849 Port Philip Gazette. May 8, 1849
Melbourne Morning Herald , May 12, 1849.
+ “ One person only in the colony has done anything effectual—•
anything on a scale which may be called large—to mitigate this
crying evil and national sin, said to fix families on our lands In ben
of bachelors. And, strange to say, that one is an humble, anure-
tending, quiet-working/mate missionary ! an immigrant missionary
• —not a clerical one ! The singularity of her mission, looking to the
nature of her work, is one of the most original that was ever devised
or undertaken by either man or woman; and the object, the labour,
the design, are all. beyond praise.”— Speech in the Legislative Council,
by Robert Lowe, Esq., late Fellow of Magdalene College, Oxford.


from the People of New South Wales.” This was a collection
of “ Brief Biographies ” of settlers and servants, taken down
in their own words, in answer to a list of printed questions.
The following is an example :—■
Statement of Bernard Kennedy, New South Wales, 1846,
“I am from Stockport, in Cheshire, England. I wish to
have out my wife’s two sisters, their names are Catherine
and Mary Hyndes. The Rev. Thomas Newham, Edgley,
near Stockport, can give every information. They might
have come out with us, and I have never written to them j
for when we first came out here, we were a good deal
knocked about. lam now doing well, have ground of my
own, and a house too. lam receiving 245. per week wages.
I have better prospects here than at home. If the girls
were here they would get 6s. or 7s. a week ; and my advice
is, come. As a token, my sisters were with us all night at
Manchester, and saw us off at four o’clock in the morning.”
In carrying out this plan, Mrs. Chisholm travelled into
the Bush, and collected upwards of 600 biographies, as a fair
example of the position of the working classes. These jour-
neys she accomplished in a covered spring van, travelling
from farm to farm, and from station to station ; one night
sleeping at the wealthy squatter’s residence, the next at the
humble settler’s cottage, welcomed and known to all. She
was accompanied by her husband, who joined her from India
in 1845. In one of her printed letters to the public, she
states, “ the facts in question were collected by me some
months previous to my leaving the colony, by visiting their
farms and homesteads ; sometimes taking down their state-
ments in their own dwellings, sometimes on the road-side,
and sometimes in the ploughed field, having the plough as
my table. I was indeed so well known to the people, who
knew my motives so well—the desire to convey faithful
information to their relatives, friends and countrymen at
home—that they invariably related to me their circum-
stances with the greatest readiness and cheerfulness. I have
in my possession a large mass of these facts, and which
I have named * The Voluntary Information of the People of
New South Walesand they present a fair average of the
condition of the working classes there. My object now in
giving some of them publicity is the desire I have of their
being made the basis for the formation of a General Loan,
Society.”


One small tract, containing a few statements, was pub-
lished in Sydney, and another in London, in 1848 : many
hundreds, of a very interesting description, remain in manu-
script.
She left Australia in 1846, hearing with her the warm
prayers of the working colonists, whose confidence and gra-
titude, both bond and free, she had thoroughly secured,
charged with the self-imposed mission of representing in
England the claim of those powerless classes who have
neither honour nor pensions to bestow on their advocates.
On considering Mrs. Chisholm’s labours during the pe-
riod which has been justly termed the great crisis of the
colonial labour market, we cannot view her position but as
one of a very singular character. Possessing a sort of ma-
ternal influence over the working classes, we find her sur-
rounded with every difficulty, and yet persevering until her
efforts were crowned with success, carrying out suggestions
which she made relative to the orphan children in the
unions.
At that period, 1843 to 1844, we find different party feelings
at work. Government agents were engaged in registering
the number of the unemployed; the Squatters Association,
which was the beginning of Sir George Gipps’s troubles;
and the Mutual Protection Society, formed by the working
classes, were established; and Government works, as a mea-
sure of relief, were forced upon the government; for it was
the aim of a certain class to keep a crowd in Sydney, in
order to trammel the authorities; while, on the part of some
of the masters, there was a great struggle to reduce the
wages to 10?., at the same time that pauper relief was
thrown open to the people.
The distinguishing characteristic of Mrs. Chisholm is
philanthropy extending to all classes and all sects—
directed by a degree of common sense that almost amounts
to genius, united with an energy, a seal, an untiring per-
severance that renders nothing she undertakes impossible.
Her philanthropy is not a mere amusement to be taken
up at odd hours, like a new romance to be laid down as
quickly .as it was taken up—to be satisfied by a distribution
of cheap tracts, or, at most, of cheap superfluous guineas—
by capricious visits to poor cottages, whose misery renders
the change from the luxurious drawing-room a pleasing’ ex-
citement. It is a part of her life—of her daily duty. For


the cause she embraced she has chosen to abandon the luxu-
ries, nay, the comforts, to which her fortune and station
entitled her; to wear stuff instead of silk; to work hard,
to live hard, to save, that she may spend upon her poor.
Her children, from their earliest years, are enlisted in the
good work.
Ten years have been thus consistently spent in promoting
that colonization which others, talking and eloquently
writing about, only impede.
We know that Mrs. Chisholm and her noble-minded hus-
band have again and again refused everything in the shape
of pecuniary compensation for their sacrifices ; and kno w-
ing this, we wonder that not one powerful or wealthy
statesman has been found to do himself honour by some
signal mark of regard for so much wisdom and virtue com-
bined.
A year’s hard work at his duty in Ireland earned Sir
Charles Trevelyan a knighthood, and a bonus of a few
thousands sterling.
Thousands have reason to bless Mrs, Chisholm. We find
her not like Mrs. Fry—descending from the drawing-room
to the prison, to return, carriage-borne, to that drawing-
room, when her errand of mercy was done—but in the
small room of a small house, in an obscure suburb, writing
at a rickety table, amid piles of colonial documents, an-
swers to her thousand correspondents.
It is a painful truth, that the finest good breeding, the
purest fashionable piety do not guard the habitants of this
highly-civilized England from an amount of cold-blooded
indifference which renders the rude barbarism of the Bush
of Australia, with its genuine heartiness, hospitality, and
generosity, far preferable. The gorgeous munificence of an
overflowing superfluity secures a meed of praise, of adula-
tion, of adoration, while the Christian charity of self-
sacrifice passes almost unnoticed.
We weep tears of the geuteelesfc joy when a miUionnaire
endows a church or founds au hospital, without, for that
purpose, sacrificing one mansion, one carriage, one foot-
man, no, not even a lap-dog or nosegay ; while a head ami
heart that might with happiness to the world found and
govern a colonial empire, toils and moils over the petty
economy of household details in order to save for—
“HT BOOK BMMiKAffITS.”


EMIGRANTS’ QUESTIONS.
In consequence of the severe indisposition of the Editor, part
of the Correspondence and several important Articles have been
omitted. No. 6 will contain a Title and Index for the First YoL
of the Series. Important questions will be answered privately.
A Scotch Joiner. —Wife, one child; not money enough for Australia,
without a free passage; can make carts and wheels, manage the car-
pentering for house-building; would not like to be located far from
town. [The last sentence shows a man not fit for emigration. No
free passages now. You can get to Natal, where houses and carts are
both wanted, for KM, : to the Western States of America for about
the same sum.]
A Tradesman. —Proceeding to Australia with hooks, and a capital
of oGOi. [Take the cash, and not haberdashery, unless you have late
advices from a friend you can depend on in the colony, Cannot ad-
vise about trade at all. or even recommend you to go, or not to go.]
A Clerk may five more economically in Sydney on 1001., if he
pleases, than in London. The climate would be unfavourable to brain
affections ; requires care and moderate food in case of weak digestion,
and to be beneficial to weak lungs. Ophthalmia is not of a virulent
character, and may be avoided by common care,
A Builder. —Capital 5001., under twenty-five years of age; joiner
and bricklayer ; can design buildings and carry out any plans : un-
derstands land-surveying, levelling,, and drainage; thought of taking
a situation in Sydney for a year or so. [Builders are more likely to
be in demand, in Melbourne and Adelaide, where house-rent is bigs,
than in Sydney, where it is low, building having been overdone.
But you are so good an emigrant that you are likely to succeed any.
where.]
Barnstable . —■YV e have a communication for two parties who 'wrote
ns thence In October,
A Domestic Serwrti — Julia. —Holding a superior situation in a
gentleman’s family, desires earnestly to emigrate to South Australia,
Can have a free passage, but has no doubt of being able to get a re-
spectable livelihood in England. 2nd. Are the provisions such as a
person may eat who has been accustomed to decent living '! 3rd, Sea-
sickness. 4th. doilies. [Do not advise to go at all if you are
afraid, as, although you may marry better in the colony than you.
can here in service, you may not be comfortable (see Lady's-maid’s
Letter in the First Series of this Journal). Consult the lady men-
tioned above. 2. You will want a little good tea and a few other
comforts (see Journal of a Voyage to Adelaide. Nos. 1 and 2 of this
Series). 3. No remedy for sea-sickness : get your digestion In good


order before starting; keep your feet warm with woollen stockings
while ill. We have found cayenne pepper in soup very comforting;
but there is no rule, 4. A warm grey cloak with loose sleeves;
cotton -peignoirs ; all other dresses made to close in front; it is very-
awkward to lie in your berth and try to hook-and-eye behind, A
pair of good blankets.]
A Grocer’s Lad. —“ Aged 19, strong and willing, and used to hard
work, but tired of working here for nothing. Think of going to
Australia, but know nothing of farming, to which I intend turning.
Have several relations farmers. Would you advise going to one of
them just to learn how to sow, plough, raise stock, and such like; it
would be no expense. Have a turn for carpentering, and some time
ago bought a lathe. Should I take it with me 1 Could I use it on.
the voyage '? it is not a large one ; or should I sell it and buy a gun t
Have got but a very little, money.. Is there any way of working my
way over’? Heard a day or two ago of a lad my age having his
passage for his service as clerk to the ship ; that is what I should
like; or is it likely I could engage myself to some respectable farmer
going out in the bush 1 (for that is what I want;) lam tired of town
life. What would be the best means of hearing of such a place T
[To go and live with a farmer would be a good plan. The lathe is not
likely to be of much use. but don’t buy a gun. You would not get
a clerk’s situation. As to working your way, that -would bs a
chance. Your best mode of hearing of a farmer’s family emigrating
would be by applying- to Mrs. Chisholm, Charlton Terrace, Islington
Green, London,]
A Saddler —Second Inquiry.■~~ r Sh.e passage referred to in page 182
refers more particularly to Texas, Arkansas, and the south-western
portion of the States. Illinois, although not a first-rate climate, has
colonies of English settlers, and the same may be said of Indiana ;
while lowa and Wisconsin are healthy, and going ahead fast. From
our accounts of Eastern Tenesseo there is a demand for your acquire-
ments, and Cumberland farmers to associate with. We have positive
information that clerks, warehousemen, and superior mechanics are
already too numerous in the Australian colonies, while for your talents
as a singer, phrenologist, and schoolmaster, there is no opening worth
going for, although the latter might suit a single young man. We
have no information about assisted passages: if granted to you, it
would be at the rate of about 71, each. Take such furniture as you have,
after ascertaining what freight will cost, if to Australia. To America
nothing but bedding, tools, cutlery, pins, and needles : for women, as
ample stock of thread, cotton, silk, lace, insertion, &c.
An Australian Agriculturist- —We have a communication under
this signature, full of valuable information, unfortunately too late for
insertion, all our pages being in type, except the Answers to Corre-
spondents, We propose to make use of ids letter, and would be glad
to have his name and address in confidence.


SIDNEY’S
EMIGRANT’S JOURNAL,
AND
Traveller's Magazine .
THE DEAR LAND SYSTEM.
(From 1837 to 1849.)
{Concluded from page 251,)
1848. —Up to this year the consideration of the effect of
the minimum price of U. an acre on the colonisation of Hew
South Wales had only been considered by the successive
committees in connection with other subjects ; but in 1848
a select committee of the Legislative Council, under its new
and popularly elected shape*, was appointed “to inquire
and report what ought to be the minimum price or prices of
land in Hew South Wales. ’ In this year the land question
had assumed an entirely new shape. 'When first the'system
of selling instead of granting land was introduced into Hew
South Wales in 1831, there were only two classes in the
colony, leaving out of the question the town and trading
jpopulatkm— masters and servants. The masters were lords
of docks and herds ; agriculture they despised. The servants
were prisoners. Agriculture was despised, because almost
the only persons engaged in it were prisoners, or the descend-
ants of prisoners, who received small grants under Governor
MaeQuarrie, on the banks of the Hawksbury and Hunter.
Thus, at that time, and, indeed, until 'New South Wales
obtained a representative assembly, the only class who bad
a chance of being heard against the “ Sic vola sic J-uho n of
a Governor were the squatters. G
* Formerly the Legislative Council consisted entirely of official*
and nominees of the Crown.
NSW SERIES —NO. YI.
a


At 6 s. an acre, many of the squatters bought the pastures
they occupied, and agriculture, in the shape of small farms,
took a great stride. At 11. an acre, these purchases ceased.
When Sir George Gipps found that Ms masters in the
Colonial Office were likely to be disappointed, as Sir R.
Bourke foretold, in their calculations of a large fund from the
sale of land at its increased price, he set to work to worry
the squatters into concentration and land purchasing. He
withdrew the police for which they were taxed, and harassed
them by a variety of restrictions and regulations. To ail
complaints of attacks from savages in the far interior Iris
stereotyped answer was “ Come within the boundaries,” —an
answer equivalent to rt Oome where your sheep and cattle
can have no food, and be ruined.”
If the price of land had been continued at ss. an acre,
the squatters would have received little sympathy from the
rest of the colonial community. They are the pioneers of
colonization—the producers of the great staple export on
which all Australian colonization has been founded. But it
would be as unjust to the colony and mother country to permit
them to occupy millions of acres for, ever at a nominal rent,
as it would be to dispossess them of pastures useless for any
other purpose than grazing, in order to compel them to pur-
chase land at a ruinous price.
When the squatters found that their fortunes were at the
mercy of a Governor, or even a Crown Commissioner, they
united In self-defence. Between 1831 and .1847 the influx
of free emigrants, and constant amalgamation with the de-
scendants of prisoners, had created the nucleus of a middle
class, not wealthy enough to become great flock-owners, too
rich to become servants,' At every turn these parties found
themselves impeded in their desire to become freeholders by
the letter of the law framed by the Wakefield school by
the regulations framed hi the colony in the spirit of that
law—and by the studied neglect of officials ever ready to
exalt their own dignity by insolent procrastination. These
parties joined to agitate with the squatters.
Sir George Gipps alienated the good will of all parties.
He was right in his theory that the squatters had no right
to the fee simple of the land they grazed, but while striving
to preserve to the colony an interest in the waste lands,
ha made no step towards promoting the sale of land within
the boundaries to the only parties who could cultivate it.
He dared not differ from Ms masters at home, and thus Ms


arbitrary tyrannical mode of enforcing views, sound and
Just in the abstract, caused the whole colony to sy mpathise
with the pastoral class.
Hence arose among the squatters a cry for the reduction
of the price of laud, and fixity of tenure.
The cry was earned to England, embodied by active
representatives, in a Parliamentary Party. The 'Colonial
Office found, itself in danger of being beaten, and. there-
fore, retaining the 1/, an acre minimum, conceded terms
to the squatters, which gave them ail and more than they
hoped.
The ll an acre became, in fact, a protection to the squatter,
who would feel sure of never being bought out of his leased
pastures at such a price. The Colonial Office hoped to divide
and conquer when the interests of the squatters and the
middle class 'became opposite. The middle class desired to
see the price and the size of lots reduced; the squatters,
having obtained fixity of tenure at rents lower than the quit
rents formerly attached to free grants, became the advocates,
or at any rate ceased to oppose a high minimum price. In
tact, the foundation was laid for an agrarian war whenever
time shall give both a freehold and an agricultural value-to
these squattages.
It was under these circumstances that the Committee of
1848 was compelled to take into consideration not only the
price of land, but. the “ Orders in Connell” under which the
pastoral lands of .the Colony were in future to be leased
The following passages from their Report exhibit clearly
the case of the “ Cultivating Colonists,” against the theory
of the Colonial Office, and the monopoly of the squatters
“The first part of Earl Grey’s despatch (29 Nov. 1846) con-
sists of an argument to prove that alienation by sale is pre-
ferable to free grants. Admitting this to be true, your Com-
mittee are at a loss to see how it follows that, because sale
is better than grant, it is better to prohibit sale by an inordi-
nately high price, than to promote it by a moderately low one.
Is seems strange to urge the expediency of sale in defence of
a policy, the effect of which has been to put down sale alto-
gether. These leases {sqmUvng ham) confer an
ownership little short of freehold. * * & Government has
appropriated about 180,000,000 acres of laud to about 1800
persons, in a country whose population is not 300,000, and
it has endowed this favoured class with land at the rate of
100,000 acres, in a country where there is one inhabitant to
v 2


every 100,000 acres.” Surely a system ■which allots on an
average 100,000 acres to an individual cannot, so far as disper-
sion is concerned, he outdone hy the 'wildest abuse of grants. Go-
vernment does not leave men to themselves, but enforces dis-
persion, while it thinks it is compelling concentration. *•&
It cannot be too often repeated, that to place a prohibitory
price on land is only a roundabout way of granting it to its
present occupants (the squatters), without the safeguards
with which a direct and avowed system of granting may be
accompanied.
“As to the benefits which have been derived from the sale
of waste lands, they would observe that the million of
money which has been raised, and the 50,000 emigrants who
have been introduced in the last ten years, must be referred
to the sales effected during five years of that period when
land was under 20.?. an acre. The gross proceeds of Jane!
sales during the last ten years are, in round numbers
920,000?. Of this sum 85,000?. is the amount received for
land during the last five years, 835,000?, the amount received
during the first five years of that period. Thus, if the sum
raised from land has been the means of introducing 50,000
emigrants, 46,000 have been introduced by land put up
under 30?, an acre, and 4000 only by land put up at 20?. an
acre. In other words, had the price remained unaltered, we
might have raised 2,000,000?, instead of 1,000,000?., and in-
troduced 100,000 emigrants instead of 50,000?’
This same Report includes an elaborate table of land sales
from 1837 to 1846. In this table it is shown that the sum
realised by sales of land in 1846 is less by 3000?, than one-
fourth of the sum realised from the same source in 1837.
In 1837, the population amounted to upwards of 83,000,
while in .1846 it amounted to upwards of 196,000, * "*• *
While exports, shipping, and circulating medium have, in-
creased one-fourth, the proceeds of sales of land have de-
creased more than three-fourths.
This Report, the fifth in six years that had been made
by Committees appointed by the Legislative Council of New
South Wales, accompanied by a body of evidence which,
embracing almost all classes, only needed that of frugal
labourers with savings, and immigrants with small capital,
to make it complete and unanimous, produced no effect
■whatever on Earl Grey. We believe wo are justified in
asserting that he never even read it.
. Without attempting to explain how It was that neither


a laud fund, nor low wages, nor concentration, had been
produced by his system, he concludes his despatch with, a
piece of declamation that would have sounded very well
before his theory had been tried and failed, by saying,-
« I shall deeply lament if any arguments, however inge-
nious or forcibly expressed, shall lead the public to desire the
abandonment of those principles under which the Colony
has made its extraordinary progress of the last ten or twelve
years, and under which the settlements of Port Philip and
South Australia have been so nourishing, in order to recur
to the principles on which, was founded the colony of
Western Australia.”
It would he impossible to find a paragraph in which so
much of false assertion, false assumption, and false argu-
ment were compressed in the same space.
There is not one argument in the Report in favour of the
million acre grant system on which Western Australia was
founded. All the reasoning points to Sc. an acre minimum
upset price—Port Philip has flourished on squatting, and
squatting alone —all the land purchasers became insolvent.
In South Australia, not only did the whole colony become
insolvent—not only was it abandoned by every one who had
any means—but at the time the mines were discovered it was
sinking fast for want of a market for its only produce—
wheat. The South Australian Company were unable to
collect any rent, and only by extraordinary exertions were
£O,OOOI, raised to pay for the special survey of the Burra
Burin, mines, in a colony on which at least a million sterling
had b een expended. It is well known in the colonies thas
without the copper mines South Australia would have stood
in, the emigration market no higher than Swan River.
But as Earl Grey had no time to read and answer
the Fifth Report, he referred it to Messrs. Murdoch and
Rogers, the Colonization Commissioners. These gentle-
men have done all that two clever young barristers could
for their chef. They have carped at the report and the evi-
dence just as barristers do ingeniously carp when paid for
opposing a patent, or any other matter of which they are
entirely ignorant. In a word, they have done their best to
earn the approbation of Lord Grey ; and if they had been
asked to prove the inutility of subsoil ploughing or vacci-
nation, or steam navigation, they would have succeeded
equally well.
A man must have extraordinary faith in office to believe


that the two gentleman in Park Street know better what ia
good for Australia than colonial witnesses, consisting of colo-
nists, merchants, bankers, landowners, squatters, auctioneers,
Judges, and even _ governors. For it is remarkable, that
neither in Australia or New Zealand can any consistent ad-
vocates of a high, price system be found, except officials.
We only refer to these pages of Ci done to order criticism,”
to substitute a piece of real for a piece of sham evidence.
No state paper is now considered complete without a slice
of statistics, often lugged in by the head and shoulders.
The Colonization. Commissioners quote the rapid rise and
decrease of railway projects as a fitting parallel between
the rise and decrease of Australian land sales, the railways
being a speculative luxury, the land a necessity.
But we turn from this red tape parallel to a real parallel,
in the United States’ land sales.
In 1835 and 1836 there was excessive speculation in the
United States lands, the acres sold amounting to twelve
millions in the first, and twenty millions in the second year.
The next year they fell to five millions, and declined until
1841; but- in 1842 they amounted to Just one million six
hundred thousand acres, and steadily increased year after
year, until, in 1847, two 'million, two hundred thousand
acres were sold, producing more than that number of dollars,
A recent Act of the American legislature has reduced the
price of the unsold inferior lauds in the settled states.
The ninth general .Report of the Colonial Land and Emi-
gration Commissioners, printed in 1849, will afford the last
extracts for our historical panorama of the colonial land
and labour question.
These commissioners, by the by, devote more pages to
the coffee bugs and rats of Ceylon than lines to the ques-
tion which forms the staple of Australian discontents, and
if overcharged, at no distant period be the source of a
servile war.
The total sum. received by the last returns for land sales
in New South Wales, via., in 1847, was 9182/. 15s. Of this
sum, 1707/. 10*. only was for country land, the balance
being for town and suburban lots.
During the same period, 26,807/. was received for squatting
leases and licences.
In Port Philip district, country lots were sold during the
same period to the value of 19,400/,, and town and suburban
land for 48,000/,


The squatting leases and licences for the year produced
17,203?,
In South Australia, the amount realized for land -wags
36,336?.
The respective quantities of town, suburban and country
land are not given. Whenever these official documents arc
particularly elaborate, they are certain to omit something
important.
Fortunately for South Australia, the discovery of copper
mines has not only supplied an export and stimulated emi-
gration, but has led the Governor to abolish the system of
large special surveys and substitute small lots of eighty
acres, and even less.
Lord Holland once told a story of an hospitable host who,
not satisfied with drowning his guests in excellent wine,
exhibited a trophy of their drinking powers in the shape of
a pile of emptied bottles, not a little to the astonishment
of some who had drunk without thinking. For the benefit
of those who have drunk in, without thinking, the ornate
periods of Bari Grey and Mr. Gibbon Wakefield, on the sub-
ject of the virtues of dear land and cheap labour, we have
recapitulated the opinions of Australian, legislators in 1843,
1844, 1845, 1847, and 1848.
We have shown, on evidence which cannot be disputed,
that neither a land fund, nor low wages, nor concentration,
nor cultivation, have been secured by the measure that was
intended to secure all these presumed advantages. Emigra-
tion is carried on by means of squatters’ rents, and sales of
building land. When wages are low, there is more disper-
sion, because more profit in squatting.
But we are not content with proving the fallacy of the
prophecies of Wakefield and his dupes in the Colonial Office,
from Glenelg to Grey. We deny his premises. We deny
that it is an advantage to force upon a colony the division
of labour and the accumulation of capital to be found in
this pauper-ridden country.
In colonies there is no fear of producing a potato-garden
Tipperary-like peasantry; for what says Mr, Fox, principal
agent of the New Zealand Company, the great godmother
o? Wakefield’s system:—
“The system of Cottage Husbandry which has resulted
from the causes above alluded to, requires a few observations.
I am aware that that system, as it has been practised in


Europe, has met with very general reprobation, though some
writers, as Mr. Bulwer in his ‘ France and the French/ and,
if I remember rightly, Mr. Laing in his ‘Travels in Norway,’
have taken a contrary view of the subject. It may, how-
ever, he that the minute subdivision of land in
the midst of the circumstances which have accompanied it
in Ireland, Flanders, or occasionally in England, does not
tend to elevate the condition of the small tenant or pro-
prietor, and that the amount of produce raised from the
soil under that system is Jess than results from the extended
operations of the capitalist. But the Cottage Husbandry
of (ail colonies) Nelson differs most materially from that of
the countries alluded to in many important particulars. It
differs from the Irish in the absence of exorbitant rents,
which being often far beyond the ability of the land to pay.
drive the. tenant to the English, harvest fields or manufac-
turing towns, where he raises the requisite amount ; his land
serving him only as a homestead, ami a potato-garden, cul-
tivated in his absence by his wife and children in the most
slovenly manner. In Belgium, or in England, the small
proprietor or holder of a labourer’s allotment is surrounded
by land, every acre of which is appropriated by some one ;
he has no common land, or an entireiv inadequate quantity
of it, on which to depasture and rear cattle ; or if, as in some
parts of .Belgium, he uses his allotment for the maintenance
of a few cows, he has nor. enough land for cultivation and
corn-growing in addition. The consequence is, that he is
without dairy produce, and without manure, or without corn
if he .has these. In England, also, the holdings are usually
very small-—often not more than a quarter of an acre—high
rents are exacted for them, and the tenant has no chance of
enlarging his allotment, or of acquiring the fee simple of it,
None of these circumstances exist in Nelson. The rents are
very moderate, seldom exceeding the value of one or two
bushels of wheat per acre the allotments are not very
mmute, seldom less than five acres, generally more; the
power of purchasing the fee-simple is generally stipulated
for in the lease ; ample opportunities exist for increasing
the size of the holding, or removing to a larger as capital,
increases ; and lastly, there are many thousand acres of
pasture-land adjoining, on which the tenant of the small
allotment almost invariably has several head of cattle, old
and young, affording him manure, if required, and consti-
tuting a growing source of wealtin On this ■system, the cot.-


iaaer will gradually grow out of that condition, and become a
more extensive holder and capitalist; reversing what is seen in
the cottage husbandry of old countries, -inhere subdivision, com-
mencing with large estates, co-ntinuMly 'progresses , the allotments
becoming smaller , and every generation of tenants or owners
■poorer than the last. Here the small holder, beginning with a
very small portion of land, gradually accumulates mere, and
will eventually lose the character with which he commenced.
In the lack woods of Americathere are many who begin the
world with little more capital than an axe and their personal
industry, but who, having sufficient elbow-room and many
advantages similar to those existing here, end their days m
competency, if not in riches. * * * And I would observe,
th.at in any new colony, even "where capital is most abundant,
small holdings will undoubtedly prevail to a considerable
extent; for where laud is cheap and good, the British agri-
cultural labourer will always, at as early a day as possible.
Invest his savings in the cultivation or purchase of it. But
as I have observed, sub-division, instead of progressing in
each case, as in old countries, ceases, and agglomeration
follows.”
We conclude here. We will rest on the statements of
the agent of Mr. Wakefield’s Company .
That is our case*.
At the Maitland Amateur Theatre the celebrated song and chores
of “Nix my Dolly, pals, fake away,” is advertised to be sung, with
all the strength of the company, for a benefit,
A Crvjiii'v.ED Vice, —A black brought up before a Port Philip
Justice of Peace charged with being drunk, grinning, answered, “Bars
Bail much drunk, Sar—only small bit drunk—very little grog,”
Discharged with a reprimand.
Vise Peoopoe.—The average produce of an acre of grapes in
Europe varies from Ito pipes; on the Shine, to 2 and 2£ pipes;
hi the south of Europe and Hungary, where land is of little compara-
tive value, and labour dear, the plough, scarifier, and horae-hoe may
be advantageously substituted for hand labour, Woollen rags, and
probably waste wool, form good manure.
* The above Article may be considered the conclusion of the Essays
which appeared in the First Series of the Journal under the radons
heads of “ Wakefield's Art of Colonization,” pages 177, IBS, 194, 201;
“ Truth about New Zealand,” pages 260, 275, 288, 280, 287; also,
pages 131, US, 167, 258.


THE RESOURCES OF AUSTRALIA.
Isr describing Australia as an emigration field, it is neces-
sary to confine the attention of the emigrant to those few
pursuits in 'which industry and capital are sure to meet
■with a fair reward 5 in fact, to confine his attention to the
beaten tracks of colonial occupation. But when we are coa~
sidering the future career of that great and interesting
country, we may venture to speak more freely and more
suggestively.
In 1851 England will throw open to the whole world a
vast museum for she display of all kinds of raw and manu-
factured produce. In this exhibition, the produce of our
colonies will he viewed with peculiar interest, after the un-
exampled zeal with which emigration has been, carried on
during the last two years, as most families have some rela-
tive, connection, friend, or acquaintance in one of our many
dependencies.
In the matter of raw produce, the countries which produce
the most valuable will ordinarily afford the least varied
examples. There is such a wide distinction between possi-
ble and profitable produce. Por instance, volumes would be
required to index the vegetable and mineral riches of the
United States; but take cotton, tobacco, timber, wheat and
maize, and. in an export point of view, little remains except
the gold of California.
And so with regard to the three great settlements of
Australia, A few fleeces will make no grand show, but from
Hew South Wales and Port Philip alone they would reure-
seat an exportation exceeding a million and a quarter
sterling; and copper-ore and ingots from South Australia
will take up little space, but vouch for the value of one of
oirr most flourishing dependencies to the tune of a quarter
of a million a year,
The catalogue, to be useful, should contain an introduc-
tion to the specimens of each colony and country, with im-
portant statistical facts compressed into a few figures.
In the following paper, ws propose to give all the infor-
mation on the resources of Hew South Wales within our
reach, -with a few speculative suggestions for the benefit,
not of ©migrants, but of colonists.
Wool was exported in 1847 to the value of L272,118£
22,397,722 lbs." -


"Vessels built.
Vessels r
1
‘gisterecL
Year,
Number.
Tons.
Number.
Tons,
3 888
20
808
41
6,220
1839
12
773
79
10,862
1840
18
1207
98
12,426
1841
36
2074
110
11,260
1842
26
1357
89
9,948
1843
47
1433
92
7,022
1844
18
619
87
8,087
1845
IS
1042 '
98
9 ? 'i7 0
1846
28
1032
88
4,895
1847
36
2284
104
9,428
4340 tons —value, 195,300?. There was also an
export of candles, hut our return is imperfect in that par-
ticular*.
Hides and Leather were exported to the value of 39,000?.,
and imported to 21,283?.
'Timber.-~The export has fallen off from 20,000?., in 1840,
to 7333?,, in 1847. The importation of timber has ranged
at about 10,000?. a year until 1847, when it was swelled to
14,000?, This sum includes about 1000 tons of sandal-wood
from the South Seas landed for re-export, considerable <|uan~
titles of cedar from the coast of Australia, and from Yaa
Piemen’s Land, beyond the boundaries of the colony. bTew
Zealand pine, for spars and building, and American timber
for cask staves and scantlings.
Ship Building , —The number of vessels built and regis-
tered in the colony of Kew South Wales (including the dis-
trict of Port Philip), from the year 1838 to 1847 inclusive,
were : —-
Bait Provision —exported, 11,000?.
* The total Imports of hides and tallow received from .New South
Wales into England last year show the following result as compared
with 1847. Of hides there has been 25,222 less, but of tallow 6780
casks more. Yery little mimosa bark has been received. The ster-
ling value of the total imports of hides, tallow, ana bark, received
this year into London and Liverpool, were estimated at 212,690?.,
against. 128,100 b in 1847, and 109,000?. in 1846,


Baric. —This-trade has dwindled away after reaching 9114?
in 1844, to 754 in 1847.
Butter and Cheese. —ln 1843, quantity, 81,173 lbs.—-value,
34884, which steadily increased until, in 1547, it stood--™
quantity, 253,880 lbs., value, 5977 1.
South Sea Fishery. —lß47, exported, sperm whale oil, 1214
tons, black whale oil 331 tons, whalebone 84 tons ; total
value, 80,6284
Coal and Coke, in 1847, tons, 5850—value, 38114
Carts and Wagons —value, 10004
'Vineyards.—in 1847, 899 acres in Hew South Wales pro-
duced 44,030 gallons of wine, and 1402 gallons of brandy •
Port Philip, from 100 acres, obtained 1300 gallons of wine,
and 30 gallons of brandy. The most productive county wag
Camden, where Mr. M‘Arthur’s vineyards are situated- 73
acres produced 11,000 gallons, nearly half of this quantity
having been grown on Mr, M‘Arthur’s estate. Cumberland,
which may be considered the metropolitan county, obtained
only 11,089 gallons from 255 acres; while Gloucester, in
which the Port Step hens colony stands, far distant and
thinly peopled, raised 7000 gallons from 90 acres.
It appears from late Australian papers, that a wine-
growing society has been formed in New South Wales, offer-
ing prizes and comparing notes. This will, of course, load
to great improvements, but we regret to see that they have
also turned their attention to the hopeless task of obtaining
a reduction of the English duty on colonial wine. The true
old proverb says, “Good wine needs no bush when they
produce good wine in. quantity, (and they have soil and
climate in their favour,) they will be sure to find customers
at their doors. We take this opportunity of observing that
wine-growing is as much a small farmer’s or cottager’s occu-
pation as that of a man of great capital, on the Rhine, where
every peasant has his vineyard.
Manufactures. —-The price of labour has prevented many
from being established, but from the colonial wool, chiedy
of the coarser kinds, a tweed of a very useful and pleasant
wear is made at Paramatta, Penrith, Newcastle, Musweli
Brook, A sugar refining company at Canterbury near
Sydney, produces very excellent loaf sugar at one-half of
the cost of English, Starch, soap, and earthenware, are
also manufactured, of good quality; and we should not
be surprised if, as married couples increase, and settle on
land in the interior, when the present iniquitous land me


nopoly has been knocked on the head, there will he a con-
siderable home manufacture of waste wool by the spinning-
wheel at leisure hours. Some thrifty Scotch may introduce
the custom, although the climate is against much woollen
wear; colonial blankets, too, will probably be manufactured*
The Live Stock of New South Wales consisted, ia 1847,
of—-horses, 103,000 ; horned cattle, 1,600,000; sheep,
10,060,000 ; pigs, 62,000.
Seventy thousand sheep have been exported in the last
four years, and large quantities of cattle, chiefly New Zea-
land.
The total exports of four years, ending
1847,'amounted to 6,036,686
Total imports of four years . . 6,777,659
Excess of exports . , —■ —■ — 268,027.
The Revenue of 1848, estimated at . £306,660
Charges thereon ..... 296,226
Surplus revenue, over , ~— 10,324.
Pottery.--k clay of a very superior kind is found in Aus-
tralia, of a close, fine texture; it is as yet quite unknown to
our manufacturers, but we have seen common jogs which,
when broken, showed a grain almost as fine as china. We
cannot advise any speculation on a large scale, but can un-
dertake that a few potters, able to make coarse cottage
ware, tea-cups, &c., with ingenuity enough to set up their
own apparatus, would make a very comfortable independent
living in several parts of the interior of Now South Wades,
and probably, although we have no exact information,
about Wellington, in South .Australia.
Tanning and Currying has not yet been carried to the
point which it must attain. Hides are plentiful ; every one
wears boots ; hut the cost of carriage, and the rapid decom-
position in the summer, and wages, are the obstacles.
There are many places where men, with families of sons,
could make a fortune as tanners. Bark is plentiful and
not dear, often to he had for gathering.
Minerals, —Some specimens of carmel coal from the
Australian .Agricultural Company’s new mine on. Williams
River may be expected at the great Exposition, a really
valuable article, both for colonial consumption and ex-
portation ; but no other mineral has as yet been worked
profitably. Several copper mines have been opened, hut
hitherto"the loss has been in proportion to the quantity
raised.


Agricvltme. — Putting on one side those experiments
which can only be undertaken by men, of large capital, the
greatest prospect of agricultural improvement, and of the
introduction of new and profitable articles of produce, lies
in our emigrants taking as their model the parallel climates
of the South of France, Spain, Italy, Egypt, Malta, Syria, and
India.
In almost all these countries, cultivation is carried on by
persons of means far below what are in the possession of the
humblest Australian settlers, but hereditary maxims enable
them to cultivate most successfully, in spite of a droughty sun,
and a soil that a farmer accustomed to the mellow loam and.
damp climate of Britain would pronounce hopelessly barren.
The habit of living easily by gracing over miles of country
has led the majority of Australians to undervalue their soil
and climate. Indeed, a lady, whose knowledge of the country
is only equalled by the ignorance of colonial authorities,
has remarked to us that, although she saw capital crops in
poor men’s holdings, she never could hear of a bit of good
land in any squatter’s occupation,
A book full of valuable suggestions for Australian Agri-
culturists was written eight years ago by Mr. Peter Cun-
ningham ; the price rendered it rather beyond the Australian
emigrant’s mark, and it fell still-born ; vet wo can assure
the Colonization Commissioners that if they would reprint
extracts from it, in the appendix to their next Report,
it would be infinitely more valuable and interesting than the
dissertation on the Ceylon rats and coffee bugs, or a Mr.
George Rennie’s story about th e cows and bulls of the Falk-
land Islands*.
JPioughiti#. —‘’'When in Chili, I advanced to make the
usual observation, ‘ Why don’t they introduce the English
plough f when I was informed that it had been introduced
by an intelligent Englishman upon his own property, hut
abandoned after a fair trial; the land worked by it being
found to produce no better crops in moist years than that
worked by the Chilian plough ; while, during dry years, the
land worked by the latter produced a crop, though often a
scanty one, and that worked by the former produced none at
all T o any one who has witnessed the working’s of the two
* “ Hints for Australian Emigrants, with Engravings and Explana-
tory Descriptions of the Modes of Irrigating Land in Egypt, Syria.
South America,” &s. Boone, Hew Bond Street.


ploughs, the cause of failure in the English one in dry years
jaa-ust l>e soon apparent, as by means of its mould-board the
dry upper soil is turned down and the moist under soil
turned up, go that a large amount of ground moisture is
naturally expended by the English, mode of ploughing,
which is saved in the Chilian—from the Chilian plough
having no mould-board, and consequently simply stirring tbs
soil like a harrow, leaving the relative positions of the dry
upper soil and moist under soil nearly the same as before,
thus giving a great advantage to the Chilian mode in dry
years, by the less exhaustion of the ground moisture enabling
the crop to be brought to maturity with a less supply of
rain. When the upper soil had been scorched up for a con-
siderable period, during a blew South Wales drought, it was
remarked, that a tolerable day’s rain seldom penetrated
deeper than an inch ; what a great loss of moisture, there-
fore, must not the English plough occasion, when, by turning
several inches of moist soil, it exhausts the latter of as much
moisture as will require several days’ rain to restore ! hud
as from the rapidity of vegetation in warm latitudes a
single shower often suffices to save a crop, bow necessary
must it be to preserve as much moisture as possible in
the soil, in order to give the crop a better chance of success!
Further dangers also result from the English ploughing in
dry years. Istly, If the grain be sown during dry weather,
before the newly turned-up moist soil is exhausted of its
moisture, the latter causes the grain to sprout, and eventually
die, in consequence of the turned-down soil being exhausted
of its moisture before the ploughing commenced, Sndiy,
When the turned-up soil has been as thoroughly exhausted
of its moisture at the time of sowing as the timmd-down.
soil, the same result ensues should rain fall in the interim,
unless it be sufficient to saturate the under soil as com-
pletely as the upper. If grain, however, be sown upon laud
worked by a plough similar to that of Chili ('when the
superficies is exhausted of its moisture), it will remain nn-
germinated in this dry superficies until rain, falls ; so that
when this takes place, it has a much greater chance of
reaching maturity, on account of having a store of under
moisture to rely on, of which the English, plough-worked
ground is necessarily deprived. It must therefore be mani-
fest that the simple stirring of the soil (instead of turning
it over) in dry years, by a plough having no mould-board,
or a plough-barrow, must give a much better chance ot a


crop; while by the plough-harrow (or. scuffle) a much
greater extent of ground can also be gone over in a given
time, and consequently a great amount of labour saved,
care being taken that the working; be deep enough, as on
this in a great measure depends the success of crops in
dry and hot as well as wet and cold countries, where the
land is not naturally swampy, by admitting a greater
amount of ground moisture to be accumulated under the
roots of the plants.”
As fine a crop of wheat as ever I saw in 'Few South Wales
was produced at the unploughad extremities of a field during
a dry season, when the crop upon the ploughed portion was
a total failure.
Alexander Harris also remarked, that when plough crops
failed hoe crops succeeded,
, Melons and, Pumpkins . —Pumpkins may be preserved for
many months. The Malta winter pumpkin, cut before
ripe, covers the flat-roofed houses throughout the winter. In
the Mediterranean the melon-seeds are soaked several days
in water, and then dibbled superficially in a circle around
a shallow hole, into which old manure has been worked,
taking care to train the young plants in the proper direction
by wooden pegs. Loose sandy soil suits melons well; the
finest noa-irrigated melons I have seen, in the Mediterranean
were grown on sandy soils.
Wheat. —Throughout the various South American and Me-
diterranean countries, with similar hot and dry climates to
Australia, the wheat cultivated is the bearded variety—the
beard sheltering the ear from the sun’s and wind’s action—
while, at the same time, attracting the atmospheric moisture
toward the plant. Their sowing is still more essential in
Australia than England ; the moisture being less, a greater
extent of ground is required to supply a plant with it.
Trees for shade and fruit. —On the plain of Athens I saw
no difference between the wheat plants growing close to the
roots of olive trees and those at a distance from them, the
shelter afforded by the tree shade compensating for other in-
juries: while in Egypt 1 fov-nd all the date groves about Alex-
andria con verted into kitchen gardens, where cabbages, carrots,
and other vegetables, flourished more luxuriantly, through
means of irrigation, than where no shade was afforded.
Potatoes . —The English potato deteriorates in Australia.
Chilian potatoes would supply suitable cuttings for the
colder, and Peruvian for the warmer districts of Australia.


Olive Trees.— a In the Mediterranean the olive is generally
propagated by budding or grafting in April, from a bearing-
tree, upon a wild olive stem, reared from the stone of the
wild olive ; in three years from which time the tree usually
begins to bear, Olive trees stand drought well, and flourish
in soils where few other profitable articles would grow,
while cultivation of crops between them benefits instead of
injures, provided proper maimrings and crop rotations be
attended to. When planted upon declivities, rounded walls
of loose stones are raised beneath them, into whose enclo-
sures the earth from above is thrown, until a level platform
is formed around their roots, for preventing the washing
away of the soil, and enabling the rain to sink in more
readily around. The olives in the Mediterranean are ripe
in October, when they are gathered for oil-making, by
shaking from off the trees; the women and children col-
lecting them in baskets for storing up until required for use.
In the store-house they are sprinkled with salt and piled up
in heaps, the salt assisting in clearing away their watery
particles, and making the oil part more freely from them,
A good tree, in full bearing, will furnish twenty gallons of
oil, and taking ten gallons as the average, this, at 2s. Gd. per
gallon, shows the good profits that must result from olive
cultivation in Australia. Previously to extracting the oil,
the olives are put into baskets and soaked for some minutes
in a cauldron of water near the boiling point, from whence
they are emptied into the bruising trough---this heating
forcing them to give out their oil more freely. The bruising
trough is of a round form, constructed of pieces of cemented
stone, with a mo veable wooden spindle in the centre, into
which a cross-beam of wood is mortised, to yoke the working-
animal to, and serve as an axle for the stone wheel to move
upon. This stone wheel is close to this upright spindle, and
as the working animal moves round the trough,, the stone
wheel is consequently moved round also, crushing the olives
in its progress ; the driver walking behind with a spade, to
shove them into the wheel-track as he proceeds. The bruised
material is now' put into pentagonal cloths of strong horse-
hair, with five flaps to each for covering them ; about two
gallons of which are put into each cloth, and five cloths over
each other put into the screw-press, to have the oil ex-
tracted. When preserved for food, the olives are thrown
in a ripe state into saturated salt pickle, and kept for
NEW SERIES-—NO. VI. X


use ; bread and olives forming one of the principal mealy
during a considerable portion of the Mediterranean year. 51 ...
The Oarouba, or Locust Tree. —■“ It prefers dry soils and
dry climates, and yields a yearly crop of saccharine pea-like
pods, which form no small portion of the subsistence of xaaa
and animals in many eastern countries. Prom the above
qualities, its introduction into Australia must be beneficial,
as places at present unproductive would be made to yield g,
supply of food for both the human species and the brute. It fr.
a lively evergreen, affording a tolerable shade, while its roots
shoot to such a distance that few other plants can live near
it; and hence it is only propagated in places where ns
other plant could be equally productive. Caroubas yield
from 400 to 800 pounds of pods, which sell in the Levant at
ten paras (one halfpenny) per oke of 2| lbs. Sugar is ma-
nufactured from them; as also a sweet syrup, much em-
ploved in making preserves,”
.Date and Fig Tree. —“ When reared from the stone, date
palms do not bear before their fifteenth year ; but in their
sixth year, when reared from slips. Twenty-three varieties
are at present known, some of whose fruit (such as that of
the red date of Lower Egypt), can be used only when ripe
from the tree, as it rots, instead of dries, after this; while
the fruit of most of the others can be dried and kept for
after use, by allowing this process to take place upon the
tree, before the gathering. The yearly average produce of
the fruit-crop amounts to 260 lbs. per tree ; and the bunches
are so large as to require supporting, by means of strings
made from the leaf-stems attached to the butts of these
stems. They are planted at about fourteen feet asunder,
and hence their average crop per acre is twenty-five times
greater than that of wheat, while the ground between is at
the same time available for the cultivation of all kinds of
kitchen vegetables, each seeming to favour the growth of
the other, when properly irrigated and manured (as exem-
plified at Alexandria), the dates favouring the vegetables
by their shade, and the working, manuring, and irrigation
between equally favouring the date. The dates in greatest
.esteem are the Tafilet date, long date of Upper Egypt, and
the small date of the Oases or Wadys of the Desert, and
hence called the Wadoon date—all of which can he dried
for after use. The date grows in every kind of soil, but,
like other fruit-trees, is most productive in the sandy • the


best flavoured dates being those grown in countries where
rain does not fall, and irrigation is consequently their sole
support; similarly as we find the hothouse fruits of Europe
superior to those grown in the open air, from rain applied
to fruit, during its growth, injuring its flavour. Hence it is
observed, in England, that the fruits of dry years are finer
flavoured than those of wet years. In the date the male and
female flowers grow on separate trees, therefore male trees
must be planted at intervals among the females,, in order to
Insure their fecundity. Pig-trees also will serve many use-
ful purposes by their more extensive propagation in the
colony. They flourish in stony grounds, clefts of rocks
being their favourite resorts ; their roots ramifying exten-
sively in all directions, and little moisture being required
to ensure a crop, which is in general most abundant. When
dried they form a healthy and nutritious article of food,
much relished in the East. The fig-tree has separate male
and female flowers, and hence it is a common practice,
throughout the Mediterranean, to hang the fruit of film
wild fig - (which ripens a month before the bloom of the
others burst) among those blooms, which, attracting files,
assist in impregnating the female flower, from the flies
carrying the pollen of'the male to it, in their flight from
bloom to bloom,”
An Englishman finds himself located where corn and po-
tatoes will not grow, and takes to living on salt beef and
flour, imported from Sydney, when, by taking a lesson from
the south of Europe, he could grow delicious vegetables and
fruits round his hut.
Irrigation-— The chapters devoted to this important sub-
ject are too long for us to extract, and would be unintel-
ligible without the accompanying wood-cuts. The plates-
exhibit the irrigating wheels in use in Malta, Asia Minor,,
the Greek Islands, and Egypt. They are all simple- and
cheap, and might be constructed, from the description, by
any wheelwright or pump-maker of common ingenuity, with
the assistance of a labourer to do the earth-worn, ior his
own farm or garden, or a neighbour's.
It is quite a mistake to imagine that nothing less than
a great capital can attempt to irrigate from even a deep
well: all a'Syrian, Maltese, or Egyptian person would re-
quire for the purpose are to be found on. every Australian
station—timber, hide-ropes, leather for buckets, and a horse
or ox to put the machine in motion. Experiment has.
x 2


shown that wells may he constructed in almost any part
of Australia, while the undulating nature of the soil affords
great facilities for constructing ponds and tanks. Malta,
Egypt, and a great part of Asia Minor and India,, ■which,
now support considerable populations, would, without simple
contrivances for distributing well and river water, be re-
duced to deserts. We hope to see among the produce of
Australia, at the approaching Exposition, wine, oil, tobacco,
figs, silk in cocoons, and cotton, dried raisins, figs and dates,
and also models of cheap water-wheels and other irrigating
machinery .
BrrriMNQ a Shanty. —Seizing one of the axes, Smith proceeded
to cut down some small saplings, leaving a fork or “ crotch” at the
upper end of one or two of them. They were some twelve or fifteexi
feet long, and were arranged in a conical form, like a marquee or ass.
Indian wigwam, the poles being about a foot distant from each other,
where they rested on the ground, and all running to a point at the
top, where they were kept from falling by the forks that had been
left at the upper extremities of some of them. "When this frame-work
had been completed to his satisfaction, Smith felled a large hemlock
tree that stood close hy 5 and as he cut off the branches, with their
dark green feathery foliage, his wife, aided by Harry, dragged them to
the spot required. When a considerable quantity had been accumulated.
Smith came with his axe, and having cut off the heaviest parts of the
branches, left those only that were most thickly covered with leaves.
These, with Harry’s assistance, he spread thickly over the frame-work,
and ere long, when the former entered the wigwam, he found himself
separated from the outer air by a dense and verdant covering, suifi-
cSont to turn aside an ordinary shower of rain, and to protect them
from, the chilliness of the night, which was now considerable, as the
season was advancing. While Harry and his man had been thus
employed, the wife of the latter had been busily engaged in pulling
off the small upper twigs of the hemlock boughs. These she carried
into the wigwam or tent, and arranged on one side as a bed for Harry*
spreading them so thickly as effectually to protect him both from the
hardness and the humidity of the ground. By the time all this was
effected night was fast falling upon them, and the gloom of the forest
made it appear later than it really was. A roaring fire was kindled
opposite the door of the wigwam, and the whole party went down to
the boat to carry up their provisions, together with their household
goods and chattels, consisting principally of a frying-pan (beyond all
controversy the most essential article in the culinary department of
the Backwoodsman’s life), a tea-ksttle, a tin teapot, two or three tin
gups, and a large tin dish.


TERMS GRAFTED BY GOVERNMENT TO THE
COLONIZERS OF NATAL.
1, The money must be deposited to the credit of the Com-
missioners at the Bank of England in sums not less than
1000?. each,
2, For each such, deposit a certificate, will be issued by
the Commissioners, which, will be considered to represent
the same amount of money in any purchase of Government
Land at Natal.
3, The land must be purchased in conformity with all such
rules, and after being exposed to sale at such upset price
as may be in force in the colony at the time when it shall
be actually bought.
4. The depositor is to undertake the conveyance to Natal
of agricultural labourers, mechanics, skilled labourers, or
small farmers accustomed to some manual labour, and in-
tending to work for their subsistence.
5. He is to engage to furnish them with a steerage pas-
sage, and to grant them, after arrival, twenty acres of hind
in fee for each adult, and five acres for each child, with a
right of choice out of at least double that quantity, in con-
sideration of a payment by the emigrants of not more than
10?. for each adult, computed according to the Passengers"
Act,
6. If any persons who belong to the foregoing classes,
and for whom therefore a drawback can be claimed of the
Government in the manner to be presently stated, should
proceed as intermediate passengers, there must be sufficient
evidence that they had enjoyed an option of proceeding in
the steerage for the maximum charge above mentioned,
and that they had preferred paying the difference of price
for the superior kind of accommodation.
9. For each approved emigrant (two children between
one and fourteen years being counted as one emigrant) who
may be introduced into the colony, there will be returned
to the depositor out of the amount paid by him to the credit
of the Emigration Commissioners the sum of 10?., on receipt
from the colony of a certificate that such emigrant had been
safely landed, and appeared to have been properly treated
on the voyage; and, further, had been duly put in posses-
sion of the promised quantity of land.


THE USE OF THE FALKLAND ISLANDS.
We commend this question to the consideration of the
Financial Reformers. We have in our American Colonies,
especially in New Brunswick, millions of acres of uninhabited
fertile land, which a railroad or a plank road, or even the
common road marked out by Sir James Alexander, would
reader saleable, repaying the first cost a hundred times over.
We have in each of the three Australian Colonies, and in
the Middle Island of New Zealand, millions more of acres,
which, at a reasonable price and on a common-sense system,
would find annual purchasers and cultivators in some ten,
thousand emigrants; and these two countries, of climates
and products so opposite, possess in themselves ail the ele-
ments of rich, great, progressive, self-supporting dependen-
cies. Wisdom and statesmanship would suggest the con-
centration of all our powers of colonization upon some
one or two great dependencies upon countries where the
course of the capitalist was clear, and the employment of
the labourer certain. Such is not the system adopted by
our Colonial Office. It is with difficulty that for any truly
important object the preliminary expenses are extorted.
It is seldom that, for education or scientific objects, or
works of charity, a single shilling can be obtained.
But while economy of the most stringent nature forms
the staple of official answers and Parliamentary speeches,
thousands of pounds are frittered away on colonizing
and bits of colonising dilettanteism. Take the Falkland
Islands for an. instance. These islands were taken posses-
sion of for the second or third time in 1838. Since 1840
they have enjoyed the benefit of a governor; first, modestly,
in the shape of a lieutenant of a schooner; by degrees the
importance and the pay of the establishment has been in-
creased, and the Falkland Islands now figure in the esti-
mates at SOOOf. a year.
The present Governor is Mr, George Beanie, a staunch
Whig of course—the projector of the Colony of New Edin-
burgh, on that famous Wakefield System which, in its day,
supplied speculators with the excitement since afforded
by railways. Mr. Rennie spent a fortune in contesting
boroughs on Whig principles, and, not having realised his
anticipated profits by founding colonies, gratefully accepted


an appointment in a part of the world where, if there be
no summer, no trees, no corn, and no colonists, so also there
are no debts or duns.
In order to console Mr. Bennie for his sovereignty with-
out subjects, he has been accompanied by a magistrate and
a chaplain. The annual cost of this little B&rrataria is
little less than 10,000?, a year. The number of inhabitants
is under 200, costing rather more than 30?, a year each.
It would be cheaper to create a sinecure in the Isle of
Sark and the Calf of Man, or even the Isle of Bogs, if the
virtues of great political zeal and moderate means' must he
rewarded.
The price of land is fixed at 6s. an acre. So one buys
any; but that does not prevent the Colonial Office from,
quoting the precedent.
Mr. Reni.de, having nothing else to do, has prepared a
report, which figures in the “ Ninth Report of the Colonial
Land and Emigration Commissioners.”
It is a document worthy of a ci-devant pupil of the
Wakefield school; plenty of pretty phrases, little useful in-
formation ; he neither tells the number of his subjects nor
of the ships that have visited him. But, after it,
no sane man, who has not a disagreeable or unlucky relative
to provide for, can doubt the worthlessness of the Falkland
Islands, unless as a convict station.
Mr. Rennie recommends holding the Falkland Islands,
that our Australian ships may there find refuge. An old
story, but unsupported by evidence. He does not give a
list of the ships that have touched for that purpose—the
fact being that every vessel tries to give these islands m
wide a berth as possible, 2nd, He calls'attention to some
forty thousand wild cattle, besides wild horses; value them
at 21. a piece, all round—probably double their w orth—-
and still they scarcely deserve an ex-M.P., 800?. per
annum, when a herdsman at 80?. would look after them
more effectually. 3rd. He calls attention to fine harbours,
which are of little value without some temptation in the
shape of exports or imports —to the absence of trees , and to
the presence of u wild fowl, which have not net ledreied the
necessity of being wild” This is the best sentence, adding one
more bull to the island, 4th, He rejoices over grey mullet,
weighing 15 lbs.—it seems a long way to go for grey mullet.
5 th. He finds the soil “generally peat”—& sort of soil of which
our own home production far exceeds the demand.- 6th,


Tea and sugar „ . ,
£3
0
0
Washing sheep ,
v ■ 6
0
0
Shearing 100 score, at 2s, 6*2. .
12
10
0
Carriage of 4000 3hs, wool
1
0
0
14 Wool bales, at 5s,
4
10
0
Extra ,
8
0
0
MS
0
0
He does not think corn would grow, but is cheered in the
Falkland summer oyer “cabbages, turnips, and radishes' 9
and “ peas, beans, potatoes, &c., looking yerj promising j J ’ 5
adding, the “ defect of the climate is absence of heat and
want of moisture in summer ” 7th. He thinks that shipping
(if it will only come) may be supplied to any extent with
meat, vegetables, butter, and cheese, and that a consider-
able export may be created of hides, tallow, salted fish, &c.
And this is all that Mr. Rennie can say for his tight little
Island. Without trees, without corn, without heat or rain in
summer, with boisterous cutting blasts, with perpetual rain
snow, sleet, and ice in winter, nothing but gross follv or
grosser fraud could lead emigrants to such a howling solitude .
If the Falkland Islands have political importance, or If
they are to be a convict colony, let us know it. Bat to
waste 5000(1. per annum on pretence of rendering them a fit
abode for British subjects, is a scandalous waste of public
money; a disgraceful edition of the penny wise pound
foolish practices that pervade our official attempts at
colonization.
Sheep Leases. —One remedy appears to me to he open to the
stockholders beyond the boundaries. They can lease their sheep to
a class or men whose position in life at once renders personal labour
easy, and wool-growing a profitable occupation. I submit the follow-
ing. 2000 ewes of best class are worth 5001, it the proprietor of
these leases them to an emigrant with a large family of boys, the
tenant gives a lien upon the wool until the rent is paid, by having it
consigned to the proprietor’s agent. The father of the family acts as
watchman, and his boys as shepherds, so he has nothing to pay for
labour. Of course be grows his own wheat, and there is no tiling in
tbs shape ot food to be paid for beyond a little tea and sugar, as he
can have poultry, pigs, and vegetables in abundance. His expenses,
therefore, would be as follows
Now the value of the wool at KM. is 1661. 13s. id., leaving
l3s. id. profit on the dtp, exclusive of increase, and I thinly
the tenant can afford to pay to the proprietor 100 L per annnsa, or
20 per cent. Twelve Tears v& Australia,- '■


LETTERS FROM ABROAD.
[We hope those who approve of our plan and principles will continue
to forward us genuine Letters from Emigrants .]
From a Builder.
Adelaide, South Australia, March I§, 1849.
My Beak Mother, We sailed from Plymouth on the
Bth of November, with a splendid breeze, running nine to
ten knots an hour—-■•everybody on board in excellent spirits.
I remained on deck till the Lizard light, at the Land’s End,
gunk from view. The next morning we were skirting the
Bay of Biscay, the wind still continuing favourable. We
sighted Madeira on the 17th, where we fell in with the
trades, which carried us within a degree of the Line, where
we fell in with light winds and cakes for three weeks, not
making about fifty miles during that time; the sun being
directly over our heads made the heat most intense, so
much so that we were obliged to remain below during the
day, and sleep on deck at night, for between deck was un-
bearable, the rats, cockroaches, and fleas were about in thou-
sands, that made it impossible to sleep; this is a thing that
the owners ought to be punished for, as all passenger ships,
according to the Act of Parliament, ought to be smoked ;
and very necessary It is, for those things are very destruc-
tive, eating your clothes, or anything they can get at. At
last we got a breeze, and we kept crawling on day after
day, all of us anticipating touching at the Cape, and hav-
ing some change from the monotony of sky and water ; but
we were at last disappointed, for the wind set in from the
north-east and continued in that quarter for three weeks,
blowing at times a perfect hurricane, which made it impos-
sible to put in at the Gape, if We ran forty-two
degrees south, and the wind continuing in the same quarter,
the skipper very foolishly laid to, and very nice work lay-
ing to is, with a tremendous sea running : the ship pitched
and rolled to such an extent that everything between
decks was rushing from one side to the other in a most
amusing manner; there were boxes of all sorts, peas, rice,
butter, sugar, water-casks, and red herrings running a race
lying in our bunks highly amused, for it was impos-
sible to stand. It was a great mistake of the skipper to do
gs he did, for the Glemlg } a ship which- started with us, fell


in "with the same wind and kept running as close as she
could to it, till she got to forty-eight south, where she fell
in with a good wind and got in three weeks before us, in-
stead of which we, after the wind fell, had calms and light
winds for some days, for we heard afterwards that he newer
intended to call at the Cape at all, therefore he had no
business to keep so close to it; however, at last we weathered
the Cape, and much pleased we were to hear it, for it is
horrid work to be cramped, cabined, and confined, with
nothing to see but sky and water and the same routine to
go through day after day. There is nothing more trying
to a man’s temper, as I have seen the most laughable in-
stances of; for instance, we seldom had a day pass over
without a tight, for it is the rule on board a ship for might
to be right; if A. loses a knife or spoon, he does not at-
tempt to look for it, but takes B\s. B. grumbles about it,
and not being able to thrash A, takes a spoon or knife
from one less capable of taking it from him. therefore, if
you lose any thing and can’t fight for it, you must put up
with the loss. I was very fortunate in that respect; I
agreed with them all, and never had one row all the passage.
Well, to cut a long story, or rather a long voyage short,
we came in sight of Kangaroo Island on Sunday* the 3rd of
March, and the next day dropped anchor in Holdfast Bay,
where boats put off to us. I availed myself of their services,,
and went on shore with several others directly. We had
about a mile to walk across the sands to get to the port,
from which we rode in. the con veyance to the city, a. dis-
tance of seven miles. The road is very fiat, and up to your
ancles in dirt, for there has not been a drop of rain here fox
five months: the wind, which always blows from the south-
west, raised it about us in clouds, so that we could see
nothing of the country, for we were almost blinded with it.
I was very much disappointed with the town ; the buildings
are, some of them, not better than sheds or cow-houses; so
that painters are not wanted here, as one can do it. After
I had been here a week, I got a Job to assist a man for a
few days, for which I got 6s. 6d. a day, but it only lasted
four days. While I was at work in the back part of the
building, I heard a voice in the front talking to my mate
that I thought I knew, so I went and looked, but could not
recollect any one I knew like him; he was dressed in a sort
of half-sailor’s, half-bricklayer’s, half-plumber’s dress, but
when he was gone I asked what his name was, and heard.


to my surprise, that it was Le Lem, who was working as
journeyman for a builder in the town; so, as soon as I was
done- work, I found him out, and made myself known to
him, for he did not recollect me. He was very much sur-
prised at seeing me here; he said I was the .last person he
should expected to have seen here. He then told me that
he first went to Sydney, where he entered into business as a
builder, and was doing well ■until the panic took place, when
he lost everything, and was at last left without one shilling
in the world; he then went as a sailor before the mast to
Liverpool, but never wrote or send, to any of his Mends,
and returned to Sydney again in the same capacity; he
then got tired of that, so went up the country as a hush-
man, which he says he liked very much, bus hearing that
this place was good he came here, and has been working as
journeyman ever since. He has got married here, and says
he intends to settle here now, as he has got tired of the
wandering life he has for the last five years been follo wing.
He sends"his respects to all, and says he should very much
like to be among you all again once more. There has been
a thousand immigrants arrived since me; what they do I
cannot tell, for there is nothing to be seen of them about
the town two days alter their arrival There is nothing
doing here at present in mj line, so I intend to go twenty-
five miles further, where they toll me that things are better,
and wages higher. I shall write again shortly and give
you a true account of the place, but in the meantime, it
you know any one who is thinking of coming out here,
without a capital, tell them from me to stop at home, for
there is plenty of labour here at present, as it comes oat
faster than the capital can be created to employ it. I must
now conclude with my love to all, and believe me to remain,
your affectionate son,
WM. DORRAGAN.
From a Cabinet Maker.
Melbourne, .Port PMiif, Jan. 11,1810,
“Mother, Brothers, Sisters, and Eshatxyes, •-■• I had
a delightful voyage, without one death of a grown per-
son. From the time we sailed from Plymouth tkl we
came in sight of the land of Australia we were just one
hundred days, and we came to anchor on the .107th day, I
‘went to work the first day I went ashore. I could have


had work at five or sis places: it is all piece wort, which
just suited me. Carpenters are slack, in consequence of so
many emigrants coming out, and no more buildings gohm
on. They work day-work, and get from 6s. to 7s. per day!
I began working at chair-making, at which I earned about
21. per week.” Not being satisfied with the character of
his first employer he left him. He then proceeds—“ While
I worked for that man, Stowes and I lived together, but
now we are living by ourselves; we have three mortises,
which we pay 7s. 6d. per week for. lam working on my
own account. I can earn 31. a week; sometimes I have
earned 47,, when I have no hindrances. Perhaps by mv
description of the house you may not understand: we have
a comfortable little house, with two rooms and a workshop
and a large yard. Rent is at present very high, on account
of so many coming out, but it will sink in the summer.
Our hottest months are December and January; the coldest
June and July; but it is not colder than 45 degrees in
winter, nor hotter than 95 in summer. It is not the same
here as it is at home™~you say as cold as Christmas, we say
as hot as Christmas. We are 10-| hours before you. There
are many curious things here, for we have the moon upside
down to what you have it. We are living In the city of
Melbourne. It Is nearly as large as Oxford, It has some
fine buildings in it. The buildings are composed generally
of brick and stone. There are a few small weatheiMfoarded
houses; they are generally fitted up with cedar. So please
to give my respects to Mr. Peyman, and tell Mm that
painters are but of very little service here. The town is
set out seven miles square, for building. It is situated in a
valley, The streets are quite straight; you may stand at
one end in the bush and see through the town to the bush
at the other end. Cottage houses are generally two rooms
on a floor, letting at 85. a week; but we can live very chean;
we can live like gentlefolks in England for about 6s. per
week, and have beef steaks or mutton chops every morning
for breakfast. We can get good beef, as good as you can
get in England, if not superior, the best joints 2d. per lb,;
prime for salting, per lb.; salt, l|.i,;'best mutton, 2d.,
cows’ hearts, 41 each; calves’ ditto, 2d. ; calves’ lights
and livers, 6d. each; sheeps’ ditto for fetching; cow’s kid-
ney, 2d: ; calf’s ditto, Id. ; sheep’s ditto, \d. ; best tea. U B d.
per ib.; ditto good, Is. 61, Is. 3d., Is.; best coffee, KM; loaf
.sugar, 6<i; best moist, ,31; beer, 6d. per quart; ale, 91;


wine of any description, 2d. per bottle ; gin (very dear) Is,
the half-pint; rum, Is. half-pint; brandy, 4s. a bottle;
butter, 2d. per lb.; cheese, from 2d. to B d. ; bread (4 lb, loaf)
Qd., superior to any in England; peas, Id. per quart; pota-
toes, Id per lb.'; best flour, Is. 6d. the stone ; plums, B d. per
lb.; currants, iod per lb.; gooseberries, 6d and 9d per
quart; oranges, 2d and 3d each ; apples, 8d per ik What
do you think of a good beef-steak for breakfasts .1 bought
a steak I ft. 6 in. long, 4J in. wide, | in. thick for one half-
penny. Clothing is much the same price as in. England,
with the exception of shoes; they are very dear. When I
asked a shoemaker what he would charge me for new bottom-
ing a pair of boots, he said 2 55., which quite frightened me,
because leather is so very cheap. Now lam turned shoe-
maker occasionally. I bought some lasts and tools and
leather. They will not cut small bits of leather as they do
in England. You may have your choice of all that is in
the shop ; if you Taney a piece, if it is half a hide you must
take it; but that is of no consequence, it will not cost above
2s. 6d or 3s. 1 bought a lot of leather for uppers, linings,
and soles for 6«. 9d, out of which I have made five pairs of
shoes, and I have as much left, and 1 do not know when I
shall’be able to use it up. So I leave you to judge what
profit the master shoemaker gets. 1 can now make shoes
that lam not ashamed for any master to see—as good as
any I have seen, and much stronger. Several people want
me to nrake shoes who saw me make my own and Mary s.
I have often thought of what Collins, the butcher, used to
say respecting the hedges being all fuchsias; it is true
enough they are, for I have never seen a hedge sixmo I
have been in the colony, for there are none. The fences
round the gardens are all palings, and in the country, com-
monly called the bush, posts and rails just like those by the
side of the railroad in Port Meadow. Selim, if you intend
coming, as you intimated to me in your letter, I shoulu be
very glad to see you, or any one belonging to me. bor a
single man to come out there is no difficulty; he
his'passage out any month, which I would as leave do, or
rather. You could ship as servant in the cabin-—that Is
the berth in which you get plenty of everything, _lf any-
one should come out belonging to me, I should advise them
to bring a box of bread cut in slices and baked dry; they
would find it very useful. But I do not wish to persuade
any of you So come, neither do I wish to dissatisfy any of


you with, your homes; but if any of you think proper to
come I will give you a good beefsteak. K. M. and Eliza*
beth would do very well here, and female household
servants of any description get from 181 to 2(E. per year*
There is no trouble in getting back if you do not like it. "You
may ship back with any vessel that is coming to England,
You would see it advertised almost every week—‘Persons
wanted to go to England.’ If Elizabeth B should come,.
she should bring plenty of ribbon and net with her, for they
are very dear, Near the town of Melbourne we have some
of the most salubrious walks I ever saw in my life; in fact,
I never saw any before half so good. Please to give my
respects to ; tell them I like the country, and I only
wish I had come out seven years ago. If I had I should
have no occasion to work now. At that time a joiner, or
any one that could use a hand saw and an axe, was getting
from 14s. to 16s, per day.—Yours, <fec.
JOHN BAILEY.”
Eetkospect fob 1848. —During the year 1848 tbs arrivals la
our harbour have amounted to 282, namely—ships and barques,
72; briga and brigantines, 70; schooners, 87; cutters, 45; steam
arrivals from Sydney and the intermediate ports, 8. These arrivals
have respectively brought us cargos, capitalist-passengers, free emi-
grants, or political and commercial advices from London, Leith,
Liverpool, Plymouth, Swansea. Guernsey, Hamburgh, Bremen,.
Bahia, flio de Janeiro, Cape of Good Hope, Port Elizabeth, Algoa
Bay, Mauritius, Freemantle, King George’s Sound, Portland, Mel-
bourne, Launceston, Hobart Town, Sydney, the settlements in New
Zealand, Batavia, Singapore, Hong Eong. With these and several
other colonies and countries we are likely to have an increase of
commercial intercourse. In the three quarters of 1848, for which,
official returns have been published, the tonnage of shipping inwards
was 31.698 tons; and 3514 souls were added to our population; bat
in consequence of the unprecedented numbers who have landed on
our shores within the last quarter, it is fair to presume that our po-
pulation will have had a total increase exceeding 6000 souls in the
year, of whom several hundreds have paid their own passages. The
overland arrivals of horses and bullocks from New South Wales have
been very large, and the importations of horses and vehicles from
"Vein. Diemen’s Land have added considerably to our means of internal
communication. The Land Fund receipts for the year ended 30th
September, 1848, exceeded 40,000 L, although large portions of the
lands sold were not enhanced by great expectations as to any mineral
wealth contained in them; the purchases being made for the most
part with a view to agricultural and pastoral occupation, —-.Port
Adelaide .


ARCHDEACON SINCLAIR’S PLAN OF PARISH
EMIGRATION.
This plan for establishing Juvenile Industrial Schools in
the Colonies, which we made the subject of a detailed
article in page 18 of our First Series, has been so much
approved by Sir George Grey, the Governor of New Zealand,
that he has caused it to be inserted in the Auckland
Government Gazette with the view probably of adopting it
whenever the following Ordinance is carried into practical
effect.
“ Education Orbit* a.nce, —Whereas it is fitting that pro-
vision be made for promoting the education of youth in the
Colony of New Zealand, be it enacted by the Lieutenant-
Governor of New Zealand, with the advice and consent of
the Legislative Council, as follows:
a 1, It shall be lawful for the Governor for the time being,
with the advice of the Executive Council, out of the public
funds of the Colony, to establish and maintain schools for
the education of youth, and to contribute towards the sup-
port of schools otherwise established, as he shall from, time
to time see occasion.
u 2, Every such school shall be subject to inspection in
manner hereinafter provided.
a 3. In every school to be established or supported by
public funds, under the provisions of this ordinance, religious
education, industrial training, and instruction .in the English
language, shall form a necessary part of the system to bn
pursued therein; but in order to provide for the instruc-
tion of children of parents dissenting from the religious'
doctrines to be taught in any such school, such children as
shall attend the same as day-scholars only, may, upon
application to be made in that behalf by their parents or
guardians, be taught therein, without being instructed in
the doctrines of religion.
“4. Every such school shall be placed under the superin-
tendence and management of such one of the persons named
or referred to in the schedule hereunto annexed, as the
Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, shall
in the case of each such school especially direct,
d. The teachers of every such school shall bs appointed
by the person under whose superintendence and manage


meat the same shall respectively he placed as aforesaid, and
shall he removeahle by him at pleasure.
“ 6. In order to secure the efficiency of schools, to be
supported by public funds, every such school shall he in-
spected once at least in every year, by an inspector or in-
spectors, to be for that purpose appointed by his Excellency
the Governor.
“ 7. As soon as conveniently may be after the inspection of
any such schools, such inspector or inspectors shall make a
report in writing to the Governor for the time being, setting
forth the name or description of such school, the number of
children educated therein, the funds out of which the same
may be supported, and the amount thereof respectively, the
salaries paid to the teachers thereof, and the yearly cost in-
curred in the support and education of each pupil main-
tained therein; and shall also report upon the discipline
and management of the school; the nature and extent of
the industrial instruction pursued therein; the attainments
of the children, and the state of the school generally as re-
gards its efficiency.
“8, As soon as the several schools which may be sup-
ported under the provisions of this ordinance, shall have
been inspected as aforesaid, the whole of the reports relat-
ing thereto, shall be together laid before the Colonial Legis-
lature, if the said Legislature shall be then in session, and
if not, then within one calendar month next after the com-
mencement of the then next ensuing session.
u 9. Provided always and be it further enacted, that the
whole, amount of the sums to be advanced under the au-
thority of this Ordinance, in any one year, shall not exceed
one-twentieth part of the estimated revenue of the Colony
or province, as she case may be, for such year.
“ 10. In the construction of this Ordinance, the word
‘ Governor ’ shall be taken to mean the Lieutenant-Governor
or the officers administrating the government of the Colony
for the time being,
a George Grey, Lieutenant-Governor,
and Commander-in-Chief.
“7th Oct. 1847.”
u Schedule. —The Bishop of New Zealand, The Bishop
or other head of the Roman Catholic Church in the Colony
of New Zealand, The Superintendent of the Wesleyan
Mission, The head or minister of any other religious body


who shall have been engaged in the education of youth in
New Zealand.”
On this an Auckland paper remarks:—
“ The venerable projector recommends a school capable
of accommodating twelve hundred children, six hundred of
either sex, the goings out to be kept up by drafts from
home. The schools, the Archdeacon inclines to think, might
speedily be rendered self-supporting, le ourselves see
nothing whatever to prevent them. Indeed, with a colonial
experience of some two and twenty years, we have met with
no plan of emigration at ones so simple, so reasonable, and
so practicable, as that which does honour to the head and
heart of John Sinclair, and to which we trust New Zealand
will be among the first of colonies earnestly ami energeti-
cally to respond,”— New Zealander , 18 th April, 1.849.
Tools as:o Imp.ls«bnts non a sew Faan. 0 ruler this head also
I shall generalize rather than particularise. I shall state the sort of
tilings required, and leave the quantities to be adapted, for the -most
part, by the, parties, as well as leave the larger and sm <i *H w
to select, each for himself, what particular tools will be a ' < ,c-
---quired by his particular operations contemplated : —Comma t ' \h, a
falling axe (forged only in the colony). Mem. If ho mean- to *<nk.
himself, with one labourer, be will need, of course, two axes; if with
two labourers, three axes; and so on. They must be halted and
ground in the settlement. Heavy poll on at least one ; each handle
of different length; each axeman will find out his own. Mortising
axe ; two rather than one in all cases, for they are a tool very apt to
get spoiled. Auger, | in., 1 in., Ij in. Gross-cut saw, 6 ft, plate
at least; f ft. better. Square teeth. Files for ditto, at least half a
dozen ; and saw set. Maul, or as it is termed in some parts of Eng-
land, beetle. The rings will be forged by the smith at the settle-
ment ; your labourer must be able to put them on. Each man that
Works at splitting requires a maul. A few small iron wedges: make
the blacksmith jag the edges so that, once in the wood, they will not
come out again. Set of splitting wedges. Generally, half a dozen
go to one set. Only one set is required. Broad axe. Adze. —Mem,
All tools p:iat require grinding may be ground at the settlement.
Spades for digging post holes—a peculiar sort; to be purchased at
the Company’s stores. Also common spades. Spud and pick ;to be
procured from blacksmith. Hoes. These also are a purely colonial
article, 12 in, in the blade, strongly supported on the buck, and with
thoroughly substantial eye. The smallest settler should have at least
four. With these tools and implements a crop may be got in • with-
out them, not; unless in a very blundering, makeshift manner.
MEW SERIES —NO, VI. X


THEATRICALS AT PORT NICHOLSON.
"We hope the following sketch of a fashionable place of amusement, in
the most genteel of our Colonies, may fall into the hands of and con-.'
sole some Yankee riled by Mrs. Trolloppe’s sarcasms.
“ We went accordingly, and found the house so full that it was with
considerable difficulty we could get up to our perches—which we were
told were the boxes. However, by dint of pulling from above and push-
ing from below, we managed to get into them. The ladder which had
been placed for the accommodation of the audience mounting to these
seats, had been broken before our arrival, by some of the audience, dur-
ing a slight disturbance. As soon as our eyes had become accustomed
to the cloudy atmosphere, which was strongly impregnated with to-
bacco smoke, we discovered the stage and its recesses. The piece was
just about to commence, the pit having come to an amicable under-
standing with each other, after considerable demonstrations of pulling
the boxes down and annihilating the occupants. The first actor who.
made his appearance was greeted with such a shout, and underwent
such an impertinent cross-examination as to where he had procured
his red striped pantaloons, how the moustache was stuck on, &c..
that he could not proceed. This being highly irregular, the manager
came on to request that order might be kept; unfortunately for him-
self he was known to the colonists as a vocalist, and was accordingly
called upon for a gong in such an energetic manner, that, to save the
stage from being upset, he sang “The Admiral;’’ and being in the
costume of “ Macbeth,” it had on the whole a pleasing effect. He
was loudly applauded for Ins good-nature, which, however, was further
put to the test by the wilful hearers calling- on their first friend of
the red striped trousers to favour them in a similar way: he, how-
ever, not being prepared to perform in this way, was hissed off the
stage, and order was not restored until one of the actresses came m
and sang at least half-a-dozen songs in succession, which were received
with raptures of applause. The piece was then commenced, and went
on smoothly for half an hour, when poor Macbeth happening to be left-
alone on the stage to get through some long soliloquy, the wayward
audience, knowing him to fee a dancing-master, and excelling in the
sailor’s hornpipe, demanded it in a maimer which would not bear a
refusal The fiddlers were accordingly ordered, in a very peremp-
tory manner, to strike up; and poor Macbeth was obliged to start
off. His long sword rather interfering with his steps, he laid it aside
and went to work in capital style, which brought forth such snouts
of deligh t and uproarious peals of laugh ter, accompanied fey such
stamping and screams and other symptoms of excessive approbation,
that in a few minutes down came the boxes, the supports having been
knocked away from beneath. This brought the hornpipe to a finale,
and with it the whole of. the performance, —Lieutenant M‘Jxillop’s
.Reminiscences in Nets Zealand*


THE LAND COMPANY'S BARGAIN, OR “ THRICE SOLD,
FROM AN UNPUBLISHED DRAMA,
BY A LUMBERER.
gcEKE —The table dhole at the Albion, Fredericton, New Brunswick.
Ltjd lioEms {a lawyer), Wilbsaham (a professor of modern
languages), Haedwat (« lumberer), Gkmder {son of the sheriff,
and sheriffs officer,) and others .
W. —By the by, Mr. Robins, have you seen the colonel’s
last importation from the old country 1 I hear he can talk
of nothing else.
L. Importation ! devil a bit! I came up the river with
him from St. John’s : young man—tall, sandy-haired;
squints a little ; carries lots of plunder- a gun, two rifles,
and a fishing pole that cost forty dollars. Talked of shoot-
ing bears, and making his way through the woods to the
Bfc" Lawrence. Snow recognised him for an old school-
fellow, and handed him over to the colonel at once. He’s
as green as a spruce bough, and will strip) as easy.
H. —Poor devil ! he’ll be soon done brown enough, I sup-
pose the -colonel had taken him over to Stoneley 1
L. It. —Yes: on pretence of salmon fishing in tbeMiramichi,
where there a’nt two foot of water, and the forest- all on fire.
The colonel’s a clever man. What lot is he going to sell
this time, Grinder?
Q % —Sturt’s cottage, I believe; it was thrown on his hands
last week, when Sturt cleared for St. John’s. It's a pretty-
bit of laud, too, what’s on the other side of the stream,
where the house ought to be ; but all the money has been
spent in beautifying the cottage, instead of clearing and
stumping; and after all, they can’t keep out the cola. ;
while you roast one ear at the fire, the other is frost-bitten
by theVind that comes through the paunels. Nothing keeps
out frost in a frame house but lath and plaster. But the
worst of it- is, there are no title-deeds ; for though il Tupper,”
the first purchaser, paid for his grant, and got the deeds
from the Company, that -onlyincludes the eighteen acres on
tfce north side of the stream,-where the house stands. Body,
the next holder, never paid more than a deposit of 10b or
t 2


so, though, he lived there two years ; and as Sturt bought of
Body, I think you will agree that, beyond the right of pos-
session, the tenure of the property rests on rather insecure
grounds. As to the ninety acres across the stream, they
were first sold to Body, and then again to Sturt; but as
neither completed the purchase, though they both paid a
portion of the money, a deed was never granted, and they
can therefore be obtained for the original sum.
W.—Mr. Tupper would, of course, make over his claim to
th©eighteen acres, and surrender the deed ?
(?.—A man has no power here to assign property, without
the consent and signature of his wife ;. and as Mrs. T. is in
England, and not likely to return, there may be some diffi-
culty in arranging it; at all events it will take time.
L. &.—And long before that our tall friend will have re-
ceived a friendly visit from you, and—-
(r, —Yes—yes. His flint will he fixed, and no mistake.
The colonel has not had such a chance since he cleared out
the W s.
H. —You should hear the settlers speak of him : I wonder
he ventures to show there. Did you hear of his reception
the last time he went up 1 x
L. R-- -Ido—what was it 1
ll—Not a very flattering one, certainly. You remember
old Plant, the Cheshire farmer, who came out five or six
years ago with a thousand pounds, expecting, on the faith
of the Company’s agent, to find oranges and pine-apples
growing, like blue-berries, wild in the woods,” and deer
standing before the. door and crying, “Come shoot me!”
?Veil 5 as long as his money and his gullibility lasted, old
Plant was- the Company’s crack settler ; his success was
quoted in all their despatches, to head quarters, and served
as a decoy to. entice others. But as the old fellow’s eyes
gradually opened, lie fell into disfavour : disputes arose be-
tween him and the Company, and he soon discovered that the
land once sold, and the money paid, the Company’s interest
in their settlers was at an end. The colonel and he are now
at daggers drawn, and scarcely ever meet without a scene,
which the colonel does his best to avoid. The last time ho
was there, however, they met accidentally in Maine’s shop ;
and just as the colonel was retreating to the door, with a
quiet ‘ Good morning,’ the old fellow stood before him, with
his legs stuck out, and his hands in ids pockets,—“ Sfcon a
bit, kurnsl,” says he, c ' I’ve got summut to tell ’ee : I’ve


found out what thee be, Tb.es Want a ku-rnel, mors nor I
he, but thee bees a darned skunk, and that’s the stinkingest
hanimal as is.”
ir.—p oor colonel! what a situation'! Why, he’s the.
neatest, best dressed, and most courteous little man in the
city.
L. R. —Exactly so. A perfect Jemmy Jessamy, and about
as fit to be lord commissioner as I am to be bishop of
Fredericton.
Wl —Can you tell me, Mr. Hard way, why that unfortunate
place, Stoneiey, is so much abused 1 I am told that the land
is good, and the climate healthy, and yet everybody joins in
the cry, except the colonel and his friends ?
If. — l will tell you, in as few words as I can. Some ten years
ago, that mighty company, the ST. R JJ. B. L. C, having a
great deal of land for sale, and no buy ers, determined, as is
usual on such occasions, to formda city. The site they selected
was singularly felicitous. At a distance of twenty-five miles
from Fredericton, the nearest town, or settlement, from, which
it was separated by am almost trackless forest, connected with
the St. John, the natural artery of the province, by a stream
neither navigable by boats in summer nor sleighs in winter,
far removed from any main read, and from the gaze of pass-
ing travellers, the foundations of the future city were laid,
A church was built and endowed ;an hotel; a shop followed;
a workhouse for the reception of the poorer emigrants; a nice
cottage for the doctor, who was engaged with a yearly-
salary; and a splendid mansion for the resident commissioner.
A picturesque and beautiful road, made, at an enormous
expense, under the direction, of the Company's own surveyor,
running up and do wn precipices, and across creeks, swamps,
and ravines, with a noble contempt of such puny ■obstacles,
connected the new colony with the capital ; and every
other day, the Company’s mail carried passengers nnd
letters to and fro between Stoneiey and Fredericton,
Young- R, who was ordained yesterday by the bishop,
was one of the teamsters. Unfortunately, along the whole
of this road, there was not, on either side, half an acre of
land on which you might raise a potato, or a blade of oats,
Ko matter; a colony of Highlanders were brought over;
they were used to a mountainous country, and would be
sure to thrive oa so congenial a soil. It was soon found,
however, that Highlanders, though accustomed to rooks,
were not accustomed to the cultivation of them; and as


there were no cattle for them to lift , they must have starved,
if the Company had not supplied them with the necessaries
of life. One or two hardy families yet remain ; the rest
have re-emigrated to the States. '
The road had been long abandoned; another is now com-
pleted, over a less romantic, but more fertile tract of coun-
try; and the deserted log-huts and neglected clearings mark
the failure the great Highland settlement.
Meanwhile, at the head quarters at Stoneley, the pro-
gress was astonishing. The Commissioner kept open
house; a splendid f&te was given, at which the Bishop,
the Attorney-General, the Master of the Rolls, and the
elite of Government House and the Garrison, were present;
a , review of the Stoneley yeomanry followed, con-
cluded by a mock fight, which, by the aid of some choice
Irish spirits, terminated in a glorious row; the “gentle”
settlers were regaled with champagne,, the “ simple” with
“kill-soldier” (rum); in short, every thing was carried on
on a grand scale, and entirely regardless of expense. This
was all very well, as long as it lasted; but at length the
directors at home began to discover that their Commissioner
was going ahead rather too fast; that grand dispatches and
fine works were not the return they expected for their
w aar )J fact, that it was “ great cry and very little
wool.” So they determined to turn over a new leaf, and
began by selecting our friend the colonel to fill the place of
the jovial commissioner, whom they resolved to cashier.
These were their directions, —“ Use the strictest economy ;
we have been nearly ruined by mistaken extravagance : "rfc
has, however, served to make the settlement popular, and
attract attention; it is time we should reap the fruits, ’Per-
suade capitalists to. buy land, and to make improvements ;
dazzle their eyes with promises of success ; and embark
them in various speculations ; whether they succeed or not,
ours will be the benefit. Blarney the rich; bully the poor ;
pooh pooh the malcontents; and, above all, send us
money.”
W. —“ Rem, quocmique modo, rem.”
IL —Don’t interrupt me with your Greek. Well, the
colonel came over, and commenced his new system ; and hig
first hit was trapping the W s, two young Englishmen,
whom their father drafted out of a pack of twelve, as unfit
for pulpit or bench, to seek their fortunes in the Stoneley
Eldorado, Not contented with selling them for ready


money several hundred acres, on which they built a hand-
some house, the colonel, by representing to their father the
certainly of success, induced him to advance large sums, to
be employed under his (the colonel’s) directions, for his sons
benefit. A dam was formed on the river ; a bridge thrown
across it; a saw and grist mill erected ; and all together be-
tween 3000 Z. and 4000 Z. spent on the property. Such an
outlay is not of course repaid in many the con-
sequence of this hasty and injudicious expenditure was that
the W~——s became involved, and then found the colonel
out. The father stormed ; the blame was shifted on the
sons’ extravagance, and the young men were left to struggle
with their difficulties as they best might.
{X And nobly has one of them done it ; he worts like a
horse, and feeds on salt pork all the year round ; that fellow
would have made his own fortune aud that of the colony if
he had had g*ood honest advice at starting,
X. R. Nothing hurts a new settlement so much as the
profuseness of gentlemen emigrants ; they not only injure
themselves, but those who depend upon them for employ-
ment and subsistence. It destroys that energy and sell-
reliance which is the life and soul of a colony ; and when
the re-action comes, and employer and employed are thrown
on their own resources, they find that they have a fresh
beginning to make, and are astonished at their own help-
lessness.
]l t —/phis was the case at Stoneley; but another and worse
evil is this. The colonel, sick of the depression which fol-
lowed on the clearing out of the W s, and being besides
more of a fine gentleman than a colonist, removes to tyc
metropolis, appoints poor old Wyatt as his vice, who can no
nothing but drink rum, and talk of Salamanca,—
jf > ...h‘VYhile he acts as master of the ceremonies at the go-
vernment house balls, talks scandal, and—
L. IL- —Lies in wait for such bonnes as our tail
fair-haired friend, upon whom he pounces with unerring
spring, and gorges at his leisure.
ip x n tbe mean while, the interests of the settlement are
neglected, the salary paid by the Company is not spent on
their estate, disputes arise, complaints multiply, and there
is no one at hand to settle the former, or investigate the
latter; and, in short, the city, whose mighty beginning I
have related, sinks into a straggling lot of clearings, with a
group of houses in the centre, now destined to be uninhabited;


for the place has a bad name, and few go there but from .ig-
norance, or stay but on compulsion.
W. —And what is the remedy for all this?
11. A very simple one. To begin, afresh ;to appoint as
commissioner a plain, sensible, gentleman farmer; who
should live on the spot and farm a hundred acres-- the
Company's farm ”; —who should be the friend and adviser of
the settlers—poor as well as rich ; —whose farm should be,
in a simple sense, the model farm, in which people might
see, not the result of lavish expenditure, but of a course
which it was in their own power to follow, almost to the
letter ; to give every reasonable assistance to emigrants, not
only at their first arrival, but io. all cases of distress, not tbs
result of ill-conduct ; to look less to the emigrant’s pocket,
and more to his capabilities for becoming a peaceful neigh-
bour and an industrious colonist; to avoid useless expense,
incurred for ostentation and frivolity, but never to withhold
the means of doing real good ; and lastly, to begin as they
mean to continue j for a retrograde motion is the ruin of a
young settlement. It’s motto must ever be—
u Go ahead !”
Stores roe, Yovaoh.—The steerage passenger, on the other hand,
can by no means trustfully to the ship’s provision. But he had better
examine the ration table for himself, and plan his own degree and
mode of varying it. Some extra tea, or coffee, and sugar are indis-
pensable ; a side of bacon ia almost equally so ; nor should he be with-
out both some rice, patent flour, and potted meats, provided he can, at
all afford to procure them. On all classes of passengers I strenuously
urge the importance and duty of not allowing the voyage to pass by
in mental idleness. A good acquaintance with the leading principles
of half a dozen sciences might be acquired in four months. But let
us merely suppose that the voyager takes with him a good volume on
agriculture, or on the rearing of live-stock; making himself thoroughly
conversant with its contents by two or even three close readings of It.
Unequivocally, such an individual, beside all the improvement effected
of the materiel of his mind itself, will have increased his intrinsic
value to himself as a colonist by fully one-third. Farmers, already
commonly acquainted with their own business by practice, might
advance on thus to the study of agricultural chemistry an invaluable
branch of knowledge. If completely informed already in that, they
might take up Universal History, or Political Economy. Only let
not the time—a season when the mind is so free from daily cares,
when the energies are in such a state of healthy tension by the influ-
ence of sea air— be thrown away.— Guide to Fori Stephens.


EMIGRATION PAST AND TO COME.
In reviewing the colonizing events of the year 1849, we note
several important changes in the policy of our Colonial
Office and the great colonizing companies—changes founded
on principles which we have never ceased to advocate since
we first called attention to the wrongs of Australia,, in our
“ Voice from the far Interior,” in 1847, and which we
have constantly urged in the pages of the “ Emigrant’s
Journal.”
Under instructions from home, rural land in the three great
Australian colonies is now sold at every auction, in lota of
moderate size, instead of 640 acres, according to the old rule.
The price has not yet been reduced ; but as the land ques-
tion will he left to the consideration of the federal council
of New South Wales, Port Philip, and South Australia,
under the new Constitution, a common-sense solution is not
far off.
Purchasers of waste lands in the colony are now enabled
to obtain free passages for three statutable emigrants for
every 80?, paid. This regulation will eventually enable
small settlers to get over their relatives from the old country .
At present the concession is only nominal, because it is
clogged with the provision that the parties appointed shall
be statutable, viz., agricultural emigrants, and that if not
approved, the commissioners shall be at liberty' to nominate
parties to lake the place of the rejected friends of the Aus-
tralian settlers. But as the principle has been admitted, the
details will be amended.
Arrangements have been made by which. Australian
settlers of the humbler class may remit money or nay the
expense of passages for the benefit of their Irieads and rela-
tives in the old country —a measure which will eventually
lead to a considerable stream of self-supporting emigration
similar to that which, in 1847, obtained from, the United
States one million sterling towards Irish emigration*.
The plan for the colonization of Natal sanctioned by Earl
Grey, under which every labourer paying 10?, for a passage ob-
* The Emigration Commissioners state the sum at 460,000?,. bat
this excludes suras remitted through Messrs, Barings, at least as ranch,
more.


tains 20 acres of land, is in direct contradiction of the theo-
ries propounded by the Colonial Office since 1840, when it
was decided that the possession of land was a luxury too
great for working men.
The extraordinary success of the Natal colony seems to
have induced our official colonizers to try their hands at
neutralizing the 1/. an acre system in Yan Diemen’s land,
by granting the whole value of the purchase money in
passage money, and half as much more in materials and
labour, so as to reduce the cost of land in Yan Diemen’s
Land below even the American standard*.
The results of this move have not yet appeared, but the
two measures betoken serious doubts in head quarters of the
efficacy of Mr. 'W akefield’s dear-land theory as a colonizing
agent; and we may therefore hope that, although unpatro-
nized and unquoted, our arguments have had some effect in
Downing Street,
The operations of the Australian Agricultural Company
at Port Stephens are another evidence of the progress of
sound principles of colonization. The fact that a company,
possessing the best port in Australia—after Port Jackson- ™
and a large tract of good well-watered land, with easy water
carriage to old-settied districts, like the Hunter and
Williams Rivers, are prepared to sell lots without auction at
half the government price, will outweigh, whenever the
question of colonization is debated, volumes of theoretical
calculations. Even the New Zealand Company are obliged
to give way to the spirit of the times and reduce their rural
lota from one hundred acres to twenty-five, so as to place
them within the reach of the class whom their original
theory only admitted to the privileges of a colony as
labourers, aad the principal agent of the New Zealand Com-
pany (Mr, Fox) has, as officially circulated, unanswerable
arguments against the exclusive system of colonization
which that company was incorporated to carry oufcf,
WA believe that the time is coming when, instead of
listening to the Utopian theories of ambitious schemers, the
people of this country will be inclined to prefer colonial,
opinions on colonizing undertakings.
For instance, on the 29th December, the Times contained,
and commented on approvingly, a letter from Bishop Selwyn
* A Revolution in Yan Diermm’s Land, p. 204.
f Page 297, ante.


of New Zealand, in which that able, energetic and excellent
man scatters to the winds nine-tenths of the rubbish that
has been written about the projected Canterbury colony, and
propounds a scheme, every line of which we approve and
commend to the attention of our colonizing friends, except
the commercial calculations, and a bishop is not expected
to be strong on finance. With wool at present prices, it will
never pay to buy land at 31. an acre, even though the land,
without culture, feed four sheep to the acre, which, on. a
large scale, we doubt.
The bishop sets his face against town lots, against forced
concentration, and against attempts to move society in Jiock
from England to New Zealand ; in fact, he adopts principles
which may be found set forth at length, again and again, in
the pages of the First Series of this Journal, Fortunately,
many who would not listen to a Bushman will listen to a
Bishop.
Twelve months since we observed-—“ The cardinal error
committed in the planning of Otago consisted in the absurd
division into town lots, suburban, and country lots, which
effects dispersion in its worst form by dividing the energies
and the capital of the settlers. The proper plan for a colo-
nist, if he buys land, is to live on his land, there to build, sow'
and dig, plough and harrow. * * To found a colony, money
must be found ; perhaps there is no better way of raising it
than by selling the waste land. Let the land be carefully
surveyed by persons accustomed to value wild land. Send
first plenty of live stock, with experienced colonial shepherds
and stockmen. If there be a port or other undoubtedly
proper site for a town, lay out as much as is likely to be
needed to be let for a term of years.
“ The rents will be available for municipal purposes. Let-
one year’s crops be grown by picked farming men. before
the main band of emigrants sail. Let none sail until lands
are ready for delivery to the purchasers. Let every man,
no matter what his rank, have his passage money remitted
in land at a low price. Keep the lots small, because it is
only the men cultivating with their own hands that can
afford to grow grain in the early days of a colony. It is
the ten-acre men who have succeeded best in New Zealand.
Under this arrangement men of capital would be stock-
holders, small farmers would grow grain and vegetables.’'
The principles of colonization maintained in the above


sentences are not romantic, picturesque, or ambitious ; but
they are the principles of common sense.
With land sold in lots of not less than 150 acres, at not less
than, 3 1, an acre, Canterbury colony, haying no natural
exports, obliged to import all its live stock from blew
South Wales, colonized by sons of the aristocracy, the
clergy, and the squirearchy will prove a great Serbonian
bog to colonizing adventurers, engulphing with their for-
tunesa hundred splendid religious, political, and philan-
thropic dreams ; absorbing capital enough, if well directed,
to found ten greater colonies ; but it will perhaps leave a
stock, on which a fruit-bearing settlement may be grafted,
and ensure the fortunes of no small number of shrewd
old Australian speculators. And yet the English directors
of Canterbury colony are clever men and honourable
men, but they prefer Mr. Wakefield’s crotchets to colonial
experience. Perhaps the Bishop’s hints may lead to useful
consultations, a healthy pause, and a reconsideration of a
scheme which, on a sounder basis, has within itself the ele-
ments of great success.
Mr. Sidney Herbert’s committee for promoting female
emigration to the Australian colonies—thus at the same time
relieving England of its crowds of ill-fed, ill-clothed, ill-paid
working women, and diminishing the frightful disproportion
of the sexes in the most flourishing of our colonies—is an
admirable move in the right direction; a move towards what
Mrs. Chisholm called providing the best of Christian mis-
sionaries—wives and little children.
_ Mr. Sidney Herbert has talent, wealth, position, zeal and
piety, all powerful auxiliaries ; but for entire success he
needs more, —he confidence of the people of this country in
the class who need to emigrate, and the confidence of the
settlers of Australia in, she class who need wives. For
entire success he must know neither sect, nor party, nor
country, so that they be honest women and British subjects.
He must try to befriend rather than patronise. His agents
should feel not only for, but with the poor.
The letter in which lie introduced the subject to the
readers of ihe Morning Chronicle was creditable to bis talents
and his heart, but it would have been more graceful to have
alluded to those who have laboured to promote female emi-
gration before it became fashionable. The sanction of Mrs.
Chisholm is indispensable towards obtaining the support of


the marrying classes of Australia,—-bush settlers and bush
labourers.
And as we are taking leave of our friends here, we may be
pardoned for reminding them that the necessity-—the
duty—of promoting female emigration to Australia has been
our earliest and latest theme ; for instance, we observed,
and were more blamed for our coarseness than praised for
our zeal, that—
“ The poor peasant girl, the straw-plaiter of Buckingham-
shire, the dairymaid of Devonshire, the Scotch shepherdess,,
and all the crowd of girls who from time to time are com-
pelled to resort to great cities in search of subsistence, and
who, struggling amid a crowd of competitors for bread, find
beauty or even common comeliness their bane, would, in
Australia, married, full-fed and happy, wean the rude bush-
men from their barbarous ways, and bring them back to the
English style of their forefathers. The moral amendment
of Australia lies in hearths and homes, and these must be
founded in the wilderness, Tne essence or a pastoral hits
is solitude flocks and herds to thrive must be far apart.
It is into these districts that the humanizing influences of
woman must be brought. If the men marry, ttte masters
can marry too, and thus tbs whole character of the Aus-
tralian bush will be changed. In .England women have
few honest trades open to them. The ‘ Song of a Shirt/ is
the best British argument for female emigration. Marriage
is either a luxury or an imprudence. Husbands are con-
gratulated when tbeir wives prove childless ; in Australia
the working man, with a few acres of corn-growing bush
land, sees in every child the source of air income, in a
word, let us have, if possible, a large annual batch of girls ;
but it would be better to send us any kind of woman capable
of being a mother, than to leave the bush in its present hor-
rible one-sexed state A*
' And again in February, 1849—•
“ We should be glad to see the ladies, who patronise so
many philanthropic institutions, turning their attention to-
wards relieving the frightful competition among ■women, by
establishing a female emigration society in correspondence
with influential parties in the colonies, Suea a society
would confer undoubted benefit on both the colony and the
mother country. In London aloae, wo hear that there are
3 Sidney's Australian Hand-Book (Ist Edition), August, 1/18.


1500 women engaged in 'bookbinding, many of whom would
be glad to emigrate. Among governesses, dressmakers, and
the daughters of small farmers, a considerable number would
be prepared to pay part towards their passage money, or
even the whole, if there were only organised arrangements
for their reception here, and distribution in the colonies.”
We may add now, that female emigration would be self-
repaying, if not self-supporting; for Australian wives
send for and pay the passage of sisters and cousins, to be
bestowed on the husband’s relations.
CANADA.
Emigration to British Forth America is, for the moment,
at a standstill. The removal of the protective duty on
timber, and the consequent failure of the lumber trade,
has caused a temporary depression, and reduced the demand
for labour. The political disturbances in Lower Canada
have tended to produce the same result. But this state of
things cannot long continue. The vast corn-producing
regions of Canada West, and the huge wilderness tracts of
New Brunswick, will not long call in vain for the axe and
the plough. If we will not occupy them, there Is a near
neighbour ready and eager to supply our place ; one who can
appreciate their real value, and knows Low to turn it to the
best account.
A tithe of the liberality so profusely and uselessly be-
stowed on barbarous tribes in various parts of the world,
and especially in the futile attempts at suppressing the
slave trade, would, by developing the inexhaustible resources
of these provinces, render their inhabitants not only loyal
and prosperous, but able to receive and employ a large
proportion of those emigrants who are now driven to the
United States,
As far as Few Brunswick is concerned, the abolition of
the lumber trade will be a positive good. The energies of
the people, previously exhausted in rash and often ruinous
speculations, will be now turned into the only safe and
proper channel—the pursuits of agriculture. Farming and
lumbering could not flourish together, and there can be no
question which, in the end, is the most useful and profitable
employment, setting aside the recklessness and immorality
* Sidney’s Journal (Ist Series), page 138.


inseparable from the latter occupation. But this must be
succeeded by some great public work, which will at once
give employment to the labourer and bring the land into
cultivation ; and nothing would effect this more completely
than the proposed railway from Halifax to Quebec, which
has been so fully described in the First Series of the Journal.
The advantages which would result from this work are too
many and too obvious to require enumeration here ; but we
are able to assert, on the authority of those who are well
acquainted with every part of the province, that along the
whole course of the projected line through the wilderness
of Sew Brunswick, the soil, with very few exceptions, is
such as will amply repay clearing, being clothed with mag-
nificent timber, which the facility of carriage would render
valuable, and being particularly adapted to the growth of
■oats, potatoes, and buck-wheat, and all the produce best suited
to the climate. The benefits that would be derived from the
stimulus thus given to colonial industry and enterprise are
incalculable ; and we can only account for the apathy of
the Government on so important a subject, by supposing
either that they consider the retention of the Canadas a
matter of no moment, or that there is even a thicker film,
than ordinary over the eyes of the Colonial Office. If we
are asked, Whence the funds for such an undertaking are to
be derived % we reply that they can easily be obtained by
abandoning such barren dependencies as the Falkland
Islands, Labuan, &c.
Foreign Emigration. —A. Duke Frederick Augustenberg, one of the
younger scions of the Holstein family who have been engaged in the
unsuccessful insurrection against Denmark, has sailed for Australia,
in company with Captain Stanley Carr, a celebrated agriculturist,
long settled in Mecklenburgh, who has contributed some valuable
papers to the Transactions of the Royal Agricultural Society. Many
of the Hungarian nobility would follow congenial pursuits on the
pasture plains of Australia—breeding horses, cattle, and sheep. They
might introduce Tokay vineyards.
National Spouts.--— The theatre and the cafe mark the progress
of French, colonisation, and, wherever ladies are to he had, the ball
room. The English carry racing and hunting round the world. The
number of races announced in tiie Australian papers is perhaps greater
than in any other countries, except England and Ireland, Small
villages have three days' racing, and the reports are all in due Jockey
Club form. Regattas, too, for sailing yachts, whaling boats, and
settlers' boats, enliven even the minor ports once & year.


DR. LANG, THE " SPECTATOR,” AND THE COLONIAL
OFFICE.
Dii, Lang has left England—-this last feat was his greatest.
He penned a farewell or benediction as vehement, as vigo-
rous, and as mendacious, as any of his farewell speeches to
Colonies or Congregations, and actually succeeded in in-
ducing the Spectator, the most acute and sober of our Eng-
lish journals, to endorse it. The whole letter scarcely con-
tained a word of truth.
The Colonial Office seldom deserves our support, but
justice requires us to state and prove that, in opposing Dr,
Lang’s Series of Colonizing Schemes, the Colonial Office watt
acting in accordance with the opinions and wishes of the
Australian colonists.
In the first place, Dr. Lang was not the Emigration Agent
of Port Philip, as some seem to imagine. He applied for
the appointment, and industriously circulated a printed
circular, in which it is stated “to be expedient and neces-
sary that, if possible, a Member of the Legislative Council
should be deputed to proceed to England for the promotion
of Emigration.” That a sum of 3000?. be raised by sub-
scription, being a salary at the rate of 1000?. a year for three
years. “ And as it is understood that the .Rev, I)r. Lang has
some intention of proceeding to England on other business,
he he requested to undertake the proposed mission .” This
circular, dated Sydney, Nov. 17,1845, did not answer. Dr,
Lang was not, and Mr. Archibald Cmminghame was, ap-
pointed, at a salary of 500?. a year, to represent the interests
of Port Philip in England, The Doctor, however, proceeded
to England, and there gave birth to a variety of schemes,
of which the Colonial Papers speak in the following man-
ner ;
a Tort Philip and Clarence River Company.
“ Recollections of the ‘ Gflenmotchkin Railway,’ or the flourishing
township of Eden, in Martin Chuzzlewit, irresistibly crowd upon us.
and we will be bound that the shareholders in either of these notable
schemes realized just as much as their brethren of the Port Philip
and Clarence River Colonization Company are ever like to receive. I '
Melbourne Daily News, April 30, 1849.
We do not approve of the scheme—-we think it must fail. We
are afraid the present scheme of the worthy Doctor will end like some
other of liis schemes, and, if carried out, must result in the partial ruin
of those who embark in the speculation, ¥e trust, therefore, that it


will not meet with even partial encouragement. Clarence River and
Melbourne must be nearly 1500 miles apart. We do not ascribe any
improper motive to the Doctor, but we think his 'prospectus is a crude,
rash, and impracticable scheme. Had it come from any other person,
we should have regarded it as something worse.”— Port Philip £fa-
zette. May 8, 1844,
“ The project is one of those many speculations that issue at ran-
dom from the fertile and planning brain of our late representative.
Dr, Lang, got up in a hasty inconsiderate manner, and, like all the
Doctor’s other bubbles, it is the offspring of a rash, clever, though
erratic imagination, prepared for the sole purpose of personal aggran-
disement, with a small sample of the leaven of bigotry at the bottom
of all.”— Melbourne Morning Herald, May 12, 1844.
The Sydney Morning Herald, the journal of the greatest
circulation and influence in Australia, wrote in still stronger
terms.
The fact is, that the Colonial Office were guilty, not for treat-
ing Dr. Lang's schemes coldly, but for not denouncing them
publicly. The Fortitude, filled by Dr, Lang’s pretty pictures
and glowing promises, sailed for Moreton Bay, each emigrant
expecting, as soon as he landed, to be settled on the land he
had paid for. But the Doctor had not a yard of land in
the territory, although ready to sell any quantity at 255. an
acre, listen to the following letters :
“ Nov. 23, 1849.
“ Sis, —I have been handed the enclosed copy of a letter, by the
brother of the writer, who left him in the Choreley, under Dr,
Lang’s scheme, which I am sorry you predicted the fate of too truly
at the time. Should you think it likely to he of service to further
the cause which you have done good service, I shall be glad to hand
you the next, promised soon—l am, yours, &c. ***.
<c Brisbane, Moreton■ Bay, N. S.. W., May 13, 1849.
“ Dear EhwaivD, —On the 28th of April the pilot came on board,
and we anchored as close to the river as we could; as there was little
water on the bar we had to be landed by a small steamer. On the
sth of May most of our luggage was out, and we expect it all in a few
days. We are truly thankful to the Almighty for his mercies to us,
and bringing us here in safety, after so fine a passage ns we have had.
We have all been a little unwell, I think from a change in the diet,
but fire all now quite well; the children are much improved, and !
am stouter than ever you saw me. We found things very tuiferent
on our arrival from what we were led to expect before we left Eng-
land. The agent here would have nothing to do with us, and the
Government cast us off, but would allow us to sleep in the Convict
Barracks. Ido not know if any good will come to us at a future
NiiW SEEIES NO. VI. ’■&


time from Dr. Lang’s scheme, But the present disappointment h
great; it appears a most villanous thing to me, for the Doctor, after
getting the most of our little capital into his hands for the land, should
ship us here to the opposite side of the world to starve with oar fa-
mily. There was no convenience for us, nor cottages erected for us
to go to, as the Doctor told us of; and had it not been for the Go-
vernment agent lending us the Barracks, we might have lain in the
street. You may think it was not pleasant, after four months’
voyage, to find how we were situated; but in the midst of ail we
found friends, as the Wesleyan minister stationed here came on board
when we arrived, and took us all home, and had a comfortable tea
prepared, which the children enjoyed very much. lam sorry to say
that labour is not in that demand we were led to believe in England ;
manufactures there are none; and the tillage of the earth is quite
neglected, although the soil would grow anything with but little la-
bour, and vegetables are very dear; potatoes, Id. per lb.; bread, S|cG
the quartern loaf; beef and mutton, 2d. per lb. for any part; ramp
steaks the same price ; but pottery ware is dear, and clothing ex-
pensive; indeed, most things but food. Green tea is Is. 10 d. per lb.;
candles, 'ld. ; soap, id.', and butter, Is. 6ri.
Nothing but sheep and cattle stations in the bush, but they will
not engage persons with a family; either young men or persons
without a family. Some of our passengers have bought land, others
have taken on lease, whilst several of the young men have engaged
at 80/, a year, with rations, to go to Ipswich, about 25 miles from
here. I have been up there, and find work more plentiful than here,
and think I shall try it for three months’ experience. Many advise
us to sell our hardware and keep a shop at once; bat I shall write
you more by the next mail. But I expect next week to get the use
of land to build a bark hut to live in, as lodgings are very dear; we
have one room down stairs, and two miserable garrets, for which we
pay the small sum of eight shillings weekly; but they don’t Enow
what to ask for anything; in the shape of house room. We have had
three days of heavy rain, but the weather is delightful. The days now
are like the latter'part of your July, and the nights like October, but
we have never felt the heat so exhausting as with you, and our spirits
are always buoyant. The hours for work are from half-past six to
half-past’five, but we have short twilight, but such moonlights as you
have no idea of at all. The natives are a disagreeable looking
set, only a small remove from the monkey; a great many are
about; they have such small limbs and arms as you never saw; tbs
women do most of the work, and we give them a piece of bread and
meat to bring water or sweep the front of the house ; but they eat
slugs, snakes, and worms, but will not taste anything the least
tainted; the children are delighted with them when they paint their
faces with red earth, soot, and grease. I intended to write more, but
will wait till the next steamer, when I hope to let you hear a more


satisfactory account of my prospects. We are all well, and unite in
love to you and all friends.—Tour affectionate brother, W. S. H.
But the doctor was not satisfied with rivalling Monsieur
Cabot and his Icaria ; he must needs attack all that others
have done in promoting the emigration which he only im-
pedes. In perfecting this part of his task (undertaken with
the express view of throwing dirt upon Mrs. Chisholm), he as-
serts, and the Spectator is sufficiently ill-informed to believe,
that Irish Roman Catholics have monopolised an undue
sfyare of free passages.
To elucidate this very point, late in last session Lord
Monteagle moved for and obtained a detailed return, which
shows, for twelve months — English, free emigrants, 13 953;
Scotch, 2739 ; Irish, 1879.
After this, who will trust Dr. Lang where religion, or the
Spectator where the Colonial Office, is concerned ?
We need not pursue further the letter of the reverend
firebrand, whom no one will trust in Australia, and whom
no one will now believe in this country. If, as he prophe-
sies, Australia become a republic, it will not be under the
auspices of a man who has in turns attacked every party,
every religion, and every individual in that country, eminent
for rank, wealth, talent, piety or philanthropy, from the
founder of the Emigrants’ Homes to the noble-hearted and
generous Bishop of Sydney.
Wages in Australia.— Extract of a Letter to Mrs. Chisholm,
received from Sydney, dated the 31st May, 1849,—“ I now proceed
to give you the information you seek for respecting the labouring
classes, Ton may rely upon the accuracy of what I here state, aa I
have it from an intelligent friend just arrived in Sydney from those
districts. Rates of wages on the Barwin, 600 miles from Sydney:
hut-keepers, 22 1.; stockmen, 30/. ; overseers, from 40/, to 50/., ac-
cording to their efficiency. Rough stock-yard builders get IDs. a rod for
building a four-rail fence, each rod comprises two costs, or eighteen
feet in length. If it were possible to procure the services of females
in. this country, they would get as high wages as the men. The
Barwin is a cattle country; further down the country, that is. at Idew
England, 450 miles from Sydney, the rate of wages are—shepherds,
25/. ; hut-keepers, 22/.; overseers, 40/.; bollock-drivers, 30/.; farm
labourers, 26/. per annum. These are the rates of wages also on
the Liverpool plains, and in the Port Macquarie district. In the
Morton Bay district shepherds are only getting 18/.; hut-keepers, 13/,;
overseers, 30/.; farm labourers. 20/.; and female servants 16/- per
annum,
z 2


EMIGRANTS’ QUESTIONS.
In future. Emigrants Questions may he addressed to S. Sidney, Esq,.
care of Messrs. W. S. Orr and Co., Amen Corner, Paternoster Brno.
A Constant Subscriber —1/. Is. received. Answered privately.
Books on Australia. —“ The Prisoners of Australia” was published
in 1841, by Hatchard, “ The Adventures of a Guardsman” in 1848,
by Bentley.
Brewer and Farmer, delicate.—2oool. capital; young and married.
[lf Australia, Port Philip. Unless you have a taste for minute de-
tails, and great and constant industry, do not think of sheep. Agri-
culture, beyond produce for house consumption, is out of the question
for a gentleman. Horses and cattle will be the thing if you buy well.
Chances occur of taking stations all standing, with stock. Of course,
spend at least a year in the bush before commencing. Our agent at
Port Philip will afford you every kind of useful information.
Piscator. —Capital, 1000 k, age 30. From Bto 10 per cent, may
easily be obtained, hut recent events incline us to speak cautiously of
Australian securities. The savings’ banks pay 5 per cent., and 6or
7 per cent, may be expected with a safe investment. You can live
well upon 60L a year in the country ; you can be boarded for 20 L,
and 51. ought to keep you in clothes. Moreton Bay, though rather
hot, is a pleasant, healthy, and flourishing place, but is at present
almost entirely occupied by Squatters. For a man not intending to
enter into business, but wishing to live on the interest of his capital,
Port Stephens, which is within 100 miles of Sydney, and where ac-
commodation may be readily and cheaply obtained, would appear to
offer a more desirable place of residence. Our South African Colonies
are the great fields for the naturalist and sportsman.
A Schoolmaster and Farmer. —A farm, of about 50 acres, may be
rented near Port Philip, but on what terms it is impossible to say,
since the last two years have altered prices so much by the large
emigration; the rent would be probably about ss. an acre cash, or
double that sum in produce. All the land within. 20 miles of Mel-
bourne is in private hands. It is possible that, on terms of taking
produce for schooling, something might be done in a new township,
but we cannot recommend dependence on a school. Port Stephens
ought to suit this inquirer, as he can. rent or purchase land there
cheaper than in Port Philip.
New York Papers may, we believe, be obtained through the pro-
prietor of Beacon’s Coffee House, Walbrook.
Labourer: New York. This would he a very bad time of the
year to arrive at JS'ew York. On arriving’, he should apply at St.


George’s Society, if an Englishman—-St. Patrick’s, if an Irishman—
. Andrew’s, if a Scotchman.
Western Australia. —The best work is the Bushman, by Mr.
Landor, 145.; for other information apply to Mr. Saunders, Colonial
Bookseller, Charing Cross. Clothes and outfit the same as other parts
of Australia, for which consult our Journal or Hand Book.
Average increase of Stock in Australia. —A. S. Q. had better con-
suit the annual returns of stock, which we have published more than
once. Shearing cannot be taught in writing,- but see Hints to
Squatters, in First Series, and Port Stephens Guide.
Land Purchasers’ Passages are not likely to be given to strangers,
unlessj-of some superior and peculiar ability,
A. Stockman {of a superior class), to superintend and assist five
or six joint stockholders, would require 50 1, a year and rations ; it
would be a better plan to go in pairs to a station to learn Bushman-
ship, and then the high wages would be saved.
I bung Men's .Emigration Society. “It has occurred to me
that { Young Men’s Societies/ formed on the plan of those which
used to be pretty general at one time in the metropolis, might be
useful for emigration purposes. At their meetings essays were
delivered, and discussions took place upon various subjects, Now, if
a party oi young men, wiio contemplated emigrating, were to form a
society, the subjects of the essays being the various fields of emigra-
tion, and discussions were to follow—and if a smell library of works
relating to the subject, travels, &c., was to be collected—a greater
stock of information might be thus obtained, and those who might
ultimately leave the country, with the same object in view, would
thus form an acquaintance with one another, proving mutually ad-
vantageous to each.” [We approve of the idea, and shall be happy
to assist it by Lectures, or otherwise. For other questions see below.]
A Tailor Sydney 11., having relations in Kentucky, had better
proceed there. The climate is healthy; on the question of trade we
cannot speak. Passage-money to New York for self, wife, and two
infant children, about 101. Inland journey about 4A more; but if
he runs short he bad better stop and work at his trade wherever he
can get an engagement.
A Stone Mason l am by trade a stonemason ; can execute or
superintend any superior kind of work. Practically acquainted with,
quarrying stone of any description, the erection of rough stone build-
ings, In early life obtained some knowledge of agricultural pursuits.
My object would be to obtain as soon as practicable a few acres of
land, whereby I could establish myself in a permanent home for life.
My wife is S 3, acquainted with cows and dairy work. I have one
boy and one girl, 7 years old. Cash in hand, 601. What do you
think of lowa, East Tennessee, or Prince Edward’s Island? 'Would
myself rather prefer one of the Australian or New Zealand colonies.”
[Your qualifications ensure you success in any rising colony, especially


Port Philip, Adelaide, and Natal, where there is a great deal of
building going on. lowa is almost too far west. In America you
must look for work nearer older states. The influence of the noble-
man mentioned might obtain, through the Emigration Commissioners,
an assisted passage for you. Thirty pounds would give you a passage
for your whole family to Natal, and fifty acres of land. Perhaps
South Australia is the best for your trade, and Natal for land and
trade.]
New Zealand and Natal.— W.8.- — “Sir, —Will you have the
kindness to give me information, if within your power, what is the
great drawback in Port Natal that government offers laud at such, a
low price, 2s. (4 si) per acre, while the New Zealand Company ask
2/. What animals or reptiles inhabit the colony ; and is it hotter than
the summers of England ?
Nottingham, 21st Dec. 1849.
[W. B. will find the reasons given by the New Zealand Company
for charging 2 1, an acre for land, either good or bad, in No. sof this
Journal, under “Blind Guides to New Zealand.” There is more
fertile land, clear of timber and ready for the plough, in Natal than
any of the New Zealand settlements, and the climate, although much
hotter than English summers, is perfectly healthy. The reason, we
presume, that government offers land in Natal at 4s. an acre, or
twenty acres and a passage for lOfi, is, that they are anxious to have
it colonized as soon as possible, and having found that, in spite of
enormous puffing, people prefer the cheap land of America to the dear
land of New Zealand, they have thought it well to transplant the
American system to Natal. This change has succeeded so well, that
nearly 1200 emigrants have sailed for that colony in twelve months!.
There are both wild beasts and reptiles in Natal, but we have not
heard of any accidents. Indeed, there is nothing so dangerous to
emigrants in Natal as the New Zealand Land Shark and Boa-con-
strictor Wakefieldiensis, or Sufficient-Price Serpent. Compare the
following—
N. E. H.— e ‘ I have seen a letter from a party I know, who has
gone to Otago, but gives a very bad account of it. He was charged
a heavy duty upon his luggage, even to pots and kettles. The rain
poured down, while he was writing, through the roof, and his fingers
were so cold he could scarcely hold his pen. He speaks of the Moly-
neux district as something better.”]
South Australia. —A young couple, without children, would find
an engagement on a farm as shepherds. Natal land sales quarterly.
Free 'Emigrants. —To Australia Felix. It is understood that free
passages have been superseded by assisted passages ; that is to say,
each emigrant is required to contribute from one third to half his
passage money.


INDEX.
African Colonies.
Cape—Cost of living at, 137.
Fox-hunting in South Africa,
137.
Natal—Agricultural and Horti-
cultural Society in, 135.
D’ Urban and Pieter - Maritz-
burgh, accounts of, 117.
Climate, &c. of, 119.
Farming Stock for, 167.
Indigo and Cotton growing in,
95.
Progress of, 114, 161.
Prospects of Emigration to, 146.
Terms granted by Government
to the Colonizers of, 309.
“The new Colony of,” by J. E.
Methley, reviewed, 214,
America.
New Brunswick. “The Land
Company’s Bargaina Drama,
328,
Abolition of Lumber Trade in,
304.
Canada—Outfit for, 224.
Prospect of Emigration to, 146.
“Sketches of Canadian Life,”
noticed, 66,
Upper Canada College, Price of
Education at, 71,
Statistics of Emigration to, 58.
California—Emigration to, 146.
United States.
Oopake, Irishman’s Letter from,
208,
Prospects of Emigration to, 146.
Statistics of Emigration to, 57.
Schoharie, Irish Farmer’s Letter
from, 74.
Texas, Descriptive Letters from,
31, 49, 110, 180.
Wisconsin, Labourer’s Letter
from, 26.
Australia.
“ Emigration to,” by Arthur Hod-
son, noticed, 48.
Emigrants, Pictures of, 12, 192.
“ New South Wales,” by a resident
of 12 years, reviewed, 212.
Prospects of Emigration to, 147.
“ Sketches in,” by Captain E. M.
Westmacott, 221,
Success of Small Farmers in, 76.
Railways for, 125.
Resources of, 298.
Sheep leases, 31 2,
Australia, Felix .
Melbourne—Exports and Imports
of in 1848, 75.
Wife’s Letter from, 130.
Port Philip Cabinet - Maker’s
Letter from, 315.
German Emigrants to, 136.
Labourer’s Letter from, 210.
Letter from Member of Legisla-
tive Council of, on wages and
wool, 148,
Australia, South .
Almanacks in, 135.
Climate of. 218.
u Description of the Barrossa Range”
in, noticed, 220.
Copper-smelting works in, 134.
Pastoral Pursuits in, 251.
Railway Company in, 135.
Sporting in, 136.


Australia, South:
“ Royal Almanack,” noticed, 217.
Sale of American Furniture in, 135.
Adelaide—Dean and Chapter of,
136.
Colonial Labour Office projected
at, 134.
Exports of metals from, 206.
Horses arriving at, 135.
Journal of a Voyage to, 28, 71.
Labourer's Letter from, 313.
Mining Share List, 134, 206.
Prizes offered by the Agricultu-
ral and Horticultural Society
of, 135.
Tradesman’s Letter from, 207,
Retrospect for 1848, 318,
Australia, Western.
Coal Field discovered, 135.
Convict Establishment desired, 135.
Port Stephens.
Description of, 78,
Guide to, extracts from, 157.
Mrs. Chisholm on, 38.
Advantages to Settlers at, 149,
New Zealand,
Blind Guides to, or a Caution to
Canterbury Colonists, 252.
Capitalists in, 211.
Mr. Power’s 'Work on, reviewed,
16.
“Auckland, Nelson, and Wan-
ganui,” described, 16, 17, 18.
“ New Plymouth,” account of, by
Charles Hnrsthouse, reviewed,
169.
“ Otago” Settlement, population of,
80.
Failure of
Wakefield Theory at, 150.
Port Nicholson, Theatricals at, 322.
“ Taranaki,” 183.
“ The Country of the poor man,”
66.
Emigrants, Information and
Advice to.
Australian Papers, where seen, 43.
Emigrants, Female, Advice to, 42.
Passages, Free, 42.
Colonial Agriculture, best Works
on, 155.
Emigration, Colonization, etc.,
Original Essays on.
Association, the Use of, 11.
Australia, Fifty-acre Farms in, 76.
Railways for, 125.
Resources of, 298,
Dear Land System,‘237, 283,
Emigration, Facts and Figures,
about, 57.
Past and to Come,
329.
Falkland Islands, the Use of the,
310.
Family Colonisation Loan Society,
97.
Rules for the formation of, 99.
Family Groups, 103.
Mrs. Chisholm, Sketch of the Co-
lonial Life of, 267.
New Zealand, Blind Guidesto, 252.
Yan Diemen's Land, Revolution in,
202.
Miscellaneous.
American Volunteers, 201,
Australian Beef and Sugar, 145.
Backwoods, Supper in the, 133.
Bush Huts, furnishing of, 168,
Building a Shanty, 308,
Butter Clarified, 136.
Canadian Coach-Springs, 195.
Farmer’s Advice, 195.
Civilized Vice, 297.
Colonial Papers, Facts and Scraps
from, 134.
Colonizing, a Hint on, 133.
Dr. Lang and the Spectator, 336,


Miscellaneous : —
Emigration, Foreign, 63, 297.
lrish, 48.
Prospects of, 146.
Sidney Smith's Works
on, noticed, 47.
Land Purchasers, Warning to, 65.
Lang’s, Dr,, Emigration Schemes,
90.
Malt exported from Yan Diemen’s
Land, 65.
National Sports, 312.
Nicaragua, 150.
Natal or New Zealand; 2s. or 21.
342.
Kailroad, Quebec and Halifax,
335,
Seeds, How to Preserve, 109.
Snake Bites, Hydropathy for, 65.
Song, African Hunter’s, 187.
Stores for Farm, 168, 321.
Vine at Camden, 136, 328.
Vine Produce, 297.
Voyage, Provisions and Stores for,
29, 30, 31, 73, 160, 328.
Wakefield System, Abandonment
of the, by Government, 151.
Waste Land, Uniform Price of,
124.
Wheat, 266.
Original Tales.
Bushman, Scenes from the Life of
a, 1, 81, 138.
Kennedy, Nance, 184.
Lumber-Camp, My First Visit to
a, 106, 195, 225.
Our Library Table, 47, 157,212.
Questions Answered
From Intending Emigrants of the
following Trades and Profes-
sions :
Australian Sheep-Fanner, 224.
NEW SERIES-—NO. TI.
Books on Australia, inquirer about,
340.
Brewer (with capital), 93,
and Fanner, with capital,
340.
Builder, 287.
Churchman, 223.
Clerk (Banker’s), 224.
■ (with Capital), 92.
Clerks, 156, 222, 287.
Clothier, 92.
Goachmaker, 93.
Drapers, 45, 94.
(with Capital), 94.
Free Emigrants, 342.
Engineers, 46, 152, 254.
(Coal-Mining), 153.
Farmers, 43, 91.
Farmer’s Son, 222, 223.
Gardener, 152.
Gentleman, 153.
capital 10007, 340.
Government Pensioner, 45.
Grocer’s Lad, 288.
Hardworking Men, 223.
Joiner (Scotch), 287.
Labourer, 340.
Leather Dresser, 154.
Manchester Warehouseman, 46.
Medical Men, 44, 152.
Miller, 45.
Minor, 151.
Musician, 222,
Newcastle Party (with Capital),
223.
New York Papers, inquirer about.
340.
Officer, 155.
Officer’s Son, 94.
Painter, 164.
Pump Maker, 92.
Saddlers, 224, 288.
Schoolmaster, 45.
and Farmer, 340,
Servants, 45.
(Female), 287,
A A


Shoemakers, 152, 155.
Shopkeeper, 152.
Shopman, 153.
Statistics, Seeker of, 44.
Stonemason, 341.
Stock, inquirer about the increase
of, 341.
Stockman, inquirer about wages of,
341.
Tailor, 93.
(with Capital), 93.
Tradesmen, 155, 223, 287.
Western Australia, inquirer about,
341.
Young Men’s Emigration Society,
proposer of, 341.
Young Couple, 342.
G. Woo'ifal! ami Son, Printers, Angel Court, Skinner Street, London.
