

■»
e
■ ~—— " 1 —— »»•; -f.
1 -T-
p ‘'" 5 K^:
So* /I i- ■-
£i
£1 . . __
—*. .
l
Z/t^oS»
5 »
c$Wmü\
SIGN
IS OF THE TIMES:
. . ' \ .
-
1
I
r
!
•
BEING •" ’ .
*
i
FOUR LECTURES
i
4
:.*• ' * «
*
/■(
HY
<x . ,
** »
♦
i
,
THE REV. R.
K. FW ENG.
*; r ' ♦
St Augustines , Luv er eil.
r
AUTHOR OF ££
■»* *
MOSES AND COLENSO,” £< FILINGS OF TIME, 5 ’ ETC.
1 .
* . ' * • \ . ■ i \
i ' ' /
■rt . • * -\S% *
,
'
• ’/ ■ ' i" < •
3m>evcU:
BUCKLETON & JAMIESON, MACHINE PRINTERS,
•. ' _
£< Argus ” Office.
•
\
/
/I
l J **
1883
* A
rz,
.r*££3. 3S
fTJ




SIGNS OF THE TIMES:
BRING
FOUR LECTURES
THE REV. R. K. EWING,
St. Augustine*s 9 7 nvereil,
AUTHOR OF “MOSES AND COLENSO,” “ FILINGS OF TIME,” ETC.
ItmrcveU;
BUCKLETON & JAMIESON, MACHINE PRINTERS,
“Argus”- Office.
1883.




The following Lectures were delivered in the ordinary routine of
a laborious ministry, not to meet any special occasion. and are
now published at the generally expressed desire of those who
heard them. Though their publication has been delayed by ill-
health, and the pressure of much work, it is hoped they are not
out of season, and, in being circulated, that the Divine blessing
will follow them.
The proceeds will be devoted to the Church debt.
St. Augustine’s Parsonage,
Inverell , 2 6th September , 1883.
13 2


•


LECTURE I.
Sunday Evening, 6th May.
“ Now learn a parable of the fig tree ; when her branch is yet tender and
putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh: So likewise ye, when ye
shall see all these things, know that it is near even at the doors.” St. Matt.,
chap. 24, v. 32 and 33 ; St. Mark, chap. 13, v 28 and 29.
On the eastern side of Jerusalem rise the Olivet ranges. Once
their extreme height is reached, a vast wilderness is seen Stretch-
ing away to the Dead Sea, They are narrowly separated from the
city by a deep ravine called the valley of Jehoshaphat, through
which flows the historic Kidron. That portion of the ränge known
as the Mount of Olives, clothed in the dark coloured and umbra-
geous olive tree, and intersected by various walks, was much
frequented for the shelter, and splendid prospect it aftorded. It
was a favourite resort of Jesus for retirement and meditation. On
one occasion, as he “ went out and departed from the Temple,
and his disciples came to him,” one of them called his attention
to its solidity and grandeur. In terms brief and sad, he informed
them that it would yet be reduced to utter ruin. Then, proceed-
ing with his companions down the declivity from the city,—across
the Kidron, and up the hill side, he sought his usual retreat.
That a structure apparently so enduring should be razed, seemed
so startling that they asked him to indicate the signs by which
it would be preceded. Seated with them “ upon the Mount of
Olives over against the Temple,he condescended on a reply,
which furnishes an example of his lofty and instructive conversa-
tion when alone with his disciples. The immediate theme to
which he was led by their question, was the destruction of the
Temple on which they were then looking ; this led him to another,
when ruin would be on the scale of a world. Indicating the
general characteristics of the times preceding these events, he
concluded with two parables ; in the first, teaching that as by
observing the budding of the fig tree earliest intimation is had of
summer, so, by noting the signs of the times, we get an insig t to
the historic position of the Church. To this duty Christ attached
such importance that he charged the Pharisees and Sadducees
with culpable neglect—'“ When it is evenmg ye say it will be
fair weather, for the sky is red ; and in the mormng, it will be foul


weather to-day for the sky is red and lowering. O, ye hypocrites,
ye can discern the faee of the sky, but can ye not discern the
signs of the times?” (St. Matt. xvi. 23).
In the second parable, that of a man who took a journey,
leaving his servants ignorant of the time when he would return,
so that they should be constantly ready to receive him, Christ
teaches the need of daily preparedness for the “ coming of the
Son of Man,” an event —though perhaps lying yet far back on the
plains of futurity—certain, but of the time when, whether at even,
or at midnight, or the cock-crowing, or in the morning, we have
no intimation. That teaching is for all time. History has its
philosophy, and every event, whether in relation to persons or
nations, is linked with the moral government of Him, who “ doeth
according to His will in the army of heaven, and among the in-
habitants of the earth.” (Dan. iv. 35). That gives continuity and
meaning, to both biography and history. As it is by the study of
fossils and rocks, by collating and comparing widely-sundered
facts, that certain scientific truths are reached, so is it in relation
to human life. Comparing what has been with what is, and both
with prediction, the times give forth their signs, we get an insight
—imperfect it may be—into the destiny to which they are leading.
That is one mode of enquiring into the works of the Lord, which,
if devoutly gone about, is honouring to Him and useful to our-
selves. To draw correct conclusions from the signs of the times
is, however, more difficult than to make scientific deductions.
For we have not to deal with inert matter acted on by mechanical
laws, but with human will and thought, and passion and feeling,
in relation to every variety of material, mental, and confiicting
interests.
“ The proper study of mankind is man,” and however we
may fail to interpret correctly passing events, devout observation,
and calm faith will help us to realise that God, in wisdom and
power, is ruling all things with reference to ulterior purposes of
intelligence and love.
My references to the signs of the times must be brief and
Condensed ; imperfect they may be, but my ahn is rather to
suggest material for thought and enquiry, than in any sense to
make a pretence of exhausting the subject. And as this is neither
the time nor the place for proving every Statement, I shall generalise
the result of my reading and observation ; it is for you, then, to
“ prove all things, and hold fast by that which is good.” (1 Thess.
v. 21). When considering the characteristics of the age, there is
no absolute Standard to aid us in drawing conclusions. We must
proceed by contrast, comparing what is, with what has been. In
that way we can best estimate the changes that have taken place,
those that are going on. and learn thence whether there are
indications of looming danger, or whether there exist reasonable
grounds of a “ good hope of the future.”


At the outset we are met by the wide-spread spirit of inquiry,
the desire to know. No past age presents any parallel. Ihe
time is not very remote when it was considered the exclusive
right of certain men, and classes of men, to know and
to rule. The masses of the people were unenquiring toilers,
accepting without much question anything communicated to
them, and doing just what they were told, It was so both in
secular and religious society. Monopolies of wealth, and learning,
and power began, and continued because the people slumbered.
Only at times, when oppression and injustice became unendurable,
were the people stirred, and a voice was heard “ crying in the
wilderness ’ } for more light and freedom. Each such occasion
became in time a land-mark in the u march of intellect, and
shows how complicated events have led up to the existing state
of things ; even as water power gives the wheel at first only per-
ceptible motion, until sustained supply produces the desired speed.
That the right of inquiry and private judgment is the will of God,
and the birthright of all men, is now denied only by tyrants, and
by religious Systems becoming rapidly fossilised. Without them
there can be neither true religion nor manhood. They are the
grand iconoclasts into which at the Reformation was breathed
the u breath of lifeand whose work is to break down every
image of seif that Stands in the way of human progress. In the
right to inquire, every man Stands on an equality.
Now, what sign does the extent to which the practical recog-
nition of that truth has reached give forth ? “ Ignorance is the
mother of (superstitious) devotion,” but, “ knowledge is power.
The one with its superstitions must yield to the might of the other.
However desirable the prospect, it must not be forgotten that
power, tobe a blessing—to be God-like—must be enlightened,
and consecrated to holy and noble purposes; for, apart from that
condition, the power of knowledge may become as disastrous to
communities —if not more so —than ignorance. Just because it
is a power, knowledge may be sought after for merely various selfish
ends, and undedicated “to the use and advantage of man, its
power is evil. Its true use is
“ To soothe the cares and lift the thoughts of men.”
The right of private judgment being conceded, have we
evidence that the present spirit of inquiry, the desire to acqmre
knowledge, is for the purpose of so purifying and enlightemng
the populär mind, as “ to regulate and perfect ” human life in
charity ? Were that the case, it would be a powerful agent in
bringing about social, religious, and political conditions in which
the kingliest would be spontaneously selected, and heartily accepted
as rulers and teachers. For the heart of the people would—in
no sectarian sense —be imbued with the true religious sentiment,


dominating and Controlling every mental acquisition. It is tobe
feared, hovvever, that the search after knowledge has not so divine
a purpose.
Morley, in bis “ Illustrations of English Religion,” says
that, “ during the first English time nearly the whole literature had
religion for ite theme.” But the drift of modern inquiry, it must
be admitted, is greatly materialistic. In the assertion of the right
of piivate judgment, and the prevailing desire for knowledge, there
is an alarming undertone of selfish wilfulness \ a striving to attain
knowledge chiefly as an agent by which personal success in
life may be secured. That presents no cheering outlook, for it
indicates not an approaching near to, but a getting farther away
fiom, Hirn who is Light and Love, iC the Giver of every good and
perfect gift.” The exclusive beut to scientific investigation, and a
growing indifference to the highest knowledge—Scripture truth—
is not a hopeful state of mind either in relation to its great Author,
01 true peace and progress. However the mental activities
of the age may give an impetus to Science, and through that
to commerce and increased wealth, looked at in Connection with
other conditions—to which I shall hereafter refer—they point to
future struggle, and disaster that will shake the nations, ere right-
eousness shall prevail, and knowledge be consecrated to its true
uses.
The impetus given to Secular education is special to the
times, and is co-related to the preceding Statements. It is statis-
tically true, that in proportion to population, the number of those
who can read and write is on the increase, and is now greater
than it was forty years ago. Of the comparatively limited oppor-
tunities of education, and the difficulties in obtaining it, which
lay in the way of certain classes— within the memory of
middle aged persons—no reader, no observer can be ignorant.
Still it was of a robust and healthy kind, and produced the men
by whom Britain’s greatness has been achieved. The names that
embellish our history during the ißth and the first part of the
iqth Century, show that education meant more than technology,
more than cramming for an examination; that it meant culture,
the complete moral and intellectual training of the mind. The
time occupied was long, and the process slow, but it sent forth
men fully equipped with solid and enduring attainments, in the
highest state of fitness for whatever position to which either their
natural bias, or the force of circumstances impelled them. During
my remarks, I ask you to preserve the distinction between educa-
tion, consisting in formation and training of the mind, and
mere learning, which is but the crude acquisition of facts, greatly
dependent on repetition and memory. The one involves patient
thought and hard work, and builds up in strength, and unity
every faculty and sentiment of the soul. The other acquires


with comparatively little labour what is only retained, but is
neilher digested nor assimilated.” To call that education is a
misuse of terms, and to trust men to bis superintendence who
has only gone through a process of learning, “is a misuse of
humanity.” The facilities for acquiring learning are now being
fostered to an extent, and under conditions unparalleled in history.
There are primary, middle, and grammar schools ; Colleges and
universities ] schools naval, military, and technological \ schools
of music, painting, and sculpture. In connection with nearly
all there are scholarships which, by competition, are open to
any without distinction of birth or wealth. As far as possible, it
is the dutv of a Government, called paternal, to biing education
within the reach of all —
“ O for the coming of that glorious time,
When prizing knowledge as her noblest wealth
And best protection, the Imperial realm
While she exacts allegiance, on her part to teach
Them that are born, to serve her and obey.”
It is equally the duty of every parent to avail himself of every
facility for gifting bis child with the bestand most suitable
education. In the words of the late Dr. Chalmers “ I have no
sympathy whatever with those who would grudge our workmen
and our common people the very highest aspirations which their
taste or their time, or their inclination would lead them to reahse;
for, next to the salvation of their souls, I certainly say that the
•object of my fondest aspirations is the moral and intellectual, and
as a sure consequence of this, the economical advancement of
the working classes—the one object which of all others in the
wide ränge of political speculation is the one which should be
the dearest to the heart of every philanthropist and every true
Patriot.” Such are the facilities in the Austrahan colomes for
getting learning—l do not say education—that is offered free—
‘‘ without money and without price.” The child of the poorest
has equal opportunities with the riebest of being taught, or, as it
is delusively called, being educated. In the Government System
of learning now in vogue throughout the land, there is much that
is at first thought attractive, much that ensures populanty from
the direct appeal it makes to self-interest. 1 ime, Observation,
and experience have compelled me to modify the views I took of
the System when it was first brought before the country.
Looking now at the Parliamentary System of education as we
have it, the question arises—What sign does it give forth ? Does
it forebode good or evil, danger or safety to the state, the
raising up of noble-hearted men, fearmg God and honounng
authorities: or, of men of superficial attainments, unequal to emer-
gencies, contented without religion, devoid of public spint, and
whose efforts shall either directly or indirectly termmate in seif?


I have no hesitation in saying that the tendency and character of
what is called education is to the latter condition. Founded
on a compromise which has failed to satisfy the parties inte-
rested, it has in a spirit of miserable and unsuccessful expediency
ignored the study of history, without which neither learning nor
education can be said to exist, and without which no mind can be
nirmshed. Though after much pressure the tardy pledge has
een given, that it will be introduced into the public schools • it
remamsyetto be seen whether that will be done in a full/or
mutilated form. We are having much learning, but little of
anything more; much technology but little culture. The teaching
of youth now consists chiefly in preparing for some particular
calling, and for secular success in life. The wretched expedient
resortedto, is that of charging the memory with facts, like a
Leyden jai, which, at the electric touch of an examination, may
successfully discharge its contents. I speak advisedly, and from
personal expenence as a teacher. Are we to look to that kind of
thmg formen tramed to stalwart thought, grandly fitted to meet
emergent conditions, and to work out noble purposes \ men
quahfied by solid and enduring attainments to face the complex
Problems of hfe, fitted either to teach or to rule % The System of mere
learning is essentially superficial, in which the best, and highest
powers and Sentiments are left comparatively uncultured. The Out-
look suggested by that state of things is not encouragino - . Let
it be continued and the time will come—if in much of social and
pohtical hfe its shadow be not already on us~that when wisdom,
and courage, and firmness, and justice, and self-abnegation and
punty shali be demanded of rulers, the result of substituting
learning for education will be sadly apparent, if not indeed too
late to undo the evil.
The dangers are increased by the fact that the so-called
education given by tfie State, is free alike to rieh and poor. To
question that I know is not populär. But I cannot sacrifice my
convictions of what is right, of what is bestand safest to the
State for any popularity. When the question of State-aid to
religion was under the consideration of the people and Parliament
and which ended in its withdrawal, one of the chief arguments
used, and that had great influence in deciding the matter was
its injustice; that it compelled men—indirectly it is true, yet
really to Support religious Systems and teachings in which they
not only did not believe, but to which they were strongly and
conscientiously opposed. With equal force that argument
apphes to the free teaching given by the State. It is feit by all
who mourn the exclusion of the Word of God and its teachines
from the public schools. It is an injustice to the poor who
through what they contribute to the revenue, not only give some’
thmg—indirectly it is true, yet really— towards the teaching of


their own children, but are compelled at the same time, and in the
same way, to assist in paying the expense of teaching the children
of the rieh. Overlooking the increasing taxation entailed by free
State teaching, release frora direct payment is a bait with which
politicians have successfully played the populär mind. * Free
learning is hailed by selfishness. For the difference between the
direct and indirect payment leaves something to the credit of
parents for personal uses. It makes a gift to our youth of so
much superficial learning as will dispose against honest toil, and
inspire with notions of attaining to what, in too many cases, is a
Position of awkward, if not dangerous, gentility. What is easily
had is generally not much prized. A real education is priceless.
To make it free, to gift it to those who have not the money to pay
for it, is in State craft righteous, and wise, and safe. That was the
view taken by the late Dr. Guthrie, who, in working out success-
fully his System of Ragged Schools, caused the Street Arabs of
Edinburgh to disappear. But to make a gift of learning to those
who have the means of paying for it, is to misuse the national
wealth, and pauperise the receiver. It is the acceptance
of a subsidy to perform a parental, and moral duty, which
should be done from a sense of right. That strikes at the root
of self-dependence, and self-respect. But for the universality and
intensity of selfishness, the proposal by a Government to give a
bonus for doing what should be done from righteousness, would
have been spurned alike by the honest toiler, and the rieh. To
succeed by free teaching in making learning general, by a Grad
Grind cramming of young memories with facts, will not, cannot,
counteract —if continued —the damaging effects, to which I have
but hinted, on the national mind.
As if to crown the evil and ensure disaster, religion that is
the highest knowledge of God —and the so-called education given
by the State, are divorced. The Bible —no sectarian book
which alone reveals the living God, and the spiritual truths essen-
tial to the soul’s eternal life, shall neither be read, explained, nor
form any part of the learning received in the schools dedicated
to the people of the State.t The Book which the greatest of
* The last Parliamentary grant in aid of the System of secular education, was over
,£650,000. Ere long, over one million will be needed. Comment is unnecessary. Such a
heavy drain annually upon the Treasury, and increased taxation to meet the deficiency
caused thereby, suggest reaction at no distant date.
t The iron hand of secularism is now laid on the teachers themselves. In “ Instructions
to Teachers,” issued from the “ Department of Public Instruction, Sydney, eBth May, 1883,
Paragraph 28 States “ Teachers of all ranks are required to abstam from actmg as loca
preachers or lay readers.” Mas the Minister of Education any moral right, or any legal
authority, to dictate to any teacher how he shall spend bis Sunday, and serve his Sayiour, the
Lord Jesus Christ ? Than to come between a man and bis God, and to mterfere with hberty
of conscience, the tyranny of secularism in power can go no further, For the day ot rest—
the Christian Sabbath —belongs to the teacher. On that holy day the Minister of Education
has no Claim on his Services. In the “ Instructions to Teachers, paragraph 28 leaves the
religious Sunday duties of öuilds in the Roman Cathohe Church untouched. Ihough
differently styled, they may be similar to local preachmg or lay readmg— a rose will smell


scientists and philosophers have eulogised and loved, which our
noble Queen gave to an Indian Embassy, as the secret and source
of Britain’s greatness and stability, and to the power of whose
teachings we owe all the freedom we possess, and the sanctity of
our homes, it is decided by a so-called Christian Government, shall
be expelled from the institutions where the intellect, and character
are dealt with of the youth who shall be the teachers, and rulers
of the succeeding generation. Apart from all side issues, an
entirely secular education practically proceeds on the theory that
the religion taught in the Bible is not essential to greatness of
character, that it is an incubus on success in life, that diligence in
business is hindered by serving God, that the chief end of man is
to learn facts by which he may best secure wealth and power;
and that religion and the affairs of daily life have no true relation
to each other. Our ancestors, whose deeds are praised by the
secularists, and who in their dread contendings, won for us the
liberties, and Privileges now most highly prized, thought otherwise.
That the duty of religious teaching is thrown exclusively on the
church does not alter the principle in question one whit. For it
is the assertion of a Separation, and a distinction which does not
exist in the spiritual, and intellectual, and industrial life of man.
So essential did the ancient Jews, under divine direction,
regard the knowledge and love of Jehovah to the right culture of
the whole mind, that the Law of the Lord was diligently taught
their children, and bound as frontlets between their eyes. (Deut. 6 c.,
8-9 v). The same principle is special to Christianity, and enters
into all true philosophy. Yet in our teaching System it is deliber-
ately legislated against, and set aside. Can there be any doubt
as to the sign that state of things gives forth ? The effect 011 the
minds of our rising youth is to lower their estimate of all holy
and divine things, to weaken respect for the amenities of life, and
to detach them from Sabbath duties and the house of God. As
the fields of sea-weed found floating in mid ocean indicate the
course of currents and of winds, so truly does what I have in-
adequately indicated, point to ultimate Godlessness. The distance
then to atheism with its turbulence and woe, is not far for a
community to travel. We are now sowing in selfishness and
secularism; the reaping time has yet to come, when words now
heard —it may be with contempt or indifference—will be recalled
in sorrow.*
as sweet by any other name.” Yet the phrasing of the paragraph frees in such cases from the
Sunday interdict. Tyranny is not always impartial in its favours. Will a colony of free men
endure the continual pressure of paragraph 28? Is there justice and humanity yet left in
Parliament to redress the wrong ?
* Since the foregoing Lecture was delivered, the Sydney Morning Herald has
virtually admitted the moral failure of the State public school System. The Church
of England Record for May, 1883, page 226, contains the following forcible remarks :
“ A sub-leader in the Sydney Morning Herald of the 23rd April, on the results of
the present System of public school teaching ought tobe re-printed in large type


and scnt to every parent in the Community. The Herald , as it would seem, has
made a discovery, and hence is ‘ the trouble and the pain ’ expressed in the article,
The Herald has at last, ‘ by many striking examples, no less than general and
daily observation,’ found out that ‘ there is something wanting in the childhood and youth
of the colonies, —something that a perfect System of education should supplyd The
habitual lack of respect and reverence —the occasional outbursts of cruelty and crime—the
ghastly narrative of Tasmanian murders—the immeasurable wickedness and callousness of
the Gippsland school-boy, who deliberately tried to wreck a railway train—the premature
maturity in crime of the four twelve-year old lads, who, in the streets of Melbourne, stuck up
and robbed their fellows, —these things as it were with loud cry declared to the Herald that
there is something wrong. The Herald also notes, and we would add rightly notes, other
elements of mischief at work, less conspicuous but more subtle, which ‘ work on and make
no sound or sign—are in fact only tobe discovered by dose observation.’ _ This ‘ something
wrong ’ the Herald proclaims tobe the one want —‘ morality and discipline in teaching.’
What a confession to make after a fifteen years’ experience of a System of teaching, upon
the completeness of which Sir Henry Parkes and his followers, and many more who ought
to have known better, have continuously exhausted their powers of laudation, and in the
faith of the efficiency of which, the public has been content to spend its money without Stint.
But the confession does not end here. The Herald admits further, that the System to which
the colony is trusting for the education of its children is merely a pqlishing System, vyhich
has concerned itself too exclusively with an exterior surface, while it has left all the inner
depths of the child’s nature untouched. One is inclined, however, to think that the detailsof
precocious wickedness which have scared the Herald into thqse admissions, must also raise
some doubts as to even the polishing success of a System which would seem to have nothing
but polishing to recommend it. We ask our readers calmly to consider, supposing the con-
fessions of the Herald tobe justified by facts, and we believe that they are fully justified,
—whether all, and more than all, that has ever been said against the present educational
System is not fully warranted. No more tremendous indictment was ever preferred against
men professing to guide public affairs, than that by wilful or objectless blundering they have
initiated and carried out a plan for the formation of a national character, which has omitted
to impress morality upon that character —has failed even to impart to it a superficial polish,
and has left untouched either for development or repression, all the better and worse sides of
the natures which have been brought under its influence.”


LECTURE 11.
SUNDAY EVENING, 20TH MAY.
St. Matt., chap. 24, v. 32-35 ; St. Mark, chap. 13, v. 28, 29
The nature and power of public opinion is a remarkable
feature of the times. I have not to enquire how, and by what
agencies it has been developed into its present condition. It is
the fact of its existence, as it is, we have to consider. From
feeble form, and restricted influence it has become mightier than
armies, searching as sunlight.
“ The voice of opinion has grown ;
’Twas yesterday changeful and weak,
Like the voice of a boy in his prime.
To day, it has taken the tone
Of an orator worthy to speak,
Who knows the demand of the time ;
And to-morrow ’twill sound in oppression’s cold ear
Like the trump of the Seraph, to startle our sphere.’*
Not later than the last Century a gentleman might kick his
valet, or swear at and dismiss his creditor unpaid; the titled and
the rieh might hold high revel and outrage decency, others 011
lower levels might imitate them, and meanwhile, to an extent now
impossible, set public opinion at defiance, which was neither
sufficiently refined, nor strong and active enough either to restrain
or prevent. Public opinion is the will of society, of which there
is no written code ; therefore its elevation or depression, its
strietness or looseness must depend on the moral and intellectual
condition of society; not in the magazine sense of society, but
in the broad and human meaning, which comprehends the people.
Every person is contributing his quota toward« the formation and
conservation of a power by which the whole nation is influenced.
More authoritative than law—for by it laws have been changed ;
mightier than kings—for by it they have been driven from their
thrones; more powerful than customs —for it has caused them to
alter; public opinion is, in a sense, omnipotent and omnipresent.
None so obscure as tobe able to hide from its notice, none so
lofty as to soar beyond its reach. Influence percolates down-
wards, and so the character of public opinion depends mainly on
those in high places, who, by example and writing have so much
at command whereby to operate on the masses of the people.
You know, and very likely have accepted as true, the saying that


“the voice of the people is the voice of God.” But the flattering
appeal it makes to selfishness and vanity is entirely misleading.
Bishop Forbes says, “In earlier times, when every man’s hand is
against his neighbour, he cares less what that neighbour thinks of
him; but as peace prevails, credit is generated, character assumes
a new value, a corporate public opinion begins to act; and then
the temptation is to refer things to an enlightened public opinion,
rather than to the law of God.” Slavery rested on the will of the
people; the “ age of Reason ” which preceded the “ Reign of
Terror ”in France, was the utterance of “ the voice of the people. ”
The looseness of manners, of thought and speech, indulged in by
all classes, as the right thing, during the last Century, and which
entered into much of its literature, had the full sanction of
populär opinion. But surely, touching either of these instances, it
would be a perversion of moral truth, and a misuse of language to
affirm that, “the voice of the people was the voice of God.”
Before that saying can be accepted as a true maxim, public
opinion must be so enlightened, and so sanctified as tobe in full
accord with the Divine will; and as the teachings of nature give
but a very partial insight to man’s relation to God, the enlighten-
ment and sanctification of public opinion needed to make it the
expression of His will, must be derived from what we have of it in
His revealed word,and must dominate in every man’s heartand life.
Regarding public opinion as it “ seems to abide in dates, and
public documents, and resolutions of public assemblies; in what
is the material husk of events,” and admitting that it has undergone
great and important changes during the progress of this Century,
what sign does it now give forth in relation to the future ? That
it has effected many salutary changes is thankfully admitted. If
it has not gone down into the heart of evil, it has rnitigated much.
It has done good Service in polishing the exterior of society, in
toning the amenities and proprieties of life, and if in other
directions it were as true to righteousness there would be cause for
unalloyed satisfaction. What is among a people undesirable, or
wrong, may not be repulsive, or depraved. Glossed with politeness
and ceremonial, with profit and power, it may even claim praise
when contrasted with former conditions. At the present day
public opinion derives its Inspiration and its strength from the
two conditions already referred to, and as they are intensely
secular, moving in an orbit wideningfrom Scripture truth, so must it
suffer in certain great essential qualities. He would indeed be a
bold man who denied that its tendency is to countenance
indifference to the religion of the Bible, and its observances; to
loosen, if not to sever, the divinely instituted relations between
sacred things and the world, and to give to secular affairs and
monied success the foremost place in mind and life. The terms
used to express both the tendency of public opinion, and the


basis on which the popularity of public teachers rests, are, reform,
liberalism, progress. But they are greatly concealing and mislead-
ing. Used for—it may be—unexpressed, yet actual anti-religious
purposes, they are powerful to captivate the populär mind. But
whatever refinement in manners, whatever elegance in life, what-
ever wealth of learning and Science may be gained thereby, can
the public opinion give cheering hopes of the future which is not
only content therewith, but is pushing that state of things ? It is
an eternal truth that “ righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is a
reproach to any people.” (Proverbs c. 14, v. 34); and “ godli-
ness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that
now is and that which is to come.” (1 Tim. c. 4, v. 8). A
state of godless inquiry, and the spread ofa godless so-called educa-
tion, must and will result finally in a godless public opinion. That
condition of liberalism and freethought once reached by any
people, disaster is near at hand.
The fact and extent of Periodicalism is one of the most
remarkable features of the age. It has been called “ a creation of
the ipth Century.”- “ Newspapers may even justly be accounted
the growth of the same recent era; the few previously published
having been scarcely more than mere gazettes, recording less
opinions than bare public and business facts.” Chambers teils us
that “ newspapers were first invented by a French physician, who,
finding his visits welcome whenever he brought any news or gossip,
applied to Cardinal Richelieu for a patent to publish the Paris
Gazette , in 1622.” Now, from the “ Penny novel Journal,” fitted
to the cravings of what a writer has called the unknown public,”
to the stately review and magazine, newspapers flood the land.
Adapted to the taste of enthusiastic youth and serious age,
meeting the wants of the politician and the man of business,
ministering to the caprice of vanity and fashion, tickling the ears
of vapid and greedy gossip, pandering to the sympathies of the
depraved,helping the best aspirations of the soul,and mingling fact,
fiction and news, slander and praise, truth and falsehood, in an
endless succession, newspapers and periodicals “ are the abstract
and brief chronicles of the times, ” whose name is legion. The
church, the state, law, physic, commerce, Science and the fine arts,
in modes both cheap and attractive, use periodicalism to make
known their wants and supplies, to disseminate their purposes and
views, to win and confirm adherents, or put opponents to
confusion. The power—of the press—universally admitted and feit
—may be said to rest on the great variety and quality of mind
engaged, ranging from the ablest thinkers of the day to the
verlest scribblers; on great speculative enterprise; onthe mechanical
appliances in use for multiplying its productions and cheapening
price; on the facilities it affords for anonymous authorship, whether
of leaders, news or letters; on the liberty enjoyed, or, as it is called,


the freedom of the press; on the Publicity it can and does
command, and on the credulity of readers. These are elements
of power into an analysis of which and their mutual relations, this
is not the place to enter. In giving continuity to my subject, to
indicate them, is enough. A power so constituted can at com-
mand achieve the greatest good, or perpetrate the deepest wrong.
However, the enquiry, hoiv it has grown, by what motives and
purposes it has been nourished, and by what imperceptible motions
it has risen into its present strength, might employ the philosopher,
and exhibit some of the worst and best phases of human nature,
that the press has achieved noblest victories, every one who loves
liberty of thought and freedom of action must rejoice to
admit. But that its glories are too often tarnished is
just as painfully true. The foundation stone of the press
at the present day, in all its varieties, is commercial
speculation. Where are the periodicals that, without regard
to profit and loss, are carried on for the sole and conscientious
purpose of making known opinions and convictions 2 It cannot
be denied that the secular newspaper is entirely a business venture.
Yet, by reason of the causes to which I have referred, it has
become not only the great exponent of public opinion, but using
the opportunities which business tact and Publicity afford, it has
grown into a mighty agent in so Controlling and directing it, that
upon its utterances the fate of Governments, the success or failure
of public and private enterprise often depends, and by which the
peace or destruction of personal, and official life is influenced.
For, in addition to its business functions in recording facts and
disseminating views, it practically Claims the right of moral censor-
ship, and from whatever motives, and for whatever purposes,
matters not, it is found frequently invading the sanctity of home.
When it is remembered that newspapers are each controlled by
one mind, take their tone and colour from the thoughts of one
man, who is as liable to err, as subject to crotchets, as apt tobe
swayed by passion, and as open to personality as other men, the
power they possess is so remarkable a feature of the age, that one
cannot feel surprised at the Statements made by the Rev. George
Crabbe, in the preface to his graphic poem “ The Newspaper,”
when, in a sense, periodicalism had just begun to exist: “ I
should have been glad to have made some discrimination in my
remarks on these productions. There is indeed some difference,
and I have observed that one editor will sometimes convey his
abuse with more decency, and colour his falsehood with more ap-
pearance of probability, than another; but, until I see the paper
wherein no great character is wantonly abused, nor groundless in-
sinuation wilfully disseminated, I shall not make any distinction
in my remarks.”


Now, what sign does the existence of such a power as that
possessed by the periodicalism of the age give forth in relation to
the future ? Does it augur such an effect on the culture of
righteousness in the public mind as must tend to exalt the nation ?
or does it forbode either a general state of indifference to religion,
sucha complete Separation between it anddailylife —secularism —as
will at last bring down the divine displeasure ? Brief attention to
what, from the want of another term, 1 may call the inner life of
periodicalism, will shed some light on these questions. Thefreedom
of the press is one of the healthiest characteristics of the day, and
that it may neither be tampered with nor destroyed, must be the
desire of every true patriot. Liberty of speech and action is one
of the brightest jeweis in the British Constitution. It isthebirth-
right of every man. Yet the great freedom possessed by the press
often —too often —passes into latitudinarianism and licentiousness.
I fail to understand how, as a business venture, the press or any
portion of it, can, in the exercise of its lunctions, lay claim to a
greater freedom in dealing with persons, or with society and its
institutions, than is possessed by any and every subject in the
state. In dealing with men and questions, has the press any
occult insight into facts and truths by which to fix a Standard for
dogmatising, not possessed by any observing, thoughtful, honest
man ? How does it happen that in every department of life and
learning, secular and religious, the men who yesterday were the
idols of the hour, and loaded with praise, are to-day the objects of
either contempt, indignation, or indifference, and vice versah Not
that the men are better or worse than they were, nor that they have
become either substantially altered in character, or changed in
opinion, but that political and other surroundings have changed,
and, therefore, on its business basis, as a generally accepted ex-
pediency, to reach and to keep success, the press in the Service of
parties, and, in the exercise of its freedom, changes too; as Crabbe
SayS t< f /-v fViö nfAcnavnn c fVi & rmmlwc ccnl
“ Chief to the prosperous side the numbers sail.”
Editors are but men, and have no immunity from the infirmities of
human nature, and, therefore, it affords me pleasure to bear testi-
mony, from my personal knowledge, that there are those into
whosehandsall personal interests —howeverdelicate —and all ques-
tions —howevergrave—may be placed with unqualified confidence.
Honourable, upright, and discriminating, the newspapers under
their control are distinguished by the same high characteristics.
Nevertheless, he must indeed be ignorant of what is going on in
the world of periodicalism, who does not know that there are too
many so unlike them, that to offend, or to oppose, is to become
their target. So criticism and reference pass beyond merits ; but
by careful wording and skilful construction, they are made to
hover within consequences. It may be said, I know, that my


Now, what sign does the existence of such a power as that
possessed by the periodicalism of the age give forth in relation to
the future ? Does it augur such an effect on the culture of
righteousness in the public mind as must tend to exalt the nation ?
or does it forbode either a general state of indifference to religion,
sucha complete Separation between it anddailylife —secularism —as
will at last bring down the divine displeasure ? Brief attention to
what, from the want of another term, I may call the inner life of
periodicalism, will shed some light on these questions. Thefreedom
of the press is one of the healthiest characteristics of the day, and
that it may neither be tampered with nor destroyed, must be the
desire of every true patriot. Liberty of speech and action is one
of the brightest jeweis in the British Constitution. It isthebirth-
right of every man. Yet the great freedom possessed by the press
often—too often —passes into latitudinarianism and licentiousness.
I fail to understand how, as a business venture, the press or any
portion of it, can, in the exercise of its lunctions, lay claim to a
greater freedom in dealing with persons, or with society and its
institutions, than is possessed by any and every subject in the
state. In dealing with men and questions, has the press any
occult insight into facts and truths by which to fix a Standard for
dogmatising, not possessed by any observing, thoughtful, honest
man ? How does it happen that in every department of life and
learning, secular and religious, the men who yesterday were the
idols of the hour, and loaded with praise, are to-day the objects of
either contempt, indignation, or indifference, and vice versah Not
that the men are better or worse than they were, nor that they have
become either substantially altered in character, or changed in
opinion, but that political and other surroundings have changed,
and, therefore, on its business basis, as a generally accepted ex-
pediency, to reach and to keep success, the press in the Service of
parties, and, in the exercise of its freedom, changes too; as Crabbe
f fVi A rii/lrt 4-Virt fm'l 'J
“ Chief to the prosperous side the numbers sail.”
Editors are but men, and have no immunity from the infirmities of
human nature, and, therefore, it affords me pleasure to bear testi-
mony, from my personal knowledge, that there are those into
whosehandsall personal interests—howeverdelicate—and all ques-
tions—howevergrave—may be placed with unqualified confidence.
Honourable, upright, and discriminating, the newspapers under
their control are distinguished by the same high characteristics.
Nevertheless, he must indeed be ignorant of what is going on in
the world of periodicalism, who does not know that there are too
many so unlike them, that to offend, or to oppose, is to become
their target. So criticism and reference pass beyond merits ; but
by careful wording and skilful construction, they are made to
hover within consequences. It may be said, I know, that my


Statements, if not overdrawn, are not fairly moulded ; and that,
apart from business considerations, newspapers, each in the In-
terests of its party, does follow a fixed and definite policy. I do not
insinuate that there can, or should, be an alleged editorial infal-
libility; that having once taken up a position, there may never be
any departure. The great problems of religious, social and
political life are so complex, and so marked by rapid
movements, that modification, if not an entire change of
opinion, may become incumbent on enlightened honesty. That
does not essentially affect what I have said. For it would not be
difficult, by reference, to show that as parties have changed places
so has the and that the estimate of men and the advocacy
of questions, has been so opposite, and so great at different times,
as to force to the conclusion that they have originated from
something other than merits. Regarding periodicalism as a gieat
power, I fail, touching the particulars inadequately mentioned, to
see anything very hopeful in relation to the evils of byranny,
selfishness, self-will, and the culture of righteousness in the
national mind, without which all its other achievements, however
notable and praiseworthy, are but of secondary importance,
Consider further the nature of the matter presented in large
supplies to the general public. On the part ofthose whoassumea
moral and intellectual censorship over others, and who claim to
have the moral elevation and purity, as well the cornmercial
and political progress of the community in view, it is incum-
bent, that the reading matter they disseminate, even if it be at times
commonplace, shall always be ennobUng. But is it so ? Does it
appear in the detailed, degrading, offen disgusting accounts
of offences, crimes and complaints tried in our lower and
higher courts of law and divorce ? Does it appear in the in-
dustry with which scandal and gossip are gathered, and flung
broadcast over society \ or in the carefully written paragraphs
minutely descriptive of scenes of impurity and violence that shock
the soul? Such questions might be multiplied, but these and
their force I am sure all must feel —are enough for the present
time and place. The answer, as I have heard it is, that as readers
desire such pabulum, periodicalism must provide it. It is claimed
that the press is supplanting the pulpit, and exercising a greater
influence over the people. If so, how awful the responsibi ity
resting on those who control it! In such a case is a merely
cornmercial platform the right one, or the highest ? But tle
answer brings out the supremacy of business considerations t at
on the basis of profit only, pandering is done to vulgär Sensation-
alism and low tastes. Is the providing of such reading evidence
of high educational tendency or purpose? Because it pays,
because it suits a certain purchasing class of prurient mmd, to put
into print, make permanent, and accessible atan early age, thoughts
C 2


and acts and suggestions, that the honest and the godly would fain
to the latest possible moment keep from the knowledge of the
young, is surely a sorry mode of bettering the populär heart and
of fitting the rising generation for taking a noble place in the
future.
Consider, also, that the weight of teaching in the periodicalism
of the age is on the side of secularism; that is, that men
can be educated to all the duties and occupations of
life, and that people can be governed without the religion
contained in the life and lessons of Jesus Christ. Hence
Christianity is treated as a thing apart from the structure,
the conditions, and the wants of society. That is consistent with
the godless education to which I referred in the first lecture, and
to bring about which the newspaper press bent its great power, and
used the Publicity it has at command. The tendency—if not the
purpose—of that teaching is to loosen the restraints of revealed
religion; to weaken in the national heart, devotion, in so far as it
is inspired by the life and work of Christ; to cause an ever-widen-
ing distance between serving God and diligence in business, and
to bring about a general disregard of days and things hoary with
antiquity, a,nd sacred with divine authority. Cordially do I admit,
that periodicalism has laid not only our nation,but mankind under
a heavy debt of gratitude for what it has achieved against tyranny
and oppression, and in winning liberty; for such fearless exposure
of wrongs in Church and Stateashavecompelled reform; and for its
efiforts in the cause of benevolence, philanthropy, and Science.
But the life of a man does not entirely consist in mere material
progress, and the possession, grand as it is, of all liberty. It is
righteousness that exalteth a nation, that is, that God must be
recognised as He by whom kings rule, and princes decree justice;
whose are the gold and the silver, and the cattle on a thousand
hills; and that His presence, and power, and will must be acknow-
ledged and acted on in the education of the young, and form a
real element in the Claims of the press tobe a great teacher of the
people._ In the practical rejection of that, in the assertion of
secularism, and the attempt to teach, govern, and elevate society
by ethics and self-interest, I see no specially cheering sign in rela-
tion to the future. There is enough in this state of things to show
how red the sky is, and how lowering. The storm and rain will
come. There is more than ordinary significance in the fact as
given in the Melbourne Argus, of May 5, that one of our bishops—
whose breadth of thought and liberalism is a household word
laments the irreligiousness of the so-called religious press ; that is,
its narrow bitterness, personality, and Unfairness. And there is
surely equal heart-oppressing significance in the fact, that slander,
under cover of privilege, and impiety verging on atheism, has
recently been uttered in our own House of Parliament; when


there was not found one of all present —supposedly representing
the honour and Intelligence of the people—to lift up his voice
in either defence or rebuke.* If ye can discern the signs of the
sky, can ye not discern the signs of the times ?
*“ I believe that religion is a sham, a fraud, and a curse to humanity Priests and
parsons, who go about professing to have the love of God in their hearts, are often animated
by the spirit of the devil. They delight in trading on the worst feelings of humanity ; while
they have the word of God in their mouths, they have the devil in their hearts, and from
their pulpits they sow the seeds of discord, not caring two straws what the consequences
may be I am a bigotted Catholic, who would help to exterminate those who differ
from me.” —Hansard , No. 17, May ist, pp. 1904-1905.


LECTURE 111.
SUNDAY EVENING, 2 7 TH MAY.
St. Matthew, chap. 24, v. 32-35 ; St. Mark, chap. 13, v. 28, 2
No thoughtful observer can be insensible to the growth of the
commercial spirit, and how it is changing the conditions of society.
No objection can be taken to earnest, honest enterprise; for dili-
gence in business is enjoined in the gospel. No objection can
be taken to prudent effort in providing against accident, sickness,
and old age ; for, deducible from the whole scope of revealed
truth, that is the will of God. What I mean is, that covetousness
is inspiring the commercial spirit; the mere desire to make gain,
to accumulate wealth, is impelling to unmanageable speculation,
and unhealthy competition, by which all thought is engrossed,
body and mind are overtasked, the higher sentiments of the soul
are held in check, and truth and honour are being jeopardised.
The extent to which these conditions exist, the pressure with
which the commercial spirit—in the sense I use it—has seized on
all classes can neither be regarded lightly nor treated as mere
pulpit rhetoric. It is eating out the heart of labour with its old
spirit of content and chivalry, and deluding it in
“ toiling for the age of gold ”
to hopeless effort, to rise to a level with the classes whose o’er-
mastery command of wealth enables them to dominate. The
number and magnitude of the bankruptcies constantly taking
place throughout the world, testify to the strain which the love of
accumulation has put on enterprise. From the small deficiencies
of a defaulting clerk to the gigantic frauds of a ring, exist the
evidences of the extent to which the lust of gain has grown. Even
manly games, and athletic sports are being turned into business
speculations, and degraded by the gambling with which they are
now too generally associated. The commercial ambition of the
age laves the palace walls. Kings and emperors are now specu-
lators and millionaires. Nor is the Church itself in many respects
free from the same spirit. The question, therefore, is, what sign
do these things give forth ? We know from present conditions
what some of the effects are; but, if continued and intensified —as
is the tendency—the future presents no hopeful outlook. Wealth
is being centralised to an unprecedented extent. Macaulay teils


us that 200 years ago, in England, one in every thirteen persons
possessed a yearly income of £IOO. Now it is believed that not
one in thirty is in the same position, and that the number of those
who have from ,£I,OOO to £2,000 a year has increased in nearly
a corresponding ratio to the decrease in the former case. That
shows how money with increased speed is being accumulated by
few people. The wealthy are becoming more so, and the poor
more poverty stricken. There is a powerful significance in the
fact that, on the royal dinner table in the Fatherland at a late
festivity, the value of the gold and silver vessels was estimated not
by thousands, but by millions of pounds; that recently, in
America, one ball given by a private citizen absorbed a noble
fortune even, ,£61,000, while thousands of the population are
homeless, and tens of thousands of true-hearted men and women
know not how to find honestly the bare necessaries of life. In one
European State —claiming to possess the true faith —it is said four
millions of pounds were spent recently on a coronation celebration;
while in the matter of roads, bridges, manufacturing Industries,
schools, and the condition of the peasantry it is a Century behind
the civilisation of the age. Our knowledge that the lands in the
old country are held by comparatively few persons, and that the
number is yearly becoming fewer, mitigates surprise at the growing
dissatisfaction. But it is a still more unhealthy state, and in rela-
tion to our immediate luture, a more alarming sign of the times,
that in this young, grand colony only 4,237 persons hold over
twenty millions of acres; that only 96 persons hold no less than
eight millions of acres, and that at but a fraction of the price at
which the lands of the mother country are becoming monopolised.
lam no leveller, and my convictions are against democracy. Yet
the “ foreboding despondency” of what all that is leading to,
haunts one. It is not only causing an ever-widening gulf in taste,
sympathy, and aim between rieh and poor, but actually creating
on the one side dissatisfaction and hatred, and on the other side
indifference and apprehension.*
The lust of gain is so tampering with political life as greatly
to control legislation,and lead the way to personal aggrandisement.
* The Melbourne Argus, at the beginnmg of June, has the followmg remarks
“ Dr. Howard Crosby’s articles on the dangerous classes in the United States show that
new countries are no more exempt than old ones from these cankers of their civilisation. but
we, in this colony, need no assurance of this kmd. They are only dangerous, however, he
contends, when they are turned into insurrectionary channels by the gross injustice of the
higher classes, and this also exists in some of the large eitles, and makes itself feit even m
the Federal Legislature at Washington, more especially in its protective pohey. But, wntes
Dr. Crosby, ‘ the community cannot be plundered for ever; combinations of capitalists and
legislators to rob the poor for the benefit ofthe rieh will eventually meet with counter-combi-
nations, which will not confine themselves to robbery. This is human nature as well as
history The present peril of our country is exactly here. The dangerous classes among us
are thbse who are engaged in amassing colossal fortunes-the giants who tread ordinary men
under their heel, and care not how rauch the people suffer. They are absorbed with their own
greatness, lifted by their wealth out of all sympathy with the mass of mankmd and live as if
the world belonged to them. . There must be a hmit to individual wealth if we are to
be preserved as a republic.’ ”


The drift of all that is to the verge of a precipice, where there
can be no pause. The thirst for gold, and the struggle in com-
petition, are so truly deadening sensibility, that the Wholesale
adulteiation of what we eat, and drink and wear, is regarded less
i n . itself a sin, than the want of skill, or the carelessness which
fails evade detection. Like the impetus of a stone once set
in motion down the mountain slope, these, and other conditions,
are hurrying society to a state in which Acts of Parliament will
be weak against excited self-interest and passion. Words treated
lightly by thoughtlessness or indifference, as but a pulpit utterance,
may be remembered when the Speaker will havegone to rest, and
the crisis shall have come, The sky is red and lowering.
The various features of the times to which I have referred
are being strongly acted on, by the never-ceasing discoveries of
Science, and their practical applications. Capable of being used
for good or evil, their divine worth and use can only appear, as
they are consecrated either to the moral elevation of mankind, or
used as Instruments of ambition, and mere commercial progress.
What formerly soemed mysteriös are solved, and the unknown
beyond is ready to reyeal itself. Computing time by work done,
in a sense, Science is indefinitely extending the period of human
life. I have but to indicate the discoveries in chemistry and
meteorology; in the physical geography of sea and land ; the
wonders of electricity, the adaptations of steam power, and the
improvement in marine architecture, out of a host of others, to
show how, what were regarded as the dreams of poet and
alchymist, are being realised. The productiveness of the soil is
being increased and made permanent j the lightnings of heaven
are turned into couriers of human thought and purpose j whilst
remoteness is so ceasing to have geographical meaning, that once
distant nations are now neighbours. The dispersing power of
discoveries, on society, and the attractions which the new has over
the old, are acting on the settled habits ol every nationality; so
that, urged by the increased facilities for transit now in existence,
the old world is sending forth its sons and daughters to found
mighty kingdoms in what are now the wastes and wildernesses
of earth. In all that, there is much that is hopeful; much
that indicates the onward march of prophecy to its fulfilment
men shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall increase. How
little do we hear in connection with scientific progress of subser-
yience to other than material interests, and political purposes ! It
is being so enwoyen with secularism and self-interest, and will
become so complicated with the new conditions created by itself,
that amid the throng of circumstance, and the conflict of opinion,
we must pause in our rejoicing, and obedient to the Supreme
will, “ stand still and see that he is God.”


Running parallel to the conditions already spoken of, and
deep down in society, there are disturbing agencies at work,
complex in origin and Operation. There is “ Fenianism ” and
a Land League,” “ Invincibles,” “ Patriotic Brotherhood,” and
“ Secret Assassination Committeesand there is “ Socialism,”
“ Communism,” “ Nihilism f each and all directing their efforts
against the structure of social and political life. And there is
“ Freethought,” “Spiritism” and “ Scientific Infidelity,” operat-
ing on thought, faith, and character. As evil forces, they are the
modern correspondents to what, in the ancient Pagan world, were
so productive of sensuality, moral insensibility, and vices that may
not be named. The professed aim and end of each and all, is to
right what is wrong, and to secure for mankind broader freedom.
That, in general terms, is what it is desired shall be accepted as
their purpose. No objection can be taken to that as an abstract
theory, and when the need exists, no objection can be taken to
have wrongs remedied, and errors corrected. Indeed, to design,
and by the use of all moral means to accomplish both, is the real
work of Christianity in the world. Looking at the avowed pur-
pose of the combinations enumerated, what sign do they give of
the future in relation to society, governments, and the church ?
Do they encourage the hope of purifying and elevating them; of
bringing about a state of general content, well-balanced authority
and Subordination, and of universal religiousness, in which, without
creeds, the love of God shall really inspire and guide worship,
and whose practical outcome in life will be the prevalence of
righteousness, and good faith between man and man ? Or do they
point to contest, to the appeal to passion, to disturbances whose
progress it is not pleasant to follow ] and to such a Separation of
the soul from God as will leave every man in rnorals and religion
tobe a law unto himself ? The thoughtful and impartial observer
is impelled to the conclusion that their tendency is to the latter
conditions. By its origin, and the acts of adherents, we can best
judge of the sign any scheme gives forth. Very briefly follow that
rule, touching the matters under consideration. In every civilised
country, and in every government, there are political conditions it
is desirable to have changed; evils that press more heavily on
some classes needing tobe remedied ] oppression that in some
places are more deeply rooted, and more feit than they are
in others, which every lover of liberty desires to see removed. I
make these Statements exclusive to the nations among whom some
modified form of Christianity is professed, and where it is sup-
posed to influence—to some extent—government and people.
Let it now be admitted that in Ireland the outstanding evil is land-
lordism. The other great oppression under which it is alleged
that country suffers, is Imperial Protestant rule. To destroy the
former and shake off the latter, and secure an indepenuent


nationality is the double purpose for which the first five societies
named have been formed. The two purposes interlace, and, with
both, the ultimate supremacy of the Pope is deeply inwoven. All
safe legislation is slow. Düring the last thirty years great political
concessions have been made to Ireland; great effbrts have been
put forth to better the condition of her peasantry, and were not
these pledges that final justice would be done to every righteous
claim ? To have agitated on that basis, she would have continued
to possess—as on other occasions she has had—the moral support
of the Christian world. The lofty character of our noble Queen and
the high-mindedness of the great statesmen who have been, and
are, in authority, were sound pledges of steady amelioration. ’ The
extent,and complications oflanded and monetary interests forbade
hasty and destructive, and demanded cautious and tardy legislation.
With the path—when wrongs existed—fully open to the sympathy,
and moral and political support of neighbouring kingdoms, and
to the throne itself, had all Christian, peaceful, and constitutional
effbrts been tried in vain ? Was the case of Ireland utterly hope-
less ? Had any attempt been made to fasten some new yoke on
the national neck to warrant the present mode of seeking redress?
Why the sudden rush to agrarian outrage, conspiracy, violence,
andmurder? Why the mad and immoral attempts to rectify
even admitted evils, by the repudiation of all obligations, the
destruction of commercial and social relations, and the violent
severance of all connection with the very kingdom which, in the
time of greatest need, of famine and sickness, had in truest philan-
thropy supplied food and succour to the hungry and the sick?
Led by the pnesthood in their fury—in the secrecy of whose
hearts their crimes are locked up—there is a deeper significance
than mere rents and leases in the blood-stained state of Ireland,
together with her relentless and Wholesale attempts at the destruc-
tion of her neighbours in England and Scotland, though prepared
to stand by her in every righteous and constitutional agitation for
the redress of wrongs.* Professing tobe a Christian people, indeed
Dunngthe progress of these pages through the press, appeared the following State-
ments, on s thNovember, in the Melbourne Ar £ us-eve r a reliable and impartial wifnej-
which are too important in their bearing upon my remarks tobe omitted :-“Two conven-
tioris are announced tobe held in Australia this month. The one at Sydney is for a national
object, and must command the sympathy of all Its success would be a united Australia.
Ihe other, which is tobe opened in Melbourne on Wednesday, is to form a branch of the
Irish National Society, with such objects as to ‘free Ireland/ to ‘ throw off the foreign yoke ’
to abohsh landlordism. If it is a success we shall have, not a united, but a divided Aus-
traha. We may see reproduced here the same senous strife of factions which is now
place in the North of Ireland where riotmg is rife, and threatens to assume the proportioni
of a civil war. The National League has made an excursion into a loyal and Protestant
commmmty, and the aggression is resented with anger. It seems to Her Majesty’s subiects
in Ulster that the Jeague is tamted with disloyalty, that the cry of ‘ freeing Ireland ’ means
mfact the disruption of the empire, and_ that the phrase about ‘abolishing landlordism/ is
but a pohte way of statmg the desire of dishonest leaders and a thoughtless mob to confiscate
the Enghsh Capital which has been mvested in Ireland on the faith of the laws of the empTre"
All of us who live under the flag. and who love it, must look upon the struggle with shame
and sorrow. Our wish must be to confine the unhappy conflict to Ireland, and our hope that
the humane and righteous Governments of Great Britain—and all British Governments,


sole possessors of the true faith, are these —on the basis oftbeir
religion —the only courses open to them, to their religious teachers,
and others by whom they are incited and led ? Urged by able
leaders —who, stränge to say, are maintained in afifluence by the
so-called poverty stricken people they excite —to attempt the dis-
memberment of a throne vvhose stability by such agencies cannot
be shaken; to inflict a fatal blow on the Protestantism founded on
the life and teachings of Christ, and to overthrow all moral obli-
gations and monied interest,_ is to enter on a course whose only
sign, by such modes of curing evil and redressing wrongs, is
hopeless effort amidst lawlessness, increasing and blood-stained
crime. Throughout the continent of Europe, the other secret
societies I have named —owing their origin to the Atheism and
Communism of the French Revolution, fostered by the Secular-
ism of the age, and the indifference to responsibility it begets—
are as loud as the others I have spoken of in their pretension
to redress wrongs. But that they are really directed to the
breaking down of all social distinctions, and of all constituted
and necessary authority, is evident everywhere from the fact,
that their machinations are secretly hatched against every
form of government, whether that of an empire or a republic ;
matured under conditions possible only to men who have torn
conscience, every feeling of humanity, every sentiment of tender-
ness and truth from the soul; and are executed with a stolid, and
Satanic indifference to the indiscriminate destruction of human
life. The spreading growth, the deepening desperation and
recklessness of such Underground combinations against law
and Order, is an aspect of the times that cannot be viewed,
either apart from the conditions already spoken of, or without
suggestive and painful anxiety. Were it not that the
societies of Freethought, Spiritism and Atheism, have an
inherent tendency to promote the evils I have inadequately
indicated, they would be of little consequence, and have
feeble effect against the pure truths of revealed religion, and
the heroic life and redemption work of the Christ whom it makes
known. But in removing all the divine landmarks which
separate between good and evil; in substituting for God s will as
the rule of life, the impulses of the human heart; in Standing aloof
from every noble scheme of philanthropy and benevolence , and
in pandering by their teaching to passion and seif interest, directly
whether Conservative or Liberal, are humane in act,. and righteous in intention-will be able
to allav Dassion to remove grievances where they exist, and to reconcile the taces. hut any
idea oJ giving aid and support, directly or indirectly, to the men and the organisations that
are baffling and thwarting the honest efforts of the rulers of the empire, is apuredly repug-
nant to Australia as a whole. If societies are formed tosend money to Ireland to aid the
National League, if the league talk is indulged in here, and if the league wntings are re-
published, it is much tobe feared, or rather it is reasonably tobe anticipated, that we shall
see the Ulster spirit springing up in Victoria also. We shall be opemng our doors to the
Furies.”


and indirectly, they lend countenance, and help to break down
and trample under foot both constitutions and institutions, which
in any sense, claim a divine origin, or have about them either the
features, or the vestments of Christianity. Grouping the agencies
at work disturbing society, and looking at the hold they have
taken of the populär mind, I cannot be called an alarmist in
saying, that they indicate a state of the sky foreboding catastrophy,
which cannot be looked at without depressing apprehension.


LECTURE IV.
SüNDAY EVENING, 3RD JUNE.
St. Matthew, chap. 24, v. 32, 35 ; St. Mark, chap. 13, v. 28, 29.
That my references to the disturbing influences at work in the
world were not overdrawn, and that their direct purpose is to
destroy the balance of society, undermine constitutional
authority, and enable the agitators to rise on the shoulders of
revolution to wealth and power, will be painfully apparent from
the following Statement by the Paris correspondent in the Sydney
Morning Herald, of iBth May :—“ The numerous arrests that have
been made show the fact that secret societies are as numerous,
and their aim as desperate, here as elsewhere, and it is now more
evident than ever that the existing Government is unable to cope
with the social discontent that is seething and heaving throughout
France, as throughout the rest of Europe. The working classes
that brought M. Gambetta into power, on the faith of his denun-
ciations of wealth and its possessors, and his promises to
ameliorate the condition of the ‘ new social strata,’ are thoroughly
disgusted and indignant at finding that they have only been made
use of to lift the denouncers of wealth into the posts and places
that have enabled their holders to amass wealth in their turn. The
working classes find that their lot is constantly becoming more
difficult, as taxes are now heavier than ever before, house room
more difficult to find, and clothing dearer, food dear and woik
scarce. As the last revolution raised its promoters to wealth and
power, they imagine that a new revolution will do as much for
them, and they are eager to attack the 'bourgeois/ and the
members and the upholders of the present Government, as were
the latter to attack the Empire, its functionaries, and its friends.”
Those pregnant phrases are in many respects as applicable to the
real character of the agitation and the agitators, now going on in
Ireland, as they are to France.* The low ebb to which religion
* The Melbourne Argus , at the beginning of June, says—“The object of Mr. R
Pigott’s article on Irish murder societies is to show that the recent outbreaks of crime, out-
rage, and disorder, are deliberately excited and stimulated by a number of unscrupulous men,
designing knaves, and sham patriots, some of whom make their livmg by Professional
patriotism, and duping ignorant people ; and others of whom lust for pohtical innuence, and
for whom tranquility means obscurity, and was in no sense the result of exaggeration as is
pretended.” As a Professional patriot Mr. Parnell has received wrung frorn the
poverty cf the poor. Hefailed to satisfy the House of Commons that he had no comphcity
in certain murders, committed under the guidance of the secret society of which he was the
leader.


has fallen in France, if indeed its power has not quite dried up,
and the utter Godlessness, not only of all in power, but it would
seem of the whole people, are the true outcome of secularism
triumphant, and are thus referred to in terms of solemn and
warning eloquence by the Bishop of Lincoln, when addressing a
meeting at Nottingham. After briefly stating the lofty and holy
truths which the festival of the Epiphany celebrates : —“ But let us
reflect,” added the Bishop, “on the event which took place on
that festival of the Epiphany in the present month (January 6th)
in the greatest city of the continent of Europe. Thousands, and
tens of thousands, poured forth in ceaseless streams to swell the
funeral cortege of one (Gambetta) to whom the greatest of con
tinental nations did honour on that day. Those funeral obsequies
stirred the heart of that immense multitude, which displayed its
admiration of him whom they honoured by the tribute they then
paid of funeral crowns and garlands, of military and civil banners
and escutcheons, of martial music and of peals of cannon. Six
funeral orations were pronounced in succession by some of their
most eminent citizens over the bier of the departed patriot. But
the fact is not tobe forgotten, as among the most striking pheno-
mena of the present day, that on that great Christian Festival of
the Epiphany, in the Capital city of the nation whose sovereign
was formerly styled Most Christian King, and which was itself
called the eldest daughter of the Church, and at the funeral of one
of its greatest citizens, who was followed to the cemetery of Pere
la Chase by almost a whole population, there was not a ray of
light gleaming from the Star of Bethlehem to enlighten the dark-
ness of the tomb, not a single sunbeam of the gospel of Christ to
gild the black pall and bier of the dead, and to cheer the gloom
of that national mourning, not a single whisper of Christianity
was breathed in all these formal orations over the corpse, not a
single syllable of reference to the awful realities of death, resur-
rection, and eternity ”
The conditions of the religious world are among the most
suggestive signs of the times. We are accustomed exultingly to
anticipate the period when the church, with holy and enlightened
power, will rule the earth, and the authority of Christ, her head
and king, be joyously and universally obeyed. But, while dwelling
on her distant glory, we are apt to overlook her present conditions,
and the sufferings through which she must pass, together with the
radical changes she must undergo, ere the promise of her greatness
can be realised. Whatever their value, and whatever satisfaction
they may afford from denominational points of view, as tests of
the spiritual conditions of the church, of how the teachings of
Christ affect and control the heart and conscience of her adherents,
in their varied relationship to society and each other, statistics of


buildings, numerical strength, and moneys raised, are neither con-
clusive nor satisfactory. One fact from among many will bear
out that Statement. The litigants who crowd the civil courts of
every kind, the adulterators of food, clothing and drink ; they who
are numerously engaged in the liquor traffic; the professional
patriots who live upon agitation, and the professional politicians
ever succeeding in increasing taxation and national debt, and ever
failing to satisfy the cry of the people—give us good government —
Claim connexion with one or other of the churches, and contribute
to their support. Farbe it fromme to depreciate either the
religious actxvities of the times, the efforts being made by the
great and the good in the cause of holy truth, or the success that
attends them. They are great, yet inadequate to the wants of the
world. Impartial seif examination is not more incumbent on
personal professors than it is in relation to the corporate church
and her surroundings. By disunions, by discords, by worldliness,
and by becoming lukewarm in her love to the Lord, and failing
away from the high purpose of the Betrothed, the church has
become Babylon, has gone into confusion. The cry for means to
do her work among the nations is made against the commercial
spirit, as it affects her professed adherents, whose response bears
no proportion to the enormous increase of their wealth. Untold
sums are spent in intoxicating drinks, in personal pleasure, in
display, in adding to the amount of solid investments, or risked in
uncertain speculations ; but to uphold the cause of the Redeemer,
mere pittances are grudgingly secured, either by supplications
demeaning both to the cause and the giver, or by resorting to
schemes so worldly, and so sensational, that in their bearing on
spiritual truth, and a Christian profession, will not bear enquiry. Of
the unity that should distinguish the church, an able writer says :
“As to the various other fragments of the body of Christ, the
different dissenting peoples, the broken stones and shivered dust of
Zion and Jerusalem, with much zeal for God, and true desire for His
glory; ignorance and fanaticism, conceit and foolishness, and
partial and one sided views of truth, have done their work among
them, and confusion and disorder have almost worked their
utmost limits. Ever dividing from one another and subdividing
again, they only manifest more and more the ordinances
for rule and unity tobe wanting and the power of unity gone.”
With respect to discipline in the church, the same writer says,
what no calm observer can question: “ There is a hollow
Imitation of the old discipline in the Greek and Roman
churches, and among Protestants there is either a total neglect of
it, or a hard and narrow administration of it, and a refusal of
communion on uncatholic grounds. Society indeed has
invented a discipline of its own, choosing to exclude from its pale


for certain sins, while allowing indulgence in many others, partial
and pitiless in its code and partial in its administration of it,
seeking rather its own protection than the amendment and Salva-
tion of the sinner, but discipline in the church there is none; the
dergy find every day that even though they are most desirous to
minister faithfully the discipline of the church, the people of every
rank would almost with one consent refuse to submit to it, and
they are obliged therefore to compromise with them and do the
best they can.” There is going on in the religious world such
conflicts between the conservatism of creeds and the democracy
of truth, between the clinging to traditional interpretations of the
word of God, the stereotyped teachings of systematised dogma,
and the great er breadth in teaching which the light of modern
Biblical criticism, and modern discovery demands, that men’s faith
is disturbed, their doubts are awakened, and their hearts torn with
anxiety. Among certain scholarly and lofty minds, whose opiniohs
greatly influence religious thought, there is a tendency to vague
idealisms of power and wisdom, by which the Fatherhood of God
is removed and the essential characteristic of Christas work refined
on, tili it is said “ atonement is not expiation but reconciliation •”
“ Christ did not die on the cross to bear the curse of the broken
law, but only to show that God could bring up man out of any
depth.” In the church itself the gospel of the kingdom as taught
by Christ himself and his apostles has been, and is, greatly over-
looked. The coming of the Judge is spoken of in her teachings,
but the coming of the Bridegroom is passed over. The hope
of all that is to happen to her, and to the world at the second
advent of the Lord has much ceased to influence the church,
and to awaken the waiting, watching, and preparation that
wondrous event should inspire. In every country —and nowhere
in a more unhallowed and relentless rnanner than in these colonies
—the civil powers are taking away from the church the possessions
which in virtue of her relation to Christ—whose are “ the silver
and the gold, and the cattle on a thousand hills ” —are hers by
right. From the growing disaflection with religion created by the
charges in high places brought against the teachings of the
modern pulpit—whether fairly or otherwise it is no part of my
present duty to say—and from the severity of the struggle going
on between scientific materialism and revealed religion ; between
godliness and secularism, and much of the current literature to
elbow the Claims of divine truth out of the way, we cannot fail to
see the approaching disasters that we learn from prophecy will
mark the end of the present dispensation. In the words of the
author already quoted, “ At the first French Revolution the spirit
of hatred to the Priesthood was confined to one nation only, but


now it has spread into all countries, and that which was then an
abscess that gathered and burst in one limb has since spread into
the whole body, and when it comes to a head the next time it
will indeed be death. The scenes that occurred in France in 1793
were a foreshadowing in one nation of what will be consummated
in all when the time comes ; only then it was an outbreak ol
populär madness, but this will be the work of kings and of
systematised wickedness.” Then at the great crisis will the Lord
assert his Majesty and save his own.
The anomalous attitude of nations and governments to each
other is a painful complication in the signs of the times. In
the true commercial spirit, and lust of excelling greatness, they
are ostensibly encouraging the arts of peace and progress, of which
the periodic exhibitions of industry and Science are the passing
monuments, and in the hearing of the people they are speaking to
each other in the language of friendship and trust. If this state of
things stood alone, if it were not really dominated by other and
seemingly stronger conditions, it would be a hopeful sign. But
governments however appear tobe so distrustful of each other,
that, from causes, best known in the secrecy of cabinets, they are
in constant preparedness for war, and side by side with their
peaceful exhibitions they are turning the world into one huge
barracks. The halls that should be the resort of unselfish
patriotism are the arenas of ignominious battle for pay, place and
power, whilst the people without are staggering under burdens
grievous tobe borne. Questions that could be bloodlessly
disposed of, either by honorable explanations and concessions, or
by a court of nations, are for various, but nevertheless unholy
purposes, so managed that nothing can adjust them but the
arbitrement of the sword. “All the nations are discontented,”
“ all forms of earthly legislation and expedience have been tried, and
have failed to remedy the evils of humanity and the inequalities of
condition in overflowing wealth and desperate misery. The cry of
the oppressed labourer and artisan, and of the poor lost creatures
of all ages enter into the ears of the Lord, as St. James says (sth
chap.) in the last day it would be ; and fraud and wrong are so
rife, that no man knows whom he can trust, or who will betray him
next. ,> The efforts being made to disseminate secular learning
separated from the restraining, guiding, and hallowing infiuence of
religion, is creating a new power in society, with which govern-
ments will yet have to cope. On their own secular terms it is
already beginning to put them on their trial, and the time will
come, when it will be in a position to pronounce and execute
judgment. For, from the walls of Pekin to the banks of the
Potomac, there is going on a great struggle touching human


life and human thought, Irom which there can be no retreat, and
whatever the suffering it must be endured tili the end shall come.
“ Be wise, O ye rulers of earth,
And shut not your ears to the voice,
Nor allow it to warn you in vain ;
True freedom, of yesterday’s birth,
Will march on its way and rejoice,
And never be conquered again ;
The day has a tongue —ay the hours utter speech —
Wise, wise will ye be, if ye learn what they teach.”
The signs of the times I have referred to indicate everywhere
chinks in the great fabric of society, through which much can be
seen, but of which I can now speak but briefly and hurriedly. As
disease is caused by certain States of water and matter, and is
modified as they change, so the different conditions of which I
have spoken, are producing uncomely changes in social and
domestic life. To trace their complex life and growth is outside
my present subject. I have but to indicate. The sanctity and
pnvacy of the domestic fireside are less prized than formerly.
Tobe freed from many of its cares —though at the loss of much
of its happiness —lamily life is becoming extensively merged in the
magnificent centralization of the modern hotel and club. The
“growing indifference to the chief of all abominations, divorce,”
and not only the toleration but the approval of “ lax notions,”
concerning the sacredness and obligations of the marriage tie, is
daily exhibited in the columns of the press. Who can mix in
society—whatever the grade—without being painfully impressed
with the expressed thoughts, and suspicions of the young men of
the day concerning matrimony, and their reasons for keeping
aloof from what God has willed is the true state of life. So, too,
must one feel at the mercenary and low motives prompting
to it, by which its true end and blessedness are overlooked
and lost. Noticeable everywhere, but chiefly in the large centres
of population, by living much away from home; by the hungering
after pleasure and novelty or excitement; and by the absorbing
cares of business competition, the first and true duty of parents —
the care and moral training of their children —is entrusted to
servants. What wonder, therefore, that the authority and Subor-
dination, the love and respect that should exist between parent
and child, and which obtained in the “ hearts and homes” of the
generation passing away, are becoming so loosened, that the rising
youth—the men and women, the fathers and mothers of the future
—impatient of control, virtually demand that they shall select their
own companions, and choose their own hours for being absent from
or at home? Surely, in relation to domestic life, and to the modesty
so much tobe valued in female character, there is an awful
significance in the phase over which thoughtlessness —and worse —


makes merry—“ the girl of the period.” In their mean and lawless
gradations, from the hoodlums of California to the larrikins of the
lower, and the fast young men of the better, classes, there is a
painfully suggestive light reflected back on much of modern home
life, too obviously traceable to the conditions indicated. Example,
like water, percolates downward. When, therefore, men occupying
the highest representative, the most responsible, the most influen-
tial, and honorable position possible under our British Constitution,
who by the noble discharge and the righteous exercise of its duties,
should make its attainment the ambition of the able and the
worthy, and who should win for their deliberations the respect, and
the sincere and intelligent approval of the country, are seen occupy-
ing their time, and dishonoring their standing, in bandying grossest
charges of corruption, falsehood, and drunkenness; under cover
of the privilege attached by law to their position, in slander-
ing men who outside their preserve are powerless to defend them-
selves, and in using the franchise as a means by which to gratify
personal vanity, feud, and brutal passion, what is tobe looked for
among the imitating masses but confusion of thought, inconstancy
to principle, and preparedness for violence ?
As they appear to my mind such are some of the character -
istics of the age. How in the future they will modify each other,
and be again affected by the upspringing of new influences and
fresh complications, it is not forme to dogmatize. We can only
say it will be so. The final outcome may be the readjustment of
governments on a foundation of justice and honesty, the purgation
of the Church from every error, and the fraternity of men and
nations on a sure basis of love and trust; or it may be the recon-
struction of the present show of things in glorified forms, of which
we can at present form no conception. But whatever the final
outcome, Imagination shrinks and falls away at the conflicts that
will precede. The burning up of the earth, and the melting of
the “ elements with fervent heat,” fitly symbolize the bitterness of
human experience, and the intensity of human woe that will pervade
the period of culmination to which the signs of the times point;
the Armageddon, by which the present fabric of society will be
destroyed and the new shall be ushered in. When that time will
come is amongst the things it is the glory of God to conceal. Christ
in his humanity knows is not. To us it is an unknown and unknow-
able quantity. The Master hath ascended on high ; the hour of
His coming may be at even, or at midnight, or at cock-crowing,
or in the morning. Mercifully He hath left us ignorant of all but
the fact of His return. Curiosity raore than piety looks for a
special sign, but none shall be given other than the words of
prophecy, and the events of the centuries as they roll. The duty
tersely taught us is “to watch;” by faith in Christ, love towards


God and holiness of life, to hold ourselves in readiness for the
coming of the Saviour. Though all things seem to continue as
they were from the beginning, yet as the change will come, it is for
us “to watch,” having our lamps trimmed, and oil in our vessels
with our lamps. That is the practical, and Godly issue to which
prediction, and the signs of the times point, for —
“ From the very permanence of things
And voiceless continuity of love, '
Unmixed with human passion, fretted not
By jealousy, impatience, or revenge,
We gather courage and confirm our faith.
. . . And if yet we lack
The witness, and the voucher of a voice,
What hindereth that we, who stand between
The living nature and the living God,
Between them—yet in both —their minister,
By noble life and converse pure, should be
Ourselves the very voice of God on earth,
Living epistles known and read of all ?”


'; 1 , .
4 / *' 4 * %
• v ! v , . < ' ■■ v ■ 'i _ • ■ / ' /;


