





SIGNAL LAMPS
FOR THE
RAILWAY OF LIFE,




PJ*ES'AOEI.
Jjs writing the following pages, judgment and feeling have
often been strangely at variance. Feeling would fain exalt
the intellectual above the physical ; judgment cries, Hold ;
where would your much-cherished fruits of intellect be if
there were not an arm of firm muscle and bone to pro-
tect them r Feeling glides forth from her retreat in the
heart, rapturously exclaiming, See! see! what a beautiful,
what a soul-cheering picture I have got ! It is our dear
native earth glowing upon the bright azure couvas of heaven.
See that lion and that lamb, how lovingly they consort
together ; and that sweet child, how he wreathes the lion’s
head with roses, and caresses the lamb!
Judgment looks down from his bench in the brain, gives
his magisterial head a shake, and rather gruffly replies,
Come, come set past that picture; it is quite unsuited to
the present time, and don’t trouble me with your dear azure
earth, and your insane jumble of lions, lambs, roses, and
children. The plain matter of fact is, that there must be
war, and there will, be for a long time to come; and the
surest way to prevent war is to be ever ready to fight;
non-resistance is the parent of aggression.


Do you sec yonder moving mass of darkness in the
East ? It is a cloud of Cossacks with their spears and
keen-eyed horses galloping hard to the West. Leave oft your
sentimentalising till some more spiritual weapon than a
bayonet can beat back these men from plundering and
enslaving. So, poor Feeling gives a sigh, turns the
picture with its face to the wall, and creeps away out of
sight, like a frightened snail creeping into its shell.
Should it be said that any of the succeeding subjects
have been treated with undue levity, we would reply, that
necessity has forged no chain wherewith to bind morality to
misery ; that it must be a gloomy, earth-bound spirit which
delights in no music save the dismal sound of the muffled
drum; loves to look on no brighter banner than a death’s
head and cross bones. With the “ man delights not me, no,
nor woman neither ” faith, we have no sympathy, and re-
markably little patience with its professors. Cheerfulness is a
duty which all owe to themselves, and to every rational
being that comes within the sphere of their influence. The
man who irradiates the human face with a sunny smile, who
affixes wings to the leaden shoulders of Care, deserves much
better of his country and his kind than he wffio causes
unavailing tears to flow, or stirs up —to sting like adders —
vain regrets over circumstances which are unavoidable in
the future, or irrevocable m the past.


Laying claim to nothing beyond plain common sense, and
an average amount of observation and experience, I do not
anticipate a condemnatory verdict from criticism, because I
am conscious that I have given expression to no sentiment
tliat Ido not sincerely believe to be for the good of that
most valuable class for whom the book was written.
The book is expressly intended for the benefit of those
who have their bread to earn in the counting-house, the
warehouse, and the workshop; and the strongest feeling
which possesses the mind of the writer is the desire to be
useful to this class, to which he himself belongs.




COHSTTIB 2STTB.
PREFACE iii.
INTRODUCTION f>
CHAPTER I.
IGNORANCE 14
CHAPTER 11.
POVERTY ' 17
CHAPTER HI.
UTILITY 26
CHAPTER IV.
EDUCATION S 6
CHAPTER V.
AMUSEMENTS » ... .. ... 4P,
CHAPTER VI.
ORIGIN AND NATURE OF GOVERNMENT &
CHAPTER VII.
MIND 67
CHAPTER VIII.
ECONOMY AND SAVINGS BANKS S 2


CHAPTER IX.
SABBATH L ABO HE 100
CHAPTER X.
SUPERSTITION 105
CHAPTER XL
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES 115
CHAPTER XII.
LIFE ASSURANCE 119
CHAPTER XTIT.
TITTNOS TO BE AVOIDED 125


signal lamps
INTIiODFCTIOI,
Tounu Men,
Let us imagine a wall of glass stretching along
the whole length of the Railway of Life, reflecting the forms of
men, things, circumstances, and events, as they slowly move,
calmly roll, or wildly dash along in one continuous wave ;
while the wall itself stands immoveably still. This wall
is Time. It dips, it vanishes from view at life’s horizon,
and joins eternity. And although we are accustomed
figuratively to speak of Time’s rapid and ceaseless course,
yet it is ourselves, in the august company of the uncom-
prehended, the incomprehensible universe/ that flow, that
drift, that drive, or it may be are driven. Time is a fixed
standard, whereby we measure the speed or duration of things
as they pass Whether brightness or darkness may encircle
the image which each of you must throw into that transparency ;
whether endurance or evanescence may mark you for their
own ; whether you be shown as a warning to be despised and
avoided, or an example to be honoured and imitated, depends
very much upon yourselves.
It is startling to think what a fearful variety of scenes
have been reflected from that glassy, that tell-tale wall. What
innumerable hosts of figures have flitted over the face of this
vast panorama-like mirror! —now closing together, now
breaking up, now disappearing, like streamers in the sky of
the far north.
Mail-clad warriors fearlessly spurring onward to death,
amid blazonry and blood, in pursuit of that purple phantom,
glory ; and emperors, kings, and knights crouching with fear
at the feet of men whose only weapons were superstition and a
cross.
Palaces, with their gilded roofs and turrets, flinging back as
in mockery the rays of the sun ; their ceilings, pictured and
high, reverberating the sounds of music, revelry and mirth j


and palaces with their floors strewn deep with the dust of
desolation, and the mist-like shadow of grim decay falling
upon mouldering roof and time and tempest-riven wall—while
silence, like a dead sentinel, keeps noiseless watch.
Billows of earth and ocean upheaving at the earthquake and
hurricane’s word. The spirit of the volcano, swimming through
torrents of molten lava, and sealing up proud cities with his
signet of fire ; and those cities, after ages of darkness, revisit-
ing the sun-light again, dug by the hand of man from their
rocky tomb.
Over its surface ages of darkness have rolled, and left not a
shadow to tell of their deeds or their name; and ages of
splendour have thrown a blaze of imperishable glory upon that
wall, which still sparkles and shines, and casts a reflected light
even upon the plains, the mountains, and the valleys of our
own dear land,
The young child, with bright inquiring eyes, hailing with
joyous wonder the sun, the moon, the stars itself, even unto
itself, a source of marvel and of joy each sense unfolding,
like flower-leaves in spring; and the old man, whose cold blood
no summer heat can warm —whose dull eye can see no
freshness, nothing new —from off whose time-withered heart
enjoyment glances, and who, weary of the sun-light, turns his
face unto the wall, and dies. The freeman and the slave—the
bridal chariot and the funeral car—cities building and cities
blazing—the half-formed world one universal slimy surge, the
breeding-place of monsters—the firm green land trod by the
foot of man —the deep blue sea, and ships careering over the
waters, like ocean birds with their bosoms embracing the
billows, and their wings wooing the breeze —the fleecy gossamer
vapour silently flitting across the dome of celestial blue, and
the dense thunder-bearer muttering and scowling in gloomy
glory from the bronzed keystone of a glowing furnace-like sky ;
all these have illumined "or beclouded life’s boundary wall
with sunshine, flame, or darkness.
Although it is decreed by a superior power, and ordained
by a law from which there is no appeal, that all must travel
along life’s rails, yet the mode of transit, the vehicle, the halts
for refreshment and rest, the conveniences, the comforts, the
thousand nameless little somethings which give zest to life,
are very far indeed from being subject to any determinate law.
We find them far from being equally divided, some having
considerably more than their own share, while others are


miserably deficient. Indeed some men are miraculously
unfortunate, tor contrary to the laws even of chance or
mischance they catch nothing from beginning to end of their
journey but jolts, tumbles, and tosses, and generally end their
days in some place where they ought never to have been, or by
some accident which a little foresight would have prevented.
Chance may give a man a lift, but his own conduct alone
can steady him upon the pinnacle on which chance has placed
him. Chance may cast a man to the earth, but want of innate
energy alone can keep him down.
Many young men live at full speed. They send the blood
coursing through the heart as often in two days as it should do
m three Their motto is, a “ short life and a merry one-”
which, being translated into railway English, signified, ’a
drunken engine-driver, and an explosion.
As every living thing must travel along this line, if strict
order be not observed individually, as well as collectively,
destruction must be the rule, a moderate degree of safety the
exception Some passengers are so very high-minded that they
will travel in first-class carriages only, and sometimes by the
force of sheer impudence they do gain their point to the exclusion
of much better people than themselves. Others again are so
very lowly minded that thej insist upon being used as stepping-
stones for people to mount up to their seats upon; they are
taken at their own estimate, and stepping-stones they are and
ever more will be.
A modest assurance becomes the lowliest of our race ; and
however high a man’s position in society may be, if he
assumes more, he is a fool in the opinion of every right-
thinking man, and, by such, will be regarded with contempt
instead of respect. ’ v
This just, unpretending estimate of the dignity of human
nature will likely, in most instances, lead to a seat in a second-
class carnage, and what may be awanting in appearance and
state will generally be more than made up in freedom and
comfort; and besides, should circumstances compel a few
stages to be gone over in a third-class, the change will neither
be so marked nor so distressing.
The amount of enjoyment to be realised on this journey
depends much upon the company you may happen to fall
among. But you have some liberty of choice here. Take a


look into the interior; if you like not the appearance of tke
inmates, shut the door quietly, turn the handle, and move on
to another.
If you see a man dressed, or bearded, in a very uncommon
fashion, do not sit beside him if you can help it; he may be
harmless, still the case is decidedly doubtful.
If you hear a man swearing at hia wife, or scolding a sick
child, on no account go into the same carriage with him. There
is not the slightest doubt in this case.
But if you see a man half lifting a poor old stranger, man
or woman, into a seat, or sitting with one child on his knees
and another in his arms —never mind how rough like he
looks—sit close to him, court his friendship. He may not be
a very bright genius after all, but the strong law of kindness
rules him, and he will neither hurt nor deceive.
This little book is not intended to dazzle your imaginations
with gilded metaphors, to palm upon your deluded judgments
glitter for gold, or bedizen the faultless form of plain and
simple truth with tinselry or artificial flowers. Our aim lies
deeper —our aim is to awake the slumbering intellect —to bid
the dweller in the dust arise—to urge the ice-bound soul to
trample on its frozen shroud —to render visible the darkness of
the moral tomb —to cheer the spirit as she clears the clouds
and fogs of ignorance, and bathes her blight pinions in the
flood of light which ceaselessly streams from truth's eternal
sun.
We would have intellect to turn its keen eye—gleaming -with
the glory of immortality —inward upon itself, to study closely
and calmly its own nature ; its strength, its power of endurance
and how far it may be stretched without losing its elasticity.
We would have you independently to think, and not be mere
responses to the oftentimes false and meaningless echoes of
past. We would have you familiarise yourselves with every
chamber in the intricate labyrinth of mind, sw r eep from its
walls the cobwebs of ignorance, light up every room with the
lamp of self-knowledge, and banish for ever prejudice, passion,
presumption, and pride.
Young men, I feel as if impelled to offer to you a few
instructions, gleaned from the rugged field of experience;
in the hope that they may point out for your avoidance, some
of the quicksands which abound in the earlier stages of the
journey through life ; and around the flower-begirt borders of


which the foot of inexperienced youth so fatally loves to
linger. These flowers are painted poison cups. These odours,
which lull and enervate the charmed spirit, are issuing from
the lungs of death.
Let the idle and the rich sacrifice time and money to that
misnamed idol, ‘Pleasure,’ if they will; you must not: your
time and money are far too precious for any such purpose, far
too valuable to be thus cast away.
Your position, though perhaps comparatively lowly, is most
useful and honourable, none more so under the sun; the
young working population of Britain, is Britain’s back-bone.
One sweat drop from the brow of a man engaged in useful
labour, is intrinsically worth more than all the gems and
pearls that ever gleamed or glittered under the surface of
the dark earth or the bright sea. The humble grass-blade
that carpets the field in an unassuming garb of eye-refreshing
green, is infinitely more valuable than the towering flower-
bearing shrub, which dazzles the eye with a profusion of
rainbow-tinted flowers, and rivals the glories of the meridian
Youth lives and revels in the anticipation of a bright future;
while false, flattering hope whispers of a summer sky without
a cloud. Age shrinks from the rushing sound of the wings
of coming time, and enshrouds himself in the shadow of the
long past.
The past to you has no existence ; but the present the
pivot on which your future turns; and lam strongly desirous
of writing something which may beneficially influence that
future—strongly desirous of giving a visible, a tangible form,
a body, to the invisible spirit of some truth-begotten thought,
which may possess the power of making young heart-strings
vibrate in unison with the voice of truth, when that mysterious
tenant, life, has for ever forsaken the chamber of the brain,
where the idea found a birth-place ; when the hand that
penned it lies cold, and stiff, and still.
Young men, ponder, deeply ponder upon this truth:
As surely as death follows life, there exists no possibility of
evading the punishment consequent upon a breach of Nature s
laws. And this : Wisdom’s ways alone are ways of pleasant-
ness, and in her paths only is to be found true peace.
If you believe not now, depend upon it the arrows of
conviction, barbed and poisoned, will reach and rankle in your
hearts in years to come.


CHAPTER I.
IGNORANCE.
Ignoeance may be defined as an absence of tbe knowledge
of the good, the useful, the beautiful, and the true. It is a
comparative term. The amount of knowledge required to
make an intelligent peasant, would make but an ignorant peer.
Wisdom and knowledge are often confounded, yet they are far
from being synonymous terms. Wisdom is the power which
properly and practically applies knowledge when acquired.
Consequently, although a man without useful knowledge
cannot be truly termed wise, yet a man’s mind may be a store-
house of dead knowledge, and yet no living wisdom there. If
knowledge shows itself not in action, it signifies nothing
whether it be imprinted on a living brain or on the dead leaves
of a book. Knowledge is the body of wisdom ; the power to
apply is the living principle, the soul. The possession of
knowledge, like the possession of worldly wealth, entails new
duties upon its possessor. It is the riches of the soul, and it is
man’s plain duty to share these riches with those who are
perishing for lack of knowledge ; his plain duty to spend these
riches freely for the redemption of those who are lying blind
and bound in the paralyzing embrace of ignorance.
The mind of the ignorant man is in a state of abject poverty,
of famine ; and poverty, mental, moral, or physical, you must
fight against and annihilate. It is a sorry sight to see a young
man ignorantly bartering his glorious birthright, reason, for a
poisoned cup, or selling himself to the fiend poverty, that he
may dree out a life of inaction and sloth, crawling through
the world like a wounded reptile, or standing rooted to the
ground like a barren, unwholesome plant. Up, up and bestir
yourselves ; ‘work while it is called to-day, for the night of
death cometh, in which no man can work.’
The light which you shed into your neighbour’s mind is bound
by the laws of its nature to flash back and illumine your own
path. If you wish to learn, attempt to teach.
Every dweller in this land (this land glorified in this) is
possessed of the unquestioned right to contribute a stone,
more or less precious according to his ability, toward the
erection or adornment of the boundless temple of human
improvement. It may be a polished marble block ;it may be a


fragment of rough, unhewn granite ; it may be a smooth pebble
from the brook, or a priceless gem from the mine of genius,
sparkling star-like in the rays of its own glorious light. All,
all are equally meritorious: that which is not given shall
never be required.
Comparatively few may be able to write so as to make a deep
an imbiding impression upon the minds of their fellow-men,
Fewer still may possess the power to give voice to ‘thoughts
that breathe,’ and utter ‘words that burn.’ But every one
can speak to his own circle of friends, and if he be in earnest,
he will reach the heart; every one can turn the stream of his
own example into a channel which will, which must instruct,
refresh, and invigorate the minds of men. Example in its
quiet majesty, is resistless as the flow of ocean —mightier far
than all the eloquence that ever burst from tongue or flowed
from pen.
Let us take a peep into the magical mirror of imagination ,
and see what picture of the danger of ignorance may be re-
flected from its ever-bright and ever changing surface.
Now, my dear young men, I do not pretend to be anything at
all like a good hand at drawing seas, or shores, or ships, or
indeed at drawing pictures of anything. So you will oblige
me, and what is of more importance, you will improve yourselves,
by supplving any deficiencies and amending any faults which
you may discover. I have occasionally tried this as a method
likely to lead to improvement, and in few cases have been
vain enough to imagine that I had improved not only myself
but also the book. However, I half suspect that there would
be a slight shade of difference in opinion between the author
of the book and myself upon that subject. Now for the
picture.
There rides a ship to windward of an iron-bound coast.
Between her and the land a rugged reef is roaring, and the
dashing surge, torn into foam and spray, is rising like a wall
between her and that shore of death.
Now, mark ye, knowledge might carry her seaward yet, but
ignorance keeps her sails handed, and her anchor down.
The breeze increases to a gale —the holding ground is bad
hear, hear the fatal, fearful clank of the chain-cable upon the
windlass, as the ship, impelled by wind and sea, leaps at and
drags her anchor and surges sternward to destruction. The
anchor holds —it brings her up once more— again she strains,


SIGNAL LAMPS-
and leaps, and tugs—away she goes again. The iron lias
snapped—she flies to the leeward now —down, down she drives
upon the reef —she strikes —the sea lifts her in his arms of
foam, and heaves her farther on the reef—she strikes, and
strikes, and strikes again.
Her shrouds and stays are gone; her beams and timbers
groaning to the wild surge’s stroke ; the coral wedge is rending,
the coral axe is splintering keelson and keel; her masts and
spar are on the brine ; her torn planks whirling in the raging
surf ; and corpses mounted on the white-mained billows, in
unconscious rivalry, are riding and racing to that shore.
Such are the effects of ignorance, physically displayed ; and
the moral havoc produced is still more dreadful; for under its
influence many a human mind has gone to wreck and ruin, like
that fated ship.
Let us look again. The scene has changed, no trace of storm
or sea, or sky, or sun is there. And yet no form of joy, no
happy child, dances across the glass ; nor does the smile of
angel-faced infancy light up the gloom.
The shaded surface tells of the midnight hour, and reflects
the form and features of a youth, upon whose face the lines of
thought are prematurely drawn. ’Tis a sweet young face with
its alabaster brow, so calm, so broad, so high. He sees not,
he hears not; an intensity of thought is sealing his senses, and
scorching his brain. How holy and harmless like he looks, and
yet he is sinning; sinning beyond the reach of redemption;
against nature.
Books are piled up in that lone, silent room. The intellectual
emanations of the present and the past, thick as autumnal
leaves, lie strewed around ; and yet, encircled by those trees of
knowledge, ignorance—heart and brain-consuming ignorance,
sits enthroned. He has centred his spirit upon one dark,
metaphysical point, and held her to her dangerous task, till she
no longer wishes to be free ; ignorant that the mind like the
body requires rest and variety of nourishment; ignorant that a
continuous stream of exciting thought, directed upon the same
portion of the brain must, by the operation of a plainly written
and easily read natural law, produce disease, madness, or, even
that death of the intellect, from which there is no resurrection-
idiocy ; ignorant that the lustre in his eye and the rose-tint on
his cheek, are signs of an early grave.
We would turn in fear from any attempt to arrest the march
of mind ; but all who have thought upon this subject must be


aware that if this march be not properly conducted, frequent
halts for relaxation and rest made the rule, it will end in im-
becility or a gravp.
Although a man should be able to count the number of the stars,
and name them every one ; yet, if he be ignorant of the nature
and constitution of his own body and spirit, his knowledge is
practical ignorance, his wisdom gilded folly. A mans brain
may be burdened with certain descriptions of knowledge, and
yet the curse of ignorance be hanging like a millstone round
his neck, 'I he path of ignorance is ever dark, ever downward
ever tending toward destruction and the grave. Under its
influence, man stumbles uncertainly onward, hugging to his
heart, he knows not which, falsehood or truth, and mistaking
each meteoric flash for a beacon’s warning gleam. Knowledge
like the safety-lamp, not only lights up <>ur path, but warns us
to retrace our steps when that fire-damp danger approaches.
Ignorance yokes remorseless cruelty to the same car with that
blood and fire-nursed monster, superstition, and drives the fiend-
begotten pair over a mercy-forsaken lgnorance carpets
the earth with the horrors of a Scandinavian heaven, revelling
in turmoil, drunkenness, and gore, Ignorance condenses the
most diabolical passions that ever rankled or raged in the
bosom of unregenerate man, enshrines this image of its own
dark self, bends the knee to it, and names it ‘ God.’
CHAPTER IT.
POVERTY.
By the word Poverty we mean a want of the necessaries <»f life.
We hold no man poor who has a sufficiency of plain wholesome
food, and clothing fitted to protect him from the weather,
however coarse that clothing may be.
A man who jtrovides for himself and his family thus by his
own unassisted industry, is nearly rich enough for any useful
purpose*, and if he has, in addition, a surplus to meet contin-
gencies, he is quite rich enough, and this earth would tell a
happier tale were there mo one richer. There would be more


justice with leas law, more religion with leas hypocrisy, more
labour with less pauperism, more corn with less gunpowder,
and more cast-iron frying-pans, with less gold and silver
plate.
However, considering that this state of things is not likely to
occur, in our day, or in any other person's day, and also
considering that it would not continue so for a fortnight even
should it occur, we may conclude that the less we dream about
such ‘ baseless fabrics ’ the better, and the sooner we address
ourselves to stern realities, to things that are, the better.
There are evils which exist under the domination of that
dreadful word must , —a small word, but terrible in its remorse-
less, its unbending might. Evils that must be: these we
meddle not with, it were vain work.
But there are other evils which exist under circumstances
partly controllable by us, and according to the arrangement of
these circumstances, they may or may not be.
Of this latter class is Poverty, the arch enemy of man. Still
hope sometimes shines behind his dark face, for fate has not
chained him to that terrible must.
Poverty, in the meaning in which we use the term, is a
magnet which powerfully attracts all the baser atoms which
enter into the composition of a human being. Whenever these
atoms come within the sphere of its influence, they leap to it,
they cling and cluster around it. Poverty points as steadily to
moral, mental, and physical destruction as a poised and free
magnetic needle points to the north. Young men, beware of it;
carefully, anxiously shun every approach which leads to it. It
always chills the heart, and oftentimes benumbs the brain of
whomsoever it touches, and he whom it falls upon it blasts.
Poverty is a sovereign also, and takes precedence of king
Death. His palace is a poorhouse, that last resort of im-
providence, idleness, wretchedness, misfortune, and crime ;
whose inmates are surrounded by the dull, lifeless waters of
oblivion, where the dying gaze is fixed on the unmoved face of a
stranger, and the hard hand of a hireling closes the sightless
eyewhere the scanty meal is doled out by weight or measure-
ment, and the dead are laid in unwillingly-bestowed coffins and
begrudged graves.
So, my young reader, if you be entering upon a career of
extravagance, in any form, ‘Pause and ponder, ponder and
pause—who knows what thine own end may be ?’ Better to
fall amid the bloom of rosy summer, a million times better to


have fifty cube feet of solid earth aud a tombstone coA r ering a
heart which ceased to beat while the sun of life rode high, than
to be reserved for such a night as this.
Poverty is a traveller ; ranging over the whole surface of
creation, devouring the young man and the maiden, the mother
and the child; blasting the hope of nations, aud consuming
armies as if they had been breathed upon by the spirit of fire.
Mountain replies to mountain, with his wolf-like bowlings,
strath and glen take up the echo, and fling it on the winds of
ocean, to be again sent booming back from the famine-struck
wanderer on the deep. In all ages, he has carried havoc into the
ranks of man, and paved the earth, like the hall of Valhalla,
with human skulls. In his terrible presence, crimson war turns
pale, and pestilence stands aghast; yet, fearfully strange to
tell, men court him, men hold out their hands to him, men, with
open arms and eyes, rush into this destroyer’s embrace.
Poverty is half-soldier, half-assassin —a more remorseless
never shouldered a musket or sheathed a dagger in his neigh-
bour’s back—silently and surely, not showily, he does his
work.
Prom no brazen bugle rings the wild charge ; no mounted
squadrons dash over the battle-field, swift and bright as the
lightning’s flash, condensed and deadly as the thunderbolt; no
gleam from helmet or sword flickers upon the pale face of the
dead, as if the spirit of life was striving to reanimate the blood-
stained clay; no bursting shells are tearing the earth; no
storm of iron and fire rages and mocks the cloud artillery of
heaven.
Hunger, exposure, and nakedness are the weapons which he
wields ; and the music to which he marches is groans, and sobs
and sighes, and the drear wind howling to the tune of desolation
and whistling through broken windows and roofless walls. The
ground on which this great enemy to human existence suffers
a defeat will be accounted more sacred than the field of
Marathon ; the conquerors more glori°us than that self-devoted
band who fought and fell within thy pass Thermopylae.
Poverty destroys all that is noble and independent in human
nature, and forces even the bold spirit that would have braved
the field, the fire, or the scaffold, for its God or its country,
to crawl like a worm in the dust. It quenches the intellectual
fire which burns in the soul of man. Under its sway, intense
selfishness leaps into activity, justice and benevolence are in
their death-throes, and all that is hideous in unredeemed human
nature insanely springs into life.


Is Nature a blundering arithmetician? Has she miscalculated
the extent of her means, and scattered the seeds of life to fill
the granaries of death ? No; she has provided an abundance
for the supply of all the natural wants of all earth’s inhabitants ;
therefore, this monster. Poverty, must be the brood of circum-
stances, originating with man. These circumstances are mis-
management, misfortune and crime—all of which can be by
man, more or less guarded against and controlled.
The tax which man pays to nature for liberty to tread the
earth, and breathe the air, is labour. No excuse will avail
against her stern decree. She is an inexorable creditor, deaf as
fate to an appeal, blind as justice to misery. If he keeps not
up that payment, poverty rudely ejects him, and imprisons him
in the grave. Nature has branded idleness with the stamp of
crime; necessity and man join in the condemnation, even the
earth upheaves her bare bosom, and swears that man must toil
or die, that without labour there shall not be life. Whatever
tends to neutralise or destroy the fruits of labour is equivalent
to idleness, \V ork as hard as you may, if you waste what you
have wrought for, you had as well have remained idle ; and
poverty, the punishment, the curse attached to idleness, will
seize upon you.
Untiringly should the full force of your energies be directed
toward the destruction of every fort in which this enemy can
possibly make a stand. To banish him from earth is beyond
your power ; but you may, by proper precaution now, exter-
minate him so far as you are personally concerned; and the
only way to do this effectually is to block up every avenue
which directly or indirectly leads to this terminus of woe. Of
all created existences, man alone possesses the telescopic eye of
reason, an eye which can penetrate through the mist of futurity
and read the mighty volume of the future by the glare of the
torch of the past. By that light you may plainly see what a
body and soul-blasting agent poverty has been, now is, and
evermore will be. And you may also see that its victims are a
centre round which revolves an ever-extending curse. Under the
pressure of poverty, man’s holiest aspirations die, and ‘give no
sign.’ It freezes the warm feeling as it gushes forth, and
throws it back upon the chilled heart, cold as the sleet-like
sweat upon the brow of the dying. Poverty is honour and
honesty’s executioner, religion and morality’s grave, earth’s
hell; and you should watch, and pray, and struggle, and strive,
and guard against it, as you would against perdition. This may
appear strong language, yet it is not one whit too strong for the
subject.


Scripture informs us that under the pressure of poverty the
hands of the merciful women sodden their own children ; that
is, mothers killed, boiled, and devoured their own infants.
Can the strongest, the wildest imagination fancy anything more
horrible than this ? No ; though the blaze of madness was
flashing across Imagination’s mirror, which blaze renders its
reflective power a million times more vivid and intense than
when the soul’s pulse calmly beats time and ‘ discourses most
excellent music.’
In our own day we have seen Ireland depopulated, her starved
peasantry flinging curses at the once-worshipped land of their
birth ; the Highlanders and islanders of Scotland devouring
garbage from the sea-shore like swine ; and the curtain fall
over the last scene in that djsmal tragedy, the north-west
passage, that maddest of all mad expeditions, in which man
presumptuously warred against nature, and perished, bir John
Franklin and his brave crew turned cannibals.
What power could so overturn, so utterly pervert the entire
mental and physical organisation of the men ? That grinning
demon Poverty holds up his infernal face, and answers, ‘ It
was I !’
Honest poverty may do well to sing about. I know nothing
else that it is good for; but depend upon it you will get no one
to admire a ragged ccat, or yet respect the shoulders that it
hangs from, however honestly the said coat may have been
come by.
By whatever path poverty may have reached us, honestly or
dishonestly,, by misfortune or by crime, it is still poverty ; and
as such must directly tend to moral and mental degradation
and physical destruction From our first scream to our last
moan, that stanch bloodhound, hunger, hangs ever on our
track, in storm and calm, in cloud and sunshine, in smiles and
tears ; in all our wanderings through the bright gardens and
flowery fields or the wet mosses and dreary moors of life, he
follows on ; and man’s life is spent in ceaseless skirmishing
with this untiring foe. The slothful, the dissipated, the faint-
hearted, and the reckless, he throttles and pulls down ; w T hile
the bold, the industrious, the frugal, and the rational generally
head him to the last.
Come, my young friends, let us take another look into the
mirror : perhaps Poverty himself or some of his doings may be
reflected there. Ay, there the demon himself sits, with his
shrunken, fiend-like face, rattling his dry bones in triumph over


human misery, desolation, and despair. How this monster’s
form darkens and disturbs the mirror’s surface, as the cloud
and wind blacken and ruffle the face of the lake or the deep!
There in that damp, dark, cheerless hovel a wretched group
of cold and hunger-bitten children are crouching round the
mockery of a fire, —hunger quivering on every lip, painted on
every cheek, gleaming in every eye. The father lies on his
death-bed, and the pale mother, with every tint of hope
bleached from her wan face, hangs over him mutely ministering
despair. He dies: and the last sound that falls upon his
closing ear is the cry of his loved ones for bread.
Such is poverty—no fancy sketch either ; such scenes do
occur every day, and to prevent their recurrence man must
use natural means, must habituate himself to the practice of
forethought, industry, and economy. The moan of the heart-
sick mother, the wail of the starving child may ascend, but the
era of miracles is past, stern Nature unrelentingly stands fast
by her laws, no manna falls, no heaven-sent raven bears a mor-
sel in its beak for them.
Do you see that tall spiritual-looking girl with a black dress
and her pale clear skin like a transparent covering veiling her
hollow cheek ? It is for her last parent, her mother, she wears
that weed of woe. How unsteadily she walks, and how
stealthily she looks around her ! Is it drink, combined with
consciousness of guilt, that causes this P No : it is hunger and
shame. She is on her way to the pawnbroker with her last
resource, dear to her almost as life, her mother’s wedding-ring
and she shrinks from every passer-by as if they knew her
errand.
She is now feebly descending the broker’s stair, pressing the
few shillings which she has received almost madly to her
lips, and fervently thanking God for this respite from death
There is an unearthly brightness shining in those deep
blue eyes, which speaks not of despair. It is the light of
hope, hope that has soared above earth, outflown life, and
with unswerving wing has swept through death’s dark ’ vale.
What is it that has kindled and keeps unquenched this
light in that mild eye ? It is religion, the religion of universal
charity and unbounded love. She prays, she hopes that all
all the hungry, the worn, the weary ones of earth may yet be
fed on pastures rich and green, may yet find rest and ioy
around her Saviour’s feet. A steadfast, an unwavering
faith assures her that the grave is only a dark tunnel
from the gloomy arch of which she will emerge into a region
radiant with happiness beaming from the faces of angej


and saint, refulgent with rays of glory streaming from the
countenance of the great, the uncreated One, where her
soiled black gown will be replaced by robes pure, spotless, and
white, her moanings turned into songs of joy, and her fevered
spirit bathed in streams of living waters flowing from under
the throne of the Lamb which was slain for her. That earth-
born fiend, starvation, has not soiled her pure spirit, tinged
her sweet red blood with the yellow bitterness of gall, or stung
her quiet submissive soul into rebellion. She is a precious
exception to a rule overwelmingly general.
.Nature gradually sinks below the rallying point, and the
girl must die. Her ears are ringing with sounds unheard
before; misty-like forms are wheeling and floating before ner
eyes ; and with that even in death remembered word ‘ mother,’
upon her lips, she calmly glides into everlasting rest. It was
the first word she lisped in infancy, and in death the same
dear sound quivered upon her pale, thin lip, like the low wail
from an iEolian harp-string, when the night-wind is breathing
its last.
No struggle, no spasm marked her exit; worn, starved, at-
tenuated life, lacked power to make this last vain show of
resistance against the conqueror Death.
This is another phase of poverty, common as consumption
and as little regarded as oaths in a sheriff or police court.
To be an object of pity is in no case desirable. To be hated
in some instances is much better and more respectable. Long-
continued pity imperceptibly glides into contempt, and yet a num-
ber of young men seem to aim at no higher designation than
‘poor fellow.’ Like sick children, they lean against any friend
who will take the trouble of supporting them, and when death
levels their upholder, they sink into a grave deeper and darker
than ever closed over a corpse.
Others possessed of greater activity try a wonderful variety
of projects, and to their utter astonishment succeed in none.
They wonder much what can be the cause of this, and after
deep cogitation the truth breaks in upon their brain, clear as
mountain snow by moonlight. That most unlucky and mis-
chievous of all recorded and unrecorded misses, IMisfortune,
has by some means only known to Satan and herself, always
crept into partnership with them; and not content with a
sleeping partnership, has been dreadfully awake knocking
everything into chaos, running up a score of expenses which


she never could have even the most indistinct idea of paying,
and leaving a set of books which all the accountants that ever
existed could never bring to a balance.
Many blunders arise from confounding causes with
consequences, Misfortune is never a cause, though it may
suit the convenience ol some people to assume so, and then to
draw fallacious inferences from it, as if it were so. As all
accidents are caused in a greater or less degree by ignorance,
recklessness, or carelessness, so may an uninterrupted course of
failure be traced to the same source. These men act before
they think, and then stand still thinking, when their only
chance of salvation lies in energetic action.
Want of self-confidence is an evil which we often see
attending upon the most amiable and most estimable of young
men. ‘ ’Tis true, ’tis pity—pity ’tis too true,’ that this
deficiency causes them often, to be distanced by men very far
inferior to themselves in heart and brain. Their first difficulty
appears to them an adamantine wall which they can neither
leap over nor break through. They attempt to get forward by
passing round the end of the wall, when, after wasting time,
they find that it ig a circle, and that they have arrived at
precisely the same spot from which they set out. They now
turn away sick and disheartened, whereas had they attempted
boldly to breast the wall, they possibly might have found it
to be only a wreath of mist or the shadow of a passing cloud,
which the first gleam of sunshine would have shone through
and dispelled,
A desire for and the capability of carrying out a system of
mental improvement, presupposes the possession of at least the
necessaries of life. A hunger-stricken child is little beter than
a young wolf. What conception of justice, mercy, or truth
can it form, when all its energies are concentrated upon the
readiest method of assuaging the hunger w'hich is gnawing its
heart ? To urge the necessity of mental improvement upon a
being whose body is bowed down under the pressure of want,
is striving to rear a superstructure upon a shadow. Comfortable
worldly circumstances are the foundations upon which moral
and mental improvement must be built. Before a man can
ascend in the moral scale, he must be properly lodged, clothed,
and fed. Before he can appear respectable in his own eyes,
he must feel conscious that he appears so in the eyes of others.
This consciousness can never be attained amid misery and
rags.


Self-respect rears itself upon the ruins of meanness, false-
hood,and deceit, and calls upon Poverty’s slave to ‘ arm himself
with his chains, ’ and smite his oppressor in the dust. Where
self-respect is extinct, the moral nature has expired, and the
mere animal is all that is left unhurried. Abject poverty lies
like a tombstone upon this redeemer’s grave.
Poverty is a most comprehensive curse; it inwraps the
whole man, and every circumstance which pertain to him.
It freezes sociality and sympathy at the fountain-head, and
sinks man from the highest to the lowest position in the ranks
of animated nature. It must be so, for it consists in the
deprivation of everything that tends to civilize and soften the
mind of man —deprives the body of that which is necessary for
healthful existence, and perverts earth into a place of punish-
ment. If men must continue in this state, it were merciful
to leave them in their ignorance, for knowledge would render
them more keenly alive to their misery.
Poverty has been sometimes lauded as a a sort of highway
to heaven; but as we so often see poverty and crime linked,
padlocked, and chained together, we are justified in assuming
that it leads to a different locality. It now is and must for
ever be a fearful paralyser of mental energy —a deadly foe to
intellectual improvement. Nothing great or good thrives
under it baleful shade. It strangles in the birth that guardian
of our moral strength and punty, independency of spirit. It
renders its victim a stingless reptile, helplessly writhing under
the heel of the oppressor. It throws him for a stepping stone
into the gutter of life, and there, amid the bitter waters of
suspicion, contumely; and scorn, leaves him to linger, struggle,
and perish.
Let no man lie quietly benumbed in the chilling embrace
of poverty, nor ever give himself up to what he calls “ resig-
nation, contentment,” but which is heartless apathy, mingled
with distrust.
Let no man ever say, “ I am miserably poor, and Providence
has decreed that I shall ever remain so,” This is fatalism
exhibiting itself in one of its most practical and consequently
most pernicious manifestations. So long as this doctrine is
purely theoretical, as it generally is among us (I am lead to
this conclusion by observingg that our fatalists when they get
sick are the first, last, and loudest in their cries for the doctor)*
it is harmless. But when it influences the practice, then does
it fight under the same banner as the destroyer, Despair,


Fatalism is a paralysing lie. It froze the Turkish blood
under a burning sun, and laid the energy of the fiery Persian
cold and lifeless in the dust. What motive can any one have
for exertion who believes that the flaming sword of inexorable
Fate is ever pointed at his breast, and that to press forward is
to be consumed in the blaze ? A practical belief in this
doctrine murders hope—that mighty motive power which drives
the machinery of human action.
To every one we would say, Hold firm your faith in the reality,
the immortality of hope. Hope on —hope ever. Hope even
against hope. Believe that hope never dies; that although
eclipsed by the terrible shadow of despair, it shines gloriously
behind that fearful veil, and will burst through the darkness of
that hell, and beam with bright effulgence on the spirit that
has courage to resist and patience to await.
Look not upon hope as ideal, etherial, and purely spiritual,
but clothe it with flesh, pour warm blood into the incarnation,
regard it as a living thing, to be grasped, to be wooed, to be
won.
CHAPTER 111.
UTILITY.
Although there is a large amount of absurd trifling mingled
with the affairs of this world, yet the principle of Utility
always must preponderate. Even the triflers contribute
considerably to this result; for although not inclined to work
much themselves, they anxiously strive to keep their neighbours
usefully employed. This, however, is something like the
skysails looking down and ordering the courses to fill, and
carry the ship steadily and swiftly through the water.
Young men, print the word Utility upon your brain, and
turn your eyes oftentimes inward and read it. Set the prin-
ciple itself up as a standard, and measure everything by it.
Before attempting to acquire any branch of knowledge,
satisfy yourselves, in the first place, that it is intrinsically worth
the time likely to be spent in its acquisition ; and, in the second
place, that it is an acquisition which, in your circumstances,


will be practically required. Unless, in both cases, an affirma-
tion can be given, it will be better for all young men who have
no fortune but their time and their talents, to relinquish that
pursuit, and devote their energies to some one that will tell
practically and beneficially upon their future career ; and of
such there exist for every one an abundance.
We are “ killing time,” is a common expression with people
who are engaged in some trifling occupation : in no case exists
there the slightest necessity for this ; occupations which will
improve time, and also confer a high degree of enjoyment, are
to be had for the gathering.
The production of anything useful is ever accompanied with
labour, but the consciousness of being engaged in the produc-
tion of something useful, sweetens labour.
Composition is useful and valuable in all circumstances in
which men are placed in society, and consequently should be
practised by all. For all so simple a matter as writing a letter
is, very many cannot do it well. The principal reason is that
they skim over the surface of their minds ; they don’t go deep
enough. We should like much to see all young men attempt to
be authors, no matter how humble the theme ; authors a great
proportion of them might never be, but it would compel the
whole of them to be thinkers.
We have never known anything carelessly or hurriedly
written that was not bombastic or common-place—mere surface
work. You might hunt through page after page for one new
idea, or an old one strikingly re-set, and not find it; for the
simple reason that nothing of the kind had ever been there.
Ideas which flow spontaneously are seldom worthy record ;
they come like shadows, and shadow-like depart. Originality,
simplicity, clearness, and power move slowly, requiring time
and deep thought. So be not disheartened; do not think
yourself incapable of progress, although the composition of one
sentence should cost you an hour. If you rapidly fill sheet
after sheet without halting frequently seriously to think, you
may safely without farther examination put the whole concern
into the fire. This is the only way in which an article got up
in such a fashion can ever shine.
Apply the standard of utility to the subject of which you
intend to treat. If it comes not up, dismiss it; the subject is
unworthy of your pen. If it stands this test, then do not pass
a sentence if a member in it grates upon yolir judgment, ear,
or taste. If it does not please yourself, it has little chance
indeed of pleasing any one else.


Write and re-write till you are satisfied ; if it be worthy of
recording, it is worthy of the time necessary to express it well.
Beware of attaching value to a sentiment merely because it is
yours ; this is a value which your mother or sister may recognise,
but which, with the exception of yourself, no other person will.
On no account attempt to print a line until you can render
yourself easily intelligible without the aid of italics, parenthesis,
or notes.
Never commit to paper a sentence which you would feel
ashamed to read aloud in the presence of your father. Even in
corresponding with one another, always express yourself
sensibly and purely. We don’t expect you to write funeral
sermons or essays on morality ; but there is no fun in nonsense,
nor is there the most distant relationship between ribaldry and
true wit.
Press as much clear common sense into a page as you possibly
can, whether it be a page of a letter or a book. Pack the ideas
closely—arrange them neatly. Do not pitch in a loose bundle
of rough angular words to set your correspondent or reader
asleep or a swearing, according to the temper or mood of a man.
Brevity is said to be the soul of wit. If we think a little,
perhaps we may find it to be the substance, as well as the
soul, of many things besides wit. Even the living body of man,
if it be spread over a wide surface in proportion to its weight,
that is, if there be a great distance between the shoulder-blades
and an undue proximity between the breast and back-bones,
is physically unfitted for many a very useful purpose, although,
like a great array of words, it does look broad, large, and
formidable, till tested.
We must confess that we are, in principal and in practice,
decidedly utilitarian; so much so, that we could not wish to
live an hour after having ceased to be useful. However, we
hope that our ideas of the useful are not bounded by any
narrow bigoted circle of our own drawing, but are in accordance
with the growing intelligence of the world. Still we cannot
think that anything directly useful is likely to accrue from
puzzling a ploughboy’s brains about lunar observations, or the
variations of the magnetic needle, or teaching men the rudiments
of a variety of sciences, which sciences they never can have
time to acquire, or opportunity to see practically applied.
There are a number of lessons which it is of vital importance
that all should learn. These lessons form the bible of
utilitarianism, the basis on which rests the great principle of
utility, which upholds the world. All other attainments must


be subservient to tins; if they be not, they are out of their
place, and their influence upon society in the mass will be
detrimental. These lessons apply to the universal family of
man ; all others relate only to individual branches of that great
family. Each of these other attainments, whatever may be
the abstract value of it, will be useful only to him who has
occasion to use it. What can never be used, can never be
useful, is an axiom which none will dispute. insist upon
this with the purpose of impressing upon you the propriety,
we might say the necessity, of more immediately attending to
the acquisition of that description of knowledge which bears
upon the profession which you intend to follow through life.
We fear that the system generally followed smells rankly of
the stereotype foundry.
Nature bestows a limited amount of mental energy and time
upon each of her children This energy this time are
uniformly distributed among masses of men belonging to the
same variety of the human species, while individually we can
conceive nothing more unequally, more uncertainly divided.
Time and energy are separate and distinct, and may be meted
out in very different proportions.
Though you may feel yourselves endowed with energy enough
to plunge through many a bog, to tear through many a brake
which lie not in your way, take care that the sun of your life
be not high in heaven while you have your day’s work to
begin. Young men, 1 am exceedingly anxious that I should
be understood in regard to this matter, and hope that I have
expressed myself so as to be understood; for I know that the
wind blows heavily from this quarter.
I neither doubt nor dispute the value of your pursuits, but
wish you clearly to understand that everything earthly is only
relatively valuable; that the same branch of knowledge which
may be to one of you valuable as life, may be to another
directly injurious, by absorbing the time which ought to be
devoted to some absolutely necessary purpose. Were your
time limitless, it might be otherwise.
We do sincerely believe that the man who would energeti-
cally and successfully teach the mass of mankind the true
value of a shilling, would render an unspeakably greater service
to them than he who would teach them to draw the lightning
from the thunder-cloud, or to measure the speed of the chariots
of heaven, as they roll through boundless space with steed and
wheel of tire.


The great business of an overwhelming majority of mankind
on earth is to keep themselves alive ; and he who can most
materially assist them in rendering life comfortable, is the
world’s great benefactor.
Every age has its own elixir of knowledge, morality, and
life; strange that ignorance, wickedness, and death should
still’ trail their ungainly forms along our streets. In my
schoolboy days, Latin was the desideratum. If you understood
Latin you knew everything, and was fit for anything ; so I was
taught Latin without having received a single lesson in
English grammar. There was no need; a boy who could
read Latin had no use for English grammar. So they said.
They were slightly mistaken, however, as I found out after-
wards. It was a dry, time-killing business, and the only
fruits from it are occasional visits from the departed spirits
of vocatives, accusatives, and ablatives. Ah, and sometimes
a ghastly genitive pops in its Roman nose.
In minds which nuturally tend to run into the extreme,
there may be a danger of applying Utility’s test too strictly,
and thereby stripping life too literally of its ornaments;
but in youth this will seldom occur, and as these minds
will run into extremes, the extremity of utility is by far
the safest.
Much more than a sufficiency of the savage and the
child still Ungers about civilized grown man than is required
to render him quite accessible enough to the barbarism of
glitter and glare, and the rattles and toy-drums of childhood.
If the test of utility was to be strictly and impartially applied,
how entirely it would overturn the existing ideas regarding
the proper positions of men and of things !
The ploughman would take precedence of the painter,
the shoemaker of the statuary, the baker of the banker,
the dairymaid of the duchess, and the diamond market would
tumble about the ears of the descendants of Abraham. The
air would be darkened with leaves torn from volumes of
what had long passed for useful knowledge. Coal barges
and tile or straw-roofed cottages rank higher than pleasure
yachts or crystal palaces.
Utility tells us that the macadamized road which leads
to a flour mill or a meal market, concerns us greatly more
than the airy path which leads to Jupiter ; that the density
of a comet is a mere nothing to us in comparison to the


Specific gravity of a cheese, and the length of its tail quite a
moonshine matter when compared with the length of our
grocer’s bill. It also says that we need not care overmuch
how brightly the earth’s internal fires may be blazing, or how
many cauldrons of rocks may be boiling over, if our own fire
at home be burning low, and the bottom of the kettle cold.
It also whispers (in confidence recollect) that he who catches
a fat pig has something much more savoury and substantial for
his pains than he who discovers a planet. Now, young men,
that this will appear very prosaic and vulgar to you I have no
doubt. But poetry is seldom plain truth, and this is no
fairyland, nor are we fairies. We must have food, clothes, and
lodging, or the first frosty morning will finish the whole of us.
However, my young friends, I do not wish you to see
exactly with my eyes. Time will clap his glasses across the
bridge of each nose soon enough, without me enticing you to
wear them before your time, and then you will see objects by
a more mellowed, utilitarian, and subdued light, though I
hope they will appear not a whit less pleasantly than they
do now
Time’s glasses are none of your flashy green sight preservers,
delicately, nay almost invisibly mounted in gold, showing every
object in nature as green as a gooseberry in June ; but good
true glasses, showing things as they really are, or nearly so,
substantial in glass and in frame, some of them perhaps a
little tinged with blue, but no one need pick a very blue
pair, unless he be partial to the colour.
Now, young men, confess that you pity those who walk
about with their noses thus accoutred, and say to yourselves,
“ Oh, I would not wear those ugly things for I cannot tell how
much.”
Keep your pity for yourselves and your green preserves ; we
don’t need it—for us it is quite superfluous and quite uncalled
for. We see more comfortably, more truly, and more distinctly
than you do, though perhaps not quite so far; and although
some poet says or sings,
“’Tis distance lends enchantment to the view.”
We don’t want to be enchanted. An elderly man, if he be in
health, and his circumstances ordinarily comfortable, and I
must also add if his mind has been trained and cultivated,
enjoys a greater amount of calm, rational happiness than the
youngest man amongst you.


Now I will tell you quietly a few tilings which Time’s
glasses will yet distinctly show to you.
They will show you the folly of “ wearing your hearts upon
your sleeves, for daws to peck at.” This is Shakspeare’s ; and
should any of you require an explanation, it is simply this:
Beware of laying open your plans, your purposes, your doubts
your hopes, your fears, to every or any busy medler who may
try to read your heart, that they or he may laugh-, mock, thwart,
or betray.
They will show you the egregious silliness of expecting
other people to incommode themselves by doing things for you
which you can bat will not be at the trouble of doing for
yourselves.
They will show you the danger of estimating the sincerity
or ability of any man by the profession he makes, or the position
he holds,
They will show the absurdity of any one of you fancying
himself the sun of the human system, and thinking that his
fellow-creatures were made for the purpose of dancing
attendance upon and revolving round him.
They will show you how fallacious it is to estimate the
capabilities of men by their size. The most famous men on
record, some of them famous for working a terrible amount of
mischief would, even in these war times, be considered rather
light for’riding in a troop of the lightest of dragoons. A small
wedge will lift more than a large lever, the same amount of
power being applied. The one you could carry in your
pocket, the other you could scarcely get into a church door,
for all so wide as it is.
The ornamental should in every case give way to the useful.
Cleanliness, plainness, and neatness are the only personal
ornaments which become an educated young man. Kings and
such like do very well for lascars and negroes.
Nature is a strong utilitarian, She provides very few legs
or arms that are not specially required, and fancy articles are
rather a scarce commodity in her shop ; and where she does
indulge in the fanciful, utility is so closely conjoined, that it
would almost puzzle you to trace the junction line. Still there
is a good medium: ornament sheds light upon the dark grey
walls; moulds a cornice to the plain ceiling, and sweetens the
angular corners of the chamber of life. Therefore we would


not have you to pull up at once, or confine the study of natural
history entirely to a knowledge of the animals which produce
mutton-chops, beef-steaks, and shoe leather ; though, in point
of utility, they certainly claim to be considered first. Nor
would we be too severe upon Entymologists, bv binding them
down closely to follow the only utilitarian branch of their
occupation ; which branch consists of beating up the quarters
of those brown-coated little creatures which naturalists say
could leap over the dome of Saint Paul’s were they only
big enough; we think them quite big enough, but we may
be mistaken. Still we would not like any of you to be so
extremely enthusiastic in this pursuit as the greatly-little
philosopher of Berlin, who scientifically immersed invisible
animalcule in a paintpot, and then startled all the insect-
breeders in Europe with an exulting shout, when he saw
them—the insects, not the breeders—most vividly in his
mind’s eye swallowing each other in garbs of blue, red,
yellow, and green.
As for those mummy-hunters who would fall on their
knees to the pickled skin of a dead monkey, which some
antiquity-dealer had palmed upon them as the remains of
an antediluvian lady, and who value everything according to
its presumed age and certain worthlessness, and who, with
all their excavating, have not yet dug up the simple fact,
that one atom af matter is quite as old as another —we would
have you to eschew their company altogether. A single ray
from the sun of utility never shone upon such an unprofitable
pursuit.
Were you and I, my young reader, to lay our heads
together, we would soon discover a host of circumstances
which we could class among neither the useful nor the
ornamental. Indeed we would be compelled to set them
aside with labels attached marked “ mischievous ” something
after the same fashion as chemists label poison. Now, I
would like that you would look upon these things as you
would do upon a group of barren rocky islets, possessed of
those at times most dangerous qualifications, a lee shore and
a vertical landing-place ; and give them a particularly wide
berth accordingly. Or, if you choose to consider them as
icebergs afloat, why then creep up under the eyelids of the
wind, and let them drift past you to leeward.
One of the most conspicuous of these chilling affairs is
affectation, looming like a mountain in the eyes of every
one save the ignorantly happy person who has placed himself


in a singularly ungraceful position on its loftiest peak. He
believes that the ground around him is level as a bowling-
green, and that his motions are as graceful and free as the
the movements of a young Apollo, while people are drawing
conclusions between him and a young bear, and so far as
the “poetry of motion” is concerned, giving the befuired
animal a preference. No one can fee] amiably inclined in
company with an affected person. The reason of this is,
the person is unnatural, and everything unnatural jars upon,
disarranges the mind, and by implication stirs up feelings
which are neither pleasant, beneficial, nor to be wisely
tolerated by those who may be exposed to the influence
of the affected—of those who choose to give themselves
up to the domination of ignorance and conceit. Affected
folks should be turned into the field to graze; a few nights
would cure them. If there was a little hoar-frost on the
ground, they would not require to lie so long out as did
king Nebuchadnezzar. The poet Cowper, one of the mildest
and best of men, thus expresses himself upon this subject, and
you may depend upon it that no trifle made him speak out in
such an unwonted style, I quote from memory, but the lesson
was learned when the memory was fresh and green; so the
chance of misquoting is trifling. The young memory resembles
the sand on the river’s bank, which socks up the shower as it
falls, and the rain-marks remain on its bosom of insipient
stone ; while the old memory looks very like the same sand
after having undergone the solidifying process which has
converted it into rock, and whose time-tempered face the
summer shower or winter’s sleet may drench but cannot
penetrate:—
“In my soul I loathe all affectation,
'Tis my perfect pcorn.
Object of my implacable disgust,”
So says Cowper, and we heartily say, Amen,
Upon the stage a bad player is a source of irritation and
annoyance The affected person places himself exactly in this
position ; he attempts to represent a character which is not
his, which he cannot play, and the result is a wretched failure.
Everything turns out contrary to his acticipations : men give
smiles when he calculated upon tears; and the lip curls in
scorn, where the silly thing expected looks of admiration. The
poor player has a claim upon pity, and the claim is allowed,
for he must play or starve; but affectation has no such claim,
and pity must be running down the waste pipe with those who
would think in this case of bestowing it.


Man certainly ought, certainly can improve himself both
internally and externally, and in this he will be materially
aided by observing the outward manifestations of the spirit
which actuates intellectual and polished people around him.
But if he descends to be a mere copyist, he lowers himself to
the quadramana —they can imitate as well as he, perhaps
better—and loses rank in the scale of created existences.
When you see a patient man —a man standing calmly under
a heavy grief—no fuming, no fretting, but bearing it bravely
up, because it must be borne: try to lav hold on the spirit
which actuates him, not servilely to copy the mannerism of the
man. Try to feel patient, and that feeling will clothe you
with a manner of your own, natural, unstudied, and free. The
spirit is as much yours as it is his, when you catch it. The
mode is his own, never can be yours, and would not suit you
though you had it.
Catch all your neighbours’ excellences if you can, but graft
them upon your own stock. All imitations are bad, because
they are unnatural, because they do not accord with the
nature of the imitator. Even an ass’s bray sounds more
discordantly when it attempts to imitate the braying of another
ass.
Pride also can in no case be either ornamental or useful.
It consists in an overweening opinion of self, mingled with
malevolence. Pride is always vindictive, always ready to
avenge fancied slights, ever battling for what it terms its own
rights, and yet ever unhesitatingly trampling upon the rights
of others.
There is a wide difference between vanity and pride, We
can smile at a vain young man, but a proud youth raises a
feeling of scorn or indignation.
There is no sin, though perhaps a little silliness and no
great utility, in a lad spending two or three minutes more at
the looking-glass than are absolutely necessary, and thinking
his own feet and hands smaller and neater, his own teeth
whiter, and his own complexion more becoming than common •
and if this idea causes him to exert himself to find the means
whereby he may keep himself respectable, neat, and clean, as it
is very likely to do, it will be so far beneficial. But pride is
a very different matter ; laziness and dirt are quite compatible
with it. A reduced Spanish grandee would consider himself
for ever dishonoured should he condescend to do anything
useful: still the proud Don could beg.


Pride lias its source in an utter misconception as to tlie
nature and extent of our dependence upon each other, and in
an entire overlook of what man really is. Man, without the
assistance of his fellows, is of all created beings the most
helpless and the most hopeless. Even were it possible that he
could exist alone and unaided, what a moping, melancholy life
he would lead ; and then, when sickness and helplessness came,
how soon would he become unto himself a horror and a
loathing! What has a dependant being like this to do with
pride ?
Pride ! look at man who has fought a night with cholera.
Pride ! look at a man dying of cancer in the face. Pride ! look
at a corpse which has lain unburied for a month. Pride, go
hide thyself in that corpse's festering bosom.
We trust that no one will infer from anything we have
said, that we would have you to undervalue science or its
professors ; the truth lies very far on the other side. True
science is the practical application of a knowledge of Nature’s
laws, and scientific men are the high-priests of nature, and as
such should be looked up to with a degree of respect bordering
on veneration.
To prosecute a single branch of science to a beneficial
termination, requires a life-time, and a mind able and ardent.
Knowledge which can carry you no farther than the formation
of a hypothesis, is not worth the possessing ; and an accumula-
tion of unconnected scraps of scientific truths are far from
being equivalent to the value of the time consumed in their
collection. A thorough knowledge of the simplest rule in
arithmetic would be utility itself in comparison.
We may safely parody the poet’s celebrated line, and say—
“ A little knowledge is a useless thing.”
CHAPTER IY.
EDUCATION.
The idea called up in our minds by this term is generally
limited to the knowledge acquired at school. This is a very
narrow signification indeed. Education embraces a much wider
appeal than this. It commences in an early stage of infancy,
and the first book that the infant reads is its mother’s face.
The lineaments of that face are the infant’s letters, and the tiny
scholar soon masters its alphabet so as to comprehend at a


glance whether she be pleased with it or otherwise ; soon learns
to understand by the tones of its teacher’s voice whether she
be soothing or scolding it.
Man comes into this world the most ignorant of all young
animals : what others owe to instinct, he must owe to education,
A young lamb would look over a precipice, and turn from it; a
child would dash over it at once. A kitten would run from the
flame of a candle ; a child would grasp the candle with both
hands, and put the flame into its mouth.
Education begins when the first ray of intelligence breaks
through the mist of life’s morning, and only ceases when the
hopeless darkness ol life’s midnight beclouds the brain.
I would be very far astray from the path which leads
human nature upwards, were I to write anything which might
tend to produce a doubt in the immateriality of the spiritual
essence which constitutes reason and life in a living man.
The mind of man is generally gross and grovelling enough
without this tombstone to shut body and soul for ever up within
the clay walls of an parthly sepulchre. Still we cannot shut
our eyes to the plain fact, that the manifestations of this
essence can only be made visible to us through the agency of
a material substance, and that these visible manifestations
proceeding from the action of the invisible spirit, are controlled
and modified by the shape and size of the brain. The brain is
divided into compartments, each having its own proper work
to perform. All of them are useful, but some of them, owing
to their nature, or perhaps to their volume, are more liable to
run into abuse than others. To check those faculties which
are over-active, and to excite those which are unnaturally
languid, is a vital principle in education. The force of
education is powerfully shown in what we call habit. Habit
is education carried to perfection in some particular point; and
so perfect in many cases is it, that actions absolutely opposed
to the original tendency of the nature of man are mechanically,
almost involuntarily performed, without consulting the judg-
ment, or waiting for an orler from the will. If any passion or
practice be inordinately indulged, the mind must habitually act
upon that portion of the brain which is that passion’s seat.
This continued excitement produces inflammatory action and
increase of volume, and gains a still farther accession of
strength by withdrawing the vital energy from the surrounding
tissues, and thereby totally upsetting the balance of power,
which is more necessary to individuals than it is to nations.
Nature has decreed that whatever part of the human frame-


work is fed to repletion, must be at the expense of that which
remains idle —and this should emphatically teach us the danger
of making an idol of any passion, for it will eventualh make
its brethren fall down and worship it, and derange the moral
and physical government of the whole man.
To break free from the trammels of some confirmed evil
habit, we have not only the acquired bias of the mind to
contend with, but also actual disease, which that habit has
induced upon the material organisation of the brain.
Look at the confirmed drunkard ; what solemn protestations
he makes, what fearful oaths he swears, that he will tear himself
from the grasp of the fiend who is destroying his soul, con-
suming his intellect, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood !
How these oaths and protestations snap asunder like rotten
withes I The man might as well swear to cast from him the
rage of a malignant fever, while it was coursing through artery
and vein.
Education can never make the mind send forth rational
responses from an ediot brain ; but it can mightily improve one
not naturally inclined to produce a harvest of moral or intel-
lectual fruit. In this case every step forward is actually two
in advance, for in proportion as the good advances the evil
recedes. By proper training, a permanent change in character
may be established: a cruel boy may become a merciful man.
An alarming amount of mythology and corresponding rubbish
is emptied into young minds in schools and colleges, while
wholesome, substantial knowledge is, for the sake of this
immoral lumber, kept in the back ground. You will find
numbers of most sapient-looking youths deeply versed in the
public and private histories of Jupiter, Pluto, Juno, Venus, and
such like, and yet who know as little of their bodily and mental
organisation as the veriest clown who ever “whistled as he
went, for lack of thought.” Were we to live in this world for
ever, or even for a thousand years or two, there might be a little
spare time to spend on knowledge such as this But as the
average duration of human life is short, much shorter than is
generally supposed, time certainly ought to be more profitably
employed than in debasing the mind with the gross absurdities
of a past paganism.
A general idea of the mechanical structure of our own bodies,
should form a prominent branch in the education of the young.
It would save an incalculable amount of suffering, by rendering


people more careful of themselves, and causing them to attempt
the arrestment of disease in its first stage, a most important
matter, and one which, among people ignorant upon this subject,
is universally neglected. Even such a simple matter as a
disjointed finger, mistaken for and treated as sprained, may and
has caused serious inconvenience through life.
This, combined with an understanding of the nature and
operation upon the human frame of a few simple medicines,
would, to ordinary people, be of much more service than one
half of the learning generally taught at school. AVe know of
no species of knowledge more useful, or more easily acquired,
or which could as generally be comprehended. A deep insight,
such as is indispensable to the physician and surgeon, is neither
required nor desirable. By the aid of a good treatise upon
domestic medicine, and a few descriptive drawings, any intelli-
gent person could possess himself of all that he ever was likely
to make practically useful. In serious cases it of course could
never supersede the regular physician. But in every case it
would give the patient a greater chance of recovery, by enabling
him to describe more correctly the symptoms and the seat of
the disease, and render him in simple cases qualified to prescribe
for himself.
The ultimate aim of all popular systems of education is or
should be to enable the people, by their own efforts, to raise
themselves higher in the moral,* intellectual, and physical
standards—to enable them to render themselves more com-
fortable, more independent, more wise, and consequently more
happy. To teach them that to do unto others as they would
that others should do unto them, is the centre around which
all their actions ought to revolve; that individual happiness
can never be attained while misery is howling around, and that
to spread happiness within and around their own dwellings,
is the only true way to secure their own; that the most
likely way to discover truth is to look for it in the simplest
form imaginable, and not to soar into the clouds in search of
the solution of a difficulty, while the solved problem is, or may
be, lying disregarded at their feet; that thought without action
is powder without ball ; that flowers may be planted, but that
com must be sown ; that liberty to do as we please is quite
inconsistent with the spirit of true social freedom ; that a cruel
government alone can restrain a merciless people ; that one
who will not command his temper* is unfit for society—that he
who cannot, ia iiisane; that suspicion and distrust are neither
prudence nor wisdom; that hope is the light of the soul, and


must be kept steadily burning; that to stake health against
wealth is a madman’s game ; that poverty is a sepulchre in
which the living lie entombed, but that in ordinary circumstances
the tenant of that tomb can from its mouth roll back the stone ;
that a victory gained over our passions is more glorious than
any ever won on field of blood ; that man should woo virtue
for very love, not follow in her wake impelled by the dog-like
fear of punishment; that change of opinion is not necessarily
inconsistency; that no man need be ashamed or hesitate to
own himself wiser to-day than he was yesterday ; and that the
most practical method of showing our love to the great Creator
is to love and protect the creatures whom fie has made. Christ
knew and taught this : “ Son of Jonas, lovest thou me? Yea,
Lord, thou knowest I love thee. Feed my lambs —feed my
sheep.” This was bringing Peter’s “ Yea, Lord, thou knowest
that I love thee,” to the test —to the proof.
Education has done much for this country, is still doing
much, and still has much to do. It has swept from among us
that irrational veneration for ancient wrecks, rendered to them
merely because they have drifted long upon the sea of time;
made men .fearlessly question the grim spirit of departed ages,
and no longer place implicit faith in the uncertain murmurings
which issue from the tomb of the past.
Dust and darkness are no -longer holy things ; tyranny and
misrule are no longer worshipped under the sacred shadow of
the divine right of kings ; witch-finding is no longer a science
studied by magistrate, priest, people, and king; the old, the
helpless, the defenceless are no longer tortured to death for
impossible crimes ; nor dare murder seek refuge upon the steps
of the altar or the throne.
Men no longer lie like lazy, hungry dogs around convent
walls, throatling each other for bones thrown to them by the
hand of a monk. Freedom is no longer a proscribed word, nor
are her wings blackened by fire nor purpled with gore.
Doubtless perfection’s star is far beyond the line which bounds
our mental vision, and living men shall never see its light;
still it is glorious to be sailing for the point in which it shines.
Truth is ever arrayed in the freshness and vigour of youth, and
neither age nor any other possible circumstance can ever
sanctify or justify falsehood, even should it appear enshrouded
in cobwebs spun by spiders, over the unknown date of whose
existence century upon century of unrecorded time lies piled.


Young men, we really can see little in the history o£ the
past to entitle it to reverence or regret, but many things to
cause you to rejoice that you were reserved for the age in which
you live, —this age, in which science is dashing error from her
bloodless path ; this age, in which the temples and towers of
ignorance are heaving and surging like a sea or a city
earthquake-tossed. Yet recollect that duties and privileges go
hand-in-hand, and that you have a very different account
indeed to render from that which your grandfathers had at
your age.
Young men, you are more valuable than the middle aged or
the old, because you have a rational prospect of a longer term
of life, and consequently of being possessed of power of
doing good, when we who are well advanced on life’s journey
will be quietly slumbering in the bosom of our mother earth.
Yet recollect that death awaits even you at every turning; and
although, with the fleet foot of youth, you may pass him by,
yet he shakes his fleshless Anger at you as you pass, and with
the famed spectre exclaims, “ I will meet you again at Philippi.
I would earnestly impress upon you the necessity of self-
cultivation—of training each faculty till it arrives at a point as
near to perfection as its nature will allow. Curb the imagina-
tion, exercise and strengthen the judgment, throw living energy
into the will. The will is the commander. It signifies little
how efficient the other faculties may be, if the will be slow in
action or deficient in power. Imagination in youth is a wild,
untrained colt, ever breaking away and prancing over the
glittering barren fields of vanities and lies. Bridle him, and
give judgment the reins.
Suppress all outward signs of anger and of rage, however
great may be the provocation. Smother them within your own
breast, though in the effort your brain should swim. A few
trials may render this easy, perseverance must render it so.
It is a victory worth fighting for. The man who loses his
temper, stands disarmed in presence of his foe.
Self-improvement is a branch of education in which the
scholar and teacher must be one ; a branch of education you
must master if you would ever obtain a clear idea of men and
things as they actually are; if you would ever rise above the
earth that you tread on ; if you would avoid the extremes of
worshipping or despising your fellow-men ; if you would gam
a knowledge of the laws which regulate and control the workings
of your own being.


Nature throws man from her quarry a rough, unpolished
block. In that unhewn block smoulders a spark of hell, ever
ready to flash into flame, and make the untamed, the un-
disciplined heart glow like a furnace with the fires of pride,
passion, and lust. Falsehood, treachery, ingratitude, and deceit
are basking in its unholy rays, and malignant revenge lies
coiled up like a snake, ever ready to lance and strike his venom
into the veins of his victim. r ihe weeds, the briars, the thorns
which spontaneously spring up and cling around, supply the
fuel, while the germs of intellectual flower and fruit which
beautify, adorn, and redeem the nature of man, are consumed
like a vineyard before the lava-breath of a volcano.
Yet even in his lowest state man cannot be all fiend, for in
that block also lies the undeveloped glories of a miniature
paradise, and the angels’ love, faith, mercy, hope, and peace,
are slumbering in its inmost bower.
Will you doom them to that sleep which knows no wakiiigp
No, certainly no. Breathe upon them, and the} r will give signs
of life You have the power; use it. They stir, they awake,
they arise, they wave their bright wings. The block is now
ringing with the melodious accents of peace and good-will unto
men ; its brow expands, the light of love is beaming from its
eyes, its countenance is radiant with the beauties of holiness,
and a redeemed man steps forth with every lineament gleaming
and glowing with immortal life.
Look to it well that you earnestly seize upon every oppor-
tunity for improvement. If they be many, grasp at them all;
if few, multiply them ;if none, create them. Bend all your
energies to this great work—great may we call it, for it is the
reclamation of waste souls. No one can fathom the capacity
for improvement which his own mind contains. Even now you
may be carrying an unpolished gem in your bosom, lustreless
as the eye of death, yet infinitely more precious than all the
jewels that ever shone on crown or coronet, or glittered on a
proud imperial brow , while by application you might have it
sparkling like a planet, or shining like a star, and shedding its
radiance into many a dark corner of many a human heart.
We will close this chapter with a few remarks which we hope
may be useful to you, and which are in no way foreign to the
subject, Education, or, as it may be termed, instruction. Turn
not from them because they may appear trifling; time is
composed of seconds, and so is that fathomless idea which
swallows up the mind—eternity.


Young men, be temperate in all things; temperance itself
may be advocated intemperately. Be frugal, be industrious ;be
truthful, that you may be trusted, Turn not from truth,
although it may appear rugged and stern; rush not into the
arms of a lie, although it may be a place of refuge for the time :
be assured it will yet cast you forth, dishonoured and polluted,
to the world’s scorn. Let truth and candour clearly shine
through all your actions ; let them be to you now as the day-
cloud and the nightly pillar of fire was of old, guides and leaders
through all your wanderings.
Be self-reliant: be not like a child learning to walk, always
looking up in its nurse’s face, to see that the protecting arms
are not withdrawn.
Be stable. “ Unstable as water ” is the certain antecedent
to “ Thou shalt not excel.” Examine, determine, and do; a
halter between two opinions is neither respectable nor respected.
Do not readily substitute another man’s judgment for your
own in any case which lies as open to your investigation as it
does to his ; exercise your judgment —there is no man more
poor than he who has no opinion of his own,
Beware of a murmuring, fault-finding, discontented spirit;
it poisons the well-springs of life. Do cheque it in the bud,
or it will spread through and contaminate your whole nature.
Strangers will avoid you as a pest; and the heart of even the
mother that bore you will turn from you in bitterness.
Dwell upon the bright side of all things; everything has
it —even the grave is not all gloom, for sorrow and care pierce
not the coffin-lid, and no pang of grief or pain starts the deep
slumberer in the tomb.
Awake, then, young sleeper ; thou groveller in the dust,
arise; spread out your dormant faculties to the vivifying
influence of Education s sun, and show that you were created
for something nobler than to be born to slumber and to die.
CHAPTER Y.
AMUSEMENTS.
Ik spending time, there is no middle course ; you must either
improve it or waste it. In amusements also there is no
neutrality ; they must either be beneficial or hurtful. Those
amusements must certainly be the best which combine exercise
and the enjoyment of pure air with mental recreation.


There are few spots on the earth’s surface, perhaps none,
which afford an equal number of days during the year in which
out-door amusements may be comfortably enjoyed, than this
much-calumniated little island of ours; yet we are always
complaining that it is too hat or too cold, too wet or too dry,
and if by any accident we get a day exactly to our mind, we
manage to qualify the enjoyment by assuring ourselves and our
neighbours that it is by far too good to last.
All amusements should be encouraged and practised—in a
rational way of course —by young men, which brace the nerves,
add firmness to the muscular fibre, and increase the volume and
power of those bellows, the lungs, which blow up the flame of
life, and without the healthful play of which the fire of existence
burns low, and faint, and dim
Cricket, swimming, and rowing are most excellent in
summer ; so are skating and curling in winter ; and if snow be
more plentiful than ice, why, pelt each other with snow-balls.
Little ill-feeling can be produced, for the balls seldom strike,
and when they do, they generally hit some particular friend of
the thrower, who cannot take it ill, for he knows very well that
they never were intended for him.
To a lad constitutionally unfitted for violent exercise, and to
whom it might be death, botany affords a most delightful
recreation, and one exactly suited to his circumstances. Walking
at an ordinary pace is quite exercise enough for him ; anything
severe would in many cases be as bad or worse than
inaction : and this is all that is required in a botanical excur-
sion. As it must be pursued in the pure country air, and as
it is much more soothing than exciting or absorbing, it is
eminently qualified for weak constitutions and invalids.
The herb and root-hunter is invariably a good, humane man,
ever ready to apply his skill and the treasures he has gathered
from field, or glen, or streamlet’s bank, for the preservation
of the life of man. or beast There is health and usefulness in
his occupation, and it imparts a calm, quiet, nature-loving
feeling of happiness, which fowler or fisher never knew.
The cultivation of a small garden comprises all the requisites
which constitutes an unexceptionable source of amusement.
The senses af seeing and smelling are regaled, the body health-
fully exercised, the mind soothed and invigorated, and the
faculties which delight in arrangement and order called into
action amid the sweet and pure companionship of flowers.


Each plant is a page from Nature’s glorious book ; and
records of the sun, the rain, the earth, the air, are written on
each stalk, and leaf, and liower The intelligent, intellectual
florist reads page, and gleans wisdom from the pale leaves
of the lily, and finds truth nestling in the blushing bosom of the
rose.
There is a field in the vicinity of Glasgow Cathedral divided
into small flower plots, and numbers of the smaller beds let at
the yearly rent of five shillings ; and on a summer’s evening
old and young may be seen swarming like bees among the plants
and flowers ; and upon such another assemblage of busy hands
and happy smiling faces the sun has seldom shone. The
happiness of these city florists is contagious ; the face of every
one who looks upon them instantly brightens into a smile, and
you really feel at a loss which to admire most, the smiling faces
or the blooming flowers. In my humble opinion, a few fields
apportioned out in this manner, and placed under proper
superintendence, would have a wonderful effect in improving
the morals and the health of the community.
Within the garden of life there blooms a flower, the perfume
of which enables a man to stand firmly up under a load of grief
and care; it lights up the toil-bedimmed eye, lends wings to the
weary feet, tension and elasticity to the relaxed sinews, and
heightens and brightens every joy. But, like many other
things, this flower has a way of its own ; it won’t be forced ; if
you try the hot-house system of cultivation, it dwarfs and
dwindles into the very ghost of a flower. It only requires a
soil remarkable for neither poverty nor richness, frequent trans-
planting, pure air, and plenty of clean cold water. It thrives
best at a distance from spirit and apothecary shops ; and quack
doctors’ pills are to it an utter abomination.
This flower is named Health ; cherish it, guard it as the
apple of your eye, but at the same time take especial care not
to be ever m» dling with it. It cannot bear much handling ; it
is quite possible to kill it with excess of care and kindness.
All amusements which excite the mind, and raise it much
above its natural level, are demoralising and dangerous, and
ought to be avoided. When the passions are unnaturally alive
and active, judgment, and the sense of justice, which is the
offspring of judgment, are of necessity proportionally languid
and weak. Hence arises the desire to cheat aud quarrel at
games of chance—-a desire found by many to be too powerful
to be successfully resisted.


Of all articles in tlie amusement market, I do believe singing
saloons to be the very worst. Young men gather into a
crowded, heated room, breathing life-destroying carbon, mingled
with the stupifying fumes of spirituous liquors and tobacco,
listening to the syren voices of female singers, till they become
as pale-faced and nerveless as a band of sick girls. Every trace
of manhood is banished for the time from their effeminate souls,
and then they stagger forth into the midnight air, with brain
and body relaxed, incapable of resisting evil influences morally
or physically, A meeting of this kind is more immoral and
unmanly than an Irish wake, where the company breaks the
monotony of whisky-drinking by breaking each other’s heads
with the poker or the shillelah in honour of the dead.
The theatre, though generally placed in the front rank, can
hardly be held up as a place of amusement, if that old beldame,
Tragedy, be mounted on her stilts It requires no deep insight
into the nature of mind, nor any intimate acquaintance with the
drama, to convince that the representation of tragedy must be
exceedingly hurtful. The more brilliant the talents of the
author and actor, the more dangerous must be the effect
produced. A man who delights in tragic representations,
cannot be a humane man. The monster-spirit of Nero must
be strong in a greater or less degree within him ; and those who
shudder and weep at scenes of simulated agony and mimic
murder, and yet feel as if drawn by an invisible cord to this
banquet ol misery and blood, are either partially insane, or in
great danger of becoming so. No healthy mind will ever woo
suffering. It delights in pleasure, and flies from pain. The
sound of contentment and happiness falls like sweet music on
its ear, in perfect unison with its own nature; while the
morbid spirit revels in the elements of its destruction, and
finds symphony in the discordant notes of hell.
In countries where torture and death are common punish-
ments, the people get brutalised. They first look upon human
suffering with indifference; then a fiendish appetite is raised,
which craves incessantly for blood, and they rush in masses to
feast their eyes upon agony.
The moral feelings of the people are obliterated, the moral
guilt of the criminal unthought of, in this feast of blood. The
zest of punishment has swallowed up the warning and the
crime. So is it with the representation of murder upon the
stage: it hardens the heart, renders the moral feelings callous.
The much-vaunted moral is a shadow quite too ethereal to be
r ecognised by such an audience.


There is a wonderful coincidence between the physical and
mental nature of man in this case. The same quantity of a
narcotic that would shake the system to the verge of dissolution,
will by repetition be required to keep the friction of the human
machine from amounting to agony; and the same quantity of
stage horrors which may have shaken the soul to her centre
upon the first representation, may become insufficient to
assuage the morbid thirst for unnatural excitement thus called
into existence.
No one who has studied the science of mind so as to make
it practically valuable, would willingly allow the feelings to be
torn, and the mind to be kept on the stretch, till the nerves of
the throbbing brain are twanging like the string of an over-
bent bow.
Relaxation is a matter of necessity to the mind, and rational
amusement a medicine. The man who can make his neigh-
bours merry, is a blessing to the community; and a good hearty
laugh is better far than physic, Punch —not whisky-punch—•
has saved more lives than any physician in England,
We lay it down as an anxiom, that nothing is truly great
that is not truly good, and that nothing is truly good that is
not truly useful. Let us subject the great tragedy of Othello
to this ordeal, and see how it stands the test.
There are passages depictive of passion and mental agony
in this play, which, for intensity and concentration, are without
a parallel in human language. Yet, is the play truly great ?
Is it truly useful ? We will see.
Tew creations of the human brain present a more revolting
picture of human nature than this tragedy, A proud jealous
African, a silly girl wooed and won in despite of nature by this
African’s tales of war, a cowardly treacherous villain, and a
depraved fool, are the principal materials used in the con-
struction of this play; and it would have been marvellous if
even the genius of Shakspeare could have extracted anything
useful out of them. The truth appears to be, that a moral
formed no part of the plot.
Were it not for the bewitching magic of a name, the gross
lewdness of the language used by Othello and lago would
banish this tragedy from the stage.
Still, genius in its might uprears itself amid the pollution.
There is a fearful sublimity in the outbursts of agony extorted


from the Moor while stretched upon Jealousy’s bed of fire>
but the language is rank from the brothel, the ideas hissing and
glowing from hell.
Is there a glimpse of anything in it that civilized man should
love to look upon ?
Yes, there is a lesson of mercy taught: let us trace it, and
discover if it has any relationship to that doubly-blessed spirit
which Shakspeare beautifully and truly characterises as “bless-
ing him that gives and him that takes.”
“ I that am cruel am yet merciful: I would not have thee
linger in thy pain.” 80 says the Moor while in the act of
repeatedly sheathing his dagger in the bosom of his beautiful,
young, innocent, half-strangled wife, —that trusting girl Avho
had left home and braved her father’s curse for him, and whom
he mercifully murders upon mere suspicion !
This is the justice and the mercy exhibited in this tragedy ;
but the plain fact is, that justice and mercy are incompatible
with the nature of tragedy. Substract the wickedness from it,
and a cipher remains. The representation of tragedy is a relic
of barbarism, and should be laid in the same grave with the
human sacrifice, the judicial combat, the torture, and the trial
by fire.
Still this Moor, this “ child of the sun, with whom revenge
was virtue,” was mercy itself in comparison with the English
Richard. The African solemnly says to his wife, “ I would not
kill thy unprepared spirit;” “ I would not kill thy soul.” The
Englishman exclaims, in tones of mingled triumph and hate, as
he passes his sword through a harmless, defenceless old man,
whom that same sword had rendered childless, “ Down, down
to hell, and say I sent thee thither;” an exclamation which
would find no echo even in hell, although I have heard more
than one young aspirant to the honours of the sock and buskin,
hissing it through their closed teeth like enraged geese, or
ganders—that, I believe, is the masculine. Beware, young
men, i>f plays and players. The rage for personating leading
characters in tragedy is a master passion, and the fate of the
yyung man who is possessed by this devil is to be deplored.
Let no superstitious dread deter you from coolly and fairly
examining the Avritten works of any man, let his name stand
ever so high. He is or was but a mortal like yourselves; and
although he may have more genius, you may have more light.
Genius, abstractly considered, merits neither praise nor blame ;


but veneration or reprobation is its due, according as it has
been directed to the purification or contamination of man.
Shakspeare, in making the young and fair Desdemona
deeply and truly love a black man, who, according to his own
account, had somewhat descended into the vale of years, holds
a false, a distorted mirror up to nature ; and lago reasons well
when he infers from that circumstance a deficiency in her moral
sense which might lead her to be unfaithful to her husband.
Nature is ever the same The female heart beat time to the
same tune in the days of the Venetian dame as it does now ;
and we venture to affirm that no girl of our colour exists who
would marry a black man if she could possibly get a white one;
• and Desdemona’s father testifies that his daughter had no
scarcity of pale-faced wooers. No white girl would, though
her sable suitor had passed through as many dangers as there
are drops of rain in a thunder-shower. The dangers through
which the Moor had passed, are assigned as the cause of
Desdemona’s unnatural love.
So sensible are our players of this incongruity, that instead
of coming upon the stage black—as the Moor, who certainly
should have had a pi’etty good idea of his own colour, describes
himself to have been —they play the part with complexions
varying in depth of shade from the bright hue of the polished
bottom of a brass pan, down to the sombre tint reflected from
the sides of a copper kettle.
The second character in this play is lago, a name often used
to express the idea of deep villainy in the superlative degree.
This character is not pictured as a being with human feelings,
but as a fiend without gratitude, mercy, or remorse.
If ever hell should gain the power to smuggle such a
specimen of her own production into the bosom of the human
family, our best plan, for the sake of the family name, would
be to coffin him as quickly and quietly as possible, and instantly
screw down the lid.
We can see no utility whatever in making a public exhibi-
tion of such a wretch. Our own belief is, that no organised
being belonging to this earth can exist, wholly composed of the
elements of evil.
We believe that there is a redeeming light, glimmering like
a beclouded star, in the Imsom of the moat wicked man that can
live, and that such an incarnation of guilt us lago never stood


upon this green earth, and gazed with mortal eye into the blue
vault o£ heaven.
Experience loudly and emphatically tells how dreadfully
destructive the gloating over the representation of such scenes
as the following must be to the healthy action of the spiritual,
and, by implication, the bodily organisation of man. They
sweep over the spirit a moral simoom, burning up the freshness
of the intellect —a malaria, poisoning the atmosphere in which
the soul breathes. The gross, sensual nature they brutalise ;
the refined and intellectual they enervate and sicken,'
Pale, pale, as well befits the destined bride of Death, there
sits young Juliet, each beauteous lineament quivering with
irrepressible agony —horror, grief, and fear entwining her fair •
form—preparing herself for a long sleep in a damp, dreary
vault, where shrouds are waving over coffins, bones are crumb-
ling into dust, remnants of mortality strewed around, and stifling
vapours steaming from the decaying dead; her soul, racked by
the dreadful fear that she may awake to madness, and dash her
desperate brains out with a kinsman’s fleshless bone, or pluck
slain Tybalt from his bloody shroud.
You may apply the dissecting knife to the heart of the king
of terrors, and lay its inmost fibre bare, yet find no ideas more
excruciatingly horrible than those which are here made to pass
through the mind of this young girl, and through the minds of
those who witness the representation,
Cheerfulness is to the moral nature what sunlight and pure
air are to the physical ; and until the darkness of the sepulchral
vault, and the pent-up vapour of a charnal house, heaped from
floor to ceiling with the pestilence-stricken dead, invigorates the
physical man, fills the heart’s fountain with the crimson stream
of life, and sends it bounding through the system in high health,
it never can be possible for cheerfulness to dwell where the
chambers of the brain are filled with images of horror and of
dread, and the mind’s ear attuned to the wild shriek of agony,
and the low wailings of despair. And of such elements is
tragedy composed. There is not an idea essentially pertaining
to it which can inform the judgment, ennoble the intellect,
soothe the chafed spirit, or make the worn pilgrim, tired of
life’s journey, step lighter under his load.
"Were the subject not heart-sickening, we might call up Lady
Macbeth, and hear her vowing that she would draw her nipple
from the boneless gums of her infant, and dash its brains out,
rather than renounce her schemes of treason, ambition, and


blood. We might summon up the dog Richard, born with teeth,
ready from the womb to bite; and had we a taste for wading
through a slaughter-house, we might follow him a few steps in
his butcherly career. How the smell of so much innocent blood
sickens ! Richard’s wooing and winning of the Lady Anne is a
mockery —a libel on womankind and on nature.
And again, we have a cruel Jew claiming his pound of
Christian flesh, and holding out his skinny fingers, trembling
with eagerness to clutch it, quivering and reeking, from the
body of a living man.
This 1b all very well, and may be very true. “ But you
forget the moral,” I hear some one exclaim.
What is a moral? Dr. Johnson says that it is “ the instruc-
tion of a fable.” This is not a very clearly-expressed definition,
but it must mean the instruction to be derived from the reading
or seeing the representation of a train of fictitious circumstances,
arranged so as to assume the appearance of truth. Now, take
up any one of the fables which we have been examining, and
show where the instruction lies.
“ There can be nothing easier,” it is replied. “Do you not
see that the usurper is always dethroned, the tyrant and the
shedder of innocent blood always slain; and this certainly
teaches that guilt will never pass unpunished,” It teaches a
gioss falsehood, then, for guilt often does pass unpunished.
Kings, and priests also, have often murdered men, women, and
children in masses, and yet they themselves have lived luxuriously
to the last, and died on beds of down ; so, according to your
own showing, the moral is false, the instruction conveyed by the
fable a lie.
And even were it true, must we go to human shambles
for instruction ? Must we take lessons in morals from the
executioner P To learn honesty, must we enter a of
thieves ? To appreciate the beauty of truth, must we associate
with liars.
Many a heart-broken paragraph has been penned, many a
melancholly howl raised, over the decline of the public taste tor
the drama, and every cause assigned for the falling oft but the
real one, which is the decided amelioration in the tone of public
feeling.
Do they mourn over the decline of the same spirit which
actuated the Romans in the gladiatorial arena when the thumbs
of even their delicate ladies were pointed downward, the well-


known signal to the victorious gladiator to plunge his weapon
in the body of the wounded man who lay writhing at his feet?
That the vivid representation upon the stage of such scenes
as Ave have been describing must have a pernicious effect upon
the moral and intellectual faculties, is in strict accordance with
all that Ave know of the nature of mind. The mind that at first
recoiled and shuddered at such exhibitions, can be trained to
look upon falsehood and treachery with indifference, and upon
cruelty and even murder as matters of amusement.
The almost superhuman genius of Shakspeare, as embodied
-in these tragedies, has done much to produce and promote this
unhealthy feeling in the national mind. We are proverbial
through the civilized world for melancholy, and a tendency to
commit suicide. How much of that character may be justly
traced to the representation of these dreadful plays, I pretend
not to determine; but that lasting injury may be inflicted on
the mind through that agency, we know by observation and
experience.
Shakspeare’s pictures of the horrible are drawn with a poAver
before which reason coAvers and trembles. Their artificial
character is swallowed up in their terrible intensity, and the
mind is prostrated before the unveiled throne of horror.
The “ air-draAvn dagger ” Avhich led Macbeth to Duncan, and
on its “ blade and dudgeon gouts of blood; ” the voice crying,
“ Sleep no more, Glammis hath murdered sleep the old king’s
“ silver skin laced Avith his golden blood the spirit of murdered
Banquo shaking his gory locks in his murderer’s face, surround
us with a pestilential atmosphere destructive to the health of
body and spirit.
It decidedly shows an enlargement in the moral and in-
tellectual faculties of the national mind, when it refuses to
breathe this malignant vapour ; and instead —as some people
would have it—of marking a spirit of retrogression, it is a sure
sign of the onward progress of the soul,
In tragedy, that which passes for a moral is almost
universally much more than neutralised by the strength of the
poisonous vehicle which conveys it. At the end of the play
one tyrant falls, but the audience has seen perhaps ten people,
virtuous and innocent, sent to their account before him. So the
so-called moral is a misnomer, a sham.


But worse still, even the flow of natural indignation against
the most notorious criminals, is often checked by some redeem-
ing trait being artistically pushed into the foreground.
Jealousy and pride are deified in the person of the Moor
of Venice, and suicide almost sanctified : and although he
criminally kills, none look upon him as a murderer.
That essence of all evil, Richard Third, fights like a fiend on
Bosworth fmld, and the curtain falls on a hero.
In Borneo and Juliet, we can recognise nothing save an
instrument of mental torture, most exquisitely finished and fitted
for its work ; and the man who can look upon its representation
—if represented by talent—without his intellectual nature
being considerably damaged thereby, has a brain proof against
anything less material than a blow.
We are aware that it is a dangerous experiment to lay
violent hands upon an idol in the midst of its worshippers, and
that he who does so is very apt to be deafened by an uproarious
shout of “ Great is Diana of the Ephesians;” still that shout
does not prove the idol to be beneficial, or even harmless ; while
the fact that there is a class of lunatics distinguished by the
term “stage-struck,” tragedians to a man, each of them
nervously anxious to “exchange his kingdom for a horse,” or
hold a midnight confabulation with his “ father’s ghost,” or,
mistaking his grandmother for a groom, orders her to “ saddle
white Surrey for the field to-morrow,” goes a great way to prove
the very reverse.
These tragedies accorded precisely with the spirit of the age
in which Shakspeare lived and wrote ; but the more mild and
merciful spirit of the times in which we live, refuses to hold
communion with them. The spirit of this day loathes amuse-
ments garnished with blood, and turns from the supernatural
—which made the multitude hold its breath with awe in the
days of the virgin queen—with derision. Why should tragedy
form an exception to a universal law by outliving its time? No
amusement should be encouraged which does not tend to enliven
the mind, or add vigour to the body
CHAPTER VI.
ORIGIN AND NATURE OF GOVERNMENT.
Uncivilized man is naturally and essentially a fighting, thiev-
ing, unprincipled tyrant. His hand is lifted against the life
of everything that lives, His appetite for plunder is as


indiscriminate as it is insatiable; and that which he cannot
carry off he will wantonly consume with fire. Bloodshed and
starvation follow upon his unhallowed track. Each man is his
own avenger, and no one cares to sow when any one may reap.
To reform this, laws must be framed, administrators of the
laws appointed, prisons built, bolts and fetters forged, and. that
most powerful of all feelings, fear, brought into energetic
action.
These laws and their administrators form what is termed a
government; and they assume different forms according to the
nature of, and the degree of intelligence possessed by, their
originators —all tending, however, to the same end: the
preservation of order, of life, and of property. Force and fear
are the only yet discovered powers which can prevent one
portion of mankind from preying upon another; hence the
necessity for defensive war.
Still, some men believe that this earth was never intended
for a large cannon foundry, an extensive gunpowder mill, or a
bazaar for the sale of Colt’s revolvers and Minie rifles, and that
Highlanders and horsemen were not created exactly for the
purpose of testing the merits of the latest improvement in the
manufacture of bomb-shells ; and are so very blind that they
cannot see the propriety of men pelting each other with blazing
red-hot cannon balls.
These visionaries, with hearts of gold, but brains of lead,
dream of a community where human virtue fills the throne;
where stainless honour guards property, and guards it well;
where Justice lays aside her idle sword, unbinds the fillet from
her brows, and gently lays her down amid the rustling of the
silken banners of mercy and of peace. It is a bright, a glorious
vision. What a pity that it is as baseless as it is bright!
This subject is one of those commonly known by the term
dry, it belongs to earth, entirely to earth, and to man con-
sidered in connection therewith. It is all plain, straightforward
work ; and since we cannot render it attractive or amusing, we
must strive to render it intelligible and instructive. Yet it is a
subject which deeply concerns us all; for from birth to death
we * are beneficially or hurtfully influenced by the form of
government under which we live.
Circumstance —that seldom-acknowledged controller, silent,
but mighty —is the former of all systems of government j and


every government must have been more or less adapted to the
nature and circumstances of the people at the time at which it
was formed.
Any government, to remain stationary, must be powerful
enough to master circumstances, by checking the spirit of
progression. Should it fail in this, as eventually it will, it must
pi’ess forward or perish.
All radical changes in government, or in anything else, to
be safe, must be gradual. ’Tis nature’s immutable law. The
seeds of civil and political liberty must be sown in a prepared
soil, or from that seed and soil will spring murder, rapine,
anarchy, destruction.
Let an unprepared nation take a flying leap from despotism
to republicanism; then outraged nature rises in Avrath to
vindicate and avenge her broken law of continuity, A mad
democracy crashes through law, order, justice, and mercy, like
a burst-forth hell. The cap of liberty shades the red brow of
slaughter, and freedom’s tree rots amid carnage, or disappears
under billows of blood.
We are very naturally led to pass a sweeping sentence of con-
demnation upon every form of government that squares not
with our idea of right, forgetful that, although it might not suit
us, nor would for an instant be tolerated by us, yet it may be
of all modes the most agreeable to the character and circum-
stances of the people over whom it bears rule.
A mild, enlightened, civilized people will ever have laws
liberal, merciful, and just; while the laws of barbarians will
ever be despotic and cruel.
When the nature of the governor becomes antithetic to the
spirit of the governed, then fierce antagonism arises, and pro-
claims the end to be nigh.
Call up the departed spirit of the mighty past, and the
cloud-clothed spectra points with his shadowy finger to the great
Julius, folding his dagger-rent cloak around him, as on the
marble pavement, even at the base of Pompey’s statue, bleeding
from many a wound, the world’s conqueror fell. The antagonistic
spirit is alive again, and kingly blood is flowing. Charles and
Louis have bared and bowed their necks to the headsman’s steel,
while the sweet roses of England, and the gay lilies of France,
jay trampled and torn upon the red boards of the scaffold, and
trenched with the life’s blood of kings.


Expediency or necessity has compelled early legislators to
enact laws, the utter absurdity of which, under presently existing
circumstances, would mark the brow of a modern lawgiver with
the brand of idiocy.
Thus, hereditary succession to the crown may throw the
sovereignty of a state into the hands of a profligate, an infant,
or a fool Yet this risk was more than counterbalanced by the
certainty, that without it there would, in those days, be an ever-
recurring appeal to the sword.
Man is strikingly gregarious, and rushes into society as
naturally as a stray sheep flies to rejoin the flock.
We can form no idea of civilized man apart from society,
nor any idea of civilized society apart from the operation of
political and civil law. Political laws regulate the connection
which subsists between the government and the people ; civil
laws the relationship which subsists between the members of
which the republic or kingdom is formed.
The law which punishes the conspiring the death of the king,
is a political law; the law which punishes one citizen for depriv-
ing another of life, is a civil law.
The law of nations relates to the intercourse between
countries foreign to each other, and marks out the line of
conduct to be observed toward neutral nations by the belligerent
parties during war.
All these laws are based upon punishment; their force, their
utility, lies in the penalty attached to disobedience. If a
government possesses not the requisite power to enforce these
penalties, then are the laws not worth the price of the parchment
on which they are written. Rewards, as a rule, are out of the
question, because it must be assumed that an overwhelming
majority will be obedient to the laws ; indeed, without this no
society could exist, it would soon break up amid anarchy and
confusion. No government could afford to reward so many, nor
does justice require that people should be rewarded for doing
their duty.
No man who suffers punishment under a just law can
reasonably complain of the severity of that law, because he shared,
in common with his fellow-subjects, in the protection afforded
by that severity.
Laws should be drawn out in the plainest and simplest
language,. The sentences short, the style concise; not one


vaguo or figurative expression indulged in. The ideas should
stand out boldly and firmly—detached, not grouped. Ambiguity
is a deadly sin in legislation. The legislator who does not doubly
arm himself against it is a fool, or something worse.
We are all expected to obey the laws, and in order that we
may be enabled effectually to do so, it is necessary that they
should be given us in a language which we cannot misapprehend.
In the proper framing and efficient working of the criminal
law, lie the strength of government and the stronghold of the
subject’s liberty. It signifies nothing how civilly or politically
free a people may be, if the criminal law be defective, be so
framed as to admit of the condemnation of the innocent and the
acquittal of the guilty. Under such laws the very name of
freedom is a mockery.
The true meaning of the word freedom is safety ; a state of
being in which one man has no need to be afraid of another.
A man would be safer under Eussian despotism, were the criminal
law good and properly administered, than under the star-
bespangled banner of republican America, were the criminal
code defective.
What we mean by the nature of goverment, is the outward
form by which it makes itself manifest. Thus we see the
nature of despotism to consist in one man monopolising the
legislative, the judicial, and the executive functions of the state —
an irresponsible being, whose will alone sets limits to his power,
and who holds human life and human liberty as dust in the
balance, when weighed against his passion or caprice.
The nature of constitutional monarchy consists in a person
placed at the head of government, and dignified with the title of
king, who rules under the direction of fixed laws, which he has
sworn to observe, and in conjunction with influences as powerful
as himself, whose duty it is to keep him within the limits
marked out by the law, and check every anti-constitutional
movement.
Eepublics are either democratical or aristocratical in their
nature ; that is, the legislators are either elected by the body of
the people, or the elective power is vested in a privileged
number. All offices in a democracy are elective, none hereditary.
Each legislator has the certainty of falling back in a short time
into the ranks of the people, and coming under the operation of
the laws which he has framed.


A republic may consist of a single state, or of a number
combined, termed a federal or confederated republic. This last
we believe, if suited to the nature and circumstances of the
climate, country, and people, to be the most liberal, powerful,
economical, and enduring form of government that can be
instituted by man.
We have already stated that the nature of a government
is its outward form. The principle is the human passion, which
gives life and action to that form. The nature may be compared
to the body, the principle to the soul.
Fear is the soul of despotism ; honour, the spirit that actuates,
or at least, according to the nature of that form of government,
should actuate a monarchy ; and political virtue is the life of a
democracy,
Splendour, wealth, and show are necessary to monarchy.
A poor king, and a court out at elbows, Avould be as little
respected as a band of tinkers. It declines in poverty; in penury
expires.
To a republic belongs frugality, plainness, and equality.
Luxury and pomp, being foreign to its nature, are the
forerunners of extermination. To conquer and to colonize accords
with the principle of monarchy ; to rest contented with, and
firmly to defend its own, is republican. The spirit of aggression
lighted the torch which consumed Carthage, and Sparta fell
before luxury and gold.
To gain a clear idea of the nature and principles of any
institution, we must descend to the foundation, and work our
way upward. We must look truth firmly in the face, although
her gaze should blind us, and although she should scatter
long-cherished opinions and prejudices, which we had learned
to look upon as facts and principles, like spray before the spirit
of the storm.
In many cases there is little affinity between the laws of
nature and the laws of man ; in some cases they are directly
opposed to each other. Nature’s law commands a hungry man
to steal bread to preserve life, if it cannot be had otherwise; human
law punishes him for the theft.
Each department of physical science is founded upon a
knowledge of, and in strict accordance with, the unalterable
and unvarying workings of a natural law. With political
science it is otherwise; however, of this we do not profess to


treat in the present chapter. Nor do we touch that pope and
priest-famed code termed canon law : laws expressly formed
to crucify reason —to pour thick darkness into the bright eyes
of science, and strangle her as she clings to the bosom of her
glorious mother, truth—to deify the demon superstition, and
throw the living spirit of man as an offering to that fiend !
When we take a retrospective glance through the dim vista
of departed ages, we are bewildered by the number and variety
of forms of government which have arisen to bless or to blast
mankind.
We find nations quaking with terror at the awful voice of
the woe-denouncing prophet, the fountains of life and energy
dried up before the withering curse of a priest, and things
with a human form stretching out their necks to the yoke,
their limbs to the fetters, at the waving of the hand of a king.
The cold, glittering, mail-clad form of chivalry is also there,
accompanied by that spirit of ‘ ‘ proud obedience ” so eloquently
bemoaned by one of Britain’s brightest orators, and which, as
he thought, sought its native heaven, when the lovely head of
France’s beauteous queen, upon the scaffold, amid blood and
dust, rolled unavenged.
The laws of the ancient Egyptians fettered the king more
than the people, prescribing even what be should eat, and what
he should drink, and how every hour of the day should be
employed; while Turkey’s Sultan revelled in unshackled power,
and recognised no political or civil law, though the Koran
bound him.
Lycurgus wrote laws for the Lacedemonians in molten iron ;
Draco, for the Athenians, in blood.
Sesostria and Semiramis, male and female incarnations of
wanton slaughter, “let slip the dogs of war ” for very sport;
hunted unoffending nations to death for pastime, never thinking
of occupying or colonising the countries which they conquered,
seeking no name more glorious than “ desolator,” no trophies
more sacred than trodden-down harvests, and heaps of unburied
slain.
The human wave which surged from out the gates of proud
imperial Borne, swept madlv over the earth, overwhelming
nations ; but there was “ method it its madness it had an aim
in view, an end to serve. In this case, the hot breath of war
filled the sails of civilization’s barque, and sent it bounding over


the waters, till it reached even this land, which was thought
the extremity of earth, and the light which in those days
flashed from Roman swords and spears, still gilds alike the
palace and the cottage of our land.
We And despots, with their jewelled feet, trampling upon
the prostrate bodies of myriads of unresisting slaves ; wallowing
in luxury, in wickedness, and in wealth ; coining human flesh,
mingled with human tears, and scattering the blood-begotten
treasure like dust; thrones of ivory and gold, sparkling with
diamonds; palaces and temples, with their gilded roofs, vieing
with the glory of the mid-day sun : and on the surface of that
country, masses of men are crawling, who hold their lives by
the cursed tenure of a tyrant’s will; men so abased, so horribly
poor, as to have no claim to the ownership of their ow r n limbs ;
no protective laws ; no appeal frtm oppression; no redress,
save in the assassin’s knife: might upon the throne, and right
pining in the dungeon, or expiring on the scaffold.
Another glance shows us a community of freemen; their
lives, their liberties and property fenced, secured by laws stern
but just; laws which give liberty to all to do good, but restrain
all from doing evil ; law r s in whose eyes all men are equal; laws
which suffer no palaces to be reared upon the ruins of the poor
man’s cot. They know that frugality is the bond which binds
together the component parts of all free governments; that
profusion in the state must be upheld by the oppression of the
people; that waste must bring want upon some portion of the
community ; and that a multitude of princes and paupers will
founder the tightest state-vessel that ever rode out a revolu-
tionary gale, or reefed top-sails to a political blast. In a
republic of this description, we see frugality carried even into
the temples of their gods.
Cicero says : “ Birds, and paintings begun and finished in
one day, are the most acceptable offerings.’’ We have the
authority of Porphry for saying, that the spontaneous pro-
ductions of the earth were primitive offerings ; and Eripides
records that the Athenians, in the height of their power, con-
sidered the gods more honoured by a small offering than by the
sacrifice of an ox.
Look back again, and nearer to the shore of time on which
we stand glitters that splendid mockery of republicanism,
Italian Venice; the breast of each citizen as void of political
virtue as the bosom of a Jew; her councils inquisitions; her
senators despots ; her ducal crown, a crown of thorns; her chief
a prisoner, and her people slaves; her lion’s mouth ever open


to receive the assassin accusations of the dark, cowardly accuser
whose courage was unequal to the planting of a stiletto in his
neighbour s back. This unnatural conjunction of the body of
freedom with the spirit of slavery has, of necessity, disappeared.
The mouth of the lion is shut, his den and whelps destroyed,
and the bridegroom of the Adriatic for ever forsaken his
stormy bride.
We repeat that the spirit, the life of democracy, is political
■virtue ; without this it cannot exist. Nature has denied this
to the people of France, and their most strenuous efforts after
the establishment of a republic, have resembled in their nature
and in their futility the mad strugglings of a blind fiend, raging
through the realms of eternal darkness in search of light. Their
nature must change before the iron hand of a military depot
can be safely removed from their shoulders, A mailed arm
alone can protect them from themselves
A determination (which comprises every social virtue) to
live and to act for their country’s good, to start forward to her
aid instantly and decidedly in the hour of danger, must displace
personal ambition, indifference, love of vain-glorious display
and self, before any people are fitted to incorporate themselves
with a form of government which recognises political power in
the lowest of its subjects.
It was a good republican law which condemned every citizen
to infamy who stood neutral during any state emergency.
Neutrality, by standing with folded arms, and allowing villainy
to usurp and to rule, has entailed more misery upon mankind
than active, open war.
England had something like a republican form, combined
with the spirit of despotism, forced upon her long before her
time ; and when the strong arm which grasped and held together
the unnatural conjunction fell lifeless, this monster government,
charged to the throat with the elements of its own destruction,
of necessity exploded and disappeared. Still it was a glorious
time for England while it la ted The sound of Cromwell’s
terriblevoice forced even the dungeonsof the Spanish Inquisition
to disgorge their prey ; while the name of the English Republic
made the teeth of every despot in Europe to rattle with fear.
Still it resulted in the recall of a dastard, who tore putrid
corpses from their graves, that he might wreak his vengeance
upon the dead bodies of those whom he dared not face while they
were living men ; ended in the recall of the son of a man who
Wi«v«d that no king was bound to keep faith with his subjects,


who changed the limited monarchy of Britain into a pure
despotism, reigned eleven years without a parliament, assumed
the power of imprisoning his subjects under his own warrant,
and kept them confined for an unlimited time without trial,
thus breaking down the strongest bulwark of British freedom ;
and maimed and tortured some of the most talented and virtuous
men of that age, under the decision of that infamous mockery
of law and of justice, the Star Chamber.
The Jews, and some other nations of antiquity, enacted
political laws for the protection of criminals. By these laws,
cities of refuge and temples were appointed, where the man-
slayer might find shelter from the avenger of blood, which
avenger was a relative of the person slain.
Our civil law supplies the place of both avenger and city of
refuge. It protects the criminal from all violence, and at the
same time punishes him for the crime.
The Romans were obliged to pass a counter law for the
purpose of checking the influx of criminals, who crowded and
desecrated the temples of their gods. We are informed by that
most concise of all historians, Tacitus, that in his day, the
Germans had only two laws, both political; they hanged traitors,
and drowned cowards; civil laws they had none. All offences
committed by the people against each other were left to the
settlement by the people themselves.
In the time of Saint Louis oE Prance, the judicial combat,
and the negative proof by oath, settled all disputes between
contending parties; so that the best fighter and the most un-
scrupulous swearer had the best chance of gaining the day.
However, although this mode of administering justice or in-
justice was at utter variance with reason and common sense, it
was certainly more expeditious than a chancery suit, and much
easier understood than the voluminous pleadings of gentlemen
learned in the law, or the summing up of the evidence of a
cloud of witnesses who have been examined, and cross-examined,
and brow-beat, till their answers have become as unintelligible
and mysterious as the responses of a heathen oracle.
The propensity to abuse power flows in the life’s blood,
vibrates in every pulse, from the heart to the utmost extremity
of the frame of human nature. Power alone can set limits to,
can control power. Despotism confers the whole power on one
individual; that power consequently is limitless, uncontrollable,
and irresponsible t fate clothed with flesh.


The very nature of tilings decrees that this power will be,
as a rule, abused ; and hence life, liberty and property are
mere toys, playthings, to be slighted, sported with, or destroyed,
according to the will of the despot.
Despotism I believe to have been the first, the original form
of govexmment, because it would require intellects pretty far
advanced in civilization and intelligence to invent the complex
machinery of a constitutional monarchy or of a republic.
In those last named, moral power has a mighty influence.
Over despotism, it is generally powerless, because moral power,
to have the slightest degree of efficacy, must have an opposing
power of the same nature to contend with and to overcome.
But what degree of moral suasion could force a blood-thirsty,
ambitious, all-powerful tyrant, to be merciful and just ? A
shower of thistles down against a granite wall; a summer
zephyr sighing among the branches of a gnarled oak.
Physical force must be combated by a fox*ce purely physical;
hence war, though a dreadful evil, is, and we fear ever will be, a
fearful necessity. This floats not on the surface, but is grounded
deep in the recesses of the nature of man. So much so is this
the case, that we find almost all religions representing their
deities as superintending or actually engaging in war ; and even
in this present day we find nations called by themselves Christian,
invoking heaven to aid them in the destruction of men professing
to believe in the same faith as themselves. This may or may
not be right : I do not pretend to judge, much less to condemn.
To arrive at a just conclusion, we must take a wide, an ex-
tended view, and not confine ourselves within the narrow bounds
of our own experience.
In accordance with this we find despotism to be the lowest
conceivable form of government ; a form so rude and simple,
that the lowest type of human brain, in its most uncultivated
state, naturally stumbles upon it; command and obey compre-
hends it all. It raises one man to a giddy height, which no
mortal brain can reach without turning, and sinks the rest to
the level of the blindly-obedient brute. And yet despotism
would have been preferable to the mockery of monarchy under
which our forefathers suffered, when each titled ruffian burnt
and slew at his pleasure, filled his castle dungeon with his
fellow-subjects, and stole a cow froxn a poor maxi’s stall, or even
the king himself from the precincts of his throne, according as
it suited the necessities or the caprice of a lawless leader of a
baud of banditti.


In taking the British government for our illustration of a
monarchy, we must remark that in no monarchy, past or present,
do we find the people enjoying such a large share of civil liberty
as is possessed by the inhabitants of this land.
Our criminal code is excellent; trial by jury is a wall around
us, which the vengeance of neither king nor noble dare over-
leap. Still we find it in some instances stringent even to
cruelty, in others lenient to a degree which renders it powerless
for the purpose for which it was framed—the suppression of
crime. I observed au account in the newspapers the other day
of a police trial, in which a brutal fellow was fined in two
guineas for nearly murdering his wife ; the money was paid,
and the brute let loose, and verv likely the use he would make
of his liherry would be to abuse the unfortunate woman again.
Had this fellow damaged a hare or pheasant one hundredth part
as much as he did his wife, he would have subjected himself to the
dreadful punishment of banishment, or at least imprisonment
with hard labour; but as it was only a woman, he was dismissed
with a fine The reason of this description of legislation is
quite plain. The hares and pheasants belong exclusively to the
law-makers : the women do not. So they are very naturally,
though very unjustly, denied the protection vouchsafed to beasts
and birds.
I have read or heard that in days of yore, when witchcraft
was fashionable, women could with a little assistance from that
very obliging gentleman whose full-length portrait has always
been considered incomplete without hoofs, horns, and a tad,
transform themselves quite readilv into cats, and scratch and
caterwaul to an alarming extent. What a pity but the women
of the pres nr day could change themselves into hares, and when
hard hunted by cruel husbands, leap into and find safety in the
bosom of the game laws !
A strange anomaly is the British Constitution. It is neither
flesh, tish, nor fowl, and yet decidedly partakes of the nature of
all three. It is composed entirely of opposing elements, all
pulling in opposite directions, which, one would naturally sup-
pose. would have the effect of making the machine stand stock
still ; and so it w'mld, were it not that a storm of public
opinion occasionally sets in, heaving the machine considerably
a-head, making the dumb speak, and the lame not only to walk
but run Had net the Reform Bill been blown through both
houses to the font of the throne by this blast, it would
remained an unreformed bill to this present day. However,


moving or standing, the government works powerfully and well,
and carries the elements of its own regeneration within itself ;
and will get better, as we ourselves advance in knowledge, and
consequently in goodness and in power.
In analyzing this government, Ave find democracy, aristocracy,
and despotism combined. The good qualities AAdiich belong to
each, counterbalance in a great degree the evil qualities Avhich
belong to ail; and the result is a powerful and efficient govern-
ment, so politically powerful as to be enabled to give safely a
much greater amount of civil liberty to the people than any
continental monarchy dares to grant.
The despotism lies in the law holding the monarch irre-
sponsible tor his actions. “ The king or queen can do no
wrong,’ so says the law of Britain : the law of common sense
says otherwise It lies also in the power which the monarch
possesses to dissolve Parliament, to suspend the Habeas Corpus
Act, Avhich act limits the time between the apprehension of a
person accused of a crime and his trial, and the suspension of
which leaves the personal liberty of the subject at the entire
disposal of the prince or his ministers.
The stronghold of aristocracy is the House of Peers, Avhere
the lords temporal sit looking anxiously after the interests of
the country, which generally means the entailed estates of the
nobility ; and the lords spiritual are also there, watching as
anxiously for the interests of religion and the church—religion,
we fear, often signifying tithes, and the church themselves.
It certainly is a strange sight to see Episcopalian prelates
sitting among dukes and earls, and passing laws for the benefit
of Scotch Presbyterians and Dissenters, and whenever a colony
is added to the British dominion, settling down like locusts
and devouring one-tenth of whatever the land contains, to the
utter exclusion of “puir Sandy ” and his kirk.
This is a true and substantial Scottish grievance, no silly
story about heraldry, and thistles sent to the left side of the
two-shilling piece, but downright black injustice to Scotland.
The democratical element resides in theTlouae of Commons,
although the masses can hardly be said to be represented there,
for comparatively few the privilege of voting, and he Avho
has no vote has no representative And although they had all
votes, it would mend the matter very little ; as long as members
are unpaid, men of property must be sent, and they will look
more to the interests of that property, than to the interests of


those who sent them. ’Tis human nature —almost all W' mid do
the same. However, there is a good time coming, and in the
meantime, we may comfort ourselves hy believing, that for one
government that may be better, there is assuredly fifty worse.
Notwithstanding the discordant materials of which the
government is composed, and which seem eminently qualified to
the whole concern to a dead lock, still it has never done so
in our day, and very likely wont. Assisted by good manage-
ment, and better luck, they continue to steer clear of each other
most admirably.
There is yet another species of government, not generally
included in the list, upon whose poor brow the light of heaven
falls, and shows no stain ; while all others reflect the crimson
tinge of blood, and the dark hue of injustice and oppression.
This is self-government—the control over our own passions and
appetites. Were this government universal, prisons would melt
like the northern iceberg as it drifts into a southerly sea; the
scaffold and the convict ship would disappear and leave no trace ;
the angel of peace would sing a requiem to the cannon s roar
and the spirit of despotism crouch, and cower, and creep, and
burv itself under empty fetters and idle chains.
A neonle who had acquired the art of governing their own
nassions and had gained dominion over themselves, would not
submit to be misgoverned by any emperor, king, court, or
congress under heaven.
'Frugality in individuals or in nations is a source of stability
and power. There is a virtuous, stern determination of purpose
Smut the frugal, which the spendthrift, taken individually or
not. No form o government can be
long great or powerful without it, and with it any form may.
Frugflity is indeed the foundation upon which all society reate
It is the creator of science and art, and the framer of all that
+ Til ease to purify, to ennoble, to adorn. It is the
destroyer of famine, tL scourge of pestilence the thunderbolt
T: I the olive branch of peace It can make the wilderness
blolsoi as the rose, can drive the triumphal) car through the
rocky bowels of the mountain, and can rouse the intellectual
energies of a nation, and send them sweeping forth on a career
of improvement and salvation. In these latitudes, men could
not S“st without saving. Hail and snow, dark wmter e
artillery, would scatter their corpses over the frozen earth.
kStill money is only to be valued as a sign, not as the thing
.lyiO. TW true riches of a ration he m the number, the


energy, tlie industry, the frugality of her people; her true
wealth, not in gold, in gems, in jewellery, in gilded palaces, and
labour carried to the winds upon the wings of vanity; but in
her manufactories, her foundries, her stores, her warehouses and
granaries In Mexico and Peru, Spain found a golden grave.
Their diamonds and gold fell on her like a storm of curses ;
because with proud and slothful hand she threw from her the
substance of all true wealth, and grasped at the glittering
shadow A coal-pit, a freestone quarry, or an iron-stone mine,
are blessings and true wealth ; a gold-field in this country
would only mock us with wealth’s shadow, and every ounce of
it would prove a curse.
AH free governments should encourage, should force, if
needful, education upon all under their rule ; ’tis this that
makes, that keeps men free ; an educated slave will burst his
bonds, or break his heart. Yet no government, however well
disposed, or however powerful, can do much for the improve-
ment of the people, unless the people are anxious to improve
themselves. If they are so inclined, they may, they can do
much, even in the face of a bad government.
For our ideas regarding the nature and principles of govern-
ment, we are much indebted to the author of that book of first
principles, “The Spirit of La^vs.”
CHAPTER VII.
A MIND.
Ant metaphysical inquiry into the precise nature of mind must
begin in doubt, and end in darkness. It is enough for us to know
that is does exist, and that we have the power of exerting a
beneficial or a destructive influence over it.
The young mind is one of the most plastic existences in
nature ; capable of being moulded into any form, of assuming
any hue, of disbelieving the most self-evident truths, and of
placing sincere, implicit faith in the utterly impossible. It is
not the invisible spirit, abstractly considered, that we should
study, but its visible manifestations upon the material organism
of the biaiu, and the nature and tendency of the words and
actions which the tongue, the hands, the feet are impelled, by
the mandate transmitted by the spirit through the brain, to
speak or to perform,


In this age of research, men pry into all things, from the
dark, sunless caverns of earth and ocean, to the starry keystone
of heaven’s resplendent arch They study almost everything,
except the workings of the laws which govern their own intel-
lectual being. Were this carefully studied, and reduced to
every-day practice, men would reason more coolly —consequently,
act more rationally ; weapons would seldom be found in suicidal
hands, and lunatic asylums would be nearly tenantless.
It may be safely affirmed that no two minds have precisely
the same strength and power of endurance. One mind may
easily attain a point, which another, though urged to its utmost
stretch, can never reach, and consequently should never at-
tempt.
It may bo said that exercise strengthens the mind. Exercise
does so. But exertion above its powers is quite a different
matter, and must and will have quite a contrary effect.
Although we hold analogy drawn from the physical to the
moral to be a mode of reasoning very frequently fallacious, yet,
in this case, the analogy carries with it the weight of demon-
stration. Give the body regular and moderate exercise, it will
increase in volume and in power ; also in that quality, without
which mere strength is of little avail, the power of exerting that
strength for a considerable length of time without exhaustion.
Tax the body beyond its powers, whatever may be the amount
possessed by the individual, a gradual decline of strength comes
on, and then the break down. The body now must have rest,
and if denied it here, it will seek it, aye and find it, in the grave.
Except in this last particular, the analogy is perfect. The
mind succumbs under the same treatment and can only be
restored by suitable rest. However, this word must be under-
stood relatively, as change of employment is often equivalent to
rest,
Still it is a sorrowful truth, that the hurt mind generally
rejects, or is incapable of accepting of her only chance of restora-
tion, and prefers rioting in the horrible discord which she has
created. If this state of excitement continues, worn-out nature
•inks in o the merciful arms of death, or into the hopeless,
loathsome embrace of idiocy.
Each man is an abridgment of the collected works of that
mighty authoress—nature. It is a strange volume, the human
mind —now glancing in rays shed from the bright eye of
hope ; now darkened, us the shadow falls upon its page from
the fixed, stony eye-balls of despair.


Let us make ourselves our study, and witliin the narrow
bounds of our own bosoms we will find life and death engaged
in mortal conflict ; angels and demons striving hard for the
mastery, and the spirit of darkness holding jubilee in the
presence of the spirit of light. Man need not step out of
himself to study nature. He carries about with him—he is
himself an epitome of all her words and works. Her laws are
inscribed on blood and brain, on nerve, muscle, and bone, in
characters of pleasure and of pain; and a living alphabet of
ecstasy and agony is imprinted by her upon the soul.
The clear sky and the thunder-cloud; the fruitful valley,
affording nourishment to all around; the volcano paving a
blazing pathway for the feet of dessolation, with ashes and with
fire; the bright river with its clear waters teeming with joyous
life, and the cool breeze from its breast tempering the fervid
heat of a tropical sun; the black foul waters of the cypress-
fringed swamp, gloomy, and cold, as the bosom of death—barren
as the rock-hewn sepulchre ; no tide, no stream, no heaven-sent
breeze, to enliven or to purify ; no sign of life save when some
loathsome reptile stirs the lake, or crawls upon the miry margin
of its dead waters, —the counterpart of all this is contained
within the book and volume of the human brain.
Self-knowledge is a mirror in which human nature, with all
her imperfections, is reflected. It teaches humility, tolls the
death-knell of pride, and leads us to look with a charitable,
brotherly eye upon the faults and follies of our fellows. It
forces the idolatrous kneeler at a shrine of clav to spring to his
feet, and dash the fragments of his shivered idol upon the
pavement whereon he knelt. It loudly tells that every child of
earth must, and shall err ; that the feet even of the purest are
soiled with earthly stain ; that the most lofty and upright mind
stands far below the standard of moral excellence, and that
perfection in good or in evil lies far beyond man’s reach. It
also tells that there are bounds within which the mind may
safely and profitably range, but beyond which the spirit of man
can never pass unscathed. Approach the confines of this
boundary, then crushing darkness presses upon the bewildered
brain and the tortured mind, like the fire-begirt scorpion, turns
upon itself and stings.
A fearful troup mounts guard upon this line i imbecility,
idiocy* madness, misery, death. On the hither side of
this line, we see tnan rationally and usefully employed,
sitting at the feet of science and art; while true religion, with


her pure white hand gent!}*- laid upon the bright head of happi-
ness, benignantly smiles upon the scene.
On the further side, we see the poor suicide struggling to
break loose from the torturing embrace of unendurable misery;
stretching out his arms to death as to a deliverer, and greedily
clutching at the poison-cup, the dagger, or the cord, as he flings
himself into the unfathomed void to escape from a fiend, which
a knowledge of, and an obedience to the laws of his own nature,
might have kept chained in its ten of darkness for ever.
On this side also, the mind, ignorantly daring, attempts to
lift or rend with finite power the veil from the face of
infinity, sowing the seeds and reaping a harvest of destruction.
And here the wild fanatic —human nature’s curse-fills the
mad-house and the grave, as he drowns the seraphic voices of
faith, mercy, and hope in the roaring of the flames of hell ; and
boasts, with the pride of an inquisitor or a demon, of how many
weak women he has bound to Terror’s torturing wheel —how
many children’s souls he has stretched on the rack.
It has been urged in palliation or defence, that these men
are sincere. Sincerity is no test of usefulness or truth. A man
may sincerely believe that he holds an appointment from heaven,
while every eye but his own sees the flaming signature of Satan
blazing at the foot of his commission.
Whatever agonises and destroys a human mind, is not
religion, but cruel superstition. There is not one inquisitorial
dungeon, not a single lunatic asylum on the path that leads to
heaven. Whatever doctrine unfits a man or woman for the
proper discharge of the duties which they owe to themselves,
and to those whom Providence has rendered dependant upon
them, has sprung from no higher source than the morbid brain
of a lunatic, or the villainous mind of a designing impostor.
To obtain as much knowledge as possible without trespassing
on this region of burning barren lava —and every description of
useful knowledge lies upon the safe and pleasant side—and to
communicate this knowledge for the benefit of others, constitutes
true philosophy and true philanthropy.
The will is the master-key which unlocks the door of the
human mind ; a strong determined will stops short only at the
impossible ; judgment and imagination are headless trunks
■without it. The man who knows not its priceless value, wanders
through the mazes of life like a strayed child. He hesitates
and hesitates at every turning, till death shrouds in darkness


his uncertain path, No faculty of the mind can be more im-
proved by use. Act determinedly but once, and you will
feel inclined to do so again. Let judgment give its sanction to
the deed, then do it decidedly and at once.
The will is also the governor of the intellectual faculties ; it
has a double power —not only incites, but restrains. It can
curb the wildest passion that ever rioted in a healthy human
brain. When it loses this power, then is that brain diseased,
and the possessor of that brain insane.
Use this faculty wisely and firmly, and the invisible
mechanism of the mind will move steadily and sweetly, without
friction, without jar. Neglect to use it; a gust of passion
comes—sweeps through the unguarded portals of the soul;
destruction drives the wheels, and wreck and ruin triumph over
all.
This subject is of deep import to every human being, whether
their philosophy leaves them mix and mingle with
this atmosphere and this earth, or their faith mounts on
archangel wing, and pierces the veiled heaven.
With fleet foot time is speeding unward. Age, with his
crown of hoar-frost, is tottering on time’s track, and against the
w r alls of life’s citadel even now is thundering the artillery of
death. Therefore let there be no delay in this matter; set
about it at once. Now or never, may be the word.
Time is our inheritance ; it behoves us to watch it well, for
it flies on the bright pinions of the morning, and the black wing
of midnight speeds it on its viewless path.
The present moment alone woos us, the past scorns our
entreaties and spurns our prayers. The moment which has this
instant glided past, is as utterly beyond recall as the first rays
of the first sun, which, diamond-like, shown upon the black
brow of darkness, and swaddled infant time in the gemmed robes
of light.
When the ship has cleared the land, and the loftiest moun-
tain peak has vanished under the distant horizon, the heavens
appear a cupola, vast and glorious, the lower edge of the azure
dome bounding and blending with the circular expanse of
ocean —the ship and her zenith always the centre of that mighty
circle. The circumference of this circle is exactly proportioned
to the power of vision possessed by each beholder. The keen
practised eye sees clouds in the distant heaven, and the white
eurf sweeping onward, companion of the storm ; while the un-


practised, untrained eye sees nothing save the clear sky,-and the
ripple of the wave laving the vessel’s side, as she holds easily on
her course; and they open their owl-like eyes wide with
astonishment, or look with pity, contempt or scorn, when, to
save the ship, the word is given to clew up, downhaul, close
reef, or furl.
We find the precise counterpart of this in the moral world.
The eye of the untrained, undisciplined mind, enclosed within
the dreary walls of ignorance, where superstition, cruelty, and
falsehood reign, and reason pales her ineffectual fires, sees no
symbol of the storm till it bursts ; no thunder in the clouds till
it strikes ; no commotion in the political horiion till the earth
trembles under the thundering tramp of anarchy’s iron noof.
The waving of the vampire wing of pestilence may be
chilling the blood in artery and vein ; the air we breathe may be
issuing from the caverns of death, yet no recognition conveyed
till the livid corpse proclaims its presence and its power.
All men have two natures —the one superficial, visible to the
world’s eye, and which must be ever alive and active that man
may live ; the other lies deep and often dormant in the recesses
of the brain, and may be shrouded like a corpse from cadle to
deathbed, without one flash of heaven’s fire lighting up its
death-like lineaments ; without one bright thought soaring on
wing of light through the dark atmosphere in which it dwells.
Lies it within the power of man to arouse thus slumberer ? Lies
it within his power to make this deep sleeper start into activity
and life P It does ; and such should be the aim of all.
Youth is the most appropriate season for this awakening.
Yet even in age it is sweet, though it may resemble spring
flowers flinging their fragrance through the stanchions of a tomb.
Until a general awakening of this inner nature takes place, man
will still make man his prey ; the decisions of gold and the sword
will still outweight the decrees of justice and mercy; the
worrier’s spirit wilt still spring from the blood-soaked field in a
cloud of sulphurous smoke leaving his body to form an atom in a
mass of those —•
“ O’er whom the storm may rush, the tempest rave.
And the steed trample, and the spearmen close ;
Yet wake them not,
So deep their long- and last repose.”
No mind can long continue in a healthy state, and under due
subordination to the will, where the imagination is allowed
habitually to soar above the judgment. The imagination may


be, often is, much diseased, and yet the judgment comparatively
sound. Sights which are not, may be vividly seen ; sounds which
cannot be, distinctly heard ; and the sufferer perfectly aware that
it is a delusion.
This we take to be the most excruciating of all varieties of
mental malady. For, in addition to the torture inflicted upon
this most intensely alive to suffering portion of our organisation,
the man is cursed with a knowledge of his fearful state, die
is mad, and knows that he is so; and possibly also knows that his
own hand kindled the uncontrollable fire, which is now merci-
lessly consuming heart, blood, and brain.
To go deeper into this subject might prove hurtful, therefore
we will try to touch it with a lighter hand.
Dreadful aud difficult of cure as a morbid state of this depart
ment of mind is, still, a cheerful, lively imagination, if conjoined
with a sound judgment, and kept under the supervision of a
strong untiring will, is one of the choicest blessings which heaven
in its mercy has bestowed upon man. If dark, gloomy, and
foreboding, and suffered to run riotous, it is an unmingled, an
unmitigated curse.
Though “steeped in poverty to the very lips,” imagination
can for a time exult above all th« cares, sorrows, and auxities
of life ; and were riches and luxuries overtopping like a wall, the
same power can sink into the depths of unutterable woe. It can
glorify the dreariest den on earth’s surface, and shroud a place in
the darkness of despair.
One very common manifestation of an unbridled imagination
we may see every day in the persons of men who walk the streets
with their eyes open, but the sense shut.
Sleep walkers, who take their midnight perambulations upon
the home-tops, in common with cats, are said to see very well
even in the dark, but the day dreamer appears to be sadly
deficient in the article of vision, as he will deliberately attempt
to walk through a wall or a lamp-post in broard day light.
Dreaming upon the streets may be a very pleasant occupation, but
I should think quite unprofitible, besides highly dangerous, as it
subjects its votary to the risk of being run down by any horse that
may have taken a sudden fancy for galloping without leave or
necessity ; or being put to the horn and tossed up by some cur-
hunted cow, which may leave him to finish his reverie within the
walls of one of his air-built castles. It is this practice which
causes men to smile, sometimes to laugh, and talk to themselves


bo idiot-like upon the streets, and when stopped n~d spoken to
by some passing acquaintance, io answer m a manner as inco-
herent as if newly startled fr.-m sleep. Jt is a bad habit,
especially for the young, as it excites and nourishes the imagi-
nation. at the irredeemable expense of the judgment—makes real,
every-day life appear monotonous and tame —leads to neglect and
forgetfulness of business, and goes far to preventthe accumulation
of plain practical knowledge.
Any one who giVes himself up to this imaginative dreamy
mood, becomes unsocial and selfish ; his mind feels quite averse
to exert itsejf upon any useful subject, but eagerly seeks to
intoxicate itself with the vapours of imagination.
Should the dreamer be clad in rags, and without a single penny
in his purse, yet fancy can instantly array him in purple and gold,
and pour the imaginary wealth of imaginary nations around his
feet. And although h« should be crooked as iEsop, or a note of
interrogation, one flourish of imagination’s magic wand can trans-
form him into the handsomest fellow alive. When tired of the
noise and smoke of the town, it is astonishing how quickly and
cheaply he can transport himself to the quiet side of a green
hill, and revel in a medley of weets, such as nature never spread
on one table in her life-time One field he clothes with all the
glories of spring, summer, and autumn, and hangs out the bud,
the blossom, and the ripe fruit, upon the same branch of the same
tree. Is the day excessively hot ? he can, in the face of a mid-
summer’s sun, clothe the eanh in a mantle of white, freeze a river,
buckle on a pair of spiritual skates, and fly along the invisible ice
at a speed which no locomotive engine, although it should burst
its iron lungs in the race, can ever hope to attain.
With the day dreamer, self is always the hero of h>s dream.
Self absorbs all, parcels out no honours, divides no crown. Does
his cranium show a full development of the organ of c> mbative-
ness? Is be fond of war for its own sake, careless whether it
be aggressive or defensive? Does he believe that the roll of a
drum, or the bla-d of a bugle, absolves him from all moral obli-
gation, and commissions him to blot out the third word of the
sixth commandment in blood ? If so, then dreams he that he is
upon the battle-field, amid all the glitteringtinselry of war; him-
self the strongest, bravest, and best appointed of all that crimson
train.
“ His charger is black as black can be,
Save the brow-star white as the foam of the sea.”
The trumpets sound —the enemy is before them—
“ Away, away, onward they dash,
Tonente less rapid and less rash."


Onward he spurs his mighty steed —the nerve and skill of
the destroying angel is in his right arm —horse and rider go
down before him like smoke before a hurricane.
Wherever the battle rages loudest —wherever the dead lie
thickest, there he is to be found, protecting his friends, and
dealing destruction among his foes.
After a hard-won victory, which, but for him, would have
been inglorious defeat, —himself and charger dripping blood,
and pierced through with as many bullets, swords, and bayonets
as would have sent a drove of elephants to their everlasting
rest, —he is laid up in a grand old castle, with an oaken floor,
and arched windows, with glass stained in every possible variety
of shade and colour, from sky-blue to scarlet. He reclines his
wounded limbs upon abed plumed and mounted like a hearse,
and is tended by a light-footed damsel, remarkably tall, and
particularly small about the waist and ankles, whose long black
tresses may with the “raven down of darkness vie,” whom his
valour has saved from dishonour, and her father, or brother, or
uncle, or perhaps all three from death.
Is the dreamer’s mind a dwelling place for that sanctimonious
fiend, melancholy ; which, Jesuitlike, wears the livery of heaven,
that it may establish the dominion of hell ? Is he possessed with
a gnawing, discontented, fault-finding spirit, which he falsely
thinks and as falsely calls religion ; a spirit which continually
whispers that this life is not worth! the enjoying, and that he
will be certain of happiness in the next world, if he can but
manage to keep himself, and as many of his neighbours as
possible, sufficiently miserable in this P Is he fond of nursing
and petting real or imaginary griefs, till they sap the foundations
of body, soul, and spirit? Then dreams he of the last, long,
lingering illness, which is destined to free his enthralled spirit
from her earthly bonds. Around his couch friends and loved
ones stand mute and motionless ; intense grief has dried up the
fountain of tears. Ministering angels hover over his pillow,
fanning his fevered brow with the cool waving of their radiant
wings, while heaven’s own balmy dew descends upon his parched
and burning lip. The cold clammy moisture of death bedews
his brow ; the shadow of the king of terrors bedims his half-
closed eyes ; the gurgle is in his throat, that token which sub-
dued life gives of entire submission to her all-victorious foe.
Death enters —blows out the lamp which lighted up the
eye —quenches the fire which kept the warm blood flowing—
and places silence, with his frozen lip, to sentinel the clay.


Now bom© on seraph wing, his freed soul skims that path
of glory, thattrysting place for angels —the milky way. Higher,
still higher he soars upon his heavenward path. Far, far
beneath, planet and star —high heaven’s regalia—set in a frame
of golden light, are shining; angelic wings of purest white are
sounding through that boundless field of azure and of gold ; the
jewelled robe that floats around the universe, and veils the
eternal throne, waves o’er him like a banner ; heaven’s burnished
gates of gold, shining in the resplendence of millions of never-
setting suns, turn upon their jewelled hinges, and blind him
with a blaze of glory ; the wel!-r- membered voices of the much-
loved dead ; the triumphant shouts of saints and seraphims salute
his enraptured ear ; his own mouth opens to join in the cry,
when greatly to his annoyance, some unwished for circumstance
arouses him from his dream. He then looks up at. the every-day
world with disgust, turns from the duties of life with aversion,
and hastens to enshroud himself again in the mist and clouds of
reverie. This habit is mental intemperance, and he who
induces in it sacrifices time, action, and energy at the shrine of
a shadow.
A reckless, untaught, uncurbed imagination, can bring the
brain into a state of excitability in which a thought will strike
and stupify like a blow; an intense thought kill as certainly
and suddenly as a rifle shot when it pierces and passes through
the brain.
I am prepared to prove this, and I have no doubt that very
many sudden deaths could be accounted for in this way.
We knew a man very well, who, although accounted no fool
by his neighbours, ignorantly allowed, or rather encouraged, his
mind to dwell upon one subject, and that subject an exciting one.
Morning, noon, and evening it was ever present with him, and
when he awoke through the night it was still there. The
natural and inevitable consequence of such conduct was a highly
excitable state of the brain. So, while one night pursuing his
favourite study, a thought, like a shock of electricity, shot
through his brain, and he sprung to his feet a madman. People
wondered how such a terrible calamity could so instantly strike
one so sober, so quiet, so orderly in all things. They of course
could not see that the the man had for a long time been
straining every nerve to accelerate the fearful consummation.
I will not shock you by describing what I saw, nor shake
your faith in my veracity by telling you how very long a human
being can exist without sleep; but in support of my former


assertion, state in as few words as possible—for I like not the
subj< cl, cither for myself or f'*r you, and nothing but a sense
of duty forces me to allude to it —how, after months of agony,
this man sunk into a desponding state, in which a belief in
everything impossible took entire possession of a mind which at
one time would have rejected the improbable, if unaccompanied
by proof. He believed that the world was ruled by witch-craft,
and that every man, woman, and child, with one or two excep-
tions, belonged to the unholy craft. His business was to
counteract their machinations, and truly a busy time he had of
it; and in interfering wnh their arrangements he was sometimes
struck senseless as by an actual blow.
He went one day into a room where a number of people
were assembled, engaged in their ordinary occupations ; he saw
at once that the ‘‘ dud had business on his han’,” and that the
charm lay in an old hearth brush, which was placed against the
wall. He knew that could he displace that brush, he would
break the charm and give them all their work to do over again ,
but he a'so knnw that it was a work «>f considerable danger, so
he very naturally hesitated a little before he made up his mind
for the grand assault. At length he dashed forward, seized the
charmed brush ; but before he could lift it from the ground,
his arm was struck powerless, did not fall gently, but was
violently jerked against his side, and a number of days elapaed
before he could again raise it to his head The cause lay in the
diseased imagination ; the effect upon the nerves and muscular
fibre of the arm was actual, real.
I could add other instances, likewise from my own personal
knowledge, which would put the imagination’s power instantly
to paralvse bevond the possibility of doubt ; but a knowledge
of this is sufficient for you ; to dwell upon it would be highly
improper, and unless you abuse your imagination, or allow it to
run wild and abuse itself, it will never acquire that power.
Among many other delusions, this man believed that he was
attended hy angels, some nl them white winged and celestial,
others of a rather duskier hue and from a very different locality.
Pugnaci ns in a most unseemly degree were they both when
they happened to meet; and, greatly to his annoyance, the
white winged had generally the worst of the fight.
They came and chatted to him quite familiarly, and told him,
among many other verv strange stories, that above all created
things they hated window glass, for they never could distinguish
between it and the unobstructed air until they had either


sprained their wings, or cut their noses against it. They also
told him that no other substance in nature was capable of ob-
structing their progress ; a slated roof or a stone wall did not
interfere with their flight in the least, but the slightest sheet of
glass brought them at once to a stand still; and that men, to
save themselves from the devil and all his angels, had only to
ensconce themselves under glass cases.
One afternoon, while walking in a garden, he picked up
a curiously-shaped bone, which, after examining, he put in his
pocket; the thought then struck him that there might be some
charm connected with the bone, which caused him to take it out
very hurriedly, and cast it from him.
About midnight an angel came who announced himself as
the great Gabriel, and demanded the bone instantly. My
friend told Gabriel that if he was particularly anxious about
the bone, he would find it at the foot of a hoPy bush near to
the centre of the garden. Away flew Gabriel with the speed of
a sunbeam, but returned at the same rate, and commanded the
than to come along with him and search for the bone, for it
could not be found. He replied that all the doors in the house
were locked, and that although angels could go through key-
holes; he could not; upon which Gabriel remarked, that as one
of the windows was well down at the top, he had no objection to
take him on his back, and fly out at the window with him—an
offer which my poor frieud most positively declined.
Gabriel now broke out in rage, and burst away swearing
a fearful oath, which, if it reached “heaven’s chancery,” shook
the pen from the hand of the “recording angel,” that he would
have every atom of that bone, although he should burn the
earth and riddle the ashes ; rather a weighty undertaking, I
should think even for an angel.
This man, contrary to the anticipations of those well qualified
to judge, recovered, and still lives to deplore the gross ignorance
of nature’s laws which led him to sow the seeds of, and con-
sequently to reap, such a harvest of misery.
Much may be done by every one towards keeping the mind
in a firm, serene, and healthy state. Still the proper treatment
is more of a negative than a positive character ; that is, consists
not so much in doing as in leaving undone. Nature when not
thwarted by the artificial and unnatural conduct of man,
generally does it herself.


By the came negative mode a man with a mind partially
diseased may go quietly aud usefully through the world, and no
one be aware of the circumstance save himself.
To d> so he must, as far as in him lies, keep aloof from all
cause*, mental or material, which tend to produce excitement.
Such a man must frequent neither tavern nor theatre : must not
allow hi* imagination to roam, but must confine his thoughts
within the cool bounds «>f r ason and of common sense, and let
nothing tempt him to give way to transports of grief, anger, or
j >v. Let him keep his mmd quiet and pretty much to himself,
and enter into argumentation with no one. Let him make no
complaint of, nor allusion to, the circumstance to any one—this
would be blowing the fire ; and Jet him hide it as much as he
can, even from himself. To accomplish this last, the mind
must not be allowed to dwell an instant upon it, this may at
all times lie difficult, sometimes impossible, still the very
attempt must be beneficial, and if constantly repeated may at
last be successful, and lead to a permanent cure.
Many men have minds so undiciplined and wild that ever
and again out into bursts or fits of passion. They
and their friends call this a “ failing rather a serious “ failing”
we do think. Let us see.
What is the signification of the term, a fit of passion F It
means a si ate of being in which a man has wilfully abandoned
himself to the domination of the devil, and thrown aside for the
time the fear oE God, of man, and of consequences a
superlatively dangerous position for any man to place himself
in ; a position from which his own hand may, in one instant,
attach a black seal to the scroll of his future destiny.
A passionate man is like an open powder-flask, safe enough
to approach if you carry nothing more inflammable about you
than a wet blanket; but if there be anything of the lucifer-
match nature in your own composition, you had better keep at
least the breadth of the street between you.
No amount of provocation can justify passion, or render it
less than the extremity of folly. If a person uses you ill, is
that a reason why you should use yourself much worse? The
effects of one’s conduct can be so fraught wi h danger to you as
a fit of passion may. It also defeats its own end. Who cares
for a passionate man ? A passionate man is a powerless man;
every one mocks him, except, perhaps, those who depend upon
Mm for bread. Look at a man in a fit of passion, spluttering


and choaking, like a drowning dog. Look at him camly, with a
philosophic eye, and try if you could fancy a more degrading or
disgusting exhibition. !S T o wise man is passionate; it would be
a contradiction to say so. Passion is an off-shoot from the same
root as pride ; and passion’s spleen is not raised in proportion
to the magnitude of the offence committed, but according to the
inflated idea of his own consequence entertained by the person
offended.
Cases have occurred of men falling dead under the
influence of passion ; of men leaping into eternity in a rage.
It should be avoided entirely: there is not one redeeming
quality connected with it. It is impolitic ; for like a curse, it
recoils. It is unjust, doubly unjust; for it wrongs both the
offender and offended. It is untruthful; for it accuses at
random, and exaggerates accident or misfortune into crime.
A fit of passion is a temporary aberration of intellect; and he
who indulges in it, is for the time being insane; insane,
and yet responsible for his words and actions. Youm; men.
think of this.
“ Really, I cannot help it,” is a plea often urged in
extenuation by those who are subject to gusts of passion. The
dog is, to a certainty, mad, which bites and “ cannot help it.”
Ihe man is as assuredly mad. who lacerates the feelings of bis
family and dependants, and' ‘‘cannot help it.” This is, without
the possibility of an exception in the case, the most pitiable and
humiliating plea that ever was pled by the tongue of man :
I cannot help it” In plain terms, lam a poor, mad wretch,
whose will has lost the power to govern my words and actions ;
1 am unfit for human society; I ought to be caged, like a wild
beast, for the safety of myself and others, because ther p is a
power within impelling me to do evil —a power which I can
neither resist nor control. The want of power to resist sudden
impulses constitutes madness, which is the highest though not
the most hopeless form of insanity.
As Polonius watched Hamlet, I have sometimes watched
men of tins description, and fancied that, Polonius-like, I had
discovered something very like ” method in their madness
fancied that the outlines of a system were visible, and that only
a certain class of individuals were honoured by their ire. They
appeared to have an antipathy towards attacking each other ;
and I also observed that those stronger or richer than them-
selves were comparatively free from danger, and that those
whom they expected to be benefited bv were absolutely safe.
From circumstances, I infer that they actually could
“help it,” if it so pleased them. A cure, in some eases, i»


neither difficult nor expensive. A notorious fire-brand, a young
fellow whom a fall upon ice would have set in a blaze, was
instantaneously cured of a severe fit by a considerate friend of
his own dashing a bucketful of salt water in his face ; so,
apparently, the disease is not so very deeply-seated as the
virulence of the symptoms would lead us to suppose.
A passionate man has more enemies than he is aware of ;
the bitter, biting words which escape him almost unconsciously,
fade from Ids own memory, but they burn like fire into the
bosoms of those to whom they were addressed, An insult
raises the vindictive feeling more, and is less readily forgotten or
forgiven than an actual injury.
We were at one time associated with a man, a friendly,
warm-hearted man, who was subject, or rather who subjected
himself, to the dominion of this evil. At the beginning of
the outbreak a warning word would check him, which showed it
was perfectly under control in the first stage ; but if once fairly
started, as a breakless railway truck thunders down an incline,
gathering speed and power as it descends, so would he drive on
in his rage till, ere he reached the climax, he would be beating
his head against the wall. The fit had evidently reached a stage
in which the man had no control over it —actual madness had
sot in for the time; and then how miserably he would lower
himself to make' amends to those whom in his madness he had
abused. If unclouded reason be the greatest blessing which
pertains to man, the voluntary parting with it, even for an
instant, must be no common sin.
Revenge is another black spot upon the chequered robe
which human nature wears. It is rage’s twin-brother, sprung
from the same infernal parent-pride. It shows itself in many
a form, exists in many a degree. We trace it budding in the
offended child throwing a pebble at his playfellow, and see its
purple flowers full-blown in the despot, as he rides over a ruined
land, heralded by blood and fire. It is a powerful passion, and
malevolent as powerful. It can incite to murder and to suicide.
Not many days ago, a lad stabbed another to death in revenge
of a blow ; and within a few yards of where I write, a man
hung himself upon a tree to be revenged upon his friends, who
had offended him by refusing an enreasonable request. These
are extreme cases, but still natural consequences flowing from
this passion in an excited state.
A lower grade of the same diabolical passion consists in
secretly feeling pleased at any misfortune which may have


befallen those who hare offended us. This is a bad spirit, very
bad, and is the root of something worse. Give it no quarter
crush it; it is wicked, it is cowardly, it is unmanly.
. revengeful person is a dangerous person; even innocence
is no certain protection from him. Men of this description
are necessarily deficient in the reasoning faculties, therefore
they are liable to commit mistakes, and wreck their’vengeance
upon those who never injured them.
A little worldly wisdom might teach people the gross folly of
indulging in passions such as these. They have not the shadow
of a chance of continuing in them with impunity. They stand
alone, in direct opposition to their own consciences, to the
laws of nature and their country, and to the moral feeling of
the civilized world.
A safe and sure method of repressing the evil tendencies
of our minds is to cultivate and cherish those which are
good. Malevolence and benevolence cannot be alive and active
m the same breast at the same time. Habitually encourage
either of them, and without your interference the other declines
and dies.
The mild, loving qualities of our nature communicate
peace and quiet joy to those who allow them a place in their
hearts ; and yet manv chase them from their hearts and their
homes to make room for some pet fiend, who will sting, tear, and
destroy.
CHAPTER VIII.
ECONOMY AND SAYINGS BANKS *
Am''ng- the great principles which uphold society, and give
power and stability to individuals and to nations, Economy
bolds no secondary place.
Under a universal system of waste, man would be consumed
before the breath of famine, and its faithful follower,
pestilence; and soon would his name and race be blotted out
from the living page of nature’s boob.
Economy in national affairs is equivalent to an increase in
revenue, without the cost of collection upon the increase;
and upon private affairs it has the same effect as an addition to
• In this Chapter I have freely extracted from two essays writtea by me upon thi*
which have previously appeared is an ephemera? form.


income, without the labour and expense which attend
production. Young men, economising is a habit which you
should study to acquire ; you will find it vitally beneficial to
you in every circumstance in life. Many young men associate
the idea of carefulness with parsimony and meanness. This is
a dangerous and most gross mistake ; for carefulness actually
shields you from that poverty of soul which leads to the
commission of low, dishonourable deeds, by furnishing you
with the means to be liberal when duty calls you to be so, and
to he at all times honourable and just, A careful man is as
distinct from a miser as a sane man is from a lunatic.
A °ound cheerful mind, seldom craving and easily satisfied,
lodged in a healthy hardy frame, is the natural conse-
quence of frugality ; while a morbid miserable spirit,
incessantly craving for stimulants, and an infirm, easily-fatigued
body, are the natural results of luxurious habits.
Should misfortune fall upon a frugal man, he stands
acquitted at the bar of his own conscience, and is pitied, not
blamed, even by those who may have been losers by him.
Savings banks are to the spirit of economy what a church is
to the spirit of devotion: they give the abstract principle a
material form, assign it a “local habitation and a name,”
causing it to assimilate with, and stamp its impress upon, the
mind. Abstractions take little practical hold upon the human
mind ; it requires something that can be seen, that can be felt,
to leave a lasting or useful impression. The page of history
shows that people without temples have never been deeply
impressed with the truth of or shown any great affection for
their religion ; and little study of human nature, as it presents
itself among ourselves, will convince that economy never can
be generally diffused among any people where there is a
deficiency of these temples, Savings Banks.
The establishment of one of these institutions is a glorious
era in the annals of any country, city, or town ; and government
does well to watch over them with parental care : still their
efficiency may be marred by over-much legislation.
The term Economy, in its full extent, embraces carefulness
of every necessary of life ; but in communities such as ours, it
more particularly applies to carefulness of the circulating medium
—of that which represents everything which we require, and
very many things which we do not. Still it must be allowed
that nature has made gold and silver comparatively valueless


but man’s opinion baa made them the renresentative of every-
thing valuable, clothed them, as circumstances may be, wiih the
bliss-bestowing qualities of a spirit of mercy, or armed them
with the destructive power of a fiend.
Let no one think lightly of money. The possession of
money is equivalent to the possession of all the comforts,
conveniences,, and necessaries of life. Money smooths the
sick-bed, pillows the dying head, lays the body in the grave with
decency, stills the orphan’s cry, dries up the widow’s tear, and to
the departing husband and father extracts the bitterest pang
from death.
Think not that I would have you to be worshippers of mam-
mon, or that I wish the kindly and charitable feelings of our
nature to be dried up by a golden thurst. No ! What I want
to impress upon you is the true value of money, ido not
wish you to hord as misers, but to save as rational men for a
rational purpose, so that you may have something of your own
to fall back upon when the day of trial comes, and through its
agency be enabled to save yourselves from future want.
The saving of a portion of yonr earnings, where it comes
within the bounds of possibility, is a sacred duty you all owe to
yourselves and to society. The man who under any
circumstance, or any train of circumstances, is obliged to
depend upon others for sustenance, is lowered in the
estimation of his fellows, and, what is of a million times more
importance, sinks in his own.
The young man who has a few pounds saved is a respectable
man, a man to be honoured and trusted ; he has no feverish
fear of sickness or want of employment; there is a feeling of
independency about him which must raise him morally and
intellectually. He is also a free agent; he can move about if he
so wills it; he is not bound to stop and starve in any particular
spot because he has not money to carry him out of it; and,
noblest, greatest privilege, of all! he can relieve a fellow-
creature in distress.
Liberty is a blessing which we all prize ; and yet the man
who squanders his money, offers himself up as a willing sacrifice
upon the altar of another's will. The certainty of immediate
starvation forces him to accept any hind of work, from any
sort of employer, and at any degree of remuneration that the
employer mav choose to offer. Let the man’s talents be what
they may, he has no »cop« for their exercise ; let his energies


be ever so great, they are “ cabined, cribbed, confined he is,
body, soul, and spirit, a very slave m the grasp of iron-handed
necessity.
A man without money is a powerless man. No one thinks
it worth while to hold him, yet he can’t run away; he could not
travel any great distance, were it to visit his dying mother; a
ver y jail-bird is he, without even the cold shelter of the prison
walls.
There are many bonds in this world more galling than hemp
or iron, and this is one of them ; break asunder this bond, and
cast this cord from you
Many people think and say that a single shilling is not
worth the saving. This is a most fatal mistake, and has been
the cause of many thousands living and dying in poverty
and wretchedness
The farmer who would throw his seed corn into the sea, or
the mother who would destroy her child in infancy, might seek
justification upon precisely the same principle.
But we must bear in mind that to save, or to do anything
else effectively, we must proceed systematically. We have the
very highest authority for this. Look abroad upon the face of
nature, and see how distinctly she bears the impress of system
upon her broad brow. There is system in decay and in re-
generation ; system in the formation of the wing of a gnat, and
in the the movement of a planet; system in the glow-worm’s
light, and in the lightning's flash ; system in the singing of a
bird, and in the thunder's roar; while her own beautiful law
of continuity, like a golden thread, runs through and connects
the whole.
A systematic course cf procedure is necessary in even the
most commonplace affairs of life. A person without system drifts
hither and thither like a vessel without a rudder, never doing,
always talking of what should be done ; fatiguing himself by
going over the same ground twice ; ever in a hurry, and \et
always behind Whereas, a man with system goes right on
to his object at once, without deviating to the right hand or the
left; no travelling in a circle with him ; cooly and leisurely
he accomplishes his purpose, with ease to his body and
satisfaction to his mind
Lay down, then, a proper system for yourselves, and
persevere in it; let nothing turn you aside; axid depend upon
it, that very strong and at the same time very unprincipled


feeling called habit, which makes no distinction between good
and evil, will come to your aid, and impel you on in the track
which you have marked out for yourselves, without trouble and
even without reflection.
Carefully calculate your necessary expenditure, and
ascertain what you really can save ; then lay it down as a law,
make it a prominent part of your system, to go regularly to
the bank and lodge the money. Lead not yourselves into
temptation, by keeping the money long in your own possession ;
if you do, depend upon it, it runs a very serious risk of ever
reaching the bank.
Never say on account of the smallness of the sum, as many
do, “ 1 don’t like to go into the bank with it.” I adbor that
application of the ‘ don’t like ” principle, if it can be called a
principle —that false modesty so very common amongst us,
whlcn falls like mildew upon bud and blossom of all enterprise
and energy. Like to do anything, everything that is not
mean, dishonourable, or unjust.
Common sense should teach a man to be careful of any
article which he cannot live without, and of which, at the
same time, his supply is but small; yet how often, with regard
to money, do we see this principle reversed. A poor fellow
hurrying away to the public-house, perfectly anxious to get rid
ef his last shilling, is no uncommon sight. What would we
think of a hungry man scattering bread upon the streets for
which he had travelled many a weary mile? We would
pronounce him insane; yet not a jot more insane is he than the
workman who toils all day, and can scarcely sleep soundly
at night for fear of being behind the bell-ringing in the
morning, and yet spends his earnings with as little reflection,
as if money, like the ancient manna, was to be had for the
gathering, or as if his being was bounded by this single day.
The man, or woman either, who is not careful of money,
rushes with open arms to embrace poverty; they await not his
coming, but, like the suicide in search of death, go forth to find
him. Poverty is the arch-enemy of man ;it enfeebles the body,
blunts the affections, demoralises the mind ; therefore, let us
guard against it by all lawful means. Between it and us let
there be war to extermination ; and upon our memories and
upon our actions be these truths branded, that the man who
misspends money is a traitor to his own life, health, and
liberty—fights under the banner of poverty, the great enemy of
his kind; but he who entrenches himself within the walla of a .


provident hank, overtops his adversary, and covers himself
with a shield, from behind which he can combat and conquer
that foe.
If you live, age must come with all its attendant wants and
infirmities. In that season of life many comforts are requisite
to sustain sinking nature which vigorous manhood requires not.
Age, even to those who have all that wealth can command, is a
time of weakness and weariness; but woe be to the poor old
man who has nothing wherewith to purchase the assistance
and the sympathy of his fellows, for experience teaches that
they must be bought, ay, and paid for in cash.
How painful it is to look upon an old worn-out man, with
dim eye, palsied hand, and enfeebled frame, striving with
tottering and uncertain step to earn a little bread,, and thereby
add a few days to his miserable existence.
Nature calls loudly to aching bones and stiffened sinews to
stop and repose, while necessity dashes the rowel of her spur
deep into the poor old creature’s side, and urges him on, till at
last he drops upon the verge of the only place of rest that has
ever been appointed for him—the grave.
Should he be forced to give in, and take refuge in a poor-
house a year or two before that welcome officer death comes
to change guard, and relieve this weary sentinel from his weary
round, he will soon find that it would have been better far had
his bones taken shelter in the grave than that all the ties which
bound him to life should be forcibly torn asunder, himself
looked upon as a burden to the land that bred him, an outcast
from society, an alien in the place of his birth—housed, yet
homeless.
In a place of this description, he wculd be allowed to go out
only a few hours once a month, to wander about and ascertain
how many of his few friends had, since his last visit, departed ;
or, like a ghost, take a glimpse at a world of which he now
forms no part.
Sunk though he be, he may still have a daughter or a
grandchild who loves him, and towards whom his spirit iu its
desolation yearns ; the hope of au occasional visit from whom
would dispel the hopeless feeling which is bowing him to the
grave, and be the means of keeping him alive, perhaps, for
years. No visitors have access here. Daughter and grand-
child are turned disappointed and weeping from the door.


Too old to form new habits, or to part with old ones, save
at the expense of life ; hope dead within him, and when she
dies, despair springs up alive from her ashes, he gradually sinks
under the unceasing torture of what is figuratively termed a
broken heart.
Improvident young men! how like you this picture ?
Examine it attentively. There is no flight of imagination
here ; believe me, it is drawn from the life.
It has been said very often that truth is stranger than
fiction. How much stranger than the wildest fiction is this
sad truth, that a mighty majority of young men, with the
prospect of old age and want open before them, never make a
single attempt to provide against those fast-coming evils !
“ Thou shalt have something for thy maintenance when
unable to work,” is a commandment which nature issues forth,
“ trumpet-tongued,” So pervading is this cry of nature, that
even a man bind and deaf must feel it through his remaining
senses, though circumstances prevent him from responding to
her call.
Young men, to you I would earnestly recommend deep
attention to this important subject You have the opportunity
and the power, and happy will it be for you if the will is not
found wanting Money, combined with character, is the lever
which must lift you into respectability and comfort, and this
money you must make and keep by your own exertions and
economy.
Those who spend their money as fast as they can earn it,
are continually hovering upon the brink of beggary ; and the
likelihood is, that they will at some period slip a foot and
tumble into the disreputable gulf. No doubt the want of
money in many cases may not be a fault; yet in all cases it is
a most grievous misfortune, a misfortune which I would
advise you to guard well against.
Poverty is a load which very few will offer to assist you in
carrying. Your humble friends will turn a cold shoulder to
you with the very consolatory remark that they have enough to
do with themselves ; and your rich ones will tell you to go and
make money as they did. Cultivate, above all earthly things,
a spirit of self-reliance ; be firm and true to yourselves, and you
will stand unscathed amid the deceit and falsehood of those
around you. Trust to your own energies ; lean upon no man.
And for this great purpose save money \ for,. noble as this


spirit is, it cannot stand upright without a prop to rest upon,
and this prop must be of gold ; therefore, again I say, save
money.
The sons of the noble and rich rise into wealth and power
through the money and influence of their friends; but you
must assist yourselves by your own industry and frugality, or
be drifted through life by a tide of privation and poverty
which will flow upon you to overwhelming.
Upon you, young men, in this movement, as well as in
every movement of a reclaiming tendency, 1 place my chief
hope ; and I would fain guard you against allurements which
dazzle the eyes of youth, so that they cannot see the deadly
venom of the serpent beneath the glitter of its painted skin.
Be careful how you spend the days of your youth. Youth
is the season in which you mix milk and honey, or wormwood
and gall, in the cup of life. The light reflected from a well-
spent youth gilds the gloom of years, and throws a cheering ray
even into the dark valley and shadow of death.
In this the outset of your career beware of forming
expensive habits. Habits of this description have a natural
tendency to lower the tone of the mind, to centre your
enjoyments in them to the exclusion of all the nobler promptings
of rational ambition, and makes you wallow on in sensuality
through life, like a sow in the mire.
Besides, your circumstances cannot afford them; you
cannot indulge in them without destroying your reputation for
morality and honesty; you cannot continue in them without
laying up a stock of remorse from which a stream of bitterness
will flow into all your after enjoyments, and make briers to
spring where flowers might have budded and blossomed.
Needless expense to you, in any form, is crime ; then how
much more criminal is it when that expense assumes the form
of drunkenness and debauchery ; robbing life’s short years of
its spring, and blasting the hope of its harvest; destroying the
constitution of mind and of body ; and bringing on that fearful
train of nervous disorder for which no physician has ever
found, or ever will find, a balm ; and in many cases throwing
back upon toil-worn parents those who should be a help and
a blessing, to be a burden and a curse !
Y'oung men ! tamper not with these bad habits in the vain
hope that yon can throw them off at pleasure, for when the
dear-bought experience of after years impels you to get rid erf


them, you will find them clinging to you a« the «kin cling* to
flesh, When you hear any old tippler say, “ I can lake it, or
I can want it ” do not believe him, he lies.
Man’s natural wants, in comparison with those which he ac-
quires, are few, and easily satisfied ; and happy would it be for
human nature if all classes of society confined their cravings
within their natural limits. There would be no magnificence
then, but at the same time there would be no destitution ; the
extremes of wealth and poverty would never meet; those
dangerous extremes,which, by coming into collision, have re-
duced countries to desolation and extinguished nations.
The fewer wants a man has the more independent is he of
his fellow-men, and the more provision can he make for the
time when distress may come. He who drinks water alone
labours not for the support of the brewer or distiller; and he
who uses no tobacco, shares not his earnings with its producer.
How careful it would make us of our earnings if we would
only consider how helpless, dependant, and wretched a man is
without money. During life he is shunned and disrespected ;
his death is looked upon with indifference, or very likely hailed
by some one as a relief. Contempt haunts him even to the very
grave’s mouth ; and with indecent haste be is huddled into the
earth, without even the cheap memorial of a grassy hillock to
mark the spot where the child of penury lies.
Self-preservation is nature’s first and strongest law, a law
which rules the actions of every sane person, and is only disre-
garded when insanity has rode rough-shod over reason.
Mere extinct rouses the brute to the instant exertion of all
its powers in obedience to this law in defence of life ; but when
the threatened danger is over, it relapses into its former supine-
ness.
But reason teacheth us that much more than such a fleeting
obedience is requisite for man. It is no figure of speech to say
that man comes naked into the world, for naked he literally
does come. Nature provides him with no ready-made clothing,
cooks no victuals for him. He cannot rise up like a sheep,
ready clothed in the morning, and nibble up his bed for break-
fast. Food and clothing, those great requisites which he can-
not exist without, must be provided for him by himself. For
this purpose forethought and labour are essentially necessary.
"Were he certain of always enjoying youth, health, and strength,
then, if the labour of each day provided for that day, all would


•CONOMY AND SAVINGS BANKS.
be well. But then sickness will come; age, if we live, must
come ; want of employment may come, for a man's own steadi-
ness of behaviour does not always secure him against want of
employment ; in this case he depends upon others as well as
himself, and if one of the upper links of society snaps, down
must go the under links of the chain.
Now, man, the sole inheritor of that proud attribute, reason,
if he wishes to lay claim to his glorious birthright, and distinguish
himself from those which have no such inheritance, must yield a
steady, rational obedience to nature's first law, not only by an
instinctive effort to preserve himself when violently attacked,
but also by a constant reasonable saving of part of his earnings
to free himself from the danger of future want —from want,
that sapper and miner of the human constitution, in infancy,
maturity, and age : that disease of which uncomplaining, un-
recorded thousands die yearly.
In the earlier and ruder stages of society, men mutually
supplied each other’s wants by exchanging one necessary for
another ; but as men gradually became more numerous and
more refined, new wants and luxuries arose, for the names of
which you will turn over nature’s catalogue of necessaries in
vain ; and this system of promiscuous exchange was found to be
attended with very serious inconvenience. Thgn gold and silver
were fixed upon as articles for which you could receive in ex-
change any other article, not on account of their intrinsic value,
for in that respect iron is immeasurably superior to both, but
owing to their beauty, durability, and above all, their scarcity.
Therefore, to ascertain the true value of money, and to ex-
pose the folly and ignorance displayed in traducing or wasting
it, we must look far beyond the mere metal of which it is com-
posed, and there we will see food and clothing, in all their
varieties ; comfortable, well furnished houses; books ; educa-
tion for grown men and children ; medicine and attendance for
the sick ; cordials for the old and weak ; with all the unlimited
profusion of delicacies and necessaries, which the labour of man
forces from the bosom or the bowels of the earth. These are
the true substances of money ; gold and silver are but their
representatives.
Young men, before leaving this subject, I feel that I ought
to say a few words on a deeply important matter, though in
truth I like not the task ; still it depends upon your conduct
in this matter whether you will ever be, or if you are, whether
you will continue to be deponitom in a provident bank.


No young man can bo too careful in the selection of a wife.
Upon the cast of this die. if his own conduct be correct, hangs
his future happiness or misery ; whether home is to be a place
of enjoyment or of punishment ; whether he is to be cheeied on
and assisted through life by the endearments of the sweetest and
surest of all friends, or thwarted, crossed, tortured by a living
thorn, which nothing but the hand of death can pluck from his
side.
A comfortable home is peculiarly necessary to a poor man.
A rich man can make a home anywhere ; but a poor man must
find it in the bosom of his wife and family, or, like a second
Adam, be driven forth from what ought to have been a second
Paradise, naked as to all earthly enjoymeirt, and with the damn-
ing consciousness of his nakqdneas paralysing every effort, and
pressing like an incubus upon his heart.
No working man’s home can ever be comfortable unless his
wife be thoroughly imbued with a spirit of economy ; this spirit
must shed its influence over all her actions, or a ' want of the
common necessaries of life will be the certain result.
An improvident woman will find means to spend in two or
three days what it takes her husband a whole week of unre-
mitting toil to earn; and then the spirit of an y honourable-
minded man is crushed by the low, mean, and disreputable
shifts that must be resorted to to keep themselves alive till
pay-day comes round. On they go in this unvaried round till
the end of their miserable journey, unchanged and unchange-
able. hxtragavance in woman is often the result of mere care-
lessness, which experience, unfortunately, seldom seems to cure.
Accusation and recrimination naturally follow this line of con-
duct ; the evil passions which lurk in the bosom of every man
and woman are roused, mutual esteem, love, all the affections of
our nature are banished from that doomed house. No working
man can save one shilling without the consent and the co-opera-
tion of his wife; he may lay a few shillings past, but unless she
goes hand in hand with him they are not saved ; for although
the money may be out of her reach, she can run him into
debt, and the creditor will force it from him,
1 sympathise not with that spirit of romance which repre-
sents woman as always the victim. Were a strict impartial in-
quiry to be instituted into those numerous abodes, poverty-
stricken through mismanagement and waste, woman would be
ound to bear her full share of the blame.


If any one of you doubt the truth of what I say, let him try
the experiment, and he will soon find himself furnished with a
library of unsettled pass-books, and as for newspapers and
periodicals, they will be abundantly supplied by a sheriff’s
officer.
There is also a fatal facility of disposition often attendant
upon the young, a morbid fear of offending, which prevents
them from firmly resisting the solicitations of those who may
be disposed to lead them aside. Many are thus led even against
their own judgment and inclination.
This proeeeds from an amiability of character which, how-
ever praiseworthy in the abstract, yet, like many other virtues,
when carried to excess, runs into vice. Thus, generosity may
be stretched into injustice, religious feeling into bigotry and in-
tolerance, and love of liberty into hatred of necessary subjection
to the law.
This description of vice is much more dangerous than if it
proceeded from the direct source of evil; because those who
practise it conceive themselves treading the narrow path of
virtue without suspecting that it has merged into the broad
highway of crime.
Now, young men, I am happy to say that I can furnish you
with a protection against the evils consequent upon this easiness
of temper; can v teach you a word of power, which, if properly
pronounced, will shut the mouths of your tempters, and make
them desist from making further attacks upon you.
There is not a smaller word in the language, yet for strength
and expression it stands proudly alone. A pigmy in appear-
ance —in moral power a giant; an infant may prattle it, yet few
young men can speak it at the proper time, or in the proper
place.
This wonderful little word is named No.
But, recollect that its chief power lies in the tone of voice
in whmh it is sounded ; you may say “ no,” anc yet make it
evident to your hearers that you almost mean “ yes.”
To make it available you must pronounce it firmly, em-
phatically, and with the falling inflection of the voice. This
will show that your resolution is fixed, the sentence finished,
the sense complete.


1 would anxiously advise you who are deficient in this res-
pect to commence practice immediately; repeat and repeat it
again till it becomes habitual to you.
There is more wisdom shown in the proper application of
these two letters than is contained in many a large volume. By
wisdom I mean knowledge that can be applied to some bene-
ficial purpose.
There are many kinds of knowledge which are not wisdom*
nor ever likely to become so. A man who has studied the
nature and effects of earthquakes certainly possesses that
quality in no shallow degree, but until he can by its aid put a
stop to the quaking, he has no claim through it to be called wise.
In the unhesitating use of this monosyllable lies true
courage. I have often heard a moral coward say “ yes,” while
it was evident to me that the desire to say “no ” was thrilling
through every fibre of his frame.
Armed with this talisman.you may fearlessly take the field.
It will protect head, hand, and heel; and, like Fitz James's
blade, answer the double purpose of sword and shield.
Many a kind-hearted young man, ay, and woman too, has
gone headlong to perdition, through their inability firmly to
say the simple word No
However, the capability of saying “no” to others is not
sufficient; you must also learn, upon all necessary occasions, to
give a decided negative to yourselves. This is termed self-
denial ; a most useful accomplishment, and one which, if prac-
tised in youth, will be infinitely beneficial to you in the suc-
ceeding stages of your journey through life.
If you listen to all the absurd schemes, or allow yourselves
to be saddled with all the burdens and expenses that self would
impose, you had better draw your first breath as a slave. A
practical slave you will be, and there is no system of slavery
more galling than that exercised over a man by his own pas-
sions and habits.
From this description of slavery there is no escape, for you
carry the driver and the lash within your own bosom.
If you would ever have it in your power to save money, and
thereby ensure comfort, respect, and independence, learn to
say “ no ” to yourselves as well as to others.


ItCONOMT AND SAVINGS BANKS. -b
A. habit of saving, contracted in youth, beneficially influence*
every circumstance through life, smoothes the current of exis-
tence, and often stands firm as an adamantine wall, when much
nobler principles are swept away like webs of gossamer before
the hot breath of temptation. This habit does more than re-
move many a heart-withering embarrassment, does more than
block up many an avenue that leads to sin and to punishment,
for it prevents their formation. In combating evils which our
own conduct has called into existence, although we may ultimately
conquer, still there is time and there is energy lost in the con-
test, both equally precious and equally irredeemable. It is an
inglorious warfare. Even the victor’s brow is darkened with
the shadow of shame; there is neither fame nor fortune to be
found on such a battle-field. Prodigality and wickedness are
intimately connected. The majority of vices are expensive ;
therefore the saving man, although be were actuated by no
higher motive, avoids them.
Our necessities are bounded by a circle drawn by the hand
of nature. Within that circle lies morality, industry, sobriety,
plenty, prudence, peace, and legitimate objects* whereon to
lavish the natural affections of the heart. Beyond that
circle lies the limitless land of extravagance, where unveiled im-
morality glories in her shame, and unblushingly holds her
strumpet face to heaven; wWe men, cannibal-like, feed upon
the ignorant and unwary of their own race; where the idiot
laugh of the hunger-stricken, skeleton-like drunkard, falls upon
the ear like the sound of revelry proceeding from a tomb Jle-
pentance and remorse are the clouds which overshadow this
birth-place of dishonesty, this fatherland of crime, and the drops
which they distil are bitter tears. .
A. person who is careless about the manner in which he
spends money, is generally careless in all the relations of life ;
whereas the person who puts his money to a proper use is in
general the very reverse. A very excellent plan for acquiring
and habituating the mind to a habit of order, and reducing sav-
ing to a system, is for every young man to keep a small cash-
book, and faithfully enter every item of expenditure under its
proper name. If at any time he has parted with hjs money for
an article the name of which he feels reluctant to write down,
he may safely conclude that there was at least no necessity for
the purchase, and that it would be better to let such bargains
alone for time to come. By entering his income on the left-
hand page of the book, and his expenditure on the right, he
could at any time, by summing up and balancing, ascertain
whether he Wl lost or given away any money of which he had


taken no account. It would also tell at the end of the year, by
the amount of earnings, if any time had been lost, and how
much, and according to its report there would be cause for con-
gratulation or repentance, which might lead to reformation.
In advocating, to the best of our ability, the cause of saving
and of savings banks, we hope that no one will suppose that we
consider them a panacea against all the evils incident to humanity
in the perilous journey through life, or that we hold up a savings
bank book as a passport to heaven ; still we know that they
lighten the journey, and protect the feet from the flints that lie
thick on their path, and we do believe that their tendencies are
decidedly heavenward. They cannot prevent sin, but they can
check its course ; they cannot strike the dart from the uplifted
hand of death, but they can assuage the anguish which accom-
panies the blow ; they cannot uplift the curse which condemns
man to water the briar-and-thorn-bearing earth with sweat and
tears, but they can break its force and qualify its bitterness.
Savings banks provide in all cases against every emergency
which money can meet, avert, or alleviate, so far as can be
accomplished by the amount deposited. They exert a beneficial
influence, not only on the worldly circumstances, but also on
the spiritual nature of man. Each man stands there on his
own feet, and thus a feeling of self-reliance is created. They
reduce casual saving to a system, and form a habit of regular
economy, which acts as a check upon intemperance, and the
disease and misery which are always found to follow in its
train. They inspire self-respect and a pleasurable conscious-
ness of having done right, which sweetens while it ennobles
man’s nature, and renders him better, and consequently more
useful and more happy. iSelf-respect is one of the most
ennobling qualities in our nature; it peeps forth in the clean
face and polished shoe, and boldly manifests itself in turning
with disgust and disdain from all that tends to dishonour. Their
beneficial influence upon the worldly circumstances is so
marked and decided, that wilful blindness alone can shut it out
from view. Still they have their opponents, and also their
lukewarm friends ; but the principle involved is too powerful
to be put down by open opposition, and too sacred to be
‘‘ damned by faint praise.”
One plea urged against savings banks is, that if government,
fails to meet its engagements, the money deposited in national
security banks will be lost. This objection applies with at least
equal force to every bank, to every commercial establishment,
and to every individual transaction in which one man has to


trust to another, indeed, we can conceive no security equal
to government security ; for it is an embodiment of both the
P Tf - P ° Wer ° f the countl 7- The defrauding of
this Tin Id h 1 ° r ’ To C ? Se ’ but es P ecia % in such a case as
TiTrTir aCt dishonour and dishonesty to which the
Tho snir!t wt pa i St hlstor T of this nation give the lie.
i he spirit that feed the slave, and yet paid the slaveholder for
that property to which that spirit denied his moral right, is still
. Ching ° Ver , the work ing man’s savings, and will
kee P the trust committed to his care inviolate. The government
who would touch or tamper with so sacred a fund asSTodd
seize U p °n land, rob dwellings, and plunder churches. Some
people ate so very sharp-sighted, that they imagine they can
see a long way under the horizon. A gentleman of S
description has lately discovered that this earth of ours has an
infinitesimal chance, at some infinitely distant date, of being
oT m S UVe ! S t J ro l ug , h s Pace, by a stroke from the tail
of a rebellious comet, which nas broken loose from the laws of
nature, and goes roaming through the boundless expanse, intent
htl 1’ T Joking up of the honour of the
British nation, and the breaking up of the “great globe itself ”
are occurrences not at all likely to take place in our day, we
them not be at tbe trouble of dlstu rbing our minds much about
Another and more widely diffused objection against these
institutions is, that they tend to foster an avericious feeling in
the minds of work.ng men, and many appear apprehensive
i da^ gt l ro i 18 consequences accruing therefrom. They may
calm their fears. Even were a few misers produced, they are
the most harmless creatures alive, and practically the most
unselfish ; for they labour and hoard for others, not for them-
selves. bchools, and even churches, have been built by that
which they have left behind them , and, taking all things into
consideration, we are npt quite certain that the world would be
anything the worse of having a more of them. However
3 T th6n i We • neV6r can have i all our necessities;
inclinations, and passions, run counter to it, and raise a barrier
which tew sane minds will attempt to overleap. In the other
extreme, in profusion, lies the danger; it enervates the mind
and drains the resources of individuals and of nations, and lav
them prostrate and powerless at the feet of the foe. If any
one of these apprehensive gentlemen wishes to find a real live
specimen of a working miser, I would say to him, do not go to
a savings bank to seek him; for this reason, the man was never
within a bank aoor in his life-time, nor has he the slightest


intention of orer being there. To allow hi* money to go out of
his own possession, under any pretence, would be to defeat the
end and aim of his existence. The miser hides his treasure
where he can steal to it at dead of night ; his pleasure lies in
counting and handling his gold ; in feasting his eyes upon it;
in haviiTg it within his reach, and in prowling around the hole
wherein he has has hid his soul. It frets and fevers him
through life and neither upholds nor consoles him in death.
Still it is the “god of his idolatry” to the last. This man labours
under disease of the mind; and neither savings bank nor any
other institution can either cause or cure it. Instances ot this
kind are indeed very rare ; we have known very many im-
provident working men, but never knew any that earned saving
to an extreme, save one ; and the truth is, that he hurt him self
and others much less by his saving, than they did by their
spending. The difference, so far as regards society, beween a
wasteful person, and one that carries saving to an extreme, is
that the former uses all that he produces, and more it he can get
it • while the latter produces much more than he makes use ot.
Strike a balance between them, and you will discover that the
one is a gain to society ; while, it will not be the other s fault,
if he be not a dead loss, This class, however, is desperately
scarce, and does not appear to multiply at all in proportion to
the multiplication of savings banks. Indeed, so great curiosities
are they accounted, that when one dies, we get a biography of
him in every newspaper, and a description of every nook and
cranny in which he had hid his cash, so vivid, as to make us
think that we see the glitter of the metal at the bottom ot the
hole Were the departure of every spendthrift so chronicled,
paper would rise in the market, and a supplemental sheet be
required from each newspaper. Those who would discourage
savings banks, because they think that such institutions may
have a tendency to produce an undue love of money in the
minds of a number, are certainly not aware how very compre-
hensive their views are, and what a sweeping revolutionary
description of logic they deal in. In plain terms, it stands
. Savings banks are apt to engender an avaricious feeling
in the minds °of a number of depositors ; therefore, let every
bank door be shut. Religion has a tendency to run into bigotry
among the ignorant and narrow-minded ; therefore, pull down
every church in the kingdom. People sometimes die under
medical treatment; therefore, put an extinguisher upon the
whole faculty. What a development of the bump ot destruc-
tiveness does some people’s craniums carry, while they imagine
themselves to be the most orderly and tender-hearted mortals
alive. We wish thtw f*utle»en kad tees, we often


A.m> lA.TIITfrI USU 90
hare, a subscription sheet for the relief of the widow and
orphans of a deceased fellow-workman, with a long list of
names appended, a goodly proportion of whom had given their
last shilling, and many who had not a shilling to” give, had
borrowed one for the purpose from some one more provident
than themselves, and marked the keenness to give which
pervaded that band, they would have been convinced that
avence was a plant quite uncongenial to that soil.
Heaven has abundantly gifted man with the will to assist
the forsaken ; saving bestows the power, without which the
will is a soulless abstraction ; and, instead of weakening, adds
vigour to that will. Prodigality not only destroys the° power
to relieve, but multiplies to an unrelievable extent the objects
requiring relief, and opens up one of the most dismal pages in
the history of human nature—a page which shows ignorance,
starvation, cruelty, and crime chronicled in characters of misery
and blood. There is a superabundance of the raw material
necessary to produce all that is required for the comfortable
subsistence of man, placed at his disposal by the hand of his
Creator,; also a superabundance of human sinew and human
energy; if rightly applied, to manufacture this material into
all that is requisite for all men. Pride and ambition pervert
the labour and material given by God for the preservation of
the life of man, into instruments for the destruction of his race.
Instead of the spade, the ploughshare, and the pruning-hook
up starts the fiend-invented bayonet, the glittering sword, the
murderous tube, whose sulpherous breath is death.
Mounted squadrons dash through fields radiant with summer
light, and teeming with vegetable life; the armed hoof of the
war-horse cuts through blade and root; artillery, with their
iron-shod wheels, complete the devastation; ruin reigns
triumphant; lank hunger sits grinning upon the naked field
that would have waved with a golden harvest, and the ground
lies desolate and bare as the desert of Sahara. Mad prodigality
recklessly tosses into the air that which would have turned the
lone widow’s wail and hungry orphan’s moan into a song of
gratitude and joy, and insanely rejoices to see it swept away by
the winds and whirlwinds of destruction. Thus man Creates
poverty and nurtures its demon brood, then turns himself round
and impiouslv charges heaven with the accursed deed Labour
is heaven’s decree ; poverty is man’s own.


CHAPTER IX.
SABBATH LABOUR.
Ik examining this subject, we take our stand upon the firm basis
of necessity ; and, consequently, neither Christian nor infidel
can escape; we will take no party or sectarian view, but look
broadly at our subject as it applies to universal human nature.
Many seem to think that there is no harm in a slight
infringement upon the Sabbath rest, although, taken as a whole,
they would incline to think that it should be held sacred To
these lukewarm people we would say that nature never halts;
that backward or forward man, and every circumstance that
unto him pertains, must bo driven ; that the zenith and the
nadir of the moral world are alike unto us invisible.
The subject, thus considered, narrows itself into two plain
questions :
Is Sabbath rest an actual necessity ? and,
If necessary, does there exist a counter necessity strong
enough to compel, and, by so doing, to justify, men in following
their ordinary occupations upon Sabbath ?
Some may throw themselves upon the right which they think
they possess to sell Sabbath time if it so pleases them. If
these men can detach themselves so entirely from society as
directly or indirectly to injure no one but themselves by this or
any other mode of procedure, the abstract right to do what
they please with themselves may be conceded; but if their
conduct injures another who refuses to follow their example,
that other has a right to oppose and restrain them, and every
human being who chooses has an equal right to assist him.
Is Sabbath rest a necessity ?
It is ; for every man who has a just regard for his mental
and bodilv health, is bound to keep his mind and body in a
state of as high health and efficiency as his circumstances will
permit.- And this can only be attained by having regular and
stated intervals of leisure and of rest. To accomplish this the
seventh day is required ; one hour or two each evening will not
do it, nor yet uncertain scraps of time thrown now and again
at random, like bread to a dog. The seventh day is required
that the mind and body may arrive at their full growth, that


SABBATH LABOUR, ]()]
their powers may exist unimpaired and vigorous till their
natural course be run ; and in cases of very hard wrought men
J t m barely sufficient, many of them devoting the greater part
of the day to sleep, not through laziness, but exhaustion. 4.
full day of rest in the seven to toil-worn man is thus a poasitive
nccGssity.
Were the Sabbath not in existence, necessity would force us
to make it; and how joyfully would even those who are honour-
ing jt very little at present welcome the glorious stranger, and
proudly claim it all as their own.
At no period of our national history was the Sabbath rest a
mattm- of greater necessity than it is at the present day • nor
is there among all the earth’s inhabitants a nation which re-
quires it more than we. Self-interest should make us guard it
jealously for ourselves, and a much nobler feeling incite us
carefully to watch over it for the sake of the unborn of those
whom we have never seen—will never see. The visual organs
of that man are very imperfect who can see nothing beyond
himself; and we really cannot conceive how any one who would
refuse to work himself upon Sabbath, can consistently or con-
scientiously patronise any conveyance which causes another to
work on that day. In these men’s breasts the feeling of justice
must not only be blind, but also deaf and dumb
Ihe second question is, Does there exist a counter necessity
strong enough to compel, and consequently to justify men in
following their ordinary occupations upon Sabbath ?
Before answering this question, let us examine if there be
anything inherent in the nature of man which incites or inclines
him to labour. If there be, we cannot trace it; for we see that
man in or near to a state of nature never thinks of tilling the
ground or applying himself to any description of systematic
labour till lured to it by a bribe, or fofced to it by the lash or
by hunger. He will hunt when it suits him willingly enough •
but it is natural for a man to chase everything that will run’
were it but a mouse. ’
In civilised society we also find that the young require to
be trained to application and confinement, of whatever descrip-
tion it may be ; that it requires a powerful motive to bind i hem
to labour when they merge into manhood, and that they as it
were spring into the arms of every opportunity which they can
find for a day’s recreation.
The pleasure which accompanies labour is derived from
habit, not from nature; or, it may be, from the hope of obtain-


ing some desirable object which cannot be attained otherwise
than by labour. Thus we see that nature has implanted no
desire for labouring upon the Sabbath-day within man; there-
fore, the plea lies entirely between man and necessity ; nature
disowns it.
Force alone can constitute a necessity sufficiently powerful
to compel or to justify men in pursuing their ordinary occupa-
tions upon Sabbath, the Sabbath being clearly necessary for the
full development of the mental and physical qualities of man.
However, in this case it must be allowed that other agencies
besides actual violence come under the term force. Does any
agency exist in this country powerful enough to compel men to
work on Sabbath, whether they will or no ?We really know of
none.
?so political law empowers the government to force men to
work upon any day ; no civil law gives the employer the
slightest dominion over the employed. The manners and
customs of our country are quite opposed to Sabbath labour,
and the moral feeling of the nation holds it in utter detestation
and scorn.
It may bo said, that an impossibility of earning seven days’
provision in six days would constitute a necessity for working
upon the seventh.' This does look formidable, but it only
looks so ; it is not so in reality. The truth is, that a man will
accomplish more work in twelve months by working six days in
the week, than he possibly could in the same period by working
seven; and the severer the labour upon body or mind, the
greater would be the deficiency at the end of the year. A
week, or a month either, is no true criterion to judge by ; but
allow time for a fail trial, a few months would suffice, and it
would be found that the man who could not earn a sufficiency
in six days, would be still further from the mark by working
seven. ,
But no such necessity exists among British workmen ; and
were wages ever so low', working on Sabbath would be a moat
effectuaf method to sink them still lower. The sure way to
enhance the price of any article is to make it scarce.
Although men could live and fatten like cattle without a
Sabbath, they ought not to give up the greatest privilege which
they possess to suit the convenience of any man. Are men sent
into this world to be content with bare life, and find nothing
but toil between the cradle and the coffin?
We see that wild animals do not require to spend all their
time searching for the means of keeping themselves alive ; and


whr ihould m*n { w ho wsumes himself t<J b.» suoh si favourite of
heaven, toil on without intermission that he may live. Our
enslaved ancestors, before they had well shaken the feudal
yoke from their shoulders, claimed and received that mighty
boon, the Sabbath; and now some of their free, their en-
lightened, descendants, are bending their shoulders and resuming
the yoke.
The letter-press printers of Glasgow have published a
defence of themselves from an accusation brought against them
by one of their employers. It is a strange document, mourn-
fully strange; we have read it with bitterness of heart.
Printers, men whose hands are ever dipping into the fountain
of knowledge ; men who supply the world with the most efficient
means ever known for acquiring wisdom, legislating, making
provision for Sabbath labour, and 'setting a price upon the
Sabbath’s precious head as coolly and systematically as a slave-
dealer values a slave.
This slave-penned page quietly speaks of from ninety to
one hundred hours labour in one week, as if this slow but
certain sort of self-murder was almost a duty, and not an
unnatural crime ; and styles a speculation for making money a
necessity; a speculation where the cheering and redeeming
influence of home, the training of children, the social and moral
government of families, individual health and life, and, to crown
this sacrifice of slaves, the Sabbath is oflered up upon the altar
of the insatiate fiend, mammon—A necessity ! and of course
they do not know how to get rid of it. We will tell them.
Sell yourselves, body, soul, and spirit; wives, children, and
all, to your masters, and you will get back your Sabbath, and
ten or twelve hours labour for six days in the week will be all
that will be required of you. Your owners could not afford to
allow you to work longer than this ; if they did, they would lose
you.
It is not to every society of men that w'e could offer this
advice with the expectation that it might perhaps be favourably
entertained. But men who can rend a limb from this blessed
body of their best friend, their saviour—the Sabbath—and
unblushingly sell the torn member for “ two shillings,” are
quite capable of selling themselves or anything else.
It is a new edition of an old story nearly two thousand years
old ; but the ancient Judas was a greedy villain, thirty pieces of
silves was his price; the modern Judas is much more reasonable,
his pries is “ two.” ,


“Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of
Askelon,” that educated men have sold thir birthright for such
a watery mess of pottage as this. Men, men,
“ You have the letters Cadmus gave.
Think you he meant them for the slave ? ”
Protracted labour implies dishonesty in the workman, and
ignorance in the employer. The man is dishonest to his own
nature, robbing it of that, without which it cannot long exist,
rest; and he is unjust to his employer, taking wages for hang-
ing half asleep over his work when nature fails, as she will and
must do. “ Over hours ” may be inevitable at times, but the
employer who does not do what he can to prevent the necessity,
or embarks in a business in which they must be habitual, is
certainly not aware that he, to a certainty, will pay money for
which he cannot receive a fair equivalent in labour. A most
respectable and extensive engineering establishment in the
town of Greenock was ruined by “ over hours.” Out of a
“ squad ” of say twelve men, two would keep a look-out, four
would sleep, and six would keep their hammers going; and
indeed, taking the hours which these men were often required
to work into consideration, it would not be easy to tell how they
could have got on otherwise
Even were we to look upon man merely as the uppermost
link in the wondrous chain of organisation and of life, was the
spirit material as the body, and like the body doomed un-
consciously to “ rejoin the universe,” still the extent of the
sacrifice would baffle calculation.
Disguise it as we may, we are for six days in the week actual
slaves to each other ; each man toiling for his neighbour, and
his neighbour for him ; employers and employed all bondsmen.
But the seventh day is the Sabbath ; the day, the only day, on
which all men may lift their eyes to heaven free ; the day on
which every toil-worn arm and exhausted brain may draw new
energy and life fresh from the sparkling fountain of freedom ; -
and dead to the sound of dear freedom’s voice must the heart of
that man be who would barter it for gold, or sell it for silver.
Men cannot justly cast the whole odium upon employers.
’Tis the slave who makes and upholds the tyrant; withdraw the
upholding shoulders of the slave, and down comes the tyrant
and his throne. It is the arm of a slave with which the tyrant
strikes. Despotism can exist only under the ribs of slavery.
I am neither enthusiast nor fanatic; I would not make a
prison of our homes on Sabbath, nor ch*se the cheerful smile


from youth or childhood’s face upon that day; but I see an
unmingled, a continuous stream of blessings flowing manward
from the sacred source ; clearly see it through the cool, calm
atmosphere of reason, observation, and experience, not through
the dark medium of bigotry, or the fire-tinged vapours of a
heated brain.
I see the Sabbath like a full-freighted ship laden gunwale
deep with the choicest blessings for the spirit and body of man;
and may the arm be withered to the marrow that would point a
gun to shatter a plank or splinter a spar.
The slightest encroachment upon man’s right to the Sabbath
ought to be instantly repulsed. Give the encroaching monster
one minute, and he will soon claim and swallow hours ; it is his
nature to progress.
Every man should bring the full force of his moral influence
into the field to protect this precious day. It is priceless ; it is
invaluable ; it is worth more than the highest price which mortal
man can pay—blood, aye, blood.
CHAPTER X.
SUPERSTITION.
Superstition is based upon a belief in the existence of super-
natural beings who are independent of, and mock at, the laws
which regulate and govern the material world, and who possess
the power of exercising a malign influence over the present and
future destinies of man. Objects, whose nature is a mystery,
and whose power is undefined and unlimited, inspire the mind
with a more soul-subduing fear than the most dreadful reality.
To appease or propitiate these infernals, the believers in
them have ever been ready to commit the most horrid acts of
cruelty upon their fellow-men, and to consign even the immortal
spirit to endless punishment. To escape this fearful destiny,
Superstition’s votaries have subjected themselves to self-
torture in every conceivable form, have renounced society, and
denied themselves the comforts and necessaries of life; reversed
nature, as far as in them lay, and turned even the blessing of
life itself into a curse. To sum it up in a few words, superstition
is fiend-worship, and its votaries or victims are worshippers of a
fiend.


Proteus-like, it assumes many a form, manifests itself in
many a degree. It may be seen witb thrones under its feet,
arrayed with more than regal pomp, endowed with more tban
regal power, thundering its spirit-blasting decrees into tbe ears
of terror-stricken nations; and you may find it in the mud-
hovel, sitting among ashes, clad in rags, shivering with hunger
and cold, and yet full of life and venom, deficient in nothing but
power.
Under the influence of superstition, men have made unto
themselves idols of wood or stone, and bowed themselves down
and worshipped the senseless blocks ; others have paid brutal
adoration to the most hideous and venomous forms of animal
life, and the blood-thirsty have conjured up a reflection of their
own dark spirits, and offered human sacrifices to please the
crimson shadow. Amid the glitter of Roman civilization,
which, while it polished the outward man till he shone like a
marble statue, left the heart as hard and cold as a statue’s
marble breast, we find men grossly deifying their fellow-mortals;
while others more sph’itualised were raising altars to the honour
of an unknown god. Sun, moon, and stars, the unseen spirit of
the storm, fire, earth, and water, have all been objects of trust
and adoration.
There are two certain methods by which a people may be
enslaved : by force and by superstition. The victim of force,
the conquered patriot, may still cherish the desire for freedom
within the recesses of his own breast, and secretly exult in the
thought that his sword may yet flash victorious in the face of
his country’s foes; that the land of his birth may yet be
enrolled among the nations that are free.
But the superstition-fettered slave recoils from the whisper-
ings of the spirit of freedom, and regards them as the secret
promptings of the fiend, looks upon every rivet in his fetters as
a holy thing and would strike down the arm that was raised to
set him free.
Superstition mocks at reason, takes refuge in the darkness
of the supernatural, and the torch of scientific truth alone can
drive him from his den. Superstition still retains power even
after belief in the truth of his teachings is for ever gone.
Whoever has been enthralled, bears the mark of the chain for
life.
The origin of superstition in a most dangerous and deadly
form may possibly be traced to the desire to pry into futurity
which characterises and possesses the untrained, untaught mind,


Man naturally seeks for a cause for every effect which comes
under his observation. Ignorance of the laws of nature pre-
cludes him from finding it on earth, and he is then prepared to
take counsel from beings of another world.
Designing men take advantage of this feeling, represent
themselves as in communion with the unknown world, and
open-mouthed ignorance rushes to them to gain a knowledge of
its future destiny. This we take to be the origin of witch-craft,
a belief in which has sent many thousands of men, women, and
children to death by torture. We may lament over this, but we
cannot wonder at any amount of cruelty which superstition may
compel ignorance to perform, when we know that at the close
of the seventeenth century a professor in the University of
Glasgow wrote and published a book in which witchcraft is
treated as an established fact, and the most heart-rending cases
of cruelty and murder defended as in strict accordance with the
decrees of God and the dictates of human justice. Something
later than this, we also find men whose memories are still held
in reverence, lamenting over the repeal of the act which com-
manded the perpetration of these horrible murders, as a national
sin, a direct breach of the law of God, and deserving of a
national punishment. At length, when fires were blazing in
every corner, men whose strong minds had broke loose from
the trammels of superstition got heart-sick of this inhuman
butchery, and, at great risk to themselves—for those who
defended the accused ran a serious risk of sharing their fate—
got the lawgivers to arrest the effusion of blood, though the
popular belief remained unchanged, and in many of the secluded
districts of this country it remains an article of sincere belief
unto this day.
We still occasionally find a horse-shoe nailed to the main-
mast of some old ship, to prevent her from foundering in a
wizard-raised squall; and an old farmer may yet be found
rivetting the same iron charm to the lintel of his byre or stable
door, to protect his live stock from the deadly glance of an old
woman’s eye, whose cat and herself he rather more than suspects
of carrying on a clandestine correspondence with the regions
below, without the aid of post-office or postage stamp. In our
distant glens, a Highland girl may yet be seen sewing a charm
of rowan-tree leaves into her bodice, and then believing herself
safe from witchcraft’s power; and so she is, as long as her
boddice and her faith in rowan-tree leaves hold firm. Still, it
would be better could she discard her belief in both the evil and
the antidote ; but she cannot; the spirit of superstition loves to
linger in the deep glen and in the mountain gorge. It would


almost appear that some responding chord in human nature
vibrates strangely in unison with this delusion. Even the most
confirmed scepticism will, under certain circumstances, resolve
itself into a mingled feeling of doubt and dread.
A young man, a native of a town in the west, had occasion
to reside for a considerable time in a very secluded and lonely
portion of the country ; and as his quarters were more than
sufficiently dreary, he sometimes passed an evening at a house
where there was more company, distant about three miles from
his own lodgings, and where he was always greeted with a
hearty welcome.
One evening, while a number of visitors from an island at a
considerable distance were present, the discourse turned upon
an old man, a native of the island, whom they held up as a
famous dispenser of most efficient charms, written charms ; and
the young women of the house were strongly recommended to
lose no time in getting possession of one each, as they were far
superior to mountain ash or anything else. The young man
was not quite certain whether they were in jest or earnest, till
the subject changed to witchcraft, when, to his astonishment —
for they were sensible, intelligent people upon ordinary subjects
—he discovered that young and old were “ sturdy stanch ”
believers in the doctrine. With a want of tact which would
have been inexcusable in an older man, he first laughed at them,
then tried to reason them out of so absurd a belief. It was, of
course, a vain attempt; you will convert no one by scoffing at
their faith, however impious or irrational it may be, but arouse
a spirit of blind and determined opposition to your doctrine, and
a hatred that would kill, if it dared, towards yourself.
Had they not seen the effects of witchcraft _ from their
infancy! Had not their forefathers believed in it, and pro-
tected themselves against it for ages ; and had they not witches
much nearer than they would wish them to be at the present
time; and if he would take the trouble of stepping into the
byre, he would find a cow there which could tell something
about witchcraft.
One very cool old lady, who had not spoken before, said that
she pitied his ignorance very much, and wondered in what kind
of a heathenish place he had been brought up. Another
wondered what kind of a woman his mother was that had not
taught him better ; and a third fervently wished that she had
him at home with her, and she would convince him that witch-
craft was no subject for laughing at.


Here he was, poor fellow, fairly conquered, disgracefully
beaten out of the field with all his scientific knowledge, by tbr Q e
most decidedly unscientific old women, and in the height of h;s
chagrin, he impiously (as it must have appeared unto them)
declared that he did not care sixpence for ail the witches that
ever existed or ever would exist. This brought the business to
a climax ; there he sat a Luther among the monks, a Galileo
among the anti-earth revolvers, a self-convicted heretic among
the true orthodox children of holy mother church.
At length the old lady who had so fervently (and charitably,
we hope) wished that she had him at home to convert him to the
true faith, drew herself up to her full height—and an extra-
ordinary height she was —and like a Pythoness under the
influence of inspiration, foamed forth a benediction or male-
diction, of which he only recollected the last words ; these were:
Go, for the living and the dead are waiting; ” “ which means,
my worthy landlady and the salmon trout which she promised
to have for supper,” said the young man, as he took his hat and
left the house. This coolness was in a slight degree assumed;
the old woman had shaken not his belief, but his nerves a little,
and he took his lonely road with less freedom than he cared to
acknowledge to himself. •
Three-fourths of the road lay between an arm of the sea and
a pine forest. The forest itself was enshrouded in impenetrable
darkness, and the black shade of the pines rendered their side of
the road as black as themselves ; indeed, the eye could not dis-
tinguish where the road and the forest met. The other side was
different; the sea throws no shadow ; so the water and the road
were both discernible. He had not travelled far in the gloom
till he began to wonder if there could be “ more things in heaven
and earth than what was dreamed of in his philosophy.” Could
the tall old woman herself be a witch ! This idea was accompanied
by a very perceptible side movement towards the water. He
tried to put it off with a laugh ; it would not do, the laugh was
a miserable failure. He had not gone much farther till he began
distinctly to understand that he was giving the wood the widest
berth possible; the inglorious fact was indisputable, for the
wood lay to the left, and his right foot was regularly splashing in
the water. He found a momentary relief in thinking that a
“running stream they daurna cross” The relief, however,
was but momentary, for he instantly recollected that a branch
of the sea, seven miles broad, could scarcely be called a running
stream, and that walking alongside of it was not exactly cross-
ing. It was merely a false association of ideas which the sound
of his foot in the water had called up.


He now heard the bleating of sheep upon the road. This
was a welcome sound, for he never had heard the names of
sheep and witch in any way connected ; nor had he ever read,
no, not even in Professor Sinclair’s “Satan’s Invisible World
Displayed,” of Satan having the slightest hankering after
mutton. In fact, the sheep was almost the only animal that, in
his present state of mind, stood, like Caesar’s wife, above
suspicion ; so, for companion’s sake, he drove them before him,
gently drove them, for fear they should run off and leave him
once more alone.
By the time that he reached home with his body guard,
companionship had rendered him considerably bolder, and he
now felt rather ashamed of himself ; so when leaving the sheep,
he took off his hat, and making a low bow, thus addressed
them : —“ Farewell, my very dear brethren; and in withdrawing
myself from the flock, I feel convinced that I do not leave a
greater sheep behind me,”
Early impressions may slumber, but cannot die; under
certain circumstances they will arise and show their power in
spite of reason, judgment, experience, or belief. This person
had been often told in his childhood about a “ brownie ” that
had wrought many a good night’s work among the corn in his
grandfather’s barn ; and had been allowed in his boyhood to
pick up a general knowledge of, and a belief of the same
description in the existence of witches, fairies, water-kelpies,
spunkies, and such like, without having it particularly explained
to him whether spunkies and such things were true or false.
But the “ brownie,” till he came to be capable of judging for
himself, was with him beyond a doubt; for, although it had
disappeared long before his day, the barn was still standing
wherein it carried on its nightly labours, and consumed an
enormous quantity of oatmeal cakes and cheese, the only food
or fee which a “ brownie ” was ever known to accept.
The “ brownie ” is rather a strange kind of being. Unlike
others of the same origin, it delights not in working mischief,
but in useful labour ; but for some private reason of its own
it refuses to be clothed. Lay bread and cheese on the barn
floor, and you will have plenty of corn ready for the mill by the
morning ; but lay down any article of clothing, and away at
midnight goes master “ brownie,” screaming, “ I hae gotten my
fee and my leave,” as was said to be the case with the one in
question. The mistress, who, it appears, had been a considerate,
kind-hearted woman, taking pity one cold night on poor
“brownie’s” naked condition, laid upon the barn floor, along


with the accustomed bread and cheese, an old great-coat of the
“ guidman’s.” That night, with screaming that awoke the whole
household, “ brownie ” took his everlasting departure. So says
a story which we have often heard told, and attested in a manner
sufficient to give any ordinary person’s faith a shake in all
human testimony.
People in those days had certainly an uncomfortable time
of it. They had ghosts in the house, “brownies” in the barn,
witches at the byre door, and satan himself personally superin-
tending the whole.
The dread of existences which belong not to this world, lies
deeply embedded in the nature of uninstructed or partially
enlightened man. We all know that the very nature of a spirit
precludes the possibility of its being visible to mortal eye ; that
to be visible it must be clothed with a material garb. And what
is it then ? No more a spirit than we are. Were spirits
clustering as close and thick around us as a newly-cast swarm of
bees around their queen, no sign could meet our eye, no sound
reach our ear. A troop of immaterial spirits could not stir one
thistle-down afloat upon the summer air, and yet it is said that they
can talk, and rap, and turn tables, aye, and in some places in
Scotland, can throw peats with a force sufficient to break dishes and
knock people down. It is an old belief —old as ignorance, and
as enduring.
Wherever science has shed light upon nature’s laws, this
belief has declined ; where this has not been the case, this
phantasy still holds an undisputed sway.
Superstition, unsupported by power, is merely a disgusting
nuisance; but place bayonets, racks, gibbets, and stakes at its
disposal, then nature, sick and shuddering, turns appalled from
agony’s wild shriek, from gushing blood, from flesh-consuming
fire.
Superstition appears in its most pestiferous and envenomed
form when it takes its seat upon the altar, entrenches itself
within walls named sacred, and surrounds itself with denuncia-
tions to terrify, mysteries to awe and bewilder, and pomp to
dazzle and blind the spirit of man. It then impiously arrogates
to itself the right and the power to control and to bind human
thought and action, and to make body and soul subservient to
its will.
The boldest believer must quail before this monster s eye of
fire, for it proclaims itself the avenger of an angry God, the
heaven-appointed arm with which offended Omnipotence strikes.
Civil tyranny is to this as a feather to a link in an iron chain.


Woe, woe to that country where the burning hoof of this
infernal dictator is on the magistrate’s neck; where mitred
superstition rears itself above the head that wears the crown !
Wherever the civil law upholds its own dignity, maintains the
power to protect or to avenge those who live under its sway,
superstition relieves its venom-swollen breast by cursing those
whom it dare not kill; and although curses fall unheeded and
harmless among us, only raising upon our lips a smile of pity
or scorn, yet they take deadly effect upon those who believe in
their power.
Tyranny and superstition twine around and uphold each
other. Wherever superstition reigns, there is no freedom nor
safety for the subject; men are continually liable to be dragged
before a tribunal which recognises no principle consonant with
nature, justice, or mercy ; and to be judged and condemned by a
band of assassins mad drunk with fanaticism, who, in their blind
fury, dash through every moral, political, or civil fence which
protects man from the violence and injustice of his fellows ;
transfusing their own blood thirsty spirit into those who may
yet be their victims, and transforming men into fiends.
Of this Montesquieu furnishes us with a fearful illustration.
He says, “A Jew was accused of having blasphemed against the
blessed virgin, and upon conviction, was condemned to be flayed
alive. A strange spectacle was then seen; gentlemen with
knives in their hands ascended the scaffold, and drove away
the executioner in order to be themselves the avengers of the
honour of the blessed virgin.” This is indeed very horrible;
but the annals of superstition, from the earliest ages, abound in
incidents in no way less horrible than this.
We are tempted by the extreme beauty, simplicity, and
truth, of what is termed “ a most humble remonstrance to the
inquisitors of Spain and Portugal,” by a Jew, to insert a quota-
tion from the above-named author. The “ Bemonstrance was
elicited by the burning of a Jewish girl of eighteen years of
age, at an auto-de-fe in Lisbon, and is powerfully illustrative of
the view which we have taken of this subject.
“ You complain,” says the remonstrator to the inquisitors,
” that the Emperor of Japan caused all the Christians in his
dominions to be burned by a slow fire. But he will answer, we
treat you who do not believe like us, as you yourselves treat
those who do not believe like you; you can only complain of
your weakness, which has hindered you from exterminating us,
and which has enabled us to exterminate you.


u But, it must be confessed, that you are much more cruel
than this Emperor. You put us to death who believe only what
you believe, because we do not believe all that you believe.
We follow a religion which you yourselves know to have been
formerly dear to G-od. We think that God loves it still, and
you think that He loves it no more ; and because you judge
thus, you make those suffer by fire and sword who hold an
error so pardonable as to believe that God still loves what He
once loved.
“If you are cruel to us, you are much more so to our
children ; you cause them to be burned because they follow the
inspirations shown by those whom the law of nature and the
laws of all nations teach them to reverence as gods.
“ You deprive yourselves of the advantage you have over the
Mahometans with respect to the manner by which their religion
was established. When they boast of the number of their
believers, you tell them that they have obtained them by
violence, and that they have extended their religion by the
sword ; why, then, do you extend yours by fire ?
“When you would bring us over to you, we object a source
from which you glory to descend. You reply to us that though
your religion is new, it is divine ; and you prove it from its
growing amid the persecutions of pagans, and when watered by
the blood of your martyrs ; but at present you play the part of
the Dioclesians and make us take yours.
“ We-conjure you not by that mighty God whom both you
and we serve, but by that Christ who, you tell us, took upon
Him a human form to propose Himself for an example for you
to follow ; we conjure you to behave to us as He Himself would
behave were He upon earth. You would have us be Christians,
and you will not be so yourselves.
“ But, if you will not be Christians, be at least men; treat
us as you would, if having only the weak light of justice which
nature bestows, you had not a religion to conduct, and a revela-
tion to enlighten you.
“If heaven has so great a love for you as to make you see
the truth, you have received a great favour; but is it for
children who have received the inheritance of their father to
hate those who have not ?
“ If you have this truth, hide it not from us by the manner
in which you propose it. The characteristic of truth is its
triumphs over hearts and minds, and not impotency, which you
confess when you would force us to receive it by tortures.


“If you were wise, you would not put us to death for no
other reason but because we are unwilling to deceive you. If
your Christ is the Son of God, we hope He will reward us for
being so unwilling to profane His mysteries; and we believe,
that the God whom we both serve will not punish us for having
suffered death for a religion which He formerly gave us, only
because we believe that He still continues to give it.
“ You live in an age in which the light of nature shines
more bright than it has ever done; in which philosophy has
enlightened human understandings ; in which the morality of
your gospel has been more known ; in which the respective
rights of mankind, with regard to each other, and the empire
which one conscience has over another, are best understood. If
you do not, therefore, shake off your ancient prejudices which,
whilst unregarded, mingle with your passions, it must be con-
fessed that you are incorrigible, incapable of any degree of
light or instruction ; and a nation must be very unhappy that gives
authority to such men.
“Would you have us frankly tell your our thoughts ? You
consider us rather as your enemies, than as the enemies of your
religion ; for if you loved your religion, you would not suffer it
to be corrupted by such gross ignorance.
“It is necessary that we should advertise you of one thing,
that is, if any one in times to come should dare to assert that in
the age in which we live the people of Europe were civilized, you
will be cited to prove that they were barbarians ; and the idea
they will have of you will be such as will dishonour your age,
and spread hatred over all your contemporaries.”
It would be well if the lessons thus plainly and powerfully
taught by this Jew were laid to heart by many of this present
day, who consider themselves charitably and liberally-minded,
but whose charity and liberality extend no farther than them-
selves, or the sect to which they belong, and who would have
every conscience under subjection save their own.
Man in a social state is certainly accountable to the com-
munity of which he forms a part, not only for his actions, but
also for his words if they tend to disturb the public peace, or to
excite others to do violence to the person, the character, the
property, or the prosperity of any individual belonging to the
state. But a man’s belief is cognizable by no political or civil
law; it is foreign to their nature, comes not within their juris-
diction ; and, if persisted in, would end in their destruction, and


in the establishment of a despotism which would in its turn,
after having outworn the patience of long suffering human
nature, be swept from the earth by a torrent of blood.
Penal laws, taken in connection with belief, can do nothing
but destroy; they can neither convert nor convince. Therefore
penalties should never be attached to the profession of any form
of faith, however erroneous it may be. But should any associa-
tion, sheltering itself under the name of a religious community,
bind its leaders by oath to embrace the first opportunity of
utterly subverting the government of the country, and enslaving
the people, it evidently breaks through the limits assigned to
belief, and enters the boundaries where the laws reign sur-
rounded by pains and penalties.
All superstitious feelings, if laid bare to the foundation, will
be found resting upon an impossibility. There is no super-
stition in plain truth. The one delights in clearness and sim-
plicity ; the other finds enjoyment in mystery and darkness.
Truth leads forward ; superstition drags backward. Truth is a
teacher ; superstition is an executioner,
The spirit of superstition eats out every human feeling
from the heart, and leaves nothing of the man but the form.
An old man had an only child, a son. The child sickened,
and that old man was ever on his knees praying and wrestling
for the child’s life. He was in the garden thus engaged when
the boy died. A friend went out and told the father that his
child was dead. “Yes,” said that old man, ‘‘he is dead, and
his soul is lost, and Q-od is glorified, and I am well pleased.”
This was a fearful subversion of the religion taught by Him
who said, “ Suffer little children to come unto Me, and forbid
them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.”
CHAPTER XI.
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.
Young men, independence is a noble word, and as words are
merely the pictures of ideas, the idea must be nobler still ; and
as ideas are only the spirit’s conceptions of something real, the
reality itself must be still more noble.
Independence, abstractly considered, can apply to no human
being; for all, from the throne downward, depend upon each
other ; but the working meaning of the word is the doing as
much, or more, for others, as others require to do for you. This


is the only independence desirable for, or, indeed, that can he
attained by man ; and he who cannot or will not accomplish
this, however free like he may look, is in thought and action a
slave.
Every lawful road that leads to independence should be
traversed with eager feet; every means that tend to its pre-
servation cordially embraced. Friendly societies will preserve
it under one of the most trying circumstances in which you can
be placed.
All are liable to sickness and to accident; a sick or hurt
person can render no service to his neighbours ; consequently,
unless he has provision made in some way or other to repay
those who provide for and serve him during sickness, he at once
loses his independence.
To make this provision, friendly societies were instituted;
and they have done it, and continue to do it, efficiently and well.
They beat back debt and want from the sick man’s bed, but
here their mission ends; they can go no farther, they can do
no more; and mighty as the service is which they so nobly
perform, more is required. There are many evils besides sickness
which money alone can alleviate or destroy; for these the
remedy lies in the savings bank —the friendly society is powerless
here. Many men, old and young, think that if they be members
of one or two societies, that all is right, till some unproyided-
against adverse circumstance comes, and they find, in their
bitter experience, that all is wrong.
No institution that has as yet been invented by man, has
done so much for the alleviation of human suffering as these
societies. Still, the nature of their constitution limits their
usefulness, and confines their endeavours to the single purpose
for which they were formed.
To preserve independence, the bank and the society are both
required. Singly they are deficient; united they protect and
support each other, and afford to men of limited income a
protection as nearly approaching to perfection as their circum-
stances can possibly allow.
Sickness, without the aid of the society, will in many cases
drain the bank ; while want of employment, without the bank’s
aid, will, in some cases, result in the loss of the benefit to be
derived from the society.
“Take a hundred or two hundred men, and you may
safely predict that a number of these men will, during the
course of a year, fall sick, and will, consequently, be
Unable to provide for themselves ; who the individuals may be,


or the duration of the disease, is, however, a stretch beyond
your prophetic powers. You may also assume that a proportion
sufficiently large to maintain the sick without any inconvenience
to themselves will always be on foot, and able to attend to their
employments, and provide for those who are down. This is the
principle which forms and regulates friendly societies.
Were one hundred men in ordinary health, their ages
ranging from eighteen to fifty-fire years, to form themselves
into a society for supporting each other during sickness for one
year ; by a weekly payment of one shilling each the following
benefits, under ordinary circumstances, would be secured :
For every individual case of sickness, accident, or by what-
ever lawful way a member may be rendered unfit to follow his
employment, twenty-eight shillings weekly, till thirteen weeks’
aliment be paid; sixteen shillings weekly for the succeeding
thirteen weeks; and ten shillings for each remaining week of
the year. Also, twenty pounds as funeral allowance, in every
case of death ; and twenty pounds at the expiration of the year
to those on the sick list, where a lingering illness or a fatal
termination might be anticipated ; and, if properly conducted,
there would still remain a considerable surplus to be divided at
the end of the year. Some may doubt, others deny the correct-
ness of this statement, but no one can controvert it, for it has
been tested by the experience of many years.
I have neglected to state that in this calculation, in order to
give the society a fair start, no allowance can be made for sick-
ness or death for the first fourteen days of the year.
Provision could be made in time coming for these fourteen
days by rendering the society permanent, and enrolling the
members for the following year fourteen days before the
expiration of the present, still, however, dividing the surplus at
the end of each year; this, of course, will keep the society
moderately poor, but it is better that it should be so. Friendly
societies, like some other things which we could name, when
they get rich, get proud, exclusive, and lazy.
Societies of this permanent description abound in the city of
Glasgow, and they do their work well, visiting and supporting
their sick, and burying their dead.
It may be thought that imposition to a great extent will be
practised upon these institutions by unprincipled members.
The reverse of this is the case, the difficulty lying in preventing
the convalescent froxri returning to work before they have
recovered sufficient strength to labour without injuring them-


selves. This feeling manifests itself strongly in quarters where
an inexperienced person would have little hope of its being
found.
These societies are generally on a lower scale than the one
which we have been describing. The payments, in most cases,
being threepence per week, for which sum the following benefits
are obtained:—
Seven shillings weekly for the first thirteen weeks of illness ;
four shillings weekly for the succeeding thirteen weeks ; and
two shillings and sixpence for the remainder of the year. Five
pounds of funeral money is allowed for a member in the event
of death ; also the same amount for the funeral of a member’s
wife, and two pounds for an unmarried member’s father or
mother.
Societies thus constituted are termed “Permanent Yearly
Societies.” Their affairs are wound up, and the society re-
organised every year, at which time the funds which remain over
are equally divided, amounting, in average years, to from four
to six shillings each member.
Any member is at liberty to leave at the end of the year,
but no one can be discharged, except for violating the rules of
the society, unless he has received aliment for fifty-two
successive weeks, in which case he receives five pounds, and
ceases to have any further claim upon the funds of the society.
Thus these societies withdraw their support when support
is most essential. Their nature denies them the power to assist
the aged or the confirmed invalid; an accumulation of either
would disperse the society, for every man being at liberty to
leave at the end of the year, and the yearly division of the funds
preventing any one from having a pecuniary interest in its
continuation, the youngest and healthiest of the members, would
leave and the society would, of necessity, fall to pieces.
Tkey do all that they profess to do, and do it admirably,
which is to assist their members during a temporary illness, and
to bury them should death bring that illness to a close. They
are easily got up, and easily wrought; the simplicity of their
construction enables unskilled hands efficiently to work them,
and the good that they do would hardly be credited by any one
who has not had an active share in their management.
There still exists a number of very respectable societies
conducted upon the old system of life membership, and no
division of the funds; but almost all belong to particular
localities, and admit no members save those in some manner


connected with the district after which the society is named.
A stated time must elapse, perhaps two years, before a new
member is eligible for relief, which of itself is sufficient to
account for the popularity of the new system, which entitles a
new member to all the privileges at the expiry of six weeks.
Every young man who is working for a wage or a salary
ought to be a member ; and should he, fortunately for himself,
require no aid, he will be helping those who are most worthy of
assistance ; that is, those who, by their membership, have shown
themselves desirous of preserving their independence by
assisting themselves.
Should any class of young men wish to keep themselves
apart from others, they could, almost without an effort, establish
a society among themselves, and arrange it so as to suit their
own tastes and requirements.
Every institution, by whatever name it may be called, which
tends to foster a feeling of independence, diminish the amount
of human misery, and consequently lessen the temptation to dis-
honesty and crime, should be encouraged even by those who are
never likely, personally or directly, to be benefited thereby.
CHAPTER XII.
LIFE ASSURANCE.
Amoks the many schemes which the teeming brain of the
philanthropist or the speculator has brought forth for the
amelioration or prevention of human suffering, Life Assurance
holds a distinguished place. Life policies are calculated to
benefit their holders in a variety of ways; but their principal
and most ostensible object is to save from destitution wives,
children, and parents, in the event of the premature death of
husband, father or son.
Upon the duration of human life, taken individually, no
calculation can be based; but we find that, when taken in
masses, it it subject to a law as unvarying and uniform as any
other principle in nature.
Thus, out of every thousand that are born, 154 die before they
are 12 months old ; at 12 years, 360 have taken their departure;
at 25, 412 have disappeared ; at 41 the living and the dead are
at a balance ; at 50, 410 survive ; at 60, 364 ; at 70, 240 ; at 80,
95 ;at 90, 14; and at 100, the last individual of the thousand ii


tottering on the brink of the grave. It is upon a distinct
knowledge and proper application of this law, taken in con-
nection with the presumed rates of interest obtainable, that the
tables which regulate life assurance business are framed.
“We may arrive at a pretty clear idea of the nature of all
insurances, by considering them as a social compact entered into
by a body of men, under an agreement that a certain specified
description of risk, to which all are liable, shall, in the event of
an individual loss, be born equally by every member of the
association —thus neutralising its bad effects by the arrange-
ment made, and saving the person who sustained the loss
perhaps from ruin, without mateiially affecting the interests of
the body to which he belongs. This of course, does not
practically apply, but it gives a fair outline of the principle.
We all know that we shall die, but the precise time at
which this momentous change will take place is unknown to
us • it is against this uncertainty, so far as regards a provision
for those left behind, that this description of assurance provides.
We are living verbs in the universal grammar of nature,
expressly formed to represent being, doing, enjoying, and suffer-
ing. The passive is not fitted to do the work of the active,
neither is it required to do so ; but there is one thing which is
required at the hand of every description of man upon whose
exertions others depend for existence, and that is to make
provision during life, as far as in him lies, for those whose claims
upon him are written on his heart by the finger of God, so that
they may not be exposed to the horrors of destitution in the
event of their providers arm being prematurely paralysed by
death.
Nature hoots at the man who would flinch from this portion
of his appointed work, and revelation calls him worse than an *
infidel. There is also another duty incumbent upon all the
dwellers on this earth, and that is, to arrange their affairs so that
they may be prepared calmly and trustingly to leave it. Life
assurance must tend materially to this important end ; for the
sight of those who are dear, helpless, and unprovided for, must
make the spirit cling to earth when it should be throwing off all
earthly ties, and preparing for its flight ; must add bitterness to
the cup of death, and weigh upon the parting soul like guilt.
The beneficial effects of these institutions are so apparent,
that they must be evident to a superficial observer, and strike
powerfully upon the mind of the careful inquirer. They directly
tend to the growth and development of the moral and intel-
lectual faculties of mankind. This they effect by striking at
the root of that great poison-tree, poverty, under the baleful


shadow of which intellect withers, morality dies, and the evil
passions of our nature spring up into life and luxuriance.
A bject poverty in childhood creates selfishness, and hardens the
heart; whatever polish may be acquired in after life is only a
cold, unfeeling glitter. He himself has suffered; why should
not others suffer p is his mode of reasoning. Hunger imparts
even to comparative infancy a preternatural acuteness which is
not wisdom, but low cunning, and gives to the poor little human
being the unsettled, suspicious look and stealthy step of a beast
of prey. He is always on the alert for something to steal, for
something to satisfy the inward gnawings that are consuming
him; and, in so doing, he obeys a law mightier far than ever was
tiamed by man a law which impels every untrained hungry
animal to preserve itself in life, let the consequences be what they
may. Truth cannot exist in such an atmosphere ; consequently,
the little creature gets thoroughly debased, and is doomed by
his well-fed fellow-creatures to punishment for his misfortunes,
which it suits their convenience to term crimes. The child of
the prince and the beggar are alike liable, when placed in the
same circumstances, to fall into the same state of degradation ;
consequently, the orphan of the man who during life lived in
affluence, but left his children unprovided for at death, is
subject to the same doom as the one who came to it as it were
by inheritance.
Life assurance professes to save children from this moral
and intellectual death, and the truth of its professions is attested
by saved multitudes.
Scenes of imaginary distress, although painted by the hand
of the most skilful artist, fade before the true, every-day
picture of that crisis of human woe. The heart-broken widow,
with a family of fatherless children clinging around her, without
the knowledge of how they are to be sustained for a single day
—the same stone covers her provision and her provider; and,
instead of receiving from the warm heart and open hand of a
husband a sufficiency for herself and her babes, a miserable
pittance is henceforth to be doled out by the cold and too often
insulting hand of charity—a pittance that will barely support
life, and renders the very shadow of respectability unattainable.
Eor her the present is devoid of hope, and the future shows the
black face of despair; and, in bitterness of heart, she prays
that the angel of death would descend and cover her and her
innocent brood with his merciful wing.
And it certainly throws no light into this dark picture, to
place in a corner of the same canvas an infirm widowed mother,


whose wants had been liberally supplied by a son who was the
light of her dim eyes and the jov of her widowed heart, but who
has departed to that ‘ bourne from which no traveller returns,”
and left her in her second childhood, poverty-stricken, friendless
and alone, to battle in unequal contest against want, woe, and
death.
Heart-rending as these cases of every-day occurrence are,
still, if they were part of the inevitable lot of human nature, if
no means existed for their mitigation or prevention, it would be
our duty, uumurmuringly, to submit. But there does exist a
specific against them, and that specific is to be found in the
benefits that arise and flow from life assurance. At the instant
that the first premium is paid, even were the man to fall lifeless
before he bad time to pocket his policy, his wife and children, or
his aged parent, according as circumstances may be, are entitled
to the full amount assured ; and however small it may be, it will
not only place them beyond the reach of immediate want, but
often has enabled the bereaved to start in a career of benefit to
themselves and usefulness to others.
It would well repay the trouble attending the inquiry, could
we ascertain why people are so generally lukewarm in this
matter. May it not arise in some instances from being unable
to distinguish between the trusting in , and the tempting of i
Providence. In other cases may it not be traced to the natural
aversion that man generally has to contemplate any circumstance
relative to his own death ? When this feeling assumes the power
of turning and frightening from the path of duty, it becomes
slavish, unchristian, and unmanly, and ought to be conquered.
Or, is it possible that an intense concentration of selfishness can
exist in the breast of anything wearing the human form, suffi-
ciently powerful to make him regardless concerning the welfare
of his family after he himself has gone to his account? No, no ;
there exists no such man. But I believe there are many deeply
interested in the present and future prospects of their family,
who are deterred by not seeing their way very clearly to the
means necessary for paying the yearly or half-yearly premiums.
Doubtless this may, in many cases, involve a considerable amount
of self-denial: still, a little retrenchment will generally surmount
this, and the vast importance of the object to be gained will act
as an incentive, and carry them triumphantly through.
It is not easy to believe what difficulties men will get over,
and what sufferings they will submit to, in pursuit of an object
on which they have set their heart, although the utility, or even
the morality of the object in question may be very doubtful j


xnd can any one be found who would hesitate to deny .himself,
what after all may be only a superfluity, to accomplish «o holy
a portion of man’s mission as this P
Whatever may be the cause, we know that an apathy doe*
exist, for the amount of the assured in this country is very small
in comparison with those that have it in their power to be so,
and are not.
It would appear as if it were only minds of a peculiar cast
that are alive to its deep importance. The careless think not of
it. The selfish shrug their shoulders and pass it by. The
drunkard hugs his bottle closer to his breast and staggers on ;
while the timid and the superstitious turn from all that reminds
them of death with dismay.
The last-mentioned class should remember that, as death
is the inevitable lot of all, they would do well to familiarise their
minds with the idea, so that they may not be panic-stricken
when he appears.
Annuitants live longer than other people. This must proceed
from their minds being more at ease than those who are engaged
in a daily struggle with the world for a subsistence. Life
assurance should, on the same principle, tend to prolong life by
relieving the mind from the anxiety that every parent must feel,
especially during sickness, concerning the future prospects of
his family. We all know that anxiety produces disease, and
causes diseases, manageable enough under ordinary circumstances,
to break away from the physician’s control, and run on into
death. Why, then, should not peace of mind act as a preventative
and a cure ?
All who feel a repugnance at approaching this question, on
account of its association with their own death, should consider
that it can in no case hasten that event, but may, under Pro-
vidence, be the means of averting it for a time.
The saving of a sum sufficiently large to be permanently
useful to a bereaved family, is a work of time ; and, even were
life certain, circumsstances may occur which may break in upon
this fund, and render the accomplishment of the purpose in this
form impracticable. But as the duration of any single life is of
all things the most uncertain, no certainty whatever attaches
to this plan. Here life assurance steps in, clothed L in the might
and majesty of comparative immortality, armed at all points


against every contingency that can be foreseen by man, and
converts this mixture of doubt and dread into a pure element
of indubitability,
The records of many insurance companies furnish proofs of
large sums being paid to the representatives of persons from
whom a very small equivalent had been obtained ; in other words,
of persons dying by accident, or otherwise, within the course of
a few months, after completing their assurance. There is one
instance on record of a man on his way out from paying his first
premium, falling lifeless upon the threshold of the office door.
The full amount of his policy was, of course, paid in the same
way as if he had lived and contributed to the funds for many
years.
The long livers, doubtless, pay for this ; but it assuredly is
well-laid-out money that purchases tranquility concerning the
future prospects of their own families, and imparts the blessed
consciousness of being an instrument in providing for the wants
of the widow and the fatherless of those who have gone before.
These transactions have been compared to a lottery ; if it be so,
it is a lottery of rather an uncommon description, for all are
gainers. The one party gains money, the other gains peace of
mind and the approval of their own conscience. Thus the loser,
in the common acceptation of the term, is by far the greatest
gainer.
Few persons possessed of property to any considerable
amount neglect to secure themselves from loss by fire—a
circumstance which may never occur, so far as they are
concerned ; while a vast majority of the same people neglect to
insure their families against the irreparable loss of themselves by
death—a circumstance which, sooner or later, must happen to
all. A fire policy is worth nothing, taken apart from the
purpose for which it is intended, neither does the nature of the
transaction admit of its being so ; while a life policy, after a few
premiums have been paid upon it, becomes a marketable
commodity, and is as much an article of real present value as a
bond upon an heritable estate.
There is a variety of ways by which life may be assured,
but there is one most valuable mode of assurance which, the
more it is known and understood, will be the more appreciated
and acted upon. This mode not only makes provision for a
family in case of the early death of the father, but provides for
the parent himself in old age. A moderate addition to the
ordinary rate of premium is paid, and the assured, at the age of


Say sixty, is not only relieved from all future payments, but
receives the amount of the policy into his own hands If he
dies previous to this period, the money is paid to his heirs.
The superiority of this method will be apparent, when we
consider that the payment of the premium in some cases may be
a burden inconveniently heavy for an old man to bear. That
the policy has already served its legitimate purpose in securing
his family against his early death ; that his family, in ordinary
circumstances, are grown up and already provided for, and
that there wants only a small fractional part of two chances to
one, that his wife, if they were of equal age, is in her grave ;
under these circumstances, it is certainly worth all the extra
premium for the assured to have it in his power to draw the
amount himself, and apply it, if need be, to his own require-
ments in his old age.
The choosing of an office is a most serious matter, and
ought to be gone most considerately and deliberately about.
In this line, as well as in others, there are hawks abroad.
CHAPTER XIII.
THINGS TO BE AVOIDED.
Avoid giving a dogmatical form to the expression of any
opinion, however confident you may feel in its truth. This
is highly offensive in any man ; in a young man it is absolutely
hateful. “I am Sir Oracle, and when I ope my lips let no dog
bark.” This is the picture of a fool, drawn by the hand of a
master.
Some outrageously candid people make a merit of saying all
that they think. Avoid this. Seldom say the tenth or even the
hundredth part of all that you think. “ I always tell my mind
because I love the truth,” these excessively candid people say;
but watch these mind-tellers, and you will find them to be the
piost mischief-loving liars in existence ; and were every one to
follow their example, heart-burning and hatred would usurp the
place of benevolence and love, and render the world unin-
habitable.
Assert nothing but what you can prove ; say nothing but
what you believe to be true ; but in very many cases you will
find silence to be true wisdom.


Avoid thinking that you raise yourself in proportion as yotl
detract from the merits of another. The fact is, that in the
attempt you act as the weight that pulls your neighbour down ;
consequently, you must go down along with him, aye, and be
undermost.
Avoid telling very improbable stories, especially if they relate
to yourself, be they ever so true. Truth may be sometimes
stranger than fiction ; but when you happen to have any of these
very strange truths in your possession, the safest way is to keep
them to yourself.
I heard a man tell that he ha<l at one time stood under a load
till he sunk above the ankles into the ground, and the bones of
both legs broke under the weight. No one who heard him,
believed the most likely story that he could tell after this, and
yet the man had told nothing but the plain truth. The
ground on which he stood, however, was soft and boggy.
Never boast of your bodily strength ; a very small ass could,
in this respect, beat the strongest of you; nor at any time, to
show off your strength, lift all that you can, or walk as far as
you are able. There is a limit to the strain of human muscle ;
go beyond this, and you never will recross it in this world again.
One evening, a young man, unmatched among his
companions for strength, lifted the end of an old cannon from
the ground ; he had preformed the same feat with the same
piece often before ; but he had crossed the limit, it was his last
lift; a blood-vessel gave way, and he died
Avoid casting “hot water or ashes to windward.” This is a
sea proverb, and you may take it literally when aboard, and
figuratively when ashore ; you will find it very useful both
ways, if you use it properly.
Avoid answering impertinent questions, whoever may be the
inquirer, especially if they relate to your employer’s business ;
you have no more right to tell the state of his affairs, than you
hare to dispose of his money. A simple, unguarded answer to
an impertinent question may place you in a very awkward
predicament. A contemptuous silence is the fittest reply; in
this case courtesy would be casting pearls before swine. Some
vain young men answer questions of this kind to show off the
extent of their knowledge, or of the trust reposed in them.
This is the very essence of rain-glorioue conceit, and instead of


raising them in the estimation o£ the questioner, it is the most
sure and sadden method imaginable of bringing themselves
down.
Avoid repeating scandalous stories or listening to those who
delight in telling them. These stories are often wholly untrue,
or some old scandal vamped up and laid to the door of the
innocent. In every case they issue from the seandal-monger’s
mouth highly coloured and generally garnished with incidents
tending to confirm the truth of what may be totally false.
Avoid those who have often a secret to whisper into your
ear which must not be repeated, and which they would not for
the world tell to any living soul except yourself. The likelihood
is that it has already been told to a dozen under the same
restrictions, and will yet be told to as many more ; and as it
will soon spread, you may come in for the blame of the disclosure
Avoid all association with habitual appointment-breakers.
An appointment is a voluntary engagement, and will be held
sacred by every right principled man ; and the habitual violation
of it implies a reckless disjegard to the p inciples of truth,
honour, and honesty. An appointment is a promise, therefore
the violation of it is a lie ; an appointment is a bargain, the
fulfilment of which no civil law can enforce, therefore honour is
the only bond which binds, and he who breaks this bargain
breaks honour’s bond. The appointment-breaker, by causing
his friends needlessly to w'ait, robs them of their time, and
thereby compromises the principle of honesty ; the disappointed
person must feel it as an unmerited slight, if he does not look
upon it as a premeditated insult.
Avoid asking questions of any living man if you have any
of these dead teachers —books, which can reply. The living face
may look upon your ignorance with pity or with scorn, but the
unmoved face of these dead teachers silently and unweariedly
instruct, and calls no blush of false shame to your cheek, no
tear of hurt pride to your eye.
Avoid thinking yourselves above being taught, or thinking
that you knotv as much about any subject as any one can tell
you. You may be instructed by one who knows much less about
the subject than yourself ; some valuable truth may have revealed
itself to him, while circumstances may have hid it entirely from
your view.
Avoid mistakes ; they generally arise from carelessness, and
carelessness sometimes leads to the same results as crime. If


yon cannot repair the mistake, acknowledge it frankly and at
once ; do not trv to excuse yourself in any equivocating manner;
this will make matters worse. If you can repair it. do so quickly
and quietly, and keep your own counsel. IN ever needlessly
proclaim yourself a biuuderer ; you may safely leave that to
othei s.
Avoid the continuance of an argument with any man after
he has shown signs of loosing temper ; if you he cool, you have
already gained the victory, and w'hy should you wash for more ?
Avoid forming a fixed opinion upon any case till you have
given both parties a hearing. No man who fancies himself
aggrieved can tell his own story quite correctly, although some
do come much nearer it than others ; consequently, judgments
formed from one-sided statements are generally unjust.
Avoid in your readings mistaking fiction for truth. I one
day heard a young man most eloquently and in perfect sincerity
of heart relating some startling passages in Scottish history which
our regular historians had by some unaccountable oversight
entirely overlooked. After listening for a short time, it plainly
appeared that Miss Porter w r as the historian, and the lad’s history
of Scotland this lady’s “ Scottish Chiefs.”
A young farmer was sitting by the fire upon a winter night
reading a stray volume of “ Rob Roy ” aloud to an intensely
interested audience, and a burst of horror and indignation arose
from every breast, when, in spite of his heart-rending pleadings
for life, Morris is thrust into a bag and thrown into the loch by
order of Helen M’ Gregor. A visitor from the city who was
sitting among them, quietly remarked that it was only a novel,
“ Novel here or novel there,” replied the farmer, who evidently
did not know the meaning of the word, “ you see that this puir
man lost his life by it, and I am thinking that you are no muckle
better than Mrs M’Gregor, or you wudua take her part.”
Avoid aiming at being singular in your person, dress, or
manner ; always try to be as like other decent people as you can.
Have your beard regularly shaved, if you have one ; and do not
be over anxious to resemble a goat, a German, or a Jew. Nature,
no doubt, made beards, but she also made barbers.
If you have money, avoid flatterers; if you have none, this
precaution is needless, for in this case flatterers will avoid you.
Avoid late hours ; midnight air in cities is much more danger-
ous than the exhalations of a midnight swamp.


Avoid under-estimating yourselves; a man’s own opinion of
himself influences his fortune more than the opinion of all the
world beside. Diffidence is very beautiful in the young, but if
you have too much of it, you may lay your account with having
very little of anything else. Assurance is the steed which
carries its rider over the wail.
Avoid confounding principles with opinions. Principles are
eternal; opinions are as evanescent as the men who hold them.
The desire to do good is a principle; the method by which the
greatest amount of good may be accomplished, is an opinion.
Avoid jesting with personal defects or infirmities ; a warm
sensitive heart may beat in the bosom of a hunchback, and a
deformed foot has more than once been the pedestal of a wondrous
brain.
Avoid a feverish desire to please; do that which is right and
if people are satisfied, they should be so.
Avoid the companionship of the immoral; by being seen in
the company of an immoral person you patronise immorality.
Avoid brooding over petty grievances; they multiply and
magnify fast ; an unintentional slight becomes a predesigned
insult, and the slightest inconvenience a thing not to be endured.
Avoid this or you will become a household nuisance.
Avoid all low, cant phrases, however common they may be •
they originate in vulgarity, and none but the vulgar will use them!
Avoid retorting in the same strain upon those who may use
abusive language towards you ; you are not bound to bark back
at every snarling cur who may show his teeth and tongue.
Avoid going beyond your depth. Stop when your stock of
knowledge is expended; let others speak who know more, and you
may add to your scanty store without diminishing their
abundance. Many a one has justly acquired the name of a
wise man simply by knowing when to be silent. No man can
know everything When a subject is brought up with which
he is unacquainted, the wise man listens and learns, while the
babbling fool joins in the conversation, and gets laughed at for
his presumption.
Avoid being critical upon the absent; especially in a
company where there are strangers to you. In a company of
this kind, a person told a story concerning a lady who was
rather eccentric in her manner; the story was perfectly hard*


less, but exhibited her in a very rediculous point of view. He
expected to raise a laugh, but to his astonishment every one of
his auditors looked as grave as if he had been delivering a
lecture on anatomy ; upon looking round for an explanation his
left hand neighbour remarked, “I can vouch for the entire
correctness of your story, for that very funny lady is my
mother.”
Avoid hurting the feelings of any one by attempting to be
witty, or by giving advice in a harsh, unfeeling manner. Wit
of this kind is malignity under a borrowed name; and advice
which must harden and confirm the erring, instead of softening
and reclaiming, must proceed from the mouth of wickedness or
folly.
Avoid a rough, rude, domineering manner. Some think
this manly; it may be so, but we never yet knew a strait-
forward, manly fellow use it. A civil, kindly, obliging manner
diffuses itself by sympathy into the bosom of those with whom
you associate, and renders the daily intercourse which must
take place between man and man profitable and pleasant.
We find people talking scornfully of “meaningless civilities;”
no such thing exists ; the slightest civility has a deep meaning
and a powerful effect.
A mild, courteous manner is quite consistent with firmness
of character, and has a purifying and ennobling influence upon
individuals and upon society. There is as wide a difference
between a courteous and uncourteous person, as there is between
a family of carefully-trained children and a band of young
boors.
Avoid those human owls who recognise no smile on Nature’s
face, no glory in the splendour of the sun, no beauty in the
blossom-clad tree, no fragrance in the summer flower, no
harmony when the earth, dressed in the green robe of spring,
is ringing with the music of newly-awakened life. These
discontented, gloomy grumblers would have you believe that
whatever is, is wrong; that the earth herself is not exactly
what she should be, and that her sons and daughters are decidedly
wose. Their talk is ever of disease and of disaster ; give them
a newspaper, and then look out for a detailed account of
accidents, death, and bankruptcies.
Avoid, unless you be very expert swimmers, boating in these
very fanciful-looking articles named, from their upsetting
qualities, we presume—“gigs.” A board three or seven fire-


sixteenths of an inch thick, is too slender a division by far to
be the only one between deep water and any animal that is not
strictly amphibious.
Should some member of a generation which is at present far,
far down the gulf of futurity, discover, imbedded deep in the
accumulated sand of ages, one of these curiosities, he will at
once conclude that the earth at the time of the “gigs” creation
must have been nearly without a tree, and inhabited by a race
of men about the size and weight of unweaned monkeys.
Avoid imputing bad motives to good actions; it is a
bewildering, mystifying kind of logic which leads to the
conclusion that good and evil flow from the same source.
Avoid law, and doubly avoid all unprofessional lawyers ; an
unprofessional man whose favourite study is law, is generally a
great rogue.
Avoid associating with those who are beneath you in mental
acquirements, and who are making no attempt to improve j they
cannot rise, and you may fall.
Avoid saying anything in jest that will /not bear to be
repeated in earnest. The ill-natured or the envious may bring
up long-by-you-forgotten words in judgment against you,
and you will hardly clear yourselves by pleading that you
must have said them “in fun.’’ The words are there, present
and palpable; but the spirit in which they were uttered is gone,
is invisible. You can scarcely conceive how widely different
the signification of the same individual words can be made to
appear by varying the emphasis, the manner, or the feeling.
Avoid expecting too much, and then you will be the lesa
disappointed when you receive, as you often will what you con-
sider too little,
Avoid trusting much to those who make extravagant
pretensions to friendship; true friendship, like true merit, is a
very calm, silent affair, and shows itself in deeds which it fain
would hide, not in a torrent of frothy, unmeaning words.
Avoid affecting to dispise any desirable object which lies
beyond your reach; people easily see through it, and with a
derisive smile whisper something to each other about a fox and
sour grapes.
Avoid petty, mean actions ; they will sink you lower ia the
world’s eye than open wickedness.


Avoid those human ferrets who are continually prying into
other people’s affairs, and who go sneaking about under the
influence of an idle curiosity, ever anxious to ferret out things
with which they have nothing whatever to do, and which can
be of no use to them after they are found.
Avoid calling very often at the same house, or using as
much freedom in any one’s house as you would do in your own.
Undue familiarity not only breeds contempt but also hatred.
Avoid needlessly rushing into danger ; this is not courage but
bravado, and is seldom done save when numbers are looking on,
and in this case, vanity has often tempted cowards to risk life
and lose it. But when duty calls or necessity compels, go forth
and meet danger cooly and calmly ; by so doing, you may in
many cases disarm danger, and disentwine the arms of death
from around your own or your neighbour’s neck.
Avoid running before any adverse gale : button your coat to
the throat and face the storm manfully. It cannot blow for
ever, and the harder it blows it will be the sooner past.
Avoid believing that idleness is harmless, that to do nothing
is to cease to do evil; there are sins negative and positive. The
positive works mischief, the negative refrains from doing
good.
Avoid crouching at the feet of any man, and never ask
pardon for the same offence from the same person twice ; the
fault must be serious indeed if its enormity equals the guilt of
the spirit which refuses to forgive.
Avoid believing anything opposed to universal experience
without proof; it may be true, but the proof lies with the
propounder of the new doctrine, not with you. His business is
to prove it true, not yours to prove it false. Always make a
clear distinction within your own minds between an unsupported
assertion and a proven fact.
Avoid keeping your mind like a lumber-room where
everything is to seek, and the article wanted never to be found ;
broken disjointed pieces of knowledge lying scattered about,
ideas thrown together in a heap, and a cloud of metaphysical
dust blowing about and obscuring the whole. However much,
or however little mind-furniture you may have, keep it neatly
and correctly arranged, so that when in search of a living fact,
you may run no risk of being stifled by the ashes of a long-ago-
defunct fable.


Avoid luxurious habits; they multiply temptations and
diminish the power of resistance ; each of them is a fetter,
gilded perhaps, but not a whit the less stronger ; each of them
is a master and will be obeyed, and he who fosters them, ceases
to be a freeman and becomes their slave.
Avoid sweeping conclusions, such as condemning an entire
body of men for the faults, it may be, of comparatively few.
Avoid judging religion by its professors, or the laws of
your country by the conduct of those who administer them ;
respect the magristrate, however much you may despise the
man, You will sometimes find the principle and the represen-
tative of that principle to be very different indeed,
Avoid disregarding trifles; the moral bonds which bind
society are infinitely small —break the slightest of them, and
you shake the frame of the social fabric.
In a word, avoid all habits, manners, and pursuits which
tend to subtract from the sum total of human virtue, and
consequently of human happiness. Inflict no needless pain
upon anything that has been breathed upon by the spirit of life,
from man who walks upright with the reflected glory of heaven
and earth glowing within the dome-like habitation of his brain,
to the blind, brainless reptile that crawls beneath the turf.
W, Gray, Printer, 97 King Street, Newcastle, N.S.W,


I
I
i f
