

"SILENT KNIGHT"
Kerosene Operated
REFRIGERATORS
INSTRUCTIONS FOR INSTALLATION,
OPERATION AND GENERAL SERVICE
DIRECTIONS
Sole Manufacturers:
HALLSTROMS PTY. LTD.
462,464 Willoughby Road, Willoughby, N.S.W.,
Australia.


HALLSTROMS’
"Silent Knight”
KEROSENE OPERATED REFRIGERATORS
INSTRUCTIONS FOR INSTALLATION AND OPERATING
LOCATION
1. The first point to remember in installing any type of
Refrigerator is to decide upon a suitable location. For
economy and efficiency in operation always select the
coolest part of the house indoors. You can assist in the
efficiency and economical operation of the Refrigera-
tor by installing it in a suitable position. Locations
such as an open verandah or small, unventilated
space, pantry or room, or against a wall or partition
facing north or west and subject to the hot rays of the
sun are NOT suitable. Always select the coolest posi-
tion in the southern side of the house.
2. The Refrigerator must be placed on a level and firm
foundation so that the Evaporator or ice-cube com-
partment in the Cabinet is level. Vibration caused from
weak foundation or loose surrounding floor boards
will cause an uneven flame, and poor refrigeration.
3. Air circulation around the Cabinet is important and,
therefore, a space of 2in. must be left free at the back
of the Cabinet and at least 20in. on both sides, as well
as a clear space above the top of the Cabinet so that
the flue pipe is accessible for cleaning purposes and
the air circulation over the fins of the back of the
Cabinet is not restricted. The space underneath the
Cabinet must also be left quite clear. It should be
noted that the more air space around the Cabinet the
better the unit will function. Cupboards or small, badly
ventilated spaces are not satisfactory.
NOTE.—To provide against excessive high summer
temperatures and to assist in economical operation of
the Refrigerator, the following direction will be found
useful when installing the Refrigerator on a wooden
floor:
Remove small section from floorboards—about
2ft. long and 4in. wide—where the Refrigerator is
to be installed, so that a draught will be created
directly under the UNIT, thus assisting the air-
cooling process.
To prevent insects or pests gaining access
through the opening it should be covered with a
piece of wire gauze.


KEROSENE OPERATED MODEL


STARTING THE REFRIGERATOR
4. Before the Cabinet is used for storage of food wash
the interior and freezing compartment with a solution
of a teaspoonful of carbonate of soda to a quart of
warm water.
5. Having checked up the level of the Cabinet, unscrew
the filling cap and fill the fuel tank within half cn inch
of the top with high quality lighting kerosene, using
a clean strainer funnel. BEFORE A MATCH IS AP-
PLIED TO THE WICK AT THE FIRST TIME OF LIGHT-
ING, OR AFTER RE-WICKING ONLY, SAME MUST BE
THOROUGHLY SATURATED WITH KEROSENE. To
assist in this saturation pour a few drops of kerosene
on top of the wick after removing the glass chimney.
AFTER THE WICK HAS BEEN THOROUGHLY SAT-
URATED apply match, carefully replace glass chim-
ney. and TURN down flame as low as possible. Slide
the lamp into position underneath the Cabinet as far
as it will go, handling carefully to avoid damaging the
chimney until the fuel tank drops down into position
over the front bar of the lamp frame. (If there is a
space between the bottom of the boiler pipe and the
top of the chimney the lamp is not in correct position.)
To remove the lamp lift fuel tank by handle over the
front bar of frame, thus enabling you to slide it from
under the Cabinet.
6. Inspect the flame and carefully adjust to the required
height (see para. 7 and 8) by turning the screw-knob
attached to the wick adjuster rod.
ALWAYS SEE THAT THE FLAME IS NEVER SET SO
HIGH THAT IT SMOKES.
NOTE.—It will be found an advantage when the Re-
frigerator is first installed to make yourself accustomed
to pushing the lamp into correct position before at-
tempting to light it. Also to examine the lamp at in-
tervals over a period of say two hours to make sure
the flame has not crept too high in the flue, which
would cause the lamp to smoke, and during this
period the little attention in adjusting the flame will
help very considerably in. the efficient operation of the
model. At the end of say two hours, turn out the lamp
for half an hour and then re-light. This will ensure
correct cycle of refrigeration.
REGULATION OF TEMPERATURES
7. To adjust the wick up or down turn the screw-knob at
the front of the fuel tank. The normal height of the
wick is obtained by observing that the top of the flame
just ENTERS THE FUNNEL-SHAPED BOTTOM OF THE
BOILER PIPE.


When the lamp is in its proper position and the flame
has been correctly adjusted it needs no further atten-
tion—refrigeration will automatically follow. From
the time the model has been first put into operation it
will require approximately six hours before the Cab-
inet temperatures are sufficiently low for food to be
placed in the Cabinet.
8. The higher the burner has been set the cooler the
Cabinet interior will become. On hot days, and when
the Cabinet is heavily loaded with food, a higher
flame will be required and vice versa. Never allow
the flame to be so high that it smokes.
9. NEVER PLACE ANY OBSTRUCTION OVER THE VEN-
TILATION OPENING ON THE TOP OF THE CABINET.
AS THIS WILL INTERFERE WITH THE OPERATION
OF THE UNIT.
PLACING FOOD IN THE CABINET
Hot, or even warm foods, any open cans of fruit, etc.,
should not be placed in the Cabinet.
The food storage compartment is an entirely closed and
unventilated space, which is necessary to obtain refrig-
eration temperatures. Any food with a strong odour, or
which is liable to absorb odours, must be placed in a
covered container. This protection is necessary even
though the Refrigerators operate with a dry freeze and
reduce to a minimum the liability of the odour of one
class of food affecting the other.
In addition, this dry-air system of refrigeration discour-
ages the growth of bacteria, which thrive on moisture;
but the fact that the air in the Refrigerator is dry also
means that it will absorb a certain amount of moisture
from food in the Cabinet. Therefore, to retain essential
moisture required for certain classes of food, it is ad-
visable to cover most foods, excepting those which have
natural covering, such as oranges and eggs. It is also
to be remembered that bananas should not be placed
in a Refrigerator in an unripe state for the reason that
it prevents them from ripening and checks the develop-
ment of their flavour.
Uncooked meats should never be closely covered, but
should be placed on an open tray, and waxed paper
laid lightly over them. In the general arrangement of
food in the Cabinet the User should endeavour to leave
open spaces next to the walls of the Cabinet as well as
between the containers, as this is an important fact in en-
abling circulation of cold air.


Do not create extra heavy refrigeration load by opening
and closing the Cabinet door an unnecessary number of
times or by leaving the door open for an unrequired
period.
ICE CREAM FREEZING: The Refrigerator is primarily de-
signed for the storage of general food, at temperatures
which are not as low as those essential for the freezing
of ice cream. The freezing of ice cream should be in ac-
cordance with a suitable recipe. To obtain the essential
low temperatures the flame must be turned to its highest
point (but not so high that it will smoke), and kept at
that height for at least one hour before the cream is
placed in the trays, and thereafter until ready for use.
DEFROSTING: Defrosting is necessary when the frost has
accumulated too thickly, or about every two weeks, and
should be carried out when the refrigerator is not imme-
diately required for storage of a large quantity of food.
DO NOT DEFROST ON HOT DAYS—DEFROSTING
SHOULD BE CARRIED OUT AT NIGHT OR WHEN OUT-
SIDE TEMPERATURE HAS DROPPED.
To defrost, remove lamp and fuel tank, open door and re-
move all foodstuffs, and when the frost has melted, wash
out the ice tray compartment with a solution of 1 tea-
spoon of CARB. SODA to a quart of luke warm water
as well as the interior of cabinet and equipment.
Whilst refrigerator is defrosting and lamp is removed, the
flue pipe should be cleaned with the brush provided for
this purpose and the burner wick should be trimmed (not
cut with scissors) and any clinker removed.
TO SHUT DOWN CABINET
If the Refrigerator is not required to be kept in operation
it should be thoroughly washed out and the door left
ajar. The ice trays should be dried and kept outside the
Cabinet.
IMPORTANT
FUEL SUPPLY
Regular filling of the tank within about half an inch of the
top three times a week is preferable to doing so about
once a week. It not only prevents the possibility of the
supply being used without being noticed, but also makes
certain that the wick is at all times thoroughly saturated
and functioning correctly if the flame is adjusted as in-
structed.


GENERAL DIRECTIONS AND SERVICE
INSTRUCTIONS
The efficiency of the Refrigerator will depend on the
care which has been exercised in closely following out
the directions and instructions for the installation, oper-
ation, and general attention to the Refrigerator.
The following directions and instructions are important,
and will be found useful in maintaining maximum effi-
ciency, and in dealing with any service requirements
which may arise:—
DELAYED REFRIGERATION.—CAUSE: Cycle of operation
disturbed. REMEDY: Turn out the lamp for about one
hour and then re-light, turning the flame to maximum,
being careful not to allow it to smoke, and gradually
reducing it to required height for normal operation.
REFRIGERATOR TOO COLD: This usually happens when
the flame is too high or the weather mild. For this reason
the flame can be turned down last thing at night and
raised again first thing in the morning, as during this
period there will be less strain on refrigeration owing to
the door of the Cabinet being usually kept closed during
that period. It should be noted that the height of the flame
will always vary with atmospheric temperature, and
should be adjusted by experience to the necessary re-
quirements.
Water dripping from the back of the Cabinet is not a
leakage, but is condensation only, and due to humidity.
It may occur in winter time, and when the air is very
humid.
FLAME DECREASES OR GOES OUT: This can be caused
by the following:—
1. No kerosene in tank. REMEDY: Fill tank with
lighting kerosene only (not "power").
2. Inferior kerosene used. REMEDY: Remove
lamp—clean wick and fuel tank thoroughly by
completely draining and rinsing with strained
lighting kerosene.
DO NOT WASH WITH WATER
3. The wick has not been sufficiently soaked in
kerosene before lighting. REMEDY: Turn out
flame lor about one hour, during which time
wick should become saturated thoroughly.
Re-light and check to see that wick burns nor-
mally.
4. The wick is covered with carbon and clinker.
REMEDY: Check up on type of kerosene. Re-
move tank and wick and clean thoroughly at
least once every fortnight.


THE BURNER SMOKES: Should the lamp smoke it must
be extinguished immediately and cleaned, as well as the
ilue pipe, baffle and flue cap.
The burner will smoke from the following causes:—
(a) The flame is too large. REMEDY: After clean-
ing as described above, light lamp with the
flame lower, and inspect same two or three
times during the first hour to see that it does
not rise too high. During that period turn
flame higher if necessary, making sure to
check up each time the flame has been turn-
ed up that it does not creep to the point of
smoking.
(b) The burner may not be located exactly under
and in correct contact with the boiler pipe.
REMEDY: Check up to see that chimney is
DIRECTLY under the boiler pipe, and that no
space exists between top of chimney and
bottom of pipe.
(c) The glass chimney may be broken. REMEDY:
This will require replacing.
(d) Soot may have accumulated in the flue pipe,
on the baffle, or in the flue cover, REMEDY:
Clean the flue pipe.
REPLACING WICK: To change the wick the following
method should be used:—
After removing the fuel tank and burner from the Cab-
inet, take burner from tank. The old wick should then
be screwed out and the new wick inserted so that the
whole width of the wick enters the crescent-shaped open-
ing at the bottom of the burner. The wick should then
be pushed up carefully until it engages with the toothed
wheels which is then screwed up until the wick projects
evenly just above the upper rim of the burner. NEVER
DRAG OR PULL WICK AT ANY TIME. Pour a few drops
of kerosene on the top of the wick and screw up the
wick about one-sixteenth of an inch and light it. Let the
flame bum until it goes out by itself and lightly remove
ash without disturbing the even top rim of the wick. The
burner should now be placed in position on to tank. On
being satisfied that the new wick has become thoroughly
saturated the lamp is then ready for use.
NOTE,—See that the kerosene container is regularly
cleaned out to provide against the accumulation of dust
and foreign matter, which would prevent the proper
functioning of the burner. Do not allow water to come
into contact with the lamp or kerosene container.
THE EFFICIENCY OF THE REFRIGERATOR DEPENDS
ALMOST ENTIRELY UPON THE CAREFUL ATTENTION
GIVEN TO THE LAMP.


IRREGULAR REFRIGERATION
CAUSE: The Refrigerator lamp is not burning correctly
and continuously at the right height. REMEDY: Cease
operating, check kerosene burner and wick. Re-start
Refrigerator at interval of one hour, commencing with
flame at maximum and later reducing to normal height.
Be careful not to allow lamp to smoke. For best results
the Refrigerator should be kept continuously in opera-
tion, day and night.
CAUSE: The Refrigerator is not level. REMEDY: To check
on the level of the Refrigerator, use the ice cube com-
partment for that purpose, with spirit level in both direc-
tions. A Refrigerator with the ice cube compartment not
level will not function correctly.
CAUSE: Flame is too small. REMEDY: Increase flame
very carefully, making certain that chimney does not
smoke.
CAUSE: Air circulation around Unit restricted. REMEDY:
Correct location of Refrigerator.
CAUSE: Evaporator is too heavily coated with frost or
ice. REMEDY: Extinguish flame and let ice melt and fall
into drip-tray, which should then be emptied. Dry the
Cabinet interior and re-light burner.
FOOD TAINTING
Odd pieces of meat, fish or butter left on the food trays
or in the corners of the Cabinet will cause the tainting
of other foods. It is important that the Cabinet should
be washed out regularly, including that portion of the
Unit which fits inside the Cabinet, as well as the ice cube
trays, food shelves, etc.
ICE TAINTING
Tainting of ice from the ice cube trays may occur if the
ice cube trays are dirty or if they are left full in the ice
cube compartment during defrosting, as some of the
water from the melted ice or frost may enter the ice cube
trays. The collection of frost or ice may have existed for
some little time, and thereby would have absorbed
odours from food in the Cabinet. It may not be pure and,
therefore, tainted ice will result. The ice trays should
always be emptied and washed very regularly.


W. E. CROSSMAN PTY. LTD., PRINTERS. 8 SPIT RD., MOSMAN. XM 418®.
