

SILVER
AND
THE INDIAN EXCHANGES;
A REMEDY FOR ITS DEPRECIATION,
IN
THREE ESSAYS,
BY
COLONEL J. T. SMITH, RE., F.R.S., F.S.S., F.I.A.,
FORMERLY MASTER OF THE MINT, MADRAS AND CALCUTTA,
&c., &c., &c.,
SUBMITTED TO THE
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA IN COUNCIL.
LONDON:
EFFINGHAM WILSON, ROYAL EXCHANGE.




The accompanying essays were written with the
sole object of assistance to the Indian authorities,
in discussing the means of remedying the very serious
embai rassment caused by the depreciation of silver
and fall of the Indian exchanges.
The Author has for many years past endeavoured
to advocate the adoption of the only measure which, in
his opinion, would be permanently satisfactory ; namely
the substitution of a gold for the present silver standard
of value in India; a change which, if carried out ac-
cording to the methods he has proposed, is easy to be
elfected, not only without expense, but with the early
and final extinction of the very heavy losses now
experienced.
The proposals are published, in order that every
objection to them may be brought forward and fully
considered. It would be presumptuous to expect that
they will not be found to contain many defects; but
it must not be forgotten that a very serious and
alarming difficulty has to be surmounted; and if any
of the suggestions offered for that purpose should
survive the test of searching criticism, it is humbly
trusted they may have the honour of being made useful
in devising the means for its solution.
The first essay contains a statement of the measures
proposed, and an enquiry into the anticipated objections
thereto ; the second and third essays contain answers
to some further objections which have been received
up to the present time.
September, 1876.




ON THE MEANS OF RESTORING THE INDIAN CURRENCY TO THE
VALUE IT POSSESSED PREVIOUS TO 1870, AND FIXING THE
SAME BY INTRODUCING A GOLD COINAGE.
1* r^le following remarks have been prepared in answer to
the wish expressed by the Under-Secretary of State for India
for any suggestions towards the removal of the serious evils
consequent on the depreciation of the value of silver, and the
fall of the Indian exchanges.
2. The proposal to introduce a gold currency for India was
made so far back as 1861, and it is hardly necessary to state
that if there appeared to be good reasons for that measure then,
the arguments in favour of it are much more evident now : for
it cannot be denied that if a gold standard had been substituted
for silver in 1865 or 1866, the whole of the present very serious
loss and embarrassment would have been prevented.
3. In a letter which I had the honour to address to the
Secretary of State for India, dated the 15th January, 1868, I
ventured to urge that the opportunity of introducing a gold
standard which then existed should not be neglected; but I did
not state all the arguments in favour of the change, because at
that time I believed that the Government wished for and
intended to make it. It may be right, however, now briefly to
mention that, besides the other arguments so ably set forth in
the former discussions of the subject; an important reason in
favour of the introduction of a gold standard of valuation
in India—one tending to the belief that sooner or later it must
he inevitable—is not merely the confusion and detriment to


trade at present experienced, but the inherent mischief of an
arrangement which subjects the enormous and daily increasing
commerce of England and India to constant vicissitudes in the
prices of the two metals constituting their respective standards
of value, and the incessant liability to the embarrassment of all
contracts connected therewith.
4. In a letter addressed by me to a leading member of
Parliament, dated the 19th July, 1869, remarking upon the
great misfortune it would be that we should miss the chance we
then had of assimilating the currencies of India and England,
I referred to the great advantage of putting an end to the
oscillations of the exchange, which with a silver currency
might range through about 16 per cent., and with a gold
medium would be limited to about 2 per cent.
5. These remarks have been justified by late events, which
have shown the possibility of fluctuations such as were an-
ticipated ; and the question now is, seeing that so great a fall
has been experienced, and the silver contained in the rupee has
already lost so much of its value, whether any measure can be
proposed by which its purchasing power in India may be
restored, and, consequently, the * exchanges brought back to
their normal condition ?
6. Although it cannot be denied that the difficulty of
effecting this object is much greater now than it would have
* Following the “ balance of trade,” the exchanges rise and fall within
the limits of the cost of procuring the moneys or currency of the respective
countries. So long as the Indian money is readily procurable by means of
silver bullion, its cost, reckoned in gold, cannot vary much from that of the
silver; hut if that facility were done away with, and Indian (rupee) money
could he only procured hy the delivery of gold, its cost might he increased, and
the corresponding amount of English gold currency given for it (or the rate of
exchange) would he increased also.


been some years ago, owing to the decline which has already
taken place, yet there seems to be sufficient ground for
the belief that, even now, if decided measures were adopted, it
would not be too late to restore the currency to its former value
for home (Indian) payments; and that, too, without any shock
or disturbance; the principal step being that of putting a stop
to the coinage of silver on private account, at the same time
taking measures to discourage the importation, or at the least
the circulation, of foreign made silver coins, and opening the
mints for the receipt of gold bullion for coinage.
7. To explain how this would operate, I must observe that
the internal commerce of India, which has only of late years
begun to be developed, is still but in its infancy compared with
what in the future it must attain to. The Indian Railways,
of which only a first instalment is completed, have, together
with the telegraph, had but a short time, comparatively, to act
upon the dormant energies of the population; yet, nevertheless,
if we may judge of the activity of internal commerce by the
growth of the import and export trade, and compare the seven
years’ average ending in 1817 with those ending in 1874, we
find that between the first and last mentioned periods—that is,
in twenty-seven years—the growth of the export and import
trade of India was from *£27,708,375 to f£99,608,798, that is,
not very far from fourfold.
8. May we not argue from this that the internal trade of
the Empire of India has increased and is increasing in some-
what a similar ratio ; that, as the export trade is based upon
the productions of the interior, and the import trade upon dis-
tribution of the returns in the interior, the two classes of
commerce, more or less, rise and fall together ?
* Vide Statistical Attract relating to British India from 1840 to 1865,
page 41.
t Vide Statistical Abstract, ninth number, pages 31 and 37,


9. Whatever may be the cause, the internal trade of India
has, ever since the beginning of this century, required constant
and steady additions to her currency, averaging during the last
thirty-eight years upwards of five millions of pounds sterling*
per annum in value. Besides this, the returns show that the
balance of imports over exports of gold bullion, during the
same period, exceeded an average of two and a-half millions
sterling annually, having been during the last twenty years
more than four millions per annum.f
10. Such being the case, it appears to be a necessary con-
sequence that, if the supply of rupees were put a stop to, the
remainder must increase in local value, as compared with
commodities, till they resumed the position which they held
on a par with gold, at the rate of 10 rupees to a sovereign,
for the 15 years previous to 18704
11. After that point had been attained, it would be the
interest of merchants to take gold to the Indian Mints for
coinage; and they would do so, indeed, before the attainment
of this improvement of the exchanges, owing to the premium
or “ batta”§ which would at first be obtained for the gold coins.
12. By this means gold would gradually be brought into
India; and, as it has been shown that an addition to the
circulating medium of at least five millions sterling per annum is
necessary, and no silver coins could be admitted, it would slowly
accumulate there; although it is true that, on every occasion
when remittances of specie abroad were necessary, gold alone
would leave the country; for unless, by any chance, bar silver
were to recover its former price of 61f d. per ounce, the rupee
pieces would become “tokens,” worth considerably less than
* Miscellaneous Statistics—Finance —Account, No. 96.
f Miscellaneous Statistics—Finance —Account, No. 93.
\Vide Ileport of the Conferences of the India Committee of the Society of
Arts, 1870, Appendix, paras. 32—34. § Vide Para. 14.


their denomination, and could not be sent abroad without loss,
there would he a bar to the export of gold coins also, at first,
Irom their not being readily procurable.
proposal therefore is, that, after due notice,
the coinage ol silver on behalf of private individuals and
advances upon silver bullion should be suspended; that
part of Act 23 of 1870, which makes it incumbent on the
Government to receive and coin it, being repealed: the Govern-
ment retaining in their own hands the power of replenishing
the silver currency whenever they may deem it expedient.
That gold bullion should be received by the Government
at the Mint rate of Us. 38 : 11 As. per standard ounce, and
coined into sovereigns and half-sovereigns (representing Rs. 38
As. 15), or ten and five-rupee-pieces of the same value *, which
should be declared legal tender, but not demandable f, the
present silver rupees continuing to be legal tender, as before.
* It would be an exceedingly great help towards the introduction of the
gold coins if, at the first, the option were given to the parties bringing the
bullion, to have it coined either into ten-rupee and five-rupee-pieces, correspond-
ing in composition with our sovereigns and half-sovereigns, or into pieces of
precisely the same value, but in fine gold, 99| touch. The latter would be
much more acceptable to native prejudices and tastes, and more useful in their
trade. There is an enormous amount of gold in India at present, of which a
considerable part would probably be brought for coinage if this were granted.
Any objection to the use of fine gold which might be raised on the ground of
the coins being softer than the standard metal, would in reality be of no im-
portance. These coins would be eagerly sought, and generally used for hoarding
and manufacture of ornaments, and they would generally escape the attrition
of common circulation. If they did not, and in a shorter time than usual lost
weight beyond the mint “ remedy,” they would cease to be legal tender.
f Gold coins were struck in the Indian Mints since 1834, and were more
valuable than their denominations as represented by the silver coins. They
were by law legal tender, but not demandable, and they commanded a premium
in the market. But only a few were called for, because the silver legal tender
currency was procurable in unlimited quantities at a cheaper rate : and these
gold coins were charged with the very high seignorage of 1 per cent.—far
beyond the outside cost of coinage. Vide Prinsep’s useful tables, page 1.


No seignorage should be charged for the manufacture of
the gold coins beyond that implied in the terms of purchase,
which are the same as those of the Bank of England, and yield a
profit of one anna per ounce, or per cent, which is more than
enough to pay all the actual outlay.*
14. As before observed, gold would leave India whenever
specie remittances abroad were necessary ; and on that account
the gold coins, not being demandahle, or parts of the regular
currency at first, w'ould command an “ agio ’or <c batta in the
bazaar. This would be no objection, and it would tend to en-
courage the introduction of gold into India at other times.
The “ agio ” might be considerable at first, but it would
gradually diminish as the rupee currency became enhanced in
value, and it would be finally put an end to whenever there
came to be an abundant supply of gold coins, as compared with
the inferior branches of the currency.
15. It may be here mentioned that the proposals con-
tained in this memorandum involve nothing which is new and
untried, or which has not the sanction of satisfactory
experience. There is a precedent for the coinage of gold pieces
separate from the ordinary currency, and making them legal
tender, but not demandahle, in the action of the Government
of India in 1833 f; and there is a precedent for the stoppage
of the coinage of silver, in the proceedings of the British
Government when our present system was established, and in
the late successful action of the Government of Holland.
There is a precedent, also, for the establishment of gold legal
* This statement is founded on the fact that the cost of coining rupee pieces
in the Calcutta Mint is from \ to | per cent., or eight to twelve annas per
hundred pieces. One-sixth per cent on gold ten-rupee coins would he one-sixth
of ten rupees, or 26| annas.
f Vide Prinsep’s useful tables, p. 1.


tender coins, without seignorage, and a subordinate token
currency, in silver and copper, in our own admirable and
universally approved system in England. The apparent diffi-
culty in the present case is the existence of the chasm to he
bridged over; but for that purpose there are special facilities.
16. Indeed, there can he no question that there is ample
power to effect the change, if it be once determined upon. As is
hereafter shown, the mere stop of the coinage would bring about
any necessary adjustment of prices, by the operation of natural
causes, without any further action of the Government; and
if a loan be raised, and the suspension of the coinage he
added to the limitation of the sale of Council bills, the ex-
changes could not fail to mount up quickly to the required rate.
To raise a loan and limit the sale of bills, without stopping
the coinage of silver, as it would cause the remittances to be
made by silver bullion, would lead to further additions to the
Indian currency, and add proportionably to the delay and diffi-
culty of restoration, liesides which, any advantage so gained, or
by any means other than the adoption of a gold standard, such
as raising the rate ot discount, &c., would only be temporary,
and would disappear as soon as the measure producing it was
discontinued. The only thing which can fix * the value of the
Indian currency, in relation to that of England, is to base it
on gold. It will be observed that the method of doing this,
* It is not intended here to assert that the exchanges would become perma-
nently fixed as soon as the coinage of silver was stopped, or they had once
reached the rate of 2s. per rupee. They might continue to oscillate, slightly;
but, from the time of the mint being closed, the rise and fall would be on either
side of an ascending rate until, after it had been settled at 25., and gold
was established in India, these oscillations would be limited to the cost of
freight and insurance of gold either way between England and India. Indeed,
owing to special and peculiar circumstances,* even this amount of fluctuation
would rarely exist.
* Vide Report of conferences held by the India Committee of the Society of
Arts, 1870, Appendix, para. 18,


which is here proposed, requires no purchase or accumulation of
either gold or silver, and no re-coinage, hut leaves the change to
he entirely wrought out hy the ordinary operations of commerce.
17. The following remarks are offered in answer to various
objections which either have been made or may be anticipated.
18. Ist Objection.— That it would be wrong for the Govern-
ment to interfere, or by any act of legislation to cause an
increase or diminution of the value of the currency.
To this objection all I have to reply is that my pro-
posal is based upon the supposition that it will be agreed
and intended that the currency should be restored in local value
to what it was for the 15 years previous to 1870. It is beyond
the scope of this memorandum to argue the point, or to
presume to offer an opinion as to the urgent importance of the
measure. It must be left to others to consider whether or not
it be the duty of the Government to restore matters, and put
them on a secure basis; giving due consideration to the fact
that the neglect to do so may involve the loss to the Indian
revenues of millions sterling per annum ; and if it he decided
that it is not so, there will be no object to be gained by paying
any further attention to this memorandum.
19. 2nd Objection. —That the rupee pieces would not be
“ appreciated ” by the proposed measures.
In answer to this I would observe that, as regards the
greater part of the fall in the value of silver, it has occurred
so recently that it is very doubtful whether prices generally
throughout the length and breadth of India have been, as yet,
affected by it to the full extent, if at all ;* but, even supposing
* Since 1873, when the price of silver began to fall, the imports of that
metal into India have been less than the normal supply ; hence the opinion that
prices cannot as yet have risen generally, owing to increase of the currency, con-
sequently, that the rupee cannot be materially diminished in value.—Vide
Economist, 6th May, 1876.


that in all India the rupees have 5 per cent, less purchasing
power than they had in 1870, can we doubt that the withdrawal
of five millions sterling per annum from the currency would
improve the value of the remainder ? In the course of ten
years there would he a comparative deficiency of not less than
60 millions sterling, or 500 millions of rupees—fully one-fourth
part of the largest estimate of the whole currency. It seems
to be hardly credible that, if prices have been affected since
1870 by the additions made to the currency since then, they
should not fall hack to their former rates long before so large
an amount of the normal supply had been withheld.
20. If the whole metallic currency of India he taken at the
large estimate of 200 millions sterling, and if it he even assumed,
as above, that it has fallen in value one-twentieth part, it would
follow that a deduction from it, or diminution of its mass by
one-twentieth part would be sufficient to restore it to its normal
value; and this, at the rate of five millions sterling per annum,
would he effected in only two years.
The recovery will probably be admitted to be only a
question of time; for it is unlikely that any one would assert
that, if all future additions to the currency were stopped for the
next fifty years, the remainder would not be locally more valu-
able than at present.
21. But the “appreciation” of the currency may still be
denied, on the ground that, as the material of the coinage
has fallen in value, the currency itself has also fallen irre-
trievably ; and that natives as well as foreigners, knowing
the exact value of the bullion contents of the coins, would
not give a fraction beyond it; so that it is in fact im-
possible but that the value of the currency must rise and fall
with the value of the metal it contains. As this phase of the
bjection proceeds from a misapprehension of the mode in which


the prices of commodities are affected and regulated by the
currency, it will perhaps be the readiest way of meeting it if
it be first enquired, How it is that the currency of any State
adjusts itself, by a self-acting process, to the true standard re-
presenting the ratio of bullion to commodities ? This is not
done in the way implied by those who speak of the natives in
the bazaar as being intimately acquainted with the precise
metallic contents of the coins, although it is true that to
“shroffs,” goldsmiths, and dealers in bullion it is well known ;
because, however well known to them, there is hardly one
person in a thousand of the ordinary population who knows
anything at all about the intrinsic worth of the pieces ; just
as the same is true even in England. Indeed, if they did,
though they would be possessed of a precise knowledge of the
value of the coins as contrasted with others, or with pure metal,
this could not in any way affect the question of their com-
parative value with commodities, or influence the scale of
prices. No man, for example, would be able to estimate the
relative value of the 123.271' grains of standard gold contained
in a sovereign, and a pair of boots. The process of adjustment
is, indeed, quite a different one, and the same as that whereby
all commodities, as well as coins, find their respective levels.
22. The instruments and means of exchange are subject to
the law of supply and demand, as any commodities are, with
this peculiarity, that there is an incessant and inexhaustible
demand for them in every corner of the country. When
the prices of commodities in general are too high, in other
words, when the precious metal formed into coins is not
sufficiently potent, then either more commodities are attracted
to the market, or the coins are melted down and the bullion
exported to other places, where it can do better. When, on the
other hand, the prices of commodities are too low, that is, when
precious metal in the shape of coins is too potent, it is quickly
found to be profitable either to export commodities to better


. “ arkets or to brin S w precious metal from abroad and form it
into coins; and till one of these has been done the currency
retains its extra potency. This process is constantly in opera-
tion; but it will be obvious that if the corrective be witheld on
the side of repairing the deficiencies in the bulk of the currency
the inevitable result must be a gradual improvement in its
power and local value.
23. As it has been suggested that the place and functions
of the currency might perhaps be taken by silver bullion,
it must be remarked that gold and silver bullion are
themselves only valuable commodities, and it is not until they
can be formed into legal coins, or sold to the Government at a
mint price ” that they necessarily command any certain price
in currency. If neither of these privileges were possessed,
silver as well as gold bullion would be a mere commodity,
fluctuating in value as gold now does in India, because no one
can legally pay his rent or discharge a debt by means of it-
and it must rise and fall in exchange for other commodities in
proportion to the fluctuating demand, and the excess or
deficiency of the supply. Bullion, therefore, could not be so
used as to affect prices.
24. In order to illustrate the subject more clearly to
those who may not be quite familiar with the effects of a con-
traction or enlargement of the currency, I would call atten-
tion to the effect which would follow the opposite measure to
that recommended. Let us imagine that it were possible to
completely shut off the egress of any coins out of the currency;
and that, year by year, steadily, five millions sterling in value of
coins, over and above the proper requirements of trade, were
thrown into and retained in circulation. It is obvious that, after
a time, the prices of commodities would be gradually increased
in proportion to the “ glut ”of the currency. Such a measure
would be difficult, practically, with a metallic circulation,


because the temptation to smuggle the coins abroad, where they
would be more valuable, would be so great; but the same condi-
tion of enlarged issue is, in effect, realised practically, in the
case of an inconvertible paper currency ; and the result is well
known.
25. And so, also, is the result well known of the with-
drawal of the surplus of an overstocked currency : that is, the
gradual reduction of all prices, including those of gold and silver
bullion. In a paper read by Mr. E. Seyd before the Society of
Arts, India Committee, on the 3rd March, 1876 (Journal, Yol.
24, No. 1216, page 308), it is shown that in the year 1865 the
American Greenback inconvertible paper currency was so much
in excess of the requirements of trade that 100 dollars of it
were only exchangeable for 50 dollars in gold; yet, by no other
means than the gradual withdrawal of the excessive issues, the
premium on gold, which was 100 per cent, in 1865, had been
reduced to 13 per cent, in 1875.
26. The same improvement in value attends the con-
traction of every kind of currency ; and this would be easily
recognised in regard to the measure proposed in this memo-
randum if we could get rid of the prejudice that coins, being
composed of metal, must necessarily follow the fortunes of the
metal. They would do so, if they could be brought into and
taken out of the currency freely. But we must not lose sight of
the important condition in the proposed plan, that no addition to
the silver coins of India wmuld be possible by the public, at any
time; and as the exhaustion of the currency could only be made
good, or the currency obtained by mean s of bills and gold, at a
cost beyond the mint price of the cheapened silver, the rupees,
though continuing to perform all their duties, as formerly, would
become “tokens ” whenever the legal standard gold coins were
brought into general use; and the cost at which current rupees
would in future be procurable, by the aid of bills or gold, would be
greater than the market value of the silver contained in them.


27. In England our silver coins circulate, without question,
at values 22 per cent,, at the present moment, above that of their
bullion contents. In France the live-franc pieces circulate, to-
gether with gold, at a rate of about 11J per cent, above their bul-
lion worth. In this latter case, the silver live-franc pieces are
legal tender to any amount; but in both cases their value is
maintained because the number admitted into circulation is
limited. If it were not so in France, the five franc pieces would
soon deluge the country, and every gold piece would be driven
out of it.*
28. 3 rd Objection . That the circulation of coins at so high
a nominal value above their intrinsic worth would be a most
powerful temptation to counterfeits, or unlawful coining of
rupees from true standard metal.
This objection is true, as far as it goes, but the evil would
not be greater in India than it has been in England, more or
less, for the last half century, without serious inconvenience;
and only half what it is at present, with our silver tokens. Nor
would it be greater than it now is in France, where the silver
five franc pieces are overrated 11J per cent., and are legal
tender to any amount.
29. It is not at all probable that, within our own territories
in India, any very large amount of unlawful coinage could
exist without detection; and it must be remembered that, in
order to impede the progress of the desired change, fifty
millions of rupee pieces must be put into circulation annually.
2
* The position in India, if my proposal were carried out, would, at the first,
be exceedingly similar to that of France at present. There would be a very
large mass of rupeas, legal tender for any amount, and circulating together with
gold ; but incapable of driving the latter out of the currency, because no more
addition can be made to their quantity. They would also themselves be in-
capable of leaving the currency, because they would be of inferior intrinsic
value to their denomination.


30. The objection, however, discloses a difficulty which
may he found to exist with respect to the privileges we have
conceded to one or two Native Mints—allowing them to coin
rupees at their discretion; and it would he absolutely neces-
sary, on the announcement of the change of system, either to
insist upon their conforming to it by stopping the coinage of
silver, or to take such measures as might he necessary to limit
the admission of silver to their mints, or confine their coins
strictly within the limits of their own domains : or to withdraw
all their own currency, and supply them with a sufficiency of
coins stamped with the effigies of the States.
31. Mh Objection,— lt has been urged by some that a
change of the Indian standard, from silver to gold, is not
desirable because, owing to the poverty of the people, silver is
so much more appropriate as a measure of value, in their ordi-
nary transactions ; that gold cannot be reduced and subdivided
so as to suit the petty dealings of the million, and bring the
pieces formed from it into familiar and constant use amongst
the people.
82. This objection is one which might have been enter-
tained before the publication of Lord Liverpool’s treatise (in
1805), and the establishment of the plan by which any number
of different metals could be associated together in currency
under a proper system of ££ tokens. It is needless now to
explain that the use of gold does not in the least degree pre-
clude, or interfere with, the use of silver for smaller pay-
ments, nor of copper, nor even of ££ cowries,” all of which, to
any required extent, find their places in a properly ordered
currency.
33. The objector who urges the better adaptation of silver
to the small transactions of a native Indian trader, not only
forgets the conclusive answer to his objection supplied by the


modern system of token coinage, above referred to, but also
the very great defect of the rupee currency in regard to large
payments. Ihis is not a question of the transport of coins, as
it has been occasionally stated, in order to be partially met
by the facilities afforded by railways, but it is the question of
“ taking delivery ” of large sums, which is found to be an
intolerable inconvenience; so much so that we may say that it
is, in piactice, next to impossible for an officer personally to
verify the contents of a treasury he is called upon to take
charge of. But it will be observed that this is not the ground
upon which a change of standard for India has been suggested,
but, rather, the enormous disadvantage of maintaining two
different standards for countries of such intimate connection
and vast transactions as England and India; and the incalculable
importance of a unity of coinage.
31. s th Objection.— Another objection which has been
suggested is —lst, that the exclusion of silver from the mints
would deprive merchants of the means of placing funds in
India; and, 2ndly, if the rupees be raised in exchangeable
value above their intrinsic worth, they would be unfit for pay-
ments out of India.
35. In regard to the first part ot this objection, it may
be observed that, when the only means of placing funds in
India, besides the purchase of commercial bills, is confined to
the bills drawn by the Council of India, and gold, the Secretary
of State will have it in his power to meet every demand of that
kind, at rates which he will be possessed of great power to
control. Hitherto, what has been called the balance of trade
has always been in favour of India, arising from the fact that
it has always been found easier to push the sale of Indian raw
products in Europe, than of European manufactures in India;
and the difference has been made good by Council bills and
bullion.


36. Taking into view the transactions of the whole pie-
sent century, we may say that the exports of products from
India have been sufficient to pay for imports and the demands
of the Home Indian Treasury; and, from the unfailing ex-
perience of the past, we may he assured that they will for
many years to come continue to do so. There has been a
falling off for the last year or two, owing to special circum-
stances affecting some of the chief staple products-for in-
stance, cotton, jute, silk, rice, &o.; and, at the same time, a
somewhat sudden increase of the home demand; hut we can-
not doubt that the above-mentioned characteristic of the trade,
depending as it does upon unalterable facts, will remain for the
future what it always has been. Moreover, it is unnecessary
to forego any important measure on account of a supposed in-
convenience to commerce, which, if provided with due notice,
can always take care of itself.
37. There will, therefore, be no difficulty in placing
funds in India which it will not he in the power of the
Secretary of State for India at once to remove, by granting
bills; and the fact of these bills being the only means of re-
mittance left, after the exhaustion of the ordinary commercial
“ documents,” must lead to an enhancement of the rate of ex-
change, which would he limited only by the transmission of
English or Australian gold; by means of which any amount
of money could bo at all times transmitted.
38. Upon the second part of the objection, it must be ob-
served, that it is not proposed to make the least alteration in
the present currency of rupees, which would continue legal
tender for the largest amounts, as they are now. It might,
therefore, be argued that, as regards external commerce,
they would be in the same position, and as suitable for
export as they have always been, and it is true that their
value outside of the currency would not be in the least altered


by the measures proposed ; but it must be admitted that they
would not be useful for export after the exchanges rose, if
the price of bar silver continued low, or went lower. In that
case, the rupees would be like the Trench five-franc pieces,
at present; they would assume the position of “ tokens,”
representing more value in local exchange than their metallic
contents. In the meantime, gold coins would enter the currency
by slow degrees, first at a “ batta ” or premium, and eventually
on a par with the silver rupee tokens. While the gold coins
are scarce, foreign payments will be made, as they are in many
cases at present, by means of fine stamped gold bars; of
which the quantity at hand may be judged by the fact that the
value of upwards of 86 millions of pounds sterling was ab-
sorbed by India in the last twenty years.
39. In addition to the above, if the suggestion made here"
after, in para. 48, of substituting gold for silver in the reserves
for note circulation, be adopted, this objection would cease to
exist. The Indian system would then correspond exactly with
that of this country, and all necessary exports would be
provided for.
It must be remembered that, as shown above, the tendency
of natural causes for the whole of this century has been to
require bullion remittances into , and not out of India. When
the opposite state of things may occur, owing to fluctuations
in commerce, balances will be, more or less, adjusted by Chinese,
Australian, or other bills, by the Indian Banks.
I must, also, here repeat the caution just given, that, with
due notice, commerce will take care of itself, and exports and
imports adjust one another.
40. Qth Objection. —lt has been suggested as an objection
that the exclusion of silver from the Indian Mints on the part
of individuals would further aggravate the fall in its price, and
tend to retard its recovery. To this it must be replied that,
looking to the very considerable increase in the supply of silver


bullion, and the already decreased and diminishing demand for
it, any permanent recovery of its price, for many years to
come, is out of the question.* It is true that putting a check
upon the deluge of India by silver will close one of the exist-
ing markets for its disposal, and tend to lower its pi ice; but
from the moment that the coinage of silver for private indi-
viduals is stopped, the Indian Mints being left open for the
coinage of gold, the Indian currency will become independent
of the price of silver bullion, and, to whatever further depth it
might fall, would be unaffected thereby.
41. ’With the risk of so terrible a calamity before us as that
with which we are now threatened from a continuous indefinite
fall in the cost of our medium of valuation, it seems to be a
paramount duty to seize the means of escape while they may he
had, irrespective of all other considerations. If suspending the
coinage of silver should fail to restore the exchanges to 2/-, it
would certainly afford the means at any moment to jix the ex-
isting rate, whatever it might be, for ever, by lowering the terms
for the admission of gold and submitting to the loss; * which,
however large it might be, would be preferable to allowing the
present system to continue, and running the risk of the rate
sinking lower indefinitely. I3ut there can be no doubt that, by
persevering in a decided course, the entire restoration of the ex-
change may be achieved, and the whole loss avoided.
* Vide Mr. Hollingberry’s Treatise on tlie Production of gold and silver, &c.,
&c. Page 111, paragraph 270, and page 116, paragraph 274.
* The loss here referred to arises from the defect of purchasing power of the
Indian revenues in the markets of the world. Gold has a world-wide value, and
if the ratio of the rupee to the sovereign be for ever fixed at ten to one, or 2s. per
rupee, the annual income of the Indian Empire, which may be roughly stateo.
at fifty crores of rupees, will be equivalent in purchasing power to fifty millions of
pounds sterling. If, however the ratio be fixed at a lower point, say for in-
stance at 10.909 to 1, or Is. 10d., the same income will be equivalent only
to 45.83 millions sterling, or an annual loss of 4£ millions, the capital-
ised value of which at 5 per cent, is millions —at Is. Bd. the annual loss
would be 8J millions, at Is. 6d. the annual loss would be 12£ millions.


42. 7 th Objection. —There is one more objection which may
be conveniently stated in the following question : How is it to
be expected that merchants will take gold to the mints to be
coined into pieces representing Rs.3B 15As. per standard ounce,
when the market price of the same gold may be upwards of
E 5.42 to 43 ? To this it may be replied, that the price of gold in
India is regulated by the rate of exchange. When a “ demand ”
bill on London is worth 2/- per rupee, a British sovereign is worth
Bs.lo, and the standard ounce of gold Es.3B 14As. When the
exchange falls to 1/9 per rupee or less, the sovereign rises to 11 or
12 rupees, and the standard ounce of gold to nearly 44 rupees. It
is capable of demonstration that there is an inseparable connec-
tion between the Indian rate of exchange and the price of gold in
Calcutta, so that when the London rate for a demand bill is 2/-
per rupee, it is profitable to merchants to take Australian gold
to the mint at Es.3B 14As. per ounce; and even sooner, to
whatever extent gold coins can be sold at a premium. It is
anticipated that the suspension of the silver coinage would
soon raise the rate of exchange, and if so, the price of gold in
India must fall, eventually, to 85.38 14As. net, per standard
ounce.
43. B th Objection. —That merchants and others will send out
dollars and various foreign coins, and put them into circulation
in spite of all the efforts of the Government to prevent it.
In reply to this, it must he observed, that no doubt the
importation of foreign coins into India may be, and probably
will be, tried, but the large balances of trade cannot be paid by
these “ uncurrent coins.” A few might be sent out and sold for
bullion purposes; but when it was found that there was no
Mint to take them to, and that they were not receivable in
payment of revenue, there would be great difficulty in getting
rid of any quantity ; and to pay balances of millions of pounds
sterling, a resort to gold would be inevitable.


It may be remarked that, if the rupees he “ appreciated,”
that fact implies a lowering of the price of silver bullion; so
that there would he no special profit in sending out dollars more
than any other bullion. They would sell for bullion purposes,
just as bar silver would, but they would not usurp a place in,
or interfere with, the currency.
44. 9 th Objection. —That if gold coins be struck of the same
value as the British sovereign, and are authorised as legal
tender for only ten rupees —in the first place, no one would
take gold to the Mint to be made into such coins ; and 2dly.,
that if struck and put into circulation, they would immediately
be collected and sent out of the country.
The first part of this objection implies —
Ist. That the current value of the rupee in India has
already fallen “ pari passu” with the price of silver ; but this
cannot be the case. It can only do so in time, and by the spon-
taneous action of Commerce enlarging the currency by sending
out supplies of silver to be coined and added to it. This has
hitherto been prevented by the increase of the drafts of the
home Treasury.
2dly. It is implied that, because the gold coins become legal
tender for only 10 rupees, they will only bring 10 rupees in
exchange. This is by no means the case. If the current rupee
is worth much less than two shillings, the gold coin will com-
mand a corresponding agio, or “ batta,” so as to realise its full
value. The action of the State in coining gold for the merchants
will be, at least, to give them a ready means of pouring into the
markets, in a popular, authentic, and easily disposable form, an
article of commerce for which there is a large demand in every
part of the empire, which is highly useful in trade, and will
therefore command its own price and value. Should gold not
be taken to the Mint for coinage at first, this would not inter-
fere with the ultimate success of the measure. It would soon


be found necessary for intermediate payments, and well worth
the trifling cost of coinage.
The second part of the objection is based upon a forgetful-
ness of the fact that gold will only be used to pay balances of
the transactions of commerce. Bullion shipments are only
resorted to when all other shipments have been exhausted. If,
then, for example, it has come to pass that debts to the amount
of one million sterling are due to India, and payment is made
by sending out gold, the difficulty suggested is, that the same
gold will be collected and sent abroad again. But it must be
remembered that, if this be done, there will still remain a debt
of one million sterling to be paid; and as all other means of
remittance had previously been exhausted, this debt would have
again to be paid by gold, and so on indefinitely. In the end,
if the balances of trade should hereafter be what they have
been for the last 38 years, at least five millions sterling annually
(besides four millions of gold), gold will accumulate in India
at that rate, by the ordinary operations of trade.
• This is on the assumption that the accumulation is not arti-
ficially assisted by raising a loan and stopping the issue of
Council bills, or otherwise.
45. Objection. —That it would be a breach of faith for
the Indian Government, having contracted a large debt in
silver money, to force the acceptance of payment of the same
in coins of another metal, and to pass a law enabling others
similarly situated to do so likewise.
This argument has been fully answered by Sir William
Mansfield (now Lore] Sandhurst) in his Minute of the Bth
March, 1864 (Chapters 3 & 4), published in the Parliamentary
papers on the East India Gold Currency, ordered to be printed
28th February, 1865, to which reference is made, as it is too long
for quotation. Moreover, it is obvious that no one could complain


of the injustice of a law by which be was only compelled to take
more than the true value of his debt, not to give it.
46. As many persons are apt to be perplexed by the idea
that the rate of exchange is governed exclusively by the
“ balance of trade,” it is necessary to point out how this ope-
rates, and to what extent it is limited in its action. The balance
of trade can only affect the rate of exchange to the extent of
the cost of transferring money from the currency of one
country to that of another. When the two countries have their
currencies based upon the same precious metal, gold, or silver,
and there is no restriction, the cost of transfer will not exceed
the freight and charges of transmitting and coining the precious
metal, which charges are generally constant, and may be safely
calculated; but when the currencies of the two countries are
based upon different metals, there is introduced another element
into the calculation, viz., the relative value of the two metals,
which may give rise to great uncertainty ; as is the case at pre-
sent between India and England, owing to the sudden and con-
siderable changes which have taken place in it. Eifteen years
ago the charges of transmitting silver bullion to India were
reckoned at 3J per cent., and for coinage 2 per cent., making a
total of per cent.; and if the rate of exchange tended to
vary by more than 5J per cent., or 1 \d. per rupee, it could be
prevented by sending silver. Now-a-days, the charges of
transmission do not exceed per cent., which, added to the
cost of coinage, makes a total of 3J per cent., but the rate of
exchange in Calcutta for demand bills has fallen from 2/OJd. per
rupee, to l/BJd., or 16J per cent., of which 2 per cent, is difference
in the charges, and 14J per cent, difference in the gold price of
silver.
At present the balance of trade cannot affect the exchanges
by more than 3J per cent, either way, hut the influence of a
change in the gold price of silver is uncertain and indefinite.


47. In the early discussion of the proposal to establish a
gold standard and coinage for India, it was suggested that the
principle of Act XVII of 1835, making 110 grains of pure gold
equivalent to 10 rupees, should he carried into effect. This
recommendation was founded upon the understanding that it
would correspond with the relative values of the two metals at
that time. Since then, and at a later date (1869), a careful
examination of the data for the preceding fifteen years, showed
that 113 grains of pure gold (contained in the sovereign) were
very nearly equal to the true value of 10 silver rupees in India,*
and as this corresponds with the value of the British pound
sterling, it is a fortunate circumstance that it can be carried out
by the simple ratio of 10 to 1 for the rupee and sovereign.
This is all the more important from the fact that, to establish
the 110 grains of pure gold, in lieu of the sovereign containing
113 grains, as equivalent to 10 rupees would, besides prevent-
ing the unity and simplicity of the relation between the Indian
and English currencies, diminish the purchasing power of the
Indian revenues by nearly one and one-third (1,328,122) mil-
lions of pounds sterling per annum.
48. It may he as well now to mention that the action of
the proposed measure for the restoration of the value of the
currency might he in some measure facilitated if any consider-
able part of the currency notes now in circulation were tem-
porarily withdrawn. To do this would, however, involve an
expense, and it might not, therefore, be convenient to resort to
it, unless it were deemed advisable to make a sacrifice to expe-
dite the change. It is not necessary to success. It would
also be of advantage to substitute gold for the reserves to be
kept against “ gold notes,” with the view to its being available
* Vide Report of Conference, held by the India Committee of the Society of
Arts, 1870 ; Appendix, paras. 32 to 34.


for export when required, or employed in circulation whenever
the time arrived for the gold coins to he declared legal tender
at the option of the creditor , as well as tbe debtor, either m
whole or part of payments.*
49. It is an important fact that the proposed measures,
even supposing them to he absolutely ineffectual for the object
contemplated, could do no harm. If the decline in the price
of silver should hereafter continue, the Indian currency, being
isolated from it, would remain, at the worst, unaltered. If the
price of silver, on the contrary, should rise, and the exchanges
approach their former rates, this circumstance would tend to
help the consummation desired; and at any moment the coinage
of silver for individuals might be resumed, when affairs would
revert to their present position. The acquisition of the Indian
currency, by the shipment of silver bullion, being put a stop
to, a much larger demand would exist for the bills of the Indian
Council, and the rates could not fail quickly to reach the point at
which the cheaper gold from the Australian mines would find
its way to the mints. The Indian currency would then be
restored to, and permanently fixed at the value which it has
been proved to have possessed for the 15 years previous to
1870, and from which it would never, in future, vary more
than to the extent of the cost of the shipment of gold either
way.
50. It will have been observed that in all the preceding
remarks the arguments have been made to embrace the supposi-
tion that the market value of the rupee now current in India
has fallen in comparison with goods, equally with the gold value
of the metal of which it is composed, though it has been pointed
* It is suggested that, when it is considered that a sufficiency of gold coin
is in circulation, creditors may be empowered by law to demand a certain portion
of their debt in gold. For instance, at first one-fifth, later on three-fifths, and
finally the whole. After which silver would be restricted as to legal tender.


out in para. 44 (Ist) and in the note to page 12, that this
cannot really be the case. In fact, if a general comparison he
made of the prices of articles in the Indian market before and
after the late decline in the price of silver, it will be found that
they are at present (Calcutta, March, 1876), if anything, lower
than before, and it has been explained (para. 44-lst) that they
will not rise until the currency has been swelled bylhe absorp-
tion of a sufficient amount of silver. To bring the value of
the rupees into correspondence with the present rate of exchange
would probably require the addition of fresh coins, besides the
normal requirements of commerce, to the amount of 20 to 30
millions of pounds sterling; and, hitherto, any very large addi-
tions have been prevented by the increase of the drafts of the
India Council.
51. It may be presumed, therefore, that at the present
moment the Indian currency is not materially depreciated, but
only in the position of being about to be so, by the augmenta-
tion of its bulk, through the importation of silver bullion,
hitherto checked by the Council Bills. This prevention and
check cannot very long continue, because the abnormal state of
the exchange between India and Europe stimulates exports from
India, and discourages imports into it; and if matters continue
as they are, will enlarge the balance of trade in favour of India
over and above any drafts which are likely to be drawn.
52. It is at the present moment, therefore, before any very
large additions have been made to the Indian currency, that we
have the power to interfere with the certainty of success; the
object being prevention rather than cure. If nothing be
done, then, after the Indian currency has been filled up to a
level corresponding with the relation of silver to gold, and
prices have risen accordingly, the rupee will have sunk to its
value in bullion plus 2T per cent, (seignorage) and, ingress and
egress, in and out of the currency being free, will remain so. If


it should happen that the future permanent gold value of silver
should be that indicated by the exchange of Is. Bd. per rupee, the
effect would be that the Indian revenue would he condemned
to a perpetual loss of value of 8J millions of pounds sterling
per annum.
53. The argument is advanced by some that the fall in the
price of silver is a mere temporary fluctuation, and that if we
have patience we shall, sooner or later, see matters restored to
their former position. Let us suppose this possible, but it may be
asked, Does it meet the urgency of the claim to remedy the
inherent vice of the arrangement which can at any time give
rise to the consequences of these fluctuations? Can any one
who is aware of the enormous losses and distress which have
been occasioned only thus far, contend that it is right to leave
matters in their present state, when it is certain that the
mischief may be prevented and put a stop to for all future
time by a single act of the Indian Legislature, involving not
the least shock or disturbance, and effecting a saving of the
heavy losses now experienced ?
54. It is to be feared that these proposals may be met by
innumerable doubts, but this is not a time when it will be safe
to indulge in them. Decisive action is called for, but the
stake is large, and, in so very important a matter, the course of
the Government ought not to be influenced by the mere mis-
givings of many, who most probably doubt because they do not
clearly see their way. It would be a very serious misfortune
if, for want of the courage of decided convictions, the only
remedy against the very terrible calamity now threatening the
Indian Empire were set aside on account of difficulties to
which we unadvisedly attached undue importance.
J. T. SMITH.
33, New Broad Street,
Istf May , 1876.


ESSAY No. 2.
CONTAINING ANSWERS TO SOME OBJECTIONS AND
FURTHER EXPLANATIONS OF THE PROPOSALS CONTAINED IN THE
ESSAY DATED 1ST MAY, 1876.
1. The object of the accompanying remarks is to afford an
explanation of difficulties which have been suggested in reference
to the proposals contained in my essay of the Ist May, and
some of which are ably stated in the following extracts from
a letter with which I have been kindly .favoured by a gentle-
man who has made the various questions of political economy,
and more particularly those connected with currency, subjects
of his special study. His criticisms are as follows :
“ First one word as to fundamental principle. The metal of every legal
currency does its work as a commodity, by means of its value in the metal market.
A sale for metallic money is an exchange by pure barter of two commodities of
equally supposed value. It is absolutely impossible to give any intelligible and
conceivable explanation of metallic currency, except upon the perception of this
nature of the action of money.” “Convertible paper-money acts as a ticket
giving possession of the substance—the commodity—on demand. Inconvertible
paper money, as the American dollar, is also a ticket for a commodity acknow-
ledged to be due, but as the time for giving it is not defined, it is bought as a
debt, subject to uncertainty of actual payment. It passes as such. V hen there
is too much of such debt for use or currency, it drops in value from excess, as it
cannot be got rid of.”
“My own experience illustrates this truth I paid a sovereign to the pro-
prietor of an hotel at Geneva a few years ago. He took it, and then asked me
whether I had a Victoria sovereign, as this one was a St. George and the Dragon,
of George 111. Surprised, I asked for the reason. ‘ Sir,’ he said, ‘ this sovereign
will be melted down before to-morrow evening. The new sovereign will prove
full weight, the dragon will be light.’ In other words, the sovereign paid my
bill as a lump of yellow metal, at its value in the metal market.”
“No law can alter this process. Aristotle, ages ago, understood the truth,
and described coinage as a contrivance to save the trouble of weighing. Nothing
could be more accurate. Ergo, coinage will not do what you desire in India.
Nothing but demonetisation will, unless silver recovers its value, and is steady,
which it will not be,”


“It is quite impossible bv mere cessation of coinage to bring a rupee worth
Is. 6d., as silver, to two shillings as coin. The coining in that case would not
cease. Excellent rupees would be manufactured by a new style of forgers, as
good as possible, and they would flood every Indian market, Ho art of man
can make silver worth Is. 6d. in Europe, largely and permanently worth 2s. in
India. The holders of Indian gold would hold it tight, except upon a premium,
which would practically make the rupee worth Is. 6d. only. You would not
get gold coin out in the place of silver. Mr. Seyd’s reference to a diminution of
green backs, accompanied by an increase of value does not apply. There were
not two prices for the same article; the paper dollar had its American value,
and none other. In the India case there are two values of the rupee, one,
supposed, in India, at 25., the other all over the rest of the world at Is. 6d.”
“Now the action on prices would be certain, though slow and capricious
during the period of transition. No European would sell goods to India for the
same number of rupees calculated at 2s. He would have to bring the rupees to
Europe at a heavy loss, for they would count only as Is. 6d. in every English
market; and he would not be able to get gold except at a premium, which
would be no cure of the evil. Gold would never come out in India in exchange
for 2s. rupees, or ten of them for a sovereign, when the rupees were worth only
Is. 6d. everywhere else.”
“I see no remedy but the demonetisation of silver, accompanied, to ease the
transition, by the issue of small convertible notes.”
“If, indeed, India had no foreign trade, and no permanent debt, but only
village every-day transactions for ready money, then she might endure the evils
of an ever changing value of her currency with comparative ease and indifference.
The alterations of the currency’s worth would be very slow, and the loss would
be distributed in small fractions all over the community. But large and abiding
debts, great freight trade, much credit and the like, would inflict terrible losses
and inconveniences.”
2. In the above, the difference between my correspondent
and myself is that his remarks apply to the cosmopolitan, and
mine to the local value of coins; for although it is quite true
that, when the introduction and withdrawal of coins from circu-
lation is absolutely free, Aristotle’s definition of coining applies,
and the coins circulate and pass for only their world-wide
metallic value; so it is equally true that when the supply of the
coins is strictly limited, they may, if legal tender, have a higher
local value, either when, as in the case of our shillings and half


clowns, their worth is regulated by that of a superior currency ;
or, as in the case of inconvertible notes, their value is regulated
by the proportion of the supply to the demand. My corre-
spondent’s j)ersonal experience in Geneva merely proves this,
that outside of any country in which a coin might possess a
local value, it passes only as a piece of metal.
3. Hence it appears, that the principles which are quite true
as applied to the original and primitive establishment of cur-
rent coins, require considerable modification when they are
brought to bear upon some of the methods for measuring and
transferring values subsequently invented, and which have long
received the sanction of successful experience. It will be
necessary to examine these in detail, in order to understand
properly the proposals under consideration.
4. And, first of all, it is very necessary to examine closely
the meaning of the statement that coins circulate and pass for
their simple metallic value. What is that metallic value ?
Is it not the aggregate of all the expenses unavoidably incurred
in bringing metal to the market ? It has been well explained
in regard to metallic gold, that “ If the miner fails to obtain
“ lor his gold ore a quantity of goods sufficient to replace what
“ the mining has cost him, with a reasonable profit for himself,
“he gives up the business and abandons the mine.*” The same
is true also with regard to the coins. They must exchange in
the market for a sufficiency of goods to replace all the expenses
unavoidably incurred in bringing them there, or they will not
be brought. Fewer coins will then be produced, “ the demand
for them continues, they rise in value and exchange for a larger
quantity of other commodities ; that is, the price of every thing
sold falls,”f till the equilibrium is gained.
3
* Bonamy Price, Currency and Banking p. 20.
f Ibid p. 21.


5. Let us now go a little further, and say that if the metal of
which the coins are struck should cost the merchant double the
present expense, the coins (cceteris paribus) would exchange
for doable the number of goods; and the same would also be
true whether the tax were laid on the metal at the mine’s
mouth, or upon the coin at the mint’s mouth, so to speak. If
it were absolutely impossible by any means whatsoever to pro-
cure a sovereign, weighing 123-274 grains of standard gold,
without surrendering 246-548 grains of the same gold, the
sovereign so obtained would exchange for double the amount
of goods now commanded by it.
6. It would be no answer to this argument to say that, in the
case of a seignorage or tax, the coins would not be worth more,
because no waste actually occurred, and the number retained
by the State are put into the market; for it is not the produce
of the whole bulk of metal delivered to the Mint, but only that
part of its produce which the miner receives for his share which
influences the further supply.
7. lienee we see that a tax, such as a “ seignorage ” if it
be quite unavoidable , necessarily adds to the market value of a
coin ; and that it is possible for a coin, under certain circum-
stances, and within the territories to which such circumstances
apply, to command goods in exchange to a greater extent than
the mere metallic value of its contents; although it is true that,
geneially, the principal or standard coins of every country are
manufactured for the public at a trifling expense, and it is
contrary to sound policy to burthen the chief instruments of
exchange with any tax whatever.
8. It is possible, therefore, by seignorage to cause a me-
tallic currency to pass in local exchange for goods at a higher
value than that of its metallic contents in the metal market.


lliere is another case in which the same phenomenon may
occur.
9. The quantity of current money required by any
country depends upon the number of its cash transactions, the
rapidity of circulation, the means of economising cash, and a
vaiiety of circumstances which vary in different countries, and
and at different times iq the same country. "When the currency
consists of full weight untaxed metallic coins, the quantity of
currency regulates itself, by a self-acting process, through its
operation on prices. When such coins are in excess, and do
not exchange for the same value of commodities as they do in
other countries, they are withdrawn and sent abroad; when
they are deficient, they are found to exchange for more value
of commodities than in other countries, and they are conse-
quently brought in from abroad, and the equilibrium is restored.
The variations in the value of the coins, as between any two
countries, can only proceed as far as the cost of transmitting
and transferring the coins from the one currency to the other;
but when they are of full weight, and passing for their metallic
value, they will never exceed that.
10. Let us now consider the case of a country in which
the currency consists of inconvertible notes. It will be at once
perceived that, with them, the self-acting regulating principle
just mentioned does not exist. It would, no doubt, be possible to
frame regulations by which the issues and withdrawal of the
notes should be so regulated that the current value of them,
within the country, should be uniformly kept equal to that of
full weight metallic coins of the same denomination; as was the
case with Bank of England notes for many years after the sus-
pension of cash payments ; but this duty might be neglected
or for political purposes abused, and the consequence might be
variation and uncertainty in the value of money, and all the


injustice and evil consequences attending the disturbance of
contracts.*
11. Whenever, from the causes just referred to, or any
others, the limitation and regulation of the quantity of in-
convertible currency have not been attended to, and the notes
have been issued in excess, that is, beyond the requirements of
the trade of the country, the result is invariably found to be
that, although they may have the privilege of legal tender,
their value in exchange for commodities varies in inverse propor-
tion to the amount of the excessive issues.
12. The converse of this is also true, that when an
inconvertible note currency has been issued in excess, and has
partially lost its power in exchange for commodities, the gradual
withdrawal of part of it has the effect of restoring its value,
until by a due limitation, it may be brought to the full value of
standard metallic money. In like manner also, if, when all the
other circumstances remaining the same, the requirements of
trade very largely increase, without a corresponding increase in
the quantity of the circulating medium, the result is that the
latter becomes “ appreciated,” and attains a greater power of
purchase in the market, in proportion to the greater number of
cash payments which have become necessary.
13. The instance which was referred to in my first paper
(para. 25) of the “appreciation ” of the American Greenbacks
by mere reduction of numbers, is objected to, and stated not to
* The objections urged against an inconvertible paper currency properly
apply to an unregulated one. When such a currency is strictly limited, and
maintained of the full value of coins, it effects an economy to the State employ-
ing it, for it performs the duty of metallic money without the cost of it. The
chief danger of inconvertible notes consists in the risk of over-issue. This
would be impossible with the rupees when they became tokens, as the coinage of
them being stopped, they would cease to be supplied, and the self-acting regula-
tion of the currency would be effected and secured by gold.


a Pply» because “ there were not two prices for the same article.
The paper dollar had its American value and none other. In
the India case there are two values of the rupee, one, supposed
in India at 25,, the other all over the rest of the world at Is. 6d.”
But upon this I would remark that the instance not only applies,
but does so “ a fortiori” It was brought forward to show that
mere reduction of numbers would “appreciate” the instru-
ments of exchange, and the fact mentioned by Mr. Seyd proved
that mere reduction had improved the American greenbacks 77
per cent. To which might perhaps have been added the case of
Bank of England notes, previous to the resumption of cash pay-
ments. If bits of paper, which are worth next to nothing, and
have no definite engagement to pay, can be made more valuable
by restriction, surely bits of metal may be so too. It could
hardly be contended that if the American greenbacks had been
engraved upon tablets of copper, or aluminium, or stamped upon
any fibrous material having a decided value in the market, that
fact would have prevented their appreciation as money.
14. There is a third case in which coins may circulate and
exchange freely for commodities in a greater ratio than that of
their metallic worth ; and that is when they are subsidiary to
another superior currency, by which the exports and imports,
and consequently prices in a country, are regulated; and in
subordination to which smaller payments are made. Of this
character is our own silver currency.
15. It is hardly necessary to explain, that just as an
inconvertible paper currency, so a metallic token currency
may circulate in local exchange at a higher value than that of
its metallic contents; and, in regard to that part of its value in
excess of its market price, it would be seen to be the same in
principle as an inconvertible paper currency, if the latter were
supposed to consist of notes stamped upon some material which


possessed a sensible value in the market, independently of their
value as legal tender money.
16. hen, therefore, it is stated that a sale for metallic
money is an exchange by pure barter of two commodities of
equal supposed value, and also that it is impossible by mere
cessation of coinage to bring a rupee worth Is. 6d. to 2s. as
coin, an exception must be made in respect of the three cases
above-mentioned, in which either, firstly, the local value of coins
has been increased by seignorage, or secondly, a restricted
currency has by limitation been raised to a higher local power
of exchange than the market worth of the materials composing
it, or thirdly, when it is established in a position of subordina-
tion to a superior currency, by which latter the values of all
commodities are regulated.
17. £now in both these two* latter respects my proposal for
the restoration of the Indian currency is free from the difficul-
ties which have been supposed to attach to it. First, it is
proposed to completely restrict the further issues of silver
coins; and it has been shown that, owing to the improvements
under our administration, the trade of the empire has increased
and is increasing with so much rapidity, that the requirements
for circulating medium would probably ten years hence, be
double what they are present; so that even if the rupees were
now depreciated one half, there would be reason to expect that,
in that time, at all events, they would have resumed their
noimal local value; in addition to which the fact is stated that
up to a very recent period (March 1876) it has been ascer-
tained that the rupees had not on the average become materially
depreciated ; so that little or nothing has to be done, except to
I might have said “ In all three respects/’ for Indian rupees are now in
the same position as if they had been coined under a seignorage of 24£ per cent.


correct the inequalities which the disturbance of the exchange
may have effected.
18. But upon this head it is objected that we cannot re-
strict the coinage of rupees for India; that “the coinage in
“ that case would not cease. Excellent rupees would be manu-
“ factured by a new style of forgers —as good as possible, and
“ they would flood every Indian market.” Upon this point it
may be observed that, although it is true, that a strong
temptation to forgery would hereafter exist, yet it is also true
that the temptation and risk would not he greater than they
are at the present moment, and have always been in India since
the year 1835. It is not supposed by any one that the existing
rupees are now worth more than usual, hut, if anything, less.
Now, the gain by forgery being the whole value of the rupee,
minus the expense of the counterfeit, it is clear that this gain
could not be greater than it has always been, if the rupees never
exceed their former value. But instead of the forgery by
counterfeit coins, there may be hereafter the new temptation
more especially referred to by my correspondent, namely, that
of unlawful coining from true standard silver. This would be
a crime of a very different character. A Native workman, using
the more fusible inferior metals, may, without much difficulty,
produce a tolerably fair imitation of a rupee, capable of being
got rid of under favourable circumstances. In that case,
reckoning, for argument’s sake, the rupee is worth 25., his profit
would be for each counterfeit coin 25., less the value of his time
and materials. He could not produce so good an imitation of
a rupee with standard silver without much more labour and
the help of machinery, as it is an exceedingly difficult coin to
execute in true metal, and his gross profit in this case, instead
of being 25., would be only about 4d. or 6d. Thus we perceive
that the temptation to unlawful coinage of genuine rupees
could not apply to the solitary forger with his few rude im-


plements; but to be of any benefit, must be undertaken on a
large scale, and with good machinery. As has been remarked
in my first essay, para. 29, this could not occur in India without
detection, nor could the coins be imported from abroad, subject
as they would be to discovery and confiscation at the Custom
House. Nor could any Native State in friendly relations with
our Government; permit or countenance a fraudulent imitation
of our coins in a way that we could not immediately and for
ever put a stop to. Eemembering the comparative absence of
the necessary mechanical appliances and skill, it may be safely
asserted that India would be far safer from fraudulent coinage
of that kind, than England, Erance, America, and all other
countries using silver token currency, and which are liable in
the same way; and that the idea of India being supplied dis-
honestly with any thing approaching to 50, or even 5 millions
of coins per annum is quite unworthy of consideration. Hence
I venture to assume that it is quite possible to restrict the coinage
of rupees in India, and that the necessary consequences of
restriction may be safely calculated upon.
19. Secondly , It having been shown (paras. 12 & 17) that,
even if the rupees in India were at present materially reduced
in value, which lately they were not, they would be “ appre-
ciated ” by restriction till they reached their former normal
powers of local exchange, it has now to be stated that, indepen-
dently of this, if the proposals I have made be carried into effect,
the rupees would, as a matter of necessity, re-acquire their normal
value, as the subordinate tokens of a gold standard currency.
20. Here I shall be met by the exclamations, Ist, “ How
can you have a gold standard currency without gold ? 2ndly,
Where is the gold to come from ? 3rdly, Who can foresee
the consequences of ‘taking so momentous a step 5 as a
change of standard in India?”


21. It will be well to meet all these and other similar
terrified expostulations by a few frank statements; and in
regard to the first, it must he remarked that a gold standard
monetary system does not, necessarily, imply the general use,
or indeed, any use at all of a gold currency. The standard of
a country may he changed from silver to gold, and from gold
to copper, lead, tin, aluminium, or any other metal, and still the
actual currency, whether coins or notes, remain the same. The
standard depends upon, and means, the commodity or article,
by the surrender of a certain amount of which the current
legal tender money is obtainable; and the value of which com-
modity the coin consequently conveys and exchanges for. A
note which should be procurable only by the surrender of
123*274 grains of gold, that is, at the rate of £3.175. IOJd. per
ounce standard, and redeemable at the same rate, is of the same
value in exchange as a sovereign, and if the whole currency con-
sisted of such notes, they would constitute a gold standard
currency, without a single gold coin belonging to it.
22. In Scotland and Ireland this is, in a rough way, ap-
proximately the case, as the people there generally prefer the
use of notes to coins. It is true they are not inconvertible, and
it might be denied that they would circulate if they were ; but
while I would remark, in passing, that if they were properly
restricted in number they would do so, just as the Bank of
England notes did, I must add that the objection would be
quite irrelevant, as the only object of mentioning them here is
to show that a gold standard currency (not a standard gold
currency) may exist without the indispensable use of gold coins.
23. It is possible that, in any country, a gold standard cur-
rency might be established without the aid of a single gold piece
in circulation. If £1 legal tender notes were delivered on the
deposit of standard gold bullion at the rate of 123*274 grains for


each note, and if they could not possiblybe procured in any other
way, they would command in the market the same purchasing
power as our present sovereigns; and they would do this even
without being payable on demand, provided that, after the
currency had been stocked with them, the demands of the
country for circulating medium never diminished, however
slightly ; for the moment that the notes began to be produced
in excess, so as to be slightly impaired in value, it would be a
loss to any one to give gold bullion in exchange for them, and
they would cease to be produced. Hence, although in a country
like England, where, owing to innumerable circumstances, the
demand for cash may be very variable, and the regulating
check of payment of notes on demand is highly necessary,
on the other hand, in a country like India, where the commerce
is advancing with rapid strides, and the demand for circulating
medium is constantly increasing, the want of such a check is
not so important, and its temporary suspension of no conse-
quence at all. The greatest apparent evil of an inconvertible
currency is when there is a want of bullion for export; and as
a self-acting means of securing the unalterable sufficiency of
the note, it would be better, in any permanent arrangement, to
make it by law convertible into bullion. At the same time, it
must be observed that, upon the hypothesis that the notes are
kept fully up to the value of gold coins, there would be no loss
in purchasing bullion, for export, in the market.
24. Just as the business of a rapidly prospering country
could be transacted by means of paper tokens, as above, so could
it also be managed by means of metallic tokens; and all the
more certainly if the metallic tokens were already in the hands
of the people, and were readily accepted by them in exchange
for the full value they originally, cost, and at which only they
could be increased in number, as the daily enlarging requirements
of commerce called for them.


25. Such is the position of India at this moment. Its in-
habitants are in possession of a currency, which, up to a recent
date, was still circulating and received at the value of its origi-
nal cost; and if the necessary change be not postponed too
long, but measures be promptly taken to secure that the cost of
procuring rupees hereafter shall be not less than what it formerly
was, before the decline in the value of silver, there would be no
difficulty in maintaining their original value, and causing them
to take thcii place as subordinate parts of a superior currency,
to be afterwards gradually supplied, and founded upon a gold
standard.
26. By the measures proposed, the Government would
not be called upon to provide any portion of the
metal required; and hence the first question to which
I have referred in paragraph 20 meets with an answer,
which shows that the standard of value of a country
may be changed without the acquisition by the Govern-
ment of the new metal constituting it. The second question
also is answered by the above remarks. The parties who
propose it are evidently ignorant of the fact that the Govern-
ment of India, as a rule, have nothing whatever to do with the
provision of the precious metals to be coined, any more than
of the letters carried by the Postal Department. Parties
engaged in commerce, chiefly, and all the public enjoy the
privilege of having the precious metals coined, and it is there-
fore from the public that the metal would be obtained for any
coins required by them.
27. It may be as well now to draw attention to the fact
that the standard of value is a measure of the labour and ex-
pense, that is, “ capital expended in producing articles in a
market for sale j and that theßoyal metals have been used for the
purpose of this measure because, together with other qualities,
they have been for lengthened periods nearly uniform in


their relation in this respect to one another and all other
commodities ; but we may add that any other substance equally
convenient would have answered the purpose. Supposing, for
instance, Platinum had a perfectly steady, and uniform, and
readily saleable value of 30s. per ounce, and it were thought
desirable, besides the English gold standard, to establish also
that of Platinum. Apart from legal objections, which might
be innumerable, there would be no difficulty in declaring by
statute that coins might be minted without charge, containing
as many grains of platinum as would be precisely equal in value
to the 123’274 grains of standard gold contained in a sovereign,
and should be admitted into circulation, having the same legal
tender as our sovereigns. When the public had become fami-
liarised with the use of them, they would pass current freely,
and no injury would be done; for it is assumed that they would
cost precisely as much as sovereigns, and be readily saleable for
as much. But this would be a double standard. If, after a
time, when the platinum coins were fully established, the re-
ception of gold by the mint were stopped ; that would constitute
a change of standard. Admitting all the particulars of the
hypothesis, it is conceivable that the change might be effected
without disturbance or injury to any one.
28. As an illustration of the propriety of the proposed inter-
ference on the part of the Government, let us suppose that, owing
to some unforeseen convulsion of nature, it were discovered that
the length of the pendulum vibrating seconds, on which our stand-
ard yard measure is founded, had gradually declined, from 39J
inches to 27 inches, and it were well known that innumerable
contracts founded upon the legal standard had been vitiated
by the change, which was still going on, to the enormous loss
and distress of the commercial world. Can we conceive it
possible that the Government would hesitate to take immediate
measures for substituting in lieu of the defaulting standard,
the equivalent measure of some other more reliable one, such as


the corresponding portion of the earth’s axis, or the French
metre ? They would be satisfied that in faithfully re-establishing
a measure of correct dimensions, they were not only not incurring
a “ momentous ” responsibility and creating a “ revolutionary ”
change, but that they were simply doing their duty by arresting
the mischief and restoring order.
29. Admitting, then, that it is the duty of the Indian Govern-
ment to guard the standard measure of value, and prevent its
alteration; that is to say, in other words, to keep the labour and
expense, or the cost, of procuring rupees as much as possible
constant and invariable, it is obvious that when the cost of
procuring the rupee has become less, it is indispensable to its
truth and accuracy as a measure of value that it should be
restored lo what it was, and uniformly kept so, as long as it is
retained as a measure. Ten years ago the cost of procuring, that
is the value of 10 rupees, was steadily the same as that of half a
quarter of wheat worth 40s. per quarter. Since that time the cost
of the rupees has fallen 23 per cent., and it would appear to be
clearly the duty of the Government to see that they are restored
to their former cost and value in India, so as to command the
same half-quarter of wdieat and other commodities as before;
just as much as it wmuld be their duty to restore the truth
of any other standard measure. This duty might he fulfilled
without changing the standard, by increasing the charge
for coining silver, more, and more, as the latter became
of less and less value in the market; or by an import duty on
silver bullion and uncurrent coins; but as these might give rise
to opposition, it is satisfactory to know that they are not neces-
sary, and that the required improvement can surely be brought
about by the “ appreciation ” of the rupee and the gradual rise
of the exchanges.
30. We must remember that the rate of exchange with
India depends upon, and in fact is, the price at which current
rupees can be procured. When they can only be had, as pro-


posed, by delivering an ounce of standard gold, worth 933 d., for
38 Us. Idas., every rupee costs and becomes in currency worth
2dd., and will for ever continue worth that, unless admission
into the currency should at any time be made cheaper. The
rupees cannot possibly leave the currency, as they would be
comparatively worthless outside of it ; but they will purchase,
at the same rate which was given for them, viz., 38 Ids. Idas,
per ounce, gold which may he required for barter or export, till
there is a plentiful diffusion of gold coins available for the pur-
pose.
31. Another objection pointed out by my friendly critic
has no doubt proved an obstacle in many minds, and it is ex-
pressed in the following sentences : —“ Gold would never come
out to India in exchange for 2/- rupees, or ten of them for a
sovereign, when the rupees were worth only 1/6 everywhere
else.” “ The holders of gold would hold it tight, except upon
a premium, which would practically make the rupee worth 1/6
only.” Now, in answer to this seemingly formidable objection, it
is only necessary to draw attention to the fact that the commerce
of India has for the last eight years required returns in silver
and hills at the rate, on average, of 17* millions of pounds
sterling per annum. That is the amount which it has been
absolutely necessary should be obtained directly in metallic
currency, after the exhaustion of all means of making returns
by goods. Such being the case, when 17 millions of pounds
sterling must be had in rupees, and can only be obtained by
Council bills or gold, it is obvious that the rate of the Council
bills must rise to that of gold, or 2s. per rupee. When that rate
has been arrived at the price of gold in India necessarily falls
to 38 Rs. Id as.f; and the rupee is worth 2s. in gold and
everything else. So far from a premium or “hatta” on gold
interfering with my proposed plan; it is contemplated and in-
* Vide Report of Committee on the Depreciation of Silver, pp. 32, 33.
f Vide Appendix, para. 18.


tended to be rather an assistance to it.* If it should be high
at first it would facilitate the introduction of the gold; and as
the rupee became " appreciated ” and established at its true
former value, and the supply of gold coins more plentiful, it
would gradually fall till it disappeared entirely ; after which
the gold coins would in due course be made demandable, and
the payments in silver more or less restricted.f
32. The remark is made that there is no remedy but de-
monetisation, to which it may be replied that my proposals do in
fact amount to nothing less than demonetisation; but it is demo-
netisation altogether free from the very serious difficulties which
have accompanied it on some occasions. When it is resolved
by a state possessing a full-weight silver currency to change
the standard to gold, and reduce the silver coins to a subsidiary
condition, it is necessary to call in and recoin the latter, in order
to make them of less value than their denomination outside
the currency, and so prevent all the evils of a double standard.
But in the case of India at the present moment, this, for-
tunately, is quite unnecessary ; because hitherto, although our
rupees have retained the high value they formerly possessed,
and which would be embodied in the future gold coins, they are
already of about 23 per cent, less value outside the currency than
* Vide Ist Essay, paragraph 44. 2ndly.
t In India gold coin would be hailed with gladness by the people, but they
would at first be used chiefly for hoarding and transactions with foreign traders.
For years to come, the vast bulk of the internal transactions of India will be
carried on by silver, the circumstances of the country being very different from
those of European nations, A.s long as the supply of the silver currency is in
the hands of the Government, the use of gold coins will be capable of being, in
some measure, regulated. If the supply of silver currency be overdone, the gold
will leave the country ; if it be kept short, more gold will be brought in again.
This would only take place slowly, and by the action on prices; and the scarcity
or abundance of the supply of gold to meet the wants of the people would be
indicated by its commanding an agio. But it must be remembered that, inde-
pendently of relative values, a premium upon new coins is unavoidable, at first,
to meet the reasonable profit of the money-changer.


the new denomination, as part of a gold standard currency,
would give them, and they would remain immovably fixed in
the currency as long as they lasted. If, indeed, my proposal in-
volved the necessity of recoining the whole 1,500 millions of
rupee pieces now in India, in addition to the fresh supplies of
silver brought in by commerce, it would be a formidable under-
taking ; and it would be a very expensive process also, as there
would be no room for any profit. But happily, as just ex-
plained, no such recoinage would be necessary; the existing
rupee currency would go on fulfilling its functions without
any change, except a very gradual appreciation, or increase of
exchangeable value; so gradual indeed that the vast bulk of
those habitually using the coins would be utterly unconscious of it.
33. Although not referred to by ray able correspondent, I
think it may be of some use if I here notice the proposal made
by M. Cernuschi for the establishment of what he lias termed
bi-metallic money.
34. This project appears to be, that an agreement should
be entered into by all the principal nations of the world to
establish double standard currencies, on the basis of the free
coinage of gold and silver, in the unalterable relation of
by weight of the latter, for one of the former ; and the main
argument in support of the scheme is that, if it be carried out,
the demand for silver would be so much increased, and that for
gold so muck diminished, that they would gradually approxi-
mate to one another in value, owing to increase and diminu-
tion of supply, and in the end would settle down in the
ratio fixed by the law of all countries.
35. This proposal may perhaps be very tempting to France
and Germany, at the present moment, as they possess large
masses of silver currency they wish to dispose of; for it would
give the silver a status and value it is not likely to attain in any
other way, and save them from very heavy losses. It might


also be tempting to India, if it were necessary to get rid of her
silver currency to establish gold, which fortunately it is not.
But let us look at the suggestion in a practical light, and judge
by the consequences necessarily involved in it, whether there is
any probability of its early successful accomplishment.
36. Even if we were to admit that, supposing the measure
carried out to its full extent, it would be attended with all the
advantages claimed for it by its author, yet it would be enough to
say that as it essentially requires the consent of so many of the
nations of the world, the time unavoidably spent in negotiations
before the result could be accomplished would forbid the idea
of resorting to it as a remedy for the present Indian difficulty,
which urgently demands immediate action. Let us assume,
however, that this difficulty does not exist, that universal con-
sent has been obtained, and laws universally established upon
the basis required ; and even, moreover, let us for argument’s
sake, grant that the results contemplated have taken place, and
that the two metals have become finally settled in their relations
to one another, namely, in the ratio of 15J to 1.
37. Let us further, too, for argument’s sake, allow that the
tw r o metals in approximating to one another, yield equally ; that
gold from the diminution of demand, falls in value as much as
silver by the increase of its demand is appreciated ; and also that
they start from the present position of things; in other words
that before the new system and laws come into operation,
there is no further loss of the value of silver, which will therefore
be reckoned at 48d. per standard ounce; and, considering that
neither the Erench francs nor the German thalers have been
yet sent to market, this is making a very large concession ; the
result to Great Britain would be as follows :
38. If the price of standard silver he 4 Bd. per ounce of 441
4


grains, that of the ounce of pure silver containing 480 grains is
51*8918d., and if the price of standard gold containing 440 grains
be 934*5d., the corresponding price for the ounce of pure
metal is 1010* 27d. Hence the price of ounces of pure silver
is 804*323d. and the difference between that and the ounce of
pure gold is 205*947d. If we suppose the silver to rise, and the
gold to fall equally, so as to meet half-way between their present
positions, the result would he a declension in the present value
of gold of 102* 973 d. out of 1010*27 or 10*19 per cent., in which
ratio the pound sterling and every other value connected with
it would be impoverished.
39. It is true that such a change might be effected, and
that tables of compensation might be prepared for the adjustment
of every value and of all contracts in the kingdom ; but going
back to the position in which we w’ere just now placed, before the
enactment of any law upon the subject, it will be evident that
if the rectification of the Indian exchanges be made dependent
upon the agreement of the British public to so large and com-
plicated a measure as would be involved in the adoption of the
bi-metallic system, it would be tantamount to the postpone-
ment for years of a remedy urgently required within a few
weeks; and that even if it were sure that the bi-metallic
system would be eventually adopted by the whole world, it
would be absolutely necessary to legislate in the meanwhile
to remove the present immediate and urgent distress in
India.
40. If I might without impropriety venture to express
an opinion as to the course to be adopted by the advocates
of the bi-metallic system, I would very respectfully observe
that if, instead of pursuing an attractive theory, they would
adopt the arrangement proposed for India, namely, allow things
to remain as they are, continuing the legal tender of both


metals, but prohibiting the future coinage of silver except
upon the vote of the representatives of the nation, they would
do all that is practicable towards lessening the evils of the
sudden change in value of the precious metals, and provide
fully for the wants of commerce by an arrangement differing
almost imperceptibly from the existing system.*
4d. Before concluding, I think it may be very desirable that
I should succinctly state some of the objects which it is necessary
to aim at in arranging a plan for the restoration of the Indian cur-
rency, the difficulties connected with a change, and the dangers
to be guarded against in carrying it out: and at the same time
explain how these have been foreseen and provided for by the
measures I have endeavoured to advocate. The proposal being
to establish a full weight metallic gold currency at the head
* It has been explained in Essay No. 2, paras. 21 to 24, that it would be
possible to have in any country a gold standard currency without gold coins, and
this was illustrated by the fact that both in Scotland and Ireland, where gold is
the standard of value, very few gold coins are in circulation. As a corollary to
this, it follows that if all the chief European nations were to adopt a gold
standard of valuation, it would not necessarily happen that the relations of value
between gold and silver should be thereby prejudiced; on the contrary, they
might possibly be improved thereby. If, for instance, all the nations used no
gold for their internal circulation, but only silver or notes, or both, strictly regu-
lated by gold—using the latter in the form of bullion exclusively for the exports
and imports, and thereby the regulation of their internal currency and prices—it
will be evident that there would be a much smaller use of gold, and a larger
use of silver; and, as silver would hold in all these countries a subordinate
position, commerce could in no direction whatever be prejudiced by any fluctua-
tion in the relative values of the two precious metals. If instead of dispensing
altogether with use of gold for internal circulation, means were adopted, by
agreement of all countries, for its use to a limited extent, the relative demand
for the two metals might be, in a great measure, controlled, and variations in
their relative values checked and moderated.


of the present silver one, the following are the chief objects and
supposed difficulties :
Ist. Supposed difficulty. —To provide a stock of gold.
2nd. Do. —To provide a currency for use, when the
present rupees are demonetised.
3rd. Object.—To avoid the difficulties inseparable from
a double standard, which has been proposed by almost
all writers upon the subject.
4th. Do. —To establish the new r currency in easy and simple
relations with that of Great Britain.
sth. Do. —To avoid any loss in the value of the Indian
revenue.
6th. Do. —To avoid any material alteration of present
prices and contracts.
42. All these objects are believed to he realised by a
combination of the measures proposed, which embody the
following principles.—
Ist. The practical exclusion of silver from the mints in
favour of gold.
2nd. The consequent spontaneous admission of gold into
the currency, by the mere balance of trade only.
3rd. The establishment of the present rupee currency at
the value it has formerly held, and still holds, in rela-
tion to commodities in India, by stopping further
silver coinage, and making the exchange at 2s. per
rupee, the limit for the admission of gold.


4th. By utilising the present silver currency at its full
local value for all payments till they can he made hy
gold.
sth. By the gradual legalisation of gold without, at any
time, permitting a double standard.
6th. By the final settlement of the silver rupees as purely
auxiliary tokens when the gold coins are sufficiently
abundant for all payments, and can be made legally
demandable.
43. Returning now to the supposed difficulties to be over-
come and objects to be attained stated in para. 41. It may now
be explained that th e, first named difficulties of the want of gold
to form a gold currency, and of a stock of gold coins to enable
the Government to declare them legal tender ; and to make gold
the standard of value; are met and overcome by the facts, Ist, that
a gold standard may exist with any kind of currency, provided
the latter can only be obtained by the delivery of gold; and
2ndly, that gold coins may be introduced as legal tender, and
enter the currency by degrees, provided that they be not made
demandable without due notice, and then only in such propor-
tions, and at such times as the stock of coins in the country
admit of it.
44. Secondly.— The supposed difficulty—that of providing a
currency for use when the present rupees are demonetised, is dis-
posed of by the fact that although silver is demonetised, the coins
retain their present full local value, and are as useful for all
future time within the country as they have ever been. As, in
fact, it is not proposed to demonetise the rupees, this supposed
difficulty has no existence.
45. Thirdly. —The difficulties supposed to arise from the


temporary existence of a double standard, evidently do not exist,
according to my proposal; because, from the moment the recep-
tion of silver by the mints is stopped, and the currency is made
procurable only by the delivery of gold, the standard would be
changed to gold, and the silver coins become subsidiary. They
would retain their former value, but it would be local only. The
gold, circulating at its world-wide value, would effect the self-
acting regulation of the currency.
4b. Fourthly. —The object of establishing the new currency
in an easy and simple relation with that of Great Britain is effected
by fixing the exchanges at 2s. per rupee, which is proved by the
elaborate analysis and investigation laid before the Society of
Arts in 1870, to have been as nearly as possible the true average
of its value for the 15 years previous to that time.
47. Fifthly. —The object here indicated is also gained by the
arrangement just mentioned, as it would fix the exchanges for
all future time within the smallest trifle of 2s. per rupee, and
the present value of the Indian revenues at 50 millions sterling
per annum.
48. Sixthly. —The avoidance of any material alteration of
present prices and contracts will evidently be secured by con-
tinuing to use the present currency as it stands, provided the
measures proposed be not delayed too long, and the violent
strain which is now brought upon commerce by the derange-
ment of the exchanges allowed to disorganise existing prices.
49. The following is the probable course of events if the
proposed measures be adopted. The Government would, with
or without successive steps, practically close the Mints to
silver. The exchanges would then rise, till they reached 2s.


per rupee, the price of gold bullion falling “ pari passu” to less
than 1G rupees per tola pure, after which it would be brought
to the Mint for coinage.
50. The existing rupees would continue to occupy the
place they have always held in the currency; and prices, if
and so far as at present deranged, would insensibly resume and
for ever retain their former scale. The price of gold being
reduced to the normal rate of 38Es. Idas, per standard ounce,
or 13R s. Idas, per tola pure,* will be procurable in exchange
for rupees without loss, when required for foreign barter or
export, pending the time when an abundant sujiply of gold
coins shall have been diffused throughout the country. When,
also, a stock of gold has been accumulated as cover to the issue
of currency notes, a large fund will be readily available for the
same purposes. The way to the prompt restoration of the
exchange and currency is to be found in the absolute control
gained by the Secretary of State the moment that the ruining
competition of cheap silver is got rid of.
51. Finally. —I am anxious to refer to a remark which is
sometimes made applicable to my proposals, namely, that the
rupees would have a “forced” currency, and an “artificial”
value. Such an epithet is rarely applied to our shillings and
half-crowns, which circulate very readily without forcing; and
in regard to artificial value, this expression is never used as to
the price of highly-taxed commodities, such as ardent spirits.
And in this particular case it is in one sense hardly correct; for
what an article actually costs to bring it to market is a real value
when there, although it may be cheaper elsewhere. I would also
notice an expression used by more than one respectable writer.
* Gold could be delivered much cheaper, and has been sold even as low as
14Es. Bas. 5 \ pies per tola. Yide my “ Eemarks upon a gold currency for
India,” note to p. 28,


and referred to in para. 20, speaking of the “ momentous step ,f
of changing the standard. If the remarks upon this subject
which have been already made have afforded the expla-
nation intended, it will be understood that the momentous
thing is, not the rectification of the standard, but the vast
mischief that has been caused by its haying got out of
order; in other words, that it would he as appropriate to
speak of the momentous step taken by a man who had fallen
into a ditch scrambling out of it, as to apply that term to the
necessary rectification of the measure of value in India. It
will also be apparent, from what has gone before, that no
difficulty, and not the slightest expense, vtould attend the
measure, on the contrary, if we take into consideration the
heavy losses prevented by the change, a very large profit to the
Government would be realised.
J. T. SMITH.
London,
August , 1876.


ESSAY No. 3.
CONTAINING ANSWERS TO SOME FURTHER OBJECTIONS.
1. The proposal of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce to
stop the coinage of rupees, has been objected to on the ground
that its effect would be to hold out the greatest stimulus to
private coinage which has ever been given in the world. That
the Americans will not lose the Indian markets if they can
help it, and if the Government will not coin these rupees, they
will do it for themselves, that no law will be able to keep what
they coin out of India.
2. This objection has been remarked upon in my Essay No.
1, paras. 28 & 29, and in No. 2, paragraph 18 ; and I have there
stated that the “ stimulus ” to forgery in India is not greater
than it has always been since 1835, and is at present; nor
as to unlawful coinage sensibly greater in India than
it is in France or England ; and that it is not within the
bounds of reasonable probability that fifty millions, or even
five millions of rupees per annum should be smuggled
into the country. The coiners must indeed be much more
successful than is at all likely, if they should succeed in
smuggling one million, or even half a million of coins annually
into India; and the utmost amount of mischief they could
do, if they succeeded in smuggling in fifty millions annually,
would be to delay the “appreciation of the currency.”
3. A great deal has been written also respecting the evils
of an “ appreciation ” of the currency, which have been stated
to be an “ obstacle to commerce.” But according to the plan
I propose, just the opposite is the case. It is the fact that the


currency is at present “ appreciated,” in the sense of being
worth more in exchange for commodities than its metallic value;
and the effect of the proposal of the Calcutta Chamber of
Commerce would be to prevent its depreciation, and to keep it,
for the moment, in the same position as the 5-franc pieces in
France. But, as regards the obstacle to commerce, the proposal
of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce is only so far defective,
that it does not go far enough. It is only a half measure. If,
in addition to closing the mints for silver, they had proposed to
open them for gold, at a certain limit, that would have estab-
lished the “ specie point,” the want of which is referred to as
being so mischievous.
4. Again, as to the obstacle to commerce, it would seem
to be implied that an obstacle would be created which does
not exist at present. Is this true ? On the contrary, is it not
the case that there is an obstacle to commerce now ? By way
of determining whether there would be any fresh obstacle, let
us consider what would be the effect of stopping the coinage
of silver, the mints being open to receive gold. If the coinage
of rupees were stopped to-day, and the Secretary of State were
to issue bills at a minimum rate of 2s. per rupee, the mints
being open for gold, as proposed by me, the rate of exchange
must inevitably rise to 25., and would remain so for all future
time, as long as that state of things existed, and with barely
the slightest fluctuation. Would that be an obstacle to com-
merce ? Would it not, on the contrary, be a vast improvement
on the present state of things ?
5. It is not recommended that the Secretary of State should
thus arbitrarily raise his demand, and that suddenly; but if lie
only left it to competition, the alternative being gold at the
rate of 38 Bs. 14 as. per oz., it would most certainly rise of
itself ; and then all further trouble and all further loss would
be at an end.


6. What is the “ true remedy” which has been recom-
mended ? It is as follows :—“ not to impede silver going to
“ India, but to permit the laws of trade to diffuse silver through
<c India and through the world.” This might be all very well if
India had no connection with England, no fixed silver revenues,
and no gold liabilities ; but having that intimate relation with
her, it is but common prudence to consider what may be the
consequences of leaving matters alone.
7. It has been said that in some mines silver can be
produced at as low a rate as Is. 6d. per ounce. If by any
possibility that should be the future permanent price of silver,
in gold, what would be the effect on the Indian revenues ?
8. This result, if it were within the range of even remote
probability, ought, at the least, to be considered. What is it ?
It would indicate a reduction in value of the Indian revenues
by nearly three-fourths of their whole amount! As it may,
however, be considered an extravagant supposition, let us sup-
pose the permanent future value of silver, stated in gold, is 4s.
per ounce. How would that affect the Indian revenues ?
9. It would inflict a permanent loss in the European value
of our revenues of eleven and a half millions sterling per
annum; and admitting that, in time, much of this might be
recovered, it is certain that two-fifths of it would be wholly
beyond early redemption.
10. What is the alternative proposed by me ? It is, that
the rupees being already “ appreciated,” should not be allowed
to fall; that the further wants of the country should be pro-
vided for by admitting gold, which would take the lead in the
currency, and for ever put an end to variations in the rate of
exchange.


11. It has been stated that my argument in favour of the
suggestion, that a Gold Standard might he adopted in India
without buying the gold, is based upon a supposed balance of
trade of India, as follows :
“ According to the last return there was a balance of trade during the last
eight years of 17 millions sterling in favour of India. By adopting a gold
standard they would make their balance payable, not as it was now, in silver?
but in gold, and in this way they would obtain the necessary gold. If there
was a balance of 17 millions sterling in favour of India, in the first place, the
balance was in rupees converted, at 2s. the rupee, into gold. In the second
place, against the balance of trade they had the India Office draughts upon
India, amounting to 15 millions sterling in gold, to which must be added all
private remittances from India, amounting to several fnillions. There are,
therefore, grave doubts as to the large reputed balance in favour of India,
after taking into account all these transactions. But if there were a balance
of trade in favour of India, it was due to the expansion of her export trade,
and as the rise of prices in India had not corresponded to the fall of silver in
London and elsewhere, the export trade was now greatly stimulated. The sole
object in adopting a gold standard in India was to raise the value of the rupee
outside India, and the effect of thus suddenly raising the value of the rupee
would be at once to check and curtail the export trade. But the scheme being
based entirely upon the excess of exports over imports, the first result of its
adoption would be to check natural causes now operating in our favour, and so
destroy the foundation on which it rested.”
12. The above does not at all represent my views; my argu-
ment that a gold standard might he established without buying
the gold, had in reality nothing to do with the balance of trade.
It was founded upon the fact that a gold standard and a gold
currency are not necessarily connected, and that a currency
made of paper or of rupees might be based upon gold —that is,
upon a gold standard —without having a single gold coin in
circulation.
13. The fact, taken from the report of the Committee, of the
actual remittances to India at the rate of seventeen millions
per annum in specie and hills, was used in support of a very
different argument, in which it was quite immaterial whether


the figures represented pounds sterling or the calculated value
of rupees at 2s. per rupee. The argument, which will he found
in Essay No. 2, para. 31, merely requires the admission of the
fact that there is a very large balance remitted to India in
specie and bills.
14. Let me repeat, that a gold standard and a gold currency
are totally different things. If the Secretary of State for
India were to forbid the future coinage of silver for individuals,
and at the same time declare that for ever hereafter he would
issue bills on the Indian Treasury to all applicants at 2s. per
rupee, he would virtually have changed the standard by that
single act, and the rupee currency would from that date be
based upon gold.* If this statement be fully considered, it
will be seen clearly, that the change of standard is not so
very formidable an undertaking as has been supposed.
15. In regard to gold currency , that certainly does require
the use of gold, and I have stated my belief that it would be
gradually brought into India and accumulate there, although
I admitted that it would always be the first to leave the country.
But this belief was not founded upon balances of trade pro-
duced by the stimulus referred to ; it was based upon the
expectation that the increase of the commerce of India would
require an increase of her circulating medium, at least as
large as that which it has been proved to have required in
past years ; and no one who considers the probable, indeed
certain effect of the vast efforts made by the Government of
late years in opening the means of communication, and afford-
ing facilities for trade, can doubt that it will be even much
greater. If it be so, if in the course of the next 39 years only
* It might perhaps he desirable to adopt this as a tentative measure, the coinage of
rupees on private account being only suspended till further notice. This might be continued
for a considerable time, with or without the use of gold coins, if a sufficient supply of the
ordinary coinage were kept up by the Government. By regulating the amount of bills put
into the market from time to time, the rate of exchange might be raised by competition to a
high figure; but it would be advisable to fix a maximum rate at which bills might always
be had, in order to provide for the necessities of commerce.


as much be added to the currency in gold as Colonel Hyde
states was added to it in silver during the period from 1833-6
to 1871-5, namely, 167 millions sterling, my expectations will
be fully realised; and more than sufficient gold coins for the
use of the public will have been established in circulation.
16. But it may be said that no additions can he made to the
circulation except by means of the coinage of precious metal
brought in by the balance of trade; and, consequently that a
scheme which is based entirely upon the excess of exports over
imports, and which checks the causes now operating in its
favour, stimulating the export, and discouraging the import
trade, must, as a result, destroy the foundation upon which it
rests.
17. This argument, which appears to he only reasonable and
conclusive, is nevertheless in reality fallacious and inapplicable
to the real circumstances of the case. In order to examine it
thoroughly it is necessary to separate the extraordinary and
abnormal stimulus now given to the export trade of India, occa-
sioned by the fall of silver, from the natural and healthy stimulus
necessarily occasioned by the increase of commerce. It is
enough to say regarding these, that the former, which is tem-
porary and accidental, will, if not stopped, work its own com-
paratively speedy cure, by causing importations of silver bullion,
flooding the currency, and raising all prices till the present
“appreciation ” or difference in the value of the rupees in and
out of India ceases to exist; and it is this which it is desirable
to prevent, because it would carry with it a heavy loss of the
Indian revenues. The latter is the natural and self-actino*
corrective of the insufficiency of the circulating medium arising
from the expansion of commerce, and which, acting slowly by the
insensible “ appreciation ” of the insufficient currency, draws to
itself the requisite supplemental coinage, through the agency of
the favorable balances of trade, which it steadily and persistently


creates; in the same manner as the accidental “ appreciation ”
is now working the same result.
18. The same “ appreciation” of the currency, and balances of
trade will continue and occur, when the expansion of commerce
requires it, whether the rupee he now fixed at 2s. hy selling it
for gold only, or he allowed to sink to Is. Gd. hy a comparatively
sudden influx of silver. And it is not correct to say that the
measure wdiich would stop the influx, and fix the rupee at 25.,
would prevent the future balances of trade, which would be
caused from time to time as the currency became too small for
the work it had to do ; or that it would destroy the foundation
on which it rests. That foundation is the future increase of the
currency ; and if it can be affirmed with any show of reason or
probability that 20 years hence the currency of India will be of
no greater value than it is at present, then it must be admitted
that there will be nothing to represent the value of gold coins
to be introduced during the interval, except that of the silver
coins destroyed or lost out of circulation.
19. Another argument brought against my proposals is the
difficulty of procuring the gold, in consequence of the large
amount of that metal as well as silver used for the manufacture
of ornaments,or hoarded; but this objection is, I trust, suffici-
ently met by the fact that I have only reckoned upon the same
additions being made to the currency in future, as it has been
proved have been made in past years, in spite of the hoarding
and ornaments ; and also that, as the standard can be changed
without the possession of a single ounce of gold, there is not
the least difficulty to be apprehended in doing so at once;
thereby for ever putting an end to all but trifling fluctuations
of the exchange, and awaiting the gradual establishment of the
gold currency, as the expansion of commerce shall call for and
introduce it.
20. The following objections have been urged against the
explanations given in my second essay.


In regard to para. 5 it is said—
“ The * cseteris paribus' spoils the argument. The coins will exchange for
double only if they do not encounter the metal cheaper in bullion, consequently
the ‘if it be quite unavoidable’ (in para. 7) must be proved, and it is not
unavoidable if cheap bullion competes. A small seignorage is sustainable
because the stamping and coining are processes worth something above bullion.”
21. This objection is, perhaps, due to my omission to explain
the nature of the “legal tender” and its effect in the market.
Having legal tender, hits of paper, containing no definite promise
to pay, nevertheless exchange for value, and sometimes equal to
full weight coins; and bits of metal when stamped and of legal
tender do the same. There is absolutely no competition between
coins which have legal tender and bullion which has not. The
latter not being available for the legal discharge of debts, or
for the payment of any tax or impost, naturally commands only
an inferior place in the market, the difference representing the
“ appreciation ” of the coins, whether by seignorage or any
other cause. The effect of seignorage or other “ appreciation ”
is to raise the local value of coins above that of bullion.
22. It is unnecessary to prove that which is matter of
hypothesis, namely, that the seignorage payable to procure
coins is quite unavoidable ; because when a seignorage is estab-
lished by law, it is impossible to obtain new coins without paying
it. Bits of bullion are not coins, and are useless for very many
purposes for which coins must be had, at any price.
23. In para. 16 my statement as to the three exceptions to
be made is admitted with the following limitations :
“A, for a trifling seignorage. B, if restricted and having no competitor
at a cheaper rate. C, if the subsidiary or token currency of metal has no great
divergence of true metallic value.”
“ Silver is legal tender here only up to 40s. Below that the metallic
value is near enough, but if the silver depreciation abides, shillings will be coined
by forgers I am persuaded, and they will have to be increased in weight.”


24. The remark under Bis also applied to para. 17, but
the answers already given will he sufficient. It must he allowed
that when the divergence of metallic value is very great, the
temptation to unlawful coinage is much increased; but as I have
explained in No. 2, para. 18, the danger is far less in India
than in European countries,
25. In regard to this same para. 18, my correspondent
writes :
“ There is something in this reasoning. To forge genuine silver rupees
may be very difficult for India, Ido not at all think that, the great difference
of value abiding, it would be impossible, but it is here shown to be hard. Still
I would back the forger as likely to win in the long run. The temptation woidd
be so enormous, and the gain so large. And do not forget that coin is easily
smuggled, it lies in small compass, and would come in in driblets. India has
many pores through which a little coined metal might penetrate,”
26. On this objection it does not appear to he necessary
to make any further remark than (referring to Essay 2, para.
18), to draw attention to the facts that the gain by coinage of
genuine rupees, with all the expenses of dishonest distribution,
would not probably be “ enormousand that even if a small
number were successfully smuggled into the country, they
would form hut an insignificant proportion of the 10 or 50
millions of rupees annually required.
27. Of course the importation of foreign made coins must
be prohibited, and they must be rendered liable to confiscation ;
the necessity for guarding against smuggling being an incon-
venience which must be tolerated by India, as well as
other countries, if we are to prevent rupees from sinking
in value together with silver. But the temptation to unlaw-
ful coinage might be gradually reduced and extinguished
if, after the price of silver was settled and become steady,
the Government were from time to time to replenish the
currency with heavier new token coins at 10 per cent,
seignorage; making use of the profits thus obtained to call in
. 5


and re-coin a corresponding number of the old pieces, giving
them the same deficiency of value.
28. It may perhaps he objected that these new pieces would
be bought up for hoarding, or for the melting-pot or exportation;
but they would not be liable to this common disadvantage
because, as regards hoarding, they would be preserved by the
much greater suitableness of gold for that purpose; and, with
regard to melting and exportation, they would be superseded
almost entirely by the superior cheapness of silver bullion.
29. Those who share my belief as to the future rapid
development of our Indian commerce, and the very large demand
sure to be made in the course of years for additional currency,
will agree that I am within the mark when I reckon that five or
six millions sterling will be required annually, of which three
millions, supplied by the Government, might be of silver, and two
to three millions by the public, of gold. If we assume, byway
of argument, that the future normal price of silver will be IBd.
per ounce, the cost of the rupee on the present system being
Is. or, say, a reduction of 23 per cent., there would be a
gain of per cent, on all the new rupees added to the
currency, if 3.0 per cent, seignorage be taken, and per cent,
be allowed for th£ expense of coinage, and there would be a
loss of 15 per cent, upon all old coins called in and re-coined.
This would allow nearly 19 millions of the old coins to be
renewed without loss to the Government, besides the 30
millions of new coins added to the currency; but even then the
process would be a tedious one; and to do more would involve a
sacrifice. If a million sterling per annum were devoted to this
object, it would take probably 12 to II years to accomplish it.
30. The renewal might be also greatly accelerated, if some
practicable measure could be devised whereby the loss in the
transaction could be slowly and equably distributed over the
whole population, during a lengthened period. For instance,
if at the time the new and heavier coins were introduced, it


were enacted that at the end of every successive year, for 15
years, the old rupee and half rupee pieces would he reduced in
value as legal tender, and in all payments made by the
Government, and all receipts of revenue and taxes, by a
cumulative discount of 1 per cent, per annum, or, preferably,
of two and one pies respectively, up to, and not exceeding
30 and 15 pies, of which 192 make the rupee; the effect would
be that in each succeeding year an increasing number of the
old pieces could be called in and re-issued of the heavier
weight without any loss. If the increasing reduction of 1 per
cent., or two pies in the rupee, were made annually, it would
follow that at the end of the sixth year it would he possible to
call in and renew nearly 31 millions of old coins, besides the 30
millions of new coins; and at the end of 11 or 15 years to
work up all the remaining old currency without any loss what-
ever. By that time, supposing the Indian Mints capable of
easily executing 100 millions of pieces per annum, two-thirds
of the work would have been accomplished.
31. The argument of Para. 19 is denied, it is said to be—
“ Not shown as to reaching ‘ former normal powers of local exchange /
the argument, if good, would place a power in the Indian Government of
decreeing one rupee equal to one sovereign ; and that this would work. ‘Former
power ’ is a mere phrase ; directly the metallic value exhibits a wide discrepancy,
2s. is not more likely than 205. ; but, of course, 2s. is all you want,’'
32. This is an important objection, and one worthy of careful
discussion, the more so as the remarks which have been made
upon the subject of legal tender may appear to give support to
it. It is very necessary, therefore, to explain that, when I say
that the rupees if restricted would become appreciated till they
reached their former “powers of local exchange,” I did not
refer to any power or authority of the Government, not even
to the “legal tender” they possess, but merely to the fact that
if they were restricted they would become gradually reduced in
numbers compared with the transactions to be settled and the


commodities to be transferred by them; and would then be
“ appreciated ” up to their former value, because their number
would be absolutely limited, and the demands of trade rapidly
increasing. No authority or act of the Government, not even
of the legal tender, gives any absolute value to a piece of
money. It only defines what a coin, such as a rupee, is, and
how it is to be obtained; which conditions being complied with,
the coin is a legal tender in discharge of contracts expressed
in rupees: but the quantity and value of commodities given in
exchange for the coin, depends upon the comparative sacrifice
of capital required to procure one and the other; that is the
cost of procuring rupees and other articles.
33. A few years ago the cost of procuring a rupee was
equal to that of procuring 12J grains of standard gold, and prices
throughout the length and breadth of India then, and a short
time ago, remained adjusted to that ratio. Now, they may be
had for little more than the cost of grains of gold, but in
the interior of India they would be considered of equal value
with the older rupees ; and, but for the exchange with Europe,
would continue to do so till the gradual flooding of the Indian
currency raised all prices, and reduced the value of every rupee
in the empire to its mere metallic worth. If the Indian
Government were to close the mints to silver, without pro-
viding any other means of obtaining the currency, they might
rise in value, putting aside the administrative difficulties con-
nected with smuggling and forgery, to almost any degree.
34. In regard to para. 24, it is observed that—
“ A vital difference is unnoticed between paper and metallic tokens.
These last have nothing but their metal to stand upon. The paper token pro-
fesses to give a dollar. That is, so many grains of gold. Of course if the metal
pledged sinks in value, the paper token follows,”
My argument is, that if inconvertible paper tokens may
by restriction be kept of the value of full weight gold coins, it


follows that metallic tokens can be so too. It would certainly
be better that tbe Government of India should be prepared,
and should advertise its readiness at all times to exchange gold
for their token currency, under certain conditions, and it will be
proper that this should he done hereafter. This step would
meet the objections as to “ divergence of metallic value,” but
I have not proposed it at present, because it would be a serious
difficulty for the Government at first to provide the means
of exchange in all parts of the empire, and most probably be
attended with heavy losses; while, on the-other hand, it is not
really necessary, for as soon as the exchanges have been restored
to the normal rate of 2s. per rupee, gold will be procurable at
par; and in the course of time gold coins will be abundantly
dispersed, and it will then be easy to establish the privilege.
35. Much objection has been raised to paragraph 25 as
follows: —
“ The cardinal point has to be proved. No proof yet given. That 2s. will he
given for what may be had for Is. Gd.” This assumes that, by Government
decision and action, a seller of goods who can get more silver from a buyer at
Is, 6d. will be content to give the same goods for less silver at 2s. A difficult job
to prove.”
What is here referred to is a matter of fact, which is
well known and established by abundant testimony, namely:
that up to a recent date, prices throughout the length and
breadth of the interior of India were not as yet materially
increased by the fall in the value of silver. If rupees passed
current only as so many bits of metal, it might have been
different, but at present they pass only as rupees; and the
natives know but little what they cost, or are worth, except in
the prices of tbe accustomed tariffs.
36. At the chief Indian ports, the abnormal state of the
exchange tends powerfully to affect the prices of both exports
and imports, and thereby to induce large shipments of silver
to be converted into rupees, which would in time raise all


prices to the level required by ls.6d. per rupee, or the true price
of silver. My correspondent continues—
-37. “ The action on prices must he considered now. It must be remembered
that much silver in India is taken for hoarding, ornaments, &c., &c., &c., and was
bought at 2s. It can be had now at Is. Gd. as bullion, and the same goods, the
same sacrifice of the buyer, will fetch more silver. That will be seen so; and, if
by nothing else, there would be two prices in every shop. So many rupees at
Is, 6d, in bullion, so many less if they have a mark upon them. Do you think
that possible for long ? That the whole country will not be in conspiracy against
it. Contracts for payments will stipulate the particular form of the metal to be
paid. The 2s. rupee will be hemmed in and pushed out.”
The writer here is evidently not aware what a patient and
submissive race we have to deal with in the generality of our
Indian subjects ; even if it were a case of hardship, instead of
inconvenience, it would take a vast deal more to awaken them
to any demonstration. But the truth is that the matter is
settled in a much more simple and effectual manner, as ex-
plained in my answer to the objections against para. 5, namely
that the effect of seignorage or appreciation is to raise the local
value of the coins above that of bullion; the consequence,
therefore, is that the value of bullion stated in rupees would
appear to fall in all parts of the country.
38. In regard to the 29th paragraph, my correspondent
asks—
“ But can any Government permanently do, or for any appreciable time,
this indispensable thing 1”
This lam obliged to answ r er in the negative, for human
research has not yet succeeded in finding any article or com-
modity which can with certainty, and for a permanence, be
referred to as a precise standard or measure of value; never-
theless, the statement may be justified as true in theory
although in practice it can only be carried out with a certain
amount of imperfection.
39. It is here asked—
“lf the rate of the Council bills must rise to that of gold at 25., why does
it not do so now ?”


The answer to this question seems to be so very obvious
that the enquiry can only be accounted for by the fact that the
subject has not been properly explained by me. The reason
why the Council bills cannot now rise to 2s. is because the rupees
which they transfer can be had in unlimited abundance at a
much cheaper rate by the transmission of silver bullion. When
this can be had at 48d. per ounce, rupees can be had for
about Is. and it is not to be expected when that is the
case, that merchants would give 2s. for them. However great
may be the demand and competition for- rupees by bills, the
competition is obviously limited by the price at which they
can certainly be obtained, in indefinite quantities, otherwise.
When they are obtainable freely by silver, the price given for
them in bills is limited by the price of silver; but when, as in
the case referred to by me in the paragraph objected to, they
would be only procurable by gold at a certain rate, the price
given for them in bills will be limited by that rate, viz., 2s.
per rupee; and if the supply of bills is short and the competition
active, they would very nearly, if not quite, fully realise it.
40. A further remark is made upon this paragraph to the
effect that —
< ‘ There would be no true ‘ former value ’ ”
of the rupees. This is perhaps best answered by referring
to the 46th paragraph of the second Essay, and the elaborate
analysis printed in the appendix.
41. On the 43rd paragraph it is observed —
“If gold is not demandable till after due notice, the rupees become
inconvertible notes, and what basis have they for any value? The shopkeepers
in America will alter their prices to the value of the day,”
Coins which are legal tender must be taken in payment,
and they exchange for commodities in exact proportion to
what it costs to procure them, as has been already explained in
para. 32. That is the basis of their value. If they be as


is assumed, properly restricted, gold bullion will sell in the
markets at par; and the value of the silver coins once
fixed in regard to gold, will not vary as the American green-
backs did, when they were issued or withdrawn at the option
of the Government. It would be unreasonable to make gold
coins, which will be only an authentic and convenient form of
gold bullion, legally demandable, when there are no coins; and
the arrangement proposed, by which they would be gradually
admitted into and take the lead in the currency, is thought
to be convenient and free from any real objection.
42. The conclusion at which my friend arrives after all
his objections, is as follows :
“Bat practically we agree. I would coin no more nipeos, and as soon as
possible adopt a gold standard. Only, till silver steadies itself, you cannot say
how many rupees should go to the pound.”
Gratifying as it is to find that my correspondent, personally
a stranger to myself, is, on the whole, prepared to support my
views, I am reluctantly compelled to take an exception to his
last sentence. It appears to me that as the measure of value
has been seriously disturbed, we are bound to restore it to what
it was before the disturbance began; and this not only in justice
to the parties to all contracts entered into before and
while the measure was impaired ; but also in justice to the
Indian taxpayer, to keep up the value of his payments in
the markets of the world.
43. If the standard be changed it will be a final settle-
ment ; but in establishing a new one it would be as unjust to
allow debtors to gain an advantage from the fact of the former
standard having failed, as to allow creditors to be mulcted in
heavy sums, because the rectification was not sooner made, or
anticipated an i rendered unnecessary.
44. The following objections have been kindly sent to me
by another correspondent, an Indian Banker, personally a


stranger to myself, said to be long familiar with the practical
consideration of these questions.
“ He (Col. Smith) supposes that from the absorption of silver, the currency
would become scarce, and that therefore the rupee would rise in value, and
circulate at the level, as compared with gold, thus artificially fixed for it."
“ The immediate effect produced by the closing of the Mint against silver
would be a heavy fall in the price of that metal; and it seems inadmissible that
any scarcity of rupees in India could ever raise the value of the rupee, intrinsi-
cally worth, say one shilling, to command two shillings.”
45. The argument respecting the fall in the price in silver
is answered in Essay No. 1, paras. 40 and 41, to which may he
added, that if India should hereafter take two or three millions
sterling per annum of silver bullion out of the market, she could
not he blamed for any further decline in its future price. In
regard to the inadmissibility that any scarcity of rupees could
raise their local value, I must refer my critic to paras. 19 to 27
of my first, and 9 to 13 of my second essay, and my answers
to the remarks of my first correspondent who takes up the
same argument with himself at pages 31 and 32.
46. My proposition is that with a limited currency, the so-
called intrinsic value has little or nothing to do with the matter.
In all markets commodities are offered for sale at such prices
as the vendors can afford; and in the Indian market the rupees
have held the place which the cost of procuring them indicated
in reference to all commodities ; and they hold that place, pretty
much, still. Suddenly, the cost of procuring rupees has greatly
fallen, and if admission to the currency remains free, they will
in time be superseded and reduced to the value of the cheaper
rupees. But if the currency be closed, as to the present method
of procuring rupees, and they should in future be only had by a
mode as expensive as the former one, then my argument is that
they will retain their value; that is, they will continue to ex-
change for what they really cost.


47. The cause which is assumed by me to bring about the
scarcity of rupees, is the increased demand for currency sure to
he occasioned by the expansion of the internal trade of the
Empire, which in the last 39 years required additions to the
value of 167 millions of pounds sterling. If it can be affirmed
that there never will he any further demand for currency, then
the “appreciation ” would be confined to the contraction caused
by the annual loss or destruction of coins, which has been esti-
mated at three millions sterling per annum; but if, as I believe to
be certain, there will be a future demand for additional currency,
much exceeding that of past years, it will be not unreasonable
to calculate a requirement of five or six millions of £ sterling
per annum; and when this has continued for a few years a
scarcity must ensue. In ten years the deficiency would be no
less than from 500 to 600 millions of rupees.
48, “ The very causes which are assumed to be the means of bringing about
the scarcity of rupees would cease to exist. Rupees would no longer be hoarded ;
but, on the contrary, would be at once pressed forward for conversion into
exchange at two shillings, and would sink to their real value.”
This argument has been already answered in paras. 15 and
19, pages 61 and 63, where it is shown that the demand for
additional currency has existed, besides the absorption of silver
and gold (of which latter 86 millions sterling have been absorbed
in 20 years*) and during all which time hoarding has been going
on, as it always has done, and always will do, while the nation
is prospering.
49. As for the rupees “ being brought forward ” for conver-
sion into exchange at 2s. per rupee, and sinking to their real
value, it seems to be forgotten that when the exchange really is
2s. per rupee, there is no more object in exchanging rupees for
English money, than when it is at a lower figure. No profit
* Miscellaneous Statistics, Finance Account, No. 93.


can be made by buying English money at 2s. and then re-pur-
chasing rupees at 25., but only a loss, by brokerage and com-
mission. If it be meant that the rupee should be sent out of
India to be exchanged for gold at 2s. per rupee, then it must be
pointed out that gold can only be brought into India in pay-
ment of a balance of trade, and that the rupees themselves can-
not be used as exports to bring returns of gold, as their value
is strictly local.
50. Hence the rupees will be worth 2s. as expressive of the
value of goods, either locally or for export, and the rupees them-
selves will be worth 2s. in exchange for commodities, as indeed
they now are, but only in India. They cannot sink in the value
given to goods so long as the exchange continues at 25., and
that will be almost immovably so, when it is fixed, as proposed
by me, in gold.
51. “ Prohibition of silver coinage would introduce gold, no doubt, but would
not in any way alter the relative values of the two coinages, as the laws of supply
and demand would come into play, and force all commercial transactions to be
finally adjusted with reference to English exchange.”
The laws of supply and demand are precisely those which
will effect the objects proposed by me, and they will establish
the relative values of the two coinages, those values being equal.
What is understood by the law of supply and demand is, that
if there be an effective and unlimited demand for any article in
the market, it will command in that market at least as much
as its cost price.
52. If the present rupees have formerly cost as much as one-
tenth of a sovereign each—are at present exchanging with com-
modities for about that value —and in future cannot be procured
for less than that value, the inference is allowable that, under
those circumstances, the relative values of the two currencies
will be equal.


And what will be the English exchange ? If 17 to 20
millions sterling in value of Indian rupee currency must
he procured within the course of every year, and there is
no other possible means of procuring them (imports into India
of commodities having been exhausted) except by gold at 2s.
per rupee, and Council bills at the same rate, it appears to be
pretty certain that it would be 2s. per rupee.
53. “ The importer of gold, who has bought that metal at its true value with
reference to silver, would never consent to hand his gold over to the Mint at
Rs. 38. Has. per ounce (equal to Rs. 10 per sovereign). If he should require
to have his gold coined for convenience sake, he certainly woidd only then part
with it at its natural and real premium. Under no circumstances would gold
coinage accumulate in the hands of the Government ; and it seems a fallacy to
imagine that by any arbitrary act could even a Government succeed in putting
such pressure upon private individuals as would force them to part with their
gold at a price far below its real value.”
When the rate of exchange is 2s. per rupee, it will be
found by merchants and bankers on many occasions easy to
deliver gold at less than 38.lias, per ounce,* and they will
gladly do so without any pressure. When it is said that “ under
no circumstances ” would gold coinage accumulate in the
hands of the Government, my meaning as stated in Essay
No. 1, para. 11 and para. 15 of this Essay, page 62, seems to
be misunderstood ; for it is not declared that gold would
accumulate in the Government treasuries, but in the country,
and in circulation; and it can hardly be denied that the Govern-
ment would have as much power and opportunity of acquiring,
and if they wished it, of hoarding gold as private individuals,
without using force or oppression.
54. “ Colonel Smith admits that gold coins would for a time command a pre-
mium, but that this would disappear as they became abundant and silver coins
became scarce. But the rarity of the silver rupee would in no way enhance its
value, even if the silver coin did become scarce.”
* Yide note to paragraph 50 of Essay No. 2.


I think this objection is answered in Essay No. 1, paras. 21
to 26, Essay No. 2, paras. 12 and 15, and in this Essay, paras.
21 and 32. It arises from the difficulty felt by many minds in
understanding that legal tender currency, whether made of paper
or metal, circulates with authority, and exchanges for as much
“ capital ” or “value ” as it takes to bring it into the market.
55. “ But what is to bring about the scarcity of rupees 1 They can never be
exported. They are hoarded to an enormous extent. And the moment ii is
found that ten rupees could purchase a gold coin equal to a sovereign, the
hoardings of years would be produced, and the law that an inferior coinage
always drives out one superior to it, would have another illustration.”
It is true that the rupees cannot be exported, and it is
piobahle that they are to some extent hoarded, but not to an
enormous extent, because it is known that gold has been hoarded
to a very large amount; and, whenever possible, it is likely
gold has been substituted for silver for that purpose. There is,
therefore, not much to fear on the score of this
though hoarding may tend somewhat to delay the early diffusion
of gold coins. As for the inferior currency always driving out
one superior to it, that only happens when the inferior, or,
rather, cheaper currency can be freely obtained by the public
and the reason is obvious; but the law does not apply when the
cheaper currency is not procurable freely, as we see exemplified
for years past in England, and now in France.
56* “ The Indian by no means prefers the bulky rupee to the more convenient
sovereign, as a coin for hoarding. On the contrary. And it is to be feared that
any attempt to carry out this plan would only cause gx-eat disturbance, and would
entirely fail in bringing about the objects sought.”
The first of these statements is, probably, quite correct;
and it affords a reason for my belief that, although there is a
very large amount of precious metal hoarded, it is principally
gold and fine silver bars, and not very much of coined silver.
The second does not require any special answer.


67. “ Much might also be said of the impossibility of preventing illicit coinage
of rupees when a gain so enormous would be the temptation.
This objection has been answered in No. 1, paras. 28 to 30,
No. 2, para. 18, and No. 3, para. 26.
58. The foregoing objections contained in the three Essays
are the most important that have been received up to the
present time ; and it is hoped that they will afford a sufficient
illustration of the principles upon which the proposals for the
restoration of the Indian currency and the introduction of
gold are founded, and of the chief arguments by which they
may be attacked and defended.
59. The most interesting point for enquiry and decision
is, whether the Indian Legislature, by suspending the coinage
of silver, and publicly undertaking to transfer Indian rupee
currency to all applicants, in London or elsewhere, at a fixed
rate in pounds sterling, would not thereby change the Indian
standard of value to gold, without the slightest disturbance or
even knowledge of the native community; and be enabled to
put an end to all material variations of the currency, and
future depreciation of the Indian revenues.
J. T. SMITH.
London,
Ist Sept., 1876.


Extract from Report of Conferences held by the India Committee of the Society
of Arts, 1870.
ON THE METHODS OF COMPUTING THE COMPARATIVE VALUES OF GOLD AND
SILVER IN INDIA.
1. Before proceeding to explain the various
methods of calculating the relative values, in
India, of gold and silver, it is necessary to say a
few words about averages. A fair estimate of the
truth cannot be arrived at, unless an independent
and unbiased judgment be first formed as to the
number of years’ average best suited to the pur-
pose. I shall myself on the present occasion refer
to the statistics of the years 1853 to 1867, the
largest number of which reliable data are pro-
curable, and beyond which the important in-
fluence of the gold discoveries in Australia does
not come into operation.
2. It must be remarked also that, in calculating
the average market-price of silver and gold,
allowance ought to be made for the quantities
imported and sold at different times. To do this
involves troublesome calculations, and it is not •
always that the labour very much affects the
result. This may, perhaps, account for the
omission.
3. The methods above referred to are as
follows:
First.—By taking the average prices of the two
metals in the ports whence they are supplied, and
adding to them, respectively, the costs and all the
expenses of their transmission to India.
Secondly.—By ascertaining the average market-
price of gold bullion, in rupees, in the Indian
market.
Thirdly.—By ascertaining the value of the
bullion contents of a sovereign, in rupees in the
Indian market, as compared with the value of
good bills on England, as shown by the quoted
rates of exchange.
4. First Method. —To begin with the first of
the above methods of calculation, it may be well
to state that the value of gold bullion in India
is very nearly the same, but, if anything, rather
less than in London. This has been brought
about by improvements in the means of com-
munication established of late years. Although
in some degree a repetition of what has been
before stated, yet, as the observation is a novel
one, bearing upon the subject under discussion in
all its aspects, a little further explanation is
desirable.
5. It is almost unnecessary to mention that
gold bullion sent to England for sale fetches the
invariable price of £3 17s. 9d. per standard ounce,
immediate payment; to which it may be added
that, lately, large quantities of gold produced in
Australia have been sent by the Peninsular and
Oriental Company’s steamers via Ceylon to Eng-
land. When at Galle, (in Ceylon), goods and
passengers are within a week’s transit of Calcutta
or Bombay, but not nearer than about three
weeks from England. The practice has been
established by the principal banks having branches
in Australia and the East, to telegraph instruc-
tions to their agents in Galle, as to the destina-
tion of gold arriving there on its way to England.
When the exchange with India and the price of
gold rise above a certain point, orders are sent to
alter the destination of the gold to Calcutta, or
Bombay, where it is sold, and bills on London
purchased with the proceeds, thereby producing
a better result than the actual delivery of the
gold itself at the Bank of England in exchange
for the £3 17s. 9d. per ounce, as above stated.
6. At present, we have no further connection
with this fact than to point out the inference
that gold bullion, which is on its way to England
for sale at £3 17s. 9d. per ounce, must on its
arrival in Ceylon be worth only £3 17s. 9d. per
ounce, less the charge of conveyance and delay,
&c., from Ceylon to England ; and the same gold
taken to Calcutta, cannot in reality be worth
more than the same £3 17s. 9d. per standard
ounce, less the difference between all the charges
of the longer voyage from Ceylon to London, and
the shorter one from the same place to Calcutta.
Owing to the absence of competition, it happens
that, just now, the charges for freight and insur-
ance by the Peninsular and Oriental Company’s
steamers are more for the shorter than the longer
voyage; but the difference in the loss of time,
owing to the greater length of the voyage to
England, makes up for the overcharge; so that,
including delay, the cost of landing gold bullion
in Calcutta or Bombay is not more, and (if a gold
currency were established, and a large supply of
bullion required to feed it, so as to induce com-
petition) it will probably be materially less than
the cost of delivery in London; and hence its
value may safely be calculated as the same.
7. The value of standard gold bullion in India
may, therefore, be taken as being, in English
money, £3 17s. 9d. per oz. or less. We will now
inquire into that of silver bullion.
8. In my “ Remarks on a Gold Currency for
India,”* published in January, 1868,1 gave a list
(at page 33) of the London market prices of sil-
ver, taken from the Parliamentary papers, sup-
plemented by information very kindly furnished
to me by Messrs. Pixley, Abel, and Langley, ex-
tending from 1853 to the end of 1866. To this
I am now able to add the facts for the year 1867.
9. The ordinary average price, taken in the
common way, for these fifteen years, is 6P3375d.
per standard ounce. The freight and charges in-
curred in sending this to India, including loss of
interest during transit, amount to 2f per cent.,
which, added to the cost in London, brings up
the price per oz. in India to 63 - 0242822774 d. But
the English standard ounce of silver contains 444
grains of pure metal, so that the ounce of pure
silver would be worth in India 63'02428 x |||- or
68*13435885078. On the other hand, the ounce
of standard gold, containing 440 grains pure,
being worth in India, as above explained, 933 d.,
the ounce of pure gold must be worth
933 d. x US, or 1017-81818181 pence, &c.
Hence the relative value of the two
metals, according to the above statement,
is:—
1017-8181818181 »
68-13435 &C '’ ° r 14 ‘ 938399 -
10. The above appears to be the relative value
of the two metals, as bullion, in their pure state j
and the same ratio applies also when both con-
tain the same proportion of alloy, which is the
case with rupees and sovereigns. So that, to find
the- value of a sovereign, containing 123-274
grains of standard gold, in rupees, we have first to
multiply the number of grains by the above ratio,
to show the corresponding number of grains of
rupee standard silver bullion of equal value; and
secondly, in order to reduce this bullion to


rupees in coin, to take off from the amount so
obtained the Indian charges of mintage, 2T per
cent.
11. Now, 123-274 X 14-938399=1841-516198326
grains ; and deducting 2'l per cent, from this, the
remainder is 1802"8443598, or rather less than
6th per cent, more than 10 rupees, of 180 grains
each, being exactly 10-01580, &c., or 10 rupees 0
annas 3 pies ( Vide par. 32.)
12. It must be here observed that the above
result is arrived at by using the valuation of
silver founded on the ordinary average. The
value of gold has been taken without any deduc-
tion for the high freight and insurance now
charged between Australia and India.
13. It must further be remarked also, that the
values above calculated are based upon the pre-
sent cost of transmission of the silver to India
applied to the former average market prices. To
obtain a true average of the value of silver
bullion in India in former years, the price of each
year ought to be added to the cost of transmission
of the same year, and if this were done, the aver-
age value of the ounce of pure silver would be
J per cent, more than has been above shown, and
would be represented by a price in English money
of 68-4750 d., the value of the gold contained in a
sovereign being then only 9 rupees 15 annas 5J
pies.
14. Second Method. — This method is com-
paratively more easy and intelligible than either
of the others, as it is the mere statement of the
actual selling price, in rupees, in the Indian
market, of gold bullion, as quoted in the returns,
and reduced to “ standard ” fineness.
15. Taking the fifteen years from 1853 to 1867
inclusive, the average price of gold in the Calcutta
market is 257'4 annas per tola, pure. The result
is very nearly the same, whether the ordinary
average be taken, or if it be calculated in the
more exact manner above referred to.
16. Taking the above average, it appears by
mere proportion that when the tola, or 180 grains
of pure gold, costs 257’4 annas, the 113-001605
grains pure in the sovereign must be worth
161-592295 annas, about one per cent in excess
of ten rupees, or 160 annas, the exact value being
10-099518 rupees. It must be observed, however,
that in discussing the comparative values of the
two metals for coinage, we are bound to consider
the cost of both as delivered to the mint. Now if,
as has been proposed, gold were coined free of
charge, and paid for immediately on delivery, its
comparative cost would be mucli less than the
average market price, where, in addition to the
cause presently to be stated, it is enhanced by
charges which would be avoided by delivery to the
miut, viz., brokerage, delay, and the necessity for
selecting finenesses to suit the market. These
causes united amount to half per cent.; but the
chief cause which tends to raise the market
price of gold above what, in the nature of things,
it must needs be, and shortly will be, is that, for
want of telegraphic communication between India
and Australia, a great deal of gold is actually
sent from London, at an extra cost of nearly two
per cent. In fact, gold which might be sent
direct from Galle to India, virtually comes to
London, and is sent back again burdened with the
unnecessary cost of a six weeks’ voyage. This is
owing to the following causes: —The gold market
in India is a very limited one, and very sensitive,
and cannot be supplied with so costly an article
as gold on speculation ; for a very slight addition
to the stock causes a fall in the price, so that the
despatch from Sydney or Melbourne of a precious
commodity which cannot be kept waiting for a
rise of prices would be attended with the greatest
risk; and hence, with the exception of bullion
which happens to be on its way to England, and
capable of diversion to India, sudden changes in
the market can only be met in London, prices
being reported, and sales “for arrival” being
effected by telegram. As before explained, this
involves an additional expense of nearly two per
cent., and therefore adds to the average quotations
of prices in the market; but it will certainly be
put an end to whenever telegraphic communica-
tion shall have been successfully opened between
the two continents, or when there is a steady and
certain market for gold at a fixed price.
17. Third Method. —The method of calculating
the average relative values of silver and gold in
India by means of the exchanges, is founded on
the folio whig principles:—
18. When the balance of trade is in favour of
India, and bullion is required to be imported, it
has been above shown that it may be delivered
there at the same cost as in England, if not less ;
and it must be especially noticed that the gold bul-
lion imported into the Indian market arrives there
in lieu of being delivered at the same time and
cost as in London.* Its value in Calcutta, there-
fore, must be equal to its value in London, as
either alternative is equally at the command of
the owner, and hence, in order to exchange it in
Calcutta without loss for a bill on London, he
must do so at such a price as would give him the
same value as the gold would fetch in London at
the very time of sale in Calcutta; that is to say,
for example, in exchange for an ounce of standard
gold he must have at least the equivalent of
■£3 17s. 9d. payable in London at the very time of
his parting with the bullion in Calcutta.
19. The effect is nearly the same,l - and it will,
perhaps, make the explanation more clear if, in-
stead of applying our remarks to an ounce of
standard gold, we refer to the quantity contained
in a sovereign, and say that a bank manager or
merchant landing gold in Calcutta, must, to avoid
loss, exchange every sovereign’s weight of standard
gold for the equivalent of a bill for 240 pence,
payable in London at the very time of sale.
20. A first-class six-months’ bill will be neces-
sarily detained a month in transit, and be dis-
counted on its reaching London; and if we
assume the average rate of discount at 4 per cent.,
thus making the charge for six months 2 per
cent., and allow J per cent, for the loss of interest
during the transmission, we arrive at the fact
that when gold bullion is required to be sent to
India it is more valuable there by 2J per cent,
than first-class six-months’ bills; and that, on
• The time is in fact not the same, as it would not reach
London for two weeks after it would arrive In Calcutta,
but the difference in the freight and charges by thel'enin-
aular and Oriental Company at- present make up for tins
delay, as before explained, so that, as regards values, the
gold is about the same in both places. . , »
t The only difference is that the bullion contents of a
severe.gn would not be quite worth 240 pence, but only
about 239*6 pence; so that, by usiag 240 pence, the gold
is reckoned at a trifle above its true value.


tlie average, the gold bullion necessary to form a
sovereign (123-274 grains standard) is equivalent
m value to a first-rate bank-bill for 240 pence
plus 2i per cent., that is 246 pence.
21. It is obvious this is only an average state-
ment, and that various circumstances may, from
time to time, slightly modify the equation. If
for instance, the rate of discount in London were
o per cent., gold would, for six-months’ bills, be
worth 3| per cent, more than its intrinsic equiva-
lent. If the rate were only 2 per cent., then it
could be sold without loss for only 1£ per cent,
more. And the same may be said for the allow-
ance for interest during transit. We are, how-
ever, now only dealing with averages, and there-
fore what has been already said is sufficient, and
it leads to the conclusion that gold from Australia
may be delivered in India, in any quantity, in ex-
change for unexceptionable six-months’ bills, at
the rate of 2 J per cent, above its London price It
may be useful to add that the Bank of England
pnce for a tola of pure gold is 381-6818 pence,
T per cent ' be y° nd tbat is 391-22386 pence,
if the London rate of discount be such as to re-
quire 2£ per cent, to be added, a merchant could
aflord to sell his tola of pure gold for as many
rupees as are shown by dividing 391'22 by the
number of pence given for a rupee in six-months’
bills. For instance, when the rate is 25., he
could sell
9QI *OO
pure gold for =-or 16 rupees 2 annas per tola.
If the London rate of discount be less than 4 per
cent, he can afford to sell his gold cheaper, and
mcc verm. But if the rate of exchange be high
the price of gold necessarily falls in due propor-
tion. At 2s. Id. per rupee (London discount be-
ing, as before, 4 per cent.), the price of gold
would be- 39 *g 22 or 15'648952 rupees per tola
pure.
22 ’! s now a if er the conditions, and sup-
pose that, the exchanges being adverse to India it
is necessary to send gold to England; we have’to
inquire at what rate, supposing the gold existed
in India m the accessible form of gold currency
it could be transmitted to England, and what
would be its value as compared with first-rate
six-months’ bills. Here, taking the same form of
illustration as before, we may remark that sove-
reigns worth 240 pence in London would in the
event of its being necessary to transmit funds
thither from Calcutta, be of a i per cent
more value than a first-class six-months’ bank
b i i b ?, Ca . US T *5 takes tile surne time to
send both to London and realise them, and the
cost of sending the gold is about If per cent.
I he bill costs nothmg to send, but it must, on its
arrival, be discounted for the six months at an
average charge of 2 per cent. The difference is
i per cent, in favour of the sovereign remittance,
each sovereign in Calcutta would be
worth 240 pence plus i per cent., or 240-6 pence,
in a six-months’ bill.
23. We have now established the fact that
supposing a gold currency of sovereigns coined
free of charge existed in India, any amount of
metal required for the purpose could be supplied
from Australia, and the value of the coins so
struck would vary from a maximum of 246 pence
to a minimum of 240-6 pence in first-class six-
months’ commercial bills. Hence the mean value
montLTss! gn W ° Uld CqUal t 0 243 ' 3d - ia
nf have next t 0 filld out the average value
first-class commercial six-months’ bills in
rupees, in the Calcutta market, and then com-
pare the two, viz., the gold and rupees. Bv
returns with which I have been favoured from
the India-office, showing the average monthly
price of first-class bills in the Calcutta market^!
throughout the sixteen years from
1853 to 1868 inclusive, the average rate was 24-39
pence per rupee. Consequently, ten rupees
would command 243 9 pence in bills. But the
mean value of the bullion contained in a sovereign
“• as w . e # have just seen, 243-3 pence to bX
Hence, if coined without charge (as in England)
upe s e°s ve t r hXir uld \ e - of le^s Value than tei’
inpees, the difference being o'6 to 243 pence or
oso.q l one - fou rth per cent. Dividing 243-3’by
243 9 we have 9’975 rupees as the true value of
the sovereign. U 1
25 In the above statement I have endeavoured
to show what the value of the sovereign must
necessarily be, if it were established as legal
su PP os | n g th e rates of exchange
to be on the average what they have been for the
ast sixteen years. But the results are o Pe „to
tins correction, that they are based on the
turn that the present disproportion of the charges
dieuXon 11 ?),!T n Uran r u etWeen Aus tralia and
L-aicutta on the one hand, and Australia and
London on the other, will continue; a most im
probable supposition when coupled with that of
an Indian goid currency. Were t™ rates of
fi eight and insurance properly adinafp^
effect would be to «d«S < CWS&d < S
cent more CaICU 10n by one - fourth to one-half per
th!t 6 'if The Ser e a hP cart « show, conclusively,
that if sovereigns were coined to India free of all
expense they could and would be supplied at a
less cost and current value than ten rupees sun
posmg the latter to be of the same value as that
which they have borne on the average during the
last sixteen years ; but it must be observedßiat
this conclusion involves the supposition that there
is a ready market for the gold, such as a mint
would be, and that the metal can accordingly be
at once disposed of for the net value at which it
can be afforded. This has not been the case
hitherto, and it may be useful as well as interest!
mg to trace the effect ,of this want of a ready
“ tht ' enhanced market price of gold y
27. It has been shown that the value of’gold
fwV* 8 - a ma J. ter of necessity, be superior to
that of six-months commercial bills, representing
its intrinsic worth in the English’ rnK thf
superiority amounting on the average to 3 3
pence in each sovereign, or about 13 per e ent
Hence, an ounce of standard gold in coins woTu
W a rl tolailSO B f° d six ' mon ths’ bills
worth lr? - nS I-n f PUre B old would be
worth 386 929 pence in bills. Now, the average
puce of bills for the last sixteen years having
been 2-439 pence per rupee, we have only to
divide the number of pence to a six months’bill
eqmvahmt to a tola of pure gold, by the number
f pence in a six months’ bill given on the aver-
age for a rupee, to obtain the value in rupees of
e q g . ( ’ ld - 0n doin 8 this (dividing 386-929 by
24 39) it follows that the average value of gold per
6


tola pure, as compared with bills, was 15 rupees
13 annas 9 - 9 pies (which, it must be remembered,
is the rate at which it could certainly be delivered
at the mint), is more than | per cent, below the
price (15 rupees 14 annas 10'3 pies) which would
yield sovereigns for 10 rupees, and nearly 1J per
cent, below the average actual selling piice,
which, as stated before (par. 15) was, during the
sixteen years referred to, 16 rupees 1 anna 5
pies per tola pure. This difference between the
rate at which it could be and what it actually has
been sold, shows the effect of the absence of a
certain market, and the other cause above referred
to (Vide par. 16).
28. A difficulty may perhaps arise in conse-
quence of its having been stated, in par. 20, that
when the exchange is favourable to India, and
the rate, for instance, is 2s. Id. to 2s. 2d. per
rupee, a sovereign’s weight of standard gold is
worth 246 pence in bills ; and in par. 22, when
the exchanges are against India, and the rate,
for instance, Is. lOd. per rupee, it is worth only
240"6 pence, whereas, it is well known that gold
is much dearer in the Calcutta market during an
adverse than during a favourable state of the
exchanges. This apparent contradiction will be
explained when we consider that, during a favour-
able exchange for India, bills command a much
lower price in rupees than during an adverse one,
so that when the rate, for instance, is 2s. 2d. per
rupee, a sovereign worth 246 d. in a six-months’
bill would be equivalent to only 9'46 rupees ; when
the rate is Is. lOd. per rupee, a sovereign worth
240-6 pence in a bill would be equivalent to 10-93
rupees. Thus the large number of pence in a
bill represents a smaller number of rupees.
29. If we were to attempt to deduce an average
value of gold from an average of the prices so
calculated from the highest and lowest rates of
exchange, we should be led to a somewhat higher
value of gold, because a fall in the exchange has a
greater effect hi raising its price than a rise has
in lowering it. But the result so arrived at would
be inaccurate, because it will be seen, from what
immediately follows, that the introduction of a
gold currency would have the effect of restraining
the variations of exchange within narrow limits ;
and the value of gold, as derived from the normal
rate, agrees with that stated in pars. 24 and 27,
making the bullion value of the sovereign | per
cent, less than 10 rupees.
30. For instance, if we assume that a gold cur-
rency of sovereigns, at the rate of 10 rupees each,
were established in India, the short exchange
between England and India could not fluctuate
more than 2s. to Is. Hid. per rupee. In regard
to the former, when the exchanges were favour-
able to India, gold would be laid down there from
Australia at its English value, and the 123274 grs.
of standard gold, which would otherwise have
produced 20s. in England, will become 10 rupees
in India, thereby saving the expense of transmis-
sion from London. In regard to the latter,
sovereigns in free circulation in India at 10 rupees
each, will be sent home at an expense of 1J per
cent., thus giving an exchange of Is. Hid. The
greatest fluctuations would, therefore, be from
2s. to Is. Hid., or one per cent, on either side of
the average. At present, the greatest fluctuation
amounts to 8 per cent, or even more on either
side of the average ; but this refers to six-months’
bills, and at times must include variations in the
rate of discount
31. We may also observe that the establishment
of a gold currency in India would not only reduce
the fluctuations in the exchange eight-fold, but
would put an end to a very large unnecessary
expense now incurred in supplying the wants of
India for specie. Including the loss of interest
during transit, silver cannot be sent out to India
at a less charge than 2f per cent., nor placed in
currency for much less than 5 per cent.; and
these charges, at the rate of supply of the last
ten years, amount to half a million per annum,
of which the whole would be lost, and £275,000
more, making the total loss of £775,000, on the
return of the metal to Europe during an adverse
exchange. Gold, on the other hand, would be
landed in India at its European cost only, thus
supplying India at a saving of £300,000. And 10
millions in value would be returned to Europe at
the expense of about £225,000, which would be
the whole loss, instead of £775,000.
32. On summing up the results at which wo
have arrived by these three different methods of
inquiry, we find that, by the first method, as
applied to the last fifteen years, the value of the
bullion contained in a sovereign is found to be
10-0158026, &c., rupees, or 10 rupees 0 annas
3 pies.
33. By the second method, the bullion value of
the sovereign in rupees, taking the average of
the last fifteen years, is found to be 10'099 rupees,
or 10 rupees 1 anna 7 pies. By the third method, we
find the bullion value of the sovereign, as reckoned
on a fifteen years’ average, 9’975 rupees or 9
rupees 15 annas 7 pies, all these valuations being
subject to reductions'on the establishment of the
gold currency, as shown in the following table:
Table Showing the Bullion Value of a
Sovereign in Rupees.
First Method.. 10-0158
Subject to a reduction
I of J per cent. *
Second Method 10-0995
Subject to a reduction
of 1J per cent., f
besides $ per cent.
Third Method.. 9'9750
Subject to a reduction
| of £ per cent. J
Average .. 10-0301, or 10 rupees 0 annas
5J pies.
34. It will be observed that the valuations above
stated are subject to heavy deductions, owing to
causes sure to come into operation on the estab-
lishment of a gold currency and a certain market
for gold at a fixed price. As the calculations
have been founded on data collected from the
most authentic sources with great care, during the
past three years, it is not probable that they will
be found very far from correct; and even supposing
that they should be sensibly modified by later
information or facts derived from other sources,
there seems, nevertheless, to be little room for
doubt that the future value of gold would be so
much reduced by a free communication with the
mines, and its establishment as the standard
currency of India, that the British sovereign
would probably need the addition of a mint
charge, to a greater or less extent, to bring it up
to a fairly estimated equality with the 10 rupees
hitherto current in India, as expressive of legal
contracts and the commercial value of the
liabilities of the Government.
J. T. SMITH.
• On account of undue charges of freight and insurance
from Galle to India, vide pars. 6,12, and 25,
t On account of brokerage, delay in sale, vide par. 16.
t On account of the undue market price of gold, owing to
want of telegraphic communication with Australia, vide
pars. 1C and 27.
