

SILVER
AND
THE INDIAN EXCHANGES;
A REMEDY FOR ITS DEPRECIATION;
BY
COLONEL J. T. SMITE, R.E., F.R.S., F.S.S., F.I.A.,
FORMERLY MASTER OF THE MINT, MADRAS AND CALCUTTA,
&c., &c., &c.,
SUBMITTED TO THE
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA IN COUNCIL.
LONDON:
EFFINGHAM WILSON, ROYAL EXCHANGE.




ESSAY No. 5.
REPLY TO THE OBJECTIONS CONTAINED IN A LEADING ARTICLE
OF THE " ECONOMIST,” UNDER DATE NOVEMBER 11, 1876.
Printed for Private Perusal.]
1. It may be considered a very great advantage and assist-
ance towards the discovery of the truth when an accomplished
writer, one of the first authorities in Europe on financial
subjects, undertakes the duty of examining an important
monetary proposal, and marshalling in array against it all the
arguments which his large experience and extensive knowledge
enable him to suggest.
2. I feel, therefore, exceedingly thankful that the Editor
of the “Economist” has done me the honour of devoting a
leading article to the examination of my plans; and I have
only to regret my misfortune that, from the peculiar circum-
stances of India not being fully appreciated, and from my
failure to afford sufficient explanation of them, the result arrived
at has been that they have been misunderstood; a fact clearly
shown by the declaration contained in the beginning of the
second paragraph of the article, which, after an accurate descrip-
tion of the scheme (with one exception, which will be hereafter
noticed, para. 80) in the first paragraph, falls into the error of
saying that it is a plan for introducing “not a gold standard,
“ but a double standard of a peculiar sort.”
3. The tw r o first paragraphs of this article are as follows :
“It has been suggested that the coinage of rupees should be suspended in
India; that their importation should be prohibited; that gold should be coined
for anyone who will take it to the Mint at a fixed rate (say 2s. the rupee), that
both rupees and gold should be legal tender, which everyone must accept, but that,


for the present at least, no one should be able to demand gold. And in this way
it is hoped that a gold standard would be introduced into India, without the
Indian Government having to buy gold to exchange for silver, the cost of which
would be more than it could afford.
“But when examined, it will be seen that this is apian not for introducing
into India a gold standard, but a double standard of a peculiar sort. Though
the coinage of rupees is suspended, they are still to be legal tender, and their
value will therefore continually rise ; they will be ‘ monopoly coins/ so to speak,
circulating at a scarcity value, and they will so circulate concurrently with gold.
And this is to be the perpetual currency of India, for the only motive for think-
ing of it is that silver is already about to fall greatly in value • its very adoption
would for a very long time cause such a fall because it would close the Indian
market against silver—and therefore the cost of buying gold to exchange for the
rupee currency of India will be, years hence, more insuperable than it is now,
“ But to this plan there are the gravest objections. First,” &c., &c.
4. In order to arrive at a clear apprehension of the in-
applicability of the epithet, “ a double standard of a peculiar
sort,” it will be useful to enter into a brief examination of the
terms employed, to ascertain their significance. Let me then first
ask : Q. What is a standard ? —A. Without pretending to exact
logical precision, this may be explained to be a clearly defined,
and, as far as practicable, fixed and unalterable gauge, employed
in regulating other measures in common use. Q. What
is a standard of value ?—A. This is the value of a pre-
cisely defined quantity of a certain commodity, used to
regulate the value of a currency, which latter measures the
values of all other commodities.* Q. How does the standard
of value regulate the value of a currency? —A. By giving
free and unlimited power of adding to and obtaining the cur-
* When a currency consists of full weight coins conforming to the standard
within prescribed limits, and if within those limits, legal tender, it is sometimes
said that the currency is the standard of value; hut, though in common parlance
this is not wrong, it cannot be said to be strictly correct; because the coins
never are, and never can be, precisely “ standard,” and the term is wholly in-
applicable to some currencies, such as inconvertible notes and token coins.


rency to all parties wishing to possess it, on their surrendering
the prescribed standard equivalents ; thereby enlarging it and,
“ pro tanto,” diminishing its value; or with equal freedom to
diminish it and increase its value, by disposing of the coins.
5. It is not necessary to explain further how this system
operates; but it is important to notice that it is essential to the
automatic regulation of a currency that there should he abso-
lute freedom of exchange between it and the commodity by
which it is to be regulated. Prom the moment that the free
exchange of the currency for the regulating commodity is
stopped, there is an end of the regulation, and the commodity
ceases to be the regulator or standard.
6. Since 1835 silver has been the regulating commodity for
the Indian currency, and 168’465 grains of that metal in its
pure state, or 183’78 grains tine,* are surrendered to
procure the rupee. The “ modus operandi” of regulation
is as follows : —The coinage of silver being quite free, it be-
comes a profit for individuals to bring silver to the Mint the
moment that, by a fall in its value, the coins struck from it can
he had cheaper in comparison with commodities than the ex-
isting rupees of former coinages; and in such a case fresh
rupees are poured into the currency until, in time, it becomes
diluted and impaired in value, down to the level of the depre-
ciated silver. On the other hand, if silver becomes more
valuable than before, the coins are melted and sent
abroad ; and thus the currency is always kept on a par with the
value of silver. But the moment the coinage of silver is stopped,
these adjustments are put an end to; and silver, however much
it might decline in value, could have no effect upon the exist-
* The actual metallic constituents of the rupee are 165 grains pure, and
180 grains pith fine ; but the merchant bringing silver to the Mint is subjected
to charges of 2T per cent., which cause each coin to cost what is above stated.


ing currency. Tlie rupees, being legal tender, would, as the
writer in the “Economist” truly says, continually rise in local
value, although the silver they contain might fall. In other
words, the currency would he no more regulated hy silver. That
metal, therefore, cannot he a self-acting standard by which the
Indian currency will be regulated, when, in accordance with
my proposals, the free coinage of it for private individuals is
stopped.
7. The writer in the “ Economist ” does not say what the
two commodities are which constitute the “ double standard ”
according to my scheme; but we may presume that gold is one,
because my proposal is that a certain specified quantity of it
shall by law be made equivalent to ten rupees, and when
coined be legal tender for that sum. Wo have just seen that
silver cannot be the other standard, because, while excluded
from the Mint, it would be incapable of affecting the currency
in any way, still less of regulating it. Hence, as this is impos-
sible, we are driven to the conclusion that, because it is proposed
that the “ monopoly rupees ” shall be legal tender, as well as
gold, the writer may, perhaps, intend that the “ rnonopolv
rupees,” continually rising, are the other standard, regulating
themselves.
8. There may be some who really fail to see the distinc-
tion between a legal tender coin, or token, and the standard of a
currency, but this cannot possibly be the case with the accom-
plished writer in the “Economist,” and I must conclude
that he cannot have fully understood my plans. I will proceed,
therefore, to enquire why, and to what extent, the monopoly
rupees would “ rise continually.”
9. The author of the article uses the expression “ their
“value will therefore continually rise,” without indicating any


limit of this rise, either as to time or extent. An uninformed
reader might, therefore, be led to believe that in the absence of
any check they would rise indefinitely; and the more so if he
failed to see the real meaning of the phrases, used shortly after-
wards, that they are to he the “ perpetual currency of India,”
and “ that the cost of buying gold to exchange for the rupee
“ currency of India will he years hence more insuperable than
it is now.”
10. The reader’s difficulty would be felt in consequence of
its not being stated why the rupees would rise in value, and the
extent of the rise. I will, therefore, explain these points. The
rupee currency might rise in local value, and prices fall, because
in a progressive country a continual increase of currency is
necessary,* and as no increase to its bulk would be possible to
the public by means of silver, the value of the currency might,
under my proposed arrangement, gradually increase until it
became profitable to procure it by taking gold to the Mints,
under the conditions prescribed by the new standard of that
metal.
11. Hence we see that the monopoly rupees would not
rise continually and indefinitely, but only till their value
equalled that at which the currency would be freely obtainable
by means of gold at 2s. the rupee; and that having reached
that point, as any further quantity of the currency would he
obtainable at the same cost, its enlargement would ensue, and
all further rise in value be prevented.
* “ Prices would fall, not rise, in consequence of the non-coinage of the
rupees. We must remember that the currency of a stationary country requires
constant renewal; that of a progressive country requires constant increase, and
therefore, if you keep the quantity fixed, prices are sure to fall. And as the rupees
cannot be imported, there is no check on this fall. Smuggling rupees apart,
the decline will continue as long as the fixity in quantity of the rupee is main-
tained, and it will be quicker or slower in proportion as the increase of the
country is so,”—“Economist,” sth August, 1876,


12. How much rise does that represent ? Upon this point
I venture to offer the self-evident remark, that if, in changing
the standard from silver to gold, the quantity of the latter
metal taken to constitute the new standard, to he given in
exchange for the rupee currency, were precisely of the same
value as the average normal value of the quantity of silver
contained in the existing standard, the effect would be that no
rise in the value of the currency would occur or he possible,
excepting so far and to the same extent as it might be necessary
to restore it, if it had become diluted and impaired by the
previous free admission of depreciated silver coins. But this
is not the case.
13. On this point I beg to refer to the third paragraph of
my fourth Essay, where the effect of the change upon prices is
refeired to, to which I may add the remark that every writer
upon this subject, up to the present time, has declared that
hitherto there has been little or no depreciation of the Indian
currency, and that prices in India have not sensibly Such
being the case, the expression in the “ Economist ” that their
(the monopoly rupee’s) value will rise continually,can only mean
that, “ circulating at a scarcity value and concurrently with
** they would rise till they were equal to the rupees
procured by gold; but if the value ol the rupee currency pro-
curable by the coinage of gold be the same as that of the
rupees previously obtained by the coinage of silver, it is evi-
dent there would be no rise at all, excepting and only to the
* The following is from Professor Fawcett’s “ Manual of Political Economy,”
sth edition, page 504 . “ On this point there seems to be conclusive evidence that
up to the present time (July, 1870) no such decline in the purchasing power of
silver has taken place in India. If such a decline had occurred, general prices in
that country must have advanced, whereas there seems to be no doubt that during
the last three or four years, when silver has been falling in price, general priced
have not advanced in India, but, on the contrary, have somewhat fallen.”


extent that any local variation in prices might have possibly
taken place.
14. In order, then, to complete the proof that there will he
no rise at all in the currency by giving unlimited access to the
purchase of it at 2s. the rupee, it is only necessary to enquire
what the former value of the Indian currency really was;
which will be found to have been carefully investigated in
comparison with gold, so far as my materials would permit, in
my fourth Essay, paragraphs 46 to 61, the result of which tends
to prove that the fact of the standard of gold being fixed at
85.38 14 as. per ounce of fine, or 2s. the rupee, instead
of raising the value of the currency above its former equivalent,
would, if anything, he below it, looking to the data supplied
from the beginning of this century; and equal to it, comparing it
with the average of the 20 years ending the 31st March, 1873.*
15. Hence the expression “ continually rise,” used by the
“Economist,” must be interpreted “rise up to the value of the
“ new standard rupees which if the new standard be, as above
shown, on the average of years, only equal to the old, will in
effect be no rise at all.
16. But it is important to notice the obvious conclusion
which follows from, the above-stated fact, namely, this: that
monopoly rupees which are capable of rising continually cannot
he a second or double Standard. They are themselves regulated
by, and if they rose at all, would rise to the one new standard,
namely, that of gold. Hence it is not correct to say that the
arrangement of the currency proposed by me is a double
standard of a peculiar sort, for it is not a double standard of
any sort, but a single gold standard, regulating the Indian
* Vide Essay IY V para. 60.


currency ; which may consist of silver and copper token coins
with or without full weight gold coins, and any other description
of currency.
17. There is other evidence, also, that the writer in the
“ Economist ” has not fully appreciated my scheme. He states
that the “ only motive for thinking of it is that silver is already
“ about to fall greatly in value/’ And again, “If silver
“ should fall enough to make this scheme worth thinking of ”
&c., &c.
18. If a reference be made to the latter part of each of the
following paragraphs in m j first Essay, viz., paragraphs 3, 33,
and 53, it will be seen that the avoidance of the present loss and
injury to trade caused by the experienced fall in the value of
silver, was by no means the only motive for my proposal, but
the far more important one of putting an end to the ruinous
fluctuations of exchange between India and England and
Europe, and fixing it immovably for the future.*
19. The writer in the “ Economist ” says that to the plan,
which he describes as follows : “ That gold" should be coined
“ for anyone who will take it to the Mint at a fixed rate (say
2s. the rupee); that both rupees and gold should be legal
“ tender, which everyone must accept, but that, for the present
at least, no one should be able to demand gold,” there are
the giavcst objections; and he proceeds to mention and
explain four, which I will deal with seriatim.
20. In stating his first objection he says :
“ A currency of monopoly coins, circulating much above their cost value, is
sure to cause their forgery. This is as certain as that a high tariff will cause
smuggling. If silver should fall enough to make this scheme worth thinking of
* Vide Essay I, paras. 3, 33 & 53; 11., paras. 28—30; 111., 42 ; IV., 43.


the gain by coining rupees in India would bo very great, and we may depend
upon it capital would go into the business. Some of the shrewdest people in the
world —the American producers of silver—would have an interest in managing
it, and we may be sure they would manage it. The case must not be confounded
with that of a ‘ token coinage ’ of silver, such as we have in this country, because
our silver coins are only legal tender for small sums, and therefore great masses
of them are useless. But in the plan supposed, ‘ monopoly coins ’ would be the
main currency of India, and any quantity of them could be got rid of. India
would seem to have most unusual facilities for the operation, for there are native
states imbedded in our territory where we hardly know what happens, and there
is a rich monetary class of shroffs and bankers who would feel no effectual moral
scruple against disposing of illicit rupees. The moral objection to such a cur-
rency as one of perpetual use is very great, for it is an incessant temptation to
diffused fraud, and this evil would be fastened on India for ever.”
21. To this the following short answer was given in a
letter which the Editor of the “ Economist ” did me the
favour to publish, in his issue of the 2nd December last:
“ In regard to the first objection, which relates to forgery and unlawful
coinage, or importation of foreign-made genuine rupees, I would explain . First,
that to those who are well acquainted with'lndia, the probability of the coining
of genuine rupees on a large scale in any native state, with a British resident at
its Court, or the importation of foreign-made coins without the knowledge of the
Indian Government, in both cases subject to the danger of confiscation, is well
known to be extremely small. Secondly, that this objection would only operate
during the period of transition from the present to the new system, that is, till
the legal tender of the silver Coins was restricted; and, thirdly, that even sup-
posing the introduction of unlawful coins did take place to a large extent, it would
do no harm to anyone except deprive the Government of a profit of coinage
which, if we assume that a million such coins made their way into the circula-
tion annually, could not at the outside exceed <£25,000, whereas the saving
effected by the measures proposed would be, at least, two or three millions
sterling.”
22. The above might have been extended and made more
complete, hut for the necessity for limiting the demand upon
the Editor for space in his valuable journal. It may per-
haps be considered that any further answer now, in addition to


the statement regarding the “forgery” of rupees, given in
paragraph 18 of the second Essay, is not required ; and I would
gladly avoid the risk of wearying the patience of those who
honour these essays by their perusal; but as this objection
appears to be advanced as one of real importance, and has been
adopted hy others, as well as the author of the article in the
“ Economist,” it appears to me to be very necessary to meet it
in the fullest manner on every point.
23. Before doing so, however, I must draw attention to
the fact that, looking forward to the future, the probable
demand for currency throughout India will be at the rate of
millions sterling per annum (vide Essay 4, paragraphs 22
and 21); a small estimate, if we hear in mind that the population
to be served is equal to that of the whole of Europe twenty-six
years ago, * and that Indian trade has, at present, comparatively
no assistance from cheques, bills, and other expedients of credit,
which in England have been estimated to effect 97 per cent, of
the money transactions of the nation.f Of this £IOJ millions,
if we assume that the present value of the Indian currency is
110 millions sterling, and that at the end of forty years it will
be 560 millions, of which three-fifths will be of gold, it would
follow that, on an average, millions of gold and two millions
sterling in value of silver must be added to the currency
every year; and it is very important to obseiwe, in considering
the effect of unlawful coins on the value of the currency,
that their effect would be precisely the same after they had been
introduced, as a like number of lawful coins issued from the
Mints. But they would be imports into India, and would take
the place of so much bar silver, or under the new system, of
* Vide Malte Bran & Balbi’s Universal Geography, Edition 1851, p. 172
and the Memorandum on the Census of British India, 1871-72, printed 1875.
f Vide Mr. Heywood’s Inaugural Address to the Statistical Society, 21st
November, 1876. Journal, Yol. 89, p. 624.


o-old, which would otherwise have been imported to adjust the
balance of trade in favour of the Empire.
24. According to the estimate just given, the first two mil-
lions so introduced would render unnecessary the like addi-
tions to the silver currency by the Government, and deprive
them of the profit of coinage.* Afterwards, all further unlawful
additions would take the place of gold, which would otherwise
he brought in by commerce; and, finally, if the amount of
spurious coinage annually exceeded the £IOJ millions required,
the balance of trade would be affected, and the rate of exchange
rendered less favourable. How far this is likely, or otherwise,
the reader must judge for himself. What it is now most
important to notice is the fact that anything short of the
£IOJ millions, supposing that to be the correct average, would
have no ill effect whatever, except that of depriving the
Government of the profit of the silver and gold coinage f,
besides delaying the introduction of coins of the latter metal.
25. It is also necessary to premise that when it is mentioned
that “there are native states embedded in our territory where
“ we hardly know what happens,” it being thereby implied
that coinage may be carried on without the knowledge of the
Government of India, many circumstances of importance must
have been overlooked. First, the enormous amount of coinage
necessary to produce a really serious evil; secondly, the impos-
sibility of executing it in secret. The first point has just been
explained. In regard to the second, it may be well to mention
that the coinage or actual fabrication of the rupee pieces,
was purposely made as difficult as possible when the
new rupee was established in 1835, in order to necessitate
the use of the very best expensive machinery. The coins
* Vide Essay IV., paragraph 26—2ndly to stldy, and V., para. 32.
f Ibid., and V., para. 88,


could not be executed in large numbers at a cheap rate, so as to
escape early detection, if inferior machinery were used; and the
erection and use of even a small mint could not be done in a
corner. The Hint of Calcutta cost more than two hundred
thousand pounds sterling, but it was capable of turning out
within the year ten to twelve millions sterling in value of silver
coins. A cheaper mint, as to first cost, might be made to do
part of the work sufficiently v\ ell, but not so economically;
and even on a small scale would require the employment of a
large number of men. In the Madras Mint, capable of turning
out only one million’s worth of silver coins per annum, the
workmen constantly employed numbered from 800 to 400.
Coupling with this the fact that for every million sterling in
value of coins stamped, there must be more than one hundred
tons of silver bullion brought into the Mint, and the same
weight of coins carried away and distributed in circulation, it
will, I think, be apparent that it would be but a very short
time before the English officers at the Court of a native
Rajah would become acquainted with the fact that something
very like coinage was being carried on.
26. Returning now to the first objection stated by the
writer in the “Economist,” it must be observed that the state-
ment as to the ease with which “ any quantity of unlawful coins
“ could be got rid of,” has not by any means the force which it
appears to have, owing to an unintentional bias in the author’s
representations.
27. It is implied that fraudulent coinage does not take
place in England because large masses of coins cannot be got
rid of, and the temptation is insufficient; but in India, where
large masses “ can be easily got rid of,” the temptation would
be in full force. But this argument will not bear close
examination. The profit on a small mass of unlawful coins


may not be enough to tempt a large capitalist, but it may be
quite enough to tempt a small one; and. for one large capitalist
willing to undertake an unlawful business on a large scale, with
all the risks attending it, there are twenty who would .be
willing to try a small one. The writer forgets the circum-
stance, that the disposal of a few pounds’ worth of half-crowns
and shillings, genuine though unlawful, may be entrusted to
almost any one; but to get rid of 50 or 100 millions of similar
unlawful rupees in India, in exchange for the produce of the
country, requires the agency of merchants of a high class. And
when, without dwelling upon the immense difficulty of evading
the Custom’s officers, hy secretly importing hundreds of tons of
specie, we consider how very soon suspicion would he drawn
tow ards a mercantile house whose ordinary transactions are
known to involve no large returns in specie, but which is
observed to transmit to the interior, week after week, con-
tinually, many lacs of rupees not. obtained from the Mint or
Treasury, it will I think be admitted that it would be as difficult
to find agents in India to run the risk of smuggling 50 or 100
millions of rupees per annum, as it would be to find agents in
England to distribute one thousand pounds worth of silver coin
in the same time.
28. The smaller sum would yield quite a sufficient tempta-
tion for a certain class of men, hut we do not find it attempted,
even on a small scale. Perhaps the true explanation is, that
large dealings require men of substance and character to
manage them, and such men will not lend themselves to trans-
actions which, if discovered, would involve not only ruin but
disgrace. Even smaller dealings fail to tempt men, when a
small amount of capital as well as character are at stake.
29. If this were not true, it would be incredible that an
article for which there is in England an enormous and universal


demand —an article which may be manufactured upon any scale
whatever, with little or no capital compared with the coinage of
the precious metals, which is absolutely incapable of detection
when once introduced into the market, and the profit connected
with the unlawful sale of which, instead of being 10 or 20 per
cent, would be more than 500 cent., has not for years past been
attempted upon a scale sufficient to attract public attention.
30. I refer to the manufacture of ardent spirits, which the
shrewdest people—the distillers, not only of America, hut also of
France, Belgium, Germany, or Italy, would find to be far more
easy than the coinage of rupees or shillings.
31. Again—if the difficulty of disposing of large masses of
coins be the one great hindrance in England, and its supposed
absence in India owing to rupees being legal tender for large
sums, the inevitable forerunner of profitable breaches of the
law, it may be fairly asked how it happens that in France, where
the five-franc silver coins possess all the tempting attributes
of the Indian rupees, and, according to the writer’s view, large
masses of illicit coins would he as easily got rid of as in India,
they being legal tender for the largest amounts; where the
people are as shrewd and clever as any in the world, where
there is abundance of good machinery and every appliance
suitable for coinage already in actual use, not to mention that
of Germany, Belgium, or England, within 24 hours reach,
instead of, as in India, the comparatively total absence of such
machinery and appliances, and none procurable within 6,000
miles —how does it happen, I would say, that in spite of these
telling disadvantages and risks, far beyond those of India, the
French silver currency has remained without a hint, as far as is
known, of either smuggling from abroad, or unlawful coinage
at home.


32. I Lave already explained in my letter quoted above
(para. 21, SrdJy), that even if the unlawful coins were introduced
into India, they would do hut slight harm.* I may add that if,
instead of the one million I have mentioned, ten millions were
smuggled into the currency per annum, they would not retard
the measure in any degree whatever, nor postpone the final
settlement of the currency by completion of the supply of
gold coins for a single day.
33. From the above considerations I venture to draw the
conclusion that, even if the price of silver were to fall 20 per
cent, below its normal value in relation to gold, there is not the
least cause for apprehension that there would be any serious
importation into India of unlawful coins. As for their being
manufactured in the country, the supposition that a vast esta-
blishment like a Mint for the coinage of the precious metals, even
on a small scale, could be established and worked in any part of
India without the knowledge of the Government, is not more
worthy of attention than the suggestion of a foreigner would
be who should confidently predict that the high duty on spirits
would certainly lead to the establishment of illegal distilleries
for the supply of the English market in the Highlands of
Scotland or on the Surrey Hills.
31, The above remarks apply to the arguments as they
have been stated in detail; but there is a further conclusive
answer to be made to the objection, namely this: that if the
whole of the arrangements proposed by me had been fully con-
sidered, the objection as to unlawful coinage and smuggling
would have no “ locus standi,” indeed, no existence at all. If
it he true, as I have stated, that by the process of “ dis-rating ”
the present coins (not the currency ), all temptations to unlawful
coinage would be annihilated , that fact turns the flank of the
supposed objection, and the objector must needs level his
* Vide Essay IY., page 12—4 tidy.


weapons against this new foe. It is not unlikely that many
wlio are not familiar with, the subject may be unable to see
clearly all tbe bearings of such a proposition ; and that those
who have only studied the simpler systems of European currency
might apprehend difficulty in carrying it out; but to those who
know India well and the past history of her currency, this diffi-
culty will sink into insignificance, as compared with the con-
fusion and distress which its employment would be effectual to
remove.
35. It is not at all likely, however, that this last-mentioned
proposal would ever need to be called into requisition, because
the writer in the “Economist” himself, in this very article,
quoted hereafter in paragraph 75; written, it must be observed,
before the late recovery in the price of silver, expresses the
opinion that “ the predominating probability seems at present
to be ” that silver will not be permanently excessively depre-
ciated; and without this, the “ dis-rating ” of the coins would
not be in the least degree necessary.
36. Having, therefore, a simple, sufficient, and perfect*
remedy for the probable evil consequences of a moderate per-
manent depreciation of silver and fluctuation of the Exchange,
and an absolute and final remedy in the event of any further
unexpected greater I trust I may be held to be reasonably
justified in tbe hope that the objection to my plans on the score
of unlawful coinage, in or out of India, will be for the future
dismissed from consideration.
* See the last paragraph of my letter to the Editor of the “ Economist ” in
his issue of December 2nd, 1876—quoted in paragraph 62 of this Essay, of which
see also paragraphs 63 and 88.
f Vide paragraph 34.


37. The following is the description given by the writer
in the “ Economist” of the second “ gravest objection ” to my
proposal: —
“ Secondly—The confusion in trade it would cause would be extreme.
Suppose it were now enacted that no more rupees should be coined, and that gold
should be coined at 2s, the rupee, the export trade now stimulated by the low
exchange would be stopped, for the exchange would gradually rise; nor, for a
time at least, would the import trade into India find a corresponding gain, for a
great uncertainty would be produced, in which no new business would be created
though old business would be stopped.”
38. This objection I briefly answered as follows :
“ The second objection is that extreme confusion would be caused by my
proposal. In reference to this, I must ask you to consider whether there has not
been throughout this year the confusion you refer to 1 Whether it is likely any
measures would make matters much worse 1 On the other hand, I claim for my
proposals, not only that they will not add to the confusion already existing, but
that when they have been carried out, when the exchanges have risen to, and are
finally settled at, within a fraction of 2s. the rupee, all confusion and uncertainty
will be at an end. lam sure you will readily allow that when the value of the
rupee currency has been steadily fixed by gold at 2s. the rupee, no fluctuation in
the London exchange, beyond the cost of shipping gold either way, can take
place.”
39. As the main point in the second objection was the
confusion and uncertainty to bo produced by my plans, it was
thought sufficient to point out that instead of producing the
dreaded evil, the very opposite would be its effect. Upon well
established principles it is incontestable that the exchange
between two countries haring the same metallic standard of
value, cannot vary more than the cost of shipping specie from
one country to the other; and this between England and India
amounts to one per cent., or a farthing in the rupee. I have
shown in paragraph 18 of the Appendix to Essay 1., and also in
paragraph 8 of Essay IV., that for delivery in India, the cost and
value of gold are the same if not less than in London; so that the
2


fluctuations of the exchange, if there were the same standard
in both countries, would usually take place between 2s. at one
time and Is. llfd. at another, and could not exceed the
difference, including interest, of fths of a penny in the rupee
either w r ay.
40. But that such a state of things is very different indeed
from what exists at present, will be clearly seen by the annexed
diagram, No. 1 in the Appendix, which illustrates the actual
variations of the rate of exchange between England and India,
and its great depression below the normal rate of 2s. during
the year 1876, taken from the reports made in the columns of
the “ Economist ” from time to time, as contrasted with a
similar line drawn upon the same scale, showing the utmost
departure of the exchange from the normal rate which would
be possible at any time if my proposals were adopted, and the
currency of India were regulated by gold; in other words, if
the same standard of value were applicable to both countries.
41. Diagram No. 2 shows the value of the rupee in pence
during the present century from 1800 to 1877, to illustrate
the remarks made in paragraphs 46 to 61 of the 4th Essay.
Diagram No. 3 shows the variations in the price of bar silver
during the year 1876, and illustrates its inconvenience as a
standard for India. Perhaps it may be said in apology for it, Ist,
that the year has been an exceptional one, which is no doubt true,
and 2ndly, that the diagrams only show the variations of silver
in respect to gold, and therefore do not necessarily indicate so
great a fluctuation in regard to commodities.
42. Butinregard to the first apologyitmust be observed that,
although the year 1876 was a disastrous example of the difiicuU
ties connected with a silver standard in India, similar departures
from the normal rate, though not so frequent and sudden, have


occurred throughout all the century, as shown by Diagram No. 2;
and the following quotation from the “Economist,” under date
the 28th October last, speaking of the gold price of silver, tends
to show that such fluctuations are likely to be more probable in
the future than they have hitherto been.
“ The gold price of silver has now been affected in the same way as the gold
“ price of other commodities for the first time, because it has now been for the
“ first time a commodity in the same position as other commodities. Formerly,
“ the existence of a ‘ double standard ’ in various important countries took off
“ from the market part of any sudden extra supply of gold or silver, replaced it by
“in equal supply of the other, and so equalised the price. But now that the
“ ‘ equilibrating apparatus ’ has been withdrawn, the price of silver in gold upon
“ the London market will be affected by the causes which produce cycles of price,
“justlike anything else.”
43. In regard to the second explanal ion it must be remarked
that it is the variation in respect to gold that is all important to
the commerce of India. It is the fact of having two fluctuating
standards to regulate our vast and increasing transactions which
causes all the mischief and ruin to commerce ; and it is the in-
calculable variations in the exchange, consequent on the con-
current or diverse movements of the two metals, which
confound all calculations and mock all prevision.
44. The remarks above made, and the illustrations given,
will probably be sufficient on the subject ot uncertainty and
confusion ; but it may he necessary to make a few observations
regarding the statement that the export trade of India would
be stopped, and the import trade not improved, in consequence
of the rise in the exchange which would ensue j because, unless
the question he thoroughly explained, some apprehension might
remain in the minds of those who would hail with gladness the
increased exports, as facilitating the necessary withdrawal of
funds from India for the borne expenses of the Government.
45. It is quite true that the measures proposed by me
would, under the direction of the Government oi India, cause


the exchanges to rise, and thereby diminisli the extra abnormal
stimulus which has lately affected the export trade from that
country. It would at the very same time remove the abnormal
depression from the import trade, produced by the same cause ;*
for the writer s argument against this, founded on uncertainty,
is obviously incorrect if, instead of uncertainty, certainty is pro-
duced. Both trades would return to their former normal and
healthy conditions, the exchanges would at first be invariable,
except aftei ample notice, andwouldinthe end be unalterably fixed
at their former and proper average; and commerce, undisturbed
by the alarms and perils of a constantly varying relation of
value between the Indian currency and those of Europe, would
continue to grow, as it has hitherto done, by the natural opera-
tion of the enlightened measures adopted for its development.
46. It appears to have been overlooked by the writer who
objects to my proposals, on the ground that the exchanges
would rise, and put a stop to the exports from India, that from
the moment the free coinage of rupees in India was suspended,
until the late of exchange had risen to 2s. the rupee, it would
be entirely under the control of the Government of India;
whereas, in the absence of that restriction, and as long as the
coinage of rupees is uncontrolled, the exchange is subject to
all the fluctuations from which so much uncertainty and con-
fusion have already been experienced. If the coinage of rupees
had been stopped in August last, when the rate was Is. 7d. per
rupee, it would have been open to the Secretary of State—had
he thought it desirable to keep up Ihe unnatural stimulus of
* The following is an extract from an article on “ Bi-metalism,” in the
“ -Economist ” of December 30th, 1876;—“ And as we have also often shown,
though the trade to India is impeded by a fall of silver, our trade from India—our
imports from thence—are stimulated. The same cause which tends to impair the
one, tends equally and necessarily to add to the other.”


the export trade —to have published his determination to sell
hills to all comers at Is. 7d. the rupee, or any other rate, for the
ensuing three months, or longer; and whatever rate he fixed
would have continued without the slightest variation till he
saw reason to make a change, giving ample notice to merchants.
47. On the other hand, for want of any power of control,
the rate has of itself rapidly risen towards its former and proper
position, carrying with it all the mischief the writer erroneously
attributed to my scheme; and, as regards certainty, it would
have been impossible until very recently, when the probable
necessity for a large Indian loan has become apparent, for any
one to say what the value of the rupee in English money would
be at the end of six months, or to give even an approximate
guess on the subject with any degree of certainty whatever.
48. On the score therefore of uncertainty and confusion,
I trust that it may be not unwillingly allowed that, even if
there he no respect in which my 1 proposals may be thought
worthy of notice, they will, at the least, not be condemned on
account of their occasioning injury to trade by doubts about the
rate of exchange.
49. The third objection of the “ Economist ” is stated in
the following terms :
“ Thirdly—this would deprive India of the great advantage she will gain, if
the present state of things continue, as the entrepot through which silver is intro-
duced into the East, This is always the effect of a lowered value of the currency-
metals, The first persons who get them from the mines gain much ; those who
buy them from the mining people gain much too; and so on until the deprecia-
tion is effected. In the case of India, the importation of silver will gradually
raise silver prices; this will bring imports into India from other countries where
they have not risen. For very many years England has in this way derived the
greatest advantage from being the first country to which the Australian gold was
sent, and from which it was diffused. The Indian Finance Minister is no doubt
troubled by the fall of silver, because he has to buy gold in London, but India
itself will probably be benefitted by it, for it would give her an easy money
market, and an extending trade for exports and imports, which the suggested
scheme would spoil.”


50. And the following is my brief reply :
“In regard to the third objection, namely, the loss to India of the great
advantage of being the entrepot through which silver would be introduced into the
East, I hope you will permit me to remind you that there is nothing in my plans
to prevent India becoming this entrepot in the ordinary course of trade ; and that
it is not necessary it should do so by the process of flooding the currency, raising
prices, and attracting imports. Were India possessed of the silver mines, she
would attract imports in exchange for the metal; but not having them, she can
only procure it by sending exports to pay for it, and give it away again in ex-
change for imports. This is ordinary Commerce.
51. In regard to flooding the currency and raising prices, it would appear
that this could not take place to more than a very trifling extent; otherwise we
should have to assume that during the slow process of raising prices, silver from
the mines was seeking the markets where prices are higher, or in other words,
where it exchanges for fewer commodities, and passing by or avoiding others
where it would exchange for more. In regard to India, the owners of the silver
must not only do this, but if they allow it to be coined, they must submit to a
tax of 2-1 per cent, which would be lost on exportation.
52. For these reasons I hope you will allow that by far the greater part of
any silver passing via India to the East would not enter the currency, but be
dealt with in the ordinary course of trade ; and, as I have said, my plans would
not in the least interfere with the ordinary trade in silver, but would add
thereto important transactions in gold.”
53. To this it appears to me unnecessary to add more than
an explanation, that when it is said that the raising of prices
could not take place to more than a trifling extent, the rise of
prices spoken of is, as indeed the argument requires, not the
absolute, hut the relative rise in comparison v\ ith other
countries. The point insisted upon is that the precious metals
diffuse themselves pretty equally over all countries, and that
the owners of the silver will not send it to any country where
it exchanges for a smaller value of commodities, that is, where
prices are higher, when there are other countries ready to give
more for it. Had it been possible that, owing to the fail in
silver, prices in India had generally risen, while they remained


stationary in other silver standard countries, the result would
have been that the exchanges would have turned against her,
and the surplus metal would have been exported. As it is,
however, it is generally allowed that no such general rise has
taken place, and the great object to be aimed at at present is to
provide a remedy against the monstrous defect of a different
standard of value in India from England and Europe —the
consequent fluctuations in the exchange, and all the disastrous
losses and disturbance occasioned by them.
54. As stated in my first essay, paragraph 3, “it is not
“ merely the confusion and detriment to trade at present
tc experienced, but the inherent mischief of an arrangement
« which subjects the enormous and daily increasing commerce
“ of England and India to constant vicissitudes in the prices of
« the two metals constituting their respective standards of
“ value ; and the incessant liability to the embarrassment of all
<e contracts connected therewith.”
55. Eor the present I will merely add my hope that it will
he admitted that my proposals are not exposed to the least
objection on the score of depriving India of any advantages as
an entrep6t for the distribution of the precious metals. Silver
may he imported and exported without the slightest obstacle or
hindrance so far as my proposals are concerned ; but it will not
enter the currency and forfeit 2 per cent, for doing so, if the
shrewdest people in the world, the American pioduccis of
silver, or any other owners, know what they are about in dis-
posing of it.
56. Eourth objection.—The fourth and last objection of
the writer in the c< Economist is stated as follow s .
“ Fourthly The currency so introduced would he a very had one. There
would be one currency fit for foreign payments—-the gold—and another not so fit.


The‘monopoly coins’ would be unexportable, and so, when anyone wanted to
make a foreign payment, he would have to get gold which, as a rule, would make
gold at a premium. The effect would be just like that of a plan, often discussed
formerly m England, viz., making the notes issued on securities by the Bank of
England (the £15,000,000) inconvertible—the rest remaining convertible. The
monopoly rupees would be of limited number and artificial value, just like the
security, or Government notes, we used to discuss, and their effect would be exactly
what Lord Overstone predicted in 1857 in his evidence on the Bank Acts : ‘ Our
affairs would then go on very much in the way that a man would walk with one
of his legs six mches shorter than the other. One set of notes would circulate at
a depreciation compared with the other set of notes; hence great inconvenience
and confusion would arise.’ ”
57. 4050. What would be the effect of it ?—The effect would be that you
would have paper money of two different characters in the country, not of
equivalent value; not circulating indiscriminately each for all purposes, but some
useful for one purpose and some useful for the other, and that there would
be intolerable confusion. A man would have Government notes, and he would
present them to another man in payment; that man would say: “I do not
want Government notes; I want to make a remittance abroad; I cannot get
bullion for those Government notes; I will not take them.”
58. 4051. Are they both to be a legal tender ?_They would both be a legal
tender as far as the Government is concerned, but the Government note would
not be a legal tender between individuals. Then what is that individual to do ?
The other man says to him : “ You must go and get me the other notes ; either
you or I must pay a premium for them.”
. , 59 - ios2 ; What w<mM th « harm of that ?-The harm would be enormous
injustice and intolerable confusion.
60, In the plan now suggested—monopoly coins being compulsory tender-
gold not bang demandable-it would be settled which party should pay the
“premium.” Everybody would be obliged to take the purely domestic medium
o exchange, and to buy with it the medium which is also of foreign use. But


in other respects the evil would be exactly what Lord Overstone describes. There
would be two currencies in the country with different values, and prices in one
would, as far as the discrepancy went, be different from those in the other.
61. For a short time, and during a period of transition, we can quite imagine
that this inconvenience might be endured. But the present plan is by its essence
a permanent plan—a plan for making a currency for India for all time ; and then
an inherent defect of great magnitude such as this becomes a most grave objec-
tion. As Lord Overstone said of the old plan —“ Then, you would have a certain
proportion of the monetary system of the country circulating at a discount j I
cannot conceive a greater state of monetary disorganisation than that,”
62. To this argument the following short answer was given
in my letter above referred to :
“In regard to the fourth objection, I would explain, that when my plans
are carried out the new currency will be identical in principle with that of Great
Britain. Even during the transition it would "be not inferior to it after the ex-
change had risen to 2s. the rupee, because India having a debt of 20 millions
sterling per annum due to her in gold, can have no difficulty in discharging any
foreign liability at “ par.” Lord Overstone’s evidence applies to quite a different
question, and is therefore inapplicable to my proposal.”
*
63. Although this answer is, I trust, quite sufficient to
meet the objection, it may nevertheless be desirable to add a
few words of further explanation. In the first place it will be
evident that when the proposed arrangement is being con-
demned on account of an inherent defect of great magnitude
applicable to it as a “permanent plan”—a “currency for all
time ” it would he proper only to charge against it the defects
belonging to it when so established, as a currency for all time ;
and then, as I have stated, it would be precisely the same as
that of Great Britain, which is admitted on all hands to be ab-
solutely free from the evil referred to. .Hence, speaking of the .


proposed currency as an established system, the objections which
have been stated could be no more urged against it than against
our British system of currency, with which it would be identical ;
and even before it final establishment, if attention he paid to the
peculiar circumstances of India, it will, I think, be clearly seen
that the inconvenience and difficulties which might occur else-
where would have absolutely no existence there.
64. The complaint made is that there would be two curren-
cies of different values, and 44 when any one wanted to make a
foreign payment he would have to get gold, which as a rule,
would make gold at a premium,” so that there would he confu-
sion of prices, &c., &c.
65. This complaint, owing to the special circumstances
which I will now mention, is wrong in both its statements, viz.;
Ist, it is not true that if a merchant in India wished to make
a foreign payment he would 44 have to get gold;” and 2ndly,
after the establishment of the currency the gold coins would
dominate prices, and it would be impossible for them to be at
a premium any more than sovereigns in England. Even be-
fore the establishment of the gold currency in abundance, the
necessity to procure gold for foreign payments would not cause
it to be 44 at a premium.”
66. Before proceeding to show this, however, I must obviate
the charge of inconsistency which might otherwise appear to
attach to these statements as compared with one made in Essay
No. 1, paragraph 14, that 44 whenever specie remittances abroad
were necessary, gold would leave India,” and on that account
the 44 coins would at first command an agio 4 or batta.’ ”
67. Here the "at first ” means before the universal supply


of an abundance of gold coins, and as regards gold bullion, the
settlement of the exchange at 2s. the rupee. Before the rise of
the exchange, gold coins equal in value with sovereigns, anc
representing 10 rupees, could not he brought into the market,
except as curiosities or fancy pieces; because the natural price
of a gold piece identical in value with a sovereign must neces-
above ten rupees, when the exchange is below 2s. the
rupee; and such gold pieces would not be coined at all in
India, except to secure a higher price than 10 rupees, wine i
higher price would be called a premium in reference to the pro-
posed establishment of the rupee as of a sovereign, but
would be, in reality, its legitimate and proper price at the lower
rate of exchange.
68. Again, the duration of this “ at first” in regard to the
rate of exchange would he entirely dependent upon the will of
the Secretary of State, and might, if he thought it expedient
he reduced to nothing * (vide Essay IV., paragraph 10), conse-
quently, its continuance for a short time from motives of policy,
and any fancied inconvenience occasioned thereby, cannot he
alleged as an essential and necessary objection, however small,
to the proposed arrangements.
69. Moreover, the condition mentioned in Essay 1., para-
graph 14, “ whenever specie remittances abroad were necessaiy
* In my 4th Essay, paragraphs 10 and 33, it is mentioned as practicable at
once to raise the rate of exchange to nearly 3s. the rupee. This requires a little
explanation. Under ordinary circumstances the heavy drafts from India by the
Secretary of State, if continued with steady uniformity, do not disturb the
exchange, which with a gold standard, would adjust itself to any rate not exceed-
ing 2s, the rupee. But if a material change took place suddenly in the woo
amount drawn, the rate of exchange would be for the time affected, being in-
creased towards 2s. if the drafts were diminished, and lowered m the contrary
event.


would, as a rule, have no application, if, as will be shown pre-
sently, gold for export is never required {vide Essay 1., para-
graph 39) though, as an exception, it might apply if the whole
balance of trade were against the empire.
70. To return then to the first statement noticed above in
paragraph 65, it appears by Lord George Hamilton’s speech in
the House of Commons on the 11th August, 1876, that India has
from 17 to 20 millions worth of gold annually payable to her
in England. Hence, a debtor wishing to pay a foreign claim,
does not ** have to get gold” at all, but purchases from his
neighbour a bill for part of the 20 millions, and therewith pays
his debt. In regard to the second statement, it will be seen by
reference to the particulars mentioned in my 4th Essay para-
graph 8, that whenever gold is required in India for export, or
otherwise, it may be delivered there for a trifle even less than
its actual value in England ; and, when the rate of exchange
is at 2s. the rupee, gold might be had in any amount, not only
without any premium but possibly at a small discount below r
the mint price.
71. It is true that wLile the gold coins are scarce, persons
who wished to have them as a matter of curiosity or fancy,
would have to pay for them; but they would not be necessary
to anyone, because his legal payments wmuld be made in the
abundant silver coins; and it would be as absurd for him to
complain that coins he was not under any necessity to possess
but might purchase or not as he pleased, were saleable at a
premium, as to object to medals being sold at a price beyond
their metallic value.
72. As to applying to the proposed arrangements, even
before the abundance of gold coins, Lord Overstone’s objection


to the mixed circulation of convertible and inconvertible notes,
a very little reflection will show that, under the circumstances,
it does not at all apply. Gold coins cannot become part of the
regular currency, so as to affect prices, till they are made by
law demandable, for no man would price bis goods in a currency
be could not demand. This objection was never experienced, or
even thought of, previous to 1835, when the gold moburs were
legal tender, but not demandable ;* and in the same way re-
garding the proposed new gold coins, until they were made
legally demandable, although they might command a premium,
it would, be incorrect to say the rupee currency was at a
discount.
73. According to my proposed arrangement, when fully
established, gold coins could not generally enter the Indian
currency unless they were of the same value in exchange as the
rupees procurable by bills, because if they cost more, it would
be a loss to make use of them, and if they cost less the rate
would be lowered to compete against them, for with 170 to 200
millions of these rupees to be disposed of in bills annually, it
would be absolutely necessary to secure a market.
71. It may be as well now to point out bow entirely the
bomogeneousness of the currency will, in India, be governed by
the rate of exchange, and its supply in either one or both of the
metals be automatic, and self-adjusted to the wants of trade;
* It has been pointed out by a friend that there is a slight inaccuracy in
my note to para. 13 of my first Essay, page 9, as it is made to appear that gold
mohurs were legal tender for 15 rupees, not demandable, subsequent to 1835.
Not having the Act to refer to, I had forgotten that this privilege of the gold
currency, which existed previously, as stated by the late James Prinsep (Useful
Tables, page 1), was abolished by it; but that circumstance does not in any way
affect the argument with which it was connected.


and this explanation will meet the remarks contained in the
latter part of the article now under reply, which runs as
follows :
75. “No doubt it is said tbe Indian Government may ‘ regulate the
currency; that it may withdraw rupees from circulation ; that it may add to the
«old in circulation, and so equalise the value of rupees and gold. But to succeed
to such an attempt, the Indian Government would want to know the amount o
currency required for foreign payments, which is that which causes the difference
between silver and gold ; and this they never could know. And American ex-
perience of ‘ gold sales ’ and greenback withdrawals is a great warning against
givino any government the power of arranging the currency. It is sure to injure
the good repute if not the real good faith of the Government (for it necessarily
creates pecuniary secrets of great value), and nevertheless it is not at all sure to
attain its end, and to equalise as it is intended the two kinds of currency. Bor
these reasons, we cannot think that the suggested plan for a new Indian currency
would be a good one, even if it could be shown that silver was sure to be per-
manently excessively depreciated. And as the preponderating probability seems
at present to be, that it will not be so depreciated, we are still more of opinion
that it would be unwise to begin a policy on the face of it, and almost admittedly,
so anomalous.”
76 "When the circumstances of the Indian trade and cur-
rency are explained, it will be seen at a glance how wholly
inapplicable these remarks are to the proposed plan. It is not
intended that the Government should “ withdraw rupees from
“circulation” at all, or “add gold to it,” otherwise than by
the ordinary automatic operations of commerce.
77. It has been before explained (Essay 111., paras. 4 and
5; Essay IV., 10 and 38), that when the coinage of rupees by
individuals is suspended, and the currency is procurable only
ky gold or hills, it will rest with the Government of India to
iis the rate at which bills shall be drawn ; and if the Secretary
of State issues hills at a lower rate than 2s. the rupee to all
applicants, the effect upon trade and the currency will he pre


cisely the same as if, nothing having been done, the given rate
of exchange had been arrived at in consequence of other cir-
cumstances, and had become permanent. The rate fixed being
short of 2s. the rupee, exactly the same amount of silver bul-
lion would be sent out to India and added to the currency as
would be the case under existing circumstances at that rate;
the only difference would be that it would be sent by the Se-
cretary of State instead of by the merchants —who would take
bills instead —and coined by the Government of India. The
quantity so sent out would be regulated strictly as at present
by the balance of trade, and the amount of funds requisite for
the Indian Home expenses.
78. We have before seen (Essay IV., para. 8), that when a
telegraphic transfer of English money can be had in Calcutta
or Bombay at the rate of 2s. the rupee, it would be more profit-
able for a merchant or banker having gold at Galle, on its way
from Australia to England, to send it to either of those ports
for sale at the Mint price of 38 rupees. 14 as per standard ounce,
that is 2s. worth of gold for a rupee, than to carry it on to
England; and it will be found by calculation that if the rate of
discount in London were even as high as 10 per cent, it would
not be worth while to send gold to India to be exchanged for
bills, when the rate for telegraphic transfer was below Is. ll|d.;*
* An ounce of gold sent from Galle to England via Brindisi, would reach
London in 22 days, and sell for 933 d. The same sent to Bombay would arrive
in less than 4 days, and if sold there for 38 rupees 14 annas, and the produce
exchanged for a telegraphic transfer on London at the rate Is. ll|d. per rupee,
the result would be the payment in London of 928-1406 d., eighteen days before
the gold sent via Brindisi would be available. The difference of 4'8594d. by
which the produce of the transfer is less than that of the gold, would not be made
good by the eighteen days’ interest, unless the rate were IQI per cent. (10-5639).
At all higher rates the transfer would be preferable, not reckoning any commis-
sion and at all rates below 10-5639 per cent, the transmission of the gold bullion


and it hence follows that if the Secretary of State were to fix
the rate of exchange at Is. ll|d. or less, little or no gold would
he taken to the Indian Mints for currency purposes, although
the standard were changed, and the Mints freely open to receive
it.* Trade and commerce would he carried on precisely in the
same way as at present, with the very great and important
advantage of a permanently fixed and reliable rate of ex-
change.
79. The Government of India would only regulate the
currency by keeping the rate of exchange below 2s. the rupee,
or otherwise, in the sense of determining whether silver or gold
should be brought into it; the wants of commerce alone would
decide as to the amount and value of the additions to he made.
There would he no necessity for the Government to “ want to
“ know the amount of currency required for foreign payments.”
They would have not the slightest interest in the matter,
80. When parties object to the suspension of the coinage
of rupees as an evil of the gravest magnitude, they make
the great mistake of forgetting that it is not the suspen-
to London would be more profitable than its sale in India and transfer at Is, 1 l|d.
per rupee. If the rate of exchange and transfer were Is. lll|d., it would pay
to send the gold to India when the interest of money in London was more than
5*281 per cent. At 2s. the rupee there is a clear profit of the eighteen days’
interest, at whatever rate may prevail.
* Although no gold would be brought to the Mints for ordinary currency
use, there might, nevertheless, be a considerable quantity brought for coinage on
other grounds. India imports more than four millions sterling of gold annually for
hoarding and ornaments, and it is not unlikely that part of this and of the immense
hoard already in India, would be brought to the Mint, the charge being so
low as i per cent, plus refinage. Gold might also be coined at first for sale in
the bazaars, if the coins commanded a sufficient “agio.”


sion of the coining of rupees, but only of the ad libitum coinage
by private individuals. It is proposed that, instead of the
public being permitted to coin the currency, of every accidental
shade of value, the Government should do it for them, and
upon their requisition, at one uniform and invariable standard,
as compared with the currencies of England and Europe, and
one comparatively uniform rate of exchange, which, if thought
expedient, might for a time be kept at 1. per rupee, or
less, and hereafter advanced so as to permit the gradual intro-
duction of gold coins.
81. If instead of this, as I venture to think preferably, the
rate were now fixed at 2s. the rupee, gold would be gradually
brought into the currency, whenever and to the extent that it
was found by commerce necessary or expedient. lor an unfet-
tered option would be given to every one to obtain gold coins
stamped from metal taken by himself to the Mint; or, if he
preferred it, silver coins delivered to him at the Government
Treasury in exchange for bills purchased at the same cost and
remitted from London ; a corresponding amount of rupees
being afterwards manufactured and poured into the cuuency
by the Government.
82. Supposing that this were not enough, and that at any
time in the opinion of the Government ot India it became
desirable further to increase the bulk of the silver coins, it would
be only necessary to sell bills at a lower rate of exchange foi
a time, and the influx of gold would be stopped and silver take
its place. In this way, and in this only, would the currency be
«regulated” by the Government; and although the power
would thus be lodged in its hands to give an exceptional direc-
tion and influence to the action of trade on the currency, yet
we may, I think, be justified in believing that such interference
3


would be but seldom required. If merchants and banks have
the free privilege of supplying either kind of currency on
exactly equal terms, we may safely conclude that their own
interests will prompt them to supply that section of it which is
most in accordance with the necessary requirements of the
public.
83. The proposed measures would be introduced without
the slightest remark or excitement; for except in so far as the
necessary publication of the gold standard would make it known,
the change would take place quite insensibly, and be generally
unobserved by the great mass of the people, till it began to
manifest itself by slow degrees, the gold coins creeping into use
more and more, as the convenience of trade and the increasing
prosperity of the community rendered them convenient and
necessary. In the end, when a sufficiency of gold coins had
been brought into use and established in the currency, the
rupees whose legal tender had been from time to time gradually
restricted, would occupy a position the same in principle as the
silver coins in the British currency, though, as regards numbers,
proportioned to the wants of the Indian Empire.
84. I trust that I have succeeded in showing, in each case
separately, that the grave objections which have been advanced,
although they might under a different state of things have
been held to bear upon my proposals, yet owing to the peculiar
circumstances of India, have not the slightest application to
them; and that there is, in reality, no reason whatever why the
Government of India should not take the coinage of rupees
into their own hands, and gradually restore the rate of exchange
to its normal condition of 2s. the rupee, thereby opening the
way to the spontaneous introduction of a gold currency, con-
currently with the present rupee token coins, in such propor-
tions as the daily wants of trade and foreign commerce would


indicate, and thus bringing about a system of currency pre-
cisely the same as that of Great Britain.
85, The present circumstances of India seem to point to
the probability that an opportunity will soon come when it will
be comparatively easy to advance the rate of exchange to
Is. llfd. or 25.; but the opportunity may not last long, and it
would be a matter of deep regret if it were allowed to pass by
unimproved; for to advance it after it has again fallen to a
lower rate, would involve, as has been already shown (Essay
1V.,. para. 35) a great loss of time, and large pecuniary
sacrifices.
86. The accomplished writer of the criticisms I have
endeavoured to answer, has not made the mistake which has
been made by others, in denying that the rupees would rise in
value; and I hope it will no longer be doubted, that had it
been necessary, owing to existing depreciation, they must
have risen to the full value of gold, at the rate fixed
by the standard, provided they were not made procur-
able at a cheaper rate by bills. But there are still some
who cannot believe that the whole coins of a vast empire
can possess an effective value in exchange above their
metallic worth, and this undefined apprehension infects
their minds with a tinge of doubt as to the whole scheme.
To such I must appeal by asking them, what they mean by
the rupees not maintaining their full token value ? My own
meaning is a ready value at what they cost , in exchange for
all commodities, including the precious metals ; and I would
ask—ls it not true that an article of universal and unlimited
demand will, in any market, command at the least its cost price ?
If so, rupees, when they cannot be bought in any way for less
than 2s. the rupee, must readily command that value in ex-
change in every market in India—as indeed they do now.


Again—ls it not true, that absolutely worthless tokens (notes)
in Scotland and Ireland readily command the full value of
their cost, in preference to the same value in gold ?
87. My objector meets this by saying, Oh, yes! hut these
notes are convertible into gold. Ans. —True, but they are
preferred as they are; and according to my proposal the token
rupees will he convertible into gold, when the latter coins have
been made demandahle; and, even in the meantime, when gold
is purchasable to any amount in exchange for rupees at their
full value {vide Essay IV., para. 8), and sovereigns pervade the
country at the same price, the rupees though not legally, are
practically convertible. Objector —But there is a vast difference
between notes and coins; coins cannot permanently maintain a
value in exchange materially beyond their intrinsic metallic
worth in the market. Ans. —I think this is a mistake. Our half-
crowns and shillings permanently main+ain their value. Ob-
jector —Yes, hut they are of limited legal tender. Ans. —So will
the rupees he, if you will have a little patience till the proper
time has arrived. But, in the meantime, my position is, that the
limited legal tender has nothing to do with the matter. That
the coins must exchange for what they cost, whether in large
numbers or small. Otherwise, how could worthless, incon-
vertible notes command any value at all, in America, Italy,
Bussia, and innumerable instances ? How is it that in Erance
the 5-franc pieces have for the last two or three years main-
tained a value very decidedly above their metallic worth ?
How is it that these very rupees have* fully maintained a value
above it ? Objector —It takes time to bring about the change.
Ans. — Yes, perhaps it may take time, but also something more
than time. It needs also that the currency be supplied
# Vide the note to para 13 of this Essny.


cheaper, in order that it should fall in value. lam afraid it is
here we differ. If you believe that rupees costing two shillings
each will be continuously supplied to the markets where they
will only command goods to the value of Is. lOd. or Is. lid. I
must take my leave of you. Por it is beyond my power to
believe that if the constantly increasing currency of a
progressive country like India is being augmented by the
manufacture of 50 to 100 millions annually of new coins
costing two shillings each; and 170 to 200 millions of the exist-
ing coins also change hands every year, being bought by gold
at the same price, the exchangeable value of these same coins
in the Indian markets can be a shade less than the value for
which they are obtained.
88. These objections and answers might be added to ; but
the basis of truth is simple. A legal tender token currency for
home circulation is worth what it necessarily costs, and, when
subordinated to a dominant system of full valued gold coins, is
the perfection of a currency for commercial purposes ; and this
is what I have ventured respectfully to propose. It may
perhaps not be generally known that there is at the present
moment a greater value of gold in India than the average
estimate (£l5O millions) of the silver currency. If this gold
were coinable at a cheap rate, and more especially in fine gold
pieces, it is very likely that a . considerable proportion of it
would be brought to the Mints, and there would be a decided
profit in coining it, even at one-sixth per cent. Probably most
of the coins would be returned to the hoards they now fill •
but it would be a boon to the owners to convert the fine gold
bars into the more useful form of coins, in which they would
be much more available as money in time of need; and the
hoarding of gold or silver, whether in bars or coins, has no
permanent effect upon the currency, which is quite independent
of it, and by spontaneous action takes care of itself.


89. Let me now briefly state a few of the principal facts
connected with the proposal under discussion.
Ist. India possesses a currency which, being founded upon
a different standard from that of England and a large part of
Europe, is for the purposes of her vast and increasing foreign
trade, most highly inconvenient and obstructive to commerce,
owing to the serious fluctuations between the two metals to
which it is liable. We have had late disastrous experience of
these, and they are likely to be more frequent,* owing to late
changes in the financial arrangements of European States.
90. 2ndly.—We have a proposal to put an end to this
unsatisfactory and baneful state of things, by assimilating the
Indian Standard with that of Great Britain and Europe.
91. Srdly.—We have proof that instead of being in the
least degree a costly measure, the change would be accompanied
*>.7 a saving to the revenues of India, which cannot be estimated
at less than one or two millions sterling per annum.
92. 4thly —We have evidence that the introduction of a
gold currency is desired unanimously by the natives of every
part of India f, as stated in the Report of the Commission
appointed to enquire into the subject.
93. sthly.—We have an early prospect of the opportunity
of restoring the existing currency to its normal value, in rela-
* Vide quotation in paragraph 42 of this Essay.
f The following extract is from the 24th paragraph of the Eeport of the
Commission, ordered by the House of Commons to be printed 16th March, 1868:
4th. “That the demand for gold currency is unanimous throughout the
country.”


tion to gold, viz., 2s. the rupee, on its near approximation to
that rate; and thereby expediting the change and the acqui-
sition of the profit and advantages resulting from it.
9 45. 6thly. —By the proposed measure loans for public pur-
poses can he raised equally well in England or India * ; because
it would reduce to a minimum their disturbing effect upon the
exchanges; which effects, with a double Standard, are equally
great, whether the loans he raised in one country or the other;
except in regard to India, so far as the capital is supplied by
permanent residents in India, and does not belong, as it often
does to a large extent, to proprietors in Europe.
95. It is with the greatest reluctance that I have in the
foregoing remarks again ventured to intrude my proposals upon
the notice of the distinguished statesmen who control the
destinies of our vast Empire; 'hut believing as I am
encouraged to do after more than nine months’ discussion,
that I advocate measures of great importance, only re-
quiring to he thoroughly explained to be approved;
and destitute as I am of the privilege of being made
acquainted with the obstacles which stand in the
way of their adoption, I have felt it incumbent upon me to
answer every apparent objection of importance which has come
to my knowledge; and in the present case more especially to
examine with the utmost deference and careful attention the
opinion of so eminent and deservedly esteemed an authority as
the writer whose criticisms are discussed in these pages.
\§th February , 1877
J. T. SMITH.
* Vide Essay IY., paragraph 20.




APPENDIX.
Diagram No. I.
DIAGRAM No. 1, showing the variations in the rate of
exchange (Council Bills on India), during the year 1876.
According to M. Girard dc Quetteville' s Circular.
N.B.—The curved line, marked a , b, c, d, represents the
greatest variation of the rate of exchange, and the greatest
departure from the normal rate of 2s. the rupee, with a gold
standard.
N.B.—The mean rate during the year was about Is. Bjd., the
highest Is. 10|d., the lowest Is. these being 9T46 and
9*75 per cent, on each side of the mean rate, or a total variation
of nearly 19 per cent. The mean rate being no less than 14 # 8437
per cent, below the normal rate of 2s. the rupee, the highest
during the year being 6*77, and the lowest 22’91G per cent,
below the same.




Diagram No. 11.
DIAGRAM No. 2, showing the value of the Rupee in Pence,
during the present century, viz.: from A.D. 1800 to 1877.
Essay IV.— para. 60.
Diagram No. 111.
DIAGRAM No. 3, showing the variations in the prices of Bar Silver during
the year 1876.
Taken from the Investor's Guardian of the 30 th December 1876.


