



SIMPLE RULES
FOR THE
GUIDANCE
OF
PERSONS IN HUMBLE LIFE;
MORE PARTICULARLY FOR
YOUNG GIRLS GOING OUT TO SERVICE.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AT THE ATLAS OFFICE, JiY JAMES TEGG & CO.,
GEOROE STREET, OPPOSITE THE BARRACK GATE.
1837.


SIMPLE RULES
FOR THE
GUIDANCE
OF
PERSONS IN HUMBLE LIFE;
MORE PARTICULARLY FOR
YOUNG GIRLS GOING OUT TO SERVICE.
SYDNEY:
HUNTED AT THE ATLAS OFFICE, BY JAMES TEGG & CO,,
GEORGE STREET, OPPOSITE THE BARRACK GATE.
1837.




TO THE CHILDREN
EDUCATED IN THE
FEMALE SCHOOL OF INDUSTRY,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
My dear Children,
Feeling anxious both for your temporal
and eternal welfare, I have been induced to select
the following Rules for your guidance, in per-
forming the duties of that station in life in which
it has pleased the Almighty to place you; the
works from which they are taken consisting of
many volumes, and not being at all times acces-
sible or attainable. With the blessing of God,
without which your friends and teachers would
m vain expect you to derive any permanent
benefit from their instruction, I am satisfied that,


if you observe the plain and simple Rules con-
tained in these pages, you will prove blessings,
not only to those with whom you are immediately
connected, but to your children’s children ; and,
through the merits of your Saviour, will be re-
ceived into his kingdom, and hear the joyful
sounds, “ Well done, ye good and faithful ser-
vants, enter ye into the joy of your Lord !” That
such may be the fruit of your instruction, is the
fervent prayer of
Your ever affectionate Friend,
ELIZA DARLING.
DEDICATION.


PREFACE.
This little work has no pretensions to originality ;
almost every word is literally copied from one
or other of those excellent works, published
within the last fifty or sixty years, for the benefit
of the humbler classes, “ The Cottager’s Monthly
Visitor,” “ The Christian Gleaner,” “ The Do-
mestic Visitor,” “ Lessons for Young Persons in
Humble Life,” Mrs. Trimmer’s works, and some
others; the Authoress, or rather Compiler, having
deviated from the original works only in occasion-
ally selecting from the Scriptures a text which
appeared to her more appropriate, or to have been
overlooked.


ANGUS A ROBERTSON,
89 Castlkreaqh St., Sydney


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Chap. I.
PAGE
Conversation between a Mother and her Daughter,
partly taken from Chap. Ist. of the “ Catechism of
the Duties of Servants/’ in the Christian Gleaner ,
February, 1826, vol. iii 1
Chap. 11.
Visit to a Neighbour’s Cottage 5
Chap. 111.
Mrs. Shepherd’s Advice to Sarah Brown, partly taken
from “ Mrs. Thrifty’s Advice to her Daughter
Martha,” see Christian Gleaner, vol. iv 14
SELECTIONS.
Advice to Servants, from the ** Domestic Visitor ” 19
~~ 1 from “ Lessons for Young Persons in
Humble Life ” 30
Catechism on the Duties of Servants, from the “ Christian
Gleaner ” 50
Poor Richard, from “ Franklin’s Essays" 118
Anecdotes, Hints, &c. 128




CHAPTER I.
CONVERSATION BETWEEN A MOTHER AND HER DAUGHTER.
“ Mother,” said Mary Shepherd to her motherj
as they were one day sitting at needle work to-
gether, “ I have been thinking, that if God has
made all men to be born alike, how is it tha.t
there should be such a difference between people
as that some should be rich, living in large houses,
with carriages and servants to do every thing for
them, and others, like us, obliged to work and do
for ourselves.”
Mrs . Shepherd : “ God himself has appointed
it, an-"’ therefore when we know a thing to be His
will e ought to be sure it is all for the best whe-
ther *re understand why it should be so or not; but
this is so plainly for the good of every one, that even
I can, 1 think, make you understand it, Mary.
Man was never intended to live alone, but in
society ; no man can, by his own personal labour,
without help from others, procure the comforts or
even the necessaries of life ; no one man could
procure for himself food, clothing, fuel, house,
tools, &c. but we are all obliged to help each other.
B


God therefore gives different abilities to render
some capable of serving others, and to some he
gives wealth to enable them to purchase the good
offices of those around them. Many virtues are
thus tried and improved, which would not other-
wise be called into exercise; on one hand, meek-
ness, contentment, patience; on the other, hu-
manity, sympathy, and benevolence.
Mary : “ I think I understand this; you mean
that if I had to make my own shoes, my own
leather, build ray own house, and do every thing,
that nothing could be done well, and that it is
much better as it is, that one should be one trade
and one another ; but this does not give one man
authority or power over another.”
Mrs. Shepherd: “ No, Mary, but this follows
as a matter of course, for one man works better and
is more industrious than another; another is strong,
while his brother is weak ; if every one could now
be placed quite equal, some would soon starve,
while others would grow rich ; when a man had
riches, his children would have more time to grow
learned; so some would soon be wiser than others,
and soon every thing would return to the state in
which we find it now, or else all would become a
scene of riot and confusion; the strong would op-
press the weak, and force them to work as savages
do now ; the strong make war upon weaker tribes,
take them prisoners, and then make slaves of them.
Women, and those who are weak, are forced to
labour, and surely we ought to be very thankful


that we live in a land where none can oppress
another, but where rich and poor are taught ‘ to
do to others as they would have others do to
them/ and know that in the sight of God they are
equally objects of the same care,and heirs together
of his salvation.”
Mary : “Yes, but mother ! are not the rich
happier than the poor ?”
Mrs. Shepherd: “ I do not think so, Mary; if
the servant has more bodily labour and fatigue
than his master, he has less care and anxiety to
disturb his peace; if his possessions are small, his
calls are also moderate; having discharged his
duty, he may his bread with relish, and enjoy
his rest; besides, outward circumstances do not
affect respectability of character—a good servant
is as estimable in the sight of God as a good master;
these differences in station, so far from interfering
with our prospects of future and never-ending
happiness, are often made subservient in pro-
moting our preparation for a better world, and in
the same proportion our real happiness in this;
but if we are real Christians, and love our Bibles,
my dear child ! none of these doubts will distress
us ; there we shall find “ that if we have food and
raiment, we should be therewith content;” we
shall see that if not even a sparrow falls to the
ground without our heavenly Father’s knowledge,
that we need not fear, as he has told us himself
‘ we are of more value than many sparrows.’
The Saviour of man, God himself, took upon Him
b 2


the form of a servant; therefore, Mary, when such
thoughts of discontent rise in your heart, think of
this, and pray that you may be thankful for all the*
mercies he' is daily showing you, and remember
that you are not worthy of even the least of them ;
get your Bible, and you will always find comfort
there. But it is time to put by our work, and
begin to prepare for your father’s dinner; lay the
cloth, and I will see if the broth and potatoes are
nearly done.”


CHAPTER II.
VISIT TO A NEIGHBOUR’S COTTAGE.
When Mrs. Shepherd and her daughter had made
their usual neat and comfortable arrangements for
the family meal, the mother desired Mary to look
and see if her father and the children were coming,
and upon Mary’s assuring her that she could not
see them, Mrs. Shepherd remembered that her
husband, on going out, had said something about
the ’squire having commenced a new plantation,
which he wished finished as soon as possible, and
that he might be later than usual; she therefore
told her daughter that as they should see him some
time before he came, the cottages being on the
borSers of a large common, they would just step
over to neighbour Brown’s and enquire if their
daughter, Sarah, was to go to her place next
morning. “ You would like, Mary, to see your
old school-fellow before she goes, and it is a sore
trial to a young girl to leave for the first time her
mother’s care, and to go to new duties and new
people, without knowing any one.” When they
arrived at Mrs. Brown’s cottage, a scene presented
itself very different from the neat and quiet room
b 3


they had just left. In one corner of the kitchen
sat the husband and father, eating a piece of bread
and cold bacon, no cloth laid, no appearance of
comfort, but the table was covered with dishes not
washed,tea cupsleft since the morning,and various
other articles; he was grumbling at finding nothing
better for him, and wishing “ the girl” was gone,
since no one could now be thought of but her;
two boys were seated on the floor, eating some
bread and cheese, while the table, in the middle
of the room, was covered wdth all the accompani-
ments of dress making; at this table sat Mrs.
Brown, Sarah, her daughter, a pleasing girl of
about sixteen, and another young woman, dressed
in a very showy and (Mrs. Shepherd thought)
very unbecoming manner, and whose countenance
was bold and unpleasant. After the first enquiries
were over, Mrs. Brown answered Mrs. Shepherd’s
enquiry of whether her daughter was going to-
morrow, by saying, “ Why, you see, she can’t
go now, for Lucy Thomas came down to see her
friends last week, and she says that Sarah will
only be laughed at if she goes to her place, dressed
in such things as we had got for her, and she is
very good-naturedly come to help us to make her
more fit to be seen. You know she has left Mrs.
Bowen’s place, and has got a fine place in London,
and knows what is what.” Lucy here gave a con-
ceited toss of her head, and resumed trimming
with a broad gay coloured ribbon, a large straw
bonnet, which she had persuaded Mrs. Brown to


procure at the neighbouring town for her daughter
instead of the plain and close one which had been
made by the village straw bonnet maker. “Well,”
replied Mrs. Shepherd, “it would not be right in
me, having left service so many years ago, and
never having been from the village since, to give
my opinion ; but I think the world must be sadly
changed, if any one would have laughed at the
neat and clean dress you had prepared for Sarah;
her mistress knows she comes from a quiet village,
and would have told her if any thing displeased
her herself. My dear mistress would never have
allowed any servants of hers to wear such things
as these, I am sure,” added she, taking up some
trimmed and flounced dresses, “ and how will
Sarah ever be able to put by any money against
evil days, which may come, if she spends so much
on her dress?” Upon this, Lucy began to converse
in a manner which, as Mrs. Shepherd could not
approve of, she bid Mrs. Brown a good morning,
and returned in a sad and silent manner to her
home. Maryilooked at her mother, and began to
speak in a very bitter and angry manner of Lucy.
Her mother said, “Mary, my dear, we should
pity her, for I fear she is not going on the right
way, and will bring sorrow to the hearts of her
mother and friends. I am sorry Sarah should
have met with such a friend, and I wish I could
lend her some of those nice good books my kind
mistress gave me when I lived with her, and has
sent me since I married. But here is your father


and the children, hungry enough I dare say, so
let us lose no time.”
While the mother prepared the wholesome
meal, Mary got ready the basin, soap, and towel,
and washed the faces and hands of the children,
and changed their shoes, as they had had a long
walk over newly ploughed fields from the school,
to which their father, as it lay in their road, always
took them when going to his work, and called for
them on his return. She also placed a dry pair
for her father, and then arranged the chairs around
the table, and her mother having removed the
cooking utensils from the fire, she put on a fresh
log of wood and swept up the hearth. The weather
was very cold, and with a grateful heart to the
Giver of all good, the happy Thomas gazed on
the cheerful blazing fire, the smoking broth now
ready, and the smiling, clean, and healthy faces
of his family. The grace was said, and after the
meal was over, Mary fetched for her father a
tankard of home-brewed wholesome ale, and the
children began to talk to their mother of their les-
sons of the morning, and to con over their tasks
for the evening school, while Thomas also con-
versed with his wife and Mary of the new walks
and shrubberies the ’squire was laying out, and
what a blessing it was to have a gentleman near
them to employ them and so many of their poor
neighbours, during the winter. An hour having
thus passed, he resumed his hat and took up his
tools, and repaired again to his work, and the


children to their school. Mrs. Shepherd and Mary
then began to clean up the kitchen, vrash-'tte
things, put the shoes to dry, to brush them, that
they might have them again to put on when they
come home. Mary then went out to milk their
cow, and feed the chickens ; these and other do-
mestic occupationsfilled up the time till the father’s
return, when he, assisted by his eldest boy, went
out to fetch fodder for the cow, and see that she
had every thing requisite for the night; the mother
gave the younger children their suppers of bread
and milk, heard them their prayers, and put them
to bed, while Mary again laid the cloth for the
supper, and made up a cheerful fire. She then
sat down to her work, having, like the children
made her supper of bread and milk. While her
father was eating his supper, her mind being much
occupied with the scene of the morning, she began
to detail to him all they had seen, and her fear
that Sarah had not made choice of a good friend.
“ She is a very good-humoured girl, father, and
we have been school-fellows together, and indeed
I should be so sorry if she was not happy, and did
not get a good place.” “ I can’t help thinking
that being happy, and getting a good place will
depend a good deal upon her own behaivour,
Mary,” said her father. “ Yes, father,” said
Mary, “but mother was wishing that poor Sarah
had some such good books to read to teach her
what she ought to do, as Mrs. Lorimer has sent
her.” “But it is no use wishing,” said Thomas,


“why can’t you lend them to her, wife?”
“ Why,” said Mrs. Shepherd, “ I should like it,
Thomas, but”—and she hesitated, for she did not
like to censure her neighbours, “the children are
so unruly, if they saw them they would soon spoil
them, and Sarah is careless; and I should be sorry
that any thing given me by my dear mistress should
be dirtied or ill used.” “ I say, Mary,” said
William, the eldest boy, “if father and mother
will give us leave, and let me ask the scoolmaster
to be so good as to give me a new copy book to-
morrow, I think you and I might copy out some
of the most useful rules for Sarah, into the book;
I can write well enough for that now —shall we
father?” “ Certainly, my dear boy; and I am
pleased with your wish to be useful; wife, you
will lend them the books, as I am sure they will
take care of them, and mark the places you think
will be most useful for them to write down,” Mrs.
Shepherd took out of a cupboard several volumes
neatly covered with paper covers, to keep them
from the dust. “ This,” she said, “ was one of the
first books my mistress gave me—Mrs. Trimmer’s
Instructive Tales. Here is one I got from the
school where I was brought up, when I left ,it for
service, for I, dear Mary, was an orphan, you
know ; and another kind lady, now dead, placed
me in a school intended purposely for bringing up
servants in a proper manner. This book. Lessons
in Humble Life, and my Bible and prayer book I
had from the school, where I was taught to read


and to love the word of God. My kind mistress
gave me these volumes of the Cottager s Monthly
Visitor, when I lately called to see her; and these,
the Christian Gleaner, she has sent me since. I
wish every one had money enough to buy such
good books.” “ It’s to little use wishing, wife ;
but it’s lucky for us,that those who have the means
have the will to help others; and I heard our good
clergyman say the other day, that he intended to
have a ‘parish library’ from that good society that
Christians have formed to teach the knowledge of
God to the poor, and then these good books will
be lent to read, and our dear children, having been
taught to write, can copy out for us such things
as will be useful to us all; and now, dear wife and
children, let us thank God for these and all his
other mercies to us, and go to our rest.”


CHAPTER III.
MRS. SHEPHERD’S ADVICE TO SARAH BROWN
The next morning, Sarah Brown called at Mrs.
Shepherd’s cottage to tell them that, luckily for
her, her mistress had written to say she should
not require her for another fortnight, as an unex-
pected event had called her from home, and she
did not wish that a new servant should arrive
during her absence. “ Lucy Thomas says she is
afraid from this,’’added Sarah, “ that my mistress
is one of your particular ones, and that I sha’nt
stay there long.” “ Well, my clear Sarah,”
answered Mrs. Shepherd, “I cannot agree with
Lucy Thomas, and I must say I hope you will
stay there a long time, as I have heard she is a
very good lady. You must expect, when you go
from home, to find things at first appear strange;
but don’t begin to fancy any hardship in doing
what you have never done before, or despair of
learning any thing you are set about. What
little you know now, you did not know without
learning, and there will be nothing required of
you but what may be learnt by taking pains. I
wish you may find just such a mistress at first.


going out as I did, and that you may behave so
as to deserve her friendship. I remember, when
first I went to service, my mistress took me into
the kitchen, and pointing up to three rules which
were printed in large letters, she told me if I
always minded those rules, we should be sure to
agree well together. They are—
“ First —Do every thing in its proper time.
“ Second—Keep every thing to its proper use.
“ Third —Put every thing in its proper place.
“ Well, to be sure, thought I, if there are only
three rules to mind, it must be a very easy thing
to be a servant; but I soon found that even these
three rules could not be minded without constant
attention. I broke them all, long before I had
been there a week. About the second day, my
mistress rang the bell, and said, ‘Mary, the clock
has struck, and the cloth is not laid.’ Then the
cook called me to carry in the dinner. I said ‘ I
was just going to lay the cloth.’ ‘ Just going, in-
deed, child! ’ said the cook, ‘ that ought to have
been done before now; the dinner is taken up,
and will be quite spoiled ’ ‘ But,’ said I, ‘ I have
been more than half an hour hunting every where
for the carving knife, and I can’t find it.’ ‘ There
would be no need to hunt every where,’ replied
the cook, ‘if you had only put it in its place.
Where did you put it when you had cleaned it?’
I could not recollect, and the knife could not be
found, and there was great anger about it; at last
the gardener brought it in, all rusty and spoiled,
c


and then I recollected that, just as I was wiping
the knives, the cook sent me for some parsley,
and I caught up the first knife that came to hand,
not thinking whether it was a proper one or not,
and having cut the parsley, (I can’t think now
how I managed to do it with such a great awk-
ward thing,) there I left it on the bed, either for-
getting it or intending to fetch it by and by.
‘ See,’ said my mistress, ‘ what mischief has been
occasioned by your putting this knife to an im-
proper use, and leaving it in an improper place;
your work could not be done in proper time,
and the whole house has been thrown into con-
fusion.’ Many such little things occurred, for I
was young and heedless, and though I was always
bustling, I could never overtake my work and
come to any regular method; but my mistress
was kind and patient, and by degrees she got me
into her own neat and orderly habits, and then I
found I could get through my work with ease, and
then sit down comfortably to sew or read. When
my mistress found that I loved to read my Bible,
and hear and learn good things, she took the more
pains and pleasure in pointing out my duty,
‘ For,’ said she, ‘ though I don’t expect perfection
in you, Mary, I do think something more is to be
expected from a Christian servant than from any
other, or else a great deal of what our Lord and
his apostles taught is in vain. I have heard,’ said
she, ‘ a good minister remark, that if a Christian
is but a shoe black, he ought to be the best in the


parish, and so ought a Christian servant. Some
servants,’ observed my mistress, ‘ are in the habit
of saying, when they see any little thing wanting
to be done, which perhaps would greatly promote
the comfort of the family, and by no means injure
or inconvenience the person who did it, “It is
not my place—l was not hired to do it—why
should I do it?—l shall be none the better
thought of,” but surely these are not Christian
servants. If they had read their Bible aright,
they must have learned “ to do all things without
murmerings and disputings,” and “ whatever they
do, to do it heartily, as unto the Lord and not
unto men, for they serve the Lord Christ.” If a
mistress observes any improper, indecent, or ex-
pensive finery in dress, and ventures to express
her disapprobation of it, some persons have been
known to say, “My money is my own—l earn
it myself, and I shall spend it as I please—what!
she is afraid I shall dress finer than herself, and
be taken for the mistress!” but this is not the
language of a Christian servant; no, she is taught
to observe and follow whatever things are lovely,
suitable, and of good report. If a mistress does
dress plain, she may be mistaken for a servant;
but there is very little danger of a servant, how-
ever smart she may be, being mistaken for the
mistress. There are many other things beside
dress to distinguish them. Nor is this the ground
of a Christian mistress’s objection to fine dress,
she desires that the dress of her servants as well
c 2


as her own should be as becometh women profess-
ing godliness. She knows also that the love of
dress is a great temptation, a snare to their virtue,
and even to their honesty; that it robs them of the
means of helping their aged parents, or laying up
a store for their own future wants, or contributing
a mite for the poor, or to the promotion of the in-
terests of Christ. Some servants, when they find
a mistress orderly and particular in her require-
ments, expecting every room to be kept in order
every day, are apt to think, “ Oh, there is no
such thing as pleasing her—one must be always
slaving and toiling.” A Christian servant ought
to know that a Christian mistress is thus orderly
and particular, that there may be time to do every
thing and enjoy every thing. In a house where
every thing is made thoroughly clean, and kept
regularly so, “ slaving and toiling” are unknown;
all goes on with pleasantness and order; and the
servant as well as the mistress finds time not only
to mend her clothes, which some servants shame-
fully and needlessly neglect, but also to improve
her mind, by suitable reading, and to cultivate
pietyin devout retirement. Some servants,if a mis-
tress desires that the cinders may be burnt up, and
large coals not thrown on the fire unnecessarily,
that the soap may not be left in the water, nor bits
thrown away, nor pieces of bread and meat left to
waste, nor plates put away to wash with enough
butter sticking about them to spread a slice or two,
accuse her of being stingy, and grudging her ser


vants food. But the truest generosity may consist
with the most careful economy; and the Christian
mistress does this—first, because she knows waste-
fulness is a sin, and frugality (by the example of
our Lord) a Christian virtue; and next, because
from these very savings, which many persons
„despise, she derives the means of affording com-
3brt and nourishment to her poor destitute neigh-
abours. If she were not frugal, she could not be
and can it be a Christian servant who
..would thwart her kind and prudent endeavours,
Jand by thoughtlessness and waste deprive some
Idestitute fellow creature of what would have been
Sso acceptable? Let such an one read the 25th
achapter of St. Matthew, and consider whether the
£.36th verse or the 42d will best apply to her.
3 “ It was thus, Sarah, that my good mistress
instructed me in my duty, and I have constant
Scause to be grateful for her kind instructions. To
|them, under God, it is owing, that this house is
|surrounded with so many comforts, that I am able
jto bring up my children in a decent and creditable
Jnanner, that I have learned to make a little go a
great way, and that I am anxious that all belong-
ing to me may not only be taught the blessed
truths of the Bible, but that they should adorn
"the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.
This good lady has always continued my friend,
and sends me frequently good books. There are
g o many things in them that would be useful to
you, dear Sarah, that I only wish I could afford


to buy them for you; but as I can’t do that, your
friends, William and Mary, have undertaken to
copy out for you all the things that will be most
helpful to you.” “So you see, dear Sarah,”
said Mary, “ I’m as glad as you, you are to stay
a fortnight longer, we shall have plenty of time
now, by writing a little every evening.” Sarah
could not but feel very grateful to her kind friends,
and hoped she should profit by the instruction
afforded her, which she could not help seeing was
better calculated for her good than the advice of
Lucy Thomas. William brought home some copy
books in the evening, and by the end of the fort-
night, he and Mary had copied neatly in two
books the following rules, and they have since had
the happiness of seeing their friend Sarah, endea-
vouring to follow “ whatsoever things are true,
honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report;” to
hear that she is valued by her mistress; that she is
saving part of her wages, to enable her to assist
her parents; and that her example and dutiful
conduct have led her parents to love that religion
which is so lovely in her, and that their cottage
is becoming more and more the abode of peace
and comfort.


ADVICE TO SERVANTS,
WHO DESIRE TO SERVE AS THE SERVANTS OF CHRIST, AND TO
DO THE “ WILL OF GOD FROM THE HEART.”
[From “The Domestic Visitor .”]
“ Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
path.”—Psalm cxlx. 105.
PART I.
Remember these dangers to shun them;
1. Eye service. —“ Not with eye service,” (that
is to say while your master or mistress’s eye is
upon you) “ as men pleasers ; but as the servants
of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart.”
Ephes. vi. 6.
2. Dishonesty . —“ Thou shall not steal,” even
in the smallest thing. Exodus xx. 13. —“ Not
purloining, but shewing all good fidelity.” Titus
ii. 10.
3. Deceit and lying. —Gehazi, the servant of
Elisha, attempted to deceive his master, for which
he was punished by God, and became a leper all
the days of his life ; —read his history, 2 Kings
v. 20 to 27.
4. Sullenness and impertinence. —“ Exhort
servants to be obedient unto their own masters,


and to please them in all things; not answering
again.” Titus ii. 9.
5. Impatience under reproof. —Hagav having
fled from her mistress, Sarah, the angel of the
Lord said to her, “ Return to thy mistress, and
submit thyself under her hands,” Gen. xvi. 6, 9.
6. Conniving at the faults of your fellow
servants. —“ Brethren, if a man be overtaken in
a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one,
in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest
thou also be tempted.” Gal. vi. 1. “ And have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of dark-
ness, but rather reprove them.” Ephes. v. 11.
7. Setting or following a bad example in the
house. —“ One sinner destroyeth much good.”
Eccles. ix. 18. “Be not deceived ; evil commu-
nications corrupt good manners.” 1 Cor. xv. 33.
8. Idle and foolish conversation. —“ Neither
filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which
are not convenient; but rather giving of thanks.”
Ephes. v. 4. “ But I say unto you, that for every
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of judgment.” Matt,
xii. 36.
9. Sloth and self-indulgence. —Christ our Lord
thus warned his disciples against these and other
sins: “ But and if that servant say in his heart,
my lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to
beat the men servants and maid servants, and to
eat and drink, and to be drunken; the lord of that
servant will come in a day when he looketh not


for him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and
will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
portion with the unbelievers.” Luke xii. 45, 46.
“ He also that is slothful in his work, is brother
to him that is a great waster.” Prov. xviii. 9.
10. Wasting your masters goods. —“ When
they were filled, he said to his disciples. Gather
up the fragments that remain, that nothing be
lost.” John vi. 12. “ Moreover, it is required in
stewards that a man be found faithful.” 1 Cor. iv. 2.
11. Slandering or speaking too freely of your
master 1 s character and concerns. —“ Let as many
servants as are under the yoke count their own
masters worthy of all honour; that the name of
God and his doctrine be not blasphemed.” 1 Tim.
vi. 1,2. “A talebearer revealeth secrets, but he
that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.”
Prov. xi. 13.
12. Boldness in dress and manner. —“ In like
manner also that women adorn themselves with
shamefacedness and sobriety.” 1 Tim. ii. 9, 10.
13. Acting in any way against the light of
conscience. —“ But he that doeth wrong, shall re-
ceive for the wrong that he hath done, and there
is no respect of persons.” Col. iii. 25. “ And
that servant that knew his Lord’s will, and pre-
pared not himself, neither did according to his
W HI. shall be beaten with many stripes.” Luke
Xu. 47. “ Therefore to him that knoweth to do
good and doeth it not, to Vilra it is sin.” Jas. iv. 17.
“ And herein do I exercise myself to have always


a conscience void of offence towards God and to-
wards men.” Acts xxiv. 16.
PART II.
Remember these duties, by the grace of God to
do them :
1. Obedience. —“ Servants be obedient to them
that are your masters according to the flesh, with
fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto
Christ.” Ephes. vi. 5.
Let it be •punctual As Abraham’s servant
said, “ Hinder me not, seeing the Lord has pros-
pered my way, send me away that I may go to my
master.” Gen. xxiv. 56. “As the cold of snow
in the time of harvest, so is a faithful messenger
to him that sent, for he refresheth the soul of his
master.” Prov. xxv. 13.
Let it be active and diligent. —“ Not slothful
in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.”
Rom. xii. 11.
Let it be willing and obliging. —“ And ye
know that with all my power I have served your
father.” Gen. xxxi. 6. “ And whatsoever ye do,
do it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men.”
Col. iii. 23.
Let it be respectful and patient. — “ Servants
be subject to your masters with all fear, not only
to the good and gentle, but also to the froward ;
for this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience
toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.


For what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for
your faults, ye take it patiently ? but if when ye
do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this
is acceptable with God.” 1 Peter ii. 18, 20.
Let it be in all things, except such as interfere
with your duty towards God. — “ Servants obey
in all things your masters according to the flesh;
not with eye service as men pleasers, but in
singleness of heart, fearing God.” Col. iii. 22.
“ Then Peter and the other apostles answered and
said, we ought to obey God rather than man.”
Acts v. 29.
2. Fidelity. —“ Not purloining, but shewing
all good fidelity, that they may adorn the doctrine
of God our Saviour in all things.” Titus ii. 10.
Be faithful in that which is least. —“ For he
that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful
also in much ; and he that is unjust in the least,
is unjust also in much.” Luke xvi. 10.
3. Gratitude. —“ Giving thanks always unto
God and the Father, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ.” Ephes. v. 20.
For your home, provision, and all comforts. —
“ The living God giveth us all things richly to
enjoy.” 1 Tim. vi. 17.
For whatever Christian privileges you may
enjoy —“ I was glad when they said unto me, let
us go into the house of the Lord.” Psalm cxxii. 1.
“ Enter into his gates with thanksgivings, and
into his courts with praise; be thankful unto him,
and speak good of his name.” Psalm c. 4,


4. Kindness to your fellow servants. —“ And
be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, for-
giving one another, even as God for Christ’s sake
has forgiven you.” Ephes. iv. 32.
Forbearing with one another. —“ A soft an-
swer turneth away wrath, but grievous words stir
up anger.” Prov. xv. 1. “ The beginning of
strife is as when one letteth out water ; therefore
leave off contention before it be meddled with.”
Prov. xvii. 14. “ Forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel
against you, even as Christ forgave you, so also
do ye.” Col. iii. 1 fi. “ Bear ye one another’s
burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.” Gal.yi. 2.
“ By love serve one another.” Gal. v. 13.
PART III.
Remember these encouragements held out to you
1. Jesus became a servant to sinners. —“ Who
being in the form of God. thought it not robbery
to be equal with God, but made himself of no re-
putation, and took upon him the form of a servant,
and was made in the likeness of man.” Phil. ii.
6, 7. See also the account of Christ’s deep hu-
mility in washing his disciples’ feet, John xiii.
“ Even as the Son of Man came not to be minis-
tered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
ransom for many.” Matt. xx. 28. “ For whether
is greater, he that sitteth at meat or he thatserveth?


Is not he that sitteth at meat ? Yet lam among
you as he that serveth.” Luke xxii. 27.
2. Jesus honours you with the name of his
servants. —“ Knowing that of the Lord ye shall
receive the reward of the inheritance, for ye serve
the Lord Christ.” Col. iii. 24.
3. God will take you under his special care
and protection. —“ The eyes of the Lord are over
the righteous, and his ears are open to their
prayers; but the face of the Lord is against them
that do evil.” 1 Pet. iii. 12.
4. God will not forget your services. —“ Know-
ing that whatever good thing a man doeth, the
'same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be
bond or free.” Ephes. vi. 8. To each one of his
faithful disciples Christ will say, “ Well done,
thou good and faithful servant, thou hast been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler
over many things ; enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord.” Matt. xxv. 31.
5. God will make you blessings to those whom
you serve. —“ And Laban said unto him, I pray
thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes, tarry ;
for I have learned by experience that the Lord
hath blessed me for thy sake.” Gen. xxx. 27.
“ And his master saw that the Lord was with
him, and that the Lord made all he did to prosper
in his hand. And it came to pass, that from the
time that he had made him overseer of his house,
and over all he had, that the Lord blessed the
Egyptian’s house for Joseph’s sake.” Gen. xxxix.
D


3, 5. Read also about the Israelitish captive
maid, who was made a blessing to her master,
Naaman the Syrian. 2 Kings v. 2, 5.
PART IV.
Remember these rules and attend to them :
1. Never forget that without Christ you can
do nothing. —“ Abide in me, and I in you, as
the branch cannot bear fruit except it abide in the
vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I
am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abideth
in me and I in him, the samebringeth forth much
fruit, for without me ye can do nothing.” John
xv. 4, 5.
2. Be constant and earnest in prayer for the
Holy Spirit promised to you.— “ If ye then, being
evil, know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more shall your heavenly Father give
the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.” Luke
xi. 13. “I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth.”
John xiv. 16. Ephes. ii. 8.
3. Engage in no part of your duty without
prayer. —“ Pray without ceasing; in every thing
give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you.” 1 Thess. v. 17, 18.
Abraham’s servant prayed, “ O Lord God of my
master Abraham! I pray thee send me good


speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master
Abraham.” Gen. xxiv. 10, 12.
4. Often lift up your hearts to God in the
midst of your work. —“ Men ought always to
pray, and not to faint.” Luke xviii. 1. Nehemiah
regarded this duty: “Then the king said unto me,
for what dost thou make request ? So I prayed
to the God of heaven, and said to the king,” &c.
Nehem. ii. 4, 5.
5. In the fear of God resist every temptation
and tempter to evil. —“ Let not thine heart envy
sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the
day long.” Prov. xxiii. 17. “ Submit yourselves
therefore to God ; resist the devil, and he will flee
from you.” James iv. 7. Joseph said, “ There
is none greater in this house than I, neither hath
he kept back from me any thing but thee, because
thou art his wife; how then can Ido this great
wickedness and sin against God V’ Gen. xxxix. 9.
‘‘ Watch and pray, that ye enter not into tempta-
tion.” Mark xiv. 38.
6. Shun as well as resist every occasion and
circumstance of temptation. —“ Enter not into
the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of
evil men; avoid it, pass not by, turn from it, and
pass away.” Prov. iv. 14, 15. Thus Joseph
acted: “ And it came to pass, as she spake to
Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto
her.” Gen. xxxix. 10.
7. Be always employed, —“ Redeeming the
time, because the days are evil.” Ephes. v. 16.
d 2


8. Never be afraid of speaking the truth. —
“ The lip of truth shall be established for ever,
but a lying tongue is but for a moment. Lying
lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that
deal truly are his delight.” Prov. xii. 19, 22.
“ Lie not one to another.” Col. iii. 9.
Do not be fond of change, nor give warning
hastily.—“ As a bird that wandereth from her
nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place.”
Prov. xxvii. 8.
Be not talkative. —“ In the multitude of words
there wanteth not sin; but he that refraineth his
lips is wise.” Prov. x. 19.
Remember the eye of God is always upon you.
—“ Oh Lord, thou hast searched me and known
me,” &c. Psalm cxxxix. “ The eyes of the
Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the
good.” Prov. xv. 3.
Never neglect secret prayer. —“ But thou,
when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when
thou hast shut thy door,” &c. Matt. vi. 6.
Daily read the word of God. —“ This Book
of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but
thou shalt meditate therein day and night.” Josh,
i. 8. The Bereans are praised for searching the
Scriptures daily. Acts xvii. 11.
Keep holy the Sabbath day. —“ Remember
the Sabbath day to keep it holy.” Exodus xx.
8, 10. “If thou turn away thy foot from the
Sabbath from doing thy pleasure on my holy day,”
&c. Tsaiah Iviii. 13, 14.


PART V.
Remember what the word of God says of servants:
Of good servants. —As Eliezer in Abraham’s
house, Gen. xxiv.; Jacob in Laban’s house, Gen.
xxx. 27; Joseph in Potiphar’s house, Gen. xxxix.;
Moses in God’s house, Numb. xii. 7; Heb. iii.
2,5; David in Saul’s house, 1 Sam. xviii. 5 ;
Obadiah in Ahab’s house, 1 Kings xviii. 3, 4 ;
Naaman’s maid and servant, 2 Kings v. 2,3, 13;
Nehemiah in the King of Persia’s service, Neh.
i. 2 ; Daniel in Darius’ service, Dan. vi. 4; the
servant in the centurion’s house, Luke vii. 2.
Of bad servants. —Quarrelsome servants, Gen.
xiii. 7 ; deceitful servants, 2 Kings xx. 27 ; sullen
servants. Job xix. 15, 16 ; proud and self-willed
servants, Prov. xxx. 21, 22.
Remember, if you are a Christian servant, much
More is expected of you for the example of your
fellow servants, as your duty to your earthly
master, and for the honour of your Heavenly
Father. Matt. v. 45.
Let your light shine. —Godliness shines bright
,n a Christian servant.
Finally, weigh much and often this question :
How may I behave as a servant, so that my master’s
house may be blessed the more for my being in it?
n 3


ADVICE TO SERVANTS.
[From “ Lessons for Young Persons in Humble Life."]
PART I.
ON THE CHOICE OF PLACE.
Engage yourselves cautiously. Always prefer
sober, regular families, even if you could have
higher wages and less work to do elsewhere. It
is in general safer and better, especially for young
persons leaving home, to go into small families;
they are there more under the kind care and notice
of their masters an d mistresses, and less exposed to
the bad example and bad advice of fellow-servants.
Always enquire whether you will be allowed on
Sundays regularly to attend the puplic worship of
God. When you are in a sober service, be very
careful not to indulge yourselves in a rambling,
fickle disposition; norsufferyourselves to be tempt-
ed away, for the sake of higher wages, or a little
more liberty and pleasure. Long and faithful ser-
vice is very creditable; it is truly called “ a good
inheritance.” Servants who frequently change
their places, get but a poor character and few true
friends, and they seldom prosper in the world. If


indeed, you are in situations where, with your besft,
efforts, you cannot obtain reasonable
live in peace or comfort, and, itbayg - Ally,
your morals, health, or character, are nTahy'San-
ger, you ought to change; but beware of giving
warning in a pet, merely because you are found
fault with, or have not every little favour and in-
dulgence you could wish. Put up with many
inconveniences, and even hardships, rather than
foolishly throw yourselves out of a suitable place,
or run the risk of hurting your character. Many
persons who have left their places without proper
thought, have come to shame and distress, and
would gladly have accepted of situations far worse
than those which they once despised. You will
no where meet with a place in which you will
have every thing you desire, therefore study to
imbibe a Christian spirit, and desire nothing but
what God appoints for you. Remember that this
world is at best but a state of trial. When, after
dueconsideration,andconsultingwith your friends,
and imploring the Divine guidance, your are con-
vinced it is proper to leave your place, do not fail,
before you look for another situation, to acquaint
your master and mistress with your intention in a
very civil and respectful manner; and all the time
you continue with them, do your best to give sa-
tisfaction. Some servants, when they are dis-
satisfied with their places, instead of mentioning
their objections to their masters and mistresses,
and giving them fair warning,neglect their business


or behave ill, in order to get turned away; but
this is very improper conduct, and hurts their cha-
racter. Never desire or expect 'your masters or
mistresses to give you a better character to any
persons who may apply to them about you, than
they fully believe you deserve; for if they were
to do so, they would break the laws of God, which
absolutely forbid all lying and deceiving. The
surest and only honest way af gaining a good cha-
racter is, bv constantly behaving so well as to
deserve it.
PART II.
ON BEHAVIOUR TO MASTERS AND MISTRESSES.
When you are in service be diligent to under-
stand your business, and to do it thoroughly.
Your masters have agreed to pay you wages, and
to provide you with food and lodging, and perhaps
even with part of your clothing, and in return you
have engaged to give them all reasonable labour,
care, and pains. If you waste any part of your
working time in absolute idleness or loitering
about, or if you do your work in a negligent, slo-
venly manner, you defraud your masters of what
is due to them, you break your word; you rob
them as much as if you were actually to take
money out of their pockets. You are paid as if
you did ypur best; be desirous to do more than is


required, or expected of you, and more than you
are positively engaged for, rather than less. In
busy times, or when there is any sickness in your
master’s family, do not grudge a little extraordi-
nary labour or fatigue. Willing and cheerful ser-
vice is always pleasing, especially on such occa-
sions; and it is seldom overlooked or forgotten,
even by unkind masters and mistresses. Rise early;
this is very necessary—if you persevere in it for
some time, it will become easy to you and even
pleasant. People may bring themselves, by habit,
to wake and rise regularly at such an hour every
morning. Obey the orders which your masters or
mistresses give you; obey them at once and cheer-
fully ; always remembering that it is their place to
command and your duty to obey, and that it is the
Great God himself who appoints to all persons their
stations and their duties. Do every thing as exactly
as possible, at the time and in the way which they
desire, even if you should think your own time
and way the best. Surely it is the right of masters
and mistresses to have their own work done at the
time and in the manner they like; you will think
so yourselves, if ever you have servants of your
own. When your masters or mistresses find fault
with you, or give you orders which do not quite
suit your own fancies, do not answer pertly, nor
mutter to yourselves, nor shew any anger or sul-
lenness ; even if you should think they reprove
you more than is necessary or use you unkindly.
Look at your masters and mistresses very respect


fully, whilst they are speaking to you ; attend to
what they say, and when they have done speaking,
express in a few civil words your readiness to
obey. Never rudely contradict them. When it
seems proper for you to mention your own opinion
or desire, or to complain of any grievance which
you think might be redressed, do it in the most
respectful manner you can. If ever you should be
so unfortunate as to be required by your masters
or mistresses to break any of God’s command-
ments, certainly you ought to “ fear and obey God
rather than men,” (Matt. x. 28, Acts v. 29,) and
run the risk of losing your places, however profit-
able they may be to you ; but still you must ex-
cuse yourselves in a decent and modest, though
resolute, manner. It is but very seldom, however,
that prudent well-disposed servants are required
by their masters or mistresses to do any unlawful
or wicked actions.
Be strictly honest. Never give or lend, or
take for yourselves, any thing; not even a rag, or
the least scrap of vietuals, that you are not allowed
to have. Neither rob, cheat, or in any way de-
fraud, your masters or mistresses yourselves; nor
see them robbed, cheated, or defrauded in any
way by others, without informing them of it, and
putting them on their guard. If you are com-
missioned to buy or sell any goods for them, do it
honestly, faithfully, and to the best of your judg-
ment. Try and make as good bargains for them
as you would do for yourselves. Return the


smallest change that is due to them, keeping back
nothing. See that every thing you buy or sell is
of proper weight and measure, and, as far as you
can judge, of a proper quality for the prices If
the choice of shops is left to you, go to those
owners who have the best character and the best
goods. For fear that in buying or selling you
should be tempted to wrong your masters or mis-
tresses, or be suspected of any unjust dealings,
receive no present from any shopkeeper, or other
persons with whom you have money matters to
settle on your master’s or mistress’s account, ex-
cept it be with the knowledge and consent of your
masters or mistresses themselves. Refuse such
presents civilly, but very steadily. Never take
for your own use any money with which you are
entrusted, even if you should fully intend and
expect to restore it before it is wanted or even
missed. Settle all money matters as soon as pos-
sible, and be exact in them even to a farthing. Do
every part of your work in its proper season. Keep
every thing that you have the care of in order,
and thoroughly clean. Take pleasure in making
every thing last as long and go as far as you can,
and in having things neat and handsome with as
little expense as possible. Have a written inven-
tory of the things in your care ; compare it with
the things once or twice a year, or oftener; and en-
deavour to have it now and then properly examined
b y those you serve. When an accident happens
to any thing you have the care of, fail not to


mention it on the earliest opportunity; and if yon
have been at all to blame, promise and endeavour
to be more attentive in future. Remember that
it is doing a master as much injury to waste or
neglect his property, as to steal it. Some ser-
vants, to excuse their wastefulness and extrava-
gance, and even their absolute dishonesty, say,
“ our master is very rich, he will never miss what
we spend or, “he squanders all he gets, we
may as well enjoy it as any body else.” But
did you ever read in the Bible, that holy book
which teaches us our duty, that we may defraud
people if they are rich, or because they are waste-
ful, or careless about their own property ? If
you were rich yourselves, or not so careful as you
ought to be, w'ould you like that people should
serve you so ? It is really the interest as well as
duty of servants to be honest and faithful. Mas-
ters and mistresses are mostly very willing to give
those who are so, handsome wages ; and to shew
them every reasonable indulgence and favour,
whilst they continue in their service and afterwards.
Be particularly careful with respect to fire.
Never take a lighted candle or lamp near a bed,
or near window curtains, or near any drawers or
closets where there are papers or linen. Do not
leave linen airing by a fire, without being watched ;
nor little children by themselves in a room where
there is a fire, nor let them at any time play with
fire. Leaving chimnies too long unswept, making
too great a blaze in the fire place, letting a candle


or lamp bum, or a poker remain in the fire, when
there is no one in the room. Carrying a candle,
about the house with a long snuff should be care-
fully avoided; as should also every thing else that
is at all likely to occasion mischief by fire. In
going about the house at night, especially to bed,
it is proper to use a short candle, or a lamp in a
large flat candlestick, with snuffers and an ex-
tinguisher.
Be not eye servants. Take no advantage of
the absence of your masters and mistresses, or of
their want of attention, to neglect their business,
to disobey their orders in any respect, or to waste
or any way wilfully abuse their property. Be
conscientious even in the smallest matters. Never
attempt to tell an untruth, or attempt to deceive
any one. On no occasion, especially when you
propose yourself for service, pretend that your
health or strength, or any of your qualifications
are greater than you really think they are. When
you have been guilty of a fault, or met with an
accident, (which the most steady and careful
people will sometimes do,) never deny it, even if
you should expect to be blamed or made to suffer
/or it. How much better is it to be blamed or
Punished by men, than to break God’s holy law,
and offend Him ! But in general to speak the
truth constantly and steadily is by far the best
policy, as well as our absolute duty; and when it
done in a civil,prudent manner, it makes persons
respected and trusted. To confess a fault before
K


it is found out, and to do our best to make all due
amends for it, is the behaviour of a true Christian.
It is particularly pleasing in servants, and seldom
fails to induce their master and mistresses to shew
them great favour and indulgence, and to put the
utmost confidence in them. Never pry into the
affairs of the family in which you live. Especially
never read any person’s letters, or other written
papers ; nor open or look into their drawers or
boxes, without their le&ve; nor listen at doors, or
any where else, to overhear private conversations,
Resolve never to speak any ill of your master and
mistress, and their family, unless it be absolutely
necessary, in order to prevent some great mischief
or ruin, either to yourselves or any one else; and
even then you must be very cautious what you say.
Tell no idle tales; make no idle complaints, not
even to your dearest friends and companions.
When you leave the family, say as little as pos-
sible to its disadvantage, or of any of its private
concerns you may be acquainted with. Never
go out, except on your usual business without
leave, and endeavour to return as soon as you are
desired or expected. When you are sent on any
errand, or other business, do not stay longer than
is necessary; a quick return shews diligence
and faithfulness. Deliver every message to or
from your master or mistress as soon and as ex-
actly as possible. The kinder and more indulgent
your masters and mistresses are to you, the more
desirous you ought to be to do your duty to them


faithfully and respectfully. Receive every favour
from them with thankfulness, and be not dis-
pleased when any which you expected or desired
is not granted to you. In all matters of difficulty,
even about your own private affairs, apply to
them (if they will give you leave) for their advice
and instruction, and be particularly thankful for
every assistance of this kind which they give you.
Try to make and keep them your friends. Some
servants, when they have been long in a place,
and think their services are agreeable to their
master and mistress, and valued by them, become
conceited, pert, and inattentive to their business;
and thus foolishly lose much of the credit of their
former good conduct, and in the end forfeit all
favour, and are even dismissed with disgrace.
PART III.
ON BEHAVIOUR TO FELLOW SERVANTS, CHILDREN,
&C. &C.
Study to live in peace with your fellow servants.
Avoid as much as possible all disputes with them.
Resolve with respect to them as an excellent man
(Judge Hale) formerly did, with respect to his
companions; “To do good to them; to use God’s
name reverently among them; to-beware of leav-
lng an ill impression or ill example among them;
e 2


Had to receive good from them, if they are more
knowing.'’ Be willing to assist yonr fellow ser-
vants, whenever they stand in need of your assist-
ance, and you can do it without neglecting your
own work. Be particularly kind and attentive
to them when they are sick or in trouble. Re-
ceive kindly and thankfully any services which
they render you. Never be persuaded to join with
them in evil practices, or in disrespectful behaviour
to your master and mistress. Never willingly
listen to any unbecoming discourse from them, or
any abuse of their master and mistress. When
they persist in wicked courses, or in any way de-
fraud your master and mistress, it is your duty to
make, as soon as possible, a full and just complaint
of them, whatever ill-will you may get from them,
on that account; if you neglect your duty in this
respect, you will be answerable for much of the
harm which they do, both to themselves and
others. Behave respectfully to upper servants,
and attend to the orders which they give you If
you should become upper servants yourselves, be
faithful to your trust. Endeavour to promote, by
all proper means in your power, your master’s in-
terest. Be kind to the servants who are under
you, but keep them steadily to their work and to
their duty. Never encourage them to make com-
plaints or to speak ill of those whose bread they
are eating. Set them at all times an example of
sobriety, and of diligent, faithful, and respectful
service, to your masters and mistresses. Wait upon
the visitors of yonr masters and mistresses very


civilly and attentively. Do not expect or desire
to be paid by them, for any of your little services;
remember that your masters pay you for your
time and pains, and that part of your duty is to
wait upon their company. Behave very kindly
and attentively to the children of your masters
and mistresses, especially if you have the care of
them. Never beat them, or speak to them in a
loud angry tone of voice, or call them by any rude
names; or answer any of their little questions in a
fretful impatient manner. Do every thing you can
that is innocent and proper to oblige and amuse
them; remember how kind our blessed Lord
was to little children; he said, “ suffer little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not;
and he took them in his arms and blessed them.”
Never encourage children to speak disrespectfully
°f their parents or friends, or to do any thing
which they are forbidden to do. Endeavour, as
far as you are able, to make them clean and tidy,
active, cheerful, and good-humoured, honest and
true,obedient to their parents, kind to one another,
civil to every body, and merciful to poor dumb
creatures'. Neglect no suitable opportunity of
giving them any little advice or instruction that is
proper for their years and situation. Never praise
them fortheir beauty or fine clothes,or any of their
clever little sayings, for fear of making them vain
°r conceited; when you praise them let it be for
nnnding what is said to them, for overcoming bad
passions and habits, and for taking pains to im-
e 3


prove in what they have to learn. Carefully avoid
telling them an untruth, or promising them any
thing you do not fully intend to perform. Be
very cautious what you say to them, but when
once you have said a thing, keep to it as strictly
as possible; talk no nonsense to them; teach
them to speak and to behave in as pretty a man-
ner as you are able. Never make them learn or
repeat any vulgar sayings, or any thing but what
may be useful and proper for them to remember
as long as they live. Do not terrify them with
dismal stories of gosts and witches, of fades and
bugbears, and never attempt to frighten them into
good behaviour by telling them “ the black man
shall have you,”or “I’llput you into the dark hole.”
Such idle tales and foolish speeches, often fill the
hearts of children with vain fears, especially when
they are left alone in the dark, and their heads
with silly and wicked notions which they find it
very difficult, if not impossible, to get rid of when
they grow up. When you speak the name of
Almighty God, or talk to them about Him and his
great goodness, and their duty to Him, do it with
the utmost seriousness and reverence; an'd be par-
ticularly careful not to set them a bad example in
any respect. If any dumb animals are entrusted
to your cave, let them have food and rest in due
season, and as far as depends upon you, let their
food be of the proper quality and quantity. Keep
them very clean; all animals love cleanliness;
even pigs in a sty if they have not fresh litter, will


fall away in flesh, though they have the greatest
abundance of food. Frequently consider within
yourselves,and enquire of those who you think are
best able to inform you, what are the best means
of making the animals you have the care of,
thriving and comfortable. Never put any animals,
even vermin, to more pain than is necessary; and
when it is your business to kill them, study to do
it in the quickest and most easy manner. If you
are employed in a shop, keep it, as far as depends
upon you, neat and clean. As soon as possible
put every thing that has been used in its right
place. Fold or put up every thing in a neat and
proper manner. Never be seen in the shop with
dirty hands or nails, or in an untidy dress. A
dirty, slovenly sbopwoman, is a disgrace to a
reputable shop. Be very civil and attentive to
all the customers, whether they are rich or poor,
genteel or homely, and whether they buy much or
little. Serve them as quickly as possible; always
thank the customers whom you have waited upon
before they leave the shop, even if they have not
bought or ordered any thing, for most likely they
bad intended to buy if they had met with what
auited them. Endeavour to do justice both to your
Masters and mistresses and to their customers.
Neither cheat them, nor cheat others, thinking to
serve them. Answer as prudently as you can any
questions that are put to you, but tell no lies, nor
attempt to impose upon any body. Truth is, in
the end, the most likely way to please all sides.


Be exact in weighing or measuring every article
you sell; always give full weight or measure, if
you do not you will be guilty of fraud, and you
will very soon ruin the credit of the shop. Count
over very carefully all the change you give or take.
Put down as soon as possible every sum which
you receive and pay, and trust not to your me-
mory. Be courteous, be patient, be clothed with
humility; put on the ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit; be slow to speak, and slow to wrath;
do your own business; be content with such things
as ye have; trust in the Lord and do good. These
are great Christian duties.
PART IV.
ON DRESS, COMPANY, AND AMUSEMENTS.
For your own sakes, as well as to enable you to
be good servants, avoid all loose and idle company.
Beware of giving way to the love of dress, of com-
pany, and of amusements. Dances, races, and
fairs, have been the means of ruining many young
people. Let your dress be neat and clean. Never
be seen with the smallest hole in any part of your
dress. But in buying clothes do not go beyond
what you can prudently afford, and what is proper
for your situation. “ I have seen,” says a clergy-
man, “ a daughter willing to wear mean clothes,
that her aged mother might have some to wear,


and I have seen such conduct highly blessed.” Be
not fond of increasing your acquaintance. To
visit your family and friends, and your poor sick
neighbours, when you have leave and a suitable
opportunity, is very proper, but most other kinds
of visiting are to be avoided ; they will lead you
to neglect your business, and often put you to
an expense which you cannot prudently afford.
Take care with whom you make an acquaintance;
people are generally the better or the worse for the
company they keep. Have no visitors, not even
your own relations, at your master’s house, and
especially never treat them at his expense, without
his or your mistress’s leave. Be careful of your
•uoney. Lay up as much as you can against
the time of need. If you can write and cypher,
keep an account of all you receive and spend.
Examine it, and cast it up at the end of the year.
Compare the accounts with the money you have
°n hand ; consider whether you may not, in the
year to come, increase your savings. Spend
ydur leisure time in an innocent, prudent manner.
Eart of it may be agreeably and usefully filled up
hy reading. If any good books were given to you
a t school, or by any of your kind friends before
you went to service, take them with you, value
them as long as you live for the sakes of the
persons who gave them to you, and for their own
®akes, and often read in them. You may very
Pleasantly and usefully employ a small part of
y°ur leisure on Sundays and other days, by


learning by heart, a hymn or a few verses from the
Psalms and other parts of the Bible, and in calling
to mind the hymns and texts of scripture you
learned when you were young; now and then
to repeat some of these when you are at your work
will make the time pass on very pleasantly, will
give you useful subjects to reflect upon, and will
help to keep out vain and wicked thoughts. You
may also very properly repeat a few lines or a
short hymn when you lie down at night, and
when you awake in the morning, or in rising and
dressing; this practice has been found very edi-
fying to many excellent persons. If you have
learned writing and accounts, and wish to im-
prove yourselves in them, write every now and
then in an evening when your work is done, a few
lines from the Bible or some other good book, on
a slate, or in a neat copy book, and do a sum or
two on a slate. Such amusements will cost you
little, and they may at some time or other turn to
profit. At any rate they will prevent you from
running into mischief, as some people do, merely
for the want of employment, and for the sake of
passing away the time. A walk in the fresh
air, especially in fine weather, is very amusing,
and good for the health and spirits. But be care-
ful, when you take a walk, either for business or
pleasure, to avoid all loose, improper companions;
their conversation, and to be seen in company with
them, will do you more harm than the walk itself
can do you good,


PART V.
ON RELIGIOUS DUTIES.
Regularly attend public worship, whenever you
have an opportunity, twice every Sunday, with
seriousness and reverence. If ever you go out on
that day, to visit your friends, or take a walk with
them, remember that though the Sabbath is a day
of rest, and of relaxation from business, it is also
a day to be kept holy, and to be used, chiefly, in
glorifying the great Creator and Redeemer, and in
preparing ourselves for a better world by prayer
and meditation, by godly reading and conver-
sation, and by a serious examination of the state of
our minds and our conduct, especially during the
week that is past. What a pity and what a shame
Jt is, that any persons should make it a day of mere
idle gossiping and wandering about; of loose talk
a nd behaviour, or of tippling at alehouses. At
the same time you must not, under a pretence of
beeping the Sabbath holy, refuse to do any neces-
sary work, such as making fires and beds, prepar-
ing victuals for the family, milking cows/ feeding
cattle, attending sick people, and young children.
“ The Sabbath was made for man, not man for
the Sabbath.” It was made to do good to men,
not to afflict or punish them, or deprive them
°f any real comfort. No work ought to be done
on Sunday which can as well be done on another
tiny. Contrive to do as much as you properly


can the day before, in order that you may have
the less to do on the Sabbath day. Whenever
you are prevented by sickness, or by any necessary
employments from attending the public worship
of God on the Lord’s day, keep the day holy, in
the best manner your situation will allow. Pray
to the Lord; worship him in the secret of your
heart; meditate upon His holy word, even if you
are not able to read it, or hear it. “ Families,”
says an excellent lady, “ may be so ordered, that
every one may go to church in turns ; and if
there be any service where this is not allowed, I
would advise the servant of Christ to leave such a
master, and seek for one who fears God.” If you
have an opportunity of attending family worship
and instruction, be thankful for so great an advan-
tage, and endeavour to improve from it. By your
constant and willing attendance, show that you
are desirous to give what encouragement you
can to your masters and mistresses to continue so
excellent a practice. Neglect not private prayer.
If you have not an opportunity of praying to
your heavenly Father in secret (which most per-
sons may contrive to have), be not ashamed or
afraid to kneel down and pray every morning and
every evening, in the presence of your fellow-,
servants, or of any one else, even if they should
neglect prayer themselves, or deride you for doing'
your duty. You stand much in need of Divine,
assistance, to guide you safely through all the■
sorrows, trials, and temptations you must meet


with in the world, and particularly to enable you
to fulfil a Christian servant’s duty, which is very
important, and often, even in sober families, very
difficult. Matthew Henderson, a servant, who
was executed at Tyburn, in the year 1746, for
murder, sorrowfully owned that he had long
neglected private prayer ; that he had forsaken
God, and been a stranger at the throne of grace,
and that therefore God had given him up to his
own heart’s lust, and suffered him to follow his
own imaginations, that he had no help from above
in the needful time of trouble and temptation.
Diligently read the Bible. Learn by heart and
treasure up in your memory, the texts in Scripture,
especially the following, which teach a servant’s
duty, and rest not, till by Divine assistance you
are able to observe the instructions, and to lay hold
on the promises contained in them. Ephesians
vi. .s—g; Col. iii. 22—25; 1 Tim. vi. 1,2; Titus
«i. 9—12; 1 Peter ii. 18—24.


CATECHISM
ON THE
DUTIES OF SERVANTS.
[From “ The Christian Gleaner .”]
CHAPTER I.
Q. What are the particular duties arising from
the relation subsisting between masters and ser-
vants ?
A. The first is obedience. Servants are bound
by the agreement into which they enter, and
especially urged by the principles and commands
of the Gospel to be obedient* to their masters, to
obey them in all things.f
Q. What does this obedience include ?
A, Submission to their authority; attention to
their orders ; and a prompt performance of their
commands.
Q. When may a servant be said to violate this
obedience ?
A. Ist. When he refuses to acknowledge his
master’s authority, and either insolently contemns
his orders, or pursues a course dictated by his own
* Ephes. vi. 5. t Col. Hi. 22.


Opinion or self-will in opposition to them. 2d.
When he does not bend his mind to understand
and recollect the orders received. 3d. When
either through sloth, dissipation, or ill-will, he
neglects to perform, either stated duties, or occa-
sional commands, with diligence and punctuality.
Q. Are there no cases which exempt a ser-
vant from the performance of his master’s com-
mands?
A. Yes. Ist. When the master’s commands
are contrary to those of God; as, for example, a
command to fraud, falsehood, or injustice; or to
the violation of the Sabbath by works that are
neither those of necessity or of mercy. 2d. When
any service is required which is absolutely not
within the power of the party to perform, such as
the requirement of Pharaoh, when he demanded
bricks of the Israelites, while he withheld from
them the necessary materials for making them;
°r such, as exacting an extent or duration of la-
bour, of which human nature is not capable. 3d.
When the service demanded falls not within the
compass of the servant’s agreement; that is, if
the servant is engaged to perform only a certain
bind of business, and is paid for that and no other,
the master has no right to enforce the performance
°f any other.
Q. Ought not some caution to be observed in
pleading these exemptions?
A. Yes. Servants under such circumstances
should look well to it that they do not, under pre-
f 2


tence of conscience, but really from motives of
sloth and self-gratification, withhold obedience to
their master’s just commands; neither must they,
through indolence, fail to exert themselves as they
might, and so pretend incapacity when the fault
is not in their ability but their will; neither must
they so confine themselves to their particular pro-
vince, as to refuse upon occasions to render any
additional assistance which the circumstances of
the family may require, and general good-will
dictate; if they think it necessary to decline
performing any service required of them, they are
at least bound to tender such refusal in the most
respectful manner.
Q. What is the next general duty of servants?
A . Fidelity; including Ist, a conscientious and
diligent discharge of all incumbent duties; and
2nd, strict integrity with respect to all property
expressly committed to their charge or coming
occasionally under their controul.
Q. To what practices is this virtue especially
opposed ?
A. To a neglect or slight performance of duty,
when removed from the immediate inspection of
the master. A faithful servant acts the same in
his master’s abscence as in his presence, for he
sees the eye of God always upon him.
2. To indolence and squandering of time. A
.faithful servant, having covenanted for a certain
remuneration to give his master his time, feels
himself bound diligently to employ the whole to


the best possible advantag^'jiit obedience.
commands, and in promotion clfhis interests^
3. To the betraying of secrets, eiltrew-esp*«s3ly
entrusted to them, or unavoidably coming within
their knowledge.
4. To wasting or destroying property of any kind.
5. To appropriating to his own use any part of
a master’s property, however small, or giving it
away to any person, without his express consent.
6. To concealment of any kind, by which a
master may be injured. A faithful servant will
honestly confess his own faults, abhorring all the
mean subterfuges of artifice and falsehood; and
he will give timely notice of any designs of others,
that may come to his knowledge, injurious to his
master’s person, character, family, or interest.
Q. Is their any other general duty incumbent
on servants ?
A. Yes; general good-will, which will influence
the manner of performing every service. It
will especially discover itself in the following
particulars;
1. In a respectful deportment towards em-
ployers, their family and friends.
2. In a respectful and favourable speaking of
them, whenever circumstances require a mention
to be made.
3. In a cordial regard to their interests, and
steady attention to whatever may promote them.
4. In a cheerful and ready compliance with
their requests.
v 3


5. In a willing co-operation with fellow servants
in whatever may tend to the general comfort and
satisfaction of the family.
6. In a meek and patient receiving of reproof,
and endeavouring to amend and give satisfaction.
Q. Are these duties inculcated in scripture ?
A. Yes; clearly so. Many passages inci-
dentally suppose them—such for example as Luke
vii. 8; Psalm cxxiii. 2; Rom. vi. 16; Job xix. 16;
Mai. i. 6; Luke xii. 47; xvii. 9. Others expressly
enforce them, such as Gen. xvi. 9; Ephes. vi.
s—B; Col. iii. 22—25; 1 Tim. vi. 1, 2 ; Tit. ii.
9, 10; 1 Pet. ii. 18; 1 Thess. iv. 11. Several
expressions of Divine approbation might be pointed
out for the encouragement of faithful and diligent
servants, such as Prov. xvii. 2; Col. iii. 24; Luke
xii. 42, 43; Matt. xxv. 21. Many pleasing ex-
amples are recorded of the Divine blessing resting
on faithful servants, such as Abraham’s servant,
Gen. xxiv.; Jacob in the house of Laban, Gen.
xxix. xxx. xxxi.; Joseph in the house of Potiphar,
Gen. xxxix.; Elisha, the servant of Elijah, 2
Kings ii.; the centurion’s servant; Matt. viii.
5 —13. And on the other hand, we have awful
examples of divine vengeance overtaking the trea-
cherous and wicked servant; as in the case of
Gehazi, 2 Kings v. 20—27; and Judas, Matt,
xxvii. 3—5.
Q. Do Christian servants stand upon a footing,
in relation to their masters, in any respect different
from that of servants in general ?


A. They are, in no respect whatever, released
from common obligations; but their duties on the
contrary are enforced by higher motives and ad-
ditional claims. A Christian servant is both sti-
mulated and encouraged to common duties, by
the presence, the notice, and the approbation of
God, which it is his privilege habitually to realise.
He is sustained through duties and trials by Divine
aid, constantly vouchsafed in answer to prayer ;
a source of strength to which ungodly men are
strangers ; and he is bound by the holiness and
honour of his Christian profession to an exemplary
deportment in all the common relations and cir-
cumstances of life. If his employers are fellow
Christians, he owes them Christian respect, co-
operation, and forbearance. If they are otherwise,
it becomes his duty to recommend religion to their
notice, not by the display of an obtrusive, over-
tearing, and censorious spirit, but by a quiet mani-
festation of the excellent effects produced by re-
ligion on his own temper and conduct.
Q. What claims have servants upon their em-
ployers ?
A. They have a right to expect from them
toth equity and good-will. And the same Scrip-
tures which so suitably enforce the duties of ser-
vants, enforce as clearly those of masters. See
Col. i v . 1; Ephes. vi. 9. More particularly a
servant has a right to expect from his employers—
I- An equitable and reasonable use of autho


rity. To authority he is bound to submit, but hot
to tyranny, oppression, or injustice.
2. A respectful deportment on the part of
servants, justly claims mildness and gentleness on
that of their employers.
3. Clear directions as to the service required,
and such aregularadjustmentof domestic concerns
in general as shall render it practicable for each
to perform the task assigned.
4. Servants have a just claim upon necessary
rest and reasonable relaxation.
5. They have a right also to protection, main-
tenance, and wages. A good master will make
his servant’s cause his own, and will protect him
against injury in his person, property, and good
name. He will furnish a reasonable supply of
whatever is necessary to the support of life, health,
and comfortable activity, and will punctually pay
such wages as the services have entitled to, and as
were agreed upon in the outset.
6. Servants are entitled to a character from
their masters. While endeavouring to discharge
their duties in a situation, they have a right to
expect suitable commendation, and, on quitting
their situation, such an attestation of their charac-
ter as their merits have fairly entitled them to.
7. It is incumbent on masters to pay due at-
tention to the moral and religious interests of their
servants. They are bound to instruct and
confirm them in the principles of religion and
virtue; carefully to watch over their morals ; to


avoid thrustingthem into scenes and circumstances
of temptation; and to set them examples of virtue.
They are bound, moreover, to a regular attention
to family worship, in which their servants should
be permitted and required to unite. Domestic
arrangements should be so made as to secure
against infringement on the Sabbath. Public
worship should be regularly attended by each
servant, and time allowed for private devotion
and reading the Scriptures.
Q. Can you refer to any passages of Scripture
which enforce these claims of servants upon their
employers?
A. Yes; the following: —Job xxxi. 13, 14;
Col. iv. 1; Gen. xxxi. .5—7, 15, 16; Deut. xxiv.
14, 15; Jer. xxii. 13; James v. I—4; Psalm
ci. 2—7; Gen. xviii. 19; Exod. xx. 10.


CHAPTER II.
ON THE PRE-REQUISITE QUALIFICATIONS OF DOMESTIC SER-
VICE IN GENERAL.
Q. Having spoken of the respective claims of
employers and servants, how may young persons
looking forward to a state of servitude, qualify
themselves to discharge its duties in a manner
creditable to themselves and satisfactory to those
they serve?
A. First, by cultivating all those principles
and habits which are essential to a good charac-
ter in general, and which are valuable and be-
coming in any station of life; and, second, by ac-
customing themselves to the performance of those
duties which are more particularly alloted to per-
sons in a sphere of labour and subordination.
<2. What are those principles and habits to
which you allude, as universally essential to ex-
cellence of character?
A. The first, is integrity, uprightness, or ho-
nesty, which consists in a just and conscientious
regard to the rights of all persons with whom we
are any way connected. Under the influence of
this principle, we shall never, on any account,
either forcibly or secretly, take from another per


son any thing, however small, that is his property,
or withhold from him any thing that is due.
Q. Name the next moral virtue.
A. Truth and sincerity , which is closely con-
nected with the foregoing. It not only stands
opposed to gross falsehood and artifice, but will
prevent us from harbouring for a moment any
wish or intention to deceive or mislead our neigh-
bour, either by inducing him to think of us more
favourably than we deserve, or to expect from us
services which we cannot render, or to bestow on
us rewards to which we are not justly entitled,
or by concealing from him some injury we may
have committed against him, or by leading him to
pursue some line of conduct which may be to our
advantage and his injury, and which he would not
have pursued if he had known the truth. These
virtues are the basis of all mutual confidence, re-
spect, and good-will.
Q. What do you consider as next essential ?
A. Sobriety , or a strict moderation in the use
of our daily supplies, so that we shall desire no
more than is really necessary to support health
and strength; and abhor the very thought of taking
what would unfit us for activity and propriety of
conduct.
Q. What do you mention next ?
A. Prudence, discretion, or practical wisdom,
which stands opposed to thoughtlessness, giddi-
ness, and folly, and which teaches what is proper
to be done, and what to be avoided. It also


suggests the best means, manner, order, season,
and method of doing and leaving undone. This
useful virtue will also discover itself in our choice
of associates, and in steadiness, decency and.
propriety of deportment towards those with whom
we associate. A still higher degree of this pru-
dence or circumspection is-especially essential to
the character of young females. It will be seen
in the strict modesty which should regulate all
their dress and demeanour; especially their inter-
course with the other sex.
Q. What more is required ?
A. Good temper, or a constant willingness to
serve and please those with wham we are con-
nected ; to bear with failings and pass over in-
juries; to receive reproof with meekness, and to
submit to circumstances with serenity and cheer-
fulness.
Q. But are not different persons naturally of
a gentle, cheerful, generous, peaceable—or, on
the contrary, of a peevish, passionate, sullen, ob-
stinate, or resentful temper ?
A. There is no doubt a great natural differ-
ence in the tempers of different persons ; but the
most effectual regulator of temper will be found
in humility and self-denial. Without these an
easy temper is not to be relied on, and by them
a naturally bad temper may be greatly rectified.
The first will teach us not to think too highly of
ourselves, or to expect too much from others; and
the latter will incline us often to give up what we


might justly claim, in order to promote the interests
of, or gratification of others. Such dispositions will
tend greatly to promote the peace and happiness
of a person’s own mind, and will endear him to
all with whom he is connected.
Q. Have you any thing further to mention under
this head ?
A. Yes; there are a number of every-day virtues,
which at first sight may appear necessary only
to persons in subordinate stations, but without
which, in reality, there can be no true greatness
or respectability of character in any line of life.
Such as these;— lndustry. An indolent person is
always a useless and contemptible being, where-
ever he may be found. Regularity ; for without
order, a vast deal of activity may be spent to no
good purpose; things might almost as well be left
undone, as not done at the right time. Per-
severence, or a steady going on in the discharge
of duty ; for if one day be spent in bustle, and
another in idleness, no great advancement will
be made in what is really useful. Forecast or
good management ; for without a constant habit
of looking forward to what will be wanted, and
when ; and an arrangement of our activity and
°ur resources, we shall be liable to the continual
Recurrence of wants, which we are not prepared
to meet. To these may be added contentment, or
a disposition to be satisfied with our lot in life, and
■Make the best of our circumstances, whatever they
tuay be. Without this, no person in this world can
G


be happy; for the highest lot in life, as well as the
lowest, is, after all, but a mixed portion.
Q. What are those habits, the cultivation ol
which you said was particularly'necessary to per-
sons in a subordinate station in life ?
A. There are several which are quite essential
to the character of a good servant, and ought to
be early instilled, by parents and instructors, into
those whose lot in life is likely to be that of servi-
tude. The first is a spirit of subordination, or
willingness to acknowledge the authority and com-
ply with the wishes of those under whom we are
placed. Without this, all must be confusion and
contention in families, as well as in larger societies.
Q. What is the second ?
A. Teachableness, as opposed to self-conceit,
or supposing oneself too wise to be taught: and
to stupidity and inattention, or backwardness to
observe and improve by what we see and hear.
A person who is desirous of gaining information
on every proper subject, and learning to perform
every useful service, is sure to make herself
valuable to her employers, and bids fair (o rise
by her own merits to respectability, and perhaps
to independence.
Q. Name the third habit to which you have
alluded.
A. A strict attention to, and recollection of,
orders received, which ensure the performance of
the duty in the very manner required.
Q. The fourth ?


A. Early rising, without which business nu\y
be pursued all day long, and not overtaken by
night; and good management of time, by which
every thing may be discharged with ease and
punctuality, and leisure secured for the improve-
ment of the mind, attention to personal interests,
and innocent recreations.
Q. What further have you to mention ?
A. Fifthly, thorough cleanliness in person and
in work. Sixthly, neatness of dress ; equally
avoiding tawdry and expensive finery, and a
slovenly negligent appearance. Seventhly, care,
fulness, or a handy, notionable manner of doing
things, by which much waste and destruction are
avoided, both in articles of furniture and imple.
ments of labour. Eighthly, frugality, or making
the best of everything committed to one’s care, suf-
fering nothing to be heedlessly consumed through
extravagance,or wasted through neglect. Ninthly,
moderation of desire after pleasure and recre-
ation ; or, as it is commonly called, a willingness
to bear confinement. This is best acquired by
taking a thorough pleasure in the full and useful
employment of time and regular discharge of
duty. This will leave neither leisure nor incli-
nation for more pleasure than most employers will
readily grant.
Q. Will these habits deserve the approbation
of employers, and promote the happiness of those
who, in a state of servitude, constantly exercise
them ?
g 2


A. They will, generally speaking, secure both
those ends ; especially if they be formed on the
only sure and abiding basis of character, true
religion, or a constant sense of acting under the
inspection of our Maker and our Judge, and an
earnest desire, above all things, to approve our-
selves in His sight; and by a patient continuance
in well-doing, to press on, in prospect of glory,
honour, and immortality.


CHAPTER III.
OF THE PARTICULAR DEPARTMENTS OF DOMESTIC SERVICE
Q. Into what particular department is domestic
service divided?
A. Many families employ only one houshold
servant, who is necessarily a servant of all-work;
others of a higher class in society, or more nume-
rous in its members, keep a cook, housemaid, and
nursemaid. To these are added, in families yet
more exalted, (besides subordinate persons in each
of the departments already named) lady’s maid,
laundress, sempstress, dairy maid, and sometimes
housekeeper.
Q. What are the particular duties of each?
and the qualifications for discharging them with
propriety ?
A. The servant of all-work will require an
extraordinary portion of industry, management of
time, good temper, and quickness of observation.
Without these, she will never discharge her nu-
merous duties with propriety; and by the help of
these, she may soon render herself valuable for
her general knowledge and aptitude, and at the
s ame time may so especially perfect herself in any
Particular department which she prefers, as to
g 3


qualify herself for'a lighter and more lucrative
situation in it, when opportunity offers.
Q. What is required of the cook?
A. To market and prepare all kinds of pro-
vision used in the family, and to keep clean all
vessels and utensils employed for that purpose.
Her essential qualities are cleanliness, frugality,
and punctuality.
Q. Have you any particular directions to give
to a servant in this situation?
A. Her frugality must be exercised both in
what she purchases and what she uses: for in-
stance, a frugal cook will not put her employers
to the expense of meat for making gravies, when
she has bones in the house that will answer the
purpose as well; nor will she make a fire too long
before it is wanted, nor burn large coals when
small coals or cinders will do as well; nor use
butter or lard for any purpose which dripping
would serve; nor will she suffer meat to perish
by neglecting to bring it out for use, nor beer, by
drawing more than is wanted; nor destroy sauce-
pans or other vessels by suffering them to remain
on the fire without water. Many such instances-
might be pointed out, but if young people will bear
these cautions in mind, and act upon them, others
will be sure to present themselves as the occa-
sions arise.
Q. Wherein will her cleanliness discover itself?
A - 1. In her person and dress. She will
carefully avoid dirty hands, straggling hair, dirty


caps and'aprons, a slatternly appearance in gene-
ral,and especially any vulgar, disagreeable habits,
as taking snuff, scratching her head, &c.
2. In her habits. She will avoid spilling grease
about, or suffering soot to fall into a saucepan, or
cinders into a dripping pan; she will carefully
keep separate, things that would injure each other,
not putting milk into a beery jug, nor cutting
bread or butter with an oniony or cheesy knife;
and she will keep things to their proper places
and uses, not standing a dirty saucepan on a
clean dresser, or wiping cups or glasses with a
greasy cloth, or the bottom of a greasy dish, or
her own hands on a table cloth or napkin.
3. In all her cooking utensils. Her copper
stewpans, saucepans, and other vessels, will be
kept bright without, and clean and well-tinned
within; she will never suffer food to remain in
them to become cold. * Her spit, gridiron, and
frying pan, will not be put away greasy, otherwise
they will accumulate a mass of dust and filth;
nor will a tin saucepan, after cleaning, be put
away without drying, otherwise it becomes rusty;
so also does a toasting fork, unless wiped dry and
rubbed with a leather every time of using.
Q. What is the best method of cleaning sauce-
pans and other kitchen utensils?
* TUe rust of copper and brass, called verdigris, which forms if any
thing becomes cold in the vessel, is highly poisonous. Many lives
have been sacrificed by (he carelessness of cooks in this respect.


A. As soon as done with, they should be filled
with cold water to soak them, by this means
whatever hangs about the sides will be prevented
from sticking, and they will be cleaned the more
easily and effectually; afterwards, a bunch of
straw and a little wood ashes, lightly rubbed
round the inside, answer very well; or if they
are particularly greasy, the ashes may be boiled
up in them with a little water, and then used for
scouring as above; afterwards, they must be well
rinsed with clean water, and made perfectly dry.
To brighten the outsides have clean leathers, a
separate one for each purpose, and rub the copper
and brass vessels with white bricks finely pow-
dered/ and the tin with fine whiting, or rotton
stone and sweet oil.
Q. How may the cook ensure punctuality?
A. By forecasting her work, allotting the exact
lime at which every part of it ought to be attended
to, in order to have all complete at the appointed
minute; and in such calculation allowing, even
in a small family, a quarter of an hour for serving
up dinner, and at least as long a time for unfore-
seen delays and hinderances. She will in parti-
cular be careful to make up her fire in proper time,
according to what she has to prepare, and never
to be without hot water; she will also regularly
clean and put in its place every article every day,
* Vitriol is often used for this purpose, but it is a dangerous thing
to leave abom ; besides, though it cleans quickly, coppers so cleaned,
ilo not retain their colour.


that the business of the morning may not be hin-
dered by the neglects of the prceding afternoon;
and she will take care to have in the house a regu-
lar supply of those things that are in daily use for
cooking, such as flour, salt, pepper, &c. or much
time may be hindered for want of having them at
the moment they are required.
Q. Can you give any rules as to the time and
manner of dressing different meats?
A. In boiling or roasting a joint, a quarter of
an hour to a pound is usually allowed, and to
most joints a few minutes over. Poultry accord-
ing to its size—a chicken will take twenty five
minutes or half an hour, a large fowl, forty mi-
nutes for boiling, something longer for roasting;
ducks, from half to three quarters of an hour;
a goose, from an hour to an hour and a half; a
turkey, from an hour and a quarter to an hour
and three quarters. Wild fowl and game should
be less done than tame. White meats, as fowls,
veal, lamb, should be floured before boiling, to
keep them white and free from grease; the pot
must be carefully scummed; use soft water for
boiling, if it can be got; put the meat in when
the water is blood-warm, and reckon the time
from when it boils ; keep it boiling the whole time,
but do not let it boil fast. All thick joints for
roasting require at first a slow but strong fire, and
that will become fiercer by degrees when the joint
is hot through; sihall thin joints (as of lamb, gris-
kin of pork,&c.) and poultry, require a clear brisk


fire from the first; Jill meat and poultry, while
roasting, should be well basted, especially on the
lean parts, turned every way in the influence of
the fire, and a little salt and flour scattered on
when nearly done. For frying or broiling, have a
brisk clear fire of cinders or charcoal; turn a
steak often; scatter a little pepper and salt,
and rub on a small piece of butter, when done.
For boiling fish, mackarel and cod may be put
on in cold water, with a spoonful of salt and a
little vinegar ; the mackarel will be done when the
water boils, the other will take five, ten, or fifteen
minutes longer,but may be proved by pulling a fin,
if it comes out easily the fish is done. For frying
fish, avoid as much as possible wetting it, let it be
cleaned an hour or two before wanted, and wrapped
in a coarse dry cloth, let it be well floured, and put
into plenty of fat, perfectly boiling. Let one side
be done of a fine pale brown before you turn it.
Q. What rules do you give for the boiling of
vegetables?
A. Potatoes and Jerusalem artichokes should
be put into cold water, just enough to cover them,
and a spoonful of salt; they should boil slowly,
with the lid off, until the skin cracks, then pour
off the water, put the lid on, and stand them on
the hob some minutes, to dry before peeling.
Carrots, parsnips and turnips are best boiled with
meat; they should be put in the liquor boiling;
turnips and young carrots will take from twenty
minutes to half an hour; old carrots require much


longer. All kinds of greens, peas, beans, French
beans, asparagus, sea-kale, &c., should be put
with a little salt into a fast-boiling saucepan, and
the lid put on immediately, making them boil up
as quickly as possible; when they do, take the lid
off, and put it on no more, but keep them fast
boiling till done.
Q. Have you any directions for puddings and
pastry?
A. Eggs should be well beaten, and then tho-
roughly mixed'with flour before any milk is added;
for a rich batter pudding, to every egg put one
table-spoonful of flour, and one of milk; let the
basin and cloth be buttered, tie it up securely and
boil it; for one egg, twenty minutes; for two, half
an hour; for three, three quarters of an hour; and
for five, one hour; which time a light batter pud-
ding ought never to exceed. For a plain batter
pudding, either baked or boiled, fewer eggs will
do to a larger quantity of flour and milk and a
little dripping or suet, finely shred, will make it
light. For puddings in which the milk and other
ingredients are first boiled and then added to the
eggs, have the bread and milk or rice milk boiling,*
and add to it by degrees, the eggs and sugar, and
put it immediately into the oven for baking, or
the saucepan for boiling, without suffering it to
* Two large table spoonsful of ground rice will thicken a quart of
new milk; wet the rice by degrees with a little of the milk cold, and
stir it into the rest boiling; let it boil a minute or two, then add the
e Sgs.


get cool. For pie crust, rub the lard and butter
or dripping to a cream ; then add the flour by
degrees, and wet it with cold water; roll it out on
a clean board. For a common paste, half a
pound of fat to two pounds of flour; if wanted
richer, more in proportion. Crust for fruit or
steak puddings is made in the same manner, with
either suet, lard, or dripping; they should be
boiled in a basin, and will take, for a good sized
fruit pudding, two hours boiling; a steak pudding
of the same size two hours and a half, or three
hours. These are long paragraphs, but they con-
tain a good deal of information, by which any
handy, notable girl, in a plain family, may guide
herself in her first attempts, and practice will soon
make all easy.


CHAPTER IV.
THE DUTY OF THE HOUSEMAID.
Q. What is the business of the housemaid ?
A. To keep clean the passage or hall, staircase,
parlours, or drawing room, and bed chambers,
with windows, grates, and furniture; to wait at
table, and answer the door if no man servant is
kept; and occasionally to perform needle-work.
Q. What qualifications are particularly required
in her ?
A. She should be remarkably neat, quick, and
handy in all her movements; and not only good-
tempered, but gentle and respectful in her man-
ners, as she will have much intercourse with her
employers and their friends.
Q. Can you give any directions for the per-
formance of her business ?
A, Her first work in the morning is to open
the shutters, carefully fastening them back; then
to prepare the family room for breakfast. She
clears away whatever may remain from the pre-
ceding evening, candlesticks, glasses, &c., and re-
moves them to a place of safety; then rolls up the
hearth rug, and takes it away to shake, and turns
hack the carpet, while she clears away the ashes,
mid cleans the chimney place and grate, fender,
o


and fire irons, and lays the fire.? She next brings
the furniture In the middle of the room, and sweeps
or brushes the carpet, shakes the curtains, sweeps
the cobwebs from the ceiling, cleaning up all flue
from the sides of the room, or scouring them if
necessary. After this she lights the fire, replaces
the carpet and rug, dusts the window-frames,
ledges, looking-glasses, chimney ornaments; then
the furniture, and puts it in its place; cleans the
brass locks, carries away all her brushes and
dusters, and returns with the breakfast cloth and
tea things.
Q. How are these various kinds of cleaning to
be performed ? The grate ?
A. First, thoroughly dusted ; next, if the bars
are bright steel, they must be rubbed, first with
sweet oil, then with emery paper or white brick,
and polished with soft leather, the handles of the
fire irons in the same manner; also the fender, if
steel. The grate itself, inside of fender, and sides
of the fire place, pan of shovel, and points of poker
and tongs, must be first brushed with the hard
brttshf till perfectly free from dust and dirt; next
with the black lead brush must be applied a mix-
ture of black lead and lamp black, wet with small
beer, afterwards, as briskly as possible, brushed
with two shining brushes in succession until per-
* In summer, when no fire has been lighted, it will only be
necessary daily to dust the grate and remove any litter, and clean it
thoroughly once a week.
+ If work is to be well done, servants must be properly furnished
with sets of brushes, &c., for every purpose, and they ought to be
careful of them.


fectly dry and brilliant; last of all, before quitting
the room, lightly dust it with a very dry, thin
linen cloth.
Q. The chimney place ?
A, If marble,must be washed with flannel dipped
in a strong hot lather of soap and water, and wiped
dry with a linen cloth. If free stone, with soap
and sand and cold water, or with a hearth stone
wetted with cold water, and dipped in sand.
Q. The brass locks ?
A. With a dry leather and white brick dust;*
brass rims of fenders in the same manner; also
brass finger plates, preserving the door from being
soiled by a piece of pasteboard with a hole cut in
it the size of the article to be cleaned.
Q. The carpet ?
A. It may be daily swept with a carpet broom,
either hair or whisk ; a few damp tea leaves being
previously scattered to catch the dust. It will
occasionally require a more thorough cleaning,
and must be taken up and beaten. After this, it
may be sponged over with a mixture of cold water
and grated potatoes, which will remove grease
and refresh the colours.
Q. The looking-glasses and windows ?
A. Remove all fly-stains with a damp sponge ;
then gently rub with a soft dry linen rag, and
finish with flannel and powder blue.
.* Finely powdered and sifted charcoal, mixed with sweet or linseed
°'l» will also answer for this purpose, as Bath brick is not always to
be had in this colony,— Editor.
G 2


Q. The mahogany (or cedar, &c.) furniture ?
A. First, perfectly remove all dust; if stained,
wash with vinegar; when dry, rub the best furni-
ture with a flannel moistened with linseed oil;
after which rub with a dry flannel or soft linen
cloth, till perfectly polished. For coarser maho-
gany, or that which is much injured by daily use,
instead of linseed oil may be used, a very small
quantity of bees’ wax and spirits of turpentine
simmered together.* In cleaning tables, &c., the
legs must be attended to as well as the tops.
Q. The coal scuttle ?
A. It must be dusted, and then polished with
leather and white brick, or white brick wet with
vinegar, applied with rag and afterwards polished
with leather.
Q. How may greasy spots be removed from
boards ?
A. Dissolve some fullers’ earth in soap lees
boiling hot, cover the spot with it over-night, next
morning it may be scoured off, and the grease will
be removed. If the grease be very deep, it may,
perhaps, require to be done again.
Q. After cleaning the parlour, what is the
housemaid’s next business ?
A. If the parlour be up stairs, she must shut
the parlour door, and sweep down the stairs one
by one, catching the dust in a dust shovel; then
dusting the windows and balustrade, also any
* A small quantity quickly gives a polish, but too much or too
trcqnenlly used, gives a vulgar appearance and a sticky feel.


furniture that may be on the landing place; but if
the parlour be on the ground floor, the stairs had
better be left till after the bed rooms are done.
In that case she will proceed at once to the passage
or hall.
Q. In what manner are they to be done ?
.4. First carefully swept; if there be a floor
cloth, wipe it with a damp flannel, after which
wet it all over with milk, and rub it till bright
with a soft dry cloth.* The steps to be scoured
with hearth-stone and sand, or masons’ dust, and
the brass knocker, plate, &c., cleaned with leather
and white brick. In a paved hall with alternate
black and white stones, after washing the whole
with soap and flannel; the white stones, if dis-
coloured, may be improved by a mixture of thin
size and pipe-maker’s clay or whiting, applied
with an old painting or dusting brush, care must
be taken, that this is not suffered to splash the
black stones, or it will look worse than if it had
Hot been done at all.
Q. How is the housemaid to proceed with her
business up stairs.
A. As soon as the family are settled at break-
fast, she should go through all the chambers,
°pening the windows and stripping the beds; this
s bould be done in a neat manner (and by all
aieans with clean hands and a clean apron), not
suffering the bed clothes to drag on the floor, or
turning them head to feet, or inside outwards; to
* Once or twice a week will be sufficient.
G 3


secure this when clean sheets are put on, let the
right side of the under sheet be uppermost, and the
mark at the right hand corner at the head of the
bed; let the right side of the upper sheet be placed
inwards, and the mark at the left hand corner, at
the head of the bed. In stripping, place two chairs
at the foot of the bed, and remove each article by
itself, smoothly and carefully doubled, and they
will always come right. Feather beds must be
thoroughly well shaken, and turned daily; and
mattresses should be turned once a week. Having
stripped and shaken all the beds, they may be left
open to air, and settle while the housemaid empties
all the slops, and scalds the different vessels, wiping
them dry with cloths kept on purpose ; then go
round again, making up the beds in the same
order in which they were stripped ; fold the cur-
tains, lay them across the head and feet of the
bed, unless they be looped up; draw the flue from
under the bed with a long broom, or in hot weather
with a damp mop; dust every article of furniture
in the same manner as in the parlour, and last of
all, fill all the ewers and water bottles with soft and
spring water, as may be ordered. See that all the
chamber and parlour doors are kept shut, while
the stairs and passages are swept and dusted.
Q. What is the housemaid’s next business ?
A . She will most likely have to remove the
breakfast things and wash them up, together with
any glasses that may remain of the night before.
Q. Have you any directions for this ?


A. It should be done in a wooden rather than
an earthen vessel, which must be kept perfectly
clean and free from grease. The water should be
as hot as it may be without danger of cracking
the things ; let the water be poured into the bowl
or tub, not upon china or glass; wash the glasses
first, then the cups and saucers, and lastly the
plates; wipe and polish with a linen cloth dry and
clean. The cream pot and tea pot should be filled
with boiling water, and left a few minutes to scald,
then wiped very dry; the tea board and table wiped
with a different cloth from that used for glasses and
cups; tea cloths hung up to dry on a line kept for
that purpose ; when dry, folded up and put away
to serve again ; black Wedge wood tea pots and
cream pots may be occasionally polished outside
with a very little sweet oil, or a morsel of butter
rubbed on a flannel, ‘carefully avoiding to touch
the inside; silver or metal tea pots with soft leather
and fine dry whiting, or whiting and sweet oil ap-
plied with flannel, and then polished with leather;
japanned tea trays washed clean and polished with
flannel and a dust of flour. Every thing put in
its place as soon as done with.
Q. What will the housemaid next employ her-
self in ?
A. She will sweep or dust any other parlour or
drawing room not in constant use, once or twice
in the week on regular days, she will sweep the
bed rooms, and scour the stairs, also scour the
bed rooms as occasion may require. For all these


matters the directions already given may be re*
ferred to. If a good manager she will allot to
every morning its regular employ, and so contrive
that the whole house should be kept'thoroughly
and constantly clean.
Q, Has the housemaid no further employment ?
A. Yes, in small families it usually falls to her
lot to clean the plate, and wait at table ; for the
latter purpose she is expected to clean herself
before the family dinner hour, and sit at needle-
work the rest of the day.
Q. How must the plate be cleaned ?
A. First, well washed in hot water or soap suds,
and wiped dry; any wrought edges well brushed;
then apply with a flannel a little sweet oil alone,
or with very fine whiting shaken on ; rub it off
with the bare hand, when quite bright, brush out
any whiting that may remain in the crevices, and
dust with a soft linen cloth.
Q. What rules do you give for laying the cloth ?
A. First, be sure to think of every thing in
the kitchen, and carry in more knives, spoons,
plates, and glasses, than will be wanted, rather
than to leave the room to fetch more. Take in
the knives in a tray, and keep another for the
purpose of removing them when dirty; dust the
dinner table, lay a baize cover, then the table
cloth, which be careful to lay on the right side ;
let the middle of the cloth go exactly down the
middle of the table, and the pattern the right way,
that is, lot the roots of the flowers or bottom of a


basket wrought on the cloth, lie toward the end of
the table at which the master sits, and the heads
of flowers upwards towards the mistress. If there
are mats, place them in even order, according to
the number of dishes, large mats for meat dishes
at the top, bottom, and, if required, in the middle,
and small ones for vegetables at the sides. Knives
and forks, according to the number of persons,
and placed at proper distances, the knife to the
right hand, the fork to the left; lay them length-
wise, and do not suffer the handles to reach
beyond the table. At the top and bottom of the
table place a carving knife and fork, outside of the
other, and a gravy spoon to each, either beside the
carving knife, or across, so as to come between the
mat and the plate of the carver. Fish slice, or soup
ladle, if wanted, to be laid in the same manner;
salt cellars at each corner of the table, a table
spoon on each side of them; the castors, mustard,
&c., on the side table until called for; wine glasses
are sometimes placed on the table, one to each
person, on the right hand side; sometimes they
are kept on the sideboard till called for, or till the
dessert; place chairs round at equal distances,
according to the number of the company. If table
napkins are used, lay one on each plate, or on the
left side of it, with a piece of bread, unless the
family choose to have the bread handed round.
In plain families, where a dumb waiter is used, or
one of the children is allowed to hand the bread
or beer as wanted, it is usual to put to each per


son a tumbler glass or mug for beer. If there is
soup, put to each person a flat plate and a soup
plate on it. Let the plates be placed round tho-
roughly warm and carefully dusted the moment
before the company sit down. Have ready on
the side table the same number of plates to change
as required. If thoroughly heated and kept in a
pile, they will retain the heat a considerable time.
Observe, if any one does not choose soup, let the
soup plate be immediately removed.
Q. In what order are the dishes placed ?
A. It depends so much on the number of articles
to be served, and on the taste of the mistress, that
particular directions cannot easily be given. In
general, however, it may be observed, that when
there are only soup and meat, the soup is placed
at the head of the table; when soup, fish, and
meat, the fish at top, soup in the middle, and meat
at the bottom ; when boiled and roast meat, the
boiled at top ; poultry and roast meat, the former
at top, the ham in the middle ; if two kinds of roast
meat, that with which the ham is eaten at top, as
for example, fillet of veal at top, roast beef at the
bottom. Vegetables and sauce boats to be placed
straight on each side of the middle, if there is no
centre dish ; if there is, then at cross corners.
Q. When the company are assembled, what
will next be required ?
A. While a blessing is implored, (or as it is
commonly called, while grace is said,) let the
waiter observe the most perfect stillness, not


walking across the room, or clattering with plates
and glasses. After this, let the covers be removed,
unless orders be given to leave on any in parti-
cular ; then let her be ready at her mistress’s left
hand to receive the plates as she supplies them,
having always one ready to give in exchange.
Let her first serve the lady at her mistress’s right
hand, then the lady opposite, so changing sides
each time till all the ladies are served, then the
gentlemen in the like order. If she moves briskly,
and has time, before another plate is ready, to
inquire of each what vegetables are chosen, and
get them supplied, she should do so, still keeping
an eye to the mistress, and not suffering her to
wait a moment for the removal of a plate. When
all are supplied with meat, then look round and
see if any are in want of vegetables, sauce, or
bread, and supply them as quickly as possible.
Observe, when any plate is empty, and, unless
ordered to the contrary, take it to the mistress, to
be supplied with the same meat as before. If the
person declines taking any more of that meat,
fish, or soup, immediately remove the plate, knife
and fork, and present clean ones. Clear the dirty
knives at once into the tray for that purpose, and
the plates into a scuttle basket lined with tin, if
one is provided; if not, place the dirty plates in
neat piles of equal size, or all large at bottom and
small at top; leave no bones or fragments in the
plates when piled, but collect them all into one.
When a plate is to be changed, as long as the
person has not partaken of each kind of meat, a


large plate is to be given ; but if meat is declined,
then exchange again for a small plate, knife and
fork, and dessert spoon, for pudding or pie. When
that has been served and declined, place to each
person a cheese plate and knife only, unless
there is a salad, then put a fork also. When
called upon for bread or beer, go to the left hand
of the person, hand the glass of beer or water on
a waiter, and (unless the custom of the family be
otherwise) wait until the person has drank, and
returns the glass. In this case the same glass
must not be handed again, but a clean glass for
each person as often as they call for drink. When
a moment occurs in which the company are all
provided and engaged, the waiter should watch
that opportunity of getting ready what will next
be wanted, as fresh plates, more beer, or pudding
and pie when the meat is nearly done with.
When meat and vegetables are to be removed, do
not spend time in taking them into the kitchen,
while the company wait for pudding, &c., but
very quickly remove them to the corner of the
room, or hand them to another servant who waits
at the door to receive them, and instantly replace
them with what is to be served next. In remov-
ing dishes be very careful not to spill the gravy,
either on the company, the table cloth, or the
carpet. When dinner is ended, let all be removed
with neatness and expedition. Carry round a
knife tray for the knives, a spoon tray for the
spoons, a waiter for the salt cellars, glasses, and
clean spoons. Go round with a fork to collect


any pieces of bread into a plate or basket. ?:: lf
there is a table brush, use it to sweep the crumbs
on to a plate, if not, use a large spoon iathAsame
manner; then smoothly fold the ends and sides
of the cloth, and remove it lightly.
Q. In what manner is the dessert to be arranged ?
A. In the first place, it is usual to put round
finger glasses and D’Oileys. The manner of ar-
ranging the dishes, &c., must depend upon their
number, always placing the three principal dishes
at the top, bottom, and middle, and the smaller
dishes disposed to the best advantage on the sides.
Between the top and middle dishes place the sugar
basin, or castor, and two glass jugs, with cold and
warm water; and between the middle and lower
dish place rummer glasses. In a mixed company
of ladies and gentlemen, put the wine decanters
at the lower end of the table; but if there be only
ladies, put the wine to the one who sits at the
head. On each dish place a table spoon, and if
there be a cake, a knife on that dish. Lay to
each person round the table, a plate, dessert knife
and fork, and spoon, and two wine glasses. When
this is done, remove whatever may remain of the
dinner, put coals on the fire if required, and quit
the room as quickly as possible.
Q. Are there any particular rules for waiting
at tea ?
A. The best qualifications are a quick observ-
ance of the intimations of the mistress, and of
the wants of the guests. It is better to have two
H


waiters, one for tea, coffee, sugar, and cream, and
the other for muffins, toast, and bread and butter;
but where this is not the case, one large waiter,
nearly the size of a tea board, will do. Keep the
eatables on the left hand, next the sugar and
cream, and what room remains to be filled with
alternate cups of tea and coffee. The mistress
usually intimates the order in which the company
should be served, if not, the servant must use her
best judgment; in winter, generally taking those
first who sit nearest the fire, and always married
ladies before single ones. If several have chosen
coffee, and only tea remains on the waiter, return
for a fresh supply, taking care not to hand to any
one with only one sort on the board. When all
are helped round, be on the watch to hand the
eatables again as required, and to receive the cups
as emptied. Be particular in informing your
mistress, whose cup you return.*
Q. Dp you give any directions with respect to
answering the door ?
A. 1. Be attentive and quick, never suffer any
person to knock or ring twice.. —2. Be civil;
civility is always cheap, scorn always odious ;
whoever may come to the door, and upon what-
ever business, let them receive a civil answer.—■
3. Be cautious. If a stranger calls, however
plausibly he may speak, do not admit him to any
of the rooms, or comply with any other request
* These rules are sufficient for plain families, where most young
servants begin their service.


he may make, unless some of the family are at
hand ; and by no means inform him of any of the
family circumstances, who may be out, or who at
home, &c.*—4. In receiving a name or message,
be careful to take it exactly and deliver it punc-
tually.—s. Be not hasty in giving an answer
without authority, especially to a person in the
habit of calling. The person after whom he
enquires may not be witliin, but another of the
family may be competent to answer his business,
or the person enquired after may have been out
and returned without your knowing it; it is easy
to say “ I will enquire/’ and having done so, re-
turn with such answer as you are directed.-—6.
Be sure, if you say any thing, to speak the truth.
There is no harm in saying, “ My master is en-
gaged, I do not think he can be spoken with;”
but there is great harm in saying “ he is out,”
when you know he is at home. If this is required
of you, by all means respectfully remonstrate
against it, and beg your employers, as they wish
you to speak truth to them, not to compel you to
tell falsehoods for them.
Q. Have you finished the housemaid’s duties ?
A. Yes, with the exception of needlework, for
which she should reserve most of the afternoon.
.Particular directions will be found among those
given to the sempstress.
* These enquiries and manoeuvres are often practised by sharpers,
and swindlers, to ascertain the absence of the male part of the family,
and rob the house.
h 2


CHAPTER V.
THE DUTY OF THE NURSEMAID.
Q. What are the peculiar qualifications required in a
nursemaid 1
A . She ought to possess in a high degree, the virtues of up-
rightness, steadiness, thoughtfulness, self-possession, ac-
tivity, neatness, and good temper.
Q. What services are required of her!
A, To attend by day and night to such children as are
committed to her care.
Q. To what particulars will her attention be directed?
A, To their persons, apparel, diet, apartment, and health ;
to their exercise, rest, employments, recreations, and the
formation of their moral character.
Q. Are not some of these duties confined to nurses of the
higher class, or even to governesses ?
A. No one who undertakes the office of a nursemaid, in
however subordinate a sphere, can be considered as free from
attention, more or less, to all these particulars, inasmuch as
it is impossible for any one to be connected with children,
without either benefiting or injuring them in these respects.
Q. In what manner will the different virtues you have
specified be particularly called into exercise? Uprightness?
A. Uprightness, or integrity of principle, is as essential
to a nursemaid as to any servant whatever; perhaps more
so, inasmuch as the property entrusted to her care is of
the most valuable kind, and if injured, the injury is more
irreparable.
Q. How should this virtue discover itself?
A. 1. In a conscientious regard to the injunctions of the
parents, and the welfare of the children, whether or not the
obedience, or the failure, may be liable to observation. 2.
In a candid and immediate communication to the parents


of any thing that may affect the welfare of the children,
whether in health, comfort, morals, or manners.
Q. Wherein is steadiness particularly required?
A, A person who is giddy, and bent upon her own plea-
sures, will be sure, in some way or other, to neglect, injure,
or endanger the children committed to her care?
Q. Can you give any examples of this?
A. Yes—many: for instance; a giddy, gossiping nurse-
maid is likely to be found in the kitchen, or at the street
door, pursuing her own pleasures, while her infant is crying
unheeded, in the nursery; or while an older child falls
down, or sets fire to itself. When out walking, she perhaps
is engaged in the society of some other nursemaid, or per-
haps yet more improper companion, while the children are
moping and moaning unheeded, or suffered to play with
dirty or diseased children; or are bribed to conceal from
their parents something improper they have witnessed; or,
by the light songs, low jests, and foolish stories in which
such a girl delights, the minds of the children are poisoned,
which is infinitely more injurious still. To avoid all these
and many similar evils, a nursemaid should be very steady ?
Q. Why must she also be thoughtful?
A. Because children require constant and minute atten-
tion : because, while young, they have many wants which
they cannot express; may suffer inconveniences of which
they cannot complain, and are exposed to dangers of which
they ire not aware. Those who attend them, therefore,
should be particularly thoughtful, quick-sighted, and studi-
ous to promote their welfare and comfort.
Q. Why is self-possession particularly necessary ?
A. Because children in their earliest infancy are liable
to sudden attacks of disease, and, as they grow older, to
accidents which might speedily prove fatal; it is therefore
highly desirable that those who have the charge of them
should not only know what to do, hut should also be able
to act with calmness and promptitude incases of emergency.
Q. Why is activity required in a nursemaid?
A . Because constant exertion is necessary to a child’s
health and cheerfulness. When awake, it should be con*
n 3


stantly dandled about and amused in a lively manner*
When asleep, the nurse will have full employment in getting
every thing in order, and providing for its wants on awaken-
ing. To a nurse who is. not of active disposition, all this
will be intolerably tiresome. She will naturally spare her-
self as much as possible; and the child, in consequence,
will become lumpy, dull, and unhealthy.
Q. In what respects is cleanliness particularly necessary ?
A. There is nothing on which the health and comfort of
an infant more depends than on thorough If
every thing about it be not perfectly clean; its tender skin
will become chafed and galled—its health will be injured
through imbibing unpleasant smells—and it will become
restless and fretful by being constantly uneasy. Besides, if
the nurse be not cleanly, the child is not likely to imbibe
habits of cleanliness, which are necessary to its own com-
fort and that of those about it.
Q. You said good temper was essential ? Why is it sol
A . For three principal reasons:—lst. A child in health
should be played with in a lively cheerful manner. Thus
it acquires many ideas, and many sources of enjoyment are
opened to it. A person of a gloomy, morose disposition, is
utterly unfit to have the care of children. 2. Because a
nurse is liable to frequent interruptions of her own comfort*
The child may want attending to just as she has set down
to a meal, or just as she has retired to rest, or just as she is
going out. A person of a peevish irritable temper, will be
vexed at these interruptions, and perhaps vent her spleen by
scolding, shaking, or neglecting the helpless babe.
3. A nurse is liable to have many exercises for her pa-
tience ; —perhaps even in the caprice of parents —certainly
in the folly and perverseness of children; which must yet
be borne with, and corrected with gentleness and reason. If
a child be violently and unreasonably thwarted, or corrected
with passion and severity, it is very likely to have its temper
soured, or its spirit broken for life by such injudicious
treatment.
Q. Having gone through the requisite qualifications of a
nursemaid, what have you to say respecting her discharge
of particular duties'! As to the person of the child!


A. Let it be thoroughly washed twice a day—the whole
body in the morning—the lower half at night. The first
week or two after its birth, the chill should be taken off the
water—afterwards used quite cold. A large soft sponge is
the best thing to wash with. First clean carefully behind
the ears, in the folds of the neck, &c.; then hold the child
gently inclining over the basin, and several times filling the
sponge, discharge the water over its head; then rub it tho-
roughly dry, and tie on a flannel cap, while it is being
dressed; on removing the flannel cap, let the hair be
brushed, not combed. The skin of very younjj infants,
when wiped thoroughly dry, may be dusted with a little
hair powder.
Q. Have you any further directions to give on the care of
its person 1
A. Never suffer any thing wet to remain on it: this is
both unhealthy and uncomfortable. Let it be washed en-
tirely naked; otherwise it cannot be thoroughly washed or
properly dried. While doing this, be very careful to avoid
drafts of air. As soon as possible begin to accustom it to
habits of cleanliness itself. This is easily accomplished by
attention, regularity, and perseverence on the part of the
nurse.
Q. Have you any thing farther to add 1
A, Yes; that a child, while very young, should be carried
chiefly in a lying posture, at least until it becomes strong
enough to rear itself up. Also, that when undressed, it
should be allowed a little time to stretch its limbs and play
about naked. To encourage it to do this, the nurse should
play with it, and gently rub its body and limbs, which will
conduce to its growth and activity.
Q. What do you say respecting its clothing?
A. That it should be as simple and easy as possible—
moderately warm, especially about the chest, bowels, and
feet; yet do not let it be overloaded with clothes; let the
head be kept as cool as possible, and avoid all tight ban-
dages ; let the clothes be entirely changed twice a day, well
aired before putting on at first, and when changed, carefully
dried, and rubbed soft, where it may have become harsh


with drivelling or perspiration. Linen should not be put on
warm. In sticking pins be very careful to do it safely and
securely, so that they shall neither slip out nor prick the
child: for this purpose slip the left hand between the clothes
and the child’s flesh, and darn the pin in and out several
times, as in darning a stocking.
Q. Respecting the food of children 1
A . The less that an infant takes for the first four months,
besides the mother’s milk, the better. If it must be wholly
or in part brought up by hand, the best food it can take at
first is grit gruel and cow’s milk, in equal parts ; the milk
not boiled, but mixed with hot gruel, which will bring it to
a proper warmth. After the first week or two, the child
may be fed on milk thickened with Hour that has been dried
in an oven. Arrow root powder, or sago, make very good
food for children. The less food is sweetened the better.*
Let it be properly cooled, and feed the child slowly—not
more than half filling the spoon. After feeding, let it sit up
a little, and be gently moved, until it have thrown off the
wind. When a child can hold any thing in its hand, let it
have a piece of upper crust of bread. Children must not fast
too long, nor yet be overfed.
Q, As to the food of older children 1
A, All kind of sweet cakes, sugar-plums, unripe fruit,
especially raw apples, are very injurious ; also heavy flour
puddings, and pastry in general. Children should have no
meat till they can run alone, and have cut most of their
teeth, then such only as is very tender and plainly dressed.
Let their meat be shred very small, and potatoes carefully
mashed and freed from every lump. The best drink they
can have is water, or milk and water : wine, beer, and spirits
are always hurtful—it might be said poisonous. It is a
nursemaid’s bounden duty never, on any account, to suffer
an infant or child under her care to eat or drink any thing
without the express approbation of its parents.
* Many nursemaids, to keep an infant quiet while they have their
tea, will feed it with bread, or bread and butter, sopped in tea, and
very much sweetened.—This is a very bloating unwholesome food.


Q. What is the nursemaid’s charge with respect to the
children’s apartment’
A. For cleaning the rooms and furniture, let her look to
the directions given to the housemaid. The following rules
will particularly apply to herself:
1. Let her take the opportunity of the child being asleep,
to tidy the room and fetch up coal, fill the kettle, and any
thing else that may be wanted,
2. Letamoderate fire be kept—never fierce—never suffered
to go so low as to chill the room; let it be lighted a sufficient
time before the children come in in the morning, moderately
to warm the air of the room.
3. While the child is asleep, let napkins, and other linen,
be well aired for its use.
4. When the child is out, let the windows be opened to
air the room, but shut before its return.
5. Let every thing that might occasion an unpleasant
smell be immediately removed out of the room,
6. When the day nursery is to be scoured, let it be done
in the evening, after the child is gone to bed, that it may be
thoroughly dry for morning. In like manner, when the
sleeping room is to be scoured, let it be done as early as
possible after the child quits it in the morning. In general,
let the most scrupulous attention be paid to cleanliness and
neatness, in every thing with which children are concerned.
Q. What direction do you give the nursemaid with respect
to the health of the child I
A, She should be constantly observant of its health. If
an infant screams, and appears to be in pain—if it draws up
its legs —if its flesh feels flabby—if it looks black in the face,
or exceedingly pale—if its breath smells sour —if it rejects
its food—if its motions are either deficient or excessive, or
present any unnatural appearance—she may conclude that
something is amiss. In like manner, if older children are
restless—start in their sleep—loath their food —appear un-
usually drowsy—their flesh feels burning hot—if they are
sick, or disordered in their bowels, or in any way complain,
let them be attended to.
Q. If any of these symptoms occur, what is then her duty ’


A. It is three-fold. 1. Let her avoid giving any remedy
of her own accord, or at the suggestion of any ignorant
neighbour. Such will often prescribe laudanum, or spirits,
or cordials of some kind, by which thousands of children
have lost their lives.
2. Let her immediately inform the mother of what she has
observed; or, in case she should be absent, the medical gen-
tleman who attends the family, or some friend in whom she
knows the parents confide.
3. Let her strictly attend to the directions she may receive
from them, not giving way to the child’s objections against
taking its medicines, or indulging it in any thing which may
have been forbidden: and let her from time to time report
any alterations she may have observed in the disorder.
Q. What have you to say with respect to the exercise of
children ?
A. While very young, it will be most safely taken in the
nurse’s arms. Let them be gently dandled about, not roughly
shaken or suddenly jerked, or turned violently round : these
often frighten a child, and produce fits, and other serious
disorders. When naked, let it move, kick, and stretch about
at pleasure. When two months old, let it be occasionally
laid on the floor a few minutes at a time * —the nurse keep-
ing sight of it the whole time, and taking it up as soon as it
becomes dissatisfied. As to exercise in the open air, the
mother will most probably regulate this matter: if left to
the nursemaid, let her bear in mind, that intense heat is to be
avoided; also a bleak or damp air • especially a keen easterly
wind; and the children should never be abroad when the
damps of evening come on.
Q. How should children be taught to walk?
A. The best way is to let them find it out themselves. All
kinds of leading-strings, go-carts, ploughs, and swings, are
highly improper. Children who have health and the use of
their limbs, will be sure to walk in time; and no attempt
• Let especial care be taken that there be nothing on the carpet
which may injure it: pins, needles, bits of coal, or cinder. This is
one advantage of neatness. A person will not be likely to drop such
things, or if she docs, will be sure to pick them up again directly.


should be made to hurry them. After being laid upon the
ground as above recommended, in a few weeks a child will
turn itself round; by degrees it will crawl upon its hands and
knees, then raise itself up by a chair, and so support itself;
at length it will take courage and walk across the room. All
that the nurse has to do is, to see that nothing is in the way
by which it might hurt itself; and this is the best possible
way in which a child can learn to walk.
When children can run about and exercise themselves, the
less they are in arms the better. They must not, however,
be suffered to walk far out of doors to tire themselves, but
will require occasional carrying till they are two or three
years old.
Q. What directions do you give as to the rest of children?
A. While very young they cannot sleep too much, pro-
vided their sleep be natural; but they must neither be rocked
nor lulled to sleep with opiates or cordials.
Let them not be laid down immediately after suckling or
feeding, but kept a few moments in gentle motion.
They sleep best at night on the armof a healthy attentive
nurse.
If laid in a bed or cradle, an infant should be laid on
the middle of the pillow, with its shoulders nearly as high
as the head, otherwise it will be in danger of rolling under
the pillow, and being suffocated. Let the child be laid to
sleep occasionally on either side, but more frequently on the
right— never on its back.
All turn-up and press bedsteads are to be avoided in
nurseries. If they must be had, let them never be shut up
without ascertaining that the child is not there.
When children begin to be more wakeful and active, they
should still be accustomed to two regular sleeps in a day—
of at least two hours in the morning and one in the after-
noon—for the first year. The morning sleep should be
continued at least for the two first years, and then, if laid
in the short-days, should be resumed in the following
summer.
Great care should be taken never to awaken children


suddenly; neither should they be carried into a strong
light immediately on awaking.
It is always beneficial to children to go to bed and rise
early and regularly,
Q, What can be the employments of children in a nursery 1
A. A good nurse will be sure to contrive some, which,
without fatiguing or overburthening, shall early instil habits
of activity, regularity, and desire of usefulness. Unless
children be accustomed to employment, they will soon
acquire an indolent, yawning, helpless habit, which will, in
all probability remain with them through life. To prevent
this, let the nurse accustom them daily to do something
useful suited to their age.*
Q. With respect to their play or recreation'?
A, The first concern; will be, that they do not injure
themselves. They must not be allowed to play with
dangerous things; such as knives, stones, halfpence, &c, ;
nor to play near an open window, or the edge of water. The
next thing is to make their play beneficial. In hot weather,
quiet plays should be contrived for them; in cold weather,
such as will exercise and warm them. They should be
encouraged to ask questions about the construction of their
playthings, and to attempt making things themselves. For
this purpose they should be furnished with a few odd bits
of wood,, card, ribbon rollers, &c., on which they may
exercise their ingenuity. They should be accustomed to
regularity even in play; not allowed to have out every thing
at once, of which they are generally tired as soon as they
have strewed the nursery. But let them choose their play
or playthings for the afternoon or evening, and then keep
to their choice.
It is a good way to reserve some special playthings only
• Such as to knit, to wind thread or tape; when they walk pot*
to collect a little bundle of sticks; to fold up their own clothes nigh*
and morning; to clear the play things before every meal, and befor®
going to bed. It will not be supposed that these things are recoin*
mended for the value of the labour, but for the value of the habit'’*'-
as they become older, they should have a daily lesson, if it be bnt
one letter; and girls, a daily task of work, if it be but ten stitches*


for wet weather, when they are confined within doors • such
as a Noah’s ark, a box of bricks, a travelling map, a set of
letters, &c. They should never be allowed to play for gain,
of even a pin ; and the strictest justice and fairness should
be observed between them.
Q. What has a nursemaid to do with the formation of
moral character ?
A, As much perhaps as the parents themselves. If she
sets a bad example, or connives at bad practices, she may
entirely frustrate their best endeavours for the welfare of
their children; let her, therefore, attend to the following
rules, and conscientiously observe them.
1. Never say or do a thing you would not like the child
to imitate, or to tell its parents of.
2. Never suffer a child, in the absence of its parents,
to be guilty of an act of disobedience to their known
commands.
3. Grant no indulgence that parents have forbidden.
4. Have no favourites, but treat all with justice and
equality.
5. Never induce a child to do any thing by promises,
which you cannot or do not intend to perform.
6. Never deceive a child, by telling it that medicine is
pleasant, that it is not painful to have a tooth drawn, &c. ;
but say that, if patiently borne, the inconvenience will soon
he over, and the advantage lasting.
7. Never terrify them to obedience, by talking of ghosts,
dark holes, old men, &c. Nothing can be more wicked
and injurious.
8. Enforce justice and encourage kindness between
brothers and sisters. Let each child have its own right
undisturbed; yet be taught and encouraged, but not com-
pelled, to share it with the others.
9. Never praise children for their beauty or fine clothes,
or make either eatables or finery the reward for good conduct.
10. Encourage sincerity, and be ready to forgive a fault
that is honestly confessed; but let no instance of injustice
Or falsehood pass without informing the parents.
11. When a fault has been committed, confessed, and
I


forgiven, never let the child be reproached for it afterwards,
either by yourself or by the other children.
12. Endeavour to impress on the minds of children a
sense of religion. Let this always be done in a cheerful and
pleasant, yet serious manner, as that which ought to be
loved, but not trifled with. That you may be enabled to
do this, and in all things to act conscientiously and worthily,
read the Bible for yourself, pray for grace to follow its
dictates, and pray also that your endeavours may be blessed
to your young and important charge.


CHAPTER VI.
THE DUTY OF THE LADY’S MAID.
Q. What are the duties of a lady’s raaidl
A. To perform every personal service for her lady ; to
take charge of her wardrobe and apartment; and to see that
the laundress and housemaid properly discharge their
business; as far as it may be connected with these par-
ticulars,
Q. What particular qualifications are required for this
department of service 1
A. As the lady’s maid is, in a high degree, a confidential
servant, and has valuable property committed to her care,
as well as, perhaps, important secrets coming within her
knowledge, a high principle of integrity is the first and most
indispensible requisite. Her natural disposition should be
active, obliging, and gentle—her education and habits
superior to those of females in the lower departments of
service, and as far as possible removed from vulgarity—her
clothing should be good of its kind, neat and suitable to her
station ; she must neither disgrace her mistress by a shabby
appearance, nor offend her by attempting to equal her in
fashion and finery she must have a thorough control over
her tongue, for in no department is a disposition to imper-
tinence, or to idle gossiping, or petty scandal, more offensive
and injurious than in a lady’s maid.
Q. How far ought her education to extend ?
A. Certainly to a thorough knowledge of her own lan-
guage, and a capacity to read, speak, and write it with
propriety. If she have also a knowledge of French it may
he advantageous, especially if called to travel. She must
he ready in accounts ; a good plain and ornamental needle-
I 2


woman, and have some knowledge of dress-making, millinery,
and hair dressing.*
Q. In what will her personal services consist ?
A. She willjje required to wait upon her lady, and assist
her in dressing and undressing; her services will be best
regulated by a due regard to health, comfort, and personal
appearance.
Q, In what way will this regard manifest itself?
A . In the promptitude and regularity of her attentions ;
in her care to have every thing required, close at hand at
the proper time: as, for example, dressing room fire, warm
and cold water, day and night clothes, combs and brushes,
linen well aired, shoes to exchange in case of coming in
damp, &c., and in her nimble and tasteful manner of dis-
posing her lady’s dress and ornaments. Her personal
attendance will also be required, in case of illness, to admi-
nister medicine, and perform many other little services,
which, if she be a trusty and attached servant, will be much
more acceptable at her hands than at those of a stranger.
Q. In what will her charge of the wardrobe consist?
A. She will be required to see that every thing is safe,
nothing missing; and that every thing is where it may be
immediately found when wanted. For this purpose she
should (1.) Keep an inventory of every thing committed
to her care, and frequently compare it to see that all is
right; and (2.) Assign to each its proper place, into which
it should be put as soon as done with. She should also
carefully inspect every article of dress when taken off, that
if they have sustained any injury, or acquired spots or
stains, they may be immediatly cleaned and repaired. It
will next be her care to give out and receive linen from tb®
wash, counting the articles, and seeing that every thing
mended, or made up as may be required, ready for use*
It will also be her business to make and alter dresses, mil-
linery, according to her lady's directions, or her own taste.
* Perhaps this situation is best filled by young persons who
been educated with a view to a higher line of life, but whom
vicissitudes of trade have driven to seek their own subsistence, a®®
who are not sufficiently educated to engage in the work of tuition*


Q. What will she have to do with the care of the
apartment.
A. To remove from the toilet all trinkets, combs, brushes,
&c. &c., every lime that her lady goes up to dress : also to
put away dresses, &c., before the housemaid comes in to
sweep or dust the room. To see that this is regularly and
properly done, the windows properly shut and fastened, the
fire lit in proper time, and the bed linen properly aired.
Q. Is there any other service required of her!
A. She is to consider herself in general at the disposal of
her lady in any way (not menial) that may conduce to her
comfort. Her usual employment when not attending her
lady, will be needle-work, and perhaps the getting up of fine
linen, gauze, lace, silk stockings, &c. She will also be
required, especially if the lady be elderly or in ill health, to
sit with her and to read to her.
Q. Have you any other directions to give?
A. To repeat the injunction, that whatever passes in the
bed chamber or dressing room, may never be repeated in the
servant’s hall; and to hint, to a well disposed young woman
filling this situation, that if employed in reading aloud, and
the choice is left to herself, she has an opportunity put into
her hands of presenting that to her mistresses attention
which may both improve her mind, and promote her
immortal interest and happiness.
i 3


CHAPTER VII.
THE DUTY OF THE LAUNDRESS.
Q. What have you to say about the laundress 1
A . She ought to be strong, active, cleanly, and frugal;
an early riser, and a good contriver. Her work is of a la-
borious kind, and its being well performed greatly depends
on her activity and good management.
Q, How must she proceed in her business ?
A, When washing is to be performed, let every thing be
got ready the day before. The copper filled with soft water ;
the tubs (which are well scrubbed and dried before putting
away) well dusted and rinsed; the line tied up; and the
linen sorted.
Q. What do you mean by sorting the linen ?
A , Dividing it into several allotments of articles, accord-
ing as they are fit to be washed together. For example,
muslins and fine table linen, body linen, sheets, coloured
things, flannels, kitchen towels, should all be washed sepa-
rately from each other.
Q. Do you give any particular rules for washing ?
A, Be sure to have good water, and plenty of it; if you
have not rain or river water, it must be made soft with the
lees of soap or wood ashes, pearl ash, or soda; but observe,
water so mixed will not do either for flannels or coloured
things; it thickens flannel, and discharges colour.
Q. How then are these articles to be managed ?
A. If you have but little rain water, it should be secured
for them ; the suds that have washed flannels, if not too
dirty, are the very best that can be used for washing coloured
things the first time : the flannels must then be rinsed in
clear warm water, and hung out immediately without wring-
ing. This water will do to second the coloured things.
Let them be taken quickly from one water to the other, and
not suffered to lie together damp, or they will dry streaky.
When sufficiently washed, rinse them twice in plenty of


spring water, and hang up immediately without wringing.
Gowns should be pinned up by the shoulders rather than
the tail, or the body lining becomes discoloured.
Greasy spots may be taken out of all kinds of woollen
cloths, blankets, scarlet cloaks, or table baizes, without in-
jury to the colour, by washing them with gall instead of
soap. A pint mixed up in a good-sized tub of warm soft
water, will be sufficient for several articles. It will lather
in the same manner as soap. To take off the smell'of the
gall, the things must be several times rinsed in water ; when
dry, they should be mangled, and suffered to remain in the
mangle all night—they will then appear as good as new.
Iron moulds or ink spots may be removed from linen by
holding it on the cover of a tankard or metal tea pot of boil-
ing water, and wetting it with the juice of sorrel and salt, or
with salts of lemon ; then washed in ley.
Mildew may be removed by rubbing well with soap, then
with fine chalk scraped ; spread it on the grass, as it dries,
wet it a little, and repeat the soap and chalk if required; it
will generally come out with twice doing.
Q How are the white things to be washed ?
A. Let all be carefully examined; then rub in soap to
such parts as most require it; as the collars and wristbands
of shirts. In this part of the operation, be careful that the
water is not too hot, or it will set the dirt. Afterwards let
all be twice well washed in plenty of clear warm lather,
shaking each article separately, and examining that every
spot and stain is removed. Then boil them, taking care not
to put 100 many into the copper at once. A small quantity
of soft soap, thrown into the boil, gives a good colour to the
linen. Well wash out of the boil, (no more soap will be
required,) then rinse in plenty of spring water.
Q. Is not blue used in rinsing?
A, Yes; the rinsing water should be made moderately
bine by means of stone blue, tied in a flannel bag and
squeezed in.
Q. How do you manage the starching? and, first, the
making of starch ?
A. With cold water very gradually moisten a table-spoonful


of starch; when quite smooth stir into a pint of boiling water
with a morsel of white wax ; let it be boiled gently a few
minutes, stirring it all the time. When poured out, cover
it over with a plate to prevent a skin forming at top, which
is both troublesome and wasteful.
Q. How is it to be used ?
A . Let the muslin be first perfectly dry ; then dipped in
the starch before it is quite cold ; then dipped in cold water
and dried again *, then again dipped in cold water, spread
upon a coarse dry cloth and rolled up. By this mode they
will look clean, and their slicking to the ironing cloth will
be prevented.
Q. How do you proceed with folding l .
A, On the ironing board, first nicely scoured, or on a
perfectly clean deal table, spread a clean linen cloth, kept
on purpose. Turn shirts, shifts, bedgowns, &c., which are
washed inside outwards. If bone dry, sprinkle to a proper
dampness for the iron, and fold smoothly. Of shirts, the
collars, frills, and wristbands dipped in cold water and not
squeezed, will bring the whole shirt to a proper dampness.
In folding, separate such things as are to be ironed, such
as are for mangling, and such as are for drying rough.
Q. What articles are fit for mangling?
A, Chiefly table-cloths, baud towels, and other straight
things. N othing that has plaits or buttons should be mangled,
as they are liable to injury and cannot be made smooth.
Q. What are for rough drying?
A . Some people like sheets, hand towels, kitchen towels,
and children’s calico night-gowns done so.
Q. How must they be managed 1
A . Let them, before they are quite dry, be folded down
smooth, and creased just as if by the pressure of the iron :
let them lay so some hours, or a whole night; then hang
them, folded, on the line or horse, to become thoroughly dry
for putting away.
Q. What directions do you give for the ironing?
A . A blanket made of the thick flannel called Swanskin
should be kept on purpose ; a coarse cloth spread between
that and the board. In ironing, be careful first to rub over


something coarse, and of little value, lest fine things should
he either smeared or scorched. Have the heat of the iron
suitable to the thickness of the article about to be ironed ;
be careful to iron perfectly straight, and let every part of the
article be smoothed. Let all be thoroughly aired by the
fire, and immediately folded up and put away.
Q. Have you any further remarks to make 1
A. Yes. It falls within the laundrymaid’s province to
take care of the washing utensils ; also of the necessary in-
gredients—soap, starch, &c. In both these respects she may
save considerably to her employers by care and frugality.
Q. In what respects 1
A. Soap should be bought in dry warm weather, and kept
some months before using ; the best yellow soap is best for
washing; let it be cut with a strong twine, in pieces of a
suitable size, and slowly dried in the air. At washing time,
let her be careful that the soap is not left in the tub, or even
in a damp place ; let the blue bag be squeezed and hung up
immediately on being taken out of the rinsing tub. The fire
of the copper hole and ironing stove should not be suffered
to go out and require lighting again ; large coal and wood
should not be burnt in either, when cinders and small coal
would do. Let no more starch be made than is really
wanted; let the horse be kept constantly filled with linen,
that ironing and the ailing may be as nearly as possible
finished together; let the copper be nicely cleaned, the tubs
scrubbed, the line wound up in a skein and hung up out of
the dust, the pegs counted and put away, the ironing blanket
carefully dried (otherwise it is liable to moth,) the irons
scoured bright and hung in a dry place, and all restored to
order as soon as possible.


CHAPTER VIII.
DUTIES OF THE SEMPSTRESS AND DAIRYMAID.
Q. You spoke of a sempstress as being employed in families
of higher classes—what is her business 1
A. To do all kinds of plain needle-work, both in making,
marking, and mending. Some knowledge of dress-making
will also be desirable, as she will probably be required to
assist in that line, or to undertake It altogether if no lady's
maid is kept.
Q. What qualities will be particularly required in her
department ?
A. She should be especially neat, quick, orderly, and in-
genious, (or quick at imitating and contriving.)
Q. Can you give any particular directions for her use 1
A. She must have been thoroughly well instructed in every
branch of plain needle-work, before she can be competent to
undertake such a place, therefore many rules will be needless.
However, until she has acquired confidence by practice, the
following remarks may be useful:
J. Of cutting out. —Stiff linen or calico should be pre-
viously washed ; the work will then be more easily done,
and be more durable. If this is not done, allowance must
be made for shrinking, about one-sixteenth in a yard.
To secure exactness in cutting out, let a paper pattern be
first cut, and each gusset, wristband, &c., be cut out by it.
If a dozen or two small pieces ave cut from one another in
succession, the last will generally be found to vary from the
first considerably enough to spoil the setting or fitting of the
article.
Let nothing be torn or cut by guess, but every thing by
threads drawn.
By good contrivance, the pieces may be made to come cut
of one another, and all waste avoided.


2. Of Sewing. —Be careful to have needles and thread or
cotton in sufficient variety and of suitable size for the work
in which you are engaged ; let the needles be carefully pre-
served from becoming rusty or sticky ; and the thread from
exposure to the air, by which it would become rotten; above
all, keep the hands very clean.
Let every beginning and end be neatly and securely
fastened; nothing proves a slovenly worker more than to
see the seams unripping, or the ends giving way.
Let the stitches be set through, and of an even size; taking
care that that size be as small as consists with the fineness
of the article.
Let every turning down be straight and of an equal depth.
Let puckering be very carefully avoided. If a great length
is to be sewed (as in a sheet) it may be well for an inexperi-
enced workwoman to divide the whole length into quarters,
eighths, and even sixteenths, setting a pin or a stitch at
each, and begin sewing first at one end, and then at the
other, so continually changing the side that is towards her.
In collars, wristbands, &c., let a thread be drawn to guide
the stitching ; and a thread raised , but not drawn, to guide
the turning down at the edge. There should never be more
than two threads taken in a stitch.
In gathering, let the stitches be as small as will consist
with bringing the fulness into the space required. There
should be two rows of gathering, one about one-sixth of an
inch from the edge of the cloth; the other as near the edge
as may be without danger of ravelling. The latter row, by
confining the edge, _preserves a flat and neat appearance.
Gathers should be stroked down with a needle rather than a
pin, which should be held in a slanting, nearly flat direction;
if held upright it is apt to fray the cloth.
Button holes are best cut with a chisel.
Let buttons be sewed on very securely by stitching many
times through and through. It adds nothing of security,
but much of clumsiness to twirl a thread round and round
the button.
All ends of tape and bobbin should be sewed over, or over-
cast, and strftigs passing through a slide, should be fastened
in the middle.


3. Of Marking Let marking be performed with the ut-
most regularity as to the threads, and in double braid stitch,
or taking the first part of the stitch twice over before cross-
ing it.
In placing the figures and letters observe the following
order;—
If only the initial (or first letter) of the surname is to be
marked, place the figure directly under it; thus,
A
1
If the initials of surname and Christian name, place the
figure below and in the middle, thus,
B C
If there are two Christian names and surname for one
person, thus, DBF
3
If table linen, sheets, &c. are to be marked with the names
of a married pair, place the initial of the gentleman’s Christian
name to the left, that of the lady to the right, that of the
surname at top, and the number below ; thus,
I
G H
4
If the date is to be added, let it be placed below all, thus,
J f L or M° N
1836 1836
4. Of Mendifig. —Sheets may be twice turned ; first the
sides to the middle, and afterwards the ends to the middle ;
this should be done as soon as they become at all thin.
In grafting pieces, be sure to put the piece in very straight,
and let it be large enough to extend as far as the original
stuff has become at all thin. The piece should be previously
washed, or allowance made for shrinking. In printed cottons
or damask, be sure to make the patterns match.


In darning, let your cotton, worsted, or silk, be very soft j
let the stitches be regular; at the end of each row leave a
small loop to allow for shrinking, and let the darn extend as
far as there is any thinness.
Q. Have you any thing farther to say ?
A . Only that the sempstress will be required carefully to
inspect every article as it comes from the wash, and repair
as occasion arises ; also, that she should keep both her work
and working utensils in the neatest and most orderly manner,
to preserve from injury, and to have always at hand for use.
In order to secure the finest work being done perfectly clean
and neat, it may be well to have two kinds of work in hand,
devoting daylight to that which requires the greatest attention,
and reserving the rougher, or mending work, for candle
light.
Q. What are the qualifications of a dairy maid ?
A. The most perfect cleanliness is indispensible ; this,
with thoughtfulness and frugality, (added to the universal
requisites of honesty, steadiness, and general good behaviour)
will form a valuable dairy maid.
Q. Do you give any particular rules for the performance
of her business ?
A. One, who is placed in charge of a dairy will, most
likely, have had opportunities of acquiring practical know-
ledge on the subject, far more effectually than can be com-
municated-<by written directions: a few hints, however, may
be useful on the management of the animal, of the dairy
vessels, and of the produce.
Q. What have you to say respecting the cow ?
A, Her lodging place should be dry, clean, and warm.
The manger kept perfectly clean, and free from sour grains,
vegetables, &c. She should be regularly fed at sunrise,
sunset, and once or twice in the day besides. She should be
allowed exercise in the open air. Her best food is good fresh
grass, which she may be either allowed to graze, or have cut
and brought to her: by the latter plan, the grass goes further.
Her diet may occasionally be varied with cabbages, lettuce,
Swedish turnips, and carrots. Potatoes to be avoided ; or,
if given at all, must be boiled or baked : common turnips are
K


poor and watery food, but Swedish turnips nourishing ; of
carrots she may be allowed two pecks daily. Pure water is
of great consequence to her health and productiveness. The
hours of milking should be regular and early ; not later than
five o’clock either morning or evening. 13e careful that the
udder is perfectly drained.*
Q. What directions do you give about the dairy vessels ?
A. The churn?, pans, shelves, floor, walls, and every
thing about the dairy, must be kept perfectly clean. The
pans should be often boiled, and scalded with boiling water
every time of using. f The strainers and butter cloths
must be very thorougly washed and dried in the open air,
and the utmost care taken that nothing in the dairy acquires
a sour smell.
Q How must the milk be managed?
A. If the cow is feeding on turnips, a small piece of
nitre, (saltpetre) should be put into the pail before milking,
to prevent any ill taste. As soon as brought in, it must
be strained into large flat pans, or lids of wood or tin. The
cream must be skimmed off at twelve hours in the summer,
and at twenty-four hours in the winter. Let the cream be
shifted into clean pans—daily in winter, twice a day in
summer—stirring it several times a day with a wooden
spatula. Churning should take place at least twice a week
during summer. The cream must be strained into the churn
through a fine sieve or linen cloth. When once the process
of churning is commenced, no cessation must take place
until it be accomplished. Butter ought not to come in less
than three quarters of an hour. In summer the churn
should be filled with cold water an hour or so before
• The habit of leaving milk in (he udder is greatly injurious to
the health and productiveness of the cow, besides being extremely
wasteful; every succeeding drop of milk is richer than the one before
it: the last half pint gives twelve times as much butter as the first.
t In very hot dry weather, pans may be thoroughly washed in
cold water, then placed in the influence of the sun all day—bringing
them in just in time to be cool for receiving the-milk. This will
answer for several days, or even a week, at which intervals they
must be scalded as usual ; observe, this method will not do except
when the sun has very great power.


churning, and placed in a tub of cold water during churning.
In very cold weather, the churn may be placed near the fire,
or warmed with water. If the butter is very backward, a
table spoonful or two, (according to the quantity of cream)
of good vinegar may be mixed with a small quantity of
warm milk and put in the churn. When the butter is
thoroughly come, strain off the buttermilk, and put the
butter into cold water; afterwards divide it into small lumps
over a sloping board—beat it well with a wooden spatula,
until entirely free from milk and quite firm—a little salt
may be added, if approved. Then divide and weigh it;
make it up either in pats or rolls, laying each separately on
a damp cloth to prevent their sticking.
Q. How may butter be preserved for winter use ?
A, Let the salt be thoroughly dried before the fire, and
then rolled with a glass bottle till perfectly fine. Have a
wooden tub, or jar, of Nottingham stone ware unglazed;
put a layer of salt at the bottom, then put the butter, and
press it down with a hard wooden rammer; cover the top
with a thick layer of salt, so that when turned to brine, it
shall entirely cover the butter.
Q. Is it not in the province of the dairymaid to make
cheese ?
A. Yes ; for this purpose if very rich cheese be desired,
new milk only must be used; it may, however, be made of
half new and half skim milk, or even of skim milk alone.
The milk must be made as warm as new milk—not warmer,
or it will harden the cheese. Put in rennet* enough to turn
it, and cover it over. When thoroughly turned, gently
gather the curd with the hands to the sides of the tub,
letting the whey pass through the fingers till the whole is
cleared, and lading it off as it collects. The vat, (or mould
in which the cheese is to be formed) is next to be placed over
the tub with a straining cloth spread inside, large enough to
* The rennet is the stomach of a calf taken out as soon as killed.
It must be cleansed from the curdled milk which it contains, then
scoured inside and out with salt; and when well sailed, stretched on
a stick to dry.
K 2


cover the whole cheese ; the curd must then be put in with
the skimmer, and pressed close down with the hand. There
should be holes in the bottom and sides of the vat to let the
whey escape; as the curd sinks add more; finally leaving
two inches above the edge. The mass must be salted,
either by mingling salt with the curd when separated from
the whey, or by putting salt in the vat, and after the curd
has been dried, crushing it all to pieces among the salt by
squeezing it with the hands. Next lay a board under and
over the vat, and put it into the press; in two hours turn it
out and put on a fresh cheese cloth ; press it again for eight
or nine hours, and then salt it all over: turn it again in
the vat, and let it stand in the press fourteen or sixteen
hours, taking care to put the cheeses last made, under all.
Before putting them the last time in the vat, the edges
should be pared to make the cheese look smooth.


CHAPTER IX.
THE HOUSEKEEPER’S DUTY.
Q. What are the duties of the housekeeper ?
A. She is the representative of the mistress in all domestic
management, care, and authority. It is her province to
•overlook all the other female servants, to see that they
discharge their respective duties in a proper manner, that
they are faithful to their employers, that their general
-deportment is correct, and that peace and order are pre-
served among them ; that opportunities are afforded them
of observing the sabbath, and attending to religious duties.
In cases of improper conduct, she is to admonish, reprove,
report, or dismiss them, as the case may require. It is her
duty to order in, receive, pay for, keep account of, and
•regulate the consumption of various articles of housekeeping,
especially grocery, preserves, and other stores. She super-
intends the business of pickling, preserving, distilling, &c.
&c. She is often the dispenser of the charity of her em-
ployers, especially during the occasional absence of the
family.
Q . What then are her qualifications for the discharge of
these duties?
A. She should be a person of native good sense, some-
what cultivated by education, and matured by experience ;
her principles should be sound and well established ; her
temper well regulated, and her general deportment such as
to command both confidence and respect; more particularly
in her domestic arrangement, she should consult the wishes,
circumstances, and interests of her employers. She should
he an economist of her time, and exercise discretion, mo-
deration, and frugality in the dispensing of whatever is
entrusted to her charge.
In her intercourse with the servants, she should cultivate
K 3


habits of justice, impartiality, and kindness ; she should
maintain a firm and well regulated authority, and she should
discover a friendly sympathy with their wants, feelings, dif-
ficulties, and general circumstances. She should avoid
pride and insolence of office, (the sure marks of a little and
ungenerous mind :) also unjust partiality and prejudice, and
an arbitrary or censorious spirit; nor less so, improper
indulgence and connivance at real faults. She should be
careful to throw no temptation in the way of those placed
under her ; nor should she weaken their respect for her by
improper familiarity and tattling among them; especially
should she avoid discoursing on the affairs of the family.
Finally, as the almoner of her employers, she should be
benevolent, faithful, and active : feeling it a pleasure to be
employed in relieving the wants of others; taking pains to
discover and point out real objects of charity without par-
tiality and prejudice ; and exerting herself to the utmost of
her power in making whatever passes through her hands as
extensively and as really beneficial as possible.*
Q. Thus have we gone through the particular depart-
ments of domestic service—Have you any concluding
remarks to present 1
A . The servant who wishes to establish for herself a
respectable character, to promote her comfort and peace of
mind while in service, and to advance her interests in future
life, would do well to attend to the following suggestions:
1. Watch and improve every opportunity of gaining
knowledge, whether in your own department or in any other;
this will enhance your present value to your employers, and
qualify you for a higher station if such should offer.
2. In choosing a situation, learn to place a due estimate
on outward circumstances. That is not always the best
place, or one in which the servant is most likely to become
rich or happy, where the highest wages are given, or the
* Young persons are not educated for housekeepers, but generally
rise to the situation by oblaining Ihe confidence of their employers,
and proving themselves useful and capable of filling it. There is no
reason why she who is now a kitchen girl, if faithful, intelligent, and
observant, should not one day rise to be housekeeper.


most liberty allowed—choose rather a serious orderly family,
where the servants are regarded as fellow creatures, and
have opportunities afforded them of serving God; Then
both your expenses and your temptations will be fewer, and
you will be more likely to find a comfortable home, good
connexions, and opportunities of saving money.
3. Endeavour to live peacably with fellow-servants, but
not at the expense of truth or integrity,—bear and forbear,—
assist and forgive,—be no tale bearer or mischief maker.
Yet engage in no unjust schemes, nor connive at practices
which you know to be wrong, —nor conceal from your
employers any thing of which it is your duty to inform
them. Peace will never stand long that has not integrity
for its basis.
♦4. Cultivate a spirit of contentment with your station,—
every situation has its difficulties. They are never lessened,
but often aggravated by discontent, and may generally be
borne by a person of a cheerful contented mind. Take all
things together, the station in which Providence has placed
us, is more free from inconveniences than any other we
could choose for ourselves.
5. Endeavour to remain long in a place. The rolling
stone gathers no moss, and the often changing servant
neither makes friends, establishes a character, or gathers a
fund,—while she who lives years in a place is not likely to
want either.
6. Cultivate the friendship of your employers,—never
approach them but with becoming respect; yet if encouraged
to do so, consult them about your affairs. They will
generally be found the most safe, judicious, and disinterested
friends to whom you can apply for advice and assistance,
and your confidence in them will be likely to secure their
regard and interest in your welfare.
7. Be cautious what acquaintance you form, —avoid idle,
tattling busy-bodies,—those who covet secrets will be sure
to betray them; —avoid the dissolute, and the lovers of
pleasure, lest you learn of their ways, and get a snare to
your soul; —avoid those who would either confer or ask
favours that require concealment; such persons would lead


you to purloining and artfulness, and that would ruin your
peace and blast your character.
8. Avoid extravagance and finery in dress. The first
would consume your gains and make you poor when you
might be rich,* and both would expose you to temptations
of which you perhaps are little aware, and perhaps to
imputations which you do not deserve. When people dress
out of their station, they are generally suspected of having
improper means of supply.
9. Resolutely save something from your wages, however
low. It is harder to save the first five shillings, than the
next fifty ; but if you do not begin at first, it is most likely
you will never begin. In this respect make self denial and
perseverence your motto, and you will through life find the
comfort of having done so. Beside the pleasure of having
something to look to in case of sickness or settling in life, it
is accredit to a servant to have her name on the books of a
Savings' Bank, and tells well in her character any day.
10. Make a conscience of assisting your aged parents.
They’have the strongest claims on your gratitude and love, —
you owe them more than you can ever pay,—yet nothing
can contribute more to their happiness, than the assistance
rendered them in their declining years by a grateful dutiful
child ; and whatever sacrifices you may make of personal
gratification, will be abundantly requited in the satisfaction
and peace of mind resulting from such conduct. Beside,
the blessing of God especially rests upon dutiful children.
Honour thy father and thy mother, is the first commandment
with promise.
11. Guard against forming an imprudent or hasty con-
nexion. Receive no addresses, or at least make no promises
without consulting your parents, or your mistress, or both.
Such prudence may guard you against many snares. When
a virtuous attachment is formed, do not hastily quit service,
but remain till you have both saved something to begin
housekeeping with decency and comfort. If your love is
* A servant who earns six pounds a year and spends but five, is
richer than a nobleman whose income is thirty thousand, and his
expenses forty.


not strong enough to wait for this, you may marry and be
miserable, —but you are not likely to marry and be happy.
12. Live under the influence of religious principles.
Lead the Bible daily, and by it regulate your life. How-
ever correct your conduct before men, you are a sinner in
the sight of God. The Bible alone reveals to you a Saviour,
However prudent your conduct, and however prosperous
your lot in life, you must die. The Bible alone can teach
you how you may be happy after death. Begin and end
every day with prayer. Be regular and attentive in the
house of God, and consider yourself as interested in what
you hear. Esteem it a privilege to live in a family where
domestic worship is maintained and religious instruction
afforded, and let every transaction of your life be such,
that neither your prayers, nor your reading, nor hearing
shall reprove. In a word, do every thing in view of that
great account which you must one day render when masters
and servants shall stand before the bar of God, and be
judged according to the deeds done in the body, whether
they be good or whether they be evil.


PRELIMINARY ADDRESS
TO THE
PENNSYLVANIA ALMANACK,
ENTITULED
"Poor Richard's Almanack, for the Year 1758.”
WRITTEN BY DR. FRANKLIN.
I have heard that nothing gives an author so great pleasure
as to find his works respectfully quoted by other learned
authors. This pleasure 1 have seldom enjoyed ; for though
I have been, if I may say it without vanity, an eminent
author (of Almanacks) annually now a full quarter of a
century, my brother authors in the same way (for what
reason I know not) have ever been very sparing in their
applauses ; and no other author has taken the least notice
of me; so that did not my writing produce me some solid
pudding, the great deficiency of praise would have quite
discouraged me.
I concluded, at length, that the people were the best
judges of my merit, for they buy my works; and, besides,
in my rambles, where I am not personally known, I have
frequently heard one or other of my adages repeated, with
“As poor Richard says,” at the end on’t. This gave me
some satisfaction, as it showed not only that my instructions
were regarded, but discovered likewise some respect for
my authority; and I own, that, to encourage the practice
of remembering and repeating those wise sentences, X have
sometimes quoted myself with great gravity.
Judge then how much I have been gratified by an
incident which lam going to relate to you. I stopped my
horse lately where a number of people were collected at an
auction of merchant’s goods. '1 he hour of sale not being


come, they were conversing on the badness of the times ;
and one of the company called to a plain, clean, old man*
with white locks, •* Pray father Abraham, what think ye of
the times? Won’t these heavy taxes quite ruin the country?
How shall we be ever able to pay them? What would you
advise us to do?” Father Abraham stood up, and replied—
“lf you’d have my advice, I’ll give it you in short; * for a
word to the wise is enough ; and many words wo’nt fill a
bushel,’ as poor Richard says*” They joined in desiring
him to speak his mind ; and gathering round him, he pro-
ceeded as follows :
ft Friends, (says he) and neighbours, the taxes are indeed
very heavy ; and if those laid on by the government were
the only ones we have to pay, we might more easily dis*
charge them; but we have many others, and much more
grevious to some of us. We are taxed twice as much by
our idleness, three times as much by our pride, and fotir
times as much by our folly : and from these taxes the
commissioners cannot ease or deliver us, by allowing an
abatement. However, let us hearken to good advice,
something may be done for us; * God helps them that help
themselves,’ as poor Richard says in his Almanack.
“ It would be thought a hard government that should
tax its people one tenth part of their time, to be employed
in its service ; but idleness taxes many of us much more*
if we reckon all that is spent in absolute sloth, or doing of
nothing, with that which is spent in idle employments, or
amusements that amount to nothing. Sloth, by bringing
on diseases, absolutely shortens life. ‘ Sloth, like rust,
consumes faster than labour wears, while the key often used
is always bright,’ as poor Richard says. * But dost thou
love life ? then do not squander time, for that’s the stuff*
life is made of/ as poor Richard says. How much more
than is necessary do we spend in sleep! forgetting, that,
* the sleeping fox catches no poultry, and that there will be
sleep enough in the grave/ as poor Richard says. *lf
time be of all things the most precious, wasting time must
be (as poor Richard says,) the greatest prodigality / since,
as he elsewhere tells us, * Lost time is never found again !


and what we call time enough, always proves little enough. 7
Let us then up and be doing, and doing to the purpose:
so by diligence shall we do more with less perplexity.
* Sloth makes all things dfficult, but industry all easy/ as
poor "Richard says; and, ‘He that riseth late must trot all
day, and shall scarce overtake his business at night; while
laziness travels so slowly, that poverty soon overtakes him,’
as we read in poor Richard; who adds. ‘ Drive thy business,
let not that drive thee / and, ‘early to bed, and early to rise,
makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise/
“So what signifies wishing and hoping for better times ?
We make these times better if we bestir ourselves. * In-
dustry needs not wish/ as poor Richard says ; and * he that
lives upon hope will die fasting. There are no gains with-
out pains; then help hands, for I have no lands ; or if I
have, they are smartly taxed / and, as poor Richard like-
wise observes, * he that hath a trade, hath an eslale, and he
that hath a calling hath an office of profit and honour / but
then the trade must be worked at, and the calling well fol-
lowed, or neither the estate nor the office will enable us to
pay our taxes. If we are industrious we shall never starve ;
for, as poor Richard says, ‘ at the working man’s house
hunger looks in, but dares not enter/ Nor will the bailiff
or the constable enter; for, * Industry pays debts, but despair
increaseth them,’ says poor Richard. What though you
have found no treasure, nor has any rich relation left you a
legacy? ‘Diligence is the mother of good luck/ as poor
Richard says; and, ‘ God gives all things to industry ; then
plough deep, while sluggards sleep, and you will have corn
to sell and to keep/ says poor Dick. Work while it iscalled
to-day; for you know not how much you may be hindered
to-morrow; which makes poor Richard say, ‘One to-day is
worth two to-morrow;’ and further, ‘ Have you somewhat to
do to-morrow, do it to-day/ If you were a servant, would
you not be ashamed that a good master should catch you
idle? Are you then your own master, ‘be ashamed to catch
yourself idle/ as poor Dick says. W'hen there is so much
to be done for yourself, your family, and your gracious king,
be up by peep of day; ‘ Let not the sun look down and say,


Inglorious, here he lies ! handle your tools without mittens ; 9
remember, that f the cat in gloves catches no mice,’ as poor
Richard says. It is true there is much to be done, and per-
haps you are weak handed; but stick to it steadily, and you
will see great effects; for, ‘ continual dropping wears away
stones, and by diligence, and patience the mouse ate into the
cable; and light strokes fell great oaks,’ as poor Richard says
in his Almanack, in the year I cannot just now remember.
“ Methinks I hear some of you say * Must a man afford
himself no leisure? I will tell thee, my friend, what poor
Richard says ? * Employ thy time well, if thou meanest to
gain leisure; and since thou art not sure of a minute, throw
not away an hour/ Leisure is time for doing something use-
ful—this leisure the diligent man will obtain, but the lazy
man never ;so that, as poor Richard says— ‘ A life of leisure
and a life of laziness are two things.’ Do you imagine
that sloth will afford you more comfort than labour? No;
for, as poor Richard says —‘Troubles spring from idleness,
and grievous toils from needless ease ; many without labour
would live by their own wits only ; but they break for want
of stock.’ Whereas industry gives comfort, and plenty, and
respect. ‘ Fly pleasures, and they’ll follow you ; the diligent
spinner has a large shift; and, now I have a sheep and a cow,
every body bids me good-morrow all of which is well said
by poor Richard.
“ But with our industry, we must likewise be steady and
settled and careful, and oversee our own affairs with our own
eyes, and not trust too much to others ; for, as poor Rich-
ard says,
<( I never saw an oft removed tree,
Nor yet an oft removed family.
That throve so well as one that settled be.”
“ And again, ‘ Three removes are as bad as a fire and
again, * Keep thy shop, and thy shop will keep thee;’ and
again, ‘lf you would have your business done, go; if not,
send.’ And again,
* He that by the plough would thrive,
Himself must either hold or drive.’
L


And again, ‘The eye of the master will do more work than
both his hands;’ and again, ‘Want of care does us more
damage than want of knowledge and again, ‘Not to oversee
workmen is to leave them your purse open.’ ‘ Trusting too
much to others’ care, is the ruin of many—for, as the Alma-
nack says, ‘ In the affairs of the world, men are saved not by
faith, but by the want of itbut a man’s own care is pro-
fitable— ‘ for,’ saith poor Dick, ‘ Learning is to the studious,
and riches to the careful, as well as power to the bold, and
heaven to the virtuous/ And, farther, ‘lf you would have
a faithful servant, and one that you like, serve yourself.’
And again, he adviseth to circumspection and care, even in
the smallest matters, because, sometimes, ‘ A little neglect
may breed great mischief; adding, ‘ For want of a nail the
shoe was lost; for want of a shoe, the horse was lost; and
for want of a horse, the rider was lost;’ being overtaken and
slain by the enemy, all for want of care about a horse-shoe
nail.
“ So much for industry, my friends, and attention to one’s
own business ; but to these we must add frugality, if we
would make our industry more certainly successful. A man
may, if he knows not how to save as he gets, ‘ keep his nose
all his life at the grindstone, and die not worth a groat at last.*
‘ A fat kitchen makes a lean will,’ as poor Richard says ; and
* Many estates are spent in the getting;
Since women for tea forsook spinning and knitting,
And men for punch forsook hewing and splitting.’
“ ‘ If you would be wealthy, (says he, in another Al-
manack,) think of saving, as well as of getting : the Indians
have not made Spain rich, because her outgoes are greater
than her incomes.’
“ Away then with your expensive follies, and you will not
have much cause to complain of hard times, heavy taxes,
and chargeable families ; for, as poor Dick says,
‘ Women and wine, game and deceit.
Make the wealth small, and the want great.’
“ And farther, ‘ What maintains one vice would bring up
two children.’ You may think perhaps, that a little tea, or
a little punch now and then, diet a little more costly, clothes


a little finer, and a little entertainment now and then, can
be no great matter ; but remember what poor Richard says,
* Many a little makes a meikle-,’ and, farther, ‘ Beware of
little expenses ; a small leak will sink a great ship and
again, ‘ Who dainties love shall beggars prove ;’ and, more-
over, ‘Fools make feasts, and wise men eat them.’
“ Here you are all got together at this sale of fineries and
nicknacks. You call them goods; but if you do not lake
care, they will prove evils to some of you. You expect they
will be sold cheap, and perhaps they may for less than they
cost; but if you have no occasion for them, they must be
dear to you. Remember what poor Richard says, ‘ Buy
what thou hast no need of, and ere long thou shale sell thy
necessaries. * And again, ‘At a great pennyworth pause a
while.’ He means, that perhaps the cheapness is apparent
only, or not real; or the bargain, by straitening thee in thy
business, may do thee more harm than good. For in an-
other place he says, ‘ Many have been ruined by buying
good pennyworths.’ Again, as poor Richard says, ‘lt is
foolish to lay out money in a purchase of repentance and
yet this folly is practised every day at auction, for want
of minding the Almanack. * Wise men (as poor Dick says)
learn by others’ harms, fools scarcely by their own ; but
Felix quen faciunt aliena pericula cautum,’ Many a one,
for the sake of finery on the back, have gone with a hungry
belly, and half starved their families: ‘ Silk and satins,
scarlet and velvets, (as poor Richard says,) put out the
kitchen fire.’ These are not the necessaries of life ; they
can scarcely be called the conveniences ; and yet only be-
cause they look pretty, how many want to have them ? The
artificial wants of mankind thus become more numerous than
the natural; and, as poor Dick says, ‘ For one poor person
there are a hundred indigent.’ By these and other extra-
vagancies, the genteel are reduced to poverty, and forced to
borrow of those whom they formerly despised, but who,
through industry and frugality, have maintained their stand-
ing; in which case, it appears plainly, ‘ A ploughman on
his legs is higher than a Gentleman on his knees,’ as poor
L 2


Richard says. Perhaps they have had a small estate left
them, which they knew not the getting of; they think, ‘lt
is day, and will never be night;’ that a little to be spent out
of so much is not worth minding ; ‘A child and a fool (as
poor Richard says) imagine twenty shillings and twenty
years can never be spent; but always be taking out of the
meal-tub, and never putting in, soon comes to the bottom
then, as poor Dick says, ‘ When the well is dry, they know
the worth of water.’ But this they might have known be-
fore, if they had taken his advice : ‘lf you would know the
value of money, go and try to borrow some ; for he that goes
a borrowing goes a sorrowing; and, indeed, so does he that
lends to such people, when he goes to get it in again.’ Poor
Dick farther advises, and says,
* Fond pride of dress is sure a very curse :
Ere fancy you consult, consult your purse.’
And again, ‘ Pride is as loud a beggar as Want, and a great
deal more saucy.’ When you have bought one fine thing,
you must buy ten more, that your appearance may be all of
a piece; but poor Dick says, ‘lt is easier to suppress the
first desire, than to satisfy all that follow it.’ And it is as
truly folly for the poor to ape the rich, as the frog to swell
in order to equal the ox.
‘ Vessels large may venture more,
But little boats should keep near shore.’
’Tis, however, a folly soon punished ; for ‘ Pride that dines
on vanity, sups on contempt,’ as poor Richard says. And
in another place, ‘ Pride breakfasted with Plenty, dined with
Poverty, and supped with Infamy.’ And, after all, of what
use is this pride of appearance, for which so much is risked,
so much is suffered? It cannot promote health, or ease
pain, it makes no increase of merit in the person ; it creates
envy, ii hastens misfortune,
‘ What is a butterfly ? at best.
He’s but a caterpillar dress’d ;
The gaudy fop’s his picture just,’
as poor Richard says.


“ But what madness must it be to run in debt for these
superfluities ! We are offered by the terms of this sale six
months’ credit; and that perhaps has induced some of us to
attend it, because we cannot spare the ready money, and
hope now to be fine without it. But, ah ! think what you
do when you run in debt! You give to another, power over
your liberty. If you cannot pay at the time, you will be
ashamed to see your creditor : you will be in fear when you
speak to him, you will make poor, pitiful, sneaking excuses,
and by degrees come to lose your veracity, and sink into
base downright lying; for, as poor Richard says, ‘ The
second vice is lying; the first is running in debt/ And
again to the same purpose, ‘Lying rides upon debt’s back
whereas a free born Englishman ought not to be ashamed
nor afraid to speak to any man living. But poverty often
deprives a man of all spirit and virtue : ‘ It is hard for an
empty bag to stand upright,’ as poor Richard truly says.
What would you think of that prince, or that government,
who would issue an edict, forbidding you to dress like a
gentleman or gentlewoman, on pain of imprisonment or
servitude ? Would you not say, that you were free, have a
right to dress as you please, and that such an edict would
foe a breach of your privileges, and such a government tyran-
nical ? And yet you are about to put yourself under that
tyranny when you run in debt for such dress! Your creditor
has authority, at his pleasure, to deprive you of your liberty,
by confining you in a gaol for life, or by selling you for a
servant, if you should not be able to pay him. When you have
got your bargain, you may, perhaps, think little of payment;
but ‘ Creditors (poor Richard tells us) have better memories
than debtors:’ and in another place, he says ‘Creditors
are a superstitious sect, great observers of set days and times.’
The day comes round before you are aware, and the demand
is made before you are prepared to satisfy it. Or if you bear
your debt in mind, the term which at first seemed so long,
will, as it lessens, appear extremely short. Time will seem
to have added wings to his heels as well as at his shoulders.
* Those have a short Lent (saith poor Richard) who owe
money to be paid at Easter.’ Then since, as he says, * The
L 3


borrower is a slave to the lender, and the debtor to the
creditor / disdain the chain, preserve your freedom, and
maintain your independency: be industrious and free; be
frugal and free. At present, perhaps, you may think your-
selves in thriving circumstances, and that you can bear a
little extravagance without injury; but
* For age and want save while you may,
No morning sun lasts a whole day,’
as poor Richard says. Gain may be temporary and uncer-
tain ; but ever, while you live, expense is constant and
certain ; and *it is easier to build two chimneys, than to
keep one in fuel,* as poor Richard says. So, * Rather go to
bed supperless than rise in debt.’
‘ Get what you can, and what you get hold,
'Tis the stone that will turn all your lead into gold, 1
as poor Richard says. And when you have got the philo-
sopher’s stone sure, you will not complain of bad times, or
the difficulty of paying taxes.
“ This doctrine, my friends, is reason and wisdom : but,
after all, do not depend too much upon your own industry,
and frugality, and prudence, though excellent things; for
they may be blasted without the blessing of Heaven : and
therefore ask that blessing humbly, and be not uncharitable
to those that at present seem to want it, but comfort and
help them. Remember Job suffered, and was afterwards
piosperous.
“ And now, to conclude, * Experience keeps a dear school;
but fools will learn in no other, and scarce in that; for it is
true, we may give advice, but we cannot give conduct/ as
poor Richard says. However, remember this, ‘ They that
will not be counselled, cannot be helped/ as poor Richard
says ; and further, that ‘ If you will not hear Reason, she
will surely rap your knuckles/ !f
Thus the old gentleman ended his harangue. The people
heard it, and approved the doctrine, and immediately prac-
tised the contrary, just as if it had been a common sermon;
for tlie auction opened, and they began to buy extravagantly,


notwithstanding all his cautions, and their own fear of taxes.
I found the good man had thoroughly studied my almanacks,
and digested all I had dropped on these topics, during the
course of twenty-five years. The frequent mention he made
of me must have tired any one else ; but my vanity was
wonderfully delighted with it, though I was conscious that
not a tenth part of the wisdom was my own, which he
ascribed to me, but rather the gleanings that I had made of
the sense of all ages and nations. However, I resolved to
be the better for the echo of it ; and though I had first deter-
mined to buy stuff for a new coat, I went away, resolved to
wear my old one a little longer. Reader, if thou wilt do
the same, thy profit will be as great as mine.
I am, as ever, thine to serve thee,
Richard Saunders.


ANECDOTES, HINTS, &c.
PRACTICAL HINTS.
Servants should accustom themselves on all occasions to
answer a bell immediately. A household servant having
had an accident which disabled her arm, took her tinder box
into the nursery, and requested the nursemaid to strike a
light, which she did. By some accident, a spark communi-
cated to the clothes of a bed where two children were asleep.
After this the nursemaid remained half an hour in the
nursery, and left it without perceiving what had happened;
on her opening the door, the air fanned the spark, and in a
few minutes the slumberers were awakened by the flames
which surrounded them. The mother, who was confined in
an adjoining room, heard the children calling, “ Jane! there’s
fire in the bed!” but thought they said, “ a spider in the
bed !” Without therefore, being alarmed, she rang the bell,
which Jane immediately answered, and reached the spot jusi
in time to snatch the two babes from their perilous situation.
Had Jane reasoned one minute, as is too often done —‘‘The
bell is for me to dress the children—l will just finish what
I am doing, or I’ll fetch their shoes, or just fill this water
jug, and then go”—that minute would have rendered her
assistance useless, and the children might have perished.
In consequence of such delay, an old lady, who kept but
one servant, was burnt to death. She had a favourite dog,
and was in the habit of occasionally ringing for something
for it. The servant, upon hearing the bell, said, “ I need
not hurry, it is only something wanted for that tiresome
dog j” but her horror and distress was great, upon finding
when she did go, her mistress, an infirm and helpless old
lady, in flames, and so dreadfully burnt, that she expired
soon afterwards.


BAD MANAGEMENT.
[From Cottage Comforts, p. 12.]
“ There are the beds to be made, and the breakfast things
to be washed, and pudding and potatoes to be boiled for
dinner.” A bad manager receives these directions from her
mistress, and to work she goes, with bustle enough perhaps,
as if she would accomplish it all long before dinner time.
She makes the beds, and comes down to wash the breakfast
things—“ Oh, dear ! Oh, dear ! was ever any thing so pro-
voking I—not a drop of water in the kettle, and the fire just
out.” Then the sticks and the bellows go to work, (by the
way, I never knew any but a bad manager, who found it
necessary often to use the bellows ;) at length the water
boils, and the clock strikes—“ Why, what o’clock is that?
—my pudding ought to be in—and it is not made, nor any
water set on for it; well, I must use this, and do the tea
things afterwards.” The pudding is made, and put in half
an hour later than it should be; then to work again to heat
water for the tea things—it boils—but she must now first
put on the potatoes, or they will not be half done by dinner
time. The potatoes are put on, and the water poured out—
but now the family are assembled for dinner, the cloth must
be laid—and the potatoes are all but raw, and the pudding
but half boiled, and the water cold, and the tea things not
washed up, and the mistress displeased, and the house thrown
into confusion. It seems never to occur to a bad manager
that there are some things, which, if once set a-going, go on
by themselves. If she had but supplied the fire with coals,
it would have drawn up ; and set on the kettle, the water
would have boiled for the tea things, while she made the
beds; and the fire would have been at liberty for the pudding
water to be set on, and all the mischief would have been
prevented. How would this disposition do to be carried into
a. cottage ?


THE STORY OF HEGIAGE AND ABDARMAN.
[From the Cottager's Monthly Visitor.]
There are few faults of which young people, who have not
been carefully brought up, are so apt to be guilty as false-
hood, and a sort of deceit which is very nearly akin to false-
hood— the one being to tell a direct lie, the other to conceal
the truth, and to make things and actions appear what they
are not. Those who have had the blessing of being taught
their duty, and can read their Bible, must know how sinful
every kind of deceit is to the God of truth. Our Saviour
tells us that the Devil is the father of lies, and we know,
also, that it was by deceit and cunning, he tempted the
Mother of mankind to disobey God, and, thereby, to lose
the joys of Paradise. The same wicked spirit is still con-
tinually endeavouring to lead us into sin; and those who
would, perhaps, at first, shudder at the thought of telling a
direct lie, he may yet try to tempt to what is, in fact, as sin-
ful, and lead us to indulge in the habit of committing sly
actions, or of telling, what are very vulgarly and very
falsely called, white lies, which are often said, by ignorant
people, to do no harm \ let the person who tells them, how-
ever, consider, that they must do him very great and material
harm, and that whatever may be the pretence, it is always
wicked and dangerous to depart from the simple and safe
path of perfect truth. We are commanded to speak the
truth always , and woe be to him who shall, in any way,
wilfully disobey the laws of God I Let us then take heed,
and watch and pray, lest we fall into temptation: the sinful-
ness of our nature and the power of temptation are doubtless
great; but the power of Him whose grace is always at hand
to help and strengthen us is much greater; and if we will
earnestly seek it, we may be assured it will abundantly enable
us to resist the evil. Whatever may be the advantages
which a departure from the strict truth appear to offer us, we
may be quite certain that it will in the end be most fatal to


OUr happiness; whereas, “ Truth will always stand our
friend.”—The following true tale of the love of truth in an
heathen may shew us, as numberless other histories may
also do, how much it is our interest, as well as our duty, to
speak the truth in all things*
A celebrated warrior named Hegiage, who was as fero-
cious and cruel as he was brave, had, in one of his battles,
taken a great many prisoners ; and he commanded them all
to be put to death. As they were about to be led away to
execution, one of them said to Hegiage, ‘ You ought to spare
my life, for, one day, when Abdarman had uttered many im-
precations against your cruelty and injustice, I rebuked him,
and he has ever since been my enemy. ’ Hegiage demanded
if there were any witness to the truth of this, and he was
told that one of the other prisoners, who had just been con-
demned to death, had been present: this man was called
forward, and having borne witness to the fact, and thereby
procured the pardon of his fellow prisoner, was sternly asked
by Hegiage, whether Ae also had taken his part against Abdar-
man ? * No, sir, I did not think I ought,’ replied the honest
man. Hegiage, in spite of the fierceness of his character,
was struck with this courageous integrity, * Well,’ said he,
after a moment’s silence, ‘lf I were to grant you life and
liberty, would you still be my enemy ? * * No, sir,’ replied
the prisoner. *lt is enough,’ said Hegiage, * I depend on
your simple word, take your life, which is less dear to you
than truth ; and receive your liberty as the just reward of
your honesty.’ ” May we Christians remember and practice
the lesson thus given us by an Heathen,


PER
DAY.
PER
WEEK.
PER
MONTH.
PER YEAR.
5.
d.
£•
S.
d.
£•
S.
d.
£-
5.
d.
0
1
0
0
7.
0
2
4
1
10
5
0
2
0
i
2
0
4
8
3
0
10
0
3
0
i
9
0
7
0
4
11
3
0
4
0
2
4
0
9
4
6
1
8
0
5
0
2
11
0
11
8
7
12
1
0
6
0
3
6
0
14
0
9
2
6
0
7
0
4
1
0
16
4
10
12
11
0
8
0
4
8
0
18
8
12
3
4
0
9
0
5
3
1
1
0
13
13
9
0
10
0
6
10
1
3
4
15
4
2
0
11
0
6
5
1
5
8
16
14
7
I
0
0
7
0
1
8
0
18
5
0
2
0
0
14
0
2
16
0
36
10
0
3
0
1
1
0
4
4
0
54
15
0
4
0
1
8
0
5
12
0
73
0
0
5
0
1
15
0
7
0
0
91
5
0
6
0
2
2
0
8
8
0
109
10
0
7
0
2
9
0
9
16
0
127
15
0
8
0
2
16
0
11
4
0
146
0
0
9
0
3
3
0
12
12
0
164
5
0
10
0
3
10 0
14
0
0
182
10
0
TABLE
OF
EXPENSES, INCOME, OR WAGES.


THE CONTRAST.
Who is it each day in the week may be seen
With her hair short and smooth and her hands and face clean,
In a stout cotton gown of dark and light blue.
Though old, so well mended, you’d take it for new.
Her handkerchief tidily pinned o’er her neck.
With a neat little cap, and an apron of check ;
No great flouncing border, no ragged old lace,
But a hem nicely plaited sits close round her face.
A top coat of stuff, and an under of serge,
Without one hole or rip either little or large;
Her shift and her stockings all sound and all clean.
She’s never fine outside and dirty within.
Go visit yon cottage, though humble and poor,
’Tis so clean and so neat you might eat off the floor;
No rubbish, no cobwebs, no dirt can be found,
Though you hunt every corner and search all around.
Who sweeps it so nicely, who makes all the bread 1
Who tends her sick mother—who works by her bed?
‘Tis the neat Tidy Girl, she needs no other name;
At home and abroad she’s always the same.
THE CONTRAST.
Who is it on Sunday may often be seen
In a light showy gown of red, yellow, and green;
The sleeves loose and large, hanging down like two bags,
And a frill round her neck of old lace all in rags.
Her bonnet cocked up to display to the view
Long ringlets of curls and a great bow of blue.
With white cotton stockings and slippers so thin,
That the cold and the damp they must surely let in.
But this she don’t care for as Pride feels no pain,
And cold is just nothing to one that is vain ;
This being the case she has got but one coat,
And her shift is so ragged it’s not worth a groat,
W


Go see her to-morrow when Sunday is o’er,
You’ll never desire to look at her more ;
All ragged and tattered, all dirty and black,
Her clothes are just ready to fall off her back.
No neat cap or bonnet to cover her head,
O no! she likes twenty curl papers instead ;
An old ragged cloak o’er her shoulders is thrown,
And the name of a Slattern she cannot disown.
THE HAPPY SERVANT MAID.
Though mean be my portion, and humble my birth.
And laborious and lowly my station on earth;
Though my name in the annals of fame be unknown,
Nor splendour, nor gaiety, call me their own,
Yet I’m sure (though the great ones may reckon it strange)
I would not my lot with a monarch exchange;
For I’ve often been told that a king on his throne
Has vexations and toils which to me are unknown,
And pleasure’s a phantom and honour’s a name,
And slander’s shrill blast drowns the echo of fame;
And the cares and the sorrows attendant on wealth
Oft’ mar the enjoyment and ruin the health.
Now I’ll tell you my habits and then you may see
Who on earth may be blither and happier than me.
I rise with the lark—this conduces to health.
As well as to cheerfulness, wisdom, and wealth,
Thus my plan, and my work, and my time are my own,
And all is in order when mistress comes down;
I should hate, when I heard her to hurry and run
As if this were untidy and that were undone,
Her kind spoken orders with ease I fulfil,
For labour is light when performed with good will.
I would wish to avoid what might grieve or offend.
If reproved, hear with meekness and strive to amend;
If aught I’ve neglected or injured or broken,
’Tis but right that the truth be immediately spoken;
Thus I ’scape the temptation to falsehood and shame,
And establish my credit, respect, and good name;
My apparel is plain, yet decent and good,
I would not be tawdry and fine if I could;
Nor would I be dainty and choice in my fare
Though the cost and the payment are none of my care.


I’m thankful for plenty, but waste I abhor,
'Tis a robbery, metbinks, of the sick and the poor;
For oft a nice morsel that mistress bestows.
Were I wasteful and careless ’tis they that must lose.
The work of each day, be whatever to do,
I like to go quickly and steadily through;
Nor leave things half finished or half cleared away,
Nor burden to-morrow with cares of to-day;
And on Saturday evening I love to forecast
How the Sabbath in sacred repose may be passed;
But when all is done 1 can sit down at rest.
To sewing or reading, as pleases me best.
My mind to improve or my garments to mend.
Or some little kindness perform for a friend.
Till the parlour bell rings at the hour of prayer
This ended in peace, to my rest 1 repair;
With no crimes to disturb me, no cares to annoy,
And how sweet and refreshing the sleep I enjoy
And what though my wages are not very high,
I find them sufficient my wants to supply.
I have bought a good Bible, for that you no dorbt
Will allow is a treasure I can’t do without.
And then, ’tis but right 1 should send a small part
To my dear aged parents, to comfort their heart;
While a snug lltte mite in the Savings’ Bank placed,
To myself may prove useful when labour is past;
Yet enough still remains to provide me with care
In all that’s befitting a servant to wear.
Come morning, come evening, I’m fit to be seen;
If so happy a maiden—then who’d be a queen?
B.
THE NURSEMAID.
Good Sir, —I’ve just read in your first Magaaine
Of a servant comparing herself to a queen;
And suspect (if I’m not very greatly mistaken)
’Tis my good sister Betty has there undertaken,
For your reader’s instruction to set down in rhyme.
How she manages business, and money, and time. 4
In all she has written I fully agree;
No mortal is happier than Betty and me:
But as she is a housemaid and I am a nurse.
My story will tell rather different in verse;
M 2


So I hope you’ll accept it, and .not pour contempt
On Nanny the housemaid’s first humble attempt:
I was young when I first went to service, ’tis true,
And like other young people, but little I knew;
But my parents thus charged me, “ Be just and upright,
And still keep the fear of your Maker in sight;
And mind, too, whatever your mistress may say.
You attend, recollect, and exactly obey.
Keeping close to her orders you can’t well displease,
And experience and knowledge will grow by degrees ;
But don’t be conceited, and forward, and vain,
Or you’ll never true wisdom and goodness attain.”
Their sober advice I’ve endeavoured to mind,
And its truth and importance still daily I find.
At first, my go;d mistress again an 1 again.
Would with patience her maxims and motives explain,
Till at length to her habits quite thoroughly grown.
She is never afraid now to trust me alone.
If by illness confined, or gone out for the air.
She knows all goes on just as if she were there:
As she passes the nursery, and takes a kind peep
At the children at play time, at meals, or asleep.
With pleasure her voice and her footsteps I hear.
For I’ve nothing to hide, and I’ve nothing to fear;
My mistress’s orders and plans are so good,
I wish they were every where well understood.
Then hear, ye young nursemaids, the rules she has taught;
When an infant is first fo the nursery brought,
Tldnk how precious the charge! let it constanly share
Your watchfulness, tenderness, cleanliness, care;
Keep it warm and well nurtured; yet don't overload
Its body with clothes, or its stomach with food: •
In all things distinguish too much from enough;
Be gentle, yet lively; and active, not rough;
If, disordered ami restless, the baby should cry,
Never venture an opiate or cordial to try;
Though some ignorant neighbour should strongly advise,
You know not what mischiefs from hence may arise:
If ’lis suddenly ill or in violent pain.
Seek quickly some proper advice to obtain—
Call the mother, if near, or her medical friend.
On immediate attention its life may depend.
If accustomed betimes on the carpet to crawl,
’Twill acquire skill and strength, and ’scape many a fall:
Then be sure when you guide its first efforts of speech,
You are careful no lisping or nonsense to teach ;
When beginning its toys and its pastimes to choose,
Neither weakly indulge nor perversely refuse;


If it chooses to play with a knife or the fire,
’Twill be needful to know to correct the desire :
All its innocent wishes with pleasure fulfil.
But yield not to stubbornness, pride, or ill will;
When passion and violence struggle and cry.
Though painful the conflict, you must not comply ;
But when humbled he seeks you, by penitence driven.
Let the fault be at once both forgot and forgiven.
In your language be simple and clear as you can,
Let no sort of deception e’er enter your plan;
Never threaten with objects terrific and vain,
Nor mislead or mispromise compliance to gain;
Be it always your care that each sister and brother
Be gentle, obliging, and just to the other:
Not for worlds let a single expression or word
From your lips, that’s profane or indecent, be heard,
In song or in story, in earnest or jest;
Or a book lay about that might poison his taste;
Be your tales and your ditties not vulgar nor vain—
The sweet stories of scripture will best entertain ;
Hymns, poems, and rhymes to a plentiful store.
You safely may add to your nursery lore;
They will aid yon some simple devotion to teach,
To the first dawning efforts of reason and speech;
And, O think ! if your charge at some far distant day.
Looking back to the years of his childhood, should say :
“ Receive the warm tribute of gratitude due,
I imbibed my first lessons of goodness from you ”
What blissful emotions would wake in your breast,
Cheer your labour, and soften your pillow of rest.
Far different fter feelings who has to reflect.
On a nurseling destroyed by her vice and neglect;
Sin’s fearful weeds growing till ripe for the curse,
From the seeds in young infancy sown by his nurse;
Thus taught by my mistress, I’ve ever since tried
By such precepts my conduct and actions to guide :
Alas! I oft fail, and come short every day,
But for grace and assistance 1 earnestly pray.
I am happy in master and mistress’s favour,
And a blessing, 1 trust, crowns my humble endeavour.
With pleasure I see the dear children I love.
Rising up to their parents rich comforts to prove.
Though some of them now have grown out of my care.
In their kindest remembrance I still have a share :
There’s Edward, and Catherine, and Emma, and Fanny,
When from school they write home, send their love to poor Nanny,
Each holiday once in the nursery they dine,
Dear hearts! and I love them as if they were mine;


And Miss Anna, the eldest, just turned of sixteen,
(As fine a young lady as ever was seen,)
Brought me home a new gown—in the nursery left,
And ’twas wrote on “ Affection’s and gratitude’s gift.’'
Three dear little boys still remain in my trust—
I can’t bear to think on’t, but come the time must.
When for school they must leave me, or I leave before.
For they’ll soon stand in need of a nursemaid no more ;
Then perhaps (but I scarcely can make up ray mind)
I may settle, for William 1 think would be kind;
And we’ve each of us laid a few pounds up in store.
To furnish our cot, and keep want from the door.
But, married or single, I am not afraid,
1 shall e’er be left friendless, or begging my bread ;
Whatever distresses my course may attend,
My master and mistress I know will befriend ;
And each child has been trained to assist in her need.
The nurse who in infancy pillowed its head.
All the prime of my days and my vigour gone past,
And poor feeble Nanny quite worn out at last;
I believe they would soothe all my sorrows and pains.
And point to the world where trne blessedness reigns ;
And read for my comfort when I cannot see.
The scriptures they learnt when they sat on m y knee ;
When the joys and the sorrows of earth I resign,
And a portion “ far belter” I trust shall be mine.
They may wander perhaps 'neath the yew tr ee’s dark shade.
And seek the green hillock that covers my h ead ;
To their children may point out the spot wit h a tear.
And say, “ Faithful Nanny, who nursed me, lies here.’'


LINES
Written bp a youny woman when in the capacity of a servant.
Extracted from a small volume of occasional Poems, price Ij.,
published since her death for the benefit of three infant children,
Though servitude’s my destined lot.
And I am doomed to roam
Far from my native peaceful cot.
Far from my friends and home:
Yet ever be His bounty blest.
Whose hand bestows my food ;
I know what He appoints is best.
And must be for my good.
If God saw fit to make me great.
He would not this deny ;
And while I’m in a meaner state,
He will my wants supply.
Ordained this humble state to fill.
Though destitute of wealth,
I can't be poor while I have still
Contentment, peace, and health.
Let virtue be my early choice.
Let Jesus be my guide ;
I’ll hearken to Religion’s voice.
And give up all beside.
Then let each murmuring whisper cease.
Each earth-born care subside;
I’ll rest upon the word of grace.
For God will still provide.
A SERVANT MAID.
JOHN TOMKINS.
[From “ Original Poems."]
One honest John Tomkins, a hedger and ditcher,
Although he was poor did not wish to be richer;
For all such vain wishes to him were prevented
By a fortunate habit of being contented.


Tffo’ cold was llic weather and dear was the food,
John never was found in a murmuring mood,
For this he was constantly heard to declare.
What he could not prevent he would cheerfully bear.
For why should I grumble and murmur he said,
If I cannot get meat, I can surely get bread ;
And though fretting may make my calamities deeper.
It cannot procure bread and cheese any cheaper.
If any one wronged him or treated him ill.
Why John was good humoured and sociable still;
For he said that revenging the injury done,
Would be making two rogues, where there need be but one.
And thus honest John, though his station was humble.
Passed through this sad world without even a grumble;
And ’twere well if some folks, wdio are greater and richer.
Would copy John Tomkins the hedger and ditcher. 1
FINIS.
*>• TKG O AM) CO. PRINTERS, OEOKdE STREET.
