

• * *
«*IJI
BENSON, PRINTER, 180 NAPIER STREET, FITZROY.
•■
Z PE/lOE-OKTE SHILLING. $
I &
y : ~ }
u CZjf cna tw&fd e|p cmsjw® #
I MSI 1H I
i The gjjcpl
! i
* BEING AN 9
i I
| ACCOUNT OF NINE MONTHS WORK IN THE TABERNACLE |
<S 9
9 BACKVILLE STREET, COLUNQWOOD, *
I ASD A |
| VINDICATION OF CHARACTER, |
J BY THE REV. W
JOHN ALEXANDER DOWIE, J
4 &
Minister of the Free Christian Church, Fitzroy. |P
S:|v : ■ &
| WITH APPENDIX. . |
I I
A--- i
<H JRelhomiire: . fP
5 i
HENRY COOKE. PUBLISHER, 24 SWINSTON STREET SOUTH.




Sin in
THE CAMP:
BEING AN
Recount 0f |ptu gtatjis Work in % Cabmtaxle,
SACKYILLE STREET, COLLINGWOOD,
AND A
VINDICATION OF CHARACTER,
By the Eey.
JOHN ALEXANDER DOWIE,
Minister of the Free Christian Church, Fitzroy.
WITH APPENDIX.
JUjjffom'its:
HENRY COOKE, PUBLISHER, 24 SWANSTON STREET SOUTH.
—o—
1 8 8 3.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
INTRODUCTION.
CHAPTER I.—A PERSONAL RETROSPECT ... 5
lI.—HOW I CAME TO COLLINGWOOD ... ... 10
lII.—THE CONDITION IN WHICH I FOUND THE
TABERNACLE ... ... ... ... 11
IV.—MY SAVIOUR’S VICTORIES ... 14
V.—SIN IN THE CAMP 16
VI.—MANY ADVERSARIES ... ... ... 36
The Spiritualists and other Infidel Blasphemers 37
The Liquor Traffic and its Defenders ... 40
The Bacchanalian Legion in Parliament ... 57
The Betrayers op the Temperance Cause ... 68
My Christian Critics. 62
VII.—THE CHBRBURY CORRESPONDENCE ... 66
„ VIII.—HE CAME, HE SAW, HE RAN AWAY. ... 76
IX.—CLOSING SCENES OF MY MINISTRY IN
THE TABERNACLE ... 80
X.—FALSE CHARGES—TRUTHFUL EXPOSURES 84
XL—FORMATION OF THE FREE CHRISTIAN
CHURCH 99
XII.—THE FUTURE—“HE KNOWS.” ... ... 103
Resolution op Stewards re Pamphlet... ... 105
APPENDIX ... ... ... ... 106-112


SIN IN THE CAMP
CHAPTER I.
“ I live for Christ who loves me,
For hearts that know me true ;
For yon heavens that smile above me,
And wait my coming too ;
For the cause that needs assistance,
For the wrongs that need resistance,
For the future in the distance,
For the good that I may do.”
So many rumours have been circulated concerning my past career
in the Christian ministry, and otherwise, that, at the urgent request
of many friends, I will briefly state the principal facts.
Born in 1847, at Edinburgh, Scotland, and educated there, I
came with my parents, in 1860, to Adelaide, South Australia.
Entering into commercial life at once with my pen, I continued
therein, not without success, for seven years. Having at a very
early age consecrated my life to Christ, I began to study, at the end
of 1867, with a view to entering upon the Christian ministry ; and
for that purpose I returned to Scotland, where I studied at
Edinburgh University, and elsewhere. After this, I came back to
South Australia, and was ordained to the office of pastor at Alma,
on the 21st of May, 1872, by seven of the foremost ministers in the
Congregational Union of that colony. I found the church at Alma
almost empty, having been for years without a settled pastor. Many
souls were saved, several important preaching stations were estab-
lished, large congregations were gathered, and the fruits of my ministry
there remain to this day. After nine months labour, I resigned,
being in weak health, and returned to Adelaide.. But the church
has never been without a settled pastor since that time, and from it
another and larger church has sprung. For many months I was
very ill—preaching but little. When I partially recovered, I was


invited to minister to a large suburban Congregational Church ; but
I declined, having determined to leave the colony, the climate of
which did not suit me. I went to Sydney, New South Wales, in
September, 1878, an entire stranger to all there. I was at once
invited to supply a Church at the beautiful sea-side suburb of
Manly. There was no Church or School formed, and no minister
had ever been settled there. Within a month the building was
crowded to its utmost capacity, and I accepted a call to become the
minister, stipulating that it was to be for a year only, as I hoped to
be strong enough to return to Scotland thereafter. During my
ministry many souls were saved, a strong Church, a large Sabbath
School, and a Young Men’s Christian Union were formed, the
building was improved and much enlarged, class rooms were added,
and everything was paid for when finished. This was the work of
sixteen months. At the end of that period, I was strongly urged
to remain, but although I greatly loved the place and people, I felt it
my duty to do more work, now that health was returning, although I
was not strong enough to return to Scotland, as I had hoped.
Many offers were now made to me. At last, after much prayer for
guidance, I accepted a call to the pastorate of Newtown Congre-
gational Church, Sydney, one of the most important charges in the
denomination. Camden College, where the students for the Con-
gregational ministry were being trained, was close by, and its
proximity to the University, besides being surrounded by a large
mixed population, made it an interesting sphere of work. During
my ministry there, many souls were saved, and a considerable debt
was almost entirely removed, without any outside appeals for money.
I remained there exactly three years, from February, 1875, to
February, 1878. I intimated my intention to resign, and to retire
from the Congregationalists as a denomination, in October, 1877,
but, at the unanimous request of the Church, I retained my pastorate
for nearly four months longer, until they had secured the services of
a minister, then in England, to succeed me there. The Congre-
gational ministers of Sydney and suburbs, at a meeting of their
Fraternal Association, passed a unanimous resolution strongly pro-
testing against my retirement from the Congregational Union, and
earnestly urging me to retain my connection therewith. But I was
obeying the voice of conscience, and the leadings of the Holy Spirit,
and, at its next session, I resigned my membership, as a minister of
the Union. I was thus free from all denominational trammels in the
work to which God had, I believed, called me.
Thus ended my career in the ordinary work of the ministry,
regarding which so many scandalous things have been whispered.
And as this is the first time I have even noticed these, let me here
challenge my cruel detractors to impugn the correctness of the facts
I have stated. I will say more. It has been basely rumoured that
it was by compulsion I retired from the Congregational ministry,


and from my pastorate. The facts now given refute that. But I
will take this opportunity also to say three things very emphatically.
First, no adverse vote or resolution of any kind was ever passed or
brought against me by any Church or organization of any kind, nor
even a hint of such a thing, at any period of my life. Second, I
never retired from any position other than of ray own free
will, nor from any position which had become untenable: for had
I chosen, I could have remained in any of my three pastorates in the
Congregational ministry until this day. And, third, I never
retired from other than conscientious motives, without being in any
degree influenced by pecuniary or social considerations, or aught of
a selfish or mercenary nature, but the contrary. The last of these
assertions is sufficiently proved by the fact that, when I quitted the
Congregational ministry, I also laid down a good salary, a comfort-
able manse, and an influential ecclesiastical and social position, to
enter upon harder work, without regular salary, without any house,
except such as I could provide for myself, and to pursue a line
of action where ecclesiastical opposition and social ostracism were
certainties. The other two assertions are indisputable facts. They
who deny their truth must produce their proofs. If they still deny,
but do not attempt to prove their calumnies, their name is written
on their faces. And there I leave it.
It was in February, 1878, that I stepped upon what I have called
from that day the Free Christian Platform. Holding with unshaken
confidence the fundamental principles of all evangelical churches,
I felt it to be my duty to endeavour to reach, more directly
and personally, the perishing multitudes around me. Therefore, I
preached in the theatres and public halls of the city of Sydney, and
used, as largely as I could, the press and platform to make known
the Gospel, to destroy the vices of intemperance and infidelity, and
to proclaim righteousness. More than three hundred thousand
copies of twenty-four tracts, written by myself were distributed freely,
and by their means many souls were won. Many of these tracts
have been reprinted in the colonies, and in America, and I rejoice
io know that God has graciously used and blessed them. By these,
by pamphlets on various stirring themes, and by open air-preaching,
many thousands of souls were constantly reached ; and in the
theatres and halls many were eternally saved. For nearly three
years this Mission was continued, until I and my friends felt that
the time had come for retaining the converts and forming them into
a Free Christian Church. But we have since found that we were
mistaken—God had other experiences and severer discipline for me
in store, ere I was to see the plummet in my hands to build. Plani
were being discussed for the building of a I ree Christian Tabernacle.
We had determined not to form a Church until we had built for it
a house. A large sum of money was suddenly offered by one
person, sufficient to build a place for nearly three thousand souls.


The promise seemed to bankers and landowners in Sydney, to rest
upon good foundation, and, on the faith of it, money and land were
offered to me. But from accepting such offers I was mercifully
preserved : for the “ generous donor,” as a Sydney paper called him,
turned out to be a worthless swindler and rogue. This, however, was
not discovered until far on in 1881 ; and, meanwhile, I had left Sydney
at the end of December, 1880, en route for England, there to
meet the “ generous donor.” When I reached Adelaide, I was
detained there unexpectedly by letters from him speaking of his
speedy return to Australia, and asking me to wait for him in that
city. Weary months followed, and then the truth slowly became
known. Bankers, lawyers, merchants, and other keen business men
in Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, New York, London, Plymouth, and
Macclesfield, had all been deceived by a clever scoundrel, with forged
credentials, a smooth tongue, great simplicity of manners, and most
accomplished hypocrisy. How he, succeeded would take a volume to
tell, and this is not the time nor place to say more concerning this
singular incident in my life. I only refer to it now, because it is a
necessary part of my present task. It is a story which, if fully told,
might take rank amongst the romances of crime, a kind of work for
which I have neither time nor inclination. But even out of this
incident, scandalous rumours against me have been circulated by
those who delight in lies. Need I say that, amongst this rogue’s
numerous victims, I was not the least sufferer: for time, money,
strength and prospects were sacrificed through him to a most serious
extent. Yet in all my trial, I have seen God’s gracious design,
permitting, for ends I do not yet fully see, these disappointments
and sorrows. When at last the truth was fully known, the waters
seemed dark and dread around me, and it was some time before I
was again fit for service. Not that I had been idle during these
months of suspense. I had visited my old friends at Alma and
preached among them, finding many faithful ; and some I had visited
upon the Northern Areas, who were saved under my ministry nine
years before, finding them successfully labouring for the Lord in
many ways, with large Christian families around them. And for
five months, from May to October, 1881, I aided the Salvation
Army, which had just landed its first officers in Australia, and
whilst I saw much to admire, yet I saw not a little to deplore, in
tliat most significant and peculiar organization. However, 1 felt it
my duty, in its darkest and weakest days, whilst struggling to get
a footing, to help it, by preaching and lecturing, and by defending it
by voice and pen against its many foes. But I was never an officer
or member of the Army, and for my many months of labour with it,
I never sought nor received any money consideration. I saw
hundreds of souls profess to be saved, scores of whom were genuine
converts, and in that respect 1 had a rich recompense. But of other
reward I had none, excepting that which 1 have been privileged often


to receive—the last of the beatitudes, spoken of by Christ in
Matthew v. 11, 12. In November, 1881, I came to Melbourne,
intending to return, after a short stay in Victoria, to Sydney, there
to take up the broken threads of my three years evangelistic work in
that city. For several months I explored the moral wastes of the
city, visited gaol, hospital, houses of refuge, churches, missions, &c.,
and formed some estimate of what was being done, and especially of
what was left undone, in Christian and philanthropic work. I found
here, as elsewhere, that infidelity and spiritualism were slaying their
thousands, that the liquor traffic was slaying its tens of thousands,
and that a formal and cold travesty of Christianity was responsible
for the awful condition of hundreds of thousands in this land. My
soul was deeply stirred, and I felt a strong inclination to remain, at
least for a time, in a city which was so evidently the most powerful
centre of Australian life, the real capital of Oceania, where good work
done for Christ must permeate throughout this New World in the
South, which our race are ruling and peopling. An unforeseen event
detained me. The then lecturer for the Victorian Association of
Spiritualists thrust upon me a controversy which protracted my
stay. It was conducted by correspondence, afterwards published by
my friends in a pamphlet, entitled, “ Spiritualism Unmasked,” and
which I remained here to write an Introduction to, and to see through
the press. That work completed, I was ready, and was arranging
to return to Sydney at the end of April, 1882, when the events
occurred, which have led to my remaining until now. These events
more properly belong to another chapter, to which this is but
introductory.
In closing this retrospect, I desire to say that I have confined
myself to facts, of which numerous proofs exist. I place it on
record as a fair epitome of my ministerial life, until a year ago, a
record which, I am sure, no one can successfully impeach. And
there I leave it, grateful to God, “ who counted me faithful, putting
me into the ministry,” and grateful for the measure of success which
He has given me in it. 1 now proceed to give an account of my
stewardship for the past year, concerning which my integrity has
been publicly and privately, but, as I shall show, falsely assailed by
those who owe me both gratitude and money for services, rendered
for Christ’s sake, to them in time of trouble. The question which
the reader will find he has to answer now is—Did I suddenly give
the lie to my whole past life, and for some paltry and mean purpose,
betray my Lord and His cause ? With the facts which the follow-
ing chapters contain, I have supplied the material for an intelligent
and honest answer. Such an answer I desire.


CHAPTER 11.
goto | mm to Collm^tooob.
“ Where our Captain bids us go,
’Tis not ours to murmur No ;
He that gives the sword and shield
Chooses too the battle field.”
On the afternoon of Monday, May Ist, I was engaged in writing
a letter to a friend in Sydney, informing him of my purpose to
return there on a certain day, and requesting him to make certain
arrangements for a meeting shortly after my arrival. But an
unaccountable and irresistible conviction that I should not then
finish or post the letter, made me to rise from my desk and leave the
room. Immediately after, I met my valued friend Mr. Henry
Cooke, of 24 Swanston Street, Melbourne, who said that he was at that
moment about to write to me concerning a matter of some import-
ance. He then informed me that Mr. C. M. Cherbury, minister of
the Tabernacle, Sackville Street, Collingwood, had that day called
upon him, and said, that owing to a serious failure of health, he
would either be compelled to go away for some time, or possibly
completely and permanently become disabled. Under these circum-
stances, he asked Mr. Cooke whether I could be induced to take his
place during his absence, expressing at the same time his high
opinion of, and entire confidence in, me. Mr. Cooke said he had
promised to put the matter before me, and did so very earnestly,
urging me with much impressiveness to give the proposal prayerful
and thorough consideration, after making needful enquiries into the
condition of work, &c. I was amazed at this totally un of
proposition, and told Mr. Cooke of the unfinished letter then lying
upon my desk, and why I had left it there. This strongly confirmed
my friend in his conviction that I would be following the guidance of
the Holy Spirit, if I considered Mr. Cherbury’s proposal ; and I
agreed with him.* Interviews with Mr. Cherbury followed, I visited
the Tabernacle, saw the various branches of the work in operation
there, preached two sermons on successive Lord’s Days, had consul-
tations with the stewards of the Church and with other members,
and got some idea both of what was done, and of what needed doing.
Meanwhile, Mr. Cherbury and all associated with him, seemed eager
for me to decide ; and he, and his wife especially, gave me most
alarming and distressing accounts of his mental condition, saying
that he would soon go to a lunatic asylum or the grave, if he was
* See in Appendix 1 a letter from Mr. Cook, published in the Southern
Cross of March 17, 1883, confirming these statements.


not speedily relieved from the burdens of his position. These
considerations, and the state of the work, impressed me deeply, with
the urgency of the appeals made to me. Therefore, I agreed to
accept the unanimous invitation of the Church and all its office-
bearers, presented to me at a meeting held in the Tabernacle, on the
evening of Monday, May 15th, 1882, to become the pastor pro. tern.
On the following Lord’s Day, May 21st, I entered upon the entire
charge of the Tabernacle. Mr. Cherbury went to Tasmania, for a
few days, and, at the request of the stewards, I wrote an appeal to
the Church and the Christian public to provide him with money to
cover his expenses to Europe and back. I embodied in that appeal
the substance of a memorandum which he wrote for me giving his views
of the rise, progress, and then condition of the work; and he saw and
fully approved of that appeal, both in manuscript and in type, before
it was issued. I have made that remark because the circular
contains the clearest confirmation of my statements, as to the
position which I had agreed to occupy during Mr. Cherbury’s
absence in the following words : —“ It may now be stated that after
much prayer for Divine guidance, the oversight of this work, in all
its parts, has been committed to the Rev. John Alex. Dowie, late of
Sydney, with the unanimous consent and approval of the Stewards,
the Church, and all concerned.” The appeal was printed in
thousands, was widely distributed, and I procured its insertion as a
supplement to the Southern Cross of 20th May. It resulted in the
total sum of £l6l 9s. 9d. being raised ; and, when I remarked to
Mr. Cherbury that this sum was insufficient for the long absence he
contemplated, he expressed himself grateful and satisfied. I have
since been informed that several considerable sums were received by
him privately. On June 13th, he sailed for London, per “Lusitania,”
after preaching a farewell sermon, and delivering a farewell speech,
in both of which he referred to me in terms of deepest gratitude and
fullest confidence. I was now left alone to deal with a condition of
affairs which I will now proceed to describe, so far as words and my
limited space will permit.
CHAPTER 111.
Oe (toifriticm m fojricjr <J fatmfc % Cabentudc,
“ Tho- jh the mills of God grind slowly,
"iet they grind exceeding small ;
Though with patience He stands waiting,
With exactness He grinds all.”
A large weatherboard building down on the “ Collingwood flat,”
within easy reach of thousands of working people, the Tabernacle is


so situated as to be a convenient place of meeting for those whom
Jesus loved so well, “ the common people,” who “ heard Him
gladly.” One of the saddest features of modern city life is the class
separations and “ caste” distinctions, to which we seem to be return-
ing, in the dwellings of the people. Toorak and Collingwood are
respectively the West End and East End of our Australian London,
and there is, alas! an even greater estrangement in many respects
between them ; for, added to their non-intercourse with each other,
there is a touch of contempt in the democratic suburb, for the pitiful
pride of the selfish plutocrasy. The “ rich and the poor do not meet
together” where they can help it, as a rule, in this country, and it
is a fact to be greatly regretted ; for the results are increasingly evil,
both in political and in social, and, above all, in Church life. My
experience in Collingwood strongly confirms me in the view that it
is not good for any Church to be composed almost entirely of any
one class socially. This was undoubtedly one cause of the sad
condition in which I found the Church of Christ in the Tabernacle :
for the absence of any considerable number of intelligent and
cultivated Christians was a serious hindrance to progress, inducing
a low standard of piety in some of the truly pious, and a content-
ment to abide in ignorance, with an impatience of all exhortation
and stimulation to a nobler level of thought and action. lam aware
that these words expose me to malicious misrepresentations by
certain persons, whose principal aim is to flatter the ignorance, and
thus secure the material support, of those they persistently mislead
and delude. But lam not writing to please or to censure, and I will
declare what I know to be true ; since he who tells the truth to his
neighbour is his truest friend and helper. Honest persons will at
once approve my aim ; and as to others, I am indifferent to their
opinions. A Church in which the weak and the strong, the poor,
the medium and the rich, the ignorant, and the educated, the young
and the old are fairly represented, is likely to be almost infinitely
more useful in winning souls to Christ and helping each other in the
divine life, compared with the Church of a class. A Church where
the weak and ignorant are encouraged, because they are pliable, and
where the strong and intelligent are discouraged because they are
inconveniently well instructed, may suit the schemes of its cunning
organizer ; but it will be a curse to the community, and an awful
peril to the eternal welfare of its members. Such a Church I found
in the Tabernacle, when I had thoroughly tested its composition,
although there were many in it also whose piety and good sense had
long discerned the vicious principle of its construction, and who
could see its inevitable failure in the long run. Indeed these latter
I found, eventually, to form the immense majority of the Church ;
but they had been overborne, until my coming amongst them, by two
causes. The first of these causes was, that there was no such idea as
government of the Church, by the Church, and for the Church in


the mind of its plausible minister, who governed the Church, by
himself, and for himself, aided by ignorant and pliable stewards,
whom he practically appointed and removed at his own will
and pleasure. The second cause was, that the Church had no
real legal or constitutional existence, and no powers of action in any
way, there being no Trust Deed, no declaration of faith or fellowship,
and, therefore, no control whatever over its property or minister. It
was thus a name and nothing more, without the right to meet and
decide any matter, unless its autocratic ruler chose to, for form’s
sake, occasionally consult it. The Church had even been without a
secretary or treasurer until a few months before I became its
temporary pastor ; but the treasurer’s appointment was a meaning-
less farce, for up to the day of my entrance upon my duties—May
15th, —he had never had charge of a sixpence of the Church’s
money, Mr. Cherbury receiving and disbursing all its income, with-
out checks of any kind. No candid reader will, therefore, say that
I exaggerate when I again repeat, that I found the Church in the
Tabernacle to be a mere name of convenience.
But all this was changed when I came upon the scene. I insisted
upon the Church being legally constituted, and its rights legally
declared, by the execution of a Trust Deed ; and this was done, on
June 9th, only four days before Mr. Cherbury’s departure. I
immediately invested the treasurer with the real powers of office, as
well as its title, and never stood between him and a single penny of
the Church funds from the first day to the last of my pastorate. I
recognised the Church as, under God, the fountain of power, having
the right to control its affairs, and to hold its own elected officers
responsible in all things. The Church became at once, not only a
name, but a real power, needing the more care in its spiritual over-
sight and general guidance, that it had been entirely unused to the
exercise of such powers, or to the burden of such responsibilities, as
were now vested in, and rested upon it. Bounding forth from its
natal bondage, it needed much divine grace to use its freedom wisely ;
and God did, in a very marked and wondrous way, give the immense
majority grace to guide its course through all the unexpected trials,
temptations, and toils which followed.
These general facts f ~ to the condition of affairs upon my assuming
office require to be supplemented by some reference to particulars,
which are needful to a right understanding of the position. The
congregations at the Tabernacle were large ; but the percentage of
active Church members was unusually small. The spiritual con-
dition of affairs was most gloomy. Conversions were almost unknown
for months before I came ; and Mr. Cherbury repeatedly publicly
declared that the gross inconsistencies of many Church members, and
the innumerable anxieties produced by their misconduct, had largely
caused his illness. Privately, he spoke still more plainly, and Mrs.
Cherbury declared that he could neither sleep nor study through the


trouble that many of the people were giving him. Disorganization
existed on every hand ; and many things which seemed outwardly
strong were inwardly and spiritually not only weak, but hindrances
and corrupt. The autocratic policy of Mr Cherbury, like all
tyrannies, was recoiling upon himself, and was producing ruinous
discontents and wide-spread weakness, threatening to bring the
whole work to a state of utter chaos. The Choir was a perpetual
trouble, and the conduct of many of its members was openly com-
plained of. The School was poorly officered, and although well
attended, like the Tabernacle, was most disorderly, and unfruitful
spiritually The Church funds were only known to Mr. Cherbury
himself ; but I can certainly affirm this, that there was not one
penny in the treasurer’s hands when I took office, with increased
burdens and needs to- be provided for, owing to the necessity for
supporting Mr, Cherbury’s family during his absence. The nominal
number of Church members was 195 when I came; but of these
many were absent from the colony, or resided at a distance. Only
about 8 had been added for nearly six months previous, and many
were most irregular communicants.
This was the condition in which I found the Tabernacle, when I
took the oversight as pastor pro. tem.
CHAPTER IV.
Htjj Sabhmr’s fflidtatm.
“ Every battle I shall win,
Triumph over every sin,
‘ What 1 ’ you say, ‘ a victor be ? ’
No, not I, but Christ in me.”
“ And the angels re-echoed around the throne,
‘ Rejoice ! ’ for the Lord brings back His own
There is one record of my brief ministry in the Tabernacle which I
prize above all others. It is contained in a little book which I
usually carry in my pocket, to which the Lord, sometimes daily,
permits me to add new names, names which I trust are for the most
part written in the Book of Life. My little book bears on its front
page the title which heads this chapter. When I look at it as I
write, I see that from May 28th, 1882, to 14th February, 1883, it
contains the names of 167 souls, nearly all of whom professed
repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, or sought
fellowship with us being already believers in a few cases, as the direct
result of my ministry. This record, and the living record of the
earnest, consistent, and useful lives of scores amongst them, whose


lives and deeds I almost daily witness—l say these records are
God’s answer to my foes, and His gracious testimony to my friends,
that I have thus the stamp of the Holy Spirit’s approval upon my
ministry in the Tabernacle. The Roll of Members shows that 79 of
these were added to the Church, and that 9 of that number were
removed for various reasons, leaving a clear addition of 70 to the
roll during the nine months of my pastorate. A number of those who
were converted, but were not then added to the Church, lived in
distant parts of Melbourne or its suburbs, and, by my advice, joined
themselves to Churches in their neighbourhood, as I do not approve
of Lord’s Day bus’ traffic. Others removed into the country soon
after ; others connected themselves with Churches around us of
which their parents were members, as I do not approve of the
separation of families ; others, alas, proved, in a few cases, that they
professed what they never possessed ; others who did not wish to
connect themselves permanently with the Tabernacle for various
reasons, are now seeking admission into the Church of which I am
at present the pastor ; and, finally, several others have passed away
into the mansions of eternal light, dying triumphantly, who are for-
ever beyond the reach of harm, witnesses in heaven to the grace
which the Lord bestowed upon me on earth. That joy no man
taketh from me : for they are safe within the Eternal Fold with the
Great Shepherd, to whom I was privileged to lead their weary spirits,
when still in the wilderness, where I found them. Yea, and I do
not less rejoice over those who live to u fight the battle by my
side, as well as for those who were called early away to “ wear the
crown ”of immortal life above. May I not gladly sing my song of
triumph too, with one of the most glorious and renowned of my
Lord’s great captains, though mine be but gleanings in the harvest
where he reaped nations ? I will rejoice in the Lord who blessed
me amid bitter and sore trials, ere I pass on to record them ; for
only such blessing as He gave me could have sustained my soul
amidst foes within and foes without, who vainly sought to destroy my
influence and to disgrace my ministry. I will say, with Paul and
his helpers—“ For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing ?
Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at His
coming ? For ye are our glory and joy.”
I have dwelt upon “ my Saviour’s victories ” in winning souls, ere
I pass on to a sadder record, which I feel sorry to be compelled
to write. But it is a record of His victorious power also, in purifying
His Church, and in bringing forth from an Egyptian bondage, a
people tried as with fire, and preparing them thereby, I trust, for
nobler conquests amidst the hosts of wickedness, and powers of
darkness, who have usurped and defiled the souls of tens of thousands
around us whom Jesus died to save, and to whom He sends us with
messages of love and warnings of doom. Christian readers who are
led by the Spirit, will at once perceive as they read what follows,


that the victories which Christ won by our agency have great
significance, when viewed in connection with the sin which was
made manifest in the Church, and the conflicts which raged against
us from the “world lying in wickedness ” around us. Especially do
I call my Christian readers attention to the fact, that during the
period from May 21st to July 23rd, the first nine weeks of my
ministry, no less than seventy souls professed to find peace and
pardon in Christ; and that the first outburst of sin within, which
took place on the latter day, was preceded by this mighty witnessing
of the Holy Ghost to my faithfulness to Christ. Then between
July 23rd and October 2nd, when the next outburst of sin from
within took place, ten weeks, the Holy Ghost again testified His
manifest approval of the Church’s acts of discipline, in casting out
the wicked, who should never have been in its bosom, by causing
us to hear the cry of “ saved I ” from seventy-six more souls—
making 146 souls who professed Christ during our severest trials
from within and without. Nor is it without significance that from
that time to the end of my temporary pastorate, only twenty-one
souls were added, in a period of nineteen weeks ; for God was mani-
festing Himself, from that time, though until the end we did not
fully perceive His design, as determined to bring out of the Taber-
nacle, “ the precious from the vile.” And now, to the narration of
that painful story of these days of sorrow and trial, through which I
passed with a true and faithful band, composing at all times a
majority of the Church, I will now address myself.
CHAPTER V.
Sm m % Camp.
“ The sword may be burnished, the armour be bright,
For Satan appears as an angel of light;
Yet darkly the bosom may treachery hide,
While lips are professing, ‘ I’m on the Lord’s side.’ ”
“ There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel, thou canst not
stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from
among you.”—Joshua vii, 13.
After I had been in the Tabernacle for nearly ten weeks, a
strange consciousness, within my spirit, that there was something
wrong in the Church, took firm hold of me. Yet the skies were
apparently cloudless, the congregations were overcrowding the build-
ing, many souls had been won, and everyone was apparently rejoic-
ing, with certain most noticeable exceptions, at the prosperity so
manifest on every hand. But a lull had come, and for nearly two


weeks only four souls bad been won, whereas tbe weekly average bad
been over eight. Conversing on this with a most devoted Christian
friend, of ripe experience and much wisdom, be suggested tbe
establishing of an early Lord’s Day morning meeting, for. a fuller
consecration of believers, I agreed, and on Lord’s Day morning,
23rd July, the side-room of the Tabernacle was filled, at seven
o’clock, with earnest souls pleading for sanctifying power. It was a
glorious time, and as I walked home with my friend, who bad
suggested tbe meeting, we were sure that God was about to reveal,
and to remove, tbe unknown hindrance to His work. And so He
did. But, oh it was an awful and immediate answer, an answer
“by fire.” Within three hours, a tempest of long concealed evil
passions, entirely unsuspected by myself and tbe Church, burst forth
from the hearts of six out of the eight stewards, whom Mr. Cherbury
had assured me were all tried and faithful men. Up to that morn-
ing, I had never had a single word of contention with them, and they
professed to be heartily and honestly co-operating with me, whilst in
reality they had for several weeks been secretly plotting to thwart
my wishes, and compel me to do something, to which they knew
I had well founded conscientious objections. On that morning, their
plot was fully ripe, and they sprung it upon me without a single
moment’s warning. To understand what they attempted, it is
necessary to refer to some facts which the Minute Book of the
Church proves were within their knowledge.
At a meeting of the stewards, held on Monday, 26th June, nearly
a month before this time, I informed them that I had “ on that day
written a letter to the Melbourne Total Abstinence Society, stating
that their meeting fixed for Thursday, 29th June, could not be held
in the Tabernacle, as it was required for other purposes, and also
that in future it would not be necessary for the Society to arrange
for meetings in the Tabernacle, as the Church intended to take the
entire charge of all Temperance Meetings held ther*.” To this
communication the stewards made no demur whatever, v and appeared
to entirely agree with my decision. I gave them at that meeting a
brief statement of the reasons for the course I had adopted. Not a
word more was said between us concerning the matter, until the
morning of Lord’s Day, 23rd July, when, as I have already written,
their plot was ready for execution. Within a quarter-of-an-hour
before the opening of the morning service, they waited upon me in a
body, in the vestry, and the secretary handed me a written
notice announcing that a Temperance Meeting, under the auspices
of the Melbourne Total Abstinence Society, would be held on the
following Thursday evening, in the Tabernacle, at which a certain
gentleman named, was to preside, and certain others were to speak.
My surprise may lie imagined, I cannot describe it. I saw by their
faces that there was no mistake—it was the result of an entirely
unprovoked determination to thwart my wishes. I quietly asked


(1) why I had not been consulted about this meeting ; (2) who had
countermanded my letter to the Society ; and, (3) what their
intention was in taking such a course of action ? They did not reply
to the first two questions ; hut a rude and ignorant person amongst
them replied, with a savage kind of glee, to my last question —“ We
want to show you that you are not going to be master—why you are
everything’, and we are nothing—you must do what we tell you ! ”
It was as if a dart were thrust into my heart, to see the passion and
sin which were thus unmasked. But time was pressing, and I
simply announced that for conscientious reasons, which I had already
informed them of, I could not sanction, and would not announce the
meeting. The secretary, with a sardonic leer on his countenance,
said they were quite prepared for that, and would announce the
meeting themselves during the service in the Tabernacle, and it
would be held in defiance of me. Astonished beyond expression
at this further revelation, I said they must not do anything so
wrong and disorderly ; but they defied me, and one said, “We are
six, and you are one—Avhy don’t ye do what we tell ye ? ” Again
urging them not to be disorderly, I went into the Tabernacle and
conducted the service; but when I came to the notices, the
secretary mounted the platform, and read the notice to the con-
gregation, in a defiant tone and manner. I then said, “That
notice is read in express defiance of my wishes ; and I convene a
meeting of the stewards at six o’clock this evening, to reconsider
their course of action.” Wnat occurred at that meeting I now
quote from the Church Minute book. “ The discussion which
ensued revealed the following facts: (1) That the stewards were
fully aware of the nature of Mr. Dowie’s letter to the Society, of
26th June ; (2) that, notwithstanding, they had, without
informing him, or expressing to him their views, determined to
resist and defeat his designs, and still preserve connection in
Temperance work with the Melbourne Temperance Society ; (3)
that they had requested a Mr. L , to see that deputations were
appointed for the quarter, July to September, and thus to show
the Society, that Mr. Dowie’s letter, as pastor, pro. tem., was to be
treated with contempt, and entirely ignored ; and (4) that they
were determined to again interrupt the service in the Tabernacle
by repeating the announcement of the morning, concerning the
Temperance meeting. Mr. Dowie again repeated the weighty
reasons which had induced him to write the latter portion of his
fetter to the Society of June 26th ; and now produced further
evidence of the anti-Christian conduct of the Society, and some of
its leading speakers, especially dwelling upon the proved falsehood
and malignity against himself of Mr. , (a certain official of
that Society), as revealed in a correspondence between Mr. Henry
Cooke, of 24 Swanston Street, Melbourne, and Mr. B. , which
letters Mr. Dowie read. Mr. Pettigrove and Mr. James Jones,


(two of the stewards then present), stated that Mr. Dowie’s
words, and the letters he had read, fully convinced them that he
was right in his action and the stewards wrong ; but the remain-
ing six stewards stated that they were still determined, in defiance
of all entreaty and of all the facts, to interrupt Mr. Dowie in the
public service that evening, unless he would yield to their threats,
and read the notice. Mr. Dowie then reminded the stewards that
their conduct in that case would be, (1) contrary to the Word of
God; (2) a usurpation of his functions ; (3) a usurpation of the
Church’s authority; and (4) a scandal to the Church and the
world, and a sin against God. The six stewards already named
still declared their intention of proceeding with their notice, and
violently reproached Mr. Dowie for not yielding to them, alleging
that they had as much authority, in spiritual things as him. Mr.
Dowie pointed out their error and offered to refer the whole
matter to a Church meeting, if they would defer action that even-
ing, so as to prevent an open scandal, which might be injurious to
the work of the Lord, hitherto proceeding so prosperously,
seventy souls having professed to find peace with God during the
past two months. The six stewards refused all compromise, and
contended that the Church had nothing to do with the matter.
Mr. Dowie then informed the stewards that he would not permit
the secretary, whom they had appointed to read the notice, to
come upon the platform that evening, and that, if he read it
publicly in the Tabernacle notwithstanding, he (Mr. Dowie),
would immediately call a Special Church Meeting for the follow-
ing evening, (Monday, 24th July), to consider their sinful and
disorderly conduct. The six stewards thereupon defied- Mr.
Dowie, and with many angry words left the vestry, declaring their
purpose of carrying out their disorderly intention.”
I have given the full account of this meeting with the rebellious
stewards, as it is recorded in the Church books, books which are
now in the hands of my bitterest enemies; and in all the sad scenes
which followed I will write nothing concerning them except what
is contained in the same records, or in correspondence now in my
possession, or of incidents which happened in the presence of
many living witnesses. If ever any anger existed in my heart
against those who gave me so much sorrow and trouble by reason
of their sin, lam sure that it does not now exist. I hate their sin
still; I know they were Satan’s tools to hinder God’s work : I know
they injured many souls, and I cannot but declare that plainly,
now that they have made it, by their recent sinful conduct, my
imperative duty to state the whole truth concerning my
ministry in the Tabernacle. But I again repeat, before I go
further, that, whilst I hate sin, I love the souls of sinners, and not
least do I love those concerning whom I must needs write in this
pamphlet. Christ “ the friend of sinners ” was, and is, the friend


of no man’s sins. No man can be Christ’s friend who is the friend
of hypocrisy, falsehood, and lawless defiance of God’s Word, and
of God’s servants. It is because I would not tolerate, within the
Church, the existence of such disorder that I have been exposed
to such malicious misrepresentations, as have led many to
conceive of me as a monster of tyranny, instead of what, with all
my infirmities, I know I am, namely, a man who desires to fulfil
his ministry as a faithful servant of the most High God. And
now I continue the narrative of the first outbreak of sin in the
Church, by giving in full the scene as I recorded it in the minute
book, a record which was subsequently read in open Church
meeting and confirmed as true, without a dissentient voice.
NOTE OF DISORDERLY EVENT IN TABERNACLE, LORD’S DAY
EVENING, JULY 23rd, 1882.
“ I here deem it right to record in this book an account of the
most deplorable act of disorderly conduct, upon the part of office-
bearers of a Christian Church within my experience ; an event
which led to the discovery of much sin in the fellowship, and to
many painful, but necessary, acts of Church discipline.
“In the middle of the service, before preaching, and just as I had
concluded the announcements, Mr. W rushed on the platform
and excitedly asked me if I was not going to do what the
stewards required, me. I made no reply, beyond asking him
kindly to retire from the platform. The choir were engaged in
singing the usual hymn before the sermon. Mr. W again
ascended the platform, and told me he was determined to read the
notice. I again requested him to retire from the platform, and
not create a scene of disorder and scandal, dishonouring to God,
and hurtful to Christ’s cause. He said he would go down; but
he would read it, and defy me. Meanwhile, the choir reached the
close of the hymn, and I immediately rose and said to the crowded
congregation before me, “ You will find the subject of my
discourse, (The Trinity House Pilot), in John xiv. 6.; and was in
the act of reading the words, when Mr. W rushed in front of
the platform beneath me, and cried out “Friends! ” I asked him
kindly to sit down. He cried out, “I won’t sit down,” &c., and
then read the notice for the Temperance meeting on the following’
Thursday, saying that the stewards were determined it should be
held despite my objections. I waited until he had finished and
resumed his seat. I then briefly informed the meeting of my
objections to co-operate with the Melbourne Total Abstinence
Society ; but remarked that the insulting and disorderly conduct of
which they had been witnesses, made it a very much graver matter,
which I felt must now be submitted at once to the Church. I, there-
fore, called a special meeting of the members of the Church for the


following 1 evening l to consider my action, and the conduct of the
majority of the stewards, and, meanwhile, I took the responsibility
of saying 1 on behalf of the Church, that the meeting announced for
Thursday by them would not be held. Mr. W here cried
out, ‘lt will be held in spite of you,’ or words to that effect. I
continued, ‘ Then I shall ere that have ceased to be your Pastor:
for, if the Church approves such sinful conduct, I will immediately
resign.’
“I then proceeded with my discourse, which was most attentively
listened to ; and, after closing the service, a prayer meeting was
held, attended by several hundreds ; nearly all of whom expressed
their kind sympathy with me as they retired.
u These are briefly the facts of this sad event which I did my
utmost to prevent.
“ JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.”
Amongst the kind words of sympathy for me expressed by the
scores of persons who crowded around me, and shook hands with
me as they retired, there was one who brought to me a message
from God, which deeply impressed me at the moment, which soon
made a permanent impression on my course of action ; but the full
significance of which I did not see until nearly seven months
afterwards. A lady, whom I did not know, and whose face I did
not clearly see, for she was veiled, said to me, as she grasped my
hands—“ Do not be discouraged Mr. Dowie, by these wicked men.
Remember God has said to you, “ If thou take forth the precious
from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth.” Saying these words,
she passed out at the door, and I do not know that I have ever
seen her face or heard her voice since. That evening, sitting in the
house of a wise and beloved Christian brother who was a Trustee,
although not then a member, of the Church in the Tabernacle, but
who threw in his lot with me from that evening, I told him and
his family of this incident. We searched immediately for the
passage, and found it, with its context, to be still more strangely
appropriate. As it influenced me so deeply, I will here quote
the whole passage, as it was written by the finger of divine
inspiration, twenty-five centuries ago, in Jeremiah xv. 19-21. —
“ Therefore, thus saith the Lord, if thou return, then will I bring
thee again, and thou shalt stand before me : and if thou take forth
the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them
return unto thee; hut return not thou unto them. And I will
make thee unto this people a fenced brazen wall; and they shall
fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I
am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the Lord.
And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will
redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.” Such a direction


for my course of action was herein given, such glorious promises
of blessedness were attached to my unflinching obedience, and
such assurances of protection, deliverance, and victory were given
unto me in these words, that I did not dare for a moment to
think of retreating from the conflict, which I plainly saw now lay
before me.
The next day, Monday, I spent almost entirely alone with God
until the evening. What passed during these hours of communion,
prayer, and spiritual preparation, He knows, and it is not needful,
nor possible indeed, for me to take the reader into that silent
room. Suffice it to say, I came forth in His strength, sure that I
had His presence and power with me in the coming struggle with
the “ seducing spirits,"’ who were striving to get a footing in the
Tabernacle, using as agents persons whom I have since found were
not “ walking in the light/' hut in a “ darkness ” so profound,
that they were blind to the terrible consequences of their sinful
actions to immortal souls.
Let the candid reader here pause and ask, what possible
reason could I have for desiring to provoke a needless conflict with
these stewards ? I had only been a few weeks in the Church,
whereas some of these men had been years ; I knew comparatively
few of the Church members, whereas they were knowm to them all,
and -were related to many by kinship and long friendship; I knew
not how many would stand up for God and His truth at all costs,
whereas I might fairly consider it not improbable that many
would shrink from censuring men they knew, should they still
prove disorderly ; I had much to loose, and, from a human stand-
point, nothing to gain by the conflict. Now, had I not been
desirous of doing what I knew to be God’s will in resisting sin,
without regard to personal consequences, would I not have
avoided it by a dishonourable submission, or by equally wrong-
compromise ? What the Lord did that evening by myself and by
the Church, I will now set before the reader in the exact words of
the entry in the Church minute-book, which, like all the other
minutes I may quote, were confirmed as correct records, by the
unanimous vote of the Church.
SPECIAL CHURCH MEETING-, HELD IN THE TABERNACLE, ON
MONDAY EVENING, JULY 24, 1882.
“ The Rev, John Alex. Dowie presided.
“ After a short service and prayer meeting had been held, those
present were placed in three distinct divisions :
“ (1) —Members of the Church (of whom there were about 150
present).


“ (2) —Candidates for Church fellowship, and other believers
worshipping at the Tabernacle (of whom there were nearly 100
present),
“ (^3) —Persons regularly attending the Tabernacle as hearers of the
Word (of whom there were about 150 present).
“ Mr. Dowie before opening the Special meeting, explained to the
last two divisions that they were simply present as silent spectators,
an unusual course at Church meetings, but adopted for the following
reasons on that occasion ; (1) because many believers were amongst
them who were likely to enter into fellowship with the Church ; (2)
because the offence to be dealt with had been defiantly committed
“ before all,” and God’s Word required should be “ rebuked before
all.” [1 Timothy v. 20.] ; and (3) because he felt it was only right
that as, in his opinion, the Church had been publicly disgraced, it
should be publicly justified. Mr. Dowie further stated that of
course only members of the Church could speak or vote.
“ After prayer, and reading of Psalm xvii. and Jeremiah xv. 19-21,
Mr. Dowie was about to state the facts rendering it incumbent upon
him to call the Church together, when
“ Mr. D. B interrupted him, and challenged his right to
preside.
“ Mr. Dowie maintained it was his duty, and called upon the meet-
ingl to express their view of the matter by a show of hands.
“ The Church almost unanimously agreed with Mr. Dowie, that as
Pastor, pro tem., he was ex-officio President of all Church meetings.
“ Mr. D. B and other stewards then requested that the
Roll of Members should be called.
« The Roll was called, and it was found that, as they had already
declared, all present claiming to be members were upon the Roll.
“ Several other interruptions, and alleged points of order, raised by
Mr. W and other stewards being disposed of,
“ The Pastor, pro. tem. (hereafter for brevity styled, ‘the Pastor,’)
then proceeded to state the facts upon which he based the following
charge, “ I charge W. W , and the five other stewards
associated with him in his scandalous conduct last Lord s
Day, with being guilty of open disorder and sin, demanding the
severest censure of this Church.”
“ The Pastor then proceeded to fully explain his charge, and prove
its justice by the following reasons :
“ I. —Because they had despised the Lord Jesus in his person,
whilst performing his duties as His minister. (See Luke x. 16.
Titus ii. 15).
“ ll. —Because they had despised the lawful authority of the
Church ; (1) in setting aside, so far as they could, the power and
responsibility in spiritual things with which it had entrusted him ;
(2) in not obeying the Lord’s command to “ tell it to the Church,”
had they any just cause of complaint against him, which they had


not; and (8) in setting a disorderly example to other members of
the Church, who, if their action had been upheld, would have an equal
right to interrupt Divine Worship at any time with their fancied, or
real, grievances. (See Matthew xviii. 15-17, 1 Cor. x. 32. 1
Cor. xi. 22).
“ lll.—Because they denied his solemn right to exercise the
powers of his office as an overseer (under Christ, the Chief Shepherd)
of ‘ the Church of God,’ which he was commanded to ‘ take care of,’
in accordance with the directions of the inspired Word of God, and
the leadings of the Holy Spirit, and not only so, but they endeavoured
to wrest his office from him, for the time, and usurp his functions in
things spiritual. (See 1 Cor. xii. 28. 1 Tim. iii. 5. Eph. v. 24.
1 Peter v. 1-7).
“ IV.—Because their action on Lord’s Day in interrupting Divine
Worship was (1) a scandal to the world ; (2) an unlawful act both
against human and divine law ; (3) calculated to injure the scores of
young converts and anxious enquirers who were present; and (4) was
certain to have ‘ grieved the Holy Spirit ’ and hinder the work of
grace going on amongst the people, had it been permitted to pass on
unpunished by the Church.
“ V.—Because the thing which they desired was wrong in itself,
since it was a fact, and they knew it from his lips and were warned,
that the Melbourne Total Abstinence Society was in a spiritually
corrupt and anti-christian condition, and, therefore, it would have
been sinful to have thrust its delegates upon the Tabernacle platform,
as they desired.
“They knew (1) that the Society neither opens nor closes its
meetings with prayer or praise to God, wherever it can prevent it;
(2) that the Society lets its property to infidels, spiritualists, low
comic actors, buffoons, clog dancers, &c,, on week days, and even for
attacks upon Christianity on the Lord’s Day, without any regard
to the law of God ; (3) that among the Society’s prominent members
and speakers are open enemies of Christ and His Church, more than
one of whom they knew to be guilty of the vilest sins ; and (4) that
the Society annually feeds the socially ruinous and nationally
demoralising spirit of gambling by its gala lotteries for houses,
furniture, &c., merely to make money to acquire property thereby,
utterly regardless of spiritual consequences.
“ Having fully set the whole matter before the Church, and
expressed his deep sorrow for, and sympathy with, the members in
their position, the Pastor then called upon those whom he had
charged with sin to address the Church, if they so desired.
“ Mr. W then produced the Trust Deed of the Church, and
contended that by it the stewards had the entire control of all the
Church’s affairs, spiritual and otherwise, and they had acted upon
their rights, finding all power was slipping away from them into the
Pastor’s hands. When asked to read the clause to which he


referred, he read one which limited the stewards to the duties pertain-
ing to the secular and pecuniary affairs of the Church, subject to the
Church. He gravely contended that those two words, ‘ secular ’ and
‘ pecuniary,’ covered everything.
“ The Pastor pointed out that they expressly excluded ‘ spiritual
affairs,’ which were his concern, subject to the Church and the Word
of God. This seemed to disconcert Mr. W : for, after indulg-
ing in much rude language towards the Pastor, he sat down ; but
during the remainder of the meeting was frequent in interruptions.
“ Mr. D. B then spoke at length of his services to the
Church, and indulged in much abuse of the Pastor, calling him,
‘the man, Howie,’ ‘that thing,’ ‘that tyrant;’ but never defended
the conduct complained of, beyond saying, ‘ the stewards are right.’
“ Messrs. McA , P , C. P , and E, briefly spoke,
defending the course they had taken, and denying the justice of the
charge laid against them by the Pastor.
“ Messrs. Pettigrove and Jones defended the Pastor’s action.
“ The whole of the stewards having thus spoken, and the six
accused stewards declining to withdraw from their disorderly posi-
tion, the Church expressed, by a show of hands, their desire to
proceed to a vote upon the Pastor’s charge.
“ After several minutes of silent prayer, the Pastor submitted his
charge (see page 23) to the vote, asking all who approved of his
conduct, and censured that of the stewards, to hold up their right
hands, thus finding the charge proved.
“ Nearly the whole of the members present seemed to respond.
“ The Pastor then asked those who were of a contrary opinion to
vote. There were only five hands, exclusive of the six stewards, held
up. The vote was received by those censured with cries of ‘We
resign! ’ and many reproachful words were addressed to both Church
and Pastor.
“ The Pastor declined to receive resignations thus tendered in anger,
and besought the censured stewards to reconsider their position, yield
to the Church’s decision and the Word of God. His words were
rejected with scorn, and he was compelled, through the disorderly
conduct of Messrs. B and W especially, hastily to adjourn
the meeting until that evening fortnight (7th August), to give time
for consideration to all concerned.
“ The Pastor closed with the Benediction, amidst much inter-
ruption from several of those censured, and it was with much
difficulty that these persons could be persuaded to retire, which they
did at last using much violent language.”
Does not the perusal of these minutes prove now, to the truth-
loving reader, that God was with me, or such a result to the struggle
with the first outburst of sin could not have been given ? And 1 was,
as the reader will see, so far from revengeful in the hour of decisive


victory, that I was willing to continue to co-operate with them on
condition of their heartily bowing to the decision of the Church.
Could I have done more to show that I had no personal feeling
against them ; and that I desired peace to exist between us, upon its
only true foundation, purity and righteousness ? In proof that I
took pains to be reconciled to these persons, most of whom I then
still thought might be Christians indeed, although greviously erring,
I addressed to them, within four days, the following letters, I give
them fully : for the basest misrepresentations as to what these letters
contain have been industriously circulated by my enemies in the
Tabernacle. They must blame themselves, now that the whole truth
has to be proclaimed : for, since I am reluctantly compelled to
defend the acts of myself and the Church, every needful word shall
be written.
“ The Tabernacle, Sackville Street,
Collingwood, July 28th, 1882.
‘‘ To Messrs. McA , P , B , and R , stewards of
the Church of Christ, meeting in the Tabernacle :
“ Beloved Brethren, —Grace to you and peace from God our
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. May the Holy Spirit guide me
in writing, and you in reading, these lines.
“ By the vote of the Church, on Monday, 24th July, Mr. W.
W , senr., Secretary, Mr. C. P , and yourselves were cen-
sured for the following reasons :
[Here follow the five reasons entered on the Minutes of 24th July,
see pages 23 and 24],
“ These are the reasons for your censure, and for my now, in con-
sequence, suspending you from office, pending (1) your submission
to the law of Christ, and the authority of the Church ; (2) your
confession of error and repentance before God, and before the
Church ; and (3) your unreserved recognition of the fact that, as
Stewards , your duties are confined to ‘ the secular and pecuniary
affairs of the Church.’
“ The Church meeting stands adjourned until Monday week, 7th
August, at half-past 7 p.m., and I have made provision for the
carrying on of your duties until that time, when I trust you will be
present and submit, as is your duty as Christians, to Christ’s law.
“ And now, having discharged my official duty, I have requested
our dear sister in the Lord, Mrs. C. M. Cherbury, to hand you this
letter, and have further asked her to assure you of my undiminished
love for your souls, and my earnest prayers for your restoration to
this Church, and to your offices in it. Praying that the Spirit of
God may lead you to be of one mind with us in the Lord.
“ I am, beloved brethren, faithfully yours in Him,
“ JOHN ALEX. HOWIE.”


“ The Tabernacle, Sackville Street,
Collingwood, 28th July, 1882.
“ Mr. W , Secretary of the Church of Christ, meeting in the
Tabernacle.
“ Dear Sir, —My beloved sister in the Lord, Mrs. C. M. Cherbury,
who is the bearer of this, has been requested by me to read to you a
portion of a letter which I have addressed to Messrs. McA ,
P , B , and R , But as your case differs materially
from that of the others, I address you separately.
“ Your whole spirit and actions last Lord’s Day and Monday
evening, led me, and I believe an overwhelming majority of the
Church, to doubt the reality of your conversion to God, and to see,
under any circumstances, that it was undesirable for you to continue
to hold office in this Church. Will you kindly, therefore, forward
to me your resignation as secretary, with all the books, papers, &c.,
which you possess, and please forward at once the Provisional Trust
Deed of this Church to one of the Trustees.
“ I have asked Mrs. Cherbury to assure you of my undiminished,
and even increased, love for your soul, and the eternal interests of
your family ; and to say that I will be glad to hear (1) of your
willingness to express openly before all the congregation your
submission to the law of Christ and the authority of the Church, and
(2) yowr confession of sin and repentance before God.
“ If you are willing to do these things, I shall be glad to see you
with a view to your restoration to Church fellowship ; but, if not, I
must ask the Church at its first meeting to vote that your name be
taken from the Roll of Members,
“ I beg you again, to receive the assurance of my unchanged
desire for your souls eternal welfare ; and I have asked Mrs.
Cherbury specially to repeat that assurance.”
“ I am, faithfully yours,
“JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.”
“ The Tabernacle, Sackville Street,
Collingwood, 28th July, 1882.
“ Mr. C. P , steward of the Church of Christ, meeting in the
Tabernacle.
“ Dear Sir, —My beloved sister in the Lord, Mrs. C. M. Cherbury,
who is the bearer of this, has been requested by me to read to you a
portion of a letter which I have addressed to Messrs. McA
P , B , and R . But as your case differs materially
from that of the others, I address you separately.
“ Your whole spirit and actions towards me last Lord’s Day, and
your especially rude and sinful words to me as you went out of the
door on Monday evening, have led me, and I believe will lead an


overwhelming majority of the Church, to see that it is undesirable for
you to retain office.
“ Will you kindly, therefore, forward to me your resignation
as steward at once ?
“ I am also now in serious doubt as to the reality of your conver-
sion to God, and whilst I have an undiminished, and even increased,
love for your soul, and the eternal interests of your family, still I
will not permit any known impurity to remain in the Church. I
shall be glad, therefore, to hear (1) of your willingness to submit to
the law of Christ and the authority of the Church, and (2) your con-
fession of sin and repentance before God.
“ If you are willing to do these things, I am willing to see you
with a view to your restoration to Church fellowship ; but if not, I
must ask the Church at its next meeting to vote that your name be
taken from the Roll of Members.
“ I beg you again to receive the assurance of my unchanged desire
for your soul’s eternal welfare ; and I have asked Mrs. Cherbury
specially to repeat that assurance.”
“ I am, faithfully yours,
“JOHN ALEX. HOWIE.”
It will be observed by these letters, that Mrs. Cherbury was the
bearer of them; and, although I regret bringing her name into this
matter, the truth imperatively demands my reference to that fact.
It arose in this away.
Naturally, she was anxious to know what I intended to do in carry-
ing out the vote of the Church, which censured the six stewards.
I called upon her, and read to her my draft copies of the foregoing
letters, in which, at first, there was no reference to her whatever.
She expressed her great pleasure at their tone, and her entire
approval of their contents, and asked me to make her the bearer of
them. She further expressed her great regret at their sinful con-
duct, her conviction that the Church was right in its decision, and
offered to do her utmost to induce the six suspended stewards to
comply with my letters,
I accordingly altered the letters in that particular, and she volun-
tarily delivered them to each person. She also induced one of them,
Mr. C. P——, to come and make his open submission to the Church
and to me ; although, I regret to say, that a week later he again
“ changed his mind,” as he said, and became worse and more defiant
than ever. It will, therefore, be seen that, whatever may now be
said to the contrary, Mrs. Cherbury, as well as almost the entire
Church, supported my action at this crisis—a fact which my
enemies have not only carefully suppressed, but have falsely stated
the opposite, and have represented this, and all that followed, as


my own personal, and tyrannically cruel, deeds. I say here, what I
will in this pamphlet fully prove hereafter, that every act of my
temporary pastorate at the Tabernacle, from the first to the last,
was entirely approved, often by all, and always by an overwhelming
majority, of the members of the Church.
The fortnight for which I had adjourned the Special Church
Meeting passed away, and on Monday evening, 7th August, the
Church again met, I read the letters which I had sent to the
suspended stewards, and also obtained the Church’s approval of a
letter which I had forwarded to the Melbourne Total Abstinence
Society, to which I will refer in another chapter. The Minute Book
then contains the following account of what followed, during that
dreadful meeting 1 , viz.:—
“ The Pastor then reported that he had received no answer to the
letters which he had sent, on behalf of the Church, to the six
Stewards, except from Mr. C. P •, as already reported, and was
about to propose that the Church should give them all another month
for further consideration ere proceeding further, when,
“ Messrs. D. B and P , who were present, rose and
demanded to be allowed to speak, in a rude manner.
“ The Pastor said they were under censure and suspension, and
could only be allowed to speak if they intended to submit to the
Church’s decision.
“ Messrs. B and P again demanded to be heard, declared
they had a right to review the Church’s decision, said they treated it
with contempt, and would not regard it, and that the Pastor was
tyrannical.
“ The Pastor then put it to the vote as to whether they should be
allowed to speak ; and, by a very large majority, the Church decided
that they should not, until they submitted to the censure passed at
last meeting.
“ Immediately this vote was taken,
“ A scene of great disorder ensued, owing to Mr. D. B ,
screaming with rage, advancing towards the Pastor with threatening
words and gestures, as if he intended to assault him. Many mem-
bers rose from their seats to interpose, several sisters fainted or had
hysterical fits, and all the endeavours of the Pastor to still the tem-
pest of sinful passionate words uttered by Mr. D. B , his wife,
Mr. P , and others, were unavailing. Under these circumstances
so dishonouring to the Lord, the Pastor was compelled to declare the
meeting dissolved, which he did, and pronounced the Benediction,
amidst mocking interruptions from the disorderly persons present.”
Every true child of God must see that there was now but one course
open to the Church, unless it were to be broken to atoms from
within by the violence of its own stewards. It was with the utmost


regret that I recognised the need for the exercise of the extreme
act of Church discipline, the expulsion of persons whose language
and actions proved beyond doubt that they were “ tares ” amongst
the “ wheat.” Such “ tares and wheat ” must grow together in
the “ field of the world but they must be rooted up, should they
get into the Church, which is “the garden of the Lord.’’ Wolves
and sheep may, and do, eat of the same earthly food ; but there is
no place for wolves at the Lord’s table, or in the fold of Christ—
that is for His sheep. It was clear that the “ wolves” were in, and
they must be got out; and it was my business, as an under shepherd,
to do it, so far as I was enabled by His Spirit. But I did not act
hastily, nor without earnest consultation and prayer in private, with
the wisest and most consistent members, prominent amongst whom
were the ten brethren who were acting as temporary stewards.
On Thursday evening, 17th August, ten days after the previous
disorderly meeting, the Church again met to deal finally with the
suspended stewards. After reading certain correspondence between
Mr. Philip Kitchen and myself, to which I will in another chapter
make reference, the Minute Book records the following business.
“ The Pastor informed the meeting that he had been assisted in
transacting the business of the Church by a number of brethren, who
had acted as stewards pro. tern and that with their unanimous
approval a number of important recommendations would be submitted,
so as to put an end to the disorderly conduct which had occurred.
“ These recommendations were then read, and passed seriatim , in
the shape of the following resolutions after discussion.
“ Resolved : I.—That inasmuch as Messrs. McA , B> ,
P , W ,C. P •, and R have not submitted themselves
to the censure of this Church, and to the law of Christ, this meeting
now resolves, with deep regret, that it is necessary in the interests of
Christ’s kingdom, and for the good order and progress of this
Church, to remove them from the office of stewards, and they are
hereby so removed.
“ ll.—That inasmuch as Messrs. W , B , and C. P ,
have been guilty openly of conduct entirely inconsistent with their
Christian profession, this Church, obeying the word of God, ‘ Put
away the wicked man from among yourselves.’ (1 Cor. v. 13).
resolves hereby to remove their names from the Roll of Members.
“ lll.—That the Pastor, pro. tern., be requested to forward these
resolutions, and that he will further exhort Messrs. McA ■,
P , and R , to ‘ hear the Church,’ and submit themselves
to its censure, as Christ requires they should, when the Church acts
in accord with His law, so that they may be restored to fellowship,
from which they are by their own action at present suspended.
“ (The first resolution and the third were carried by majorities of
48 to 9, or nearly six-sevenths of those present; and the second reso-
lution by 45 to 15, or nearly three-fourths of those present).”


At this meeting also four other matters occurred which I think it
well to note here, viz, : (1) 32 new members, the first fruits of my
ministry were added to the Roll, of whom only three took any part
in the meeting ; (2) eight brethren were appointed to act as Stewards
in the place of the six removed from office, with the two faithful
members of the old stewardship ; (3) I reported that I “ had
suspended two members of the Church, (Lloyd Edwards and H.
H ,) for sinful conduct, of which they refused to repent, and
asked that their cases might be referred to the stewards ffir investi-
gation and report, which was unanimously agreed to and (4) the
minutes close with the words which are pleasant to write, “the
meeting, which was quiet and orderly, then closed with prayer.”
This closes, therefore, the story of the first and most dangerous
outburst of “ sin in the camp,” concerning which so many untrue
statements have been made privately and publicly. I leave the
facts to speak for themselves : for they afford my most effective
justification. But it was quite apparent that there were many evil
elements in the Church which might lead to another outbreak, of
which there were many signs : for “ the light ” now shining into the
dark places of unrenewed hearts in the Church was revealing other
forms of sin in the fellowship. It was not, however, until the close
of September, that the new conspiracy fully revealed itself, fostered
from without by the bitter enmity of some of the expelled stewards,
and aided from within by persons whose sins were finding them out.
During the six weeks which intervened, we enjoyed comparative
peace, and nearly sixty souls professed to find peace in Christ.
The second outbreak was the means of fully revealing a sickening
mass of ungodliness and desperate wickedness, which made me
shrink, with an almost despairing sense of loathing and disgust, from
the task of further attempts to purify the Church. It was at that
time that I wrote to Mr. Cherbury desiring him to hasten his return,
as I wished to be relieved from my most undesirable position,
aggravated as it was by the now open antagonism of his family, who
were openly aiding the disorderly elements in and out of the Church.
But we had learned a lesson in dealing with these disorders, and
on this occasion the action of the Church was short, sharp, and
decisive. This was the last pitched battle, so to speak, that we had
with “ sin in the camp ” until Mr. Cherbury’s return, when the final
struggle took place. After this the enemy within kept very still,
fearing the now certain consequences of their manifestation : for it
was now seen to be entirely impossible for them to overcome
myself and the great majority of the Church. I will not enter
at length into the details of the two cases of discipline, which led
to revelations compelling the exclusion of a number motfe, and
to the appointment by the Church of a Special Committee of
Discipline, consisting of sixteen members. It is, however,
necessary to give some account of this scene : for the most disgrace-


ful public and private attacks have been made upon myself, and
others, in consequence of our having done our simple duty to Christ
and His Church in this matter. Indeed many readers will remember
that it was not only falsely reported in the public press, as I shall
show in another chapter; but it came before the Supreme Court in
evidence, in the case of Edwards v. Fenton, the plaintiff in that case
being one of the young men expelled at this time from the Church.
I will also refer to that case in its proper place, simply informing ray
readers that the special jury, by its unanimous verdict against the
plaintiff, took, from a civil and legal stand-point, in February, 1883,
the same view of his character, that, from a religious and spiritual
point of view, the Church in the Tabernacle unanimously took on
October 2nd, 1882.
The reader will remember that, at the Church meeting of the
17th August, which finally decided on the ex-stewards case, I had
reported that I “ had suspended two members of the Church
(Lloyd Edwards and H H ) for sinful conduct, of which
they refused to repent, and asked that their cases might be referred
to the stewards for investigation and report, which was unanimously
agreed to.” I was most unwilling to proceed to extreme measures
with either of these young men, and privately, again and again,
besought them to repent of their sin, and to seek forgiveness from
God and those against whom they had sinned, so that they might
be restored to fellowship. I continued to pursue this course week
after week for six weeks, but I was only met with cynical contempt
or sullen silence, and at last with open defiance and absolute
refusal.
They absolutely refused to see the stewards appointed to investi-
gate their case ; they openly boasted that they were acting, in so
doing, in concert with some of the ex-stewards whom the Church
had removed ; they were rapidly becoming the centre of a party of
irreconcilable and disorderly persons inside and outside the Church ;
and, finally, I regret to say it, they were able to boast truthfully of
the practical sympathy of the whole of Mr. Cherbury’s family, who
openly associated at this time with the persons already expelled for
disorder. The false cry was now first openly riased that I was
working against Mr. Cherbury in some mysterious way, and for
some base personal purpose ; a cry for which there never was a
shadow of foundation, and for which there never has been advanced
a single particle of proof. But this cry was a lie which exactly
suited the purpose of the disorderly, exciting for them, as it did, a
misplaced sympathy in the minds of many good people ignorant of
the truth, and exciting against me, as it did, an indignation against
my supposed baseness and meanness, which exists in many breasts
to this day. This cry, however, did not impose upon any members
of the Church, excepting the ignorant, the consciously inconsistent,
and the disorderly spirits who were fearful that the discipline of the


Church would very swiftly overtake them, as it had already done
others.
It soon became apparent that action must be taken : for my
patience with, and entreaties to, these young men to forsake their
sin was being put down, by the ignorant and the wicked, to fear or
guilt upon my part, especially as they had dared in their sinfulness
to attribute falsehood to me. The stewards, therefore, formally
requested them to attend a meeting, to which their reply was an
insulting refusal. Accordingly, at the next ordinary Church meet-
ing—2Bth Sept.,—-the stewards reported, that “Lloyd Edwards and
H H , who are now under suspension, should be brought
before the Church, with a view to their removal from the roll of
members, for disrespectful and sinful conduct, which has been
proved to the satisfaction of the stewards.”
The meeting was a peculiar one. No special business being
expected, the great majority of the members were absent, and, in
consequence of the stewards not anticipating any serious opposition
to the adoption of their report, as the misconduct of the young men
was so notorious, many of them were absent. But, to my surprise,
many persons claiming to be Church members, presented themselves
that evening, whose faces I had not seen before, but whose disor-
derly conduct at that and the next meeting, sufficiently explained
to me the reason why they had kept out of my sight. By a small
majority of votes this cleverly-packed meeting, therefore, taking the
Church clearly unawares, as was afterwards proved, refused to adopt
the stewards’ report. Seeing the state of affairs at a glance, I
refused to receive the decision, and stated that I would immediately
convene a special Church meeting to reconsider it, adding that, if
the stewards’ proposal to remove these young men was not then
adopted, I and they would immediately resign. The malice, disap-
pointment, and anger depicted on the faces of the disorderly, and
expressed in their open threats and reproaches, was proof that I
had rightly judged, and that I was face to face, for the second time,
with another determined conspiracy to drive me from my position
in disgrace, and to hinder the Lord’s work, then progressing steadily
in our midst.
On Monday evening, 2nd October, within four days, the Church
met in Special meeting, and the following minutes are copied from
the Church Book, so that there may be no mistake as to what
occurred :
Resolved, “ That the resolution of last Church meeting that Lloyd
Edwards and H. H , be not removed from the Roll of Members
is hereby rescinded.” Carried.
Resolved, “ That the Church, having heard the statements of the
Pastor and stewards concerning the slanderous and scandalously
offensive conduct of Lloyd Edwards and H. H , now resolves
that it is necessary for the peace, progress, and good order of this


Church to remove their names from the Roll of Members, thus
obeying the word of our Lord, by His inspired apostle, ‘ Put away
from among yourselves that wicked man. ’ ” (1 Cor. v. 13).
“ Carried by a amjority of five-sevenths of those present, namely 110
against 44, against the following amendment, viz.: — “That these
brethren be censured and suspended for three months from Church
fellowship.”
It will thus be seen that the Church unanimously found these
persons guilty of sin, including even the disorderly minority who had
previously voted, four days before, that they were innocent ; thus
fully justifying my refusal to accept their decision when they had
packed a meeting. The reader may wonder at this result, but had
he been present he would not. The following note, recorded by the
secretary, and approved by the Church, appears on the minutes, viz.:
disgraceful manner, frequently interrupting the chairman in his
remarks, until at length he became so disorderly, that one of the
members moved that he be expelled from the meeting. [I declined
to put that motion, and entreated him not to press the Church to
such extreme measures]. After this, he became more orderly ; but
still interrupted the chairman, addressing him in the most defiant
and disrespectful manner. At the close of the meeting, whilst the
Benediction was being pronounced, several of the members (of the
minority) so far forgot themselves as to make audible remarks, and
one even went so far as to cry out “ Amen ! ” (mockingly) before the
chairman had half concluded the Benediction.” This note, however,
necessarily gives an imperfect idea to those who did not witness
the horrible scene, when these young men thus disgraced, and proved
the hypocrisy of, their Christian profession. Even their disorderly
associates and supporters in the meeting were horrified when Lloyd
Edwards rose, and raising his clenched fist, advanced towards me
with a scream of passion crying out, “ You dog ! I’ll smash your
face, and drag you down from that platform ! You dog ! ” &c. It
was at that point that his immediate expulsion from the meeting was
moved ; but, knowing with whom I had to do, I merely cautioned
him, and continued my opening remarks. The dreadful conduct, how-
ever, of many of the minority on this occasion, when they saw at last,
that, beyond all question, they were hoplessly defeated in their dark
designs, demands some passing description. Not realizing their
weakness in the meeting, they called for a division on the motion,
and being, therefore, told, as the noes, to pass to my left hand, they
huddled together into a comparatively dark corner of the Tabernacle,
under the clock. When they found there, from their own scrutineers,
that the majority outnumbered them by 5 to 2, i.e. 110 votes to 44,
their rage knew no bounds ; and amongst the viragoes there was one
who even proclaimed her willingness to assist in “stringing Dowie up
by the neck ” at a neighbouring lamp-post, and afterwards, “ flinging


his body into the''. Yarra! ” And these were “ members ” of a
Christian Church ? Can the reader wonder that three days before
this scene, I had written to Mr. Cherbury requesting him to return
at once and relieve me from the charge of so many spiritual “ wolves”
as I now found to be in the Church ? Can the reader, too, conceive
my disgust when I found that many of these persons were, almost
daily, welcome guests in Mrs. Cherbury’s family, whilst the faithful
quiet, and earnest majority were treated, like myself, with disrespect
by that family, whom we were actually supporting ?
But the last great battle with the enemy within the camp had
been fought and won. From that time onward, we had no fear
that the disorderly would even temporarily triumph, despite all
the aid they received from without, in the misplaced sympathy
of many professing Christians, and the open aid of a mendacious
and mercenary press.
It was evident, however, that some quieter, swifter, and more
effective way must be devised, and, accordingly, at its next meet-
ing, October 9th, the Church adopted ten rules for the exercise
of Church discipline, which were found to work admirably.
These created a Special Committee of Discipline, composed of
myself and sixteen members elected by the Church, which inves-
tigated all alleged cases of needed discipline, two-thirds of whom
must agree upon any report or recommendation to the Church, which
body voted, without debate, upon such report. This Committee
quietly, carefully, and prayerfully, dealt in a solemn, earnest
fashion, one by one, with those members of the disorderly minority
whose scandalous conduct made it imperatively necessary ; and,
in every case, the Church almost unanimously adopted their
report. Many of the inconsistent and disturbers were, however,
now very quiet, and, acting in open concert with Mr, Cherbury’s
family, and in secret concert with the expelled members, held
themselves in readiness for a final effort after Mr. Cherbury’s
return. But that event will be considered in its proper position.
Meanwhile, I must ask the reader’s attention to some other
events which happened outside the camp of the Church. These
were a series of attacks upon me from the enemy without, who
was co-operating most vigorously, but equally in vain, with the
enemy within. Serious and numerous, however, as these attacks
were, I held them to be of inferior importance, though, of course,
in the worldling’s eye they seemed the most damaging. They
are chiefly noteworthy in these pages because of their great num-
ber, their concentration upon one object, namely, my public
extinction, and their continued persistency in some forms to the
present day.
I cannot close this central chapter in my last year’s experience
without a sense of deepest gratitude to God, who enabled me to
overcome by His Holy Spirit’s power, through faith in Jesus, my


Lord and Saviour ; and I praise Him for His ppreat goodness. To
the great majority of the Church also, whose fidelity to conscience
and to God, made them loyal and noble fellow-workers with me,
in the darkest of days, I owe, and here record, my grateful
thanks.
CHAPTER YI.
||(amr
“ Is God for me 1 I fear not, though all against me rise ;
When I call on Christ my Saviour, the host of evil flies.
I know it, I believe it, I say it fearlessly,
That God, the highest, mightiest, for ever loveth me,
At all times, in all places, He standeth at my side ;
He rules the battle fury, the tempest, and the tide.”
Thirteen years ago I was engaged, whilst a student, in certain
Christian work amongst the perishing multitudes in my native
city, Edinburgh ; but I was greatly discouraged because of
ecclesiastical opposition, and little apparent success. One bitterly
cold winter night, as I pressed homewards through the snow-cov-
ered streets, I thought that I must abandon my almost fruitless
endeavours to do Christ’s work in the district I had just left.
But when I opened, by my warm fireside, an hour later, the
Book which has ever been my chart and guide through life, I
felt it was no mere chance, but the guiding hand of God,
which led my eye to the passage from which I have taken the
title of this chapter. I read these words—“ But I will tarry at
Ephesus until Pentecost: for a great door and effectual is opened
unto me, and there are many adversaries.” (1 Cor. xvi. 9, 10).
It was a guidance and strength to me then, and it has been often
since. I went forward until the victory was won, and the lesson
I then learned, has stood me in good stead on many occasions, and
in many places, where I have had to u hold the fort ” against
“ many adversaries ” who were besieging it and trying to hinder
my Saviour’s victorious and onward march.
There was a time when I might have hesitated to go forward
in this city, had it not been for the Lord reminding me of, and
instructing me by, the story of Paul’s victories at Ephesus.
Like him, I had my conflicts here with “ evil spirits,” and with
the priests and scribes of Bacchus, who felt, like Demetrius, the
friend of Diana, that their “ craft was in dang-er.” But, amidst
all their uproar, I have felt the conviction, that their antagonism
was only a stronger confirmation of God having “ opened unto


me a great door and effectual” in this city, and in that confidence
I have gone, and am by God’s grace still going, forward. It
will take more, and stronger, foes than I have yet looked in the
face to cause me to turn my back ; nay, more, I am fully per-
suaded that no foe to Christ shall ever see my back : for I have
His sure promise, “ Lo, I am with you alway.”
It is difficult to classify my “ many adversaries ” during my
ministry in the Tabernacle; but, for the convenience of my readers,
I will endeavour to do so. The first of these, as it was the first
in the field, I will describe as— •
THE SPIRITUALISTS AND OTHER INFIDEL BLASPHEMERS.
The first Lord’s Day evening discourse I preached in the city
of Sydney, in February, 1878, when I first stood on the Free
Christian Platform, was entitled, “ Modern Spiritualism, an anti-
Christian Imposture ; ” and, from that day to this, I have missed
no opportunity given me to smite that diabolical and immoral
system. I ask no favours from it, or from any other organized
foe of Christ, and of man, and I give it no quarter. It is unclean
and hell-born from start to finish. It is the highway to the deep-
est abysses of vice, the shameless mother of God-defying, atheistic
hordes of secularists and sensualists, and is an open menace to
the very existence of society, and to every moral or spiritual
virtue. I was glad, therefore, to have an opportunity of smit-
ing these “ seducing spirits and doctrines of devils ” in my
pamphlet, entitled “ Spiritualism Unmasked,” published in Mel-
bourne, during April last. That pamphlet was made the
occasion, by the notorious blasphemer Thomas Walker, of a
disgraceful libel upon me in the public newspapers. The Age and
the Telegraph did me the justice to insert a convincing statement,
showing its baseless untruthfulness, and also made the amende
honorable, by editorial expressions of regret for having inadvert-
ently published it. I called upon my traducer to apologise, to
which he replied by further outrageous insults. Acting under
friendly and legal advice, I strove, by an appeal to the County Court,
to try and prevent this dangerous and desperately ungodly person
from attacking honest persons with continued impunity. But I tried
in vain : for justice was so blind in that court as to see no libel,
where any ordinarily impartial person could see one, seeing that I
was grossly libelled as having written “malevolent falsehoods,” dec.
But no ; Judge Cope was unequal to the strain upon his powers of
perception, and gravely stopped the case, just as Mr. Walker’s
blasphemies and immoral teachings w r ere being revealed in his
cross-examination, by saying he “ really did not think there was
any case to go to the jury ? ” Here indeed was a proof that
justice was blind. However, this licensed traducer has since so
distinguished himself in doing his master’s w ork, that no person


of any reputation but would feel himself insulted by his good
opinion. His barrister, however, who had most coarsely abused
me, and stated gross untruths concerning me, capped his legal
larrikinism by withdrawing his remarks, and saying that
“ whatever he said was only done as a joke.” And so the case
ended, so far as the court was concerned, amidst confessions of
judicial blindness and jocularity. But I was far from satisfied,
and appealed to my fellow citizens against that lame and
impotent conclusion, in a lecture which I delivered in the Taber-
nacle, to an audience which crowded out the available standing
and sitting room in the building, there being nearly two thousand
persons present. I entitled it, “ Modern Spiritualism, Legal
Larrikinism, and Heathen Justice.” At this lecture, the enemy
uttered his first growls, and attempted to prevent my speaking,
but without avail. When I concluded, a number of questions,
intended to put me to shame, having been satisfactorily answered, a
well-known infidel speaker did me the justice to rise, and, in kind
language, express the opinion of himself and of others present
that I had completely disposed of the personal attacks made upon
me. But, for one such candid person in the spiritualist and infidel
ranks, there are hundreds, to whom truth is hateful, who still
continue their revilings, although they know that they rest only
upon falsehoods. This fact is, however, no surprise to those who
are familiar with the demoralizing teaching of spiritualism, which
not only denies the divinity and authority of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, but boldly denies the very existence of evil.
One of their most influential leaders throughout the world has
openly declared (1) “ Evil does not exist ; (2) there are no evil
spirits ; (3) all spirits are good; (4) what is called evil is good ;
(5) virtue is good, and sin is good ; (6) murder has no influence
upon the soul ; (7) vice and virtue too are both right and
in place ; and (8) a lie is a truth intrinsically, it holds a
lawful place in creation, it is a necessity.” These are the exact
words of an author, Dr. Child, of Boston, whose diabolical
philosophy is endorsed by all advanced spiritualists. Can any
Christian reader wonder then that I have, as often as opportunity
offered, struck this system the heaviest blows within my power,
feeling, as I did, that every stroke was approved by my Lord, and
in the best interests of my fellow men ? As to the opinion of the
deluded victims of spiritualism, I heed them as little as I would
the insane ravings of the inmates of Yarra Bend. It is one of
their avowed principles that the “ distinction between good and
bad men is a moral and religious fiction,” so that, upon their own
showing, their opinion of myself, or any one else, as to our
relative goodness or badness, would be a worthless and “fictitious
distinction.” Upon such persons, reason and truth are utterly
thrown away, so long as they deny the claims of both. Yet that


fact should not deter Christians from seeking' their good, (1)
because the Spirit of God is omnipotent, and He over-rules,
directs, and blesses the efforts of every faithful man ; and (2)
the exposure of their horribly depraved teachings may effectually
warn away from their destructive associations, the ignorant,
unwary, and foolish crowds of unsaved souls who flutter around
the borders of this gate of hell, called Spiritualism.
Whilst I am writing these lines, the whole community is
standing aghast at the fearful revelations of the blasphemies
openly taught by Mr. Thomas Walker, as the mouth-piece of the
spiritualists, who have now, under this blind guide, developed
into secularists or atheists. This was a developement which I
ventured to predict in “ Spiritualism Unmasked,” a year ago ; but
I was then, as I am still, “ a voice crying in the wilderness,” for
the most part, in this matter. The Christian community are yet
far. from being awake to the dangers arising from the continued
toleration of these moral Nihilists, whose platforms and literature
are sowing, unchecked, a harvest of vices, which our children may
reap in blood. “ Their throat is an open sepulchre,” and from
bowlings against the Lord’s Day in the Town Halls of our cities,
they are ready, when the hour has come and their master has
provided the leader, to translate their words into deeds, and to
wreck, so far as they can, the Christianity and morality of the
commonwealth. In such an event, history proves that the sacred-
ness of neither life, nor property, nor liberty would be regarded
for one moment, when their passions get full exercise. That they
could permanently succeed is an utter impossibility; but, that
their attempts would be fraught with the utmost peril to political
and religious progress, is as certain as the fact that they are even
now a drag on these two wheels of true prosperity. If lam
asked for proofs, I point to the newspaper press of this city,
which, with one exception, openly befriends the foes of Christ,
and has amongst its reporters and leader-writers many avowed
sceptics. I point to the newly formed Sunday (Desecration)
Society, which was most notably originated by, and, now derives
its principal impelling power from, the same diabolical sources.
I point to a leading member of the present government, who is
an ex-leader writer for the Age, an avowed spiritualist and foe of
Christ; and there are others in it whom the secularists and
sensualists, I fear justly, publicly claim as holding, and I suppose
practising, their views of religion and morality. I point to the
scandalous, filthy streams of public immorality, which, in open
defiance of laws on the statute hook, flow almost unchecked down
our public streets; and to the diminishing power of the law to
deal with crimes of almost every kind. These I hold are a few
out of many evidences which prove beyond question that in doing
my little part against spiritualism and infidelity, I was doing the


work of Flim who was manifested to destroy the works of the
devil. Much of the public antagonism with which I met, sprang
from those secret infidel enemies who swarm in the press, the
parliament, and in that traffic in poisonous liquors whose sup-
porters gave me the first trouble within the camp, and who fought
like fiends against me outside the camp, during my ministry in
the Tabernacle. That traffic I found to be in Collingwood, what
it is everywhere, the producer of every vice and the destroyer of
every virtue; Its friends are always, and everywhere, therefore,
necessarily my foes ; because the traffic they defend is dishonour-
ing to God and soul-destroying amongst men. Amongst the “many
adversaries ” who beset me, I therefore place second on the list,
THE LIQUOR TRAFFIC AND ITS DEFENDERS.
In 1853, when a child under seven, I became, in Edinburgh, a
pledged member of “The British League of Juvenile Abstainers,”
whose “ principle ” is stated on my card of membership to be,
“ Abstinence from giving or partaking of alcoholic liquors, tobacco,
and opium;” and whose “object” is expressed as, “the union of
the youth of the British Empire on this principle,” I have kept
my pledge, and endeavoured to extend its principles, from that day
to this. But within a year of signing it, I ranged myself under
the banner of the Cross, and made it a part of my vow to Christ,
the Captain of our Salvation, depending upon His Spirit for
strength to keep this, and every pledge to abstain from sin. Know-
ing that “at the last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an
adder,” I have tried to persuade all around me not to take the first
glass of the poison, and not without success. Knowing the certain
ultimate effects of that deadly drug alcohol, I have besought, in
Christ’s name, those who sipped from the fatal’cup of death, to
give it up at once and forever. Knowing the sure doom of the
nation and empire where this maddening draught of the devil’s
brewing was drunk, as seen in the fall of Babylon, of Rome, and
of every race where Bacchus reigned, I have raised my voice as a
citizen against the madness which encourages the manufacture, the
sale, and the drinking of such poisons. Knowing the havoc it has
wrought in the Church of God, from the day when Noah fell drunk
in his tent, until this day, when so many ministers I have known
have fallen drunk from their pulpits ; when so many nominal
Christians fall drunk from their pews into a drunkard's hell, I have
raised my voice against it in the Church ; and I have, by divine
grace, taught, and still teach, that the man who uses his time,
money, brains, hands, or property in the drink traffic, is a man
whom God’s Word proclaims is a seller of poisons more deadly
than serpents and adders, and is, therefore, unfit to enter, and
should not be allowed to remain in, the Church of Christ.


Small wonder is it then, that with such sentiments, I have never
found my ministry to be dull, or devoid of a most pleasant sense of
the devil being particularly angry with me, —for want of which some
of my brethren in the ministry have even begun to doubt the exist-
ence of that great enemy, an evidence, I fear, that he has been
hitherto particularly pleased with their ministry. I will do that enemy
the justice to say, that he has never concealed his dislike of my
ministry, and that he has paid me, for many years, increasingly
marked and public attentions. He has also shown, in the skilful
management of his forces, amazingly good generalship, generally
managing to range in the fore-front of the battle against me, some
weak or treacherous wearer of the Christian or Temperance uniform.
It was in that way that he began the battle with me inside the
Church of the Tabernacle, so fully described in the preceding
chapter. Who could have supposed that, in the secretary of the
Church, who led that rebellion on the 23rd July, one would find a
liquor seller ? “ What !” the reader says, “do you mean to say
that the person who read out that notice of a temperance meeting, in
defiance of your known wishes, was engaged in selling daily the
deadly poisons from which that meeting was to persuade men to
abstain Exactly so, my friend ; I do say, and he dare not deny,
that such is the simple fact : for he was, and is, a wholesale mer-
chant’s confidential salesman of brandy, rum, gin, or any other form
of this alcoholic poison ; and his principal, like himself, daily pro-
fesses to pray for the eternal welfare of the souls of those whom the
drink which he daily sells is eternally destroying. I will tell the reader
more. At least one other of these ex-stewards, was also interested
in defending the traffic, so far as being in the employ of a man and
woman who are, probably, the largest dealers in these poisonous
drinks in Fitzroy, and who are also Christian professors, to the
scandal of the Church to which they belong. The reader may
wonder why such tools were chosen to have anything to do with a
temperance meeting ; but they were chosen, so far as I can see, only
for one reason, that, whereas I wanted to fight intemperance with
the aid of the Church, and as a part of its proper work, the enemy
knew that the work would be less dangerous to his schemes if it was
kept in the hands of a society where God is not recognised, and
many of whose speakers, are open foes of Christ and his Church.
I will prove that in its proper place. This, however, was the way
in which the “ many adversaries,” connected with the liquor traffic
made their first attack upon me—the wolf in this case wore a
sheep’s skin.
As the reader now knows from the preceding chapter, the attack
failed, the Church stood by me, and gave me, as was my right and
duty, the control of its temperance work amongst the multitudes
whom the traffic was destroying around us.


On Thursday evening, 27th July, 1882, the very day on which the
enemy had plotted to sieze our platform, I preached a special
sermon, on “ The Battle is the Lord’s ; or, how to fight the liquor
traffic.” There was a large attendance, and at the close I asked
those who desired to enrol as active members in a “ Christian Tem-
perance Crusade,” to remain and take a vow which I had prepared.
After earnest consideration and prayer, fifty-one persons took the follow-
ing vow, repeating the words, with their right hand uplifted, after
me, viz. :—“ Believing that without Christ I can do nothing, and
depending upon His Spirit alone for strength, I vow before God, my
Eternal Father, that I will henceforth abstain from all intoxicating
liquors, and will fight for the destruction of the liquor traffic till I
die.”
For many weeks the crusade went on with very little opposition,
and with gratifying tokens of success amongst the miserable victims
of intemperance around us, for whose sad and degraded condition
the crusaders were feeling a daily increasing concern. Street pro-
cessions were organised, and, in the depth of the winter, amidst
rain and mud often, the crusade continued its mission of mercy.
Finding that it was gathering strength, the enemy began to fire a
few shots at us, sometimes in the shape of bad language, rather
gravely accentuated with an occasional stone. But we only sang
the more heartily, and prayed for them the more earnestly. Large
crowds of people, the vast majority of whom were most orderly in
their conduct, gathered around us as we passed through the streets,
singing our carefully-practised hymns. The people, for the most
part, listened attentively to both singing and speaking, walked
quietly with us, and followed us into the Tabernacle, where many
took the crusaders’ vow. The rage of the liquor dealers, and their
numerous dependents and allies, increased steadily, until it became
a perfect frenzy. The publicans appealed to their so-called Christian
friends, who supplied them with their liquor in many cases. These
persons gravely shook their crafty heads, held up their hands in
pious horror, and declared that I must either be mad or a devil.
One of these liquor dealers in a large way, stirred up the disorderly
within the Church against me at this time, and kept me busy there,
as already described. Their “ craft was in danger,” their attempts
from within were a failure, and now they proceeded to organized riot-
ing, with a view to bring me into public contempt. To make their
attacks the more effective, they enlisted against me the newspaper
press of the city, almost without exception. It was not difficult to
secure their assistance : for the press had some old scores against
me. It was known to many of its reporters especially, and to some
of its leader-writers also, that in two lectures on “ The Drama, the
Press, and the Pulpit,” published in Sydney, in March, 1879, I
had expressed the entire contempt in which I held the moral, social,
and political principles of the press of that city. They knew also


that, in my lecture of 29th June, in the Tabernacle, with 2,000
persons within hearing, I had expressed similar sentiments concern-
ing the daily press here, with the solitary exception of the
Telegraph, Some of them also knew that I had begun my conflicts
with the soulless, greedy, and unscrupulous portions of the press,
which so consistently support the liquor dealer, and his fearful
crimes against God and man, in Adelaide, more than fifteen years
ago ; and that I had a few skirmishes with my old foes there only
the previous year. Some of the Melbourne press men also had
acquaintance with the fact, that the Advocate , the Popish organ of
this city, had addressed itself, about March, 1877, for three succes-
sive weeks to my especial extinction, in long abusive articles, of
three or four columns each, purporting to review my pamphlet,
entitled “ Rome’s Polluted Springs,” which contained an examina-
tion of, and a reply to, Archbishop Vaughan’s famous address on
“ Hidden Springs.” The bitterness of that attack led me instinc-
tively to expect the fiercest and most persistent enmity from that
quarter, should I ever have a stand-up fight in this city with the liquor
traffic ; for Popery and beer are, I have always found, the firmest
of friends. I was not mistaken. The Herald led the van in the
newspaper battle which, after a little skirmishing from the spirit-
ualists in the Age , fairly set in on Saturday, 23rd Sept., 1882.
Retained, as it is so manifestly, to chant the praises of Bacchus
and Rome, both of whose cunning priests have secured for it so wide a
circulation, the Herald is, for absolute falsehood in its reports of
those it hates, only surpassed by the vehemence and malice of its
comments upon them. Its first leader, of 23rd Sept,, upon myself,
was a fair illustration of that fact. For ignorance and brutality of
expression it was inimitable. It was headed, “ The Crusaders.”
Its literary accuracy may be imagined, and its Milesian authorship
decided, by its second sentence, which begins thus : —“ The Rev.
Mr. Dowie has revived a new crusade.” Surely none but a scribe
of Bacchus, who had been devoutly and deeply drinking his
divinity for some hours at some favourite shrine, say at “ The Rain-
bow,” could have conceived that brilliant thought, and made that
amazing discovery, concerning me. After having seen me perform
this extraordinary feat of raising from a dying condition something
which had never before lived, it will not excite any surprise when I
tell the reader of many other marvellous sights which this editor
saw, of things which never happened, and of the dreadful speeches
he heard, which were never spoken. Need it be said, that this
accurate chronicler saw “ proceedings which were a compound of
lunacy and outrage, eminently calculated to provoke a breach of the
peace or that I had subjected “ a respectable man to gross and
brutal insult”; or that I was guilty of other “outrageous behaviour?”
Of course not, the sober reader would quite expect these drunken
helots of literature to see and say such falsehoods ; and so they did.


Nor will it surprise the reader to know that the same editor had such
elevated views of justice as to suggest, that the proper punishment
for my crime of striving to rescue the victims of Bacchus was a
“ sound drenching in that horse-trough which a beneficent law
permits the publican to provide.” That of course was to be expected,
since the only kind of water with which such persons are concerned
is dirty. But that was not all, this editor darkly hinted that, if
these threats were insufficient to make me for ever hide my devoted
head, “ the authorities may rest assured, that unless they are checked,
these doughty warriors will meet with decidedly unpleasant treat-
ment.” This was, even for a scribe of Bacchus whose imaginative
faculties might have been refreshed by brandy at “ the Rainbow,”
just a trifle too indiscreet : for it clearly showed not only a deter-
mination to put down the “ outrageous lunatic,” but a determination
to coerce “ the authorities,” if they too would not bow down and serve
their Baal. It was a distinct invitation to the drunken and dis-
orderly to assault us in the public streets, which was eagerly and
joyfully acted upon from that time henceforth. Every street arab
felt that he had been publicly invited to try the effect of road metal,
rotten eggs, or any other kind of “ decidedly unpleasant treat-
ment.” The nights were dark, the crowds were large, a well-aimed
shower of stones was a heroic feat which might make it “decidedly”
unpleasant for the Crusaders, and win the high approval of the
Herald. Who could tell, even the “ brutal ” Dowie might get an
eye cut out, or be trampled to death, or suffocated in a horse-trough,
and cast out upon the highway a bleeding lifeless mass ? Such an
issue was by no means too dreadful for the scribes of Bacchus to
conceive, or the priests and degraded worshippers of that demon in
Collingwood to execute. One can even conceive the diabolical joy
which would thrill their murderous breasts. In the Bacchce of
Euripides, a play which was written in praise of the god Bacchus,
there is a passage which describes how the Bacchanalian chorus
rejoice over such a deed. The “ god ” there contrives to make a
son appear a horrid beast in the eyes of his drunken mother, who,
with her companions, sieze, cruelly torture, and kill him, tearing him
from limb to limb, whilst they sing—“ Ye have accomplished a
glorious victory, illustrious, yet for woe and tears : for it is a glorious
contest to plunge one’s dripping hand into the blood of one’s son.”
Does my reader think this an exaggeration ? Look around and see.
Similar atrocities occur almost daily. Look upon the records of only
one year’s triumphs of the Liquor Traffic. There you will find that
Drink has caused the blood of mothers to stain the murderous hands
of their drunken sons, and that Drink has wrought every cruelty
that Satan or Bacchus, they are identical, could devise to destroy
man and dishonour (Tod. Wherein then does the Bacchanalian
Chorus of the modern press differ from the Bacchanalian Chorus of
the ancient Greeks ? Certainly, Drink is not less infamous for its


awful horrors : since famine, war, flood, and fire never wrought
such awful deeds as drink has caused. Certainly not in the
unanimity which they manifest in defending this “god”
against any Christian minister so “ brutal ” as to attack him.
Certainly not in the loudness with which they praise their god
of liquid fire, or the relish with which they swallow him, and
try to swallow his enemies too. It is only here that they
differ—the modern chorus has two faces under their hats, and is
hypocritical: for, whilst they flatter and defend the Liquor Traffic,
they profess to deplore its horrible effects. But the ancient chorus
were honest demons, who did not hide their worship of Bacchus
under indecent pretences, and, like Cadmus in the Bacchce , they boldly
proclaimed the justice of the Bacchanalian murder of those opposed
to that monster, saying with him, as he looks upon the bleeding head-
less body of Pentheus—“ But if there is anyone here who despises the
gods, looking on this man’s death, let him acknowledge the gods.” And
were the Bacchanalian chorus of the Press, the Parliament, the
Liquor Trade, and even many hypocrites in the Churches, to be truly
honest, they must needs throw down their sham Christianity, and
erect three altars, one for Bacchus, one for Plutus, and one for
Venus : for Drink, Money, and Lust are the trinity most worshipped
in this sin-cursed city.
But I must press on with my narrative, and as rapidly as possible
sketch the battle of the Bacchanalians which followed for several
months.
The Herald painted my portrait in its columns with a fidelity to
falsehood worthy of “ the father of lies.” I was painted as being
attired “in a rat-catchers ” costume, at the head of a kind of
“ Guy Fawkes procession,” and a specimen speech of mine outside
a public house was given, nearly every word of which was a lie.
The reporter saw me “kneel down for a prayer, and in this position
skake my fist at the disturbers on one side,” and much more to the
same false effect, all proving that “the affair was a burlesque.”
This key-note sounded, the Chorus struck in.
The Age employed the Lord’s Day leisure of some of its spirit-
ualistic staff to produce a long leader in its issue of Monday, 25th
September, on “anew religious difficulty,” the sting and origin of
which was seen in its tail. There I was described as a “ foolish
fanatic,” those who aided me were “ a congenial mob,” the false-
hoods of the Herald’s report were repeated, and I was labelled by
this member of the Bacchanalian chorus, “ a nuisance, and a
“ spiritual mountebank.” From time to time, the Age found room
for a continuation of these sweetly expressed compliments, only some
of which I saw and preserved. For instance, on October 7th, I was
called “ a ranter,” one who “ like the Pharisees of old drew thankful


comparisons” between, myself and “ the poor publicans”—evidently
been ignorant of the fact that the “ publicans ” of Christ’s day were
tax collectors, and not poison sellers. The writer in his anger even
denied me the rights of manhood, and wound up his sneer by reduc-
ing me to the rank of insects, classing me amongst “ black
beetles.”
The Argus joined also in the Bacchic frenzy which now seized
upon the press ; which, as I shall hereafter show, invaded the
parliament; and which aroused some persons in the Churches almost
to madness, when they found that their combined threats, sneers, and
lies, failed to make any impression whatever upon me. The Argus ,
belying its motto, told falsehoods like its neighbours. It represented
me as a “ so-called ” minister, implying that I had no right to the
courtesy title of “ Rev.”—for which title I care less than nothing.
But the Argus knew that it was insinuating a falsehood it dared
not express, by hinting that I was a fraud and no minister : for
since regular ordination, and a career without public stain, gives me
the right to be held a minister, as it does many around me, then it
was a base and mean libel which was uttered from the vaunted
cathedra of truth on October 4th. These are the congenial weapons
with which the slaves of Bacchus fight for their “god,” they fight
as savages do with poisoned spears, and they employ contemptible
falsehood as poison to tip the arrows of malice. And wherefore that
malice ? I answer in the Argus’ own words of 28th September,
when referring to Mr. Mason’s attack upon me in the House of
Assembly, they wrote, “ he will invite the Attorney-General to order
the police to protect the publicans from the enthusiastic but dis-
agreeable Mr. Howie.” Mr. Mason, and all the representatives of
Liquordom in press and parliament, having failed to put me down,
their frenzy knew no bounds, hence these false insinuations a few
days later. However, all sincere Christians will know how to value
the opinions of the Argus, whose opposition to Christ is thinly
veiled at any time, and whose only divinity is gain. Bacchus has a
high place in the money market, and all the hundred eyes of the
Argus glare with hate upon anyone whose actions might endanger
any of the gods of the Exchange. All their thousand claws are
eager to tear, and their ten thousand serpents’ teeth are ready to
bite, the monster who dares to question the divine right of Pluto,
god of darkness and of gold, and his drunken but wealthy associate
Bacchus. The Argus is the dog Cerberus, who watches over the
dark interests of the Hades of a corrupt society, where Mammon
holds undisputed sway. I count it among my honours to number
among my many adversaries this foul literary Cerburus, whose
“ mouth is an open sepulchre,” despite its veneer of culture, and I
should be as much ashamed to merit its praise, as I am thankful to
have been honoured by its abuse. 1 shall know that I have erred,


or that the Argus has been regenerated, should I awake to read its
approval of my conduct as a Christian, who has vowed to serve God
and not Mammon : for I mean to keep that vow, His Spirit helping
me, until I die. The only Christians whom the Argus approves are
such as, like Judas Iscariot, are ready to “ sell the truth” for the
smiles of Society, that soulless goddess who shares the throne of
“ filthy lucre ” with their divinity. Men who are ready to barter
the Lord’s Day, and to waive the Lord’s supreme demands, and
indisputable claims, upon every hour of man’s time and every power of
man’s being, are the friends of the Argus ; but, whether they wear a
bishop’s apron and mitre, or a Genevan gown, they are beyond
question the enemies of God. “ Know ye not,” writes James, the
inspired apostle, “ that the friendship of the world is enmity with
God ? whosoever, therefore, will be a friend of the world is the enemy
of God.” God’s enemies are the friends of the Argus ; and, there-
fore, I am ready to find myself at enmity with the unregenerate
Argus, and its superfine cultured ungodliness : for I know whose I
am and whom I serve.
The Australasian is also to be numbered amongst my “ many
adversaries;” and aspiring, as it does, to be the Saturday Review ,
in criticism, of Australian journalism, its attack was more polished,
and I am bound to say in many points much fairer, than the other
members of the literary Bacchanalian chorus. In its issue of 11th
November, it devoted several columns to a consideration of the
interesting problem which I presented to the literaly surgeon, and,
accordingly, having firmly bound me down on the public dissecting
table he proceeded to “ cut me up ” in that dainty self-confident
fashion, which, of course, was a final disposal of me. But, strange
to say, I live, and the knife never even touched me : for it was a
bogie of his own creation for the most part, and not myself, whom
the clever analyst, “ J.M.,” presented to the public, in the article
entitled, “An Ishmaelite.” I was represented as a “ dyspeptic ”
reformer, and a personal illustration of the alleged “ universal decay
of sleek-headed men, and such as sleep o’ nights whereas I
neither lack a perfectly sound digestion, nor the capacity to sleep
almost immediately my head touches the pillow, and for twenty years
I have only consulted a physician once, and that was just once too
often. As for the idea of my personality presented by the sketch
of a lean and hungry “ snapping dog, wearing a torn skin,” the
figure is both metaphorically and physically an absurdly inappro-
priate one: for a man, rather short than tall, who, at thirty-six years
of age, weighs twelve stone, and can gratefully feel a chest power of
over forty inches in circumference, is not the ideal of a hungry, desert
Ishmaelite. The bogie of a physical scarecrow, as my critic knows, is
as false as a great many other insinuations and assertions in his
article. His description of the condition of the Tabernacle, “to my


knowledge,” he adds, was simply that of an ignorant outsider, who
had no knowledge whatever of the subject, except such as others
gave him, and that he saw a crowd ot persons there. He might
any night see a bigger at a theatre, gazing at a filthy play ; but
would that crowd be a proof of the elevating power of the Drama ?
He might see larger crowds still of spiritually ignorant devotees, in
St. Patrick’s Cathedral here, adoring a piece of bread as a god ; or
in St. Peter’s, at Rome, kissing the bronze toe of an old image of
the heathen god]Jupiter, which does duty there for a statue of the
apostle. But would these multitudes of idolaters be a proof of the
blessed influences of the Roman Catholic apostasy, with all its soul-
destroying and anti-Christian blasphemy ? No, of course not.
Well, neither does a crowd at the Tabernache, or in the Fitzroy
Town Hall, or anywhere else, afford proof of the succsss of a work
calling itself Christian. Success in Christ’s work is tested by prin-
ciples, and by a Spirit, which it is beyond question safe to affirm
“ J.M.” knew nothing about when he wrote his Ishmaelitish article.
For the same reason, he fails to understand even what he sees and
hears. An eye and ear witness is often the most unreliable of
witnesses, unless he knows more about a man and his principles
than he can know after an act of Bacchic devotion ; for “ a gift
doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righ-
teous;” and no literary hireling of Bacchus, like my critic, could
fail to be blind and perverse in writing of an enemy of his god.
“J.M.” knew that payment for, and insertion of, his article con-
cerning me was entirely dependent upon his, Balaam-like, cursing
me, and all ray works, in elegant English, which he certainly did
when describing a night’s observation of the Christian Temperance
Crusade. But, although he was paid to curse me, this poor literary
Balaam tried to compound with conscience, by even, in some degree,
praising me, when he wrote of me as a preacher and lecturer. He
wrote :—“ On the following Sunday night, I had the pleasure of
hearing Mr. Dowie preach a very good sermon ... He has a
sweet voice, and a copious flow of expressive words. . , . His
tones are
gentle
As zephyr blowing below the violet,
Not shaking his sweet head.”
Then, as a lecturer, he writes of me as follows ;—“ On the following
Thursday, Mr. Dowie delivered a temperance lecture, entitled ‘ A
Wasted Life.’ His utterance was above the average of such
deliverances. Mr. Dowie in an eloquent exordium [he tripped there
in his literary accuracy, and should have written peroration ],
besought all who were not crusaders to remain behind after the
lecture and take the vow. Mr. Dowie may, and doubtless does,
confront foes and accusers boldly, and say,


‘ I sing with mortal voice unchanged,
To hoarse or mute, though fallen on evil days,
On evil days though fallen and evil tongues,
In darkness, and with dangers compassed round,
And solitude
Oh yes, this Balaam was even constrained to bless the man whom
Balak, in the form of the Argus and Australasian proprietors, had
hired him to curse. He even closed by reminding me, “as a part-
ing piece of advice,” of a beautiful expression of Pascal concerning
humility : for which I very sincerely thank him, since no man on
earth can be too humble. But let me remind my critical Balaam,
that there are higher authorities upon humility than either himself
or Pascal. I prefer the inspired word of* God, which says in one
breath that the true man must humbly bow before God, and at the
same time stoutly resist the devil :—“ Humble yourselves there-
fore under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you
in due time ; casting all your care upon Him, for He careth
for you. Be sober, be vigilant ; because your adversary the
devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may
devour.” (1 Peter v. 6-8). As he closed his critique of me
with a parting word of advice, I here close my brief examination of
it with a message, which I have from the risen Christ, to him, and
to all like him, who wickedly make the press “ a stumbling block ”
to the people, instead of a help to them. Here it is : —“ I have a
few things against thee, because thou hast there them that hold the
doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block
before the children of Israel. . . Repent ;or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my
mouth.” (Revelation ii. 14-16).
But I must hasten to introduce to my readers one of the basest,
bitterest, and most persistent of my many adversaries, the most
drunken of all the literary helots in the Bacchanalian chorus—
The World. Edited by “the devil,” and written to gratify
“ the flesh,” that would be just the flag I would expect my
bitterest “ adversary ”to fight me under: for I have never
taken any pains to conceal the fact that I am no friend to the
“ wickedness,” in which, God says, “ the world ”is “ lying.” Who
edits the World, I do not personally know ; but I should think that
he must be the direct literary heir of one Ely mas, whom Paul said
was “ full of all subtility and mischief, a child of the devil, and an
enemy of all righteousness.” To detail and fully expose the
untruths that vile sheet has printed concerning me during the last
year, would require a pamphlet in itself. Let some few suffice as
specimens of the rest. On September 28th, it caught up the Herald s
key-note, and within a few days the Bacchic frenzy became so fierce
and high, that it took a new departure and reached summits of


screeching abuse, and depths of degrading coarseness and mean lying,
such as left all the chorus far behind. It introduced me to its
readers as taking “ a dress circle among the week’s wags; ” it
reminded its readers of a sermon which it alleged I had preached, in
which I “ prophetically consigned everyone ” except myself, to “ a
pit seat in the sweet bye-and-bye, where the gods would be unre-
strained by any managerial announcement not to throw oyster-shells
and ginger beer bottles down upon them ; ” it said I had certain
monstrous transparencies made, “ with beautiful emerald-green, pink,
golden, and blue angels, and ugly whisky bottles, painted on them
it said my “ army consisted of six very plain old women, a reformed
and unhappy looking larrikin, a one-eyed man, and a few others,”
&c., &c., with a “ cauld kail het ” kind of dishing up of a few of the
Herald's lies. This was the World lying in fun, I suppose ; but
lying notwithstanding in every line. But in the same issue, it began
its lying in earnest, and aimed its poisoned arrows at my heart. It
described me as “ a pseudo-reverend gentleman,” insinuating the
same falsehood as the Argus , with which I have already dealt ; it
stated that certain attacks were made upon me by a certain politician
with whom I shall deal further on in this chapter, who had
the previous night betrayed the cause of “ local option ” in Parlia-
ment, and for whose good opinion I care nothing' ; and it summed
me up as “ the butt of the larrikin’s wit who mountebanks in the
gutters ” —hinting that the police must stop me and punish me.
And what dreadful deeds had I committed ? What crime was the
law to punish me for ? Only this, the crime of daring to oppose
Bacchus in his march of crime and death, the crime of daring to
expose myself to innumerable insults and dangers in warning and
saving his perishing victims. However, as all these attacks failed,
and as I went on despite all the diabolical enmity of the World, the
flesh, and the devil, the frenzy grew fiercer still, and, at last I was
solemnly cursed, “ with bell, book and candle,” in its leading columns
on October 6th. The unadulterated hate and false suggestion of the
production is only excelled by its absolute untruthfulness ; and it
would be difficult to find more libels in less space. The attempt
was made to suggest that my past was disgraceful ; but,
beyond vague assertion, the cowardly writer did not dare to
venture, knowing well that no proof could be found. I was
represented, by inference, as a scheming wretch, half-fool, and wholly
rogue, whose professions were false and intended to deceive.
My “ discourses ” were “ flavoured with the spice of folly, and
enlivened by the antics of a clown.” It appeared that I had a
“ hunger for inglorious glory and also, that I “ not only violated
every principle of common sense, outraged the ordinary decencies of
society, and made himself a nuisance to respectable citizens, but
has rendered himself liable to be indicted as a public nuisance.” Ah,
that was the sore point. The scribes of Bacchus said constantly


that I was “ liable to be indicted j” but who amongst all the hosts
of them dared to indict me ? Not one. They knew they were
printing and circulating falsehoods ; and not one of all the liquor
traffic legal luminaries dared to undertake the impossible task of
proving their lies. But the writer continued, “ the attention of the
Government has been drawn to his proceedings, and there is no
doubt but that if he persists in continuing them, the assistance of
the police will be necessary to suppress his mistaken zeal.” Again
the Bacchic scribe knew he was writing falsely, in the vain attempt to
terrify me : for at this very time I had demanded, and obtained,
from the Chief Commissioner of Police abundant police protection,
before and after this attack, both for the processions in the street,
and the meetings in the Tabernacle. I defied successfully both the
O’Loghlen Government and the whole Bacchanalian chorus to
hinder my work ; and I went forward, strong in my legal rights : for
I neither by word nor deed broke any law of man, and stronger still
“in the strength of the Lord,” since I was obeying His command,
“ Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in
hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.”—
Luke xiv. 21. But the writer continued, accusing me in his frenzy
of “ insincere sincerity,” and so plunged himself into the depths of
literary bathos, proving his utter mental imbecility. Perhaps, how-
ever, it was only a specimen of the World’s insane sanity, or its untrue
truthfulness, or its unwise wisdom, or its drunken sobriety. Who
can tell ? It is, alas, to be feared that the writer had swallowed too
much of his liquid god : for he certainly had lost the power to dis-
tinguish between black and white, between sincerity and insincerity.
The occurrence is not uncommon in real life ; although it is not often
that the drunken literary Bacchanalian so clearly reveals himself in
print. But the writer continued, and being now fairly beyond all
control, he made four charges against me in one of his closing para-
graphs, which are partly an utterly shameful perversion of facts, and
partly the most infamous of fabrications. He wrote, “ And yet we
see (1) a man who has thrown aside the garb of the clergy to attitu-
dinise as a defeated candidate on an electioneering hustings ; (2) a
man who has publicly appealed for sympathy for one of the most
notorious criminals and red-handed murderers of the day ; (3) a
man who has threatened brute force to prevent the due execution of
the law ; (4) allowed to force himself into the position of a public
advocate of temperance.” In reply, I say (1) that I defy any man to
prove that I ever wore “ a garb ” of any kind, so that I could not
throw it aside : for my position as a Christian minister has never
been a question of “ garb,” or clothes of any sort. My ministry is
not, and never was, a mere profession, to be laid down with my
clothes, and to be put on with my clothes ; I leave that for such
men as the writer of that article to do. I have never been ashamed
of my ministry : for it has ever been the service, joyful, free, self-


denying, and continuous, of a heart filled with love and loyalty to
my Master, and with unshaken, and ever increasing devotion to His
service. He knows I speak the truth ; and all who really know me,
know it too. I have taken part in politics, but it was as a minister
of Christ, as well as a citizen; and in New South Wales a Christian
minister may sit, and Christian ministers have sat, in the Legislative
Assembly. I have taken some little part in literary work, and have
even edited more than one paper ; but I have never laid aside my
ministry—that was a part of it. (2) I have pleaded for the com-
mutation of the death sentence ; but not that I ‘‘sympathised ” with
murder, as my unmanly traducer degradingly insinuates: for I
pleaded without money or any reward, except the abuse of men like
my maligner, and I, in many cases, obtained with others, the lives of
criminals, whose faces I have never seen. I did so, because lam en-
tirely opposed to capital punishment, on I believe Christian principle.
(3) I have never in all my life violated the law ; and I fling back the
foul lie that I “ threatened brute force to prevent the due execution of
the law : ” for, when I failed to procure the commutation of a death
sentence, after working until the last hour almost, I have spent the
morning of an execution in prayer for the soul of the man whom the
law was engaged in strangling to death. The adminstrators of the
law have never charged me with either resisting or violating it—no,
it takes an anonymous coward in the World to falsely charge me
with that crime. (4) Finally, lam supposed to have “ forced ”
myself “ into the position of a public advocate of temperance.”
Why, 1 grew into the position, from my seventh year, just as a man
grows into being a musician or a painter ; and, before I was out of
my teens, I was a temperance writer and speaker, and an elected
member of the general Committee of the South Australian Total
Abstinence Society, and one of the Honorary General Secretaries of
the S. A. Alliance, the constitution of which I drafted. In Scotland,
I was a member of the Scottish Temperance League, an occasional
writer in its well-known journal, and a speaker on its platforms in
Edinburgh, Glasgow, and elsewhere. In New South Wales, I was
a member of the Alliance ; I was President of an Abstainer’s Union ;
I wrote many temperance tracts, of which about 100,000 copies
have been printed, and gratuitously distributed ; I drafted the
constitution, wrote the manifestoes, was a member of the General
Council, and for some time one of the honorary secretaries, of the
Liquor License Laws Amendment Association, of which the present
Lieutenant Governor of New South Wales, Sir Alfred Stephen, was
President; an organization which did more to bring about the present
reforms in the licensing laws, and the abolition of Sunday selling,
there, than any other, nearly the whole of its programme being now
the law of the land. I formed many branches of that Association,
delivered some of the first lectures expounding its policy to the
people, and for a number of years, I was chosen, by all sections of


Temperance reformers in Sydney, to expound that policy to the
Premiers of successive Governments, as one of the spokesmen of
large deputations ; and I have, on many occasions, received the
kind public thanks of my fellow-labourers, and of public meetings.
In this colony, I have been invited, on many occasions, to speak on
the platforms of the Melbourne Total Abstinence Society in the city
and suburbs; I have delivered the Inaugural Addresses of two new
Total Abstinence Societies by express invitation ; I have spoken
also at large meetings, on several occasions, for the Victorian
Alliance, in such places as Melbourne, Sandhurst, &c. And all
this I did without ever asking or receiving a farthing in money
recompense, at a cost of time, strength, toil of brain, wear of body,
and expenditure of money, such as none of the Bacchanalian selfish
and lying horde can even imagine. Yet lam publicly insulted, as
being presumptuously insolent, after twenty-nine years of Tem-
perance service ; and the public are told, that I “ force ” myself
“ into the position of a public advocate of temperance.” I leave
every honest man to judge between us, as to who is presumptuous,
as to who is honest, my anonymous accuser or myself ? Ido not
fear the verdict. But who is this particular Bacchanalian critic ?
I think I could name him ; but I will spare him, and proceed to ask
him a few questions as to his identity, which will reveal the probable
characteristics of this mysterious Bacchanalian, “ No. 1.” “Were
you not once a minister, who said one day, when very angry, to a
brother minister who offended you, ‘ I have a good mind to lay my
ministry aside with my coat and give you a sound thrashing ? ’ ”
lam assured you did. Perhaps this may account for your falsely
charging me with throwing aside “ a garb,” since men commonly
measure others by their own moral standards. It is many years ago,
since you threw aside your ministerial garb in Sydney; and I think you
are what we Scotchmen call “ a stickit minister,” hence, possibly, your
desire to make me one also. “Were you not once paid a large
salary to lecture for the total abstainers here ? ” I am so assured.
But long since you became “ a stickit teetotaler,” and you are now,
alas, a Bacchanalian scribbler, bent upon destroying one who is faithful
to the Master, and faithful to the cause, which you have publicly
betrayed. You see I know you, and yet I refrain from naming you.
You dared, you of all living men dared, to close your vile article
concerning me with these words :—“ Toleration in such a case
becomes disgraceful. Bowie as a comical crusader could be treated
with scorn. Bowie as an outrage on public decency must be
suppressed.” You will find one day that my Lord and Master is your
Judge ; and He will require this at your hands. I leave you, my
fallen brother, to your own reflections, and pray that you may seek
and find God’s mercy ; and, since you now see that neither your
“ scorn,” nor your falsehoods, nor all the power of the Bacchanalian
chorus have “ suppressed ” me, let me add that “ the Lord is my


keeper,” and that it is only by His power I have been kept, amidst
all the murderous attempts of those who vainly decreed “ Dowie
must be suppressed.” And with these words I leave
the World ; and will briefly review the other small fry members
of the chorus.
The Licensed Victuallers’ Advocate and Sportsman's Guide , of
course, paid me particular attentions, too numerous to mention
at length. Some one sent me its issue of October 7th, which
reveals the frantic frenzy of hatred which possessed “ the trade ”
against me. My name figures in no less than four separate
columns in that number; and, in addition, I am made the subject
of the leading article. In a letter addressed to the Chief Com-
missioner of Police by the secretary, Mr. T. Parker, of the Vic-
torian United Licensed Victuallers’ Association, that scribe of
Bacchus, on behalf of the Committee, bullied the Commissioner in
fine Bacchanalian style concerning “the proceedings in Colling-
wood of a person named Dowie, and certain men and women
associated with him.” After writing utter falsehoods as to what
these proceedings were, the secretary prophesies that unless lam
“ I am at once put down serious breaches of the peace will
ensue,” as it is impossible for the Licensed Victuallers quietly
to submit to my “outrageous insults.” He demands, in closing,
that “ the cause of complaint will be speedily removed. ” But
this impudent letter to the police was fruitless : for I continued
to demand, and receive, their protection, so far as it could he
called such. Another column contains a long advertisement by
the same person, hypocritically telling the Licensed Victuallers
“ not to take the law in their own hands, hut to secure witnesses
to the outrages offered them, and to communicate the evidence ”
to him. He added “the Association will prosecute.” But it
was only a vain attempt to frighten me : for I continued the
Crusade, and they never dared to prosecute. Immediately
beneath that advertisement comes the editorial anathemas, the
first sentence of which will doubtless suffice, viz :—“ Mr. Mason,
M.L.A., deserves the thanks of the trade for bringing before the
Assembly the idiotic and insulting proceedings of the man Dowie,
and his ‘ tail.’ ” Again, in the column entitled “ Bar Talk,”
written by “ Three Star,” that brilliant scribe developes, quite
naturally, an idea from the pig trough, which he modestly.off’ers
to the injured Bacchanalians of Collingwood. He says “ I’d
like —oh, woud’nt I like?—to duck that fellow Dowie in a
trough—a pig trough at that. . . The pig trough
idea is fascinating now isn’t it ? Wonder where Dowie ’ud
think he was going to then ? and whether such no-mistake-about-
it treatment woud’nt induce him to assign a cooler destination for
honest Boniface ? ” Bacchus always has a “ fascination ” for the


pig trough, it is so congenial to his filthy tastes and habits; but it
is rare to see him confess it. Another paragraph in the same column
was a lie from start to finish; but I won’t take any more out of that
swinish literary vomit produced, very appropriately, by “ Three
Star.” I will only give one more under “ Trade Gossip/' which runs
thus, “ F. C. Mason, M.L.A., never loses a chance to put in one
from the shoulder on behalf of the publicans. ‘ Salvation ’ Dowie
has been brought by him under the notice of the Attorney-
General. If the police don’t stop Dowie’s impudent verbal
onslaughts on publicans, the latter will take the law (and the
gospel (!) as personified in Dowie) into their own hands.” This
was the perfection of the Bacchanalian frenzy; and the reader
will see that it is not the fault of the organ of the trade that I am
now alive : for, like Pentheus, in the tragedy of the JBacchce, I was
Tainted as a monster unfit to live. But I went on despite all, and
was not in any degree moved by these attacks: for in my
spirit the words were ringing, “ The battle is the Lord’s.” I saw
the perishing, and I dared not discontinue until it was the Lord’s
own time.
Amongst my smaller adversaries was the Bulletin. In its
“Town Talk,” of October 6th, I was described as “ a smart chap.”
In another column this advice was given : “ Let the publicans
collect a choice lot of larrikins, arm each with a pint-pot full of
beer; march up to Dowie’s residence, and after singing ‘We
won’t go home till morning,’ let Mr, Dowie’s health be proposed.
After that let a signal be given, and the great army of boozers
will present arms, and drink.” This was only fun; but it, alas,
got down to its level of serious abuse, as a true member of the
great Bacchanalian chorus, and suggested that “ dead cats,
ancient eggs, and other cognate matters . . . should be
utilised,” in the defence of their god against our attacks.
And with that, having now seen “ the dead cat and pig-
trough ” level, which the press had reached in their hatred of
me, and of the Christian Temperance Crusade, I will leave their
attacks there, asking the reader to note that these stinking
weapons are most appropriate for such warriors, and that their
suggested baptismal font of filth must have been highly congenial
to such corrupt minds.
As I shall not again deal in these pages at any length with
my “ adversaries ” in the press, I will here make two observations
concerning it.
The first is personal. Their hatred to me arose, most mani-
festly, not from any wrong I had done, but from my unselfish,
and unsparing hostility to the drink traffic, which it is their
interest to defend, and a Christian’s duty to destroy, since it is


the friend of every vice and the foe of every virtue. Hence it
was that these cunning' scribes of their murderous divinity, Bac-
chus, raised the cry, “Away with this man!” and hounded on
the ignorant, the infidel, and liquor-brutalized multitudes to
assault me. And if any should ask, as Pilate did, “ Why, what
evil hath he done ?” the newspaper press, with almost united
voice, clamour with increased vehemence, in their thousand ton-
gues, as of old, “ Crucify him! crucify him!” Yea, and they
will rather have the seditious and murderous Barabbas, in the
form of the liquor traffic, released unto them, to go on with his
bloody work in every street of the cities and towns, and in every
highway throughout the land, slaying in body, soul, and spirit,
thousands on every hand. Do my Christian readers wonder then
at the enmity of the press, when they remember that, following
Christ, I too was “ manifested to destroy the works of the devil,”
as is the absolute duty of every believer, according to his capacity
and opportunity ? No, Ido not complain of, and I do not fear,
for one moment, the enmity of all who love and serve sin; but
I do say that it is a monstrous injustice that any true Christian
man or woman, should allow themselves to be led into harsh criti-
cism and even bitter antagonism, to me, or any other servant of
Christ, by the opposition of a press, where men who serve Mammon
and Bacchus are chief proprietors and editors. I, like my readers,
will soon disappear from the field of battle; but I want to say in
that day, with some measure of confidence, when I stand before
the messenger who whispers that the hour of my departure has
come, “I am now ready ... I have fought the good fight,
I have finished the course, I have kept the faith.” Therefore, I
will go forward ; for “ the battle is the Lord’s,” and I know
that
“ At all times, in all places, He standeth at my side ;
He rules the battle fury, the tempest, and the tide.”
The second observation I make concerning the press, is one of
general interest. An unscrupulous, mercenary, and wicked news-
paper press, like the greater portion of that in this city, is not
only a great social and political danger, it is an active volcano of
evil, which pours its floods of destroying fire into every house-
hold, and pollutes the nation’s life at its fountains. No civil
rights, and no political safeguards, can cope with these pestiferous
springs of moral corruption : for those anonymous assassins who
for the most part write in the press, are not only aiming to form
and guide public opinion, but they openly assert their right to
the absolute control of the principles and actions of public men
and public affairs, not in the public interest, but for the gratifica-
tion of their own passions, and the attainment of their personal
ambitions. There are few men who dare even to differ with


these, to the general public, unseen tyrants : for the penalty is
too great for most men to face. Hence the people must beware,
lest a morally licentious and a politically mercenary press should
be found to have undermined its liberties: for such men of dark-
ness, who night by night poison the fountains of truth whilst the
people sleep, seem to me to have been very minutely described by
the Spirit of God, in Ezekiel’s vision, twenty-four centuries
ago : —“ Son of man, these are the men that devise mischief
and give wicked counsel in this city ; which say, It is not near ;
let us build houses : this city is the caldron, and we be the flesh.”
There seems to me to be three practical remedies within the reach of
the Christian people of this land, if they would unite to secure them.
I suggest (1) that the law should compel all newspaper writers to
put their names above or beneath all articles or paragraphs express-
ing the writers’ opinions on any question or person, so that the
opinion shall be valued at its true worth ; (2) that the law should
compel a newspaper to publish a reply to attacks upon the opinions,
practices, or good name of the person attacked ; and (3) that
the Christian community should endeavour to establish, and main-
tain by a generous support, a healthy and vigorous daily newspaper,
such as Christian people would not be ashamed to give to their
children to read.
The wise and foreseeing Christian poet, Cowper, wrote many
years ago,
“ How shall I speak thee, or thy power address,
Thou god of our idolatry, the press ?
By thee religion, liberty, and laws,
Exert their influence, and advance their cause :
By thee worse plagues than Pharaoh’s land befel,
Diffused, make earth the vestibule of hell ;
Thou fountain, at which drink the good and wise ;
Thou ever-bubbling spring of endless lies ;
Like Eden’s dread probationary tree,
Knowledge of good and evil is from thee.”
The words are even more appropriate to-day than when they were
first written, and leaving them to the consideration of the thought-
ful, I turn away from my “ many adversaries ” in the press, and
will briefly allude to the attacks made upon me by
THE BACCHANALIAN LEGION IN PARLIAMENT.
The first attack was made in the Legislative Assembly, on 21st
September, during the discussion upon the question of Local
Option, when Mr. Mason rehearsed to the House the falsehoods
of the Press, and demanded my suppression ; but without any result.
The Crusade continued, and the Bacchic frenzy being now at its
highest pitch, another debate, lasting for about two hours, was led
off on October 3rd, by Mr. Mason, with another mass of mis-
representations, and another demand for government interference


But it was all in vain, the Attorney-General would have
liked to help his Bacchanalian friends, but he did not dare : for the
simple reason that my proceedings were legal and peaceful. Mr.
Mason had many helpers ; but there were several members who
spoke against his design, notably Messrs. Hall, Longmore, and
Gardiner, gentlemen to whom I have never spoken, so that their
defence was perfectly honest and generous. The formal motion was
negatived ; and the battle ended in empty talk. I will refrain from
any lengthened criticism of my bitter adversaries there, beyond say-
ing, that one could not but see that they were identical in spirit
with the other Bacchanalians of the press. My reply to the debate
was simply to announce a lecture for the next Friday evening, to
continue the processions, and to address a long letter to the Chief
Commissioner of Police demanding protection. A vast crowd of
friends and foes thronged and over-crowded the Tabernacle, on the
evening of Tuesday, 6th October, to hear what I had to say on
“ Drink and its Defenders ; Temperance and its Betrayers ; and the
Need for a Christian Temperance Crusade/’ Despite some vain
attempts to intimidate me before delivering the lecture, and other
desperate attempts to hinder me by disorderly persons within the
building, I managed to make myself heard and understood ; but I
found myself at the close in the midst of a perfect pandemonium.
Still I was enabled to close with singing and the benediction. The
disorderly persons whom the Church had expelled from its fellowship
were there in full force ; and a number of other persons, connected
with a local Temperance Benefit Society made themselves foolishly
prominent under their spiritualistic leaders, as well as persons
connected with the Melbourne Total Abstinence Society, who felt
themselves aggrieved by the action of myself and the Church in
purging- our platform from its delegates. This will, therefore, be a
fitting point to introduce upon the scene, as among my other
“ adversaries,”
THE BETRAYERS OF THE TEMPERANCE CAUSE.
I have lived long enough to see not only the great progress which
the Temperance cause has made, but the growth of great dangers
within its ranks—dangers which have already seriously threatened
not only its progress ; but its right to rank as a true social reform,
conducted and controlled, as it so largely is in Australia, by men,
who, with many noble exceptions, are either office-seekers, or who
make the temperance platform a political or social stalking horse.
I have lived to see the origin and growth of that watery and sickly
imitation of Freemasonary, called Good Templary, with all its waste
of time in wearisome ritual, with its pitiful and plentiful supply of
man-millinery to mark its absurd “ degrees,” as if progress depended
upon ribbons and high-sounding empty names of mythical honours


conferred by each other upon themselves. And I have steadily seen
that the grand old self-denying Christian principles of the simple
total abstainers of my youth, was seriously hampered by the heavy
load of Temperance ritualism, which has at last well-nigh eaten out the
heart of the philanthropic principle of self-sacrifice. Temperance,
like Christianity, is healthiest, and most effective, in winning and
rescuing the perishing, when it has least formality in its modes of
operation, and when it is least encumbered by all kinds of useless
internal machinery and external pretentiousness. Then, its benefit
societies, have, for the most part, crystalised into mere monetary
organisations, sometimes passing on for many months, if not years,
in their tents and lodges without making a single organised effort
to save the perishing drunkard, and stem the steadily rising flood
of intemperance. Seeing this, and sometimes saying it in a friendly
spirit, I have incurred the wrath of the poor petty spirits who too
often float, like corks, on the top of these millinery organizations.
It did not, therefore, surprise me to find a letter, said to be from
“ the Rechabites of Fitzroy,” in the Herald of Sept, 30, denouncing
me with great vigor. Neither did it surprise me to hear (1) that
that they were really entirely ignorant of myself, or my doings, except
from the mendacious reports of a hostile press ; (2) that some of
them had somewhat close relations to the liquor traffic ; (3) that the
mover of the resolution against me in their tent was a “ spiritualist,”
and, therefore, an enemy of Christ and His ministers ; and (4) that
the Tent from which it emanated, almost never holds a public meeting
to extend Temperance principles, but grubs along with its money
grinding in a selfish and worldly fashion which, is probably, quite
natural to many of its members. Yet this obscure, and almost
useless, Tent, had vivacity enough left, under spiritist guidance, to
send an insulting letter to the nightly organ of Popery and Liquor-
dom, the Herald , expressing its “ disapproval ” of my proceedings,
whilst at the same time its members knew that they were no more
responsible for my actions, than if they lived in Heligoland : for I
never was a member of the Rechabite, or any other “ Order ”
amongst the many Ritualistic parasites on the Temperance cause. It
was gratuitous impudence, to assume the right of organic disapproval.
But it was another proof to me, that avowed infidels and spiritualists,
may, and do, lead the Temperance men of this city into very crooked
paths indeed.
And this is more strikingly seen in the conduct of the operations
of the Melbourne Total Abstinence Society. Many absurd rumours
have gone abroad, as to the contents of a certain letter which I
addressed to that society, immediately after the Church meeting of
24th July. As that society was immediately concerned in the first
outburst of “ sin in the camp ” (see previous chapter, pp. 16-29),
I will, therefore, set these rumours at rest by giving in this place the
letter to which I have referred.


“ The Tabernacle, Sackville Street,
Collingwood, 25th July, 1882.
“ To the Secretary of the Melbourne Temperance Society.
“ Sir, —On Monday, 26th June, I sent you a letter informing you
that, for certain important reasons, it would not be convenient to the
Church of Christ meeting in this place to hold the Temperance
meeting fixed for Thursday, 29th June, upon your society’s plan of
meetings for the quarter ending 30th June. I also stated our
intention of in future conducting the whole of our Temperance work,
without seeking for the assistance of your society.
“ You never acknowledged the receipt of that letter ; but, instead
of that, an intrigue was carried on to set my expressed wishes at
defiance, and, despite my determination to the contrary, to thrust
your society’s representatives upon the platform of the Tabernacle,
for which I alone am responsible to the Church of which I am the
temporary Pastor and Evangelist.
“ Accordingly, in defiance of my wishes, an utterly irregular notice
of a meeting for Thursday next, at which a deputation from your
society was announced to speak, was read by one of the stewards
who had lent himself to be the tool of these intriguers: for whose
action, I, and the Church here, hold your Committee in a measure
responsible, since you had my letter in your possession, and since, as
I am informed, a member of your Committee led the conspiracy.
“ I at once publicly disavowed the notice, declared that, whilst I
was pastor, no representatives of your society should stand upon the
platform of the Tabernacle, and called a special Church meeting for
last night (Monday) to deal with the subject and confirm, or annul,
my letter of 26th June.
“ The meeting, which was very largely attended, was held, and, by
an overwhelming majority, the offending were censured,
and my action was heartily endorsed.
“ It is, therefore, now my duty again to call your attention to my
letter of 26th June, and to inform you that, as a society , this
Church desires no fellowship with you in fighting against that foe of
God and man, the liquor traffic, since it finds in your policy, and in
some of your prominent, and even leading members, serious hindrances
to co-operation. You will, therefore, kindly and at once inform the
very worthy gentlemen, as I understand them to be, whom you have
placed in the false position of inviting to speak, in defiance of my
official letter, upon the Tabernacle platform, on Thursday next, that
the meeting will not be held. I make no reflections upon or objec-
tions to these gentlemen, who were doubtless kept in ignorance of our
objections to your society ; but we decline to receive any person
whatever who comes as your representative.
“ A society which neither opens nor closes its meetings with
praise or prayer to God ; a society which lets its halls and rooms


to infidels, spiritualists, and other foes of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ; a society which numbers open enemies of Christ and
His Church among 1 its prominent members and speakers; a
society which panders to low depraved tastes by its coarse
exhibitions of buffoonery every Saturday night, merely to make
money thereby ; a society which annually feeds the socially
demoralising and nationally ruinous spirit of gambling through-
out Victoria by its Gala Lottery—such a society is, in our opinion,
a scandal and a disgrace to the noble cause which it was founded
to extend ; and we cannot dishonour God or injure our people by
showing any sympathy with it whilst so conducted, as we should
do if we received its official delegates upon our platform.
“ I deeply regret that I aided your society for a short time ;
but it was during that time I obtained that insight into its
demoralising policy which makes me to take my present attitude
towards it.
“ Your action has necessitated these expressions of my con-
victions. As a life-long abstainer, and a Christian minister, I but
fulfil my duty in so writing : for great plainness of speech is
necessary when I find that intrigues are directed towards the
injury of the Church of which I am pastor, as well as to my personal
injury, which you individually have before attempted.
“ I request that this letter be laid before your Committee at its
next meeting.
“ I am, faithfully yours,
“ JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.”
This letter will, of course, account for the opposition of the
leading persons associated with its policy, and especially for the
action of its President, when he aided my enemies from his place
in Parliament, on the evening of 27th September. But, when it
is remembered that it was on the same evening that he, Mr. James
Munro, grossly betrayed the whole Temperance sentiment of the
country, in accepting the “ Compensation ” amendment of Sir
Bryan O’Loghlen to his Local Option motion, it is impossible to
wonder at his opposition. Every common sense man sees, that,
if Local Option is only to become law when every publican
receives a money “ compensation ” for the withdrawal of his
license, then it will never become law : for the country would
never face the expenditure. His action, too, inferentially, con-
ceded a point to the traffic which the law denies them, namely, a
right to the annual renewal of the license to make and sell alcoholic
poisons in their various forms, from beer to brandy. They have
no moral or legal right to any renewal or compensation, should
the people at the end of the period for which they are licensed


decide not to renew their licences. Publicans are only tolerated
bv law from year to year ; and when the people are wise there
will come a year in this, as in some other countries, when they
will be tolerated no more, but abolished for ever, as enemies to the
public good. But that time is not hastened by the silent tolera-
tion of men in the leading ranks of the Temperance cause, who
propose to come to such terms with the enemy. When a general
sells his army a la Bazaine, to the enemy, it makes the thought-
ful distrust him, to say the least. “ Compensation” is a fatal
blow to Local Option; and is as unjust as it is impossible. If the
traffic, however, will agree to that principle all around, I am will-
ing to advocate it. When the traffic compensates the people for all
the miseries and loss it has directly inflicted during its awful
career of iniquity, then is the time for settling accounts with it.
Who can doubt that even the mere money value of its crimes,
(amongst which are many murders, suicides, shipwrecks, railway
smashes, premature deaths, loss of health, pauperism, lunacy,
orphanages, cost of crime, and waste of priceless time) —would
amount to such a sum as would swallow up all the fortunes of
Victorian Liquordom, and still leave them in a debt so great, that
even a lifetime of honest work would not enable them to discharge
it ? I commend this matter to the earnest consideration of the
faithful temperance reformers throughout the country; and I
earnestly call upon them at once to repudiate the policy of
betrayal, embodied by their leader in the amended resolution
placed, with his approval, on the records of the Legislative
Assembly. And as for me, well I expect the enmity of betrayers.
I never belonged to a clique who would pursue a crooked policy
of expediency, and I never will. No terms can be made with
the traffic ; for its existence in any form is a curse. Our victories
over it must be by stages, it is true ; but to compromise with, and
compensate it, at any stage, is neither good policy nor sound
principle. The liquor traffic must utterly perish, ere the people
can breathe the air of freedom : for its fetters are on everyone,
and even those who hate it wear the fetters of taxation to support
it. Who would compensate the thief and murderer to give up
his crimes ? No one would dare to propose it. Apply the
principal to the traffic : for the cases are identical.
And now I turn to the last class of my “ many adversaries,”
and although the title is in some cases far from appropriate, I
will venture to call them,
MY CHRISTIAN CRITICS.
And this is the most trying part of all : for whilst the Master
said “ In the world ye shall have tribulation,” surely Christians
need not add to each other’s burdens, by bitter words, spoken in


ignorance or otherwise. I shall not write, in this closing section
of this already too long chapter, one single word more than is
absolutely needful : for I cherish the hope that I shall dwell in
peace and brotherly love amongst all who love and serve our one
beloved Master, even Christ; and I shall here cover with that
mantle of love, incidents and speeches connected with some of my
brethren in the ministry especially, which they will yet, I am
sure, acknowledge were not justified. But so many false
rumours have gone abroad concerning my relations to the trustees
of the Tabernacle that it becomes my duty to state the facts.
This is the more necessary since I was attacked by one of these,
Mr. Philip Kitchen, in the columns of the Southern Cross of 24th
March, 1883, in a letter which abounds in mis-statements, as I
shall show when I come to the tenth chapter of this pamphlet,
when I shall meet some recent false charges with truthful
exposures.* The exact position of affairs between myself, the
Church, and the trustees is fully expressed in the following
correspondence, which was submitted to the Church, and approved
without a dissentient voice, at a meeting held on 17th August.
“ Ellore, Power Street South,
Hawthorn, July 29, 1882.
“ Dear Mr. Dowie, —I believe that Mr. Fenton has informed you
that it has been proposed to invite you to meet the trustees and the
late stewards of the Tabernacle, Sackville Street, to see if it is at all
possible to procure a reconciliation between yourself and those
stewards who have resigned, or in some other way make arrange-
ments by which the Lord’s work commenced and carried on by Mr.
Cherbury may go on harmoniously, and the hindrances at present
existing to this be removed.
“ I need scarcely say that the trustees have viewed with the
greatest sorrow and concern recent occurrences, and that this
movement on their part is not from any desire to interfere, as at
present they have no power to do, but simply to see as friends of
Mr. Cherbury, and as well-wishers to the work at the Tabernacle, if
they can render any assistance at the present juncture. I learn from
Mr. Fenton that the time mentioned will not suit you. Would
Thursday afternoon, at 113 Russell Street, at four o’clock, be a
suitable time for you ? An early answer will oblige,”
“ Yours truly,
“ PHILIP KITCHEN.”
* See, in Appendix 11., a copy of this letter.


u The Tabernacle, Sackville Street,
Collingwood, 31st July, 1882.
“ Beloved Brother in Christ, —Yours of 29th reached me this
evening.
“ Evidently you are misinformed as to the condition of matters in
this Church. The Lord’s work is not in the least degree impeded
by the action of the Church meeting of this day week, when six
stewards were censured for an unscriptural and sinful course of
action on the preceding Lord’s Day. Eight souls have found peace
since then, making 78 since my entrance upon this work ; the
Lord’s Day and week evening services have increased in spiritual
power, and in attendance ; and the finances of the Church are
sounder and larger. The Church is thoroughly united, and full of
joy and courage. There were only three independent votes, out of
about 175, given in favour of the offending stewards’ course of
action ; and son voted against father, and sisters against their
brothers, in the vote which disapproved and reproved the stewards’
sin. They are now under suspension, pending their submission to
the law of Christ, and the authority of the Church, before the next
Church meeting—Monday, 7th August. One of them, Mr. C.
P , submitted privately, and asked forgiviness of God and of
me, in the vestry to night ; and, subsequently, he openly, and
voluntarily, did the same in the prayer meeting, which was attended
by some 200 to 300 persons to-night. I have requested all of them
by letter, forwarded by the hands of sister Cherbury, to yield, and
confess their sin ; and I have good hope that they will. Meanwhile,
nothing stands still, but the contrary, and their places are supplied
by twelve brethren who are of higher average intelligence, zeal, and
piety.
“ Under these circumstances, you will kindly excuse my not
agreeing to meet you and your fellow-trustees in conference with
those whom the Church have censured, since I would thereby
endanger its discipline. There is only one means of “ recon-
ciliation,” only one “ arrangement,” which the Church can recognise,
and that is submission. I dare not, and cannot, discuss any other.
11 But I will be happy to meet with yourself and your co-trustees
on Thursday afternoon, at four o’clock, at IT3 Bussell Street, Mel-
bourne, to explain to you, informally, the whole facts of the case,
and show you copies of letters, &c., bearing upon it. But I must
again repeat, I cannot discuss with the-suspended stewards—for
whom I and the Church are in constant prayer—-any proposals or
arrangements : for I will not compromise with sin under any
circumstances.


“ With sincere Christian esteem, and gratefully recognising the
fraternal spirit of your letter.
“ I am, faithfully yours in Jesus,
“ JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.”
Mr. Philip Kitchen, Eliore, Power Street South, Hawthorn,
“ Melbourne, August 2nd, 1882.
“ Dear Mr. Dowie, —As you object to meet the late Secretary and
stewards, and as, in their absence, and with the spirit manifested in
your letter to them, no practical result can be anticipated from the
trustees entering into the merits of your disagreement with the late
office-bearers, there appears to be no necessity for the proposed
interview.”
“ Yours faithfully,
“ PHILIP KITCHEN.”
Every one will see that the course which I adopted was the only
way to preserve the Church’s independence ; and that, had I consti-
tuted the Trustees a Court of Appeal, I should have sacrificed a
most important principle, and have acted in direct defiance of the
Trust Deed, which makes the Trustees act under direction of the
Church, and not the opposite. But I deeply offended Mr.
Kitchen, it appears, by my course. However, I had the approval of
the Church, and of my conscience. I also had the approval of Mr.
Fenton, one of the three trustees, who became a member of the Church
on the very evening on which it approved of my letter to Mr.
Kitchen ; and who is with me to this day in Church fellowship I
never gave Mr. Kitchen any occasion whatever for his most unkind
attacks upon me ; and, from the date of the above correspondence
to this day, I have only met him once, and that for a few minutes
on the street, when the Tabernacle was never mentioned.
Let this plain statement suffice in closing this toilsome chapter.
And now, I pass from all these varied attacks made upon me
outside the camp, by “many adversaries,” to the events within the
camp, which immediately preceded Mr. Cherbury’s return ; and to
the correspondence which passed during his absence.
But surely a word of thanks and praise to God becomes me, for His
grace which so richly blessed my spirit and my ministry amidst all.
I will say, “ 0 God the Lord, the strength of my salvation, Thou
hast covered my head in the day of battle,”


CHAPTER VII.
Cjjorburg (tonspttfreita.
“ In God I’ll trust 1
Though human help in time of need,
I find, at best, a broken reed ;
Though I have nursed
But secret foes, in shape of friends ;
Though love itself in sorrow ends,
Still God I’ll trust.”
On the morning of Lord's Day, June 11th, 1882, I preached in
the Tabernacle, from the words in Genesis xxxi. 49, “ Mizpah : for
he said, The Lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent
one from another.” Mr. Cherbury was sitting on the platform at
my side. I made a covenant there with God, that I would do my
duty as Christ’s minister in his place ; and I can look up to Him
to-day, and around upon the people, and say, I have, by divine
grace, fulfilled my part of the covenant; and, truly, the Lord has
fulfilled His. Mr. Cherbury also covenanted with God that day.
But has he fulfilled his ? He has made false charges against me
of having broken my covenant. These charges were publicly made
behind my back, were advanced without a single proof, and they will
be seen to vanish into nothingness, when the spear of truth touches
them in chapter X. Meanwhile, let the reader understand that
the facts contained in this and the following chapters, are absolutely
essential to an understanding of the position: My desire is to place
my readers, for the time being, in the place of a jury. God will
judge ; and, when the time comes for summing up, His voice of
truth will be heard, delivering the solemn charge to the conscience
of every reader. And woe to that man who “ contemns the counsel
of the Most High,” and allows personal prejudice, and sinful hatred,
to give a verdict contrary to conscience, God will judge and punish
him, in that day when no secret sins can escape the Omniscient.
During Mr. Cherbury’s absence I wrote many long letters, fully
describing events up to Sept. 28th ; but from that date I wrote no
more : for I had in that letter urged him to return as speedily as
possible. I have complete copies of all these letters in my posses-
sion, so that I can tell exactly what they contained. As I shall
have occasion to comment upon certain letters of Mr. Cherbury, I
will here give several quotations from my two last letters, dated 4th
and 28th Sept respectively, to both of which letters he makes reference.
On Sept. 4th, I wrote to him referring to the state of matters
in the Church, subsequent to the first outbreak of “ Sin in the camp”
—an outbreak which was finally dealt with eighteen days before, on


August 17th, (see page 30). Referring to that, and the acts of
Church discipline which followed, I wrote, “I am sure you are leaving
all things fully to the Lord, and I go on in the full conviction that
nothing has been done, or is being done, which, as a man of God, and
true minister of Christ you will disapprove. I believe your confi-
dence in me cannot rightly be lessened because of my action and
that of the Church : for everything has been done without anger, and
in a spirit of love and loyalty to Christ and His teachings.”
“ Do not let your mind be troubled by letters from persons, who
however worthy, are outsiders, and entirely unacquainted with
the facts except from the unreliable lips of base rumour—whom
some one has said is always a liar—or from those whose conduct has
been censured and punished by the Church. There is a tendency on
the part of some of the latter persons to make it appear that “ Mr.
Dowie is acting against Mr. Cherbury” in some mysterious way, and
so create strife and parties. lam firmly checking that in every
way : for I need not tell you it is as false as the dark pit of hell
from whence it issued a full-born lie, without a grain of truth in its
whole nature. It is most painful, and degrading almost, to refer
to such things ; but as they may reach you in some form, I hasten
to put my foot upon them. 1 have, to my own injury, fulfilled every
compact into which we entered ; I will continue to do so, or retire
from my position, of which I have no intention ; and when you come
back, you will get an honest, and I believe a satisfactory answer to
every question. I have the fullest confidence that, whatever the
future may contain, that whether you and I go on beyond my pro.
tem. co-operation with you or not—and that is with God alone to
S ay—you will do me the justice to say that I have been a faithful
friend, and a true minister during my work here. Do not let any
doubts or fears distress you—all is well : for God is with us.”
On September 28th, I wrote to him, telling him of the continued
spiritual prosperity which God was vouchsafing to us in the sal-
vation of souls—l4s having professed to find peace during the four
months of my ministry ; and telling him also of the danger to the
work arising from the conduct of his family. And that I did not
exaggerate the danger will be seen, when it is remembered that, on
the very evening of the day on which I posted that letter, the second
outburst of “ sin in the camp ” took place (see pages 82 to 34).
I have stated, in narrating that outbreak, that the two young men
leading it, “ were able to boast truthfully of the practical sympathy
of the whole of Mr. Cherbury’s family, who openly associated at this
time with the persons already expelled for disorder.” In writing
that, I was only repeating what I had already told Mr. Cherbury in
this letter written before the event, so that no one can fail to see
that it is quite impossible for me to have mistaken the distinctly
friendly attitude of Mr. Cherbury’s family to these shamefully dis-
orderly persons. I wrote in the letter:—


u Beloved brother, I earnestly wish you were back in your old
place again, if it were but for a day. that I might speak of many
things concerning which it is almost impossible to write without
danger of being misunderstood. But I must say if it be only a few
words, concerning the attitude of Mrs. C. and your son Charles, not
only towards me, but the immense majority of the Church, and all
its stewards, who are working most harmoniously for the glory of
God. I desire to say most emphatically, that such attitude has no
foundation of justification either in my thoughts, words, or deeds ;
and that it is a most serious drag on our wheels. Charles has
deliberately sowed tares of discord in the Church, by circulating
secretly a most abominable falsehood, to the effect that I had said
you had ‘ slummed ’ all your work —the facts being, as he knows,
entirely opposite : for I have both publicly and privately spoken of
you and your work, as I feel, in terms of high appreciation and love.
Taxed with this some weeks ago, he was speechless with shame
before me, but has, to my grief, shown no signs of repentance, but
the contrary.” I then went on to give Mr. Cherbury another
serious case, wherein his son was again implicated. The details of
that case fill four long and closely-written pages. Briefly put,
omitting names and details, (1) the case was investigated at Mrs.
Cherbury’s express wish ; (2) I stood out of it, and left it to the ten
stewards ; (3) the case was looking very dark against Charles, when
Mrs. Cherbury suddenly withdrew him entirely from the Tabernacle,
and sent an insulting message both to the stewards and Church ;
(4) the stewards passed a unanimous resolution to report to the
Church (a) that P——, the young man accused by Mrs. C. should
be exonerated from the charge of falsehood, and (b) that Charles
should be censured and suspended from fellowship • (5) I refused to
be any party to the second portion of their report, as I considered it
inexpedient, and I induced them not to bring it before the Church,
thus protecting Charles from just punishment ; and (6) the Church
unanimously adopted the stewards’ report exonerating P ,
The letter then continues : —“I have, and so have many of your
warmest friends in this Church pointed out [to Charles], that this
course of conduct was not only sinful against God, but injurious to
you, who have a right to expect him not to alienate from you, in any
degree, the affection and loving confidence in you, and your family,
of those whom you have laboured amongst so long and so well. It
has also been pointed out to Mrs. Cherbury that her defence of
Charles’ conduct ; her open espousal, as it seems to many, of the
cause of the censured and expelled stewards ; her numerous severe
reflections upon the Church, its officers and its actions ; and her direct
approval of Charles, going to the Church, street, within a few
hundred yards of the Tabernacle, where he openly proclaims his dis-
like of me—is a course of conduct likely to alienate the sympathies
of your people from her. But I regret to say, my dear brother, that


these expostulations are, at present, entirely useless. Remembering
the faithful labours of your dear wife in the past, I cannot but grieve
that such should be the attitude which she takes ; but loyalty to
you, to Christ, and to the Church committed for the time to our care,
demands that I should write the truth free from all disguises, and
this I have done,”* Then, after a few further remarks, my letter
continues :—“ This matter has given me more pain, caused me more
sorrow and tears, than all the other trials of the work, and I feel it
is only right you should know it. Ido not like to hurry your
return before you have recovered strength of body and mind ; but I
feel that as soon as you can return I shall be glad, after a proper
interval, to be relieved of my present position—and were your return
to-day, I should be much pleased. Do not think I shrink from
doing my duty, or that I am in any present danger of beating a
retreat, for, thanks be to God, I never practised retreats, and, by
His grace, I will hold the fort. But when you return, my present
intention is, after you have had time to settle down to work again,
and to inform yourself fully as to recent events, etc,, to convene the
Church, with you as its president, get from it a vote of confidence
and approval of my administration of its affairs during your absence,
and then retire from my position as Pastor pro. tem. And, unless
the state of affairs materially changes, this must be my course,
however much we both could have wished it otherwise. But the
unjust suspicions to which I am now subjected daily by members of
your family makes my position intolerable, except for the spiritual
blessing which God bestows upon my labours. These words are
hard to read, probably; but dear brother, they are harder to write, and
I feel that it is due to both of us they should be written. I earnestly
pray that the Lord may show to your dear wife a wiser course, and
that your son Charles may be fully saved.”
I have given these lengthy quotations from this the last of my
letters to Mr. Cherbury for two reasons, (1) because I wish the
reader clearly to see my spirit and attitude to him, and (2) because
this of September 28th, and the previous letter, of September 4th,
will be found referred to in certain correspondence from him, to
which I will now invite the reader’s earnest attention.
During the eight months of Mr. Cherbury’s absence, namely, from
June 18th, 1882, to February 11th, 1883, I only received three
brief letters. The first was from Suez, whilst he was en route for
England, and the other two from London, one dated August 3rd,
four days after his arrival there, and the other dated November 4th.
The first two were mere notes, and contain nothing of any import-
ance. It is the last which alone is important. It was posted in
* As an illustration of the difficulty we experienced with Mrs. C., I direct
attention to a letter, which the special Committee of Discipline were com-
pelled to address to her, in Appendix 111.


London, on November 6th, and delivered to me here on Thursday,
28th December, arriving per P. and 0. steamer “ Ballarat.”
In that letter, Mr. Cherbury first acknowledges the receipt of my
letter of 4th September. After expressing his surprise, and his
difficulty in understanding what has happened, he goes on to
say : —“ None of our friends have written to me, and even if any did
write anything adverse, it would not turn the scales of my judgment:
for I never receive a one-sided statement except of what is good.
As regards what you say in yours of what some say, i.e. ‘ that Mr.
Dowie is working against Mr. Cherbury in some mysterious way,
and so create strife and parties,’ I can assure you I never laughed
more heartily at anything in my life. Ido not, of course, know who
says so ; but I fancy it is a joke. I don’t think I need assure you
again of my perfect confidence in every matter relating to our work at
the Tabernacle . That confidence remains unshaken ; and, suppose
it were shaken, the past of your generous and friendly conduct would
lead me to honour you all the same. I am glad that the Lord is
working so manifestly , . . Now pray don’t worry yourself if
anything has gone otherwise than poor flesh and blood could desire,
just think of the fact, that, 1 The best of good is born of revo-
lutions.’ . , . The annual almanac sheets leave by the
“ Ballarat” for Melbourne next Wednesday, the Bth inst. There
are 5000 for ourselves, i.e. 2000 for watch-night. Mr. Kitchen will
receive them, and they are to be given away among the people on
New Year’s eve. * The remaining 3000 are for the Home of
Hope. . . I am, through mercy, much better ; but the doctors
urge me not to commence mental work too soon, or the matter will
be fatal. Now, my dear friend, try and don’t worry over anything.
All will go well. Remember me to all enquiring friends. The
Lord bless you.
“ I am, my dear brother Dowie, yours ever affectionately,
“ CHARLES M. CHERBURY,”
This letter seemed to be entirely satisfactory, and appeared to me
to confirm the personal confidence which I had always felt and
* As another proof of the petty animosity shown towards me by Mr.
Philip Kitchen, I may mention here, that when application was made to
him, on Saturday, 30th December, for these almanacs, he absolutely refused
to deliver them up, without assigning any reason, so that they were uselessly
kept lying in his book store for several months. When Mr. Cherbury
returned, they were issued, but in a mutilated form, certain words concern-
ing me being struck out with pen and ink. These words, however, can be
read on several copies which have been brought to me ; and they will be
found, when I in due lime refer to them, to prove a part of the condem-
nation of their author, Mr. Cherbury, and to account, very unfavourably,
for the conduct of their hinderer, and perhaps, blotter out, Mr. Kitchen.


expressed, that Mr. Cherbury would see with me in all the events
which had transpired, especially as lie had said to myself, and many
others, before going away, that there would be “ a great work of
weeding out done,” by my agency, during his absence. I acquainted
the stewards with the contents of the letter, and we agreed that I
should read it to the congregation on the following Lord’s Day, as
there was, as usual, no letter to the Church. Accordingly it was
so advertised, in the usual notice of the services in Saturday’s
papers. But judge of my astonishment when, on Saturday night, I
received the following extraordinary letter, written throughout
in the hand writing of Mr. W , the whilom secretary,
who had led the first outbreak of “ sin in the camp,”
(see page 18), and who had been removed from the fellowship
for “ conduct entirely inconsistent with his Christian profession ”
(see page 30). It was signed, “E. Cherbury.” I give the letter
in its entirety.
“ Arthur Villa, Delbridge Street,
December 30th, 1882.
“Dear Sir, —From statements made by you on Thursday evening
last, and also advertisement in this morning’s Age , re Mr. Cherbury’s
letter to you, I think it wise to acquaint you with certain state-
ments made in letters to me, dated 16th and 17th November, which
I shall be glad of you to very carefully consider, ere you read the
letter to-morrow.
EXTRACT FROM LETTER, DATED 16th NOVEMBER.
“ ‘ That Mr. Dowie has gone many grades too far, his own long
letter bears condemnatory proof of, and agrees in what others write
to me. Mr. Dowie has no right to lay his hands on any part of the
work except the preaching. He is but a supply and nothing more.
I am glad souls are won, but that does not justify other things.
These other things are wrong—l do not recognise other stewards
than the men so shamefully dealt with. Admitting that they did not
go the right way about that absurd temperance notice, that is no
reason for branding them and turning them out of the place, in
which the trustees and myself had placed them.’
EXTRACT OF LETTER, DATED NOVEMBER 17th.
“ ‘ I am sorely troubled about you, things seem to have got at the
Tabernacle into a state of perfect rioting. By Mr. Dowie’s own
shewing he has, it appears to me, made a regular persecuting society
of the Church, beginning with my stewards, and carrying on with
you and our dear boy Charles, and I doubt not means to finish up
with someone else. I got a long letter from him last night, which
left Melbourne, September 29th, that you are going much against


him and an overwhelming majority of the Church, and all its
stewards. Now if your conduct be true, then I feel satisfied there is
great and true cause for it, I have determined to return home, be
the result what it may ; there is something rotten at the core of all
this consternation. Our Church never was an inquisition, which
seems now to be the case. I don’t understand it at all. I will hasten
my return as speedily as I can. Everything seems to have gone
wrong, by Mr. Dowie’s own showing, mark ! He alone is responsible
for my information, he alone has told me, although what others
have written, confirms what he wrote.’
“ I have thus, sir, given you a strictly correct copy of Mr. Cher-
bury’s own statements, and leave to your own judgment whether you
should read the letter referred to, which must be as far as I can see
of a much earlier date.
“ My only anxiety being, that our dear people may not be
misled.
“ I remain, yours, &c
“E. CHERBURY.
“ To Rev. J. A. Dowie.”
Will the candid and honest reader now kindly try to put himself
in my position, and consider the perplexity in which I was placed.
I ask such a reader to remember these things. (1) These two letters
of Mrs. Cherbury’s, if the extracts were genuine, were posted in
London within a few days of the one which was posted to me on
November 6th ; (2) they reached this city on the same day, and
by the same mail steamer, the “ Ballarat;” (3) it was quite impos-
sible to reconcile either the tone, manner, or matter of these extracts
with Mr. Cherbury’s letter to me ; (4) since I had in that letter
his assurance “ even if any did write anything adverse it would not
turn the scales of my judgment,” and other stronger assurances, it
was impossible to account, without reflecting upon him, for such
language as was contained in these extracts, by any letters adverse
to me which he might have received meanwhile ; (5) if Mr, Cher-
bury had wished to recall his kind words to me, and expressions of con-
fidence in me, he had plenty of time to do so, and it was only reasonable
to expect he would do so, knowing that I was certain to make the
contents of his letter known ; (6.) not only Mr. W ’s conduct,
but, I regret to say it, Mrs. Cherbury’s conduct compelled me to be
very cautious in receiving from them any such statements concerning
Mr. Cherbury’s opinions of me, as they were both openly hostile to my-
self and the Church, nor were they always careful to be accurate in
their assertions ; and (7) finally, if I was to accept these extracts as
genuine, then there was no escape from the conclusion that Mr.
Cherbury was either mad or bad; for it was quite impossible to


reconcile them either with reason, or truth, or even common honesty.
I, therefore, preferred to give Mr. Cherbury the benefit of every
doubt; and, accordingly, on the following day, I publicly read in the
Tabernacle his letter to me, and merely remarked that I had
received, in the handwriting of a person who had been removed
from the fellowship of the Church, a letter containing alleged
extracts from other letters just received, but that, as they were
totally irreconcilable, on any supposition, with the letter I had just
read, I preferred to consider them to be unreliable, and would not do
Mr. Cherbury the injustice of reading them. During that Lord’s Day
afternoon, Mrs. Cherbury waited upon me at my house, and
informed me that the extracts were exactly correct, and were taken
down from her letters, by Mr. W , at her dictation, I said
that I was sorry to hear her say so (1) because she had done very
wrong in making her husband’s private letters public property, as I
had found Mr. W had sent the Church treasurer, Mr. Fenton,
an exact copy, and had even stood outside the gate of the Taber-
nacle, showing other copies to any persons who chose to read them ;
(2) that for me to read them publicly would be to ruin her
husband’s reputation ; and (3) that I still preferred to consider
them unreliable, believing them to be rather the outcome of a
diseased brain than of a depraved heart, since the statements he
made were ludicrously untrue, as all who understood the facts knew.
Therefore, in reading Mr. Cherbury’s letter in the evening service, I
spoke exactly as in the morning, making no reference to Mrs.
Cherbury’s conversation with me. But as the first month of the
year passed away, and no letter from Mr. Cherbury came to myself,
whilst we heard through the eager indiscretion of gossips to whom
the facts were confided, of letter after letter coming from him in
which we were abused, the conviction was forced upon me that Mr.
Cherbury’s conduct was deceptive and cruel. It became only too
evident from the increased boldness of the disorderly remnant still
in the Church, and those outside also, that Mr. Cherbury had
espoused their cause, and that his return would be the occasion of
another and final attempt to damage me ; although, knowing that
the immense majority of the Church were with we, they imagined
in their foolish and evil minds that I might make a successful
effort to retain the Tabernacle, an idea which never once entered
into my mind. At an ordinary Church meeting, held on January
12th, the question was asked as to whether I had yet ascertained if
the alleged extracts from Mr, Cherbury’s letters were genuine ; and
whether I would lay them before the members. I replied that 1
had every reason to believe that they were genuine ; and that with
the approval, and at the wish of the stewards, I would now hand
them to the secretary te read them to the meeting, who would there-
after place them on the Church minutes. I also informed the
meeting that one of the stewards had, at Mrs. Cherbury’s own


request, visited her and read portions of the letters from which the
extracts were taken, and found them to be correct, except that the
language employed concerning myself and the majority of the Church
was even more violent than in the extracts. But 1 besought the
Church not to discuss Mr. Cherbury’s conduct in his absence, since
I was informed that he was then on his return journey, although 1
had received no further letter from him. The Church kindly agreed
to my request, and the letters being read amidst an expressive
silence, the meeting was immediately closed. Another Church
meeting was held on January 18th, at which some necessary
business was transacted ; but no reference whatever to Mr. Cher-
bury's conduct was permitted. I, however, promised the Church that
I would not retire from my temporary pastorate until I met him face
to face with the Church, at a special meeting, when I would ask him
to withdraw or justify his charges against me. This was the last
Church meeting held until Mr. Cherbury returned, nearly a month
later.
But, meanwhile, letters were continuing to be received from
him, and on Friday, 2nd February, Mrs. Cherbury left a message
at my house informing me that she had on that day received a
letter from her husband, who wrote from Naples, saying that he had
missed the “Cuzco” there, and would come on by the next steamer,
the “Cotopaxi,” and asking me to announce this in the Tabernacle
on the following Lord’s Day. Now as the letter she received
came by the “ Cuzco, ” I was quite unable to see how he could
have missed that steamer at Naples, seeing that he was in that
city, which is the last European port of departure. Then, I knew
the “Cotopaxi” was not on the way from England at all.
Altogether the message was quite inexplicable, so I wrote a
courteous and brief note to Mrs. Cherbury, telling her that I felt
it necessary to ask her to send me her husband’s message in
writing, for the following amongst other, reasons, viz :—“ (1)
because I do not fully comprehend the message as it has been
communicated ; and (2) that I may make no mistake in inform-
ing the congregation at the Tabernacle.” This polite and
reasonable request, was construed into an insult and an offence,
by this lady, who carried her complaint into the city, far and wide:
so much so that within two .-days a Mr. H came to a friend
of mine with her version of the story, as a convincing proof of
my unkindness to Mr. Cherbury’s family, I mention this in-
cident, so trivial in itself, merely to exhibit a fair specimen of the
cruel misrepresentations to which I was constantly subjected
through the painful inaccuracy of that family—otherwise it is
unworthy of notice. As a matter of fact, whatever may have
been the true version of his missing the “ Cuzco ” —and it is
difficult to understand how a man could miss that steamer at
Naples, and yet send a letter by it—the message concerning the


“ Cotopaxi ” was beyond question wrong, since Mr. Cherbury
arrived in Melbourne, nine days later, in the “ Liguria.”
Believing, however, that Mr. Cherbury was now at last en
route , the stewards and myself felt that, as he had wilfully kept
us and the Church in ignorance of his real sentiments concerning
our action ; and as he had for many weeks after his last letter to
me been carrying on a secret correspondence with disorderly per-
sons, in which we were abused, it was our imperative duty to
request an immediate explanation on his return. We felt also
that, but for the indiscretion of Mrs. Cherbury in so foolishly
publishing her husband’s secret thoughts, of which he had no
knowledge, we should have been entirely deceived by his last
letter, so full of confidence and kind words—a letter which he
was still allowing us to believe expressed his settled convictions.
On the evening of February 7th, the ten stewards, therefore,
came to a unanimous resolution on the subject, after a long and
prayerful consideration. The secretary was instructed to em-
body this in a letter to him, which was to be delivered as soon as
possible after his arrival. On the conclusion of the morning ser-
vice on Lord’s Day, 11th February, a number of the stewards
informed me that Mr. Cherbury had arrived that morning.
Accordingly, the secretary, who had the letter prepared, at once
sent him the following note, by the hands of the caretaker of
the Tabernacle.
“ 88 Johnston Street, Collingwood.
“ February 11th, 1883.
“ Dear Mr. Cherbury,—l am requested by the stewards to
forward you the following resolution passed at a stewards’ meet-
ing, held on the 7th inst. viz : —‘ That the stewards unanimously
resolve that inasmuch as there are prima facice evidences of deceit-
ful conduct on Mr. Cherbury’s part, the secretary be requested
to inform Mr. Cherbury, on his arrival, that, until he has met
with the Church at a Church meeting, he should not take part in
any services in the Tabernacle as minister.’
“ Yours faithfully,
“ L. BROWN, Secretary .”
In closing this chapter, the reader will perceive that I do not
enter into a detailed examination of the serious charges contained
in the extracts Mrs.Cherbury sent me from his secret correspon-
dence. I leave that until the tenth chapter, wherein I will deal in
one place with these and all his charges. Meanwhile, the mere
comparison of the two sets of letters will be more than sufficient,


I am' sure, to justify the steps which the stewards, as honest
Christian men, were taking : for surely I need not say that truth
and honesty of spirit are essentials in any man, in any position,
and especially in any Christian minister. They believed that
there were grave reasons to fear that he had acted deceitfully,
and it would have been base to have concealed their convictions,
and allow him, without enquiry, to resume his office as their
pastor. No honest and sincere Christian can blame them for
what they did.
CHAPTER Yin.
|Jf Came, H t Saivr, |).e llmt
“ He that fights and runs away,
Lives to fight another day. ”
“ But when Peter was come to Antioch, I [Paul] withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed.” —(Galatians ii. 11).
The Philistines were rejoicing—their champion had come, and
each, more eagerly than the other, flocked around him. His
conduct now proved beyond question, that he was fully committed
to the course which his family had pursued during the greater
portion of his absence. He shunned all intercourse with either
myself or the stewards of the Church ; and, for three days after
his arrival, we did not even see his face, on which, when we at
last did, we saw imprinted a striking change.
Desirous, as I was, to relinquish my office as temporary
pastor into the hands of the Church, from which I received it, at
the earliest possible moment, I summoned at once a Special
meeting for Wednesday evening, February 14th ; and I convened
a meeting of the stewards for the next evening, Monday, 12th, with
the expectation that Mr. Cherbury would meet with us then.
He was informed of the meetings by the secretary in the follow-
ing note :
“ 88 Johnston Street,
Collingwood, 12th February, 1883.
“ Dear Mr. Cherbury,—l am desired by the stewards to kindly
inform you that there will be a stewards’ meeting in the vestry
this evening at 8.30 p.m., after the usual prayer meeting —also a
special Church meeting on Wednesday evening at 730 p.m.,
when matters of deep importance will be considered.
“ I am, yours sincerely,
“L. BROWNE, Secretary.”


But Mr, Cherhury did not dare to face the Church stewards,
who were all his old friends ; and sent me a note, saying; that he
would he present “on Wednesday evening-, and preside at the
Church meeting.” This was simply a slap in the face to the
Church and its officers ; and, as his conduct was certain to he
discussed at the coming meeting, it was manifestly improper for
him to preside. The stewards so decided at their meeting ; and,
fearing that all compromise was now impossible, they determined,
should they fail to get a satisfactory explanation or confession
from Mr. Cherhury, to withdraw from the Church in a body, with
all who thought with them. Accordingly, arrangements were
made to prepare a resolution to he submitted in that event. But
no other members of the Church were either consulted or knew of
any such intention, so that there was no plotting or conspiring to do
wrong in any way. Naturally, the majority of the Church looked
to myself and the stewards to defend their action ; and to main-
tain to our utmost the purity of the fellowship. Scores of them
had visited me, and urged me to promise to remain at the
Tabernacle as their Pastor, should Mr. Cherhury prove to have
been deceitful ; or to remain in the neighbourhood, and form
another Church. But to each and all, in public or in private, I
had only one answer—namely, “ I have no light, as to what my
course will be, beyond this, viz. ;—(1) I will give Mr. Cherhury
the benefit of every doubt, and if the explanations which he gives
after his return are satisfactory to the great majority of the
Church, then I will give him a wide berth, and find a sphere of
labour at some distance from him ; (’2) under no circumstances
will I be a party to judging him in his absence, nor to any idea
of separation from him, until he has met myself and the Church
face to face; (3) I will positively refuse to have any future
relations of any kind with the majority of the members, if they
in any way attempt to force me into any pre-arranged plans of
any sort, previous to Mr. Cherbury’s return ; and (4) I am fully
determined, in any event, not to continue my ministry in the
Tabernacle, not if its platform were piled with gold, so that even the
removal of Mr. Cherhury, by a vote of the Church, would not in
the slightest degree affect me. I had the conviction that the
spiritual “ leprosy was in its walls,” so to speak.
Hence, I desire to say here, that I entered into no compact
whatever, either expressed or implied, with any person or persons
to either retain my hold on the Tabernacle, or to form another
Church; and I here challenge any person to say, and prove, the
contrary.
The honest reader will, therefore, now be prepared in a candid
spirit to go with me into the narrative of the special Church
meeting of Wednesday evening, 14th February, when, at last,


Mr. Cherbury and [ stood face to face with each other before the
Church.
We met first in the vestry. He had now been more than three
day’s back, yet f had not seen his face until then, when he
entered the room with all the free and easy airs of a comic actor just
dancing on to the stage. Mr. Fenton, a steward and treasurer of
the Church, my wife, and myself were present. “Ah, Dowie,
how are ye ? Well, Fenton old boy, how are ye ? ” Scarcely
waiting for an answer, he proceeded to hitch himself on to the
table in front of us, where he seated himself with his legs spread
apart, swaying them backwards and forwards, whilst he swung to
and fro. between them, a stout walking stick. He immediately
dashed forth into a whole string of common-place chatter, about
anything and nothing, which continued for nearly half-an-hour.
During all this talk, it was impossible to get his eye : for he was
in a state of constant motion. Neither the name of God, nor a single
expression of gratitude for His goodness and journeying mercies,
ever issued from his lips. No recognition of the need for divine
guidance in the approaching meeting was heard. Chatter,
chatter, chatter, just as if he was waiting for some insignificant
performance to begin, in which he was to be an indifferent spectator,
or a mere perfunctory actor. Such a return of a minister to his
vestry, after eight months’ absence, is, I trust, an unnsual one. At
last, with a sigh of relief to be set free from this babbling flow of talk,
talk, talk, I rose to welcome the stewards and members, who now
began to arrive, and passed one by one into the Tabernacle.
The Church officers had very considerable difficulty in keeping
back non-members at the gates, some of whom, especially those
who had been expelled for disorder, burst through and endeavoured
to thrust themselves into the meeting place. But that was pre-
vented. Many unknown persons presented themselves, giving the
names of members on the roll who had not for many months, some
for several years, been in actual fellowship. These were accom-
panied by members of the disorderly minority still left in the
Church, and it was quite evident that there had been “ a strong-
whip,” as politicians would say, on the part of these persons.
The events which followed I now give in the language of the
Church minute book, viz :
SPECIAL CHURCH MEETING, HELD IN THE TABERNACLE,
WEDNESDAY EVENING, FEBRUARY 11, 1883.
“ The Pastor, pro tem., opened the meeting with praise and
prayer.
“ Mr. Cherbury, Pastor, also engaged in prayer.
“ Mr. Dowie, on behalf of the stewards, made a brief statement,
previous to the meeting being more fully constituted. He said that


the stewards had unanimously resolved that, under the circumstances,
it was unadvisable that Mr. Cherbury should preside. He himself
felt that it was undesirable that he (Mr. Dowie) should preside, in
view of certain matters connected with Mr. Cherbury’s correspon-
dence which might be introduced. The stewards, therefore, unani-
mously recommended the Church to elect a chairman from among
its members, and they nominated Mr. A. R. Fenton.
“ Mr. Cherbury then stated that, as Pastor, it was his legal right
and duty to preside, and that he knew of no matters to be con-
sidered which would prevent that. He further said that he had no
charges to make against Mr. Dowie , or anyone, and did not kno w
of anything he had done why the Church should not permit him to
preside.
“ Mr. Dowie then said it was a pity that Mr. Cherbury took that
course, because it compelled him (Mr. Dowie) to remind Mr. Cher-
bury that he had already received an intimation from the stewards
that his (Mr. Cherbury’s) conduct had, in their opinion, rendered it
undesirable for him to take any part, as yet, in the Church proceed-
ings, as minister.
“ Mr. Cherbury then admitted that he had received, and then
read, the following letter. [Here follows letter already given on
page 75.] He complained that he had not been informed of the
details of any charges, said that even if such charges were now
made, he would refuse to answer them, and again claimed that it
was his right to preside.
“ Mr. Dowie then said that the details of these charges would
doubtless be, in due time, produced, that they were already recorded
in the Church minutes of January 12th, and really consisted in
this, viz. : —‘ That he had written, by the same mail steamer, letters
entirely inconsistent with each other, and irreconcilable, as it
appeared to the stewards, with truth.’ Mr. Dowie remarked that the
abusive extracts from these private letters had been thrust upon him-
self and the Church by his, Mr. Cherbury’s, wife. He then asked
Mr. Cherbury to allow the business to proceed, and submit the
question as to who should preside, to the vote of the Church, and to
abide by that vote, whatever it might be, as he (Mr. Dowie) would.
u Mr. Cherbury said he could explain these letters, but refused to
do so at this meeting, and ended by saying that, while he would
agree to a vote being taken, as to who should preside, he would
afterwards take his own course.
•« Mr. Dowie then submitted the question to the Church, and it was
decided, by a majority of 89 against 56, that Mr. Cherbury should
not preside, a number of members not voting either way.
“ Mr, Fenton then took the chair, upon which Mr. Cherbury said
that, acting under orders, he would now declare that those who now
remained to take part in the meeting, would do so at their peril;


and said, ‘ Your action is perfectly illegal, and this meeting is per-
fectly illegal.’ Tie then said, ‘ I will withdraw.’
“ Mr. Dowic besought Mr. Cherbury to remain, and said that the
meeting was perfectly legal, and in accordance wftli the Trust
Deed.
“ While he was speaking, Mr. Cherbury hurriedly descended from
the platform, and about forty members, only three or four of whom
were males, withdrew also, one or two of whom returned into the
meeting at a later stage.
“ After a few words of regret from Mr. Dowie that Mr. Cherbury
had taken so extraordinary course, the business proceeded.”
Comment upon Mr. Cherbury’s conduct is surely unnecessary :
for those who have any sense of what is brave and honourable, not
to say Christian, will not need to be told that, if ever a time had
come for an honest man to demand a thorough investigation, it was
then. The pitiful quibble about that not being the right time will
not stand for one moment. When was the right time for an
innocent man, if he was one, to speak, if it was not when his
accusers were before him, and when his Church was there waiting
and willing to give him the utmost consideration ? How long does
an innocent man need to defend himself against a charge of deceitful
conduct ? Three days, as he had ? Not two minutes; nay, not two
seconds : for his reply is ready in two calm words :—“ Prove it! ”
But when was the best time for a guilty man ? I will tell my reader
and he will presently see it illustrated. It is when his accusers are
absent ; when the disgusted majority of those who once formed his
Church are absent ; when he is in front of a disorderly crowd, who
only tolerate him because he makes things smooth for them ; when
a number of ministers and others, who have been deceived as to the
facts, are expressing a mistaken sympathy—it is then that, with
every safety, a guilty man can speak from a coward’s castle. Most
fitting for such a man is the coward’s motto, which heads this
chapter. Most fitting is it that I should, without further waste of
time, close this, chapter, by saying of Mr. Cherbury, that he was an
ignoble Caesar : for, in the words of my title, “ he came, he saw,”
and, alas, for his courage and honour, “ he ran away.”
CHAPTEE IX.
Cbstncf Scenes of mo ijftrmstrn m % Cabernuxle.
“ Happy they who walk by faith,
And in the dark, by things unseen supported :
Knowing that clouds and darkness lead to light,
Which else were reached not.”


“ Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers ; for
What fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness?
And what communion hath light with darkness 1
And what concord hath Christ with Belial ?
Or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel ?
(2 Corinthians vi. 14, 15). -s
After Mr. Cherbury’s flight, a small group of about six or seven
young men, several of whom were related to the expelled ex-stewards,
remained behind, apparently for the express purpose of making a
hideous uproar, such as would disgust, and cause to retire, the
immense majority of the Church who remained, numbering about
120 members. But their attempts failed : for, patiently and success-
fully, the stewards carried through the programme of business upon
which they had decided only the previous evening, when certain
information reached them, which led them to believe that Mr.
Cherbury would, at all risks, stand by the disorderly persons who
had been removed from fellowship, and that he would act upon the
“ orders ” of these men, and their numerous liquor-traffic fattened
supporters outside.
I will now continue the narrative of the evening’s proceedings, by
quoting here the remainder of the minutes of our last meeting in the
Tabernacle, I desire also to inform the reader, that these minutes
have been certified to as correct by myself, as ex-Pastor, pro tern., by
the ex-secretary and treasurer, and by several of the stewards of the
late Church in the Tabernacle, since, of course, no regular meeting
for their confirmation could have been held, as the circumstances
to be now narrated will prove.
“ Minutes of previous meeting, January 18th, were read and con-
firmed.
“ Proposed by Bro. Browne, seconded by Bro. James Jones,
and carried unanimously :
“ ‘ That this Church, recognising the earnest, untiring, and
Christian zeal of the Rev. John Alex. Bowie, during his temporary
pastorate of the. Tabernacle, Sackville Street, Collingwood, from the
21st May, 1882, to this date, expresses its fullest appreciation of
the true Christian spirit which he has manifested, under the most
trying circumstances, as well as his patient endurance when sinful
discord rent the Church asunder, and prays that in whatever sphere
of Christian duties he may be engaged, the same blessing of
Almighty God which followed his labours here, may still, but in
much larger measure, bear witness to the single eye, which he has
here shown to God’s glory, and to the rectitude of a hitherto unblem-
ished Christian character: and that the secretary be requested to
forward this resolution to him in writing.’
<* Mr. Bowie returned thanks, and expressed his special pleasure,
that even the minority opposed to him, had agreed to this vote.


“ Proposed by Mr. Dowie, and seconded by Bro. Haldane, ‘ That
this Church now desires to record their sincere gratitude to God for
His goodness in raising up from amongst them the ten faithful
men who now hold office as stewards, and that the hearty thanks of
the Church are hereby presented to them for their diligent and
efficient discharge of the duties of their stewardship, and for their
wise and kind co-operation and counsel during a period of much
severe trial, whereby they have promoted the extension of the
Redeemer’s kingdom, and the highest welfare of this Church.’
Carried, with one dissentient.
“ Mr. Howie tendered his resignation as Pastor pro. tem ., and
asked the Church to accept it at once.
“ This was done on the motion of Bro. Williams, seconded by
Bro. Hardbottle, which was carried unanimously.
“ Mr. Dowie then left the platform, and took his place as a private
member in the body of the Church.
“ Mr. Fenton then stated that, on the previous day, a number of
the members of the Church (fearing Mr. Cherbury would take a
wrong course, he having ignored an invitation to attend a stewards’
meeting, and having up to that evening kept away from seeing Mr.
Dowie, or any of the officers of the Church) had determined to
propose a solemn resolution to the majority of the Church, many of
whom had- previously asked for guidance ; and he would ask Mr.
Dowie to explain and read that resolution.
“ Mr. Dowie then did so, amidst scandalous and disgraceful inter-
ruptions from Messrs. P , B , Junr., O’B , T ,
and one or two others.
“ The following resolution, proposed by Bro. Fenton, seconded by
Bro. Jas. Ball, was then submitted to the meeting, which consisted
of, at that period, about 120 persons ; and it was carried with only
seven or eight dissentients.
“ RESOLUTION OF PROTEST AGAINST SIN ;
“ DECLARATION OF MOTIVES AND OBJECTS ; and
“ WITHDRAWAL FROM THE TABERNACLE OF THE MAJORITY
OF THE -MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH.
“ The majority of the members, being now convinced that it is
their duty to God and His Church to record their solemn convic-
tions, and the principal reasons for their present actions, now
resolve ;
I, “ That, in the presence of God, and believing that for Jesus
their Saviour’s sake they are guided thereto by the Holy Spirit, they
protest against sin in the Pastor, Mr. Charles M. Cherbury, who
has been guilty of deceitful actions, and has approved of the sinful
deeds of persons who have been expelled from the fellowship of this
Church ; and they also protest against sin in the actions of a


minority of the members ot this Church, whose conduct in openly
associating with and approving the actions of disorderly persons has,
in their judgment, grieved the Holy Spirit, and hindered His
blessed work in the conviction and conversion of sinners, and the
sanctification of believers.
II. — “ That they now declare before God and this Church, that
their motives are free from all personal or private feelings of
resentment, for in deep grief and love for the erring they take their
present course, believing that loyalty to the Great Head of the
Church and His cause on earth demands such action ; and they
further declare, that their objects are such as they feel all true
Christians who know the facts will approve, being in obedience to
God s word and His Spirit’s guidance, namely (1) Separation from
spiritual defilement: for God has said (2 Cor. vi. 17, 18), 4 Where-
fore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord,
and touch not the unclean thing- ; and I will receive you, and will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be My sons and daughters, saith the
Lord Almighty (2) Victory infighting the good fight of faith : for
God has said, 4 Thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until ye
take away the accursed thing from among you.’ (Josh. vii. 18) ;
and (3) Faithfulness to the souls of those from whom they separate :
for God, by His apostle, has said, —(Heb. hi. 12, 13), 4 Take heed,
brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God ; but exhort one another daily while
it is called To-day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceit-
fulness of sin.
Hl.—“ That they do now 7 , therefore, in a body withdraw
from this Tabernacle, and from the fellowship of Mr. Charles
M. Cherbury, and those associated with him, invoking the mercy of
God upon those they leave, and beseeching God that He may now
approve this deed, and say to them, as He did to Moses, the man of
God, (Exodus xxxiii. 14-19), 4 My presence shall go with thee,
I will give thee rest. . , and I will make all My
goodness to pass before thee ; ’ whilst they also would now humbly
bow before Him and say, 4 Let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us
. and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for
thine inheritance.”
Then came the end.
Immediately the above solemn resolution was passed, I was asked
to offer a valedictory prayer, and, thereafter, about one hundred
and ten, or more, members left the building with myself and the
stewards, quietly and in a body. Then followed some of what the
Herald would call 44 decidedly unpleasant treatment. ” It was an
institution peculiar, so for as my knowledge extends, to Church
minorities at the Tabernacle—namely a disgraceful riot. Some


shouted, “ A conspiracy ! a conspiracy ! ” One woman who had
been expelled for sin, cried out, “ I’ll kill him ! ” meaning myself.
Another threw a paper bag filled with pulverized earth at my head,
with unpleasant results ; and such was the yelling and hooting of
this disorderly rabble, that I felt it was prudent to advise my friends
to disperse, and not fulfil their intention of holding a short meeting
in a neighbouring hall in Wellington Street. However, no less than
sixty or seventy of my iriends courageously followed me, of their
own accord, into Mr, Fenton’s house, where I found refuge from the
hideous howling and ferocious threats of the mob, which was openly led
on by members of the minority, and a number of expelled persons, who
have, 1 am reliably informed, been received by Mr. Cherbury into
his fellowship. In that house, and with that disappointed crowd
outside, the first steps were taken to form a Free Christian Church,
a temporary committee of management was elected, I was unanim-
ously asked to act as temporary pastor, and arrangements of various
kinds were made to begin work on the following Lord’s Day.
When we left that house far on in the night, the sky was clear, the
night was calm and morning was not far away, so we said, and we
sang, as we went homeward :
“ Long has the night of sorrow reigned,
The dawn shall bring us light:
Christ shall appear, and we shall rise
With gladness in His sight, ”
But, ere I tell the sweet and brief story of what the Lord has
done for us, and by us, during the past four months, I must once
more, and for the last time, buckle on the armour, and go out into
the next chapter to deal finally with the false charges which
have been publicly flung at my head like fiery darts from the
coward's castle. It is painful, but necessary work, and I dare not
shrink from it.' I will write in love ; but I will write the truth, and
lay bare every lie. Let the responsibility for this rest upon those
who have made it a necessity.
CHAPTER X.
falsi Charges—Cnitbful Closures,
“ They seem to me a stagnant fen,
Grown rank with rushes and with reeds,
Where a white lily, now and then,
Blooms in the midst of noxious weeds,
And deadly nightshade on its banks. ”
“ He that is first in his own cause seeraeth just ; but his neigbour cometh
and searcheth him.” (Proverbs xviii 17)«


On Thursday evening, Ist, March just a fortnight after the events
recorded in the previous chapter, a tea and public meeting was held “ to
celebrate the return to this colony of Mr, Charles M. Cherbury, pastor
of the Tabernacle.” One of my “ many adversaries,” the Argus , was
without much coaxing, induced to give insertion two days later, on
Saturday, March 3rd, to a report of these meetings. From that
report I extract the whole paragraph containing Mr. Cherbury’s
speech on that occasion, and I feel sure that the reader who has
impartially followed the narrative in the preceding chapters will not
require many words from me in reply :
“ Mr. Cherbury then rose to address the meeting, and was
received with loud cheering. He stated that when he left the colony
eight months ago for a visit to America and England, in the hope
of recruiting his health, he did so without any misgivings as to the
welfare of the congregation. When he was in London, however, in
November last, he received certain information which had caused
him to return, notwithstanding the advice of his physicians that his
health would again break down if he resumed his public speaking
and labours. Things had taken place during his absence which had
wounded him, but he was not going to stir up dirty water. His
name had, however, been bandied about and statements made which
affected his Christian character. He now publicly said they were
false. It had been said he had mentioned certain things about his
congregation to Mr. Howie, who had occupied his platform during
his absence, but he had never stated such things, nor even thought
them, and if he had thought them he certainly should not have
mentioned them to Mr. Howie, because when he went away he had
not known Mr. Howie long enough to entrust him with any secrets.
He (Mr. Cherbury) then referred to the attempts which had been
made by Mr. Howie and others to keep him out of the Tabernacle
until he had answered certain charges which they alleged were hang-
ing over him. No person, however, could truthfully charge him
with having done any wrong action, and he determined when he
came back to this colony, two or three weeks ago, to assert his right
to preside at the Church meetings of the Tabernacle, and also to
preside on the platform on all occasions. Efforts were made to
prevent him taking his proper position, but after he asserted his
right to do so, Mr. Howie gave up the contest and went away from
the Tabernacle altogether. Huring his absence the Sunday school
and Church had been almost wrecked, but he hoped that now he
had returned they would soon be restored to their former prosperous
condition.”
A week later, in the columns of the Southern Cross, the following
paragraph appeared amongst the “ News of the Churches
“ Mr. C. M. Cherbury, minister of the Tabernacle, Collingwood,
was welcomed on his return from a short furlough in England, at
the Tabernacle, on the Ist inst. The meeting was well attended,


about 400 having been present. After tea Mr. Peters was voted to
the chair, and the public meeting commenced. Mr. Cherbury
received a very cordial welcome, not only from the members of his
own congregation, but from a number of neighbouring ministers as
well. He addressed the meeting at some length ;he referred very
delicately to the troubles through which the cause had passed
during his absence. He branded as false certain rumours injurious
to his character, that had been circulated ; he referred also to the
attempt that had been made by Mr. Howie and others to keep him
out of the pulpit, but which had signally failed. The Church and
Sunday-school had been nearly ruined during his absence, but he
hoped they would soon revive. There will be but one feeling
throughout the Christian community with reference to Mr. Cherbury
—joy at his return in restored health and strength. He has done a
good work in Collingwood, and we trust that under his care past
prosperity will be enjoyed again, and past troubles forgotten.
Knowing, as 1 did, the ingrained depravity of the Argus , and that
I would probably be refused the right to answer my accuser in its
columns, I left its paragraph unnoticed, sure that God would one
day justify me.
But when the paragraph in the Southern Cross appeared, I wrote
“ an explanation,” and sent it to the editor, with a private note, in
which I said “ Whilst I do not turn aside to answer the attacks
of the world, I value the esteem of Christian brethren who regard
your paper as reliable and just to all. Your words cannot but affect
their minds, and, as I am wholly guiltless of the aspersions
made by Mr. Cherbury upon my character, you will, I trust, enable
me to prove my innocence in your columns, where you have asserted
my guilt. It is of importance to me, to my family, to my many
friends throughout Australia, and to the Church of which lam
Pastor that my vindication should be full, final, and complete.”
However, the ways of editors are dark, and my ministerial brother
did not see very clearly about that time. He admitted the brief
letters pro and con, which the reader will find in Appendices I. and
11. from Messrs. Henry Cooke and P. Kitchen respectively ; and
also the resolution of the Church expressing its confidence in my
administration. But, in the next issue, 24th March, he inserted a
most absurd and wicked letter from four of the disorderly minority,
which will be found by the reader, with some comments, in Appendix
IV. The editor, for whom I have a personal esteem, explained to
me privately, that he had taken his paragraph concerning me “ from
a report which appeared in one of the daily papers and had not been
challenged on the ground of innocency.” This statement is no
doubt true ; but what does that signify ? On a moderate calculation
I am sure I could place my hands upon more than two hundred
distinct newspaper misrepresentations and attacks upon me within
the last eighteen months. How much other work would I have


done, had I sat down to “ challenge ” them on the “ ground of
innocency ? ” A man on a journey must not ride furiously into the
bush after every mosquito which stings him ; or he would never get
home. Neither can I let the adversary make such a fool of me, as
to cause me to imagine that my usefulness can be permanently
injured by the attacks of the press mosquitos, who swarm around
every true man. However, my friend the editor of the Cross may
see a little more clearly now, when he has all the facts before him,
and I do not despair of his yet doing me Justice, especially as he
assures me, “ I would not wittingly do you an injustice.” Might I,
however, remind him again of what he knows, that it is not safe to
take without verification, from any paper, serious charges affecting
the character of any Christian man, especially if that man will not
bow the knee to the Baal of Liquordom,
I am, therefore, free to set aside the Southern Cross; and concen-
trate my attention upon the report of Mr. Cherbury’s speech in the
Argus, and upon the extracts from his secret correspondence, already
given on pages 71 and 72, as containing the charges whichlmust now
plead to before the jury of my unknown readers’ consciences, and
before the all-seeing Judge of all.
But first, let me ask my cowardly traducer, how he dares to
prefer any accusation whatever, seeing that when he and I stood face
to face before the Church (see page 79) he said, “I have no
CHARGES TO MAKE AGAINST Mr. DoWIB, OR ANY ONE.” Had he
made any, I was ready to meet them. But no 5 he dared not say
there that he had any: for he well knew that there were none.
Then since, according to his own words, his charges must have been
invented since then, I might fairly put in his own confession as
conclusive evidence against himself, and claim a verdict. I prefer,
however, to put the falsehood of these charges beyond all question,
by proving that they cannot be true.
Taking the two sets together, I deduce the following as his first
charge against me :
X. That I exceeded my rights and duties : for he wrote con-
cerning me, “ he has no right to lay his hands on any part
of the work except the preaching. He is but a supply
and nothing more.” (see page 71).
This charge is utterly false, as the following facts will prove :
(1) I was elected Pastor pro. tem. by a unanimous vote of the
Church, on Monday, May 15th, at a special meeting (see page 11)
convened for that purpose \ and the steward who proposed my
election specially reminded the members that I would, by their vote,
take Mr. Cherbury’s place in all respects. (2) The Trust Deed,
clause 6, distincly provides, “ there is ever to be present at least one
stated pastor or evangelist, and eight stewards ; ” and, therefore,


had I not been clothed with the full powers of the pastoral office,
the Trust Deed would have been violated. (3) Mr. Cherbury
recognised my position in agreeing with the words printed in a
certain circular (see page 11) wherein it is said, “ the oversight of
this work, in all its parts, has been commiteed to the Rev. John
Alex. Dowie, late of Sydney, with the unanimous consent and
approval of the stewards, the Church, and all concerned.” (4) Mr.
Cherbury again recognised my position as pastor, in his letter to me
of November 4th, whfere he writes (page 70) assuring me of his
“ perfect confidence in every matter relating to our work at the
Tabernacle ; ” and surely no expression could be stronger as to the
range of my powers. (5) Mr. Cherbury has himself not only used
the word pastor, but 11 co-pastor ” (an office I told him I would not
accept, when he urged it upon me) which means more than pastor
pro. tern. : for it implies both permanence and equality. He not
only wrote the word, but he had it printed, when in England, in the
annual almanac no less than four times ; e. g. “ Mr. J. A. Dowie,
as co-pastor, now carries on the work with great success.” again,
“ The stewards labour in great harmony with the Pastors.” again,
u Enquirers can meet the pastors in the east vestries,” and, finally,
in giving the names of the Church officials, the list is headed thus,
“ Pastors—C. M. Cherbury ;J. A. Dowie.” (6) Finally, Mr.
Cherbury recognised my office, in a most practical way, just before
leaving for England, when he placed before myself and the stewards
a document which he had carefully prepared, and which he probably
found pecuniarily useful, in which he was recommended to the
Christian Churches in America, the United Kingdom and the
Continent, and authorised to receive subscriptions or donations ; and
to my great regret now, I was persuaded to sign that as pastor
pro. tern.
I claim a verdict of acquittal, from the consciences of my unseen
jury of readers ; and I ask them to call my traducer by his right
name : for no one knew better than he, how false were the words,
“ he (meaning me) is but a supply and nothing more.”
ll.—His second charge seems to be, that the Church, under my
pastorate, exceeded its powers by expelling the disorderly
stewards : for he says :—“ Ido not recognise other
stewards than the men so shamefully dealt with.” (see
page 71).
This charge is utterly ridiculous : for a man may say, “ I do not
recognise ” anything, or anybody, he pleases; but his “ say ”
signifies nothing, unless supported by reason and facts. In this
case, both are against my traducer : for the following reasons, viz :
—The Trust Deed, clause 6, says, “ the Church for the time being
shall have power to appoint or dismiss pastors and stewards ; ” and


therefore, when on July 24th, (see page 25) the Church censured
and suspended six stewards, when on 17th August (see page 30) it
dismissed three of these, and when, after long forbearance, on 12th
January it dismissed the other three, it was simply acting upon its
legal rights, and fulfilling a divinely imposed duty.
I claim again a verdict of acquittal from my unseen readers ; and,
I ask them again to call my traducer by his right name : for few
amongst the foolish could ever exceed the wickedness and folly
which underlies such charges.
lll.—His third charge seems to be that I acted as a cruel perse-
cutor, a tyrant, a base oppressor of his wife and family
during his absence, and a usurper and traitor to himself:
for he says (page 71) “ By Mr. Howie’s own showing he
has, it appears to me, made a regular persecuting society
of the Church, beginning with my stewards, and carrying
on with you and our dear boy Charles, and I doubt not
means to finish up with some one else.”
This cluster of charges is not only false ; but there is a depth of
low depravity about them which is utterly appalling in its baseness.
The following brief record of facts will abundantly prove that state-
ment, viz.—(1) The Church was at all times fees, as the whole
narrative in this pamphlet proves, and I never “ made ” it anything:
for I never went beyond advising it, as was my duty, but never
compelling it ; and I held its confidence, love, and loyalty all
through, which tyrants never do, (2) I never had any “begin-
ning ” of strife with his “ stewards,” nor with anyone else ; but it
was his stewards, who wanted, in their ignorance of the man they
were dealing with, to oppress me, and to ignore, and tyrannise over the
Church, as their master was wont to do. (see pages 17 to 21, for
proofs ). (3) I never was other than a kind friend, and, I trust,
Christian gentleman towards his wife, although her conduct towards
me and mine was, I am bound to say, just the opposite : for within
three months, she was the centre, and in the opinion of many, a
powerful promoter, of disaffection and strife (see pages 68 and 69
especially). I can say without fear of contradiction, that, for every
£1 which I received from the Church funds, she had fully £1 10s.
My salary from May 21st, 1882, to February 14th, 1883, from
these funds, as the treasurer’s books show, was only £74 3s. 3d. or
an average of about £1 19s. per week, for the whole 38 weeks of
my pastorate, instead of £228, or £6 per week, which the first
stewards had agreed to do their utmost to provide for me. * On
the other hand Mrs. Cherbury received within a fraction of an
* See in Appendix V. a ceitified statement of my income, showing also
the present indebtedness of the Church in the Tabernacle to me,


average of £4 per week from May 21st, until October Ist ; but,
from that day forward, she openly allied herself with the disorderly,
who amongst other things threatened to “ starve him out,” and she,
though receiving less, still received, for the remainder of the period, a
sum slightly in excess of what I received. Certainly then, I did
not oppress her in money matters ; and I may also add that it was
a well-known fact that many of the persons who were disturbing and
hindering me in every possible way in the Tabernacle, were, with
the expelled members, meeting regularly in her house and con-
tributing to her support, whilst withholding from the church funds.
But the fact is, this poor lady was, from an early period of
my ministry, consumed with a paltry feeling of jealousy, even
of the spiritual blessing which God gave me in the constant
conversion of souls, and she foolishly said so, to more than
one member of the Church. (4) As to his son Charles, my letters
to his father will show how kindly I treated him, under most trying
circumstances (see pages 68 and 69) ; and, as is well known, I
even at one time nominated him for election as a steward. Indeed
his conduct was such that, but for my intervention, the Church
would certainly have expelled him from fellowship. (5) Finally,
who is this “ some-one else ” whom my traducer said, that I by my
“ own showing,” intended to “ finish up with ? ” Dare he say
plainly that it is himself? If he did, there is not an honest man
now reading these pages, who would not cry shame ; for, as I shall
presently show, when I and the majority of the Church had him
completely prostrate at our feet, without hope of escape from dis-
missal, had we chosen, I spared him.
I claim again, threfore, my readers’ verdict that this base charge
cannot be true ; and only a man who was capable of doing such base
things, could have imputed them to one who was entirely innocent,
and in whose heart there is not a drop of traitor’s blood.
Before I pass on to other forms of his false accusations, I desire
to draw the reader’s attention to his sublime contempt for truth in
the extracts, on pages 71 and 72 ; as seen in the three times
reiterated fact that 1 alone give him “ condemnatory proofs,” that
I “ alone ”am “ responsible ” for his “ information and yet that
“ others have written ” confirming him, etc. Surely no sane
man wrote such rubbish. I would gladly take that view, if it were
not for his conduct since his return, which proves malignity rather
than insanity. And to these charges I now turn.
IV.—His fourth charge against me is, that I had falsely assumed
that I had his confidence, that I had, therefore, told lies and
wrought mischief: for he said, “It had been said he had
mentioned certain things about his congregation to Mr.
Dowie, who had occupied his platform during his absence,
but he had never stated such things, or even thought o^


them, and if he had thought them, he certanly never
should have mentioned them to Mr. Dowie, because when
he went away he had not known Mr. Dowie long
enough to entrust him with any secrets.” (See
Argus report, page 85.)
There is a hazy vagueness about much of this charge ; but the
intent is clear enough, and false enough, to cover him with shame ;
for he must find his answer here in a moment from hundreds of
readers, who heard his unbounded and reiterated expressions of
perfect confidence in me. But I reply (1) Ido not know what his
vague “ certain things ” are, which he had never said or thought ;
but I can say this, that I never repeated all the things he said he
thought, or I would have made endless mischief: for I find he said
and thought countless untruths. (2) One of these untruths is his
saying that he did not know me “ long enough to entrust me with
any secrets for, if he did not, he said he did, on many occasions
to me ; and he wrote as the reader will remember on 4th November
(page 70). “I don’t think I need assure you again of my perfect
confidence [showing he had assured me before] in every matter
reflating to our work at the Tabernacle. That confidence
remains [showing that it had been already established] un-
shaken.” Who is now the liar? Are there two Mr. Cherburys ?
Unless there be, I fear no one will care to entrust the writer of the
letter from London on 4th November, or the speaker in the Taber-
nacle of Ist March, with any “ secrets ” in future : for most
people will think that when a man can say of another that he has
in him an “ unshaken, perfect confidence in every matter,” it must
certainly cover petty gossip “ about his congregation.”
Again, I have “ unshaken confidence” in appealing to my honest
jury for a verdict: for it is clear, lam sure, that to deceive success-
fully my traducer will soon require fresh pastures.
y, His fifth charge is, thatlhad made an abortive attempt to keep
him out of his position, and to take it for myself: for he
said, “ Efforts were made to prevent him taking his proper
position, but, after he asserted his right to do so, Mr,
Dowie gave up the contest, and went away from the
Tabernacle altogether.”
This is an untruth of such a glaring nature to my reader,
who has seen the valour of his ignominious flight in chapter
VIII • and who knows how false it is that I had any “ contest
and went away.” Those who know me, know better than to say
lam a man of that kind. But his retreat was a perfect rout ;an
ecclesiastical Tel-el-Kebir: for he couldn’t be got, even by coax-
ing, to stay and defend himself, when that which should be


dearer than life was being attacked, his character for truthfulness.
I fear there was as little of that quality left in him as there was
of courage. And so, without any contest, he ran away —a la
Arabi Pasha ;but he turns up, having been spared by us , to boast,
like another Falstaff, of battles which were never fought, except
in imagination. But I will tell my reader a few things which
the majority of the Church, who were witnesses to his disgraceful
flight, could have done that evening. (1) They could have dis-
missed him from office : for the Trust Deed provides, clause 6,
that “ the Church for the time being shall have power to appoint
or dismiss Pastors.” (2) They could have convened a meeting to
appoint six or more new trustees, as clause 5 provides. And then (3)
they could have instructed the Trustees to sell the land and building,
and have invested the money for Church purposes elsewhere,
as provided in clause 3.
But the majority left him all, although they could have taken
all.
Again I ask my readers, as honest men, to give me a verdict:
for I was only too happy to be able to turn my back upon the
Tabernacle, and never lifted a finger to keep it.
Vl.—His sixth and, on that occasion last charge was, that
u during his absence the Church and Sunday School
had been almost wrecked.”
This is utterly false, as regards the true Church; for it never was
more prosperous in any period of its history than during ray
ministry, and for proof of that, I ask the reader to turn back, for
a minute or two, to “My Saviour’s victories,” in chapter 111.
When he left for England, in June of last year, there were only
195 members on the roll, many of whom were non-resident, and
out of actual communion, some being in Tasmania and in other
colonies. Of these 2 were removed by death, 3 by transfer to
other churches, 2 by resignation, and no less than 15 by acts of
Church discipline, thus reducing the roll to 173 members. But
during his absence 70 members were added, chiefly conversions
from the world, thus increasing the roll upon the date of his
arrival to 243 members. Out of the 165 who made open profas-
sion of decision for Christ, some are candidates for fellowship
now, and many others are in Christian fellowship elsewhere.
These simple facts prove, that the approval of the Highest was
given to our labours, and surely, whoever may err, the Holy
Spirit makes no mistakes. If these are proofs that a Church is
“ wrecked,” then what are the tokens when the Church is
blessed ? As to the Sunday School, if it was not “ wrecked,” it
was not the fault of the superintendent, secretary, and many of
the teachers whom he left me : for, many of them formed part of


the disorderly minority of the Church, and, to show how entirely
unfitted they were for their position, they not only abandoned their
classes, but decoyed the children away to other schools. Still,
notwithstanding 1 this, as the last “ Visitors’ Report ” of the
Victorian Sunday School Union proves, the school was well
attended and well conducted. I will venture, moreover, to give
this further proof of the school’s efficiency during my pastorate,
namely, that there were more conversions amongst the scholars
than during any similar period of its existence. If these are
proofs that a u Sunday School had been almost wrecked,” again
I ask, what are the tokens when an institution established lor the
salvation of immortal souls is blessed ? I, and those associated
with me, give to God all the glory for these results, since, from
Him alone is the power; but, as His agents, we dare not be
silent when His work is denied, and evil spoken of, by one who
should never speak slanderous words.
Once more then, I appeal to my invisible jury of readers, and
claim a verdict on this count also, certain that the brand
of “ wrecker ” will rather rest upon my reckless traducer than
upon me : for he cannot disprove, although he may continue
to deny, the facts I have here recorded.
I have thus gone through the whole of Mr. Cherbury’s slander-
ous charges in his secret correspondence, and in his public utter-
ances on March Ist.
But I am not done ; for he made others equally false, with
only one of which (one already crushed to death by me in the
public press), will I deal at any length.
Whispering and slandering are always found to travel together,
and the whisperers and slanderers have been as numerous, and as
dangerous, as clouds of gnats or mosquitos. do treat them
seriously would be to write myself a fool. But some of them
have been so base, that I have been often tempted to smite their
slanders in the name of the Lord. They have been mean and
filthy to a degree of iniquity which has often sorely tried my fore-
hearance, attacking me with lies of every form in whispers
innumerable. That class of slanderers are akin to the vermin
and flesh flies that are generated amidst corruption; and the only
compensation connected with them is, that, being liars, their lies
die, after but a brief and shameful life. I leave them to die then,
amidst the fresh breezes of the truth, which God has enabled me
to bring into this pamphlet; but I warn some whom it principally
concerns that, if they are not silent, I will hunt them down as I
would a serpent, or a scorpion, which desired quarters in my
house, amongst my children.
But there is one anonymous lie floating about, which I had
better slay without further ado. It is, that I admitted a number


of members into the Church without their first passing’ through
the ordinance of Believer’s Baptism; and that, in doing so, I
knowingly violated a provision of the Trust Deed, which made
membership of the Church dependent upon such baptism. My
answer is (1) there is no such provision in the Deed. (2) The
only reference in the Deed to the subject is in these words, in
clause 6, viz. : —“ The two cardinal ordinances of the New
Testament to be administered to believers in Jesus Christ only,
as they were designed for nourishing the faith of those who can
give an intelligent reason for the hope that is in them. Believer’s
baptism to be always administered by immersion.” (3) These
words prove that it is left an open question, and not made a test
of membership ; and, had it been otherwise, the Church would
have been an Exclusive Baptist Church, and not “ unsectarian,”
as it was entitled. (4) Mr. Cherbury himself struck out of the draft
of the Trust Deed, a strict baptist clause, to which I objected.
(5) As a matter of fact, I baptised, by immersion, forty-six out of
the seventy believers whom I received into fellowship, since I
believe, and teach, that whilst the baptism of believers is not
essential to salvation, or to fellowship with Christ and His
Church, is is essential to a full obedience to His will, and is, as an
ordinance of the Lord, an undoubted means of grace.
So that lie is dead. Let it be buried in its ignoble grave. I
could name some of its promoters, perhaps its authors, but I will
once more spare them.
But there is one more great leviathan of a lie, to which I have
already made allusion, with the final extinction of which, I will
close this chapter, so far as concerns myself.
It will be remembered that ere Mr, Cherbury’s departure for
England, the money for his expenses had to be procured ; and at
his wish and the stewards’ request, the writing of an appeal to
the Christian public was entrusted to me. Reference to this is
made on page 11. The work, as is all my work for Christ, was a
labour of love, believing, as I did at thgt time, that Mr. Cherbury
was a faithful fellow-servant.
The cheque which contained the results of that appeal was
publicly handed to him, on the evening of Monday, June 12th, in
the Tabernacle. Many who were then present will remember his
expressions of undying gratitude to me, for all my “ generous and
noble conduct,” &c. Readers who will refer to page 70 will find
in his last letter to me from London, similar expressions where he
speaks of “ the past of your generous and friendly conduct,”
which, even were his “ unshaken confidence ” ever to be shaken,
would “ lead me to honour you all the same.” Alas, for the
consistency and reliability of this poor man’s assurances, he not only
forgot to be grateful, he not only forgot “ to honour ” me ; but
in the meanest way, he publicly did his utmost to degrade me, and


to insinuate dishonourable conduct to me, in this very matter of
his “ rest expenses fund.” An attack more basely mean than that
contained in the following advertisement, which appeared for
many days in all the newspapers, was never made, so far as I am
aware ; and it was made by the man whom I had toiled to
benefit. The newspapers of Saturday, March 17th, contained it
in these words :
"VTOTICE to Contributors towards the late Rest Fund for Mr. Cherbury,
IN minister of the Tabernacle, Sackville-street, Collingwood—The Rev. J,
A. Dowie, late locum tenens of Mr. Cherbury at the aforesaid Tabernacle,
not having published in the Melbourne papers the names of subscribers and
amounts contributed, though repeatedly requested to do so, the Church and
office-bearers of the said Tabernacle have no means of publishing the said
list, and hope that contributors will accept this announcement as a sufficient
apology on their part.
(Signed) CHARLES M. CHERBURY, Pastor.
S. WEBBER, Secretary.
JOHN M'ALPIN, Treasurer.
16th May, 1883
To that I replied, by advertisement, in the next issues of the
Age and Telegraph , Monday, March 19th, as follows :
TABERNACLE, Sackville-street, Collingwood. In reply to the
JL advertisement in The Age, Argus, and Telegraph of Saturday respecting
Mr. Cherbury's late Rest Fund, I desire to say (1.) That, before his
departure, Mr. Cherbury expressed, both privately and on the public plat-
form, his earnest wish that neither the names of contributors nor the
amount of their subscriptions should be published. (2) That two of the
persons signing the advertisement were the treasurer and secretary of the
fund. (3) That every penny I received was paid into the joint credit of
myself and them at the Bank of Victoria, Fitzroy. (4.) That all the pay-
ments out of that fund were by cheques signed by the three of us. (5) That
if they had wished to publish a list of subscriptions, they could, as this was
their duty not mine, have done so nearly nine months since ; but, although
they were in office as stewards for nearly six weeks after Mr. Cherbury’s
departure, they never mentioned the matter to me, to their fellow stewards,
or to the Church, until after Mr. Cherbury’s return. (6.) That a consider-
able portion of the contributions to this fund was received by these two
persons, Messrs, Webber and McAlpin. and paid, I suppose, into the bank
by them, of which they have themselves never thought it necessary to
give a public account. And (7) that only a few days ago, since my
voluntary retirement from the Tabernacle, I was asked in most impertinent
and threatening terms for an account of this fund, and, feeling that I would
best answer insolence by silence, I so treated the communications.
I now desire to inform all whom it may concern that I am ready at any
time to produce bank vouchers for all moneys I received, showing that they
were paid into the credit of the Rest Fund ; and, when they will pay for the
same, I will advertise the lists in my possession, but I shall decline to do so
at my own cost, since the Church already owes me the sum of £64 3s. 3d.
The public insult and the evil insinuations of the advertisement to which
I refer are only in keeping with the previous conduct of those who sign it.
When the money for the advertisement is forthcoming I will publish the lists


now in my hands without an hour’s delay, but I will not give them up to
persons whom I do not trust.
JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.
North Fitzroy, 18th March, 1883.
This advertisement was unanswerable, and remains unanswered
to this day. But two days later my enemies came out with an
anonymous advertisement, being ashamed of their names now, as
well they might. That precious production appeared in the Age
of Wednesday, March 21st, as follows :
To the Eev. J. A. Dowie.
Sir, —In reference to your offer to advertise the list in your possession
of subscribers and amounts contributed by them to Mr. C. M. Cherbury’s
Best Fund, arrangements have been made with this paper to pay for said
advertisement.
You are requested to publish amounts received and names of contributors
and how expended.
Any comments, remarks or information outside this will be at your own
expense.
This was not only mean and impudent ; hut when I called at
the office of the paper, to see what arrangements to pay for the
advertisement had been made, I found it was absolutely false
also : for no arrangements whatever had been made. I, therefore,
had an interview with Mr. David Syme, the chief proprietor of
the Age, who was most courteous and gentlemanly, and I
requested to know who had inserted the advertisement, and that
the Age should do me the justice, either to expose his deceit, or
make him pay for the advertising of the lists. Mr, Syme agreed
that my demands were just. He, therefore, sent for the original
manuscript of the advertisement, which was found to have come
from The Manager of the Exchange. Perhaps that gentleman,
who seems equally at home as a sporting man on Flemington
race-course, and as a shining light in the Episcopalian Diocesan
Council, may be able, quite satisfactorily, to explain his connec-
tion with that anonymous and false advertisement. Anyhow, Mr.
Syme managed to bring the Manager of this advertisement to
book, the money after several hours was procured, and on the
following Saturday, March 24th, an exact account of every penny
of the rest fund, properly audited, was published by me in the
Age. The reader will find an exact copy of that advertisement in
Appendix V. But to this day, these persons who were so
hypocritically anxious to give full acknowledgements to all the
subscribers to that fund, have never published any details of the
sum of £56 11s. received by two of them, besides what was
received privately by the third, my ungrateful traducer. Will it
also be credited, that even after my publication of these certified
accounts, the original attack, setting forth to the subscribers my


falsely alleged delinquency, was repeated for several weeks in an
obscure religious (!) paper published in Melbourne, called the
Onward ? Yet such is the fact.
Finally, therefore, I close my case before God, my unseen Judge,
and the readers’ consciences, my unseen jury, and I do not fear the
verdict. I believe it will be Not Guilty, both now and at “ the
judgement seat of Christ.”
As for my false accuser, I say from my heart, may God pity him,
and bring him to repentance : for I have no desire that he should
be eternally condemned, either by God or man. But when he
repents, I ought to know it, that I may have the luxury of forgiving
him ; and our fellow men ought to know it, that they may forgive
him for deceiving them concerning me ; and God ought to know it:
for until a man repents of sin and seeks mercy, through Christ, the
offence stands written upon His eternal books.
I cannot close this chapter of “ false charges and truthful expo-
sures” without referring to one, which, although it principally
concerns another, yet closely concerns me : for it was an attack
upon one of my clearest friends, and one of the sheerest, and most
active Christians I have ever known—Mr. A. R. Fenton, who was
one of the stewards, and the treasurer, of the Church in the Taber-
nacle, and who now occupies the same positions in the Church of
which I am the pastor.
The reader will remember that on page 32, I referred to this case,
which came before the Supreme Court, on the sth and 6th March,
The Court was crowded, and the case was reported in highly sensa-
tional style, the evening papers earning a few extra pennies
doubtless.
Briefly put, the case was that Lloyd Edwards, one of the
disorderly persons removed from the roll of members on 2nd of
October (see pages 32 to 35), claimed £SOO damages for an
alleged “ false imprisonment ” on the evening of Lord’s Day, sth
of November, when Edwards was arrested by order of Mr. Fenton,
who is, and has been for twenty years, the Senior Sergeant of
Police in charge of the city of Collingwood. This young man was
a ringleader of disorder in and out of the tabernacle j and on the
evening when the sergeant ordered his arrest, it was for disorder and
obstruction in the street in front of the building, whilst I was
engaged in my duties within, although one paper falsely said that I
ordered his arrest. It was proved in evidence that the young man
had partially disguised himself amongst a disorderly crowd, and
that the sergeant did not recognize him when he ordered him to
move on, which he insolently refused to do. But an endeavour was
made to raise the cry that it was a spirit of “ persecution ” which
had prompted Mr. Fenton, the fact being that he was only obeying
imperative orders from head-quarters, and his forbearance and


kindness were simply marvellous. Our “ many adversaries ” were
all eager for our disgrace, but once more they were disnppointed ;
and tlie judge and jury showed what they thought of the testimony
of Edwards and his friends, hy giving a unanimous and immediate
verdict to Mr. Fenton. But here again Mr. Cherbury came to the
front as a helper of the ungodly, and, during the two days of that
trial, was openly advising and helping this wicked young man
against Mr. Fenton. If ingratitude is the worst of crimes, then
Mr. Cherbury has committed it ; for Mr. Fenton had helped him
for years with money, time, and influence, being one of the first
supporters of and contributors to the building of the Tabernacle,
being a trustee of the same, and the teacher of the young men’s
Bible class. But all this was thrown to the winds by this minister
of disorder, when he thought he saw a chance of humiliating one of
the majority who had retired after protest against his sin. Mr.
Fenton’s long, unblemished, and high Christian character are too
firmly established to need any praise from me, and I can only say
that he is as much admired and loved by the good, as he is feared
by the evil, in the city where he is at once a minister of justice and
a fearless Christian, filled with the spirit of love, and truth, and
wisdom.
In this case the press became quite complimentary towards me,
and the Herald, which had (see pages 42 to 45) denounced me as
an “ outrageous lunatic,” on 23rd September, 1882, and suggested
my immersion, as a brutal fanatic, in a u horse trough,” now described
me in a totally different way, on the 6th of March, in a paragraph
wherein it said that my “ manner of speaking is soft and quiet, and
it should be added that he is a man of considerable acquirements.
The report of his doings may have led to the
impression that he is an ignorant demagogue, but this is a mistake.”
No one knows better than the Herald who is responsible for that
“ mistake.” It is one of the many papers which never make any
“ mistake for they always lie on purpose, or speak the truth on
purpose, and that purpose is to serve their own mean ends—gain.
They abuse when it pays, and they praise when it pays, and are
like another class of largely unprincipled persons, lawyers, who are
ready to take, with honourable exceptions, a brief from either side,
irrespective of right, which comes first and pays best. Truth is at
the bottom ot their well, and they leave it there, covering it over
with any expediency and lie which comes handiest. But in the last
great day, they will find that God’s woe is more than a word, as
will all who do evil to their neighbour. He has said, “ Woe unto
them . . . which justify the wicked for reward, and take away
the righteousness of the righteous from him.”—lsaiah v. 22—24.


CHAPTER XI.
of flje Jfrte Cfjristuxn Cfrurdj
“ The dawn is not distant,
Nor is the night starless;
Love is eternal 1
God is still God, and
His faith shall not fail us ;
Christ is eternal !
“ And ye shall know the truth; and the truth shall make you FREE.” —
John viii. 32.
“ And the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.”—Acts xi. 26.
“ Christ is all, and in all.” —Colossians iii. 11.
The reader will remember that at the close of the ninth chapter,
I parted with him on that solemn morning to me of Thursday, 15th
February, 1883, when I was looking for the dawn of a brighter day,
having been enabled at last to fulfil what I now saw to have been,
though I knew it not, God’s will and purpose. I had been compelled ,
nothing less would be true, to “ take forth the precious from the
vile,” (see the incident on page 21) ; and I had been sustained and
preserved in the doing of it : for every word of His good promises
annexed to my obedience had been fulfilled, and He had “ delivered
me out of the hand of the wicked.”
On the following Lord’s Day, 18th February, I preached morning
and evening in the Fitzroy Town Hall, to good and earnest congre-
gations, and when we drew in our nets at night, we found that
precious souls had been won for Christ.
On Lord’s Day morning, 25th February, just ninety-nine brethren
and sisters in the Lord, who had been members of the Church in
the Tabernacle, signed the following :
DECLARATION OF FELLOWSHIP
BY THE FIRST MEMBERS OF THE
FREE CHRISTIAN CHURCH,
AND
CALL TO THE PASTORATE op the Rev, John Alexander Dowie.
“In the NAME of the LORD JESUS,” (Colossians iii. 17),
and believing that we are “ led by the Spirit ” (Romans
viii. 14), “we give thanks to God and the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ,” (Colossians i. 3), and now make the
following solemn


31, 82.)
DECLARATION OF FELLOWSHIP,
having withdrawn in a body “ from the fellowship of Mr. C. M.
Cherbury and those associated with him ” at the Tabernacle,
Sackville Street, Collingwood, after passing the following
resolution, on the night of Wednesday, February 14th,
1883, viz.:—
[Here follows the document printed on pages 82 and 83].
Being now fully convinced of the PRESENCE and POWER of
the Lord in our midst, we the undersigned, now hereby enter
into “fellowship one with another” (1 John i. 7), humbly
testifying that “ God is faithful, by whom we were called
unto the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord.”
(1 Cor. i. 9.)
Our OBJECTS are: —1. To “glorify God in our body and in our
spirit, which are God’s.” (1 Cor. vi. 20.) 2. To “ comfort
ourselves together and edify one another,” (1 Thess. v. 11);
and to '“ increase and abound in love one toward another,
and toward all men, .... to the end that the Lord
may stablish our hearts 'unblamable in holiness before God,
even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
with all his saints.” (1 Thess. iii. 12, 13.) And—3. To go
forth, as our Lord commands us, to the perishing multitudes
around us, and “make disciples” of them, “baptizing- them
into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost : teaching them to observe all things whatsoever He
commanded us,” (Matt, xxviii. 19, 20); ever remembering
His warning words, “Apart from me ye can do nothing,”
(John xv. 5) ; and also His comforting assurance, “ -Lo, I am
with you alway even unto the end of the world. - ’ (Matt,
xxviii. 20.)
Our DOCTRINES and our CHURCH ORDER and PRAC-
TICES shall ever be based upon the acknowledgement of
the Bible as the divinely inspired Word of God, and the
only infallible rule of faith and practice ; and, believing that
“ every word of God is pure,” (Prov. xxx. 5,) we “ seek unto
our God,” and not unto men, however good or great, living
or dead, as authoritative teachers, saying, “ To the law and
to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them.” (Isaiah viii. 19—20.)
We, therefore, declare ourselves FREE from all allegiance to
human definitions of doctrines and church systems around
us, believing our Lord’s promise, “ If ye continue in my
word then are ye my disciples indeed ; and ye shall know
the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” (John viii.


We, further declare ourselves CHRISTIAN, since the “ dis-
ciples were called Christians first in Antioch,” (Acts xi. 26) ;
since an inspired apostle uses the word, “ If any man suffer
as a Christian let him not be ashamed,” (1 Peter iv. 16.)
And since, in our judgment, the Word of God rebukes the
use of men’s names as designations for His Church, (see
1 Cor. i. 12, 13 ; iii. 4, 5 ;) —nor have we any Scripture
warrant for designating ourselves by the name of any
ordinance, form of government, city, or country.
Therefore we declare ourselves to be a
FREE CHRISTIAN CHURCH,
desirous at all times lovingly to recognise, and, so far as we
can, actively and fraternally, to co-operate “ with all them that
love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity,” (Eph. vi. 24) ; and
yet holding our right as Christians to call ourselves by this
name.
Having thus declared our fellowship, we deem it necessary and
right to CALL, by our unanimous voice, one from among
our number to exercise the office of PASTOR OF THIS
CHURCH who has already been set apart to the work of
the Christian ministry, having been publicly ordained in the
Congregational Church, at Alma, South Australia, on 21st
May, 1872 ; and we hereby, individually and collectively,
invite JOHN ALEXANDER DOWiE to exercise his
ministry amongst us, believing that we have been led thereto
by the Spirit of God, in the confidence that he will “speak
those things” which will teach us “ the grace of God ;”
that he will '* exhort and rebuke,” when needful, “ with all
authority,” (Titus ii. 11—15) ; that he will “feed the flock
of God which is among us, taking the oversight thereof, not
by constraint, but willingly : not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind,” (1 Pet. v, 2) ; and that, like Paul, he may say
regarding every form of opposition, “ None of these things
move me, neither count 1 my life dear unto myself, so that
I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which
I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of
the grace of God,” (Acts xx. 24.)
AND ALL THIS WE DO in the confidence that GOD guides
us, therefore we say, “ We will rejoice in Thy salvation, and
in the Name of our Lord we will set up our banners,” (Psa.
xx. 5) ; inscribing upon them, “ CHRIST IS ALL,” (Col.
iii 11); and, “NOT BY MIGHT, NOR BY POWER,
BUT BY MY SPIRIT, SAITH THE LORD OF
HOSTS.” (Zech. iv. 6).


I trust tliat the publication of this declaration will not be looked
upon by our fellow Christians around us in any other spirit than
that in which it is sent forth. It is sent forth not as a challenge,
but simply as author atative information, as to the basis of our fellow-
ship, with no desire to provoke profitless discussion : for which we
have neither taste nor time. Our fervent desire is to do some work
in the great harvest fields around us, and we do not intend to
quarrel with our fellow reapers, who may use a different shaped
reaping hook. We gladly recognise the right of free choice in
Church systems to every Christian, and intend to copy all their best
modes of work, so far as we can adapt them, whilst we feel free to
adopt others to which we may he led. We may differ occasionally
and state why, surely, without quarrelling ; and we shall be glad it
our brethren around us will give us a kind word, and let us work
hand in hand, let us fight shoulder to shoulder, and let us die side
by side with them, as a small company in the one great army of the
Lord We say, and we intend, God helping us, to practice “In
things essential UNITY ; in things non-essential LIBERTY ;
in all things CHARITY.”
() ur membership has increased to 118 ; and we have a consider-
able number of candidates, God having blessed us to more than forty
souls, since the Church was formed—a period of exactly four months.
We have sustained from eight to thirteen cottage meetings every
week, which have been much blessed ; we have one regular rallying
meeting during the week, and would have more, if we could find
halls or schoolrooms to hire; we have established a Free Christian
Tabernacle Building Fund with two branches, for our sisters and
brethren respectively, and we purpose, in God’s good time, to buy
land and build ; we have established a Sabbath School, of about 150
scholars, with a good, earnest teaching staff ; we have a Choir, of
over thirty sweet voices, all of whom profess conversion to Christ,
with a clever young organist, a careful conductor, and a good
organ ; we hold our Lord’s Day services, which are attended by
Steadily increasing and earnest congregations in the Fitzroy Town
Hall • and, finally, we write and print a weekly tract, for free dis-
tribution in Collingwood, Fitzroy, Carlton, and elsewhere, of which
we have in seven weeks sent forth forty-five thousand _(45,000)
copies, and we hope to continue, and to increase, the circulation.
“This is the Lord’s doing;” we ascribe to Him all glory and
power ; and praise fills our hearts, as we write, with gratitude too
deep for words. This is the past ; and it is gone. The present is
ours and when this pamphlet reaches the hands eff the first five
hundred, at least, of its readers, it will, God willing, be on the
occasion of my delivering the Inaugural Address, at a public
meeting in the Fitzroy Town Hall, on Wednesday evening, June
27th. ' That address will deal at some length with what the next
chapter can only mention —THE FUTURE,


CHAPTER XII.
Clre future —“ itjc J&nofos,”
O iO/ K 3
“ The future hides in it
Gladness and sorrow ;
We press still thorow,
Nought that abides in it
Daunting us, —Onward 1”
“ But He knoweth the way that I take : when He hath tried me I shall
come forth as gold.” (Job xxiii. 10.)
“ Your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask Him.”
(Matthew vi. 8.)
It was my original intention, in designing this pamphlet, to have
made this closing chapter a place in which I might have embodied the
fruits of some thoughts and aspirations which have been maturing in
my mind for many years But neither my time, nor the other limits
imposed upon me, will permit me to do so. And, doubtless, it is
better so : for a more fitting opportunity may yet arise, and longer time
and more experience, will only more thoroughly test my opinions,
and purge them, as well as strengthen them, so far as they are good
and right. I can only say a few closing words to ray honest
and kindly disposed readers, as to our future work.
I want to say, first, I have no plans ; for I firmly believe that
God has a plan for my life and its work ; and that idea extends to
the Church of which I have the joy to be the pastor.
I say, second, that this Church has been formed by God ; and I
trust any who may have doubted it, will now see that it is so, from
the facts I have given.
I say, third, this Church exists for practical work, and aims con-
stantly at the conversion of sinners and sanctification of believers,
holding that, in spirit, soul and body,” it is God’s will that we
should be “ blameless.”
I say, fourth, this Church hates sin, and will fight it with the
“ sword of the spirit,” wherever it can strike it : for sin is God’s
enemy and man’s destroyer.
I say, fifth, that this Church will preach the full, free gospel of a
finished salvation in Christ ; and teach that sin, disease, and death
are only three links in one chain of evil, every one of which Christ
has broken, and that we are called upon to exercise a simple faith in
all that God has spoken, so that we may be free from all three.
I say, sixth, this Church will only live, and only deserves to live,
when it lives Christ in everything, and recognises constantly that
“ power belongeth unto God: ” for without “ power from on high ”
abiding in it, and flowing constantly into and from it, by the Holy


Spirit, it is certain to be a mere worthless name, which had better be
blotted out.
I say, seventh, this Church thrills with sympathy for the bodies,
souls, and spirits of all the offspring 1 of our one Eternal Father who
are perishing- in their sins, and counts every day lost in which some
of them are not healed and saved : for Eternity is drawing 1 nigdi, we
shall soon be gone from these scenes of time ; and we want to meet
our Master “ with rejoicing', bringing- our sheaves with us.”
Our way, our time, our work, our wills are, we desire it at least so
to be, all as He will : for He leads, and we follow.
“ So on, I go— not knowing,
I would not if I might ;
I’d rather walk in the dark with God
Than go alone in the light;
I’d rather walk by faith with Him,
Than go alone by sight.
Where He may lead I’ll follow,
My trust in Him repose ;
And every hour in perfect peace
I’ll sing, ‘He knows ’! ‘He knows 1’ ”


1 Beulah Terrace, Easy Street,
Collingwood, June 25th, 1888.
To the Rev. John Alex. Dowie.
My Dear Pastor, —At a meeting of stewards, it was unani-
mously resolved, that I be requested to forward you the enclosed
resolution, which has been signed by all the stewards. I was
further instructed to express the hope, that you would see fit to give
that resolution a place in your pamphlet.
I am, yours in the Lord Jesus,
P. RENDLE, Secretary.
Resolved ;—“ That we, the undersigned, stewards of the Free
Christian Church, Fitzroy, having read together the pamphlet,
‘ Sin in the Camp,’ which has been written at the unanimous
request of the members of the Church, desire to express our
approval of its contents ; and to add that, having been either
members or office-bearers, (with two exceptions) of the
Church in the Tabernacle during Mr. Dowie’s temporary
pastorate there, we hereby declare that his narrative of the
events of that period is, both in spirit and details, very complete
and correct. We desire further to have this declaration
appended to the pamphlet, before it issues from the press.
A. R. FENTON, Treasurer.
P. RENDLE, Secretary,
WILLIAM NELSON.
A. PETTIGROYB.
JAMES E. JONES.
HENRY P. DUMMETT.
JAMES BALL.
C. G. CARR.
JOHN HARDBOTTLE.
CHARLES JAMES.
JAMBS WILLIAMS.
THEO. HENRY FRANK.


APPENDIX,
APPENDIX I
THE REV. J. A. DOWTE.
(To the Editor oj the Southern Cross.)
The following' letter appeared in the Southern Cross of 17th
March, 1888. It is referred to on page ten of this pamphlet ; and
was written entirely without Mr. Dowie’s knowledge, as the
respected writer himself states :
Sib, —Believing that your columns are always open to correct misstate-
ments affecting the character of Christian ministers, I ask that this communi-
cation may appear in your next issue.
In your notice of the meeting to welcome the return of the pastor of the
Collingwood Tabernacle, Mr. Cherbury is reported to have said that Mr.
Dowie, whilst acting as his locum tenens during his absence, had nearly
destroyed the Sabbath School, materially injured and nearly wrecked the
Church, and attempted to get possesssion of the Tabernacle and congrega-
tion. Mr. Cherbury called upon me about two months before he left to say
that having made every enquiry respecting Mr. Dowie, he felt entire confi-
dence in asking him to take charge of his Church during his absence. In
accordance with his request, I wrote to Mr. Dowie and arranged for an
interview between them, which resulted in the Church unanimously electing
Mr. Dowie as their pastor during Mr. Cherbury’s absence. I have known
the latter ever since his arrival in Melbourne, and have always held him in
the highest esteem for his work’s sake. Mr. Dowie was to me a comparitive
stranger, and owing to certain rumours then prevalent I was not prepossessed
in Ins’ favour. Knowing the action I had taken towards his appointment,
the deep interest I felt in the Tabernacle and its mission work, and the
mutual confidence subsisting between Mr. Cherbury and myself, Mr. Dowie
freely conferred with me as occasions arose as to the best course to adopt.
I had also other sources of reliable information referring to transpiring
events. I need scarcely add that under the circumstances indicated, my
sole aim was to aid in promoting the temporal and spiritual interests of the
Church during the pastor’s absence, with the hope that on his return he
would have the happinesss of finding everything progressing and pros-
perous. It affords me sincere pleasure to state that I always found Mr.
Dowie in perfect sympathy with the object and hope expressed.
I have no hesitation in affirming, as my sincere and deliberate conviction,
that the course of action pursued by the Church during Mr. Cherbury’s
absence would be endorsed by every unprejudiced intelligent Christian
man—that each step taken was justified by the occasion, and that no pastor
and stewards in the faithful discharge of their duty to God could have acted
otherwise. In conclusion, permit me to state in reply to all the misstate-
ments and scandals which have been published by the secular press, and
which I deeply regret have found a place in your journal, affecting the
character of Mr. Dowie, that I have uniformly found him actuated by a pure,
disinterested zeal to promote the temporal and spiritual prosperity of the
charge committed to him, with the hope, which he sincerely cherished, of
delivering up to Mr. Cherbury the interests confided to him in peace and
prosperity. In my varied intercourse with Christian ministers and laymen,
I have not met with one more courageous for the truth, nore self-sacrificing
or more anxious to exemplify in his life the truth which he proclaims. This
conviction, based upon personal observations, was fully confirmed by the
infomation which I obtained from reliable sources whilst in Sydney. No
higher testimony could have been given by those who knew him best whilst
labouring as an evangelist in that city. My earnest prayer is that the Lord


of the harvest would raise up and thrust out into His vineyard many more
such labourers. I write this solely in the interests of truth and justice, and
without Mr. Howie’s knowledge,—and remain, dear sir, yours truly,
HENRY COOKE.
APPENDIX 11.
This letter, which is full of misstatements, appeared in the
Southern Cross, of 24th March, 1883. It is referred to on page 63
of this pamphlet. The writer is a person to whom I have
not spoken more than three or four times in my life ; and
with whom I have never exchanged or spoken a word concerning
the Church affairs of the Tabernacle. Hence his affectation of
“ being consulted,” etc., is a pure fiction, so far as I am con-
cerned.
THE COLLINGWOOH TABERNACLE,
(To the Editor of the Southern Cross.)
Sir, —Without meaning the slightest disrespect to Mr. H. Cooke, I may
perhaps, be permitted to reply briefly to his letter in defence of Mr.
Howie.
Mr. Cooke takes exception to the assertion that, during Mr. Cherbury’s
absence Mr. Howie had “ nearly destroyed the Sunday-school, materially
injured and nearly wrecked the Church, and attempted to get possession of
the Tabernacle and congregation. ” In reply, Mr. Cooke proceeds to give
Mr. Howie an excellent character, and in measure to make himself respon-
sible for Mr. Howie’s conduct, by explaining that he was consulted by that
gentleman as to the right course to pursue. All this may be true
enough ; and yet facts are stubborn things, and I imagine it would be diffi-
cult to disprove those above given.
Mr. Cooke proceeds to affirm “ that the course of action pursued during
Mr. Cherbury’s absence would be endorsed by every unprejudiced intelligent
Christian man.” This, I must say, is altogether opposed to my own
experience. As one of the Trustees of the Tabernacle I was frequently
consulted by those taking opposite sides, and have thus had abundant oppor-
tunities of obtaining full particulars of what has been done. I certainly
came to no hasty conclusion, but without endorsing all that was done in
opposition to Mr. Howie, the conviction was forced upon me that there had
been a lamentable lack of both grace and wisdom in Mr. Howie’s dealings
with those who were opposed to him.
I have also conversed with a goodly number of Christian men who are
interested in Mr. Cherbury’s work, and who certainly are not wanting in
intelligence, and without a single exception they have expressed sorrow
at and disapproval of Mr. Howie’s proceedings.
It is quite natural under the circumstances narrated that Mr. Cooke should
have written as he has done, but I am not at all sure that he is aware of all
the proceedings at the Tabernacle in Mr. Cherbury s absence, or he would
have spoken more guardedly.
Melbourne, 19th March, 1883, PHILIP KITCHEN.


APPENDIX 111.
Yours faithfully,
APPENDIX IV.
ARTHUR SACK,
March 20, 1883.
[This letter is referred to on page 69, and needs no further
explanation] :
Mes. Chekbury. —Dear Sister in the Lord, —At a meeting of the Special
Committee of Church Discipline, held in the Tabernacle, on Monday
evening, the Rev. J. A. Dowie made the following statement:—“ That upon
Tuesday, 10th October, 1882, Mrs. Cherbury received Lloyd Edwards, who
has been expelled from this Church into her house, and informed him that
it did not matter what this Church decided regarding him, but that if he felt
in his heart that he was a Christian, he was not to heed their decision, but to
look upon it as a chastisement from God, which he, like all God s children,
would have to bear for the time.” It was moved, seconded, and carried,
that the foregoing statement be sent to you, with the earnest exhortation of
this Committee of Discipline that you refrain from making such statements,
and abstain in future from intercourse with those whom the Church has,
for sin, expelled from its fellowship.
L. BROWNE, Secretary.
The following compound of ignorance and malice, appeared
in the columns of the Southern Cross, and how it escaped being
immediately consigned to the editorial waste basket, entirely passes
my comprehension, A few remarks are appended to it, making
its real nature evident, I trust :
(To the Editor of the. Southern Cross.)
Sir, —Being a constant reader of your valuable paper and knowing its
columns are open for both sides of the question —we, the undersigned, most
respectfully trust you will insert this letter in your next issue. By your last
issue of 18th March, Mr. Dowie states he received a unanimous vote of confi-
dence from the Church for his past services at the Tabernacle, Collingwood.
Now, sir, we beg to state that such was not the voice of the Church but a
party clique; for on Mr. Dowie ignoring Mr. Cherbury’s right to take the
chair, he, Mr. Cherbuty, left the building and all his friends with him, except
about eight young men who had the courage to stand Mr. Dowie s abuse,
who stopped to see what next was coming ; then there was a proposition
read and seconded amidst disorder by two of Mr. Dowie’s stewards, to the
effect that Mr. Dowie receive a vote of confidence for his past services at the
Tabernacle, and of course his party voted according to his own desires. The
reason we, the undersigned, did not vote against or for it was for the threats
Mr. Dowie used at a previous meeting, saying he would not leave the Taber-
nacle till he received the unanimous vote of confidence ; and to get rid of
him that night we remained silent. I may state it is not at Mr. Cherbury s
or the stewards’ request, but simply to state both sides of the question we
write this. Apologising for having taken so much of your valuable space,
—We remain, yours respectfully,
WILLIAM H. BALL,
DOUGLAS GIBBS,
WILLIAM M. TURNBULL,
Members of the Tabernacle, Sackville-street, Collingwood.


Per Mr. M. L. H. Hutch-
inson, 15 Collins street
West, Melbourne —
A
s.
d.
Turnbull, Dr. Adam
5
5
0
M. L. R. 0
5
0
0
Beath, Mr David
5
0
0
Currie, Mr J. L. ...
8
0
0
Sloan, Mr William
Haller, Mr J
2
2
0
2
2
0
Black, Mr James
Wood, Mr J. W
2
2
0
2
2
0
Some readers of the Sou-
thern Cross
1
3
9
Atkinson, Mr J, H.
1
1
0
M’Kenzie, Mr R,, Beech-
worth.
1
1
0
&
s.
d.
Colclough, Mr Thomas ...
1
" 1
0
Willan and Son
1
1
o
M.L.H
1
1
0
Cropley Bros, and nephew
1
10
0
Coupar. Mr J. G.
1
0
0
Brodie, Mr David
1
0
0
Thomson Mr A.
1
0
o
M.M
1
0
0
Edels, M. B.
1
0
0
li.W.L
1
0
0
A friend to the cause ...
1
0
0
W.M
1
0
0
C.C.R
1
0
0
Philip M.
1
0
0
M’Innes, E. and J.
1
0
0
Tolmie, Mrs
1
0
0
These four were among the disturbers referred to on page 82.
They say that those (over JIG members, excluding - themselves)
who passed the resolution were “ a party clique”—and yet all
the stewards, and the immense majority of the Church, including
many of its oldest members, composed this clique ? But even so,
how came it that the proposition was, as they say, made “amidst
disorder ?” It could not be what they call “my clique ” who
made the noise : for they approved of the proposal. It could
not, if they wrote the truth, be these four young- men ; for they
say, that “ to g-et rid of him (Mr. Bowie) we (these four persons
and their companions) remained silent.” Who then were left to
make the alleged “ disorder ” when the proposal was made ? No
one. Therefore, there could have been no “disorder” at that
time, and to say there was, would be to write untruthfully.
Exactly so ; and that is what any person of sense can .see these
misguided young men have done. The value of their other testi-
mony as to my conduct is, therefore, a little less than nothing ;
and, indeed, their letter would be beneath notice, but for the fact,
that it enables me again to show the reader what manner of
persons the disorderly minority in the Tabernacle was com-
posed of.
APPENDIX V.
The following appeared, as an advertisement, in the Age of
Saturday, March 24th, 1883 ; and the peculiar circumstances
connected with its publication are fully set forth on pages 94
to 97. *
ME, C, M, CHEEBURY’S rest expenses fund.
May-June 1882.
The following sums, in response to an appeal written and circulated by
the Rev. John Alex. Dowie, were received by him and lodged to the credit
of the fund in the Bank of Victoria, Brunswick-street, Fitzroy, viz :


£ s. d.
Harper, Mr William ... 1 0 0
Laird, H. A 10 0
Lloyd, Mr John ...10 0
Wood, MrJ. W. ...10 0
Sutherland, Mrs ... 1 0 0
Tough, Mr D 1 0 0
Turner, A. ... ... 0 10 0
T.B. 0 10 0
Main, Mr J 0 10 0
Lundy, Mr James ... 0 7 6
Gibbs, Mr Thomas ... 0 5 0
Meredith, Mr John J. ...0 6 0
A sympathiser 0 5 0
A friend 0 5 0
G.C.S 0 5 0
Peppin, Mr H. H. ...0 5 0
Nicholson, Mr A. ...0 5 0
M’Dougall, Mr Alex. ...0 5 0
A friend 0 6 0
Merlin, Mr W 0 2 6
J., Mortlake 0 2 6
Nalla 0 2 0
£56 19 3
Per Mr Philip Kitchen, 113
Russell-st, Melbourne—
Bennetts, Mr W. ... 5 0 0
Two friends 3 10 0
Kitchen, Mr P 3 3 0
Kirwood, Mr Charles ... 1 1 0
Williams, Messrs. F. & Co. 110
A friend ••*lO 0
A friend ... ... 0 10 0
A friend 0 5 0
A friend ... ... c .. 0 5 0
A friend ... ••• ... 0 2 6
A friend 0 2 6
Per Mr A. J. Smith. 35
Swanston-st, Melb. —
Barrow, Mr James ...2 0 0
Kirkchrist 2 0 0
Toft, Mr John Greaves ... 1 1 0
Hassall, C. P 10 0
Walker, Mrs, sen. ...100
Smith, Mr. A. J. ...10 0
Green, Mr John ... ...10 0
Landells, Mrs 10 0
Hannah, Mr Thomas ... 1 0 0
Bean, Mr W. M. ...110
A friend ... ... ...0 5 0
A friend ... ... ...0 5 0
A.B 0 5 o
Hettie D 0 5 6
£l3 2 0
Per Mr Henry Cooke, 24
Swanston-st Mel-
£ s. d.
bourne. —
M’lndoe, Mr J. B. ...110
White, Mr J, ... ...110
Williams, Mr J 10 0
Strongman, Rev. J. ...10 0
Oldfield, Miss Susanna ... 0 10 0
A friend ... ... ... 0 10 0
A friend 0 10 0
A Tasmanian friend ... 0 6 6
A friend (Mr H.) ... 0 2 6
£6 0 0
Per Rev. J, A. Dowie,
Rowe-st., N. Fitzroy—
Kitchen, Mr. Theophilus 5 0 0
Wortley, Mr V. ... ... 2 2 0
Homan, Mr Henry F. ... 1 0 0
Tregurtha. Mr., Daylesford 1 0 0
Larnach, Mr., Bank of Vic-
0 10 6
toria 010 6
Henry, Miss E. ... ... 0 10 0
Turnbull. Mr. W. M. ... 010 0
Bourke, Mrs 0 10 0
Nicholes, Mrs ... ... 010 0
Hall, Mr A 0 5 0
Edwards, Mr John (Crom-
well-street) ... ... 0 5 0
Trotter, Miss Katie ... 0 6 0
Haldane, Mr. Andrew ... 0 5 0
Bremridge, Mrs ... 0 5 0
£l2 17 6
Total received by Mr ,
Dowie ... ... £lO4 18 9
The following sums, rep-
resenting subscriptions
received by Messrs.
Webber and McAlpin.
the secretary and trea-
surer respectively of this
fund, were paid into the
Bank of Victoria, Fitz-
roy, by them; but no
detailed lists of the same
have ever been pub-
lished, viz :
May 30—Per Mr, Webber 25 6 0
June 2 —Per Mr. McAlpin 21 3 0
June B—Per8 —Per Mr. McAlpin 10 2 0
£66 11 0
Total receipts £l6l 9 9


£ s. d.
The bank pass book shows
the fund to have been
disbursed as follows, viz
June 9—Paid Mr. Cherbury
June 24—Paid to Southern
Cross for inserting appeal
as a supplement...
10 0
145 0 0
June 24—Paid to Mr. A. J.
June 13—Paid to Mr,
Smith for exchange on
Cheques 0 I 6
Cherbury... ... ... 9 8 3
June 24—Paid to Messrs.
Ferguson and Moore for
printing 6000 copies of
appeal for fund 6 0 0
£l6l 9 9
JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.
North Fitzroy, 22nd March, 1883.
We, the undersigned, have
carefully
examined the above statement, we
have compared it with the original memoranda in Mr. Dowie’s possession, we
have checked it by the bank pass book, with which it exactly agrees, and
we hereby declare it to be, in every particular, a correct and true account of
“ Mr. Cherbury’s Rest Expenses Fund,” so far as Mr. Dowie is concerned,
ROBERT W. FENTON, 86 Johnston-street Collingwood.
J. B. JONES, Sackville-street, Collingwood.


—
-i
THE CHURCH, MEETING
IN THE TABERNACLE,
SACKVILLE ST., COLLINGWOOD,
hr 4
I— 4
In account with
JOHN ALEXANDER DOWIE,
LATE PASTOR pro.
tern.
Date. — 1882-3.
No. of Weeks.
Sum Eeceiyed.
Average Weekly
Deficiency of
Salary.
Total Deficiency.
May 22 to July 24
July 31 to August 13
August 20
August 27 to February 11, 1883 ...
10
2
1
25
£ s. d.
38 10 9
10 0 0
3 13 8
21 18 10
£ s. d.
2 2 11
1 0 0
2 6 4
5 2 6
£ s.
21 9
2 0
2 6
128 1
d.
3
0
4
2 '
Totals
38
£74 3 3
£4 1 0
£153 16
9
V
Less
r >>
o
c
H
25
O
Sum received from friends who
formed a Stipend Fund on 27th
August, 1882, to 11th February,
1883
25
89 13 6
■
’5
<D
ft
be
.5
2 7 3
89 13
6
38
£163 16 9
0)
&
£113 9
£64 3
3
I therefore claim, as per resolution of Church Meeting, held on 12th January, the sum of Sixty-four Pounds Three
Shillings and Thiee-pence as being lawfully due to me. JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.
Certified as a correct and legitimate claim— A. E. FENTON and L. BEOWNE. 12)31 83-
[So many false rumours have gone abroad as to my income from the Church that I publish the above, although regreting the
necessity. The resolution above referred to is as follows :— That the Church now resolves that all deficiencies
short of £6 per week, from the 15th May until the expiration of Mr. Dowie’s temporary pastorate, are, and shall be
a debt payable from the funds of the Church.”J
BENSON, PRINTER, 180 NAPIER STREET, FITZROY.




