

SINBAD'S DREAMS,
AND THE
DEVIL'S TWIST.
A TALE OF THE SEA.
BRISBANE:
PRINTED AT THE “QUEENSLAND EVANGILICAL STANDARD” OFFICE,
WILLIAM-STREET.
MDCCCLXXXVIII.




Sinbad's
Dreams.
BRISBANE:
PRINTED AT THE “ Q. E. STANDARD” OFFICE, WILLIAM-STREET.
MDCCCLXXXVIII.




SINDAD’S DREAMS.
Once upon a time we had an acquaintance, a sailor, who
for convenience sake, we will call Sinbad. One day the
wind had been very baffling, so that he had been sorely
tried ; at the end of his watch he lay down on his bed
and had a waking dream as follows :
Sinbad’s Ist Dream.
Many many years ago there lived a very wicked man,
a sailor, even Sinbad, for he was such a bad sinner. Before
he went to sea his mother had taught him to “Do unto
others as ye would they should do to you.” When he
became too old to follow the sea he procured a fishing-boat,
lived on Fisherman’s Island and sold his fish on the main,
a few leagues distant.
The island upon which he lived was surrounded by
numerous dangerous reefs, so that many noble ships got
wrecked thereon ; but following his mother’s catechism his
boat always went to the rescue ; many lives he saved, and
oftentimes had fed the hungry : for he cultivated a patch
of potatoes, and always having a large supply of dried fish
his repasts proved very savoury to the distressed. The
name of his boat was the “ Sea Gull.”
Following his occupation he reflected how delightful it
was to do to others as you would they should do to you ;
he would like all other men to be taught what his mother
had taught him ; he would bestow the tenth part of his
potato patch for the purpose.
He accordingly set sail for the main continent of God’s
love, and agreed with the five senses of perception who
dwelt on that continent, namely as personated in Messrs—


Honest (spiritual perception), True (spiritual sight),
Ernest (spiritual sincerity), Bede (spiritual man of prayer),
and Felix (heavenly delights) that they would come over
and build a Bethel, for which purpose he gave them a title
to the tenth part of his potato patch. Fisherman’s Island,
through the development of newly-discovered gold regions,
lay within the passage route of a great commercial trade.
The gentlemen as above named accomplished their voyage
and erected the Bethel; but ere they landed on Fisherman’s
Island had become changed individuals, through causes we
will hereafter explain.
The Bethel being built, Sinbad offered the whole of his
possessions as an investment to add a tower to the building
to serve as a lighthouse upon the dark waters—for the need of
the same had been the destruction of many noble ships
laden with rich cargoes. Corpses of lovely maidens and
beauteous young men, as well as of others in the prime and
vigour of life as snatched by death from a career of active
usefulness were oftentimes strewn upon the shores of
Fisherman’s Island.
The Bethel men, to fulfil their promises, had accepted
the services of a boat-owner named Policy—a man of pre-
possessing exterior, carrying with him the promptings of
Judas Iscariot to which society he belonged in the spiritual
world. He took the tiller and worked the main sheet,
whilst his partner Cunning worked the head-sheets, had
charge of the boat-hook, the grapnell, and the lead-line.
Policy would steer by his soundings. The name of their
boat was the “Waterwitch ” —a crazy, cranky cockle-shell;
but her owners had the power of inflating her proportions
and exhibiting well-cushioned seats which proved a bait for
the unwary and innocent.
So soon as the “ Waterwiteh” was clear of the continent
of God’s love her owner steered her into a cloud, namely,
(his passengers into the illusion) that they were free from all
prejudice and 'were also candid and liberal investigators of
truth.
This cloud is a very fine vapour continuously circulating
from pole to pole in circuit. Sometimes with surface wind
and sometimes on an upper current; it is the evaporation


of the sop which Judas Iscariot ate when on earth, dis-
integrated into most minute atoms of virile bacteria, germs
destructive of spiritual perception (the sense of smell) as
well as the other spiritual senses, sight, feeling, hearing, and
tasting.
The passengers of the “ Waterwitch,” utterly unaware of it
within themselves, became so spiritually diseased as victims
of the base treachery of her captain, that they became so
thoroughly disorganised that even their names became
changed in the spiritual world. Honest, in passing through
the cloud, contracted a malformation in his organ of percep-
tion—he could not perceive the truth. True contracted a
large tumour—the bacteria of the cloud had aggregated it
over his left eye ; he could no longer see the truth. Ernest
had sustained an affection in his throat—from the bacteria
lodging therein, worse than diptheria ; he could no longer
masticate the truth. Bede’s ear became stopped the
bacteria had penetrated the left ear; he could no longer
hear the truth. The bacteria deadened the palate of Felix
—he was no longer happy in tasting that the Lord is
gracious. As they one and all depended on each other for
advice and explanations, it was clearly a case of the blind
leading the blind.
It can scarcely be understood on earth what is meant by
having individual names written in heaven—it will assist
our views to learn that as virtue derives all its sustenance
from heaven, so when virtue does not flow into a man from
heaven his character becomes reversed and he forthwith
acts under the influence of seducing spirits; his actions
change and, accordingly, his quality, so that he becomes the
opposite of what he was before and receives a characteristic
name according to the degree in which he is invested.
The proposition of Sinbad, the sailor, for a light-
house was rejected with scorn, whereupon Sinbad,
said :“ My mother used to teach me to say— ‘ Our Father
who art in heaven, deliver us from evil •’ let us do likewise,”
whereupon they all, with united breath, told him to go and
pray for himself— they would have nothing to do with him,
whereupon he reminded them, —“ Let us do toothers as
we would they should do to us.” In reply, Mr. Ernest, as


the mouthpiece of the company, answered—“We preach
Jesus Christ and Him crucified”; we don’t recognise your
whims nor fancies.
By the operation of a spiritual law, when a man refuses
a sincere invitation to pray with another for guidance, his
refusal of the invitation shuts his mind from Heaven and
opens it to the internals, hence Mr. Ernest, incapable of
masticating the truth, could eject blasphemy against the
Son of Man by calling it “ whim and fancy” to do to others
as we would be done by.
There was an earthquake in those parts and Fisherman’s
Island was slowly but surely subsiding—roaring waves,
terrible to behold, were surging around them. The men of
Bethel stood at the door of the Bethel where they had
preached “ Jesus Christ from tlieir point of viewy Sinbad
launched his boat; they looked up and saw him caught up
into Abraham’s bosom, and instead of being an old, wrinkled,
and grey-bearded fisherman, he was to their sight, a young
man as sprightly as when he was first entered on the ship’s
articles ; his bright, blue eyes and auburn hair setting off a
ruddy countenance, surrounded by a young beard, crisped
with sea-air. He was dressed in a gorgeous blue that no
dyer on earth could blend, and he was commanding a pilot
boat of exquisite model, spreading sails like the wings of a
dove, with which she could fly in the Wind’s eye, and lift
herself over the crest of a wave. He was exercising with
a vigour, no pen can describe, in piloting merchant ships
laden with the pearls of great price, and guiding them, full
sail, into the harbours of the land of Beulah.
Then did the men of Bethel cry out in anguish, “ Father
Abraham, send Sinbad for our rescue”—for when Sinbad
had left Fisherman’s Island they could not enter his boat;
as the atmosphere that accompanied the earthquake was
loaded with such gases that they were petrified into fossils
of a material ten thousand times heavier than lead—their
weight did, as it were, root them to the ground, for their feet
weighed many tons, and they could not lift them off the
earth. A voice replies, which they suppose to be that of
Father Abraham, but really it was their own slumbering
consciences awakening, which said, He who you knew on


fisherman’s Island as Sinbad has now a new name; his life
which he made on earth he has now brought with him, and
will be his characteristic throughout eternity. He is in the
pilot service, for on earth he lived to effect rescues. He
has gone higher and become a guardian angel. lam afraid
that He whom you professed to preach as Christ crucified
was never once permitted by you to guide your actions, for
underneath the Bethel was an inexhaustible well full of the
oil of charity, which you would neither use yourself nor
allow Sinbad to apply.
They felt their extremity terrible—Fisherman’s Isle
subsiding, the waves black and roaring, the desolation more
intense through the white sails and luminous sides of the
pilot boat displaying their internal darkness as more intense.
At this terrible moment the angel who holds the keys of
the bottomless pit (but who never casts any one therein
while they have any remains of goodness in them),
even drew nigh and said unto them : “ Policy was only
permitted to inflict disease upon your left organs which
communicate with the head. Your right organs which
communicate with the heart are yet intact. You have an
affection for good. * According to your faith be it unto you.’
Look in that cloud, strain your affections, and you will see
the Son of Man.” And even as he spoke they discerned
Him, and in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, their
spiritual maladies forsook them, for principled in charity
their faith could now admit the Lord to flow into them, and
once more they resumed their baptismal names of Honest,
True, Ernest, Bede, and Felix. Sinbad swooped down
and took them on board. Then their eyes being opened they
saw Policy and Cunning sink under the waves and go down
to the bottomless pit.
Sinbad awakes, and his guardian angel approaches him.
This guardian angel was an old counseller that had been
sent to him when he left school as follows—As he was
entering life some inward questionings asked him, “ Whether
Would he not like to have a guide—not to interfere with
his liberty, but always to be in sight, and whenever he was
right in his determinations to appear and encourage him


onward, but when mistaken to be approached by him and
cautioned.” Sinbad answered within himself, Oh yes.
Sinbad did not know where his reasonings had come
from, but it was the Great Teacher operating within him.
Sinbad having in the interval risen to the command of a
ship was permitted to have a dream wherein the objects
that passed through his mind, and their developments asked
him if he would pass through all these experiences to benefit
his fellow man. And Sinbad answered, “Oh, that I had
the opportunity to endure the shame and with it the power
to become more than a conquerer.”
Then his guide and counseller told him, Strength will be
given him, but he was surrounded by devils who sought to
warp the lives of all men and give them the Devil’s Twist.
Therefore to counteract their designs you must listen to
their plans j they are now upon the ship’s yard arm. Just
listen to them.


SINBAD’S DREAMS.
I felt that the voyage was over, and we were to return
to our native land, our beloved Tasmania. The land ol high
mountains, of running rivers, of fruitful fields, and of
abundant fruit. Forthwith I perceived that our ship, a
powerful brigantine, named the “ Stormbird ” was scudding
before a propitious gale. She was carrying top gallant
sail, topsails and square foresail on the foremast while the
mainsail was guyed out over the port quarter, with the
tack triced up. The wind came on the starboard quarter,
all sails were ramping full; the wind came true as an arrow
from the quarter whence it first commenced to blow. The
sea remained smooth, no waves arose, only the ripples
from the powerful gusts. And as the black clouds loomed
up behind the ship, emptying themselves of a terrific force,
the scene was appalling in grandeur. Sinbad, who had
been at sea all his life, says within himself, “If that I
had charge of this ship I would shorten sail,” for she
seems in momentary danger of running under. And while
he is thus thinking the “Stormbird” thrills with the
momentum of a squall that sends its full force in her sails,
so that she is positively wafted, but all this time Sinbad
sees none of the crew, but has an intuitive perception
that the captain is standing by the mainmast watching the
capacities of his ship, even to a packthread ; he is humming
a tune whilst very complacently nursing a lovely child in
his arms; bestowing upon it most loving caresses, yet
watching the ship at the same time as with an Eagle’s eye.
The ship enters between the land and rounds Cape Rauol
upon which an electric light burns by night to guard the
homeward bound mariner of the floating wrecks and
debris through which he has to pass; these in endless variety
become visible to those on board the “Stormbird,” some
with their mastheads only above water, others with their
top gallant masts, others with their topmasts, on which
their yards and sails are bleaching, some with mariners


still clinging to them, others with the seabirds of desolation.
Then there is a ship outside the wind current, her captain
is being thrown overboard—he is distinguishable as being of
a stalwart frame but dressed in blue. The “Stormbird”
can in no case effect any rescue for she is ramping full and
scudding like the wind. Her captain points, as he
comes in to the wreck of the “ Racehorse,” which went
down because her captain spoke a word against the Son of
Man. The “ Stormbird ’ passes as it were under a cloud
wherein Sinbad sleeps but wakes up to find himself on
board a beautiful yacht propelled by an inward momentum;
carrying a large complement of passengers, Captain Charity
is on board in command. Sinbad booms out the fore trysail
first on the starboard side afterwards on the port side,
when the captain tells him to brail it up, for the foot of it
is in the way of the passengers : the ships internal
machinery is ample for all necessities.
The yacht is now steaming above Hobart Town, and the
prospect presents a scene of indescribable grandeur.
Majestic hills on each side, the yacht gliding over a sea like
unto crystal, upon the shores of which there jut out points
of land of romantic beauty, and as they on board are
now rejoicing in the sight before them, Sinbad remarks to
Captain Charity, “ There is the orchard at Risdon where
fifty years ago, on one regatta day, we landed, and enjoyed
ourselves amongst the groves of beautiful cherries, then in
full bearing.” The yacht continues to ascend the river,
and tier after tier of mountains rise before the eye, present-
ing scenes of impressive grandeur.
The scene changes, and with it the occupation of the
company. Sinbad finds himself with his cousin Olive, with
all the old associations of childhood, when fifty years before
they together ran through the orchard at Risdon, and
gathered fruit for each other. They are now in adult age,
and behold in themselves that they are wearing the
perpetual bloom of youth. They require no articulate
words to communicate their thoughts, for they are in the
same life. Olive, from her piercing eyes under dark eye-
lashes, her face in rosy bloom, communicates to Sinbad
that they have now entered the mansions that have been


prepared for them ; they are now together ascending its
beautiful stairs and enter a large room ; here they seat
themselves at an harmonium, and the company surround
them ; they perform an old favourite anthem, which as boy
and girl forty years before they often played and sang
together.
From Greenland’s icy mountains,
From India’s coral strand,
Where Afric's sunny fountains,
Roll down their golden sand.
The scene again changes. Sinbad is beholding the sky.
He observes light detached clouds of snowy white floating
overhead, and between their edges are visible stars without
number of surpassing brillance.
The scene again changes, and Sinbad is in a good house.
He is standing near the fire-place in the drawing room.
Within the stove there is laid wood of neatly cut billets;
on the grating the smaller pieces ready for ignition ; and
while he muses the fire burns up brilliantly.
Then draws near to Sinbad the guide and instructor of
his life. One who has dwelt in the regions of his rational
faculty from his childhood—and says to his perceptions,
What you have now seen is another link of instruction
that the Great Teacher permits you to receive for your
encouragement and confidence. Your passage on * the
“ Stormbird ” is your earthly career • the favouring gale is
the heavenly influences that are carrying you onward.
You would of your own intelligence shorten sail when the
dark clouds give, as you suppose, too much wind, but those
dark clouds are the crosses of life—the loss of insincere
friends, the loss of property you were commencing to
idolise, as well as discipline of various kinds—these circum-
stances are purifying you ; the captain of the “ Stormbird ”
knows exactly what sail she can carry, and he is guarding
your heavenly innocence of childhood—namely, the image
and likeness of God which your Heavenly Father implanted
when you was born in an earthly tabernacle, this He takes
in His arms all through the storms of life. The wrecks you
witnessed drifting about off Cape Rauol are those who have


inade shipwreck of the faith—those who have spokeli
against the Son of Man—have taken the unmistakeable
directions of the Word and jeered at them—these could not
float any longer, they subside, and their hulls rest in an
under-current of the cold Dead Sea, and thus their mast-
heads are visible as they drift about in this Sargasso Sea ;
they serve as warnings, whereon the sea birds of desolation
now rest. This Sargasso Sea is an undercurrent which
sweeps round the entrance of the Pure River of the Water
of Life, and as those waters mix with the ocean no ship can
float on them which has not the required buoyancy ; at the
sea mouth they go out as a surface current, but underneath
as a circular and sweeping current is the Dead Sea—a
Sargasso pool—wherein do whirl around all those who
have so made shipwreck of the faith, that they cannot enter
the river of life. The Dead Sea undercurrent sets upon
the shore of Bruni Island, from the south-east sweeps up
that coast until it is turned by the River of Life (eveu as
the Arctic current is turned by the Gulf stream) and sweep
outward again past Cape Rauol —performing a great circuit
and extent of a Sargasso Sea.
The cloud under which you passed and emerged in a
steam yacht on a crystal sea is your passing into eternal
life, and finding yourself under the captain you sailed with,
even Charity. The heavenly innocence he was preserving
for you is now restored to your possession, and you meet
your old playmate Olive, both of you now developed angels
ascending the mansions of the blest; the occupation you
delighted in on earth now returns to you, and in the highest
rooms of the mansion you rise into more exalted strains.
The desires and aspirations of the Image and Likeness of
God when children, within you, are now realised. Those
crowds in the upper mansion are those who have been
redeemed from the summits of icy coldness, others from the
burning lusts, and others from benighted darkness, and in
this work you helped by doing good whenever you had the
opportunity, others did likewise, and now the day of the
Lord has come.
The dark cloud that followed the “ Stormbird ” you now
see floating over your head as accumulations of heavenly


clew, all to descend upon you as you require it, and the
brilliant stars you cannot number are the imperishable
truths which are eternally your guides out of states of dark-
ness.
The wood cut in billets are the work of your hands made
to fit in God’s eternal purposes, place them together in
proper order, and God in His own time will vifify them
and give light and warmth to your spiritual energies, the
home in which you dwell, namely, the desire to do good to
your fellow-creatures ; as you live in that desire it is your
home.
Think well of the lessons. As you would have shortened
sail so it is natural to you to wish to escape the natural
ills of life, but whom the Lord loveth He chastens, and
there is not one sorrow of life or disappointment ever
happens to you but what by being properly met will make
you a purer and a more exalted being, as well as remove
some dross that is a clog to your spiritual life. The force
of the temptation that only can reach you by God’s permis-
sion is so accurately balanced by compensation influences
from heaven that there are always more good influences in
your favour than evil.
Do not forget the Sargasso Sea. Wherever the implicit
teachings of the Word of God are despised, the soul
becomes leaden, its buoyancy has departed, its spiritual life
recedes ; the Great Teacher cannot dwell in the rational
faculty, and the unfortunate man has descended to animal.
But the day is coming when the sea shall give up its dead,
those who have been immersed in the Dead sea of
of sensuality, they have only sinned against the Son of
Man they have not blasphemed the Son of God, for of Him
they knew nothing. The literal teaching which they have
crucified in ridicule can be vivified so as to restore them to
the surface. Even as a shock of electricity to reach the
masthead of those sunken wrecks, pass down to their
holds, and restore their bouyancy, thunderbolts which (on
reaching the Dead Sea) act as dynamite charges to bring
substances to the surface.
You beheld the shining river, and the mountains in the
distance, The use of naountains is from tjieir height to


condense the floating clouds and to communicate the dew
as rain of heaven to water the earth, and fill the rivers.
We read of the Pure river of the water of life, clear as
crystal proceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb
Rev. xxii. 1. The throne of God is His love and wisdom,
it is Gods love that creates the waters and His wisdom
that makes them clear and shining. Moving upon these
waters, is being carried by His infinite truth. So when on
that river you will require no external aid, God will be in
the midst of you and propel you onward, and attract you
towards His throne, as if by magnetism ; it is like, going
unto like. And now before I conclude my explanation see
that you clearly understand what is meant by speaking
a word against the Son of Man. It is the refusal to put
unto actual practice the plain and straightforward teachings,
“Ho unto all men as they should do to you, as well as to
analyse each others surroundings, pity the depraved and
help to restore them as well as every other duty to our
neighbour which the parables of the Great Teacher
implicitly outline, those who neglect this privilege (for a
privilege it is, inasmuch as no one can assist others without
being helped himself); even they cannot float on the
waters of life but subside in the dead sea of sensuality.
Still with their mastheads above water, as lightning
conductors, to their hulls. So when the lightnings of the
Son of man flash from time to time through the midst
of the disobedient the remains of goodness within them
even if only as minute as a grain of mustard seed can be
vivified, that they can again come up to the surface upon
the waters of life and sail into the haven of rest.
The dark clouds that you saw coming up behind you is
the permission of Providence, for in our path through life
and contact with an unregenerate world there be many impure
images and evil suggestions which come both directly and
indirectly, through reading, hearing, and seeing, as well as
what is in the memory already from our own bodily senses.
These we cannot prevent, nor would it be desirable, inas-
much as it gives to each one the opportunity of exploring
his own evil inclinations, and resisting them by the help of
the Great Teacher, who will eradicate them, and leave an


experience in our lives which shall make us in our genera-
tion wise as serpents and harmless as doves in co-operating
with Him, and going forth as His messengers to benefit
our fellow-man.
Passing over the Sargasso Sea, at the entrance of the
haven, is the meeting of the currents. The stream of the
river of the Pure Water of Life, clear as crystal, proceeding
from the mountains of God’s love, flows into the great sea,
but being clearer and lighter than all other waters, all
waters from which have been evaporated—the dew of
heaven—subside as a Dead Sea, when meeting the Pure
River of the Water of Life. Nor can ships float upon the
Pure River unless of a buoyant frame. The buoyancy of
the “ Stormbird ” consisted that her bows were constructed
as the breast of a bird. A bird to rise must have breasts
well fitted with air vessels within, and as a sea bird will
breast the waves of the air equally well, on the wings of
our will unto Jesus we come. The wings are as ship’s
sails to carry us. The will is the inclination in wkich we
abide, even as in the hull of the ship, but the air vesseJs
within are His own sustaining influences, without which we
could not flap our wings.
The natural man says within himself, Oh that I had
charge of the ship I would shorten sail—or in other words
I would escape these trials; but the Lord says, Thou tellest
my wanderings ; put Thou my tears into thy bottle. Are
they not in Thy book ? Psalm lvi. 8.
After death, when man’s past life is set in review before
him these treasures of affliction, will, as it were, be brought
out and shown to him, so that he will see the use of every
one of them in perfecting his regeneration. He will then
discern that the dark clouds he saw coming up behind him
were of two kinds, the one with blinding rain, the other
gusts of wind without rain—uamely, those that burst upon
his will, and those that burst upon his understanding. In
the one case his lusts are excited, like as it were with
blinding rain; in the other case his pride of intellect
asserts itself in fitful gusts ; but with the Great Teacher on
board guarding his innocence the waves cannot rise, the
fifll force of the gale goes into the ship’s sails, so that she


speeds onward as an arrow to the entrance of the Pure
River of Life.
Then the guide and instructor of Sinbad once more
approached him in the regions of his mind and brought to
rememberance, where in passing over the Sargasso Sea, he
saw the captain of another ship a man of stalwart frame
dressed in tarnished blue, cast overboard into his watery
grave the gangway was unshipped and he was cast into the
sea with a great splash, whereupon he reflected that that
same captain was or had been the brother of the captain of
the “Stormbird,” but having failed to do the will of the Great
Teacher, ceased to be his brother and was accordingly cast
into the sea even as Jonah. Then did Sinbad remember
when in a foreign port, a certain countryman of his named
Godard was so selfish as to monoplise so much space at the
wharf, that Sinbad’s ship could neither discharge nor take
in cargo, except by a long staging under the stem of his
countryman’s vessel, and he recollected that the garb of his
countryman, a tall and stalwart man, was bright navy blue,
but when he saw the end of him it had become shabby
through his mean behavour, for it was to delay Sinbad in
reaching the same market where he was himself also bound,
that he had delayed him by monopoly, so as to be first in
the market.
Then Sinbad had another dream wherein it was winter,
and clad in his ulster he found himself in the house of
Godard (to whom he had written three times asking him
to renew the old friendship they had had before they met
in the foreign port where his unaccountable conduct must
have arisen from the strange atmosphere, and should he
receive no answer he would consider himself welcome and
would visit him) he had scarcely announced himself when
Godard appears in the bloom of youth as he was before he
breathed a foreign atmosphere. He was again clad in his
bright blue, his eyes were no longer dim to perceive Sinbad’s
sincerity, for they sparkled with a living warmth. So he
extended his hand to meet Sinbad’s, and brought every
muscle into play to give him a more cordial welcome than
he had ever done before. Then Sinbad entered an upper
jroorn in Godard’s ipansion, where were assembled a long


retinue of congenial friends, for most among whom came the
chief officer of Godard’s ship, shaking Sinbad by the hand
saying it was you who first taught me to hand, reef and
steer. Then another came up and shaking Sinbad’s hand
did say unto him, “It was you who first taught me the
beautiful method of determining longitude by the sun and
moon being brought into contact in the sextant.” Others
yet again came up and contributed their welcome and
thanks that he had taught one to stick cringles, another
to splice, others again the various occupations on board
ship.
Sinbad seemed to know the old faces which were quite
familiar but as to the incidents his memory was somewhat
mystified. The recognitions being over; Sinbad and
Godard, walked in company holding sweet converse through
the old familar paths, in the grounds around the mansion,
until dinner should be ready; the savoury fumes of its
preparation filled the atmosphere so that the mouths of the
visitors did water in anticipation of the great reunion of
brotherly love about to take place.
Sinbad awakes, the presence of his guide and counsellor
informs him that the wearing of his ulster on that winter
day (when his brother was estranged from him), was the
cloak of charity, so keeping the heart warm, and with it
a power to send missives of love which in the depths of the
rational mind aet more powerfully tnan dynamite, even
to bring the old states of brotherly love to the surface.
The mystery of his having taught pupils unaware to
himself, he afterwards learned that in the innocence of
Paradise the residents therein glorify God for the uses of
things around them and conversely speak of uses to
express their glorification. Sinbad had on one occasion
many years before, taught a lad the blessedness of walking
not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standing in the way
of sinners, nor sitting in the seat of the scornful: the lad
having subsequently become a sailor he put it in his own
language, he perceives that that lesson, taught him to keep
his hands from iniquity, to reef his sails in temptations
(to keep himself carefully) and steer safely through life :
likewise bringing the sun and the moon into contact,


had been the advice of Sinbad to an enquirer to make love
and faith unite, which is the indispensable necessity of
solving the great problem of the navigation of existence
namely now to live a GOOD LIFE.
Sinbad had on one of many occasions talked to a young
and thoughtless fellow of the realities of the future life,
its certainty, the everlasting occupation of angels and that
they are at all times around us. Sailors call information
of this kind “ Sticking a cringle ” the use of a cringle is to
fix on the clue of a sail, a contrivance for spreading them
out on the yards. The winds of heaven may blow but we
cannot set our sails unless they have cringles in them.
So eternal life may be before and around us, but unless we
take hold of it it will not be ours. Helping each other to
obtain it is what a sailor designates sticking a cringle in the
clue of a sail.
Splicing occurs, when honest doubt has severed the
confidence, that hitherto has been our life, we may
temporarily lose hope and trust and sever the life line
between ourselves and heaven. Brethren who help each
other in such troubles, are those who can explain the
Divine words. “ Behold I make all things new,” they who
go down to the sea in ships and see God’s wonders on the
deep, these know what it is to splice the life line, the
splice is stronger than any other part of the rope, so every
doubt that has been removed, and replaced by a renewed
confidence, makes eternal life more secure and everlasting.
As the splice is stronger than the other part of the rope,
the life line between heaven and earth is a succession of
splices of Goodness and Truth, so that every splice increases
tbe strength. Every Truth must be spliced to its
corresponding Good, else our life is only a ceremony not a
reality.
Sinbad dreams, yet once again, that at the end of a long
road he meets Godard who is about to cross the bridge,
they are both in the bloom of perpetual youth, and the
bridge is the bridge over Jordan, they have not now to
wade the river they have risen and become new creatures.
Godard says to Sinbad “You have taught me more about
Jesus, than I ever gave you the credit of knowing,”


<£ "Verily I understand there is no more death, for our
earthly bodies have been but the scaffolding, to the
building of our bridge over JORDAN.”
And Sinbad dreams yet another dream : that towards
evening he has reached the environs of the City of Light,
where he enters a house on top of a hill but in passing over
an oft frequented beaten track between large tussocks of
grass outside the environs, he perceives the mutilated
portion of the body comprising from the belly to the tail
of a long black tiger snake, its head and a portion of the
body with its respirating organs still intact. Then did
Sinbad quail in thinking that he has passed along that
track so often unawares of the indigenous serpent lurking
there, which he now only accidently (as he supposes) has
just discovered by the aid of the lamp : upon entrance
into the house he reports the disabled serpent, and the
occupants go out with bright lights, make search. and
remove it from the track, where its head and jaws still in
vigour might bite the heel of the wayfarer.
Sinbad awakes, consults with the guide and counsellor of
of his youth, and arrives at the conviction, that the De\il
has now eot his Twist.
Let me explain to you the meaning of the serpent with
its body mutilated even to the tail so that it could never
more creep or glide along the ground, when cursed it was
condemned to go upon its belly, (Gen. iii. 14.) you therefore
understand that unless it was adequately fed it would have
no belly to creep upon ; for its belly would shrivel up.
The serpent that crawls through your mind has its head
and organs of respiration in your hereditary nature,
transmitted to you as the consequences of Adam’s
disobedience and fall. You incur no sin because you
possess that tendency to sin, iniquity only consists in your
own deliberate choice of evil in preference to good. Evil
inclinations therefore compose the food of dust which
sustains the belly of the serpent giving him power even to
his tail to dart and glide. It is consequently clear to you
that the serpent within you can have no means of locomotion
through your actions, unless by your own free will you
supply your hereditary evils with fostering inclinations.


When you first set out for the .City of Light you were
prevailed upon to take the Word of God as a lamp unto
your feet and a lightjunto your path—(Psa. cxix. 105). The
devil sought to destroy you by the head of the serpent
within you, but the repetition on your lips, “ Bless the
Lord oh my soul, and all that is within me bless His holy
name,” gave the legions of hell a repulse from you so that
they never again assaulted you on that plane, but assailed
you in your appetites and lusts. But as you have gone
through the world with the words, “Thy kingdom come,
Thy will be done,” with a desire to have the answer thereto
wrought into your life, so day by day a more interior
meaning of those words has flowed into your rational
faculty, and become the lamp to your feet, and the light to
your path. Every man, woman, and child that you see
you yearn that they may be even better than yourself—
those words have become part of your life. You cannot
wish or think harm so long as those words have a spell
o/er you. The Great Teacher is governing your life, and
as you have by the same means controlled your animal
nature, you have day by day starved the serpent within
you—its belly and tail shrivelled up it can no longer glide
or dart into your inclinations; its head must, however,
remain within you so long as you dwell in your earthly
tabernacle, as the thorn in the flesh, which at any time can
revivify its body if you relapse or blackslide. The last
enemy that shall be destroyed is death. When released
from your earthly tabernacle, so far as your life has been
hid with Christ, you will rise a new creature in Him, the
head of the serpent of your hereditary nature, which has
been the seed of death within you, will have been
thoroughly bruised by the Son of Man ; and what God has
wrought in you He will also accomplish on a large scale.
Every man is a miniature world, and the day will come
when the kingdoms of this world will become the kingdoms
of the Lord Jesus Christ. As the waters cover the sea so
every man shall know the Lord ; hell will obtain no more
recruits ; the trail of that old serpent, the devil, will perish,
because there will be no more souls of the lost to compose
his armies, and in the process of time God shall thoroughly


bruise his head, so that he deceives the nations no more.
Every evil thought that we counteract by substituting a
passage of the Word that will expel it, will contribute to
<nve the devil an effectual twist, so that the earth will
become in God’s time a birthplace of angels, and the path-
way of the City of Light cleaved from all dangers.
When any one absorbs the words, “ Thy kingdom come,
Thy will be done,” into his life it is a Sun, which acting
upon the atmosphere of our memory makes the lightning
flash from east to west, or in other words, when face to face
with a difficulty or some terrible trial, or temptation ; as
the sun of the natural world causes the lightning to flash
from the east to the west so leaning and trusting upon the
“ Thy Kingdom come Thy will be done ” will bring passage
after passage to our memory; thus when a man is fighting
against a craving for drink, the Divine words will rush into
his mind, Deliver me oh God for in Thee do I put my
trust: when tempted to swear, he will take refuge in the
words : Set a watch oh Lord before my mouth ; keep the
door of my lips—(Psalm cxli. 3.) If animal passions require
control, he will trust in a higher power and say, Deliver me
from blood guiltiness, oh God, Thou God of my salvation
(Psalm li. 14.) There is no temptation that can happen to
man but what the Lord has provided some Word in the
Psalms which will banish the evil. Thus it will be found
that before we call the Lord has answered and sent us
strength, we know not whence. These operations of the
mind actually disembowel the serpent within us; the
serpent creeping on its belly on the ground, that is, under-
all the other principles of the mind, for when we elevate
our sensual nature to use it merely as an instrument for
God’s service the serpent neither has any ground to creep
on, nor any belly or tail for locomotion, and this is lifting
up the serpent in the wilderness— i.e., the wilderness we
pass through before we reach the City of Light.
Jesus came into the world to overcome hell, and assures
Peter that the gates of hell shall not prevail against him.
Peter, and all who acknowledge Peter’s Master, have to
sustain the onslaught from the gates of hell of myriads of
evil thoughts; but those, who like Peter, have their confi-


dence in Peter’s God, they are upon a foundation that no
foes can invade* nor prevail against.
God is continually sustaining us by object lessons of our
Heavenly homes. Why Sinbad should dream of object
lessons in Tasmania was because it was his home. The
American Sinbad will see these object lessons occurring in
his own scenery ; the Englishman will see them in English
scenery; John, being a Jew, saw a New Jerusalem.
Heaven is our universal hotne, of which happy homes on
earth are but the shadows. While we are in the flesh we
see in everything around us the shadows of good things to
come.
Humboldt tells us of that beautiful Cosmos in creation
which we can readily understand, “ The earth is the Lord’s
and the fullness thereof ; the little hills rejoice on every
side ; and should they not do so 1 Is not every grain of
sand on this earth consecrated by the footsteps of the
Divine Redeemer, who, when He planted His footsteps in
Palestine, did it not sanctify the earth with a power greater
than galvanism 1 From pole to pole the influence is felt,
and therefore the earth and the fullness thereof testify of
the Redeemer. And does not the enchanting physical
scenery of the earth positively smile upon us, so that the
little hills rejoice on every side 1 Why do they do so, but
because the natural world is, therefore, a shadow of heaven
—in earthly things we see the shadow, but the reality
awaits us.
Whilst these marvellous operations are passing through
the mind of Sinbad he even dreams again, that he sees a
ship of gigantic proportions enter the Hobart Town har-
bour, while her bow is opposite the Old wharf her
stern reaches to Battery Point. Casting his eyes upon the
ship he observed she was officered and manned by some of
the brightest and most comely looking Anglo-Saxons the
•world had ever produced. There was a communication
between the eyes of every one ; vigilant sentries, with
loaded rifles on the bulwarks ; and one like an exalted
being on the bridge, and there was a resemblance in
physique between all on board, a succession of counterparts;
it seemed as if some diabolical enemy had tired upon her


and struck upon her waterline. The exalted being stood
on the bridge, and awaited the report of the examiners ; it
was a terrible moment, for from the deck every ship in the
harbour was visible the glances between the officers and
men, all in attractive uniform, their eyes centering on their
chief. The critical moment was passed—from the examina-
tion it was ascertained that the shot of the malicious enemy
had effected no injury;
Sinbad saw himself in command of a brig on board of
which the exalted being came and entered into very pleas-
ant conversation with him ; went into his state room, gave
him some explanations upon the formula for clearing a
lunar distance ; then walked about the ship. Sinbad had
his wife and family on board, and the exalted being made
them all happy by his winning sympathies with them, and
also with all the crew, so that the brig seemed in the
atmosphere of fairy land.
Then Sinbad awoke, and said, “Surely that was like unto
the Son of Man, and the ship is the ‘ City of Zion,’ the
Ark of Redemption, more than any one I have ever yet
seen, and being a great student of astronomy and navigation
he read in his treatise on spiritual astronomy, “That the
wiser the angels are the more clearly they perceive that
God is in human form, and therefore the Lord appeals
to them ; for the Lord appears in a Divine angelic form,
which is the human form, to those who acknowledge and
believe in a visible Divine, because believers can see
their God, but those who are not cannot see theirs.”
And while Sinbad lay on his bed a vision passes before
his eyes, and he sees the Son of Man on the cross, and
beyond it a channel distinctly buoyed and set with beacons
between two islands where the channel was unknown and
beset with dangerous reefs, but the sea was bright and
rippling, so that ships could go through in full sail. And
as it was the very channel Sinbad was employed in survey-
ing, for which he was receiving great abuse, because his
employers knew nothing of the arduous nature of his work,
and the dangers he encountered, Sinbad is amazed, says
within himself, Surely this is holy ground, and the Son of


Man tells me clearly to endure the cross, for the benefits it
will bring to commerce and the industries of brother man.
Sinbad thinks much of it during the day. His confidence
courage, and wisdom, are stimulated ; after beholding the
Son of Man the ship’s company wonder at him, for he is a
prodigy of energy ; the channel in a few months is marked
off. Sinbad beholds the benefits he has wrought to his
fellow man, and says, “ There is no god like Jesus.”
Sinbad travels; he enters an observatory, and looks
through the most powerful telescope in the world ; the
moon and the planets appear before him in a new aspect
wonderful to behold. He says, Why do I see these things'?
Why cannot a glass eye see them 1 He answers, Because
the Creator has given me vision, and I see the wonders of
vision by the use of the telescope. He follows the chain of
reasoning and perceives that the human mind can make a
telescope for the germ of sight to peep into the immensities
of space. Cannot the all-powerful Jesus open spiritual
sight to behold the Son of Man 1 ? Sinbad exclaims “Eureka”
—the Lord has penetrated my darkness; lat first only had
a dim perception of Him, saw Him only in the clouds ; He
has now accomplished to me His second coming ; and so
far as my life is hid with Him I shall perceive His presence
and be eternally with Him.
There is no place where God is not. After His resurrec-
tion He appeared with His glorified body j locked doors
and walls could not impede Him. Throughout the im-
mensities (to the human eye) of space, there is no place
where He is not; if human eyes can by telescope of human
construction read the planets, millions of miles away, cannot
the God of Light open the depths of our eyes to read Him
and bring Him close to view wherever we are.
PRINTED AT THE “ Q. E> STANDARD” OFFICE, WILLIAM-STREET.


The
Devil's
Twist.
OR,
SPIRIT OF BABYLON.
BRISBANE :
PRINTED AT THE “ Q. E. STANDARD” OEEICE, \VILLIAM*STREETi
mdccclxxxyiii.


THE DEVIL’S TWIST.
Twist > an «m«‘
testify, &°°d men most deplorably
Of Them I bra™ ,le °* and Soult, both
respect for one another V ? cven entertaining
demons „£ °“r, whereby thTll the £, w ! re >«> on hy the
and France were deprived of^ f P e ? ceable of England
on against each other wholesale hi,J hllst oar rying
the civil war in th! l6gahsed murder - I"
startling. Episcopalians .... • 6 * a JPe°ts were even more
against Wesleyan Conor™"? E P lsco P alia ns, Wesleyan
tionalist, Presbyterian ,2 a « ainst 0o ”Srega-
rifle, and swort co r Sn ™th cannfn,
thousands. ’ co - reh «'oo»ts slaying each other by
is the Piince
each had the same Bible each thlS whilst
confidence, there is a timo *n Wlth perfect
a time to fight them. pray * or OUr enemie s and
S tr»glSnsinl’?L t s h s o riV°bT h r V *“ S6 ” d
ternpteth no man.” From whence ,? ' lB also said ’ “ God
amongst you, come thev not of 01116 wars fighting
induced state of del2 ” p„“ r r °\" last! h »“<> *hS
the love of the Trith” (2 P Thess°h Tm i'* not
twist its meaning, or the ends of ? ■ 10) ’ but P emrt and
is the great serncnt ,Z t, f J heir °™ self-love. It
the ThTS“s b Z?Tr B f ™‘ b “s sr th
-.start upon the productive


will t n"t l en S to ar t dUe “ this **
words are concerned fanif-lp 6 a ? 0^ e *> e y> ®° far as
and preach, “ Love one another "W Wlt , hout a sli P> tea ch
bitterness which they hid^r
«.*; Saist™s -
language, still “Slain with axe ” cHut offT Sp,n , tUal
self-derived intelligence know ad ab“ t Sto™" th ” r °™
all inTheirVowlTo" circmnvenT U,e . Great T “cher do
“f
“iw a -1 that ■* ~,X
alluded tot P ™°“ , is
rection but He commenced it whmi inThe flesh whe,?'r''
entered the synagogues amongst whom were manv wl.t
spirits were trammelled with the Devil’s Tw st of fal J 5
trine, through no fault of their own We lhould T„fl° 0 '
we maytaeh thfm by T t 0 the ve " s ’ <>»t
d -‘™e “fW^stlt'S
makl h upon the earth t’l °°n e< j“i & short work "'ll l He
neither God norTe deviT bn?“; 6 T M wh ° no ' v fe “ r
mouth we will judge thee” 6 “° Ut ° f thine own


Great Teacher and His mission to mankind. The treat-
ment they receive varies; the Nicodemuses (those who
perceive themselves in the dark), come by night, and
readily listen for enlightenment; the Josephs of
Arimathea, appropriate the truth which others are unfitted
to receive; the Ethiopian eunuchs pray for wisdom, but
the Sacerdotalists of the age, as the Scribes and Pharisees
of old, in spirit, scorn and kill them, casting their de -
bodies in the streets ; their hosannas have been hushed,
while their false accusers have wrought upon themselves
iudgments which appear in men of fierce countenance (Dan.
viii 23) • even freethinkers who denounce and stand up
against the Prince of princes (ver. 25) declaiming, “ Lost
the Christian heaven,” “The Christian religion necessarily
a persecuting religion;” then comes Bradlaugh saying he
would like to believe if he could, but how can he, when the
Christians found their religion upon it being necessary for
salvation that a God of mercy and love should be pro-
pitated by the pangs and cruel death of anotliei God, tl e
second person in the Trinity. Then Ingersoll and Henton
as scientists demand explanation which they who have
divorced science from religion cannot gi\e.
These different sections occupy the battle-field of
Armageddon, forming the outposts of the great battle that
is about to take place between light and darkness. 1 ierce y
the battle rages, until the souls arise of those who have
been beheaded for the witness of Jesus, whose hosannas had
been hushed, but now fire proceeds out of their mouth, as
they reproclaim love to God and love to man ; these are the
two^witnesses that have been slain. And now these two
principles regain possession of the human mind, the celestial
Church is replanted amongst men, and the Lord will dwell
with them for ever and ever.
No longer shall the bugbear of sacerdotalism stand
between man and God. Man will learn that the All of
Doctrine consists in doing His will, and a 1 who do so will
have an inward revelation supplying all necessities, foi
Doctrine ; the head of the Serpent will have been bruised
and humanity released from the Devil s Twist. That old
Serpent the Devil will deceive the nations no more


THE DEVIL’S TWIST.
Before we can understand the Devil’s Twist we must first
obtain some knowledge of the spiritual laws, whereby we
have communications with the world beyond us.
One of the most stupendous testimonies contained within
the Divine Word is the marvellous provision of the Lord
for the salvation and redemption of the human race—from
the time that Noah, the preacher of righteousness, was
ordained to preserve the remnant of the human race. The
calling of Abram, in whose seed all the nations of the
earth should be blessed ; the occupation of Canaan by the
twelve tribes; the calling of the twelve apostles; all pre-
liminary to the disciples of the Lord sitting on thrones
and judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
To judge is to protect. A judge is a protector of a
community as well as a discriminator. Since the glorifica-
tion of the Lord’s humanity He has been continually bring-
ing all communities of Christians under His Divine protec-
tion and guardsmanship, through the ministry of angels,
which the apostle very distinctly tells us in the case.
Heb. i. 14, that the redeemed angels so soon as they have
entered heaven, are sent forth as ministering angels to those
who are following the Lord Jesus Christ in the path of
regeneration. The apostle also declares that this occurs
immediately after the death of the body, for he says, are
they not all ministering spirits, not in a future time, but
now in the very atmosphere. Their work is an arduous
one ; the battles they are continually waging on behalf of
man are desperate. Man during regeneration is surrounded
by good and evil influences, when he wills to be saved he
is approached by God’s legions of ministering angels.
These have a stupendous work committed to them until the
full accomplishment of the second advent of the Lord when
Jesus Christ will have become a living power amongst men :
for until that takes place every unregenerate and lost
human being who is removed from the earth becomes a
subject of the Prince of the Power of the Air (Eph. ii. 12),


and is marshalled amongst hell’s legions, principalities,
powers, rulers of darkness, spiritual wickedness in high
places (Eph. vi. 12), against these the apostle tells us we
have to wrestle, but we need fear no evil, for the Lord has
said, “Fret not thyself because of evil-doers” (Ps. xxxvii. 1.)
It is delightful to think that the righteous enter into
glory and forthwith become ministering angels, but this
bright picture is to some extent shaded by the reflection
that the unregenera f e become after death bad spirits, and
contend against good angels until the Lord shall have put
all iniquity under His feet. Therefore it behoves us, if we
would co-operate with the Lord, to put forth our best
energies for the salvation and regeneration of those around
us, for the more fellow-creatures that die in the Lord on
this earth adds to the angelic hosts. We are not therefore
to suppose that when an evil man dies on this earth that
we are done with him. Nero’s cruelty is carried out by
his successors, who use scorpions where Nero had used
whips, because Nero has joined the Prince of the power of
the air, and descends into the children of disobedience \
happily it is counteracted by the Lord so long as His people
on earth will permit Him to reign over them, for He
Utilises their allegiance by making them instruments whereby
to nullify the malice of evil spirits.
These are the great spiritual laws of our existence with
which we must deal in our regeneration, but few of us want
to be regenerated. “It is" agreeable to the doctrines
derived from the Word, that the devil is continually en-
deavouring to seduce men, and that he is continually in-
spiring evil, whence also it is said—when anyone has com-
mitted any erroneous crime that he has been seduced by
the devil. This also is true, but few if any believe it; for as
all good and truth is from the Lord, so everything evil and
false is from hell, that is from the devil, for hell is the
devil. Hence it may appear that as all good and truth, so
everything evil and false, flows in ; consequently, also the
thinking and willing of evil, and as these things flow in, it
may be concluded by those who have any strength of judg-
ment and power of reflection that the all of life inflows,
although it appears as if it were in man (A.C. 4151).”


As concerns the Lord. He is present With everyone*
but according to reception, for from the Lord alone is the
life of everyone. They who receive His presence in good
and truth are in the life of intelligence and wisdom ; but they
who do not receive His presence are not in good and truth,
but in evil and falsity and in the life of insanity and folly,
yet still in the faculty of being intelligent and wise. That
they still have this faculty may appear from the fact that
in an external form they know how to feign and to pretend
what is true, and thereby captivate men, which would not
be the case unless they had the above faculty (A.C. 4198).
This principle is the root of man’s existence ; he caii
choose to make his abode in heaven or in hell. It is thus
that all the recruits are obtained for hell, for the senior
and accomplished demons go to and fro throughout the
earth with their blandishments, and through the unwatch-
fulness of the unwary avail of every avenue of the mind
whereby a vicious, lustful, or selfish thought can enter, and
when it has once entered in it does its work.
It is only those whose life is hid with their Redeemer that
are invulnerable from the attacks of Hell. The Redeemer
visits every child, and in some form says, “ Behold I stand
at the door and knock.” The child may be terribly
tempest-tossed with temptation as it grows and passes
through childhood, youth, and adult age, but the Redeemer
is ever present. The temptations are not sent by Him j
they are permitted to allow that child to see its own evils
and overcome them : when we say permitted, we need to
state our meaning very precisely, which will be understood
when we say and acknowledge that every child of God ill
taking up his cross and following his Redeemer must bear
some faint resemblance of his Master in being made perfect
through suffering. But with the best of us our perfection
is only imperfection—it is but a progressive entry upon the
work of regeneration. When the Enemy of souls sees us
start upon this journey, as he did with our Master, so he
does with us—he tries to tempt us ; and that the Lord may
make perfect His strength in our weakness, the Lord permits
it, as in the case of Job, but His order and laws are so
profound that, as in the case of that patriarch, all our


temptations, our battle-fields with the Enemy of souls are
governed by the Lord, so that when the battle is the fiercest
there is no temptation but is common to man. “ But God
is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
ye are able j but will with the temptation also make a way
to escape, that ye may be able to bear it (1. Corinthians
x. 13). v
Angels are conjoined to man by the Lord by one of those
vm me • aWS unc * er man is governed by the Lord.
What is man that thou art mindful of him ? only a little,
lower than the angels !! ! (Psalm viii. s)—only a little, just
sufficient to make a difference, through being clothed with
an earthly body—the spirit of the man and the spirit of
the angel are alike both from the Lord. As we become
associated with the spirits of the regenerate, of just men
made perfect, we are in company which the Lord has
arranged for us. But these operations arecontinually battled
against by the legions of hell, as was very soon experienced
in the early Christian Church, when Paul speaks of the
! n f Q Ssen !? r of Satnn to buffet him,” and also Thessalonians
n. 18, “ Therefore we would have come unto you, even I
Paul, once and again ‘ but Satan hindered us.
We need not adduce further proof from the Divine
Word to prove the existence of good and evil agency from
the spiritual world operating upon the daily life of men,
above all contending against the progress of the Lord Jesus
Christ and His work amongst men. The devil’s energies
are directed to destroy Hope Faith, and Charity on the earth
and to accomplish it by the most diabolical means, namely
by setting them at variance. We cannot understand this
better than by an allegory. The Prince of the Power of
the Air ; Malice marshalling his satellites and exchanging
congratulations upon the separations they have wrought by
working Charity and Faith into a condition of spiritual
drunkenness,) leaving Hope temporarily bereft of their
co-operation.
We shall represent their operations as the Devil’s Twist.
In the doctrine of life they occupy the mastheads and yard-
arms of the Ark, which is bearing us to the pure river of
the water of life. At this stage we do not explain the


spiritual laws of their influence; but we can translate their
operations and influences by the following:—Who these
devils on the yard-arm are can in some measure be under-
stood by the iollowing dialogue we may imagine to take place
between them. We have first to notice who they are so
we shall not be surprised, They are the opposites of the
twelve apostolic influences that are to regenerate tho world,
Their names are—
Malicious Murder Hate
Envy Ingratitude
Pride Drunkenness
Avarice Idolatry
Disobedience Adultery
Unbelief Robbery
Scene on the yardarm.
Malicious Murder. —Hail, brother devils, well met; it is
of some momentthat we are all here; none absent. Our day is
nearly over ; there are some new angels this year conjoined
to Hope chosen vessels for God’s service. They have
recently come from earth, and specially prepared are a tower
of strength against which the gates of hell cannot prevail.
Every year we are further driven back. There was a time
when we occupied not only the porch but the floor of the
church, but since Martin Luther restored the Bible to the
people we have been driven year by year further back.
Freedom of utterance on earth first wrought dismay in our
ranks; it burst up priestly power, and gave liberty of
thought, but not being able to understand their Bible, I
have succeeded in doing what I could not accomplish in the
temptation in the wilderness, namely, I have given
Christendom great delusion upon which in their innocence
of ignorance they have been susceptible. These, however,
as they attain the innocence of wisdom, they rise out of,
but my fiendish malice is often gratified. When as I would
make a target of my prisoners of war I do not shoot them
in the heart, but as a commencement put a bullet in their
ancle and then go on and perforate their body, until I make
them suffer as much agony as I can, so I perceive the Bible


is to liberate mankind. I can withstand as I withstood
Paul whenever I find an opportunity, but it is only for a
time. Still the gratification of malice is my life, and such
is the fate of being constituted a demon. That it is my
infernal delight to commission you my trusted myrmidons
with effective weapons to riddle the senses of those who
become our prisoners or stray within our lines. It is an
infernal, an insane, and an empty delight, for while we may
cripple their understandings for a time we can never reach
their heart, which is hid with Christ. So that it matters
not how we may riddle their external understandings their
Redeemer is mighty, and when He comes, which is not far
distant, He (whose outer garment conveyed a healing charm
for the chronic affection of thirty years) will in one
instant remedy all our ravages, and He whose right it is to
reign will reign supreme without a rival; meanwhile our
moan must continue. “ Let us alone, thou Son of David,
what have we to do with The® before the time.” Our
malign leprosy must ravage a little longer. The leprosy of
sin which throughout Scripture is figured and made to form
a type in the distressing form of malady it assumes of the
great evil that can happen a man in his natural life is
leprosy, which nevertheless is only a faint figure or shadow
of the power of malioe once dissemminated amongst the
families of mankind.
But here comes on deck a messenger of God, Hope is his
name, 50 years he has been associated with the angels.
And now I will open to you a page of my malicious
religion which ever has been to nip in the bud and murder
the innocents : for ages past apostles, martyrs, and that ilk,
their blood has watered the earth by the assassinations I
have wrought. But in modern times the Lord has appointed
four servants to go to the four corners of the earth,
Columbus, Swedenborg, Captain Cook, and John Williams,
the martyr of Erromanga. Their progress cannot be
hindered, and although my malicious machinations always
come down on my own head and prosper their way, yet
such is my diabolical delight in tormenting that I find a
pleasure in doing so which I could not give up.
Europe was about crowded out; wars had kept down popu?


lation ; still in spite of the plagues and epidemics I wrought
the human race increased, they must have new continents
to dwell upon. Columbus, a man of godly life, was the most
fitting receptacle to receive God’s energy for the purpose of
discovering those continents, and so the Lord chose him,
filled him with a wisdom that his enemies could not resist,
so that finally royalty assisted and equipped him to discover
America, or rather make known to men the Lord’s pro-
vision for them. And although I raised mutinies and
stirred up the most virile animosity against him; even
loaded him with chains, yet no weapon formed against him
ever prospered. He discovered the continent, made a foot-
hold for republicanism which will unfetter mankind. I
endeavoured to swamp it by a flood of iniquity, and bring
republicanism into loathing ; yet the evils I made manifest
were the very means whereby its defenders saw what they
were and removed them. So that at this day even kings
and queens are mere puppets to do the peoples’ will.
What Columbus was fitted to accomplish for the bodies of
men, Swedenborg received God’s energy to operate for their
souls —to relieve the mind from darkness—preserved by
angels, I could never kill him, but I have set it about that
he is mad ; but even this assists him. I cited the rector of
Manchester before his bishop for preaching Swedenborg.
The bishop, upon enquiry, learned that the rector was pro-
claiming Jesus Christ as the only God of heaven and earth
and accordingly implied to the accusers that he only wished
all his clergy were as mad as the rector—Manchester,
accordingly, became the centre of reform. All the blessings
that have come upon mankind have had their seat in
Manchester, and from these indirect influences England
has produced the greatest statesmen the world ever listened
to even John Bright. President Garfield acknowledged
Swedenborg as a blessing to mankind, and I very soon found
a way to assassinate his body, but my doing so brought
the whole Christian world down upon its knees to save
his life; and it was saved, but not his body. The life of
Garfield is now a household word in Christendom and his
memory is an example of practical godliness nmongst the
masses,


Captain Cook, likewise an instrument fitted by the Lord
to open the treasures of the Southern world—him I
massacred at Owyhee, but his work I cannot massacre
His body was destroyed at the hand of savages—not so
his soul; he was ripe for higher service. The Christians
on earth sing, with a great deal of truth,
There is a sweet little cherub sits up aloft,
That watches the life of poor Jack.
And we thoroughly know that a man like unto Captain
Cook who had ripened in a life of usefulness on earth,
would m the spiritual world be particularly adapted for
employment as a ministering angel over sailors—by the
assistance of such departed souls Plimsoll has received
the spirit of God within him—making him a champion for
the sailor, that no earthly power can withstand. And
then comes John Williams, the martyr of
who went to show a light to heathendom. I brutally
murdered him at Erromanga— to my own destruction for
upon his entrance in the spiritual world he became an
active transmitter of assistance so those on earth—witness
the energy transmitted into David Livingstone; Africa
opened up, Madagascar, India, and China, all being prepared
fot the day of the Lord. Verily, lam losing power on
earth, and myself is the cause of it—my diabolical hatred
impels me to murder and, yet, when I do murder my
victims, they pass, over to the good angels, whence they
transmit heavenly influences to those with whom they were
associated on earth, and so give them a power, they know
not whence, to deliver their fellow-man as brands from the
burning.
After the removal of John Williams to the spiritual
world, a wave of energy was transmitted to all missionary
servants throughout the world. The children of England
put their pennies together, purchased a ship calling it\fter
him as a perpetual memorial. And now that Livingstone, after
possessing a power that could tread down even the
African lion that stood in the way of his missionary career,
has also entered the spiritual world \ see the renewed energy
with which mission work is going on, Within the breast


of the aboriginals there is stored up the remains of the
celestial man. It is closed at present, but the delights they
find—take for instance, the African in serving and perform-
ing acts of use—indicate that they are a submerged con-
tinent of the human race. God in His own time will
change the present offensiveness of their bodies. Prepara-
tory to this they must learn the Word of God which will
open their interiors. When their interiors are opened
their bodies will change into temples of living beauty, and
this explains the missionary energy which God has im-
planted into His servants this day to translate His Word
to all people. John Williams was the pioneer. I
massacred him. He entered the spiritual world. All obstruc-
tions to his usefulness were then removed, and he became
the medium of transit for ten thousand fold more energy
than he could in his earthly body have exercised on earth.
Thus spake the demon, and at its close the mymidon
Envy thus began.
Envy.— Most august Prince, whose spirit inflates ours,
we have paid particular heed to your guidance at all times,
and we believe the account we shall render to you of
what we have witnessed will assure you that the confidence
you bestowed upon us has not been misplaced.
In every angel and in every man there is an inmost and
supreme degree in which the Divine of the Lord proxi-
mately flows, and arranges all other interior things in
succession to the degrees of order. This constitutes the
Lord’s entrance to angels and men and His especial dwell-
ing place in them, and thus man is distinguished from brute
animals, and thus man is capable of being elevated by the
Lord to himself to receive intelligence and wisdom.
Heaven is wherever the Lord is acknowledged, believed
in, and loved, and every man’s countenance when he is
freed from his earthly body becomes in heaven a reflex of
his love to the Lord; in hell every man is a reflex of his
hate to the Lord.
Now we know very well that the same will in
time occur on the earth. The Lord will enter into man
and change his very countenance; but how the devils envy


the fiat that has gone forth. That the nations of Africa,
India, and China shall some day wear the full image of God
upon their now eclipsed countenances. Do not the devils
strenuously labour that they shall be defaced by sin, or in
other words get the Devil’s Twist. And does not this
explain, how that by Envy I assisted you to massacre
General Gordon, a man who went about doing good,
combining the missionary and the soldier; now he has
become a full-commissioned soldier of the cross, and in
company with Williams and Livingstone. What wonders
amongst the uncivilised tribes with whom they were
respectively associated are they not accomplishing on the
earth, for the Lord sustains their capacities which they
consecrated to Him on earth, and now they carry the
sustenance to the workers on earth. But am I not filling
Christians with Envy ; obliterating God’s words to Abraham,
“ in Thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,”
by raising a senseless antagonism to the lower races. But
the human mind shows signs of an approaching earthquake.
The earth of the Church of England has already opened
and admitted the teachings of the rector of Manchester,
that Jesus Christ is the only God oj heaven and earth ,
fostered by John Bright and President Garfield ; this will
in due time take full possession of the myriads of disciples
of Mohammedanism, Budhism, Confucius, and Juggernaut.
Then will the day of the Lord come, and we must subside
into the bottomless pit.
Pride.— Most fitly spoken, my powerful forerunner, for
without your envious eyes I could not enter into or buffet
humanity. Now I have been able to buffet Faith, Hope,
and Charity all alike. The Lord’s messenger Hope, the
elder brother, is liable at all times to lose all patience with
the representatives of Charity and Faith for what he con-
siders their obstinacy. He himself has come out of great
tribulation. Scarcely a vice that he has not had some
leaning to. Often like Paul he has exclaimed, “ I the chief
of sinners am.” Deprived of the means of grace for two
years at a time, his lot cast either on board ship or in the
depths of the forest with the most profane of men, he found


he had to do something else than select a faultless creed,
He must find Christ as his life-line. Charity and Faith on
the other hand have been monuments of piety from their
childhood, scarcely ever been absent from the means of
grace and pious exercises for more than a week at a time ;
and at adult age, entering under their own home roof, they
have scarcely ever smelt the gunpowder of temptation.
The creed they learned as children has appeared to them a
perfect model of theology. They have learned nothing and
forgot nothing. In their childish innocence they were told
Jesus Christ came to save them from their sins, and they
must love Him, They did so, and as a consequence Christ’s
love is hid in their hearts, and their life is hid with Christ;
they are recipients of heavenly life, but they know not how.
Yet they think they do; their pride in old dogmas has
remained invulnerable. Such is the power of their pride
that when Hope tells them that Christ is the life-line, they
say, Christ is our sacrifice, our substitute. So He is, says
Hope, but it is through His organic humanity becoming
glorified and opening up a living way. No, says Charity
and Faith in one breath, it was His sacrificial death. Hope
replies, Who says it was not so, Was it not His living
sacrifice 1 As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilder-
ness, so did not our Redeemer elevate our sensual nature 1
Did He not use His own material body to minister to His
Divinity within Him 1 And so far as we can be images of
Him we must elevate (by self-denial) our sensual nature,
the nature with which we have intercourse with the animal
and vegetable world, by a daily sacrifice, through the Divine
Spirit of our Master within us 1
When Hope speaks thus to Charity and Faith they
become more desperate than ever—they remain the victims
of their early comprehension of the Trinity, in terms which
Dr. Parker announces have been both foully abused and
disastrously applied. Hope loses patience in his state of
imperfect regeneration; he feels his pride prompting him
to condemn his brothers for their short-sightedness. Hope,
who has come out of great tribulation in his temptations
and by practical experience of lifting up the serpent in the
wilderness, knows the difference between an elegant and


ornamental creed and the value of the life line between
earth and heaven in the divine humanity of the Redeemer.
Charity and Faith say : Was He not wounded for our trans-
gressions and bruised for our iniquities ? Most certainly He
was, and so would you be if you rescued a wilful child from
a burning building and through falling timber, flames, and
other experiences you had to carry him in your arms like
our Redeemer carried us from the jaws of hell.
Thus you see how Pride works and puts Faith, Hope, and
Charity at cross purposes ; they should be united in Hope,
but I have managed to set them at variance most thoroughly.
Hope is enterprising; navigates and explores all unknown
seas ; explores the wilderness; marks it out to become the
fruitful fields of the future and prides himself on his dis*
coveries. Charity and Faith will not accompany him ; they
pretend to stand aloof, but cannot ; the life of the three
is hid with their Redeemer. But while Pride can find a
perch on the yard-arm of their understandings, they must
remain divided, and writhe in the Devil’s Twist.
Avarice.— Your acknowledgements are unanswerable, but
as devils who believe do you not prematurely tremble, for
is it not written, “ The love of money is the root of all
evil.” See the gold of Australia and California, and in the
greed for it the iniquities that have deep-seated root—
murders for gold, virtue sold for gold, professors and psalm-
singers as wholesale grog merchants selling liquid dam-
nation to the publican, and then when they count their
money say “ Praise God from Whom all blessings flow.”
You devils are a pusillanimous lot, and my capacity not
gaining your recognition thoroughly surprises me.
Disobedience.— With the exception of the last speaker it
would seem that you who have spoken are utterly oblivious
of your most powerful artillery which is worked by
my machinations. Never did any one more emphatically
declare, “We will not have this man to reign over
us” than does Christendom to-day. They will not
come to the Light because they love darkness rather than
light. lam the vulcan of hell, the forger of all iniquity.
Murder cannot be performed without my permission; it is


I who have smitten the earth with the curse of sin. For
as by one man’s disobedience many were made sinners
(Roman v. 19) so at the present day when men would be
Godly I inflate their desires for some tempting bait,
at the same time persuading them it is both lawful and
expedient, but when conscience lingers and remonstrates,
I supply the devil’s prayer, Let us alone, thou Son of David,
art Thou come hither to torment us before the time. Of course
there are many ways of saying this. Especially when the
miseries of the distressed knock hard at the door of a heart
of a professedly Christian man who loves his ease too much
to hear in that knock the Great Teacher’s words, “ Behold
I stand at the door and knock.”
Unbelief. —Correctly spoken ; but you have omitted one
acknowledgement, that without a heart is hardened in un-
belief no iniquity can be perpetrated. The words, how can I
/do this in the sight of God and prosper, have by the traditions
of men become of no effect. Belief in angelic ministrations
are ignored ; heavenly promptings and instructive dreams
are accounted as hallucinations of the devil, or else as old
wives fables. Science only is the object of worship.
Hate.— Surely you overlook my talents, and the result,
is it not a world-wide arcanum this very day. “ See how
these Christians love one another,” which signifies that in
the name of the Great Teacher, every man will extinguish
his brother’s light, so that his own may burn. Self-love
under the garb of pretension to virtue is one of the most
successful of haters.
Ingratitude. —“ Man’s inhumanity to man makes count-
less ages mourn.” How could you have stimulated mutinies
against Columbus, or put him in chains without my help.
I know no shame ; you can shame a man from committing
even a murder, until you get me to lodge in his breast; if
Disobedience is the vulcan of hell I drive his sledge
hammer.
Drunkenness.— My work is immense, my aims are great,
my nets and my meshes go over the earth. I am the
culminating power. The murderer comes to me just for the


“ nip ” that will overthrow his reason and nerve his arm
for the deed.
Idolatry.— The world still worships at my commands.
Men are ceasing to enter the Christian temples through the
vanity of their own intelligence. Self-derived intelligence
is the great idol of the world to-day, both in the Church and
out of it.
Adultery.— This is a wicked and adulterous generation.
Truth is separated from Good—hence the adulterated
compounds of commerce; the gunpowder of life is filled
with sand—in every thing. Drunkenness is made a two-
edged sword by the deleterious compounds that I mix with
the alcoholic potations—there is no avenue in life free from
my ravages.
Robbery. —lt is I who climb up other ways instead of
going in at the door. The Redeemer, of Man
when on earth, gave me my character—a child
of the father of lies—a child of the Devil. In my
characteristics and developments, my nature is one
continual evidence of my paternity. When I was witness
to the re-union of Hope with his little brothers, I sought
the murder of the innocents. lam the spirit that inflamed
Herod to destroy all germs of incipent goodness. I know I
cannot accomplish my diabolical design. I can, however,
drive them into Egypt—there they must pass through the
ordeal of science and reason ; separated and shut off from
the guiding presence of heaven until God’s appointed time
for their return to the atmosphere of holiness.
The demons having thus delivered their orations their
chief rose in his place amongst them to recapitulate his
commission amongst them. He spake as follows : —You
call me Malice which is perfectly accurate, and that my
qualifications endow my title as Prince of the Power of
Air. (Eph. ii. 2), the spirit that worketh in the children
of disobedience. How, there can be no disobedience either
in the form of Envy, Pride, Avarice, Adultery, or any
other crime without the spirit of Malice as a prompter,
my malicious exultation at the human race in misery


prompts me to send all of you one and severally dressed up
with blandishments and charms.
Our State you must be aware is altering. With us there
is no time. The Lord of the universe counts one day as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. We are
at the core the same to-day as when we impelled Herod to
murder the innocents, but our means of operations are
changed. Our intensity is influenced by the recruits we
obtain from earth. As heaven is composed of the spirits
of just men made perfect so its opposite—hell—is recruited
with the spirits of the lost.
Since the advent of Immanuel as the Creator, Redeemer,
and Saviour of the human race, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, the human race has been regenerating in
crowds. The missionaries He sent out saying, “Go ye
unto all the world and preach the Gospel,” have carried with
them alivingpower, it was interrupted for a time, but Luther,
Wesley, and other Boanerges have so prepared the way of
the Lord that the knowledge of God has covered the whole
earth with Scripture texts. Stored up in the memory of
man and in the Lord’s own time he will descend into the
minds of men where they have that Word stored. Even
though it be only as a parrot would have it, yet as a conse-
quence the dry bones will arise, and our recruits from the
earth will be few. Regeneration will be so rapid that
there will be very few last souls. Hell is now losing its
heat, which is maintained by the accession to us of
murderers, robbers, and adulterers from the earth, who
come to us when we can cut them ofF in their career of
iniquity.
Hell is the Upas tree, the opposite to the Tree of Life
planted by the river of God, whereby its roots derive
moisture from the Word of God to bring forth leaves for
the healing of the nations. The TJpas tree on the contrary
is a figure of hell ; its roots are fostered by the spirits of
evil men that come from the earth. These the Prince of
the power of the air presses into his service, and as they
are familiar with the haunts of men, so far as they were
conjoined to transgressors on earth, the memory of those
that remain in the flesh are one with the memory of those


in hell. So that by this means the Prince of the power of
the air inflates the memory of his infernals with dire evils,
and as the world of mind is universal the infernals who
have recently been men on earth become the means of com-
municating iniquity to those they left behind them,
and according to their degree of intimacy when they were
in the flesh, so I transmit an evil influence. Hence the
philosophy of preachers warning their hearers to avoid evil
companions, for unions of friendship and intimacy on earth
continue after death, imperceptibly, but through the laws
of mind. Consequently, a very slight intimacy on earth
between an indifferent man and a very wicked man may be
sufficient to damn the soul of the indifferent man if the very
wicked man dies first. His spirit, by me is used as a
medium, through the action of the memory, of implanting
the most diabolical designs into the inclination of the
indifferent left behind him on earth.
Like an occasional startling shipwreck, these permissions
are allowed to befall mankind w r hen God’s servants become
awakened thereby and they post stronger guards to protect
the avenues of regeneration from being blocked.
Since Immanuel clothed himself with humanity the great
tide of regeneration has pressed steadily onward, reaching
all classes of mankind—the recruits for hell are few and far
between. The Upas tree is withering and will continue, and
will continue to clo so until Immanuel will have put all
iniquity under his feet.




