

PRICE 2d.
SINN FEIN
AND
GERMANY
Reprinted from the
QUARTERLY REVIEW,
JULY, 1918, ,
By Permission of the Proprietors.
MELBOURNE:
THE LOYALIST LEAGUE,
Universal Chambers, 325 Collins Street.
1919.




Sinn Fein and Germany.
In the “Quarterly Review” for last January we traced the
origin of the Sinn Fein movement and described its home and
foreign policy down tp 1916. We showed that, from 1903,
Arthur Griffith and the group associated with him had insisted
that Irish independence was to be achieved by making British
Government in Ireland impossible, just as Hungarian indepen-
dence had been won by making Austrian Government in Hun-
gary impossible. We showed that, three years before the
War, Roger Casement had formulated a foreign policy for Sinn
Fein based upon the imminence of a struggle between Ger-
many and England; that this policy had been endorsed by
Bernhardi and was widely discussed in Germany in 1912; and
that Casement and the Irish revolutionaries, through the Ger-
man and Irish-American subsidised propaganda, had long be-
fore the War been urging the Irish to prepare to ally them-
selves with Germany in the anticipation that Germany would
be victorious in the great struggle; that, at the Peace Con-
gress, the European Powers, actuated by jealousy of England
and controlled by Germany, would guarantee the independence
of Ireland as a neutralised State; and that EngGnd would thus
be deprived of the key of the world’s sea power and have the
Freedom of the Seas wrenched from her.
The Germanising policy thus advocated was, when the
War broke out, and now is, the declared policy of Sinn Fein
at home and abroad. This policy, pregnant in its inception
with peril to Great Britain and the British Empire, drew, dur-
ing its years of parturition, nourishment from the virus of
English party; it was nursed to maturity by the half-informed
doctrinaires and insouciant politicians called in to handle and
prescribe for Ireland; and during the War it has developed
into a danger to the liberties of the world.
In basing the policy of Sinn Fein upon a victory of Ger-
many in the anticipated war with England, the Sinn Fein
Executive, with Casement and Prof. Kuno Meyer, did not


leave out of sight the danger that their calculations might be
upset by an alliance between the United States and the United
Kingdom, and that a contest for supremacy between England
and Germany might resolve itself finally into a racial combat
between the Anglo-Saxon and Teutonic Powers. It thus
became the settled determination of the Irish revolutionary
leaders, in combination with the German elements in the
United States, to provoke jealousies between England and
America, and to embroil, so far as possible, the relations
between Washington and London.
Prof. Kuno Meyer was actively associated with Casement
in publishing articles and brochures with this object. In 1911
Casement wrote:
“The American Alliance may come off. The entente with
France, already of great value, can be developed into some-
thing more assuredly anti-German; and, if the present-day
relation of friendship with the United States can be but tight-
ened into a mutual committal of both Powers to a common
foreign policy, then the raid on Germany may never be
needed. . . .”
“A bitter resentment with fear at the bottom, a hurried
clanging of bolt and rivet in the belt of new warships, and a
muffled but diligent hammering at the rivets of an ever-build-
ing American Alliance—the real Dreadnought this, whose keel
was laid sixteen years ago, and whose secret construction has
cost the silent swallowing of many a cherished British boast.
. . . That mightier Dreadnought yet to be —the Anglo-Saxon
Alliance—Germany must fight, if she is to get free.”
In 1914 Casement went to America, and was there when
the war broke out. What he and his Sinn Fein associates
were doing can be judged from this despatch sent in January,
1916, from Berlin, and afterwards published by the American
Secretary of State:
“Telegram from the German Foreign Office to Count von
Bernstorff:
“January 26, for Military Attache. You can obtain par-
ticulars as to persons suitable for carrying on sabotage in the
United States and Canada from the following persons;
“(1) Joseph M'Garrity, Philadelphia, Pa.; (2) John P.
Kealing, Michigan Avenue, Chicago; (3) Jeremiah O’Leary,
16 Park Row, New York. One and two are absolutely reliable


but not always discreet. These persons are indicated by Sir
Roger Casement. In the United States sabotage can be car-
ried out on every kind of factory for supplying munitions of
war. Railway embankments and bridges must not be touched.
Embassy must in no circumstances be compromised. Simi-
lar precautions must be taken in regard to Irish pro-German
propaganda.
“Signed Representative of General Staff.”
Reuter’s news agency on June 9, 1918, reported that
“Jeremiah O’Leary, John Ryan, a Buffalo attorney,
Lieutenant-Commander Wessels, of the German Navy, and
Baroness Maria von Kretschmann, a kinswoman of the Ger-
man Empress, and three others have been indicted before the
Federal Grand Jury on the charge of conspiring to commit
treason, the penalty for which is death.
“The indictments against Jeremiah O’Leary charge him
with the collecting and transmission of information regarding
the conduct of the war, the destruction of piers, docks, and
troop transports with bombs, the destruction of quicksilver
mines, with hampering the manufacture of munitions, assist-
ing Germany in landing an armed expedition in Ireland, the
fomentation of a revolt in Ireland, raising funds in America
to finance .these operations, and the destruction of munition
factories and mines in Great Britain. The indictments also
allege his participation in a conspiracy to commit treason and
in a conspiracy to commit espionage.
“The seven individuals who have been indicted with
O’Leary are charged with complicity in both conspiracies.”
The statement made by the Government on May 24 gives
an outline of the connection between the Sinn Fein leaders and
the Germans, as disclosed by the documents in its possession.
The revolutionary movement (it states) consisted of two
closely related series of activities; (a) The attempts of the Ger-
man Government to create rebellion in Ireland; (b) the pre-
parations made in Ireland to carry their attempts into action.
The story falls into tw'O parts —the period prior to, and
the period since, the Irish Rebellion of Easter 1916. The events
of the first period are told with some detail; but those of the
second period, which covers recent events, can only be given
in a summary form, as a full statement of the facts and docu-
ments in possession of the Government would disclose the
names of persons who stood by the Government and also the


channels of communication through which the German Gov-
ernment was acting, and which it would not be in the public
interest to reveal at present. The necessarily abbreviated
narrative of the Government can, however, be supplemented by
references to matters already made public.
Casement’s statement of his dealings with Germany is
worth giving in his own words. He wrote a letter to the
"Evening Mail” (New York), on August 10, 1916, which was
republished as a leaflet under the title "Why Casement went
to Germany,” and is now widely circulated as part of the Ger-
man propaganda. It can be procured in any petty newspaper
shop in Ireland. He wrote:
“I have read so many explanations by others why I went
to Germany that a word from myself may not be inappro-
priate. ... In June, 1913, I resigned from the British Consular
Service. ... In November of that year came the establish-
ment of the Irish Volunteers at Dublin. The Irish Volunteers
sought to do for all Ireland what the Ulster Volunteers sought
for Ulster Protestants alone —to defend the rights and liberties
common to a whole people, Protestant and Catholic. I joined
Professor Mac Neill and became a member of the governing
body of the Volunteers, and with him addressed the first meet-
ings held after the inaugural Dublin meeting in Galway and
Cork in December, 1913. . . .”
"After making arrangements with a small band of Irish
friends whom I had gathered together in London on May 8,
1914, to get a first consignment of arms purchased on the
Continent and landed in Ireland, I went to America to com-
plete the work of obtaining the financial support of Irish
Nationalists there, to get arms, just as the Ulster movement
had obtained its armed support from the anti-Irish elements of
England. ...”
“I sought to meet the dishonest attempt to betray my
countrymen into the ranks of an army of aggression, massed
for a dishonest attack upon a people with whom Irishmen had
no just cause of quarrel, by two letters addressed through the
Irish press to Irishmen, in which I begged Irishmen to stay
at home and leave England to fight her own wars of aggres-
sion. The first of these letters reached its destination and
was published in the "Irish Independent,” October 5, 1914.
The later letter failed to reach the Irish press owing to the
British Censorship. . , ."


“I hoped that the German Government might be induced
to make clear its peaceful intention towards Ireland, and that
the effect of such a pronouncement in Ireland itself might be
powerful enough to keep Irishmen from volunteering for a
war that had no claim upon their patriotism or their honour.
With this aim chiefly in view I came to Germany in Novem-
ber, 1914, and I succeeded in my purpose. The German Gov-
ernment declared openly its good will towards Ireland and in
convincing terms.”
The letter as it appeared in the “Independent” was pub-
lished at much greater length in “Sinn Fein” (Griffith’s paper),
and was caught up by the other seditious prints and reiterated.
It had a quick effect in stopping recruiting.
When Casement arrived in Germany he got into imme-
diate touch, with the German Government and kept up regular
communication with the Sinn Fein leaders in America, such
as Judge Cohalan, Jeremiah O’Leary, and John Devoy, through
the German Foreign Office and the German Embassy in
America. Several despatches have been published by the
American Government which throw light upon the German
machinations. The Clan-na-Gael, which was in touch with
the Fenian Republican Brotherhood, the Irish Volunteers,
and the Sinn Fein Executive, was in alliance with the German
organisations in America; and active arrangements for a rebel-
lion in Ireland were undertaken. One of the German agents,
Lody, was arested in Killarney, brought to London, tried, and
shot in the Tower.
Judge Cohalan was an Irish American who had been a
member of the law committee of Tammany Hall and had been
appointed a Supreme Court Justice by Governor Dix in 1911.
At the meeting of the Irish Race Convention in March, 1916,
when a speech by Supreme Court Judge John W. Goff aroused
cries of “Down with England,” Judge Cohalan was announced
as one of the Board of Directors of the Friends of Irish Free-
dom, His name appeared as one of the conveners of the meet-
ing with that of Jeremiah O’Leary and T. St. John Gaffney,
an Irishman from Limerick, who had been recalled as Ameri-
can Consul from Munich by the United States Government.*
We shall find the Friends of Irish freedom and St. John Gaff-
ney actually plotting in Germany and neutral countries against
England in the present year and representing Sinn Fein at the
Stockholm Conference.
*See the New York “World/’ Sept. 23, 1017.


On November 6, 1914, immediately after Casement’s
arrival, Herr Zimmermann transmitted from the Foreign
Office in Berlin through Count Bernstorff, the German Am-
bassador at Washington, a message from Casement asking that
a messenger, if possible a native-born American to prevent
risk of arrest, should be sent to Ireland with word that every-
thing was favourable. He was to carry no letter. A priest
also was to be sent to work in the prison camps among the
Irish soldiers and to corrupt them from their allegiance. This
attempt on the allegiance of the valiant Irish soldiers failed,
with very few’ exceptions, ignominiously. The priest sent was
a Rev. John T. Nicholson,* an American citizen of Irish birth;
in January, 1915, he w r as found to be transmitting messages
from Germany to America for communication to Devoy by the
German Embassy. Confidential agents were sent to Ireland
from America to push the German propaganda. An immense
amount of seditious literature financed by Germany was
poured into Ireland from the United States. The message of
goodwill from Germany to Ireland, which Casement had re-
quested, was printed officially in leaflet form in Berlin, headed
“Germany and Ireland,” and was widely circulated.
As stated in the January number of this Review, a large
consignment of this leaflet and of “Ireland, Germany and the
Freedom of the Seas,” and of a proclamation dated Berlin,
November 20, 1914, purporting to be issued from the German
Foreign Office, was found in the house of Laurence de Lacy
at Enni'scorthy on February 24, 1915, when two men, John
Hegarty and James Bolger, were arrested on the charge of
having gelignite and other explosives and ammunition in their
possession for seditious purposes. These men were subse-
quently tried by jury in Dublin and acquitted. Bolger was
also acquitted on the charge of publishing the following notice
which was posted up extensively in County Wexford;
“People of Wexford,
“Take no notice of the police order to destroy your own
property, and leave your homes if a German army lands in
Ireland. When the Germans come they will come as friends
and put an end to English rule in Ireland. Therefore, stay in
your homes, and assist as far as possible the German troops.
Any stores, hay, corn, or forage taken by the Germans will be
paid for by them,”
# A%to Father Nicholson’s operations and the formation of the Irish
Brigade, see evidence given at the Court-Martial on Joseph Dowling,
“Times,” July 9, 1918.


De Lacy escaped to America, where he is now undergoing
a sentence of two years’ imprisonment for intriguing with
German agents in San Francisco.
Light was thrown long after on this transaction from an
unexpected quarter. The Zurich “Volksrecht” (Nov. 3, 1917),
the leading Socialist organ of Eastern Switzerland, published
a number of important German official documents relating to
the Casement conspiracy. The first is a letter written from
Berlin under date of December 28, 1914, and addressed to Case-
ment by Herr Zimmermann, Under-Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs.
It states that the Imperial Government has accepted Case-
ment’s proposal for the formation of an Irish Brigade to fight
only in the cause of Irish nationality under the conditions
contained in the contract already concluded between Case-
ment and the German Government. These conditions
provided that, in certain circumstances, the Irish Brigade
should be sent to Ireland well furnished with stores and muni-
tions to help equip the Irish for a united attempt to restore
freedom to Ireland by force of arms. Among the special con-
ditions mentioned were the following, namely, that in the
event of a German naval victory rendering it possible to reach
Ireland, the German Government undertook to assist the Irish
Brigade with a German auxiliary corps, under the command
of German officers in German transports, which would be
landed on the Irish coast. The landing in Ireland would, how-
ever, only be considered expedient in the event of a German
victory offering good prospects for a successful passage to
Ireland, failing which the Irish Brigade would be employed
in Germany or elsewhere—solely, however, in the manner
already agreed upon with Casement. In such a contingency
the Irish Brigade miglit be sent to Egypt to render assistance
in restoring Egyptian independence.*
The contract between Germany and Sinn Fein concluded
by Casement had been immediately communicated to Ireland,
and was published in “Irish Freedom” in December, 1914. This
speedy communication was probably effected by wireless tele-
graph, as it appears from a message from Bernstorff to Berlin
that there were numerous private wireless receiving stations
in Irelandt
*See “Daily Chronicle,” Nov. 5, 1917, and "Times,” July 9, 1918.
tS'ee the Government statement of May 25, 1918,


“It was suggested” (stated “Irish Freedom”) “that Ger-
many aimed at a conquest of Ireland; and it was declared that
the only way to save Ireland from such a conquest was to
send young men to France to fight for England. This absurd
story obtained credence from a number of uninformed Irish,
and may have helped to get a few recruits for the English
Army. We have now an official statement by the German
Government that Germany would never invade Ireland with a
view to its conquest or the overthrow of any national institu-
tions. Should fortune ever bring the German troops to Ire-
land’s shores, those troops would land, not as an army of in-
vaders to pillage and destroy, but as the forces of a nation
inspired by goodwill towards Ireland and her people, for whom
Germany desires national prosperity and freedom. In fact
Germany has no quarrel with Ireland, and Ireland has no
quarrel with Germany. The only enemy of Irish Freedom is
now, as ever, England.”
Meanwhile Prof. Kuno Meyer, who, while holding the
chair of Celtic Literature in Liverpool University, had unques-
tionably been acting as a German secret agent, had returned
to America from Germany, where he had been with Casement
endeavouring to tamper with the Irish prisoners of war. He
was lecturing the Clan-na-Gael in New York, and encouraging
the Irish revolutionaries to expect Germah aid and an invasion
of Ireland.
The Government statement indicates the character of the
despatches which passed between Berlin and the German
Embassy at Washington making arrangements for the Sinn
Fein Rebellion of Easter, 1916. John Devoy, the notorious
Fenian, editor of the “Gaelic American,” was one of the trusted
agents employed by Germany. The Von Igel papers disclosed
by the American Committee of Public Safety on September
23, 1917, make mention of the Secret Code, “Cypher Devoy,”
to be employed in communicating between Germany and the
Irish rebels. In February, 1916, Devoy informed Bernstorff
that the leaders were insisting that immediate action was be-
coming necessary; and Count Bernstorff, according to his
usual practice, surreptitiously attached to a message to Berlin
from the Washington Embassy a note from Devoy on the
Irish position, stating it had been decided to begin action on
Easter Saturday, and urging that arms and ammunition must
be in Limerick by that date.


In December, 1914, Devoy had remitted a thousand dollar*
to Casement in Germany through the German Foreign Office.*
Messages passing between the Ministry of War and the For-
eign Office in Berlin and Count Bernstorff on March 4, 14, and
26, made arrangements for a code of signals to be used while
the arms were in transit between Germany and Ireland, dis-
cussed the possibility of submarines entering Dublin Bay, and
getting as far up the Li'ffey as the Pigeon House without en-
countering nets, settled that arms and explosives should be
landed in Tralee Bay, and that a special code word should be
employed every night as an introduction to the German Wire-
less Press Service to notify the Irish of the progress of the
action being taken to assist them from Germany.
Immediately before the Rebellion the following message,
with others, was cabled:
“New York, April 8, 1916. —The following communication
from a confidential man, John Devoy, duly transmitted:
“Letter dated March 22, delayed by censor, seems con-
clusive that the first messenger arrived safely, with proposals
to send supplies, and that the cable was suppressed. Second
also safe. Third, with change of plan, due about April 15.”
“John Devoy further requests that the following telegram
be despatched to Sir Roger Casement:
“‘No letter now possible. All funds sent home; sister
and M. family well. Should Sir Roger be absent or ill, then
J.D. requests that the telegram be delivered to John Monteith.
—(Signed) KU ST.’”
“To Hi's Excellency the Imperial Ambassador, Count von
Bernstorff, Washington.”
Among other documents seized by the American Govern-
ment’s Secret Service agents in the office of Wolff von Igel.
the “diplomatic agent” of Germany, was one marked “Very
Secret,” and signed with a cipher intended to conceal the ori-
gin. It was sent April 18, 1916, and read as follows: —
“Judge Cohalan requests the transmission of the following
remarks: The revolution in Ireland can only be successful with
the support of Germany, otherwise England will be able to
suppress it, even though it be only after a hard struggle.
Therefore help is necessary. This should consist, principally,
of aerial attacks on England and a diversion of the fleet simul-
*New York “World,” Sept. 23, 1917.


taneously with the Irish Revolution. Then if possible a land-
ing of arms and ammunition in Ireland and possibly some
officers from Zeppelins. This would enable the Irish ports to
be closed against England and the cutting off the food supply
for England. The services of the revolution, therefore, may
decide the war.
“To his Excellency, Count von Bernstorff, Imperial Am-
bassador, Washington, D.C.”*
The story of Casement’s landing and arrest on April 21
is familiar to all. News of this event was conveyed to Prof.
Eoin Mac Neill immediately by a special messenger April 22,
and he forthwith published a notice rescinding the previous
orders given to Irish Volunteers for Easter Sunday, and order-
ing that on that day no parades, marches or other movements
should take place. There is a clear connection between this
notice and the loss of the German auxiliary with the guns and
ammunition for the rebels. The other leaders of the Rebellion,
however, determined to strike, and the insurrection took place.
On the same day—as arranged by Germany in response to the
request quoted above from Judge Cohalan—operations were
undertaken by the German Fleet against England.
It became clear (the Government statement says) that
very soon after the Rebellion the Sinn Fein leaders were again
asking Germany for help. On June 17, 1916, there was a mes-
sage from Berlin to Washington \saying that Germany was
ready to give further help if the Irish would only say what
sort of help they wanted. Bernstorff’s telegram further stated
that £IOOO had been provided for the defence of Casement.
A member the American Bar—a Mr. Doyle—was in fact sent
over to watch the case. In July Bernstorff communicated fur-
ther news from Ireland to Berlin stating that the work of re-
organising the rebels was making good progress, and that their
lack of money had been remedied by him. It was notorious
that Sinn Fein sympathisers had gone to America and were
making collections there; and that, owing to the attitude
taken up by Mr. Asquith after his visit to Dublin, and the poli-
tical inertness of the Government, Sinn Fein rapidly gathered
great strength. In June, 1916, there was published a letter
from Bishop O’Dwyer, of Limerick, thanking the Guardians
of the Tipperary Union for a resolution that they had passed
approving
“of my attitude towards that brute Maxwell, who in my
*See the “Times.” Sept. 22, 1917; New York “World,” Sept. 23, 1917.


opinion is only one degree less objectionable than the Govern-
ment that screens behind him. But Ireland is not dead yet.
While her young men are not afraid to die for her in open
fight, and when defeated stand proudly with their backs to the
wall as targets for English bullets, we need not despair of the
old land.”
The priests followed this episcopal lead in sedition in
numbers; and the American revolutionaries became active in
their correspondence with Germany,' and in preparing for
another rising when the opportunity might come. On Aug-
ust 23, 1916, a remarkable despatch was telegraphed from
Washington by Count Bernstorff to the German Foreign Of-
fice in Berlin:—
“The Bishop of Cork having died, there is a sharp contest
over the succession. The present Assistant-Bishop, Daniel
Cohalan, is the choice of the local clergy; but England is using
unusual influence to have appointed. is
stronglv anti-German, although Germany at our request re-
leased him shortly after the outbreak of the War. Assistant-
Bishop Cohalan is cousin of Judge Cohalan, and strongly
Nationalist and pro-German. He was the intermediary be-
tween the insurgent Cork Volunteers and the British Military
Authorities, and publicly exposed the gross breach of faith of
the English wuth the surrendered men. Hence the effort to
defeat him through the English Envoy at the Vatican, The
appointment of an Irish Bishop is made at Rome. . . It
would have a great moral effect in Rome if Cohalan were
chosen. If Germany can exert any influence to bring about
this result, it would defeat the English intrigue aimed against
her interests.”*
Germany, according to the “Globe,” acted on Bernstorff’s
advice at Rome. Dr. Daniel Cohalan is the present Roman
Catholic Bishop of Cork. Illegal drilling was going on per-
sistently during this period in Ireland; and Sinn Fein was not
only increasing in numbers and audacity but perfecting its
organisation, although most of the original leaders had either
been executed or were undergoing imprisonment. On Sep-
tember 8, 1916, as the Government statement tells, a memor-
andum was sent by Bernstorff to Berlin from an “Irish Revo-
lution Director Resident in America,” containing proposals for
a fresh rising. The advantage of having submarine and Zep-
pelin bases on the west of Ireland was pointed out; and sug-
*The “Globe,” Sept. 29, 1916; “Cork Constitution,” Dec. x, 1916.


gestions for a German Military Expedition were made. In
December the Irish were pressing for an answer; and on De-
cember 31 the German War Office informed Bernstorff of pro-
posals to land munitions in Ireland between February 21 and
25, 1917, but that German troops could not be sent. On
January 18, 1917, the Irish declined the proposal, as a rising
would be useless without the assistance of German troops. In
the meantime the German propaganda was spreading apace
and corrupting the country. Its virulence can be judged from
—merely one example out of hundreds —the following poem
on the battle of Jutland (fought just five weeks after the Re-
bellion), which is one of the most popular recitations at nume-
rous Sinn Fein concerts and gatherings: —
The Rats Came Out.
“Britannia Rules the Waves, Britons never shall be slaves!
We’ve been told the tale so often, that we've scarcely room
for doubt;
Irish Rebels in their graves, done to death by cowardly
knaves,
Would sleep peacefully, I’m certain, if they knew the rats
came out.
’Twas on the 31st of May —for ever blessed be that day!
The British Fleet off Denmark’s coast were cruising round
about,
They felt safety in numbers, and no/ fear disturbed their
slumbers,
Not dreaming for an instant that the rats were coming out.
Those tars renowned for bravery, those sworn foes of slavery,
Were out upon a picnic German merchant ships to rout;
They thought they had an easy thing, their bands were play-
ing God Save the King,
But very soon they changed their tune, they found the
rats were out.
The blood of murdered Irishmen appeals to Heaven once again.
The Fleet that shelled old Dublin Town have got a clean
knock-out.
True Irish hearts will ever pray that God will speed the com-
ing day
• When Britain’s Fleet is swept away when next the rats
come out.”


The United States declared war on April 4, 1917* 9 n J une
14, 1917, a Sinn Fein convention was held at Ennis, and
selected De Valera, who was undergoing penal servitude for
life, as candidate for East Clare; he was subsequently elected
by a very large majority. On June 15, the Government an-
nounced that they had decided to release without reservation
all the Irish prisoners. They were released, and immediately
began to deliver throughout Ireland harangues of the most
seditious and treasonable character, telling the thousands who
thronged to the meetings that
"Germany is no enemy of Ireland.” "France is bled white.
“England is beaten to the ropes.” “Make it impossible and
unprofitable for England to govern Ireland. Raise a
national army of volunteers, drilled, disciplined and equipped in
such a manner as to be able to strike a blow for Irish freedom
when the opportunity arises; and, so far as can be seen, such
opportunity will be very soon.” “Germany is Ireland s friend
because Germany is fighting for the Freedom of the Seas. It
is therefore to her interest that Ireland should be free. As
long as England holds Ireland there can be no Freedom of
the Seas, because Ireland is the key of the Atlantic. Eng-
land has been our enemy in the past, and why should we not
assist her enemies now?” “Get ready; keep getting ready,
when the call comes stand to “You never can tell
what will come; wait, for your orders.”
These are phrases taken from speeches by leaders, orga-
nisers, agitators, and priests, delivered in hundreds week by
week up and down the country. The constant cry was that
at the Peace Conference Ireland would appear with Germany’s
advocacy to protest her sovereign independence and win re-
cognition as a new Republic. The atmosphere thus created
was charged with pro-Germanism and hostility to England.
There was no propaganda to counteract it on the British side,
and it was allowed to develop unchecked.
After America’s entrance into the War, Washington was
no longer a satisfactory base for the Sinn Fein treason-mon-
gers. But on June 18, 1917, “The Provisional Government of
the Irish Republic,” which (as it stated) existed before the
Revolution of 1916, and continues to exist, had the imperti-
nence to convey to President Wilson and the Congress of the
United States the appreciation by the Irish people of the prin-
ciples enunciated in President Wilson’s communication to the


new Government of Russia, interpreting that statement in ef-
fect as a Declaration of Independence for all oppressed nations.
“Our nationalism is not founded upon grievances (they
said). We are opposed not to English misgovernment, but to
English government in Ireland. . . While prepared, when
the opportunity arises, to assert our independence by the one
force which commands universal respect and to accept aid
from any quarter to that end, we hope Americans will see
their way to aid in doing for Ireland what they did for Cuba.”
This message was delivered by the Sinn Fein “Ambassa-
dor,” Dr. Patrick McCartan, F.R.C.S., at that time a fugitive
from Ireland*and since then elected a member of Parliament.
When America entered the War, Prof. Kuno Meyer re-
turned to Germany, and„ with St. John Gaffney and George
Chatterton-Hill —a soi-disant Irishman born in Madras, edu-
cated at Geneva, and resident for many years in Germany —
founded the German-Irish Society, which has its headquarters
in the same premises in Berlin as those used by the Official
German Press Bureau. The presidents of the organisation
were Herr Mathias Erzberger, Baron von Reichthofen (a pro-
minent Junker and Pan-German), and Count Westarp, the
Tunker leader in the Reichstag. On the directorate were
Kuno Meyer, Prof. Edouard Meyer, of Berlin University, his
brother, Karl Goldschmidt, of Essen (connected with Krupps),
Prof. Schiemann, and many other eminent men in public and
professional positions in Germany. The organ of the Asso-
siation is “Irische Blatter,” a high-class monthly review, well
printed, and edited by Chatterton-Hill. It is devoted to press-
ing the Sinn Fein programme in Germany and neutral Euro-
pean States. The society started with messages of goodwill
from General Ludendorff and Herr Zimmermann, then Foreign
Secretary. It has since received similar messages from the
Kaiser.
The following is from the inaugural address of the Ger-
man-Irish Society:—
“The war has proved that Germany has very few friends.
But the Irish have acted as friends at home as well as in the
United States, and Germany must not underestimate the value
of Irish friendship. From the beginning of the war the
American-Irish adopted the German cause with enthusiasm,
and, in alliance with the German-Americans, conducted a cour-
ageous fight for true neutrality. There is no doubt that, but
for the support of the Irish organisations, the politically unor


ganised German-Americans would have been condemned to
impotence.
“The formation of this society is to supply visible proof to
the Irish in Ireland, as well as in America, of German grati-
tude and German sympathy. The heroic rebellion of 1916
still lives in the memory of all of us. The uprising in Dublin,
during which 2000 armed Irish defied a British force many
times their superior, evoked lively interest in Germany
for the Emerald Isle and all its inhabitants.
“The German-Irish Society will devote its energies to re-
opening Ireland to the world, and especially to Germany. It
will see that the voice of the Irish nation, which has been op-
pressed and sucked dry'by Erigland, again finds expression,
and generally and in every way further the progressive de-
velopment of the Emerald Isle in the interest of the German
as well as the Irish people.”*
The first number contains a full account of the Irish
Easter week Rebellion—with illustrations of the leaders. The
following is a quotation from one of the articles:—
“When the west Irish harbours serve as bases for U-boats,
and a large part of the country is in the hands of one of the
organised revolutionary armies, then will England’s rule over
the sea quickly come to an end. Not only can many English
ships carrying munitions and the necessaries of life be sunk,
but others can be captured and towed into Irish ports in order
to supply the Irish army with munitions and the Irish people
with food. Thus would England be handed over to her
enemies, and the war quickly brought to an end. The setting
free of Ireland from England would be the end of England’s
world-dominion and of English rule over the seas. Both of
these depend entirely upon whether England remains in pos-
session of Ireland. . . .
“But this result cannot be brought about without a
struggle. Ireland must secure her independence by the
bravery of her men and the support of her women. ‘He who
will be free must himself draw the sword.’ Ireland cannot
accept her freedom as a present from the hand of another
nation. The Irish, not the Germans, must drive the English
army from Ireland, and leave behind, as an example to coming
generations, memorials of their fame and glorious traditions of
the heroic struggle.
*See “Daily Mail,” Oct. 27, 1917.


“Germany will help gladly, just as the el P < Fre ”
Germans and Poles was thankfully accepted by the founders
of the American Republic, as h ranee and Spam in past day
lent their support to Ireland, and as Ireland, again obtained
support from France and Russia. Every Power which wars
with England is by that act the ally of Ireland, every sword
thrust made against England, no matter by whom, is a sword-
thrust for the freedom of humanity.
“Ireland cannot fight without weapons and war material;
and these absolutely indispensable things must be procured
wherever they are to be had. But without money that is im-
possible-impossible without a great deal of money. hrorn
whence is this money to come? The Irish in America could
raise it in the course of a month, if they had the confidenc
given bv the prospect of the result and faith in the integrity
and activity of the men, sufficient to interest themselves in the
matter. Every man and woman who desires the freedom ot
Ireland must strive to arouse this mutual confidence. That
is at the present time the essential, the indispensable thing.
When that is attained, the way is made clear.”*
The continuity of the Sinn Fein revolutionary movement
and its connection with German intrigue is further exempli-
fied by the proceedings at the great Sinn Fein Convention held
in the Mansion House, Dublin, October 25, 1917. when De
Valera was elected President and Arthur Griffith Vice-Presi-
dent of the Association, and all the surviving rebels were
elected to high office in its councils. The Sinn Fein Consti-
tution then adopted declared
“Whereas the people of Ireland never relinquished their
claim to Separate Nationhood, and whereas the Provisional
Government of the Irish Republic, Easter, 1916, in the name
of the Irish people, and continuing the fight made by previous
generations, reasserted the inalienable right of the Irish
Nation to Sovereign Independence, and reaffirmed the deter-
mination of the Irish people to achieve it; and whereas the
Proclamation of an Irish Republic, Easter, 1916, and the
supreme courage and glorious sacrifice of the men w o g av <-
their lives to maintain it have united the people of Ireland
under the flag of the Irish Republic; .
•From “Irische Blatter,” May, 1917, P- i O2 -


“Be it resolved that we, the delegated representatives of
the Irish People in Convention assembled, hereby declare the
following to be the Constitution of Sinn Fein.”
Then follow the different articles of the Constitution. The
Constitution is based upon the grounds of the rebellion of
Easter week, 1916, in which Germany was proclaimed the
“faithful ally” of Sinn Fein. Speech after speech of the mem-
bers of the Executive since October, 1917, could be quoted,
urging preparation for a new rebellion and hinting that the
assistance of Germany would be again forthcoming. Never
were traitors treated with such leniency as have these men
been by England. Their hatred of England is, however, im-
measurable. Irish Home Rulers and the Irish labourers owe
much to the British Labour Party, and yet at the Convention
a resolution was carried unanimously:—
“That, as the first principle of Sinn Fein is to end the con-
nection with England, Sinn Feiners belonging to Trades
Unions affiliated or amalgamated with English Trade Unions
should be recommended when possible to try and sever the
English connection.”
Two days afterwards De Valera, addressing the Conven-
tion of Irish Volunteers, told them;—
“They could see no hope of another rebellion being suc-
cessful except through a German invasion of England, and the
landing of troops and munitions in Ireland. They should be
prepared to leave nothing undone towards that end.”
Corresponding to the German-Irish Society in Germany
there had been founded in 1916 in America the Society of “The
Friends of Irish Freedom,” to carry on through the Germans
and Irish in America the Sinn Fein struggle and propaganda
against England. Since 1916 it has had its branches in all
the important cities of the States. J. O’Leary was its presi-
dent, and Kuno Meyer and St. John Gaffney are among its pro-
minent members. The Sinn Fein Executive in Ireland framed
in 1917-1918 a long “Statement of Ireland’s Case at a Peace
Conference,” partly argumentative, partly historical (in the
Sinn Fein sense of history), and carrying to a conclusion the
policy of Casement. Copies of this document were furnished
through the agents of Sinn Fein in Germany to various Conti-
nental Powers. The following extracts show some of the
existing links between Sinn Fein and Germany, and illustrate
its, operations: —


" Amsterdam, December 3.—A telegram from Berlin re-
ports that the German-Irish Society, which now numbers 300
members, held its first public gathering yesterday at the Hotel
Adlon. Those present included representatives of the Im-
perial authorities, members of the Reichstag, and the Irish
Nationalist, Dr. Chatterton-Hill, whom the message in ques-
tion describes as the ‘soul of society.’
“Speaking on the community of German-Irish interests,
Professor Edouard Meyer, of Berlin University, said that, dur-
ing the war Ireland had shown herself Germany’s true ally,
not only with arms in her hands, but through her passive re-
sistance, which had caused the British enormous difficulties.’
In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the day of freedom
might soon come also for Ireland, after over 700 years of bond-
age. —Reuter.”
“Times,” December 5, 1917.
St. Patrick’s Day Celebration in Berlin.
“The celebration of the Irish National Festival instituted
by the German-Irish Society on the occasion of St. Patrick’s
Day was held last evening in the Hotel Adlon, Berlin, and
was attended by a numerous company. Graf Westarp, Con-
servative Deputy of the Reichstag, welcomed the guests in the
name of the Committee, and stated that a people which was
incapable of a righteous hatred towards their mortal enemies
was also incapable of any profound devotion to its own cause.
England, Ireland’s mortal enemy, had now become the mortal
enemy of Germany. Before the war, the German people had
never thought that it would be their mission to destroy Eng-
land’s maritime tyranny, but Germany had been compelled to
undertake this task, and was in a position to accomplish it,
thanks to the numerical superiority which she had now
achieved, and to the U-boats. *
“A lengthy speech delivered by Councillor of Legation
von Stumm, as representative of the Foreign Office. In the
course of his speech he said;
“ ‘lt was recently stated in English reports on the state of
the Irish question that in Ireland all was quiet, and in the
best of order, and that an Irish Convention had assembled
which was to settle the destiny of the Irish people to the
general satisfaction. After some time, talk about the Con


vention came to an end, and now we suddenly saw that Lord
rrench, Commander-in-Chief of the Home Forces, had landed
in Ireland to re-establish tranquillity.
“ ‘What the English mean by "tranquillity'’ we can best
ascertain from the people of Ceylon, or from the Boers in the
Transvaal. The news is no surprise to us, for we knew that
the Irish people, who for centuries had conducted an unflinch-
ing struggle against British oppression, and to whose list of
martyrs Sir Roger Casement has been added as the latest but
not the last, could never have bowed its neck to the might
of the "guardian of the smaller nations.” Mr. Asquith recently
stated that the territorial conquests which England has made
during this war would come before the Peace Conference.
If he really meant it, it is his duty to see to it that the Peace
Conference should also concern itself with the destinies of
Ireland; even if Lord French, as may be feared in view of his
resources, succeeds in conquering and occupying the green
island. But he will never subjugate Ireland. And in this
struggle for self-determination the Irish can at all times count
upon the sympathy of the whole German people.'
Dr. George Chatterton-Hill, as the only Irishman present,
thanked the company for their warm-hearted interest in the
Irish question. . . He stated that Ireland was on the eve of
great events. The reason of all this was summarised in the
two words ‘Sinn Fein,’ that great political, economic, and cul-
tural movement which recognised England as the evil genius
of Ireland, and which thwarted and combated her in every
direction. The movement therefore raised the cry "Separa-
tion from England!” and demanded Ireland for the Irish.
From the moral point of view, Ireland was the best contradic-
tion of England’s hypocritical boast that she was fighting for
the freedom of the smaller nations.
"An address upon Germany and the Irish question by
Kommerzienrat Dr. Karl Goldschmidt concluded the proceed-
ings.” (“Berliner Tageblatt,” March 18, 1918.)
A report of this itieeting was sent out by German wire-
less on March 18, concluding with the words, "The freedom
of the seas would only be assured when a free Ireland is made
the Watcher of the Atlantic Ocean.”
The Stockholm Bureau of the "Amis de la Liberte irlan-
daise” handed to the Ministers of the Powers there a state-
ment of the present position in Ireland, and the claim of Ire


land to equal freedom with Serbia and Belgium. The docu-
ment was signed for the Bureau by Mr. St. John Gaffney,
formerly Consul-General of the United States, and Dr. Chat-
terton-Hill, Professor, Geneva University. (“Nationality,”
March)23, 1918.)
Ireland and the Peace Conference.
“Speaking at a largely-attended meeting in Foxford (Co.
Mayo) on Sunday, Citizen Arthur Griffith, referring to the
meeting of the German-Irish Society at Berlin on St. Patrick’s
Day, said it followed the presentation of a claim at Stock-
holm to the same treatment for Ireland as would be accorded
to Poland. Copies of the claim were accepted by all the
neutral and Central Powers. The gathering at Berlin was
officially visited by the German Government; and the repre-
sentatives of the German Government declared that they
would support Ireland’s claims at the Peace Conference. It
was because she feared they were going to that court that
England wanted to set up bogus Home Rule. Dealing with
the renewed demand for conscription Mr, Griffith said: We
tell England that she will never enforce conscription on Ire-
land.’ ” (“The Irishman,” April 6, 1918.)
The Government statement tells how in April. 1918,
shortly after Von Stumm, the representative of the German
Foreign Office, told hi's hearers that the Irish could count at all
times upon the sympathv of Germany, it was ascertained that
a plan had been formed by Germany to land arms and muni-
tions again in Ireland; and they only awaited definite infor-
mation as to the time and place and date. On April 12, a
German emissary—Dowling, alias O Brien one of the few
Irish soldiers who had been corrupted from his allegiance by
Casement when a prisoner of war, landed in a collapsible boat
from a German submarine on Crabbe Island, off the coast of
Clare. The Germans had been plotting with Sinn Fein for
a new rising, to accompany their great offensive in France,
and to be assisted bv the landing of arms and munitions from
submarines on the Irish coast. In May of the present year
arms for Ireland were shipped at Cuxhaven in submarines;
and the plots and plans for another rebellion were actively
maturing in Ireland and Germany in the hopes of a decisive
German victory in the great offensive.* _
•See evidence at the Court-Martial on Dowling, "Times/’ July g, I9tB.


In the face of these peril* to Ireland, England, the Empire
and the world’s liberties, the Bishops of the Roman Catholic
Church in Ireland, on April 18, 1918, proclaimed that ths Con-
scription of Ireland is
“an oppressive and inhuman law which the Irish people have
a right to resist by all the means that are consonant with the
*law of God”—and directed their clergy “to celebrate a public
Mass of Intercession in every Church in Ireland to avert the
scourge of conscription with which Ireland is now threatened.’’
While the Bishops in Maynooth were thus urging their
servile and superstitious flocks to resist the law of the land,
and to combine in protesting against “the naked militarism’’ of
the Prime Minister of England, Messrs. Dillon, Devlin, Healy,
William O’Brien, and the representatives of the Irish Trade
Unions, gathered in Dublin, under the presidency of the Lord
Mayor, and, in concert with the Bishops at Maynooth, resolved
to resist the “Declaration of War on the Irish Nation by the
House of Commons in passing the Conscription Bill.”
The following is a specimen of the appeals which have
been spread broadcast in Ireland—in this case an appeal to
women—and are supported by the Roman Catholic hierarchy
and the Nationalist leaders. This appeal was circulated
widely at church and chapel doors.
A Call to Irishwomen,
“Irishwomen! Your Country is threatened with a
calamity more deadly and appalling than anything that has
confronted it since the days of Cromwell. England in her
malignant hate of our small nationality has declared 1 a war of
extermination upon the last remnant of the Irish race, which
has survived her brutal rule of famine and persecution. Eng-
land declares war upon You by her decision to seize by force
the bodies of Your Men-—those nearest and dearest to you —
and compel them against conscience and national honour to
wear the shameful livery of their country’s implacable enemy
—to become helots in body and soul!
“Irishwomen ! Take your stand with Ireland. You must
realise your power and use it whatever be the cost. JThere
must be no blacklegs amongst you base enough to help the
British Government in their dirty work. There must be no
question of women filling men’s places, or taking any part,
active or passive, in this crime against the Irish Nation.


“Women must resolve to sacrifice everything in their ef-
forts to oppose, thwart and render impossible the murderous
attempt on the life and honour of Ireland. Conscription for
Ireland means eternal slavery for our country. Irishwomen!
You must choose Death itself, rather than suffer this National
Disgrace! The Time to make Your Choice is Now!”
But at this same time the ceaseless watch of the British
Navy was saving Ireland, her priests, politicians, and people,
from the “naked militarism” of Germany, and from a German
invasion plotted by Sinn Fein.
“VIGILANT.”
Varleys Pty. Ltd., Printers, Melbourne.
