

ONE PENNY.
Patriotic Pamphlets.
28
SINN FEIN
(“ Ourselves Alone ”)
Are Australians Sinn Feiners ?
Address
Rev. T. E. RUTH
Melboiirne Auditorium, Sunday, November 25 , 1927.
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Melbourne,
1917.


SINN FEIN.
(“Ourselves Alone.”)
ARE AUSTRALIANS SINN FEINERS?
A friend of mine who, through no fault of his own,
failed to be born of Irish parents in Ireland —a lament-
able fact, assumed on Archiepiscopal authority to be the
first and final misfortune, if not a lifelong disgrace —but
who was born a Scotsman, and with the strange per-
versity of his race seems somewhat proud of it, sends
me a quotation from the Gaelic Bible, which no consider-
ation would tempt me to try to read in public, and the
very sight -of which makes me glad that, like Mr. Jus-
tice Heydon, my parents were English,
The quotation is from the 100th Psalm, the 3rd verse,
and is of interest because it contains the words “sinn
fein.” “Know ye not that the Lord, He is God. It
is He that hath made us” —the Gaelic word for us is
“sinn” — “and not we ourselves,” and not “sinn fein”
the Gaelic has it. Literally, I understand “we selves,”
the language not requiring “our.”
' With real relief I turn from the Gaelic Bible with its
weird combinations of the English alphabet, to the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, and in the article on “Ireland”
I read of “The extreme party of Sinn Fein (‘ ourselves
alone’).” That is what “sinn fein”— these innocent and
inoffensive words —become when they are capitalised and
monopolised and adopted as the watchword and the mo-
tive of social, political and ecclesiastical malcontents,
“Ourselves Alone.”


Then I turn from the calm academic atmosphere of
the “Encyclopaedia Britannica” to the heated atmos-
phere of animosity, the naked and unashamed Anglo-
phobia of the Irish Catholic “Advocate.” The “Advo-
cate” has never made any attempt to conceal its hatred
of England since the accession of the present anti-Eng-
lish Archbishop; and the “Advocate” attempts to cover
with a kind of colonial whitewash the sinister designs
of “Sinn Feiners” by pretending than “Sinn Fein” is
scarcely more than a synonym for “Home Rule,” but
the whitewash is very weak, and the pretence fails to
deceive, because we have not forgotten Archbishop Carr’s
more accurate description of the Sinn Fein Rebellion
in Dublin, and because we have been taught by the
“Advocate” not to judge by appearances. You may take
members of the Italian Opera Company, garb them as
priests, get them to sing in the Choir of Singing Priests,
credit the Priests’ Choir with the melodious voices of the
Opera Company, but things are not always what they
seem, things are not always what they sound. The
“Advocate” tries to soften “Ourselves Alone” to “For
Ourselves.”
Now let us turn from the “Advocate” to the “Advo-
cate’s” master, Dr, Mannix, Let him tell us what “Sinn
Fein” means. Prevented by patriots, at the primary in-
stigation of loyal Irishmen, of loyal Irish Catholics, let
it be remembered, prevented by patriots from using the
Exhibition Building for the dissemination of the doctrines
of disloyalty, the supporters of Dr. Mannix waited on
Mr. John Wren, and asked for the use of the Richmond
Racecourse. Mr. Wren said to the deputation:—
“We in Australia are up to our necks in the fight,
“and I ask you to picture the position Australia will
“be in if Great Britain and her Allies go down.
“Everyone of us must see that this is no time for
“quarrelling amongst ourselves.”
When the deputation urged the importance of preserving
liberty of speech, Mr. Wren replied:—


“Liberty can be abused just now. The liberty of
“our country is at stake, and we must all conform
“to the regulations.”
And before he gave his consent —I am quoting from the
“Advocate’s” account of the deputation— Mr. Wren was
assured; —
“There is no Sinn Fein in any way connected with
“our movement.”
“There is no Sinn Fein in any way connected with our
movement,” Mr. Wren was assured, yet when the Race-
course was secured, then to a great concourse of people,
estimated by the secular press to number 30,000; by
the local Roman organs 100,000, and by Roman papers
in other States 150,000 —it will probably be 500,000 by
the time the report reaches Dublin—to a great mass
meeting, held on premises secured from a patriot who
said, “We in Australia are up to our necks in the fight,”
and secured by the assurance “There is no Sinn Fein in
any way connected with our movement,” at a mass meet-
ing on premises secured on those pretences, Dr. Mannix
quite openly avowed and advocated Sinn Feinism.
“We in Australia are up to our necks in the fight,
and I ask you to picture the position Australia will be
in if Great Britain and her Allies go down,” said Mr.
Wren. “What is this Empire of which we hear so
much?” asked Dr. Mannix. And the question was
greeted with laughter, laughter with derision in it.
“The Empire will have to take second place,” Dr. Man-
nix affirmed, and an Irish voice cried: “Quite right, too,”
If you want to know what Sinn Feinism is, according
to the deeds of Dr. Mannix, there you have it. His
whole speech, in every statement and in every sentiment,
was a distinct and deliberate violation of the patriotic
promises made by the deputation to Mr. Wren, and
of the patriotic conditions on which Mr. Wren let the
Racecourse. If actions speak louder than words, we
should be under no delusion as to the meaning of Sinn
Fein. Mr. Wren’s speech, as reported in the “Advocate,”
was that of a sincere straightforward supporter of Great
Britain and her Allies, a patriotic repudiation of sedition


and rebellion, and a sportsmanlike appeal to his co-
religionists not to abuse the liberty he granted them
in the use of the Racecourse for their meeting. What
happened was an exposure and an exposition of the
actual character of the Sinn Fein movement. Having
secured the Racecourse by repudiating Sinn Fein, by
saying with unnecessary emphasis, "‘There is no Sinn
Fein in any way connected with our movement,” they
immediately proceeded with a Sinn Fein demonstration,
which was anti-English and anti-British from beginning
to end.
In other ways, Mr. Wren has proven the sincerity of
his patriotism, but surely if he had listened to the warn-
ings given by loyal Irish Catholics, if he had read the
letters to the Press by loyal and constitutional Home
Rulers, then, sportsman as he is, he might have known
that there were heavy odds against the promises made
him being kept, and 'his conditions being observed.
Sinn Fein, “ourselves,” “ourselves alone,” “for ourselves,”
is sheer selfishness, first, foremost, and always. It is
consummate egotism that repudiates any truth-telling,
any truth-keeping, any observance of law and patriotic
consideration that would in any way interfere with the
supremacy and sovereignty of selfishness. That is Sinn
Fein, as illustrated by the leader of the Sinn Fein move-
ment in Melbourne, and as exemplified in the method of
securing as contrasted with the method of using the
Richmond Racecourse for their monster meeting.
Now let us come to the actual definitions and details
of Sinn Fein, according to Dr. Mannix. These are his
words as reported in the “Advocate”:—
“The men of Ireland to-da}' are determined that
“the first and paramount consideration in judging
“every question will be: Does it or does it not serve
“Ireland?”
“That is the first and paramount consideration.” In
no conceivable circumstances could the Empire take pre-
cedence. He states plainly, he reiterates, and always
amid the cheers of his army;—


“The Empire will have to take second place.”
But that is not all. His Irish policy is plainly stated
“to shake the dust of the British Parliament off their
“feet.”
So by “The men of Ireland” he does not mean all the
men of Ireland, he does not mean even all the Roman
Catholic men of Ireland —very many of whom have re-
pudiated Sinn Fein; he means, The Sinn Fein men of
Ireland and the Sinn Fein men of Ireland among the
Irish Catholic priesthood, and the Irish Catholic lay-
men in Australia. That is the Sinn Fein policy, in his
own words—
“to shake the dust of the British Parliament off their
“feet.”
And then he has the audacity to say:—
“You here in Australia are Sinn Feiners, though
“you do not call yourselves by that name.”
11.
Undoubtedly there are some hyphenated Australians
who deserve the opprobrious title which Dr. Mannix
flings at their heads, but it is perfectly certain that the
vast and overwhelming majority of Australians of every
religious creed and every shade of political preference
would utterly repudiate it.
I am not an Irishman, but I know something about
Ireland. I am by conviction a constitutional Home
Ruler, but the men who have prevented Home Rule- in
Ireland are the men who are responsible for the Rome
Rule that is the actual and potential enemy of the Irish
race, the political priesthood, of which Dr Mannix is so
typical an example. And it is a real injustice to Ireland
to claim that the principles of Sinn Fein are, even in
Ireland, the first and paramount consideration. Dr. Man-
nix knows that at the moment the Roman Catholic
Church in Ireland has discouraged Sinn Feinism. But
Dr. Mannix in Australia is not so much pro-Ireland as
anti-British. His purpose is not so much to save Ireland
as to stir up strife in Australia.


Dr. Mannix praises the leaders of the Sinn Fein rebel-
lion in Ireland, not because the Irish people in Ireland can
be pleased by his praise, but because by that means he
can foster disloyalty among the Irish in Australia, and
attract to himself certain platitudinarian Pacifists and
declare to the democracy with the irresponsible passion of
a demagogue that the safety of the people lies along the
path of sedition.
In order to do this, he has to repudiate Dr. Carr,
who said of the Dublin rebellion: —
“When the secret history of this movement comes
“to be written, it will be found to be the result
“of German intrigue, of support from some Irish-
“ Americans, of hostility to the Irish Nationalist Par-
liamentary party, and of the role assumed by a
“small knot of desperate irreconcilables.”
That was Dr. Carr’s description of Sinn Fein leaders
“a small knot of desperate irreconcilables.”
And Dr Carr added: —
“From every point of view I regard the*disturb-
ance as an outburst of madness, an anachronism and
“a crime.”
But Dr. Mannix is prepared to use what Dr. Carr called
“an outburst of madness, an anachronism and a crime,”
or anything else, as a scorpion of stinging speech with
which to attack England.
Even when he is not, in the words of Mr. Benjamin
Hoare —a Roman Catholic layman honoured by the Pope,
and who was driven from the Catholic Truth Society for
telling the truth about his Archbishop —even when he is
not, in the words of Mr. Hoare, “defaming the Empire”
ty cruel and bitter invective, he is furtively sneering at
British honour and British relationship. He is a perfect
master of the poisoned parenthesis. He speaks of
“The Empire of which Ireland is, fortunately or
“unfortunately, a part.”
7


He says
“My loyalty to the Empire, such as it is. . .
And when he is quite openly delivering seditious speeches
defending rebellion, advocating law-breaking, and de-
faming the Empire, he declares he is speaking not as a
Churchman, but as a citizen. But, see what happens, not
politically but ecclesiastically.'
As a citizen Dr. Mannix defames the Empire. As a
citizen, Mr. Benjamin Hoare defends the Empire. As
a Churchman, Dr, Mannix secures the signature of Dr.
Carr, when he is dying, to drive Mr. Hoare from his
Church positions.
As a citizen, not as a Churchman, Dr. Mannix is
denied the use of the Exhibition Building for seditious
speeches, but as a Churchman he accuses the representa-
tives of his Church on the board of trustees there, not as
Churchman, but as citizens, of having no more backbone
than a stick of boiled asparagus!
As a citizen, Dr. Mannix urges that Australians are
Sinn Feiners, that as Sinn Feiners they should put Aus-
tralia first and the Empjre second; and Mr. Justice
Heydon, senior judge of the Industrial Court of New
South Wales, says:—
“In proclaiming his sympathy with Sinn Fein, in
“urging us to put Australia first and the Empire
“second, the Catholic Archbishop Pas shown himself
“to be not only disloyal as a man, but (I say it
“emphatically, Archbishop though he be, and simple
“layman though I be), untrue to the teachings of
“the Church of which by his office he should be the
“guardian . . ,
.And the Judge states the position clearly:—
“The political entity to which we belong is the
“Empire of which we are part, as essentially as Vic-
toria is part of Australia, as Melbourne is part of
“Victoria, and as Archbishop Mannix is part of Mel-
“bourne.” ♦


(Alas!) And the Judge declares—
“The final issue of such teaching is that a man
“may put himself before his country, and such a
“man we call a traitor.”
Mr. Justice Hey don, as an Australian citizen, asks
some pertinent questions:—
“Who gave us this great country of ours, as large
“as the United States? Who protected us through
“war and peace in the most profound calm, so that
“never once has an enemy fired a shot within our
“boundaries or even against our shores for 129 years?
“Who did this during nearly the whole of that time
“without charging us a single penny, and even while
“spending large sums amongst us?”
And he makes reply:—
“And it was done for us —even now a mere hand-
“ful—living in the great prize country of the world —
“it was done for us all, Irish, Scotch, Welsh, or Eng-
lish—wherever ourdathers came from.
“The arms of the Empire were round us all, and
“we were safe, and in that cradle grew up to be Aus-
tralian people.”
And these are his judicial comments; —
“And now there is a man amongst us (but, thank
“God, not an Australian) who can tell us that in
“this war we should put Australia above the British
“Empire, our parent, our nurse, our protector, the
“home of our fathers.”
And this is his explanation of the campaign of sedition
in which Dr. Mannix is engaged:—
“Truly there are hatreds which ask for very costly
“food to glut them.”
Asa citizen, what does Dr. Mannix say to this? With
the dignity of a great democratic leader, he speaks of
Mr. Justice Heydon as
“a second or third class judge of some kind or
other. He is not an Irishman.”


And a voice cried fervently, if not devoutly, Thank
God! And Dr. Mannix makes the dreadful announce-
ment—
“His father was an Englishman.”
That is the capital offence. Mr. Hoare is not an Irish-
man either, I believe, poor man!
This “second or third class judge of some kind or
other”
“couldn’t get as many people to listen to him in
“Sydney as would fill a lolly shop.”
And once again the Anglophobia of the man is em-
phasised—
“The people of Melbourne are not going to take
“any more notice of the effusion, especially when
“they know that the writer is an Englishman.”
But in all this Dr. Mannix is speaking not as a church-
man but as a citizen. That is the distinction he com-
plains that his critics will not remember. Well, I turn
to his organ of yesterday’s date, “The Advocate,” and I
find an inspired paragraph in which Mr. Justice Hey-
don’s letter is condemned because in it he “denounces
and defames the respected Archbishop of Melbourne,”
and “shows that a judge, under the influence of the
jingoistic fever, may be narrow in his views, and disloyal
to the Church of which he professes to be a member.”
That is the position—lf a Roman Catholic dares to
disagree with the disloyal propaganda of Dr. Mannix he
is declared to be disloyal to his Church. Because he is
a Britisher, the “Advocate” says he is “a violent parti-
san of the most pronounced jingo type.” Behind the
platform propaganda of political Sinn Feinism, in which
Dr. Mannix is engaged as a citizen, there is all the
tyranny of an ecclesiastical Sinn Feinism, with all
its pains and penalties, which are more real and far-
reaching than any Protestant can imagine. s •.
Mr. Justice Heydon will not suffer alone. Sir Thomas
Hughes, another Roman Catholic citizen, complains that
10


“Dr. Mannix appears to think that by setting race
“against race, and class against class, he is doing
“his duty to the country which has so lately re-
ceived him as a denizen,”
and says—
“The parents of tens of thousands of the boys who
“have answered the call and given their lives for the
“cause resent to their innermost fibre Dr. Mannix’s
“description of the present struggle as a sordid trade
“war. Now, a baser appeal has been made by him
“that we should put Australia first and the Empire
“second.”
And Sir Thomas Hughes concludes —
“I believe every decent Catholic in Australia re-
“gards such utterances with loathing and disgust.”
We shall see presently how many decent Catholics
there are, and how many of Dr. Mannix’s sort. Mr.
Justice Duffy, another Roman Catholic, says—
“He cannot complain if his fellow-citizens regard
“him as an enemy within the gates.”
But we have to wake up to the fact that we have not
only the importation of this blind hatred of England into
our Australian politics. ,We have to contend not only
against a Sinn Fein citizenship that is utterly anti-Bri-
tish, but against a Sinn Fein churchmanship, that is
utterly anti-catholic, against a Sinn Fein sectarianism
that cries in season and out of season, “Ourselves alone.”
The leading Sinn Fein politician, who is the leading
Sinn Fein ecclesiastic in Victoria, told his Sinn Fein army
in the Melbourne Town Hall the other day that there
was no salvation for anybody outside the particular sect
of which he is head. According to this Sinn Fein Arch-
bishop, Anglicans, Presbyterians, Methodists, Congrega-
tionalists, Baptists, Salvationists, and the great crowds
of unconnected Protestant Christians are all outside the
pale of salvation. The Christian revelation, Christian


truth, Christian redemption, the Christian Gospel are
Sinn Fein possessions. Here is a sect, professedly re-
pudiating sectarianism, crying “Ourselves alone.”
Twenty-eight per cent, of the population of Victoria may
be saved if they obey their priests. Seventy-two per
cent, of the people of this State are “anathema.” There
are, it is claimed, 300,000,000 Roman Catholics in the
world; they are, by the tender mercies of the priests,
within the pale of salvation; they may cry “Ourselves
alone!” There are at least 1,300,000,000 non-Roman
Catholics apparently left lamenting. Against them the
way of salvation is blocked, the door of purgatory is
shut, the gates of heaven are closed.
That is what a Sinn Fein churchmanship would make
of the comprehensive Gospel of Christ. In his Hiber-
nian hatred of England, Dr. Mannix brings his wit to
bear upon the Lord’s Prayer, and sneers that when we
pray “Thy kingdom come” we mean “The British Em-
pire.” It is typically irreverent, and far removed from
fact, but apparently he means by the Kingdom of
God a Sinn Fein Church.
When we pray Thy kingdom come, we do not mean a
kingdom that would exclude any Roman Catholic church-
man or any churchman of any name or any man of any
fa»rh. We mean a kingdom that includes every man for
whom Christ died. The kingdom of heaven is not a
Sinn Fein institution. It is a city that lies four square,
and has gates open on every side, and Sinn Fein priests
are not the gate-keepers.
Sinn Fein is sheer selfishness, and is utterly unethical
and anti-Christian. There is not a New Testament prin-
ciple nor a New Testament precept than can be quoted in
its support. It bears upon it the brand of Cain, who cried,
“Am Imy brother’s keeper?” It is condemned by the
Christ, of whom men said, “He saved others, Himself He
cannot save.” “Look not every man on his own things,
but every man also on the things of others”—that is the
apostolic word. “Let this mind be in you which was
also in Christ Jesus, who pleased not Himself.” The
Cross is the final condemnation of Sinn Feinism.


Sinn Fein is utterly anti-democratic and utterly anti-
social. Dr. Mannix proves this by his defence of the
contribution of Roman Catholic schools to patriotic
funds. The scholars of the State schools secular,
pagan, godless—that is to say, non-Sinn Fein schools—
raise £225,000 for patriotic funds. The Roman Catho-
lic schools, with over 40,000 scholars, raise £1 15s. 6d.,
while Lutheran schools, with a mere handful, raise £5O.
The Sinn Fein reply is that .there are some Roman Catho-
lic children in State schools who have helped to raise the
large sum of £225,000. Assume that the answer is cor-
rect, and you could not have a greater condemnation of
the Sinn Fein policy of segregation, “Ourselves alone,”
In fellowship with other children, the Roman Catholic
scholars help generously. Fence them off in separate
schools, themselves alone, and 40,000 of them give £1
15s. 6d.
Take another illustration. Dr. Phelan urges his flock
to refuse to contribute to any patriotic fund, and
“to every demand that will save the Common-
“wealth Government expense, let your answer be:
“We have to pay the Bachelor Tax for our priests,
“and that is our share to the war fund.”
Now, suppose Protestants withdrew their contribu-
tions from all Roman Catholic institutions, and devote
them to Patriotic funds, would the Patriotic funds suffer
or gain? Suppose, Protestants could withdraw their
ten shilling bricks from Father Robinson’s church, and,
of course, forego the purgatorial advantages promised,
the church of “Our Lady of Victories” would look very
ragged.
Sinn Fein is the denial of democracy, the negation of
those social sympathies and inter-relation of religious
fellowship which should make the life of the community
sweet and strong, the salt of our common life.
T go further, and say that Sinn Fein is anti-national
and anti-humanitarian, I find in a little book, published
in Melbourne on Sinn Fein and the Irish Rebellion, a
quolation from a letter written by an Australian officer
who took part in the suppression of the Sinn Fein rebel-


lion. It is published to show the horrors attending that
suppression, but in the account of the searching of one
house alone there is this damning admission—
“We searched it from top to bottom, finding tons
“of rebel and incriminating documents. According
“to the papers we found, the rebels were in league
“with the Germans, and were expecting reinforce-
“ments of men and food.”
C omment is needless.
But if you want to realise how utterly anti-national and
anti-humanitarian Sinn Feinism is, ask yourselves what
would have happened if Belgium had been Sinn Fein,
and had cried “Ourselves alone,” and had sold their
national soul to German greed for German gold in Aug-
ust, 1914. If Belgium had been Sinn Fein instead of
sacramental, she might possibly have saved herself, for
a time, but she would have betrayed humanity. And if
Great Britain, which strove in vain to prevent this war,
and entered the conflict not for territory nor for trade,
but for truth keeping and in defence of her neighbours; if
Great Britain had cried Sinn Fein “Ourselves alone,” she
would have torn into shreds every principle of morality
and religion. She would have been false to God and her
neighbours.
Now, suffer this last word. Sinn Fein, which is ut-
terly unethical and anti-Christian, utterly anti-democratic
and anti-social, utterly anti-national, and anti-humani-
tarian, Sinn Fein is utterly suicidal, and for no coun-
try more suicidal than for Australia. In this conflict we
are all concerned. Nemesis follows narrowness. Selfish-
ness is suicide. He that saveth his life loseth it. The
salvation of every section of society obviously depends
on the safety of the whole. In the words of another
Roman Catholic, Monsignor Cassidy—
“If England stands, we stand. If England falls,
“we fall. God forbid that there should be any so
“base and low and blind as to wish to strike at the
“heart of England through the soul of their own
“country.”


In the name of God, the common Father of mankind,
in the name of Christ and for the sake of His comprehen-
sive Gospel, in the name of England, the mother of our
British race, and for the sake of international righteous-
ness, international peace, international brotherhood, I
appeal to the people of Australia to rise and tell the
traitor, who calls them Sinn Feiners, that the truth is not
in him, that Australians are not Sinn Feiners, they are
Britishers, they are men, they are not fools and blind.
They stand for God and King and Empire.
3 1508 00062065 3
Wholly Set-up and Printed in Australia by
Harold Smith, 376 Flinders Lane, Mel bourne.


ALL PATRIOTS
(Roman Catholic and Protestants)
SHOULD READ
Wake Up,
Australia
While men slept, the enemy sowed tares among
the wheat:
SECTARIANISM
SEDITION
SINN FEINISM
Rev. T. E. Ruth.
Price, 1/-
Post, 1/1
All Booksellers.
