

SIR ALFRED STEPHEN’S
SPEECH ON THE MEDICAL BILL
DELIVERED IN THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF N. S. WALES,
ON
THURSDAY, MAY 6, 1875.
Sydney:
GIBBS, SHALLARD, AND CO., LETTERPRESS PRINTERS,
PITT STREET, NEXT THE UNION BANK.




SIR ALFRED STEPHEN’S
SPEECH ON THE MEDICAL BILL
ALFRED STEPHEN moved the second reading of
the Medical Practitioners’ Bill. He said that in per-
forming the task he had undertaken he should not in vain ask
the House to give him their earnest attention. There had
been so much misapprehension, and so much misconception
on the subject of this Bill, as to its objects, and as to what
its provisions are, and there had been so much prejudice
excited against it out of doors, that he might have some
difficulty in persuading the House that this measure wa a
perfectly wise and salutary one. But he should endeavour
to show, and he thought he should succeed in showing, what
might astonish many persons, that it had at least been so
thought by the Parliament of Great Britain, and by almost
every, if not every colony in the British dominions. He
believed that a similar law, though more stringent, existed
in every civilized country in the world at the present time.
(No, no.) He believed so, but he did not assert the fact of
his own knowledge, because he was not acquainted with the
iaws of Germany, for instance. Perhaps an hon. gentleman
who sat near him knew more of the laws of Germany than
he did. But the laws of France were as he had stated, and


the laws of America he had no doubt were so also. He did
not intend now to trouble the House with details, which
would be more properly considered when they went into com-
mittee on the Bill, when it was quite possible that some
alterations would be found desirable, so as to remove any
objection that might appear upon the face of it. But he
would begin by simply stating the object of the Bill, which
was the protection of the public. (Hear, hear, and no no.)
And if, incidentally, the noble profession which is the subject
of the Bill is also to be protected to some degree, perhaps to
a large extent (hear, hear), he thought that was no objection,
but rather an additional argument in its favour. (Hear,
hear). Why on earth was a profession, one of the noblest
we have, one that requires long years of study, which requires
great knowledge of Anatomy, knowledge of Chemistry, and
acquaintance with those remedies that give relief to the
human frame, not to be protected against ignorant pre-
tenders ? Were they to say that persons such as these were
not to be protected because a few persons who were not thus
educated are in some cases successful? Other professions
were protected, as, for instance, that to which he had the
honour to belong. No man could practise as an attorney, or
as a barrister, without certain qualifications, and without
going through a certain amount of training. It was the
same in the medical profession. Long years of study and
practice were required before they could be admitted to prac-
tise, and why should they not be protected? Was it to be
said that education was nothing, and long years of study
were nothing, and a mastery of the intricacies of the human
frame was nothing ? Would it be said that a person having


made himself master of all these things should not be
protected in the exercise of his acquirements, but have
ignorant persons, knowing nothing even of Anatomy, to inter-
fere with him ? He thought it would be difficult to give an
answer to these questions. But that was not the object of
the Bill. Its objects were stated in the preamble: “That
protection should as far as possible be afforded to persons
suffering under disease or other bodily ailments against med-
ical or surgical treatment by unskilled or ignorant individ-
uals, and therefore that persons requiring medical or surgical
aid should be enabled to distinguish qualified from unquali-
fied practitioners.” After all, something of this kind had
already been done. Why was it that we required a certificate
on the subject of lunacy from a legally qualified medical
practitioner ? Was it not that we required some guarantee
that the person was qualified to speak on the subject ? So,
again, in coroners’ inquests, we required a certificate from a
legally qualified person as to the cause of death. We gave
the preference to educated men, who were competent to speak
upon the subject. Again, would any man say if he desired
his son to become a member of this profession, that he would
send him into the wild bush to learn it ? Would he not
send him to some distinguished medical school to learn his
profession ? Was learning nothing ? Was a knowledge of
the duties of the profession to be set at nought ? Why did
we have medical schools in our University if we were not to
protect the men who study there ? Why was it that in con-
nection with the Prince Alfred Hospital we have required
that there should be a school for students to study the human
frame ? Why were persons appointed in the University to


superintend the examinations ? Did it not show that the
Legislature had established this maxim—that knowledge,
study and information are really essential to the practice of
any profession? (Hear, hear.) He had said that the one
object of the Bill was the protection of the public, but he
did not deny that possibly there was another object, and very
possibly the effect of the Bill would be beneficial to the
medical profession. It was supposed that the Bill was
intended to put down all others but legally qualified medical
men; he should astonish the House by showing very con-
clusively that there was no such provision in the Bill. No
person, however ignorant, however presumptuous, however
unqualified, but might practise if he pleased to any extent;
there was nothing in the Bill to prevent him, and it was a
mistake—a misrepresentation to say that it was. The Bill
was supposed to be in the interests of the allopathists.
[Mr. Holt: Hear, hear.] There was no such object in the
Bill. There were two homoeopathic practitioners, he believed,
in Sydney now, but they were both qualified medical men,
and they would be qualified under this Bill; and they would
have a legal status. It might put down a person who prac-
tises upon nervous debility, and delicate diseases of women,
and who promises secrecy in dealing with their cases. If
there be such a person it might prevent him from advertis-
ing himself as a member of the College of Surgeons. The
object of the Bill was simply to prevent men from practising
fraud upon the community, and pretending to be that which
they are not. He was told that the Bill would put down the
practitioners he had alluded to, and that it was promoted by
the medical men to advance their own selfish interests. It


was said that the Bill was intended to exclude certain colleges
to which some distinguished persons might belong. (Hear,
hear.) The Medical Board would have the power, no doubt,
under the Bill, but if it were thought desirable this pro-
vision might easily be altered in committee. He thought the
power was desirable. There might be universities which decay,
and there might be others which give degrees for money.
(Hear, hear.) There might be universities or colleges where
there was no examination whatever, and by paying £4O or £SO
a man might get a degree without possessing anymore medical
knowledge than he had. It was proposed by one of the
clauses of this Bill to give the Medical Board power to
strike out from the list the name of any college, which, in
their opinion, was no longer qualified to examine students.
Such a provision exists in England, and, he believed, in
many other countries. But what shocked him was this.
This body of meo, the Medical Board, was to consist of three
persons nominated by the Grovernor, two nominated by the
Senate of the University, and eight elected by the profession
at large, physicians or surgeons; and it was supposed that a
majority of these persons —men of intellect and high
character —would be so base and so abominable, that for
their own selfish interests they would exercise the 'power,
and thereby destroy some rival practitioner. If there was one
vice in the community more injurious to morals than another,
it was this distrust by man of his fellow-man. He did not
believe any body of lawyers would act in such a dishonourable
way, nor did he believe that a body of medical men would be
so base. He thought he had seen as much of dishonesty
and villainy as any man, but he had not yet learnt to


distrust his fellow-men, and he hoped that he never should.
It was a most unjust and unworthy suspicion. These men
would do their duty. There was one gentleman who, it was
supposed, would he disqualified by this Bill, but this gentle-
man could not be disqualified, because he holds a diploma
from the Royal College of Surgeons. The General Council
of Great Britain had an established rule not to interfere
with the particular views of any class of practitioners; their
only object was to see that they were men competent to
practise their profession. And so would this Bill operate.
The Bill seemed rather long, because there were a number of
clauses ; hut the reason was simply this—the sections were
short. The Bill was drawn up by himself, and he was not in
the habit of drawing long clauses. He denied, again and
again, that there was any section in this Bill to put down or
prevent any one from practising who chose to do so, and he
challenged those who said there was to point out any such
section. [Mr. Holt : Section 44]. He would presently
come to section 44. Section 40 was as follows: —“ If any
person shall falsely pretend to be a physician, doctor of
medicine, licentiate in medicine or surgery, bachelor of
medicine, surgeon, general practitioner, or apothecary, or
shall wilfully take or use any name, title, addition, or des-
cription implying that he is registered under this Act, or
recognized by law as a physician or surgeon, or licentiate in
medicine or surgery, or a practitioner in medicine, or an
apothecary, knowing that he is not so registered or so
recognised, he shall be liable to pay a fine of not less than
five pounds nor more than fifty pounds.” Surely a person
who would be guilty of false pretences was not one whom


they would like to encourage. Then section 41 says . —“lf
any person shall wilfully take or use the title of physician,
doctor of medicine, licentiate in medicine or surgery, master
in surgery, bachelor of medicine, surgeon, medical or general
practitioner, apothecary, surgeon-apothecary, accoucheur,
licentiate, or practitioner in midwifery, professor of medicine,
or any other medical or surgical name, title, or description
to which he is not legally entitled, or which he has not caused
to be registered under this Act, he shall be liable to pay a
fine of not less than two pounds nor more than twenty
pounds, and for every subsequent offence after the first con-
viction a fine of not less than five pounds nor more than fifty
pounds.” Who was put down by that ? It did not prevent
the most ignorant person from practising. They might take
their footman and set him up in Macquarie-street as a
practitioner to-morrow: there was nothing to prevent it.
Then he would quote clause 44, which said ; —“ The Council
may refuse to register any person whose name shall have
been removed from a recognized licensing body, and if the
Council shall at any time ascertain that the name of any
practitioner has, in consequence of criminal conduct or mis-
conduct, professional or otherwise, been erased from the list
of members of any University, college, or body from which
such practitioner obtained any qualification entitling him to
practise medicine or surgery, the Council may direct the
registrar to remove such practitioner’s name from the register,
and the registrar shall erase the name accordingly.” If a
practitioner had lost his qualification from misconduct, he
was no longer entitled to these privileges. [Mr. Holt : Or
if he become a homoeopathic doctor ? It has been done in


France.] He did not know what they did in France.
Perhaps they managed those things better in France.
But it was only for criminal misconduct that a man
could be struck off the list, and not for practising
homoeopathy. No Medical Board in the world would dare
to strike off a man for that—it would be absurd to suppose
it; but if men were guilty of criminal misconduct their
qualification came to an end, and were they still to be entitled
to practise? It was scarcely reasonable that we should
encourage persons elsewhere considered unfit for the exercise
of their profession to come to this colony to practise it.
Yet he challenged any one to show that there was anything
in the Bill that tended to depreciate or exclude any particular
system of medicine though practised by persons however
ignorant. In this respect he thought the Bill ought to have
gone further. Measures of a like nature, but much more
stringent in almost every respect, had been passed by the
I
Parliament of Great Britain and had been in force in
England, Scotland, and Ireland for many years. [Mr.
Russell: They are not applicable here.] We had the same
bodies, and our ailments and diseases required that ther e
should be the same skill in applying remedies. Our Act
19th Vic. No. 17, passed in 1855, defined qualified
persons to be those who passed through a regular course of
medical study of at least three years, and had received from
some university, college, or body duly recognised, a diploma,
degree, or license, and this was to be proved to the satisfaction
of the colonial Medical Board. “ The Medical Witnesses
Qualification Act,” 2 Vic., No. 22, provided that no person
should be deemed legally qualified unless he gave proof that he


was a doctor or bachelor in medicine of some university, or
licensed as a physician or surgeon or apothecary of some college
or other medical society, or was or had been a medical
officer in her Majesty’s land or sea forces, and every diploma
or degree or license was to be submitted for the examination
and approval of the Medical Board. This excluded the
Company of Apothecaries at Dublin, and the medical officers
of the forces of the East India Company. With respect to
the Dublin Company of Apothecaries, the omission was cured
by 9 Vic., No. 12, but there was no Act that enabled a
medical officer of the East India Company, although a sur-
geon of rank, to practise in this colony. The present Act
would remove this defect. [Mr. De Salis : There were no
penalties in the Acts mentioned.] Penalties for what ? If
there were any penalties, they should be for fraud for pre-
tending to be what one was not; and how could a law be
enforced but by penalties ? If there were no penalties in
those Acts, the Acts plainly showed what persons were
entitled to practise. In Queensland, the Acts were the same
as those in New South Wales up to 19 Vic., No. 17. Then,
by an Act passed in 1861, chemists and druggists were re-
quired to pass an examination before the Medical Board. No
unregistered person could sue for fees, and any person using
any title or term implying that he was qualified, and prac-
tising without being registered, or practising contrary to his
registered qualification, was made liable to a penalty of
£2O. There were no means of enforcing a prohibitory law
except by fines. When we found colony after colony follow-
ing the mother country in this kind of legislation, there was
good reason for supposing that they were right. Now,


take New Zealand. “ The Medical Practitioners’ Act of
1867,” consolidating previous laws, provided for the appoint-
ment of a board, and every person proving to that body
that he had passed through a course of medical study of
three years in a school of medicine or surgery, and that
after due examination he had received a diploma from
a duly recognised university, college, Or body, British
or foreign, entitling him to practise, was regarded as
legally qualified, and entitled to registration. No unregis-
tered person could practise or recover any charge for medical
or surgical advice or for medicine. If registered practi-
tioners were guilty of discreditable conduct, they were
subject to disabilities identical with those provided in the
Bill before the Council. If a man were an habitual drunkard
he should cease to be a surgeon. It was a dangerous thing
to allow such a man to attend to patients. He had himself
seen an educated surgeon in a beastly state of intoxication
at his (Sir Alfred’s) own door; this person had shortly before
been turned out of a public-house. Persons like this should
not be allowed to practise, but in the present Bill there was
no such clause dealing with them as in the New Zealand
Act. In Tasmania, The Medical Practitioners Act 6 Vic.
No. 2, consolidating previous statutes, provided for the
appointment of a Board of Medical Examiners, and no
person could practise as a physician, surgeon, or apothecary,
or prescribe or administer any medicine, or perform any
surgical act or operation unless he were certified by the
Board to be a doctor of medicine, or licensed by some college
or society as a physician, surgeon, or apothecary, or had
obtained from the Board authority to practise. A breach of


this law rendered him liable to a penalty not exceeding
They had no University with a medical faculty as we had
here, and the Board had power to admit persons to practise
after examination. Another section of the Tasmanian Act
prohibited any person from selling any medicine or drug
retail without a license from the Board. Did anyone believe
that these various Acts, passed by a colonial legislature,
were passed in the interests of medical men, and not for the
benefit of the community ? The Victorian Act, 28 Vic.
No. 242, passed in 1865, was also an Act of consolidation. It
provided that every person possessing certain specified quali-
fications, on proving to the satisfaction of a Medical Board
that his diploma, license, &c., was obtained by him after due
examination in some university, college, or school of
medicine duly recognised as such in the country to which it
belonged, was entitled to registration. Unregistered prac-
titioners using the name or title of physician, doctor,
licentiate of medicine, or any other medical or surgical
name or title, were liable to a penalty of £oo, and no
unregistered person could recover at law for medical or
surgical services, nor hold any medical appointment in any
passenger vessel, or any hospital, &c. The Bill before the
House was less stringent than this. He now came to the
laws of the United Kingdom, in force in Scotland and
Ireland as well as in England. The Act 22 Vic. c. 90, passed
in 1858, began by asserting the importance of courses of
study and examination to secure the possession of the
requisite knowledge and skill for the efficient practice of the
medical profession—not to benefit the profession, but the
public. Every candidate might adopt the practice of any


particular theory of medicine. There was a provision for
excluding persons, adjudged after due inquiry to he guilty of
infamous conduct. No unregistered person could recover
any charge for medical or surgical advice, attendance, or
medicine; nor could he hold any public or official appoint-
ment requiring the practice of medicine. The qualifications
required were the same as those proposed in the Bill before
the House. The Act was amended in 1859 by allowing
foreigners to act as medical officers of certain hospitals, and
by including licentiates of surgery equally with masters in
surgery in Ireland. The Act of 1860 had reference to the
constitution of the College of Physicians, the establishment
of a uniform Pharmacopoeia, and the incorporation of a
Medical Council. By an Act passed in 1868, every colonial
legislature was empowered to compel local registration,
notwithstanding that the party had been previously
registered in Great Britain or Ireland. He thought he had
now shown sufficiently extensive authorities in support of the
measure before the Council, and had proved that if the
promoters of the Bill were in error, they erred in remarkably
good company.




