





Craftsmen’s Eeepsake
PRINTING INDUSTRY CRAFTSMEN
OF AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES DIVISION
Share Your Knowledge
FOR CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR
1935-36
©reelings
1508 0006271 i 2




1815 3ir itarji Barto, 6.c.«1®. gas isge
REAT THOUGHTS are ever worth recording and transmitting.
As in the affairs of men there comes a time in the affairs of peoples when
it is wise to take stock of the present by comparison with the past; to
reorientate by landmarks set up by roadbuilders. The Printing Industry
Craftsmen of Australia have in this keepsake gathered phrases from
observations by Sir Henry Parkes and welded them to a whole for the
purpose of establishing a worthwhile theme for typographical expres-
sion. The following is therefore not one utterance, but selections taken from addresses,
newspaper and magazine articles, letters a
Permit me for a moment to ask, for all of us, what
federation means. The six states of Australia—with the
moral certainty of their development into ten states in
a very few years —that these states are prepared to cast
in their lot in forming one powerful Australian nation.
Federation on this scale —and nothing on a smaller
scale will do—cannot be carried into effect by part of
the people. The whole of the people united must join
before it will be morally possible to bring about the
union of the colonies. A federation of Australia means
the bringing in of all the separate colonies to form one
great national people. There are questions of the most
momentous consequence staring us in the face —we are
on the threshold of them —which no one government
can deal with. One is the great development of civil-
ization, the development of commerce in the Pacific
Ocean. For the country to be safe it ought to have as
its three bases a great producing interest, a great manu-
facturing interest, and a great commerce. It is believed
that the time is coming when, without the creation of
any complicated scheme of graduated depositories of
political authority or altering the familiar proportions
of our own system of government, an Australian nation
might start into existence with all the attributes of
national greatness, with that homogeneity of interests
which is calculated to promote the strength and glory
of a free commonwealth. The communities formed have
now mingled with one another and spread their social
influences. The streams have met and formed new re-
servoirs, whence fresh streams have flowed back upon
the regions they have traversed. And that process of
consanguineous peopling is going on with accelerated
force. We are no longer a chain of isolated communi-
ties, but are one people with one main object before us
—the building up of a free nation of British stamp and
character. We have reached a period in the history of
Australian growth and development when these col-
onies present to the world all the prerequisites of
and papers published during his long career:
it material life, and where their coming together into a
e federal form of government is a question pressing for
n settlement in the realm of practical politics. The forma-
>t tive stages of federal opinion are passed; the national
i. sentiment is alive and strong in the hearts of all think-
;r ing men. A crowd of federal questions is waiting for
f the consummation of union. The question of a fitting
n government for an intelligent, rapidly growing, aspir-
e ing people, presses, and the states must meet in the
is spirit of brotherhood, each respecting the other, and all
e admitting the ground of equality. The united provinces
;t would rise, as it were, in a summer day, to an equality
e with old, historical nations, and the flag of the South-
it ern Cross would soon be known in every port of the
civilized world. Australia with her heroic spirit, her
c immense wealth, her brilliant resources, her indomit-
.s able enterprise, will make herself felt everywhere. A
l- long experience of all conditions of life in Australia,
d extending over more than half a century and more than
f twelve years in highest ministerial office in this colony,
f has led me often and deeply to think of what is possible
is in the future of this marvellous country. It is impossible
n to think of a federal Australia without speculating as
f to her future place in relation to Great Britain and to
:s the rest of the world. Many years past I have thought
y that the British Empire as it is called might develop
e into a political power grander in all the elements of
d true glory and greater for all the higher purposes of
humanity than the world has ever seen or has ever
n entered into the conceptions of philosophy. In the rela-
f tions of the future the higher order of minds must have
d worthy objects of ambition. All parties in the united
population must be inspired by the patriotic spirit that
s their name and flag are above all others. In the broadest
i national sense, in relation to the whole Empire, the
f noble words of Blackstone must receive the breath of
life, “Every branch of our civil polity supports and
F is supported, regulates and is regulated by the past.”


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE by A. Murray
Sir Henry Parkes was horn at Canley Vale, Moat House, parish of
Stoneleigh, Warwickshire, England, on May 27, 1815, youngest of nine
sons. At eight years of age he had to begin to earn, and his youthful
education was thus limited. He became a skilled wood- and ivory-turner,
known for his rare and delicate workmanship. He migrated
to Australia by the ship Strathfieldsaye, arriving July 27, 1839, with
his wife and three-day-old daughter. After a time he began business as
wood- and ivory-turner in Hunter Street, Sydney. Early literary ability
showed in the publication of Stolen Moments, a book of poems. Fol-
lowing interest in the Great Protest Meeting against shipment of convicts
to Australia, he founded The Empire newspaper in 1849. Lack of sup-
port brought this venture to bankruptcy, but his activities caused his
election to Parliament in 1854, representing the city of Sydney, and he
was a representative until 1895 in sixteen successive parliaments. His
first official position was Immigration Commissioner; his second Colonial
Secretary. He was Premier and Colonial Secretary from 1872 to 1894,
in eight parliaments. From his advocacy of the Constitution Act in
1843 and onward he played a notable part toward founding and influenc-
ing the Australian Nation. Actuated by three great desires: To strengthen
the bonds of Empire, to further the education of the people, and to see
Australia a united Commonwealth, he will be remembered for his sin-
cerity of endeavour along all lines. Australia a great British nation
within the British Empire was his dream. Education he looked upon as
one of the greatest blessings of life. He aimed at bringing about federa-
tion by giving the people of Australia a noble conception of it. To him
it was the means toward banishing of jealousies, frictions, and disparities
between the colonies. “So far back as 1867, when the people of New
South Wales had no collective thought of federation, he saw and openly
advocated national union: One great commonwealth with one flag and
one government—From Honour to Whom Honour Is Due (Hon.
Bruce Smith).






PRINTING INDUSTRY CRAFTSMEN OF AUSTRALIA
Explanation of Keepsake
'This Keepsake has been printed by the Printing Industry Craftsmen of
<tAustralla as a contribution to the traditions of the printing craft of Hus-
tralia and In emulation of the Inspiring practice of printers of other times
and other lands who each year have essayed something for the glory of
printing. \Lord "Bacon enjoins: U 1 hold every man a debtor to his pro-
fession, from the whlch y as men do of course to receive countenance and
profit y so ought they of duty to endeavour themselves by way of amends
to be a help and ornament thereunto\The research, collating y writing
and planning of the Keepsake material has been by "President H. Q.
Badman and B. Ff. Fryer; the typesetting and make-up by the Reliance
Linotype Service; the special preparation of the blocks by Hartland &
Hyde; the designing of the Initial letter by W. R. McHolme; the Fleet
Composition Service contributed the headlines of Text letter; Epworth
Press did the printing; the paper is from Wiggins , Teape & Alex. Pirie
(Export) Ltd. y White Hntlque Book and Qrey Ray poster Ffo. 1. \The
wrapper design was chosen as suggestive of the occupation of the youthful
Henry Parkes. C Oldface is a typeface belonging to the colonial
period and is regarded as one of the most pleasant of reading faces. It
has been one of the most popular typefaces in typemaking history and It Is
said that more than half of the better-class book printing In the English
language Is In Oldface. Qoudy Text is. a recent design by Frederic
Qoudy y famous type-designer , and Is In considerable use In
England and c America. The halftone is an example of the development
in printing screen illustrations on rough paper by the letterpress method y
hitherto little practised in Hus tralia. The material was obtained from
volumes and letters placed at the disposal of P.I.C.A. by the Public
Library and the {Mitchell Library through {Mr. W. H. Ifould, Librarian.
Every rise in the quality of the work men do is followed swiftly
AND INEVITABLY BY A RISE IN THE QUALITY OF THE MEN W’HO DO IT.
L. P. Jacks, in Craftsmen All.
(W)


With the Compliments of the Season for Christmas and New Year
Nineteen Thirty-five—Thirty-six
PRINTING INDUSTRY CRAFTSMEN OF AUSTRALIA
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES
But our work—behold that is not abolished, that has not vanished: our
work, behold, it remains, or the want of it remains; for endless times
and eternities, remains; and that is now the whole question with us
forever more! What hast thou done, and how ? Happiness, unhappiness:
all that was but the wages thou hadst; thou hast spent all that, in sus-
taining thyself hitherward; not a coin of it remains with thee, it is all
spent, eaten: and now thy work, where is thy work? Swift, out with it,
let us see thy work. —Thomas Carlyle, Past and Present,
