

SIR JOHN QUICK
A Distinguished Australian
AN APPRECIATION
GHAS. DALEY, 8.A., F.L.S.
(Read before the Historical Society of Victoria,
27th March, 1933)
M. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne
' ...1.1" .1 , ■■■ -1.,—■—... i",i' ".m~ 1—1.......






Victoria: the First Century .]
HON. SIR JOHN QUICK, LL.D., M.H.R.


[Extract from The Victorian Historical Magazine, December, 1934.]
Sir John Quicks A Distinguished Australian.
AN APPRECIATION.
By Chas. Daley, 8.A., F.L.S
(Read before the Society, 27 th March, 1983.)
The news of fortunes to he won on the gold-fields was an
inciting cause which attracted thousands of immigrants to
Australia from the British Isles in the early fifties.
Naturally a large proportion of these _ immigrants were
men familiar with mining operations in the north of
England and in Cornwall.
Among those who came to Victoria was John Quick, a
member of a well-known family of rural landholders of long
standing at Treviga, Towednock, near St. lyes, in Cornwall.
With his wife and a son, also named John, who was horn
on 14th April, 1852, the father in 1854 sailed in the ship
Geelong for the land of promise.
After reaching the busy and crowded town of
Melbourne, little time was lost before departing
(October, 1854) for the golden field at Bendigo,
which then had a population of 30,000 persons
engaged in gold-mining and accessory occupations. In
those early days, a scourge of the diggings inseparable from
the rough conditions of life was colonial fever, really the
typhoid fever of later days; and in a few months after
arrival at Bendigo, the elder John Quick fell a victim to
the disease, leaving the widow and son to fight the battle of
life under difficult circumstances.
At this early period, educational advantages were
naturally limited in scope, so that John Quick left school
with scant education at the early age of ten years, to earn
money in the fitting shop of Joppling’s ironworks, at Long
Gully, where his work started at 6 a.m. At this time the
basin of Bendigo Creek, with its affluents, intervening hills,,
gullies, and surfaces from Big Hill to Huntly, from Spring
Gully to the Whipstick, was honeycombed with shafts and


workings pertaining to the feverish search for gold. “ The
music of the puddling mill, the cradle, and the tub/ pre-
vailed everywhere. Conditions of life wereypriniitive. Law
and order were scarcely firmly established, hlotwithstand-
ing arduous work and long hours, young Quick was ambi-
tious for self-improvement, and under great disadvantages
studied at night. He then got employment more congenial
in some respects, in the composing room of the Bendigo
Evening News, not in those days a very remunerative
occupation. Still of necessity in touch with the mining
operations, he was employed as driver and whipper for the
Endeavour Mining Company; and, subsequently, as battery-
feeder at the Ellesmere and Hew Chum Mining Company,
varied employment which he used only as stepping-stones for
advancement. In his scanty leisure, he studied shorthand,
and also improved his general education under the teaching
of Mr. Clark, 8.A., with the result that, relinquishing the
hard manual labour, he became a junior reporter on the staff
of the Bendigo Independent, a position which for two years
he satisfactorily retained. When he transferred to the
senior paper, the Bendigo Advertiser, on which he was also
the local correspondent for the Argus, he also continued his
studies by attending the Bev. Scott’s academy. With the
laudable desire of acquiring a profession, he took the oppor-
tunity of removing to Melbourne, where, still in touch with
journalism, he, at the age of 21 years, on the 14th April,
1873, matriculated at the Melbourne University. Zealously
pursuing his studies, he decided to take up law. With
remarkable success he completed the course; and in the year
1877 obtained the degree of Bachelor of Laws, having won
two exhibitions of £3O each, as well as first-class honours.
In the Trinity term of the following year he was called to
the Bar.
He continued, however, with much success, as a journalist
on the Melbourne press; and, as a reporter on the Age,
became the leader of the parliamentary staff of that journal.
In this position he was brought closely in contact with party
leaders, and varying shades of political opinion. In the
active rivalry between Graham Berry and James Service,
Quick strongly supported the Liberal cause; and at the dis-
solution of Parliament, was invited to stand as a candidate
for Sandhurst (Bendigo), which at that time returned three
representatives to Parliament. The Service Ministry,
which, on the resignation of Berry, had been formed in


February, 1880, had a very short life, its reform scheme
being no more acceptable than that of the Ministry it had
displaced. An appeal to the electors was made in July, 1880.
For the Sandhurst electorate, R. Clark, R. Burrowes, and
J. Mclntyre, the retiring members, offered their services in
the interests of the Ministerial party, and were opposed by
J. Quick and White. The result of the election was that
Mclntyre was defeated by Quick by 80 votes. The Berry
Ministry held office for the year, being then displaced by the
O’Loghlen combination. Quick, on election to Parliament,
resigned his connexion with the Age, and took up permanent
residence at Bendigo. ISTever an extreme partisan, Quick
supported Liberal measures in general, and continued his
adherence to the Berry reform movement. With the defeat
of that Government in 1881, he sat in opposition to the
O’Loghlen Administration, which, with its soothing slogan of
“ peace, progress, and prosperity,” brought for a time a
certain measure of tranquillity in the troubled sphere of
politics.*' When the Ministry was prematurely dissolved
in February, 1883, a combination of the former rival parties
under Berry and James Service was successful in defeating
it, Sir Bryan O’Loghlen himself failing to secure re-elec-
tion. The Sandhurst members were re-elected, and
Quick maintained an independent attitude towards the
Coalition, whose policy he frequently criticized. At the
general election in March, 1886, he was again returned; and
in recognition of his ability and skill in debate, he was
offered a Ministerial position in the Gillies-Deakin Govern-
ment, but declined the honour. For the next three years
ho sat in opposition. During this Ministry’s tenure of
office, an Electoral Bill was passed, which provided for a
redistribution in regard to Sandhurst and neighbouring
electorates. Under this arrangement, the City of Sandhurst
was given two representatives in place of three —Sandhurst
South, Mandurang, Eaglehawk, and Gunbower one each.
Quick, Burrowes, and Bailes stood for Sandhurst. Bur-
rowes and Bailes were elected, and Quick, the candidate of
outstanding qualifications, was, to every one’s surprise,
rejected, his rejection being not only a distinct loss to his
constituents, but also to Parliament, where his reputation in
debate, and his sound knowledge of legal procedure, were
fully appreciated. In the drafting of Bills, his special
knowledge was frequently brought into requisition. In his
capacity as a keen political student, he had closely studied
the question of land tenure, and in 1883 published The
1980. —2


History of Land Tenure in Victoria. As a representative
practically cognizant of the requirements of a mining con-
stituency, he assisted during his career in introducing mining
legislation to secure greater efficiency in the development of
the important industry. In conjunction with A. S. Bailes.
he introduced a Bill which specifically defined the working
hours of miners-. He was also instrumental in bringing in a
Bill which provided for disfranchisement of Chinese voters;
and he later advocated and secured the passing of a Bill
to impose a poll tax on Chinese, and thus restrict their
numbers. Another measure of importance to a gold-fields
community was the Bill which allowed offenders against the
regulations of the Mines Act to give evidence on their own
behalf. In the Judicature Act he secured the insertion of
a clause providing, if so desired, for an appeal to the Full
Court on questions of law in all criminal cases.
On 15th April, 1882, the young lawyer had on examina-
tion received the degree of Doctor of Laws, and had set up
practice of his profession in Bendigo. In the following
year he married Miss Catherine Harris, daughter of Mr.
Joseph Harris, a well-known resident of the model Borough
of Eaglehawk, of which, in 1876-77, Mr. Harris had been
Mayor. Dr. Quick took up his residence in Garsed-street,
but later lived at “ Edelweiss Villa,” Quarry Hill, Hamlet-
street, Bendigo.
His rejection in the parliamentary election had compen-
sating advantages in providing more time and scope for pro-
fessional activities; but more important still in enabling Dr.
Quick to devote his talents and energies to the great cause of
the federation of the Australian States, a subject which for
many years had occupied the attention and thought of
patriotic Australians, but the consummation of which
seemed yet elusively remote. Australia still awaited
“ the incorporating word
To bid her tremble into form.”
In connexion with his profession, Dr. Quick entered into
partnership with Mr. B. Hyett, into which, later on, Mr. V.
Eymer was admitted. After some years of partnership, Mr.
Hyett withdrew, and later on Mr. Rymer also. Eventually
Mr. Luke Murphy went into partnership with Dr. Quick.
Dr. Quick found time to interest himself in general litera-
ture, and was a President of the Shakespeare Society at
Bendigo, and also of the Pickwick Society. The progress


and success of the Bendigo School of Mines received assis-
tance from him, and for many years he was a trustee of the
institution. He also occupied the position of President ot
the Bendigo Branch of the Amalgamated Engine-drivers
Association of Victoria, and held in much regard a hand-
some illuminated address presented to him by that branch
for his valuable services.
It was in the early eighties that Dr. Quick came into close
contact with the Australian Natives Association, which had
enthusiastically set before itself the arm of Australian
Federation, making it the strongest plank in its platform a
great national objective to be kept ever in view, ihe band-
hurst Branch of the Association, one of the most progressive
of its units, was specially noted for its ardent advocacy and
persistent endeavours in the federal cause. In its ranks was
a band of young men whole-heartedly devoted to its
furtherance. Although not a native of Australia, Dr.
Quick found in the Association kindred spirits, and a definite
rallying-point in the efforts to obtain federal union. In the
early days of the Australian Natives Association the con-
dition of Australian birth for membership was not
stringently enforced, and Dr. Quick became very closely
associated with the Sandhurst Branch and its ideals, and for
many years was one of the trustees of its funds. It was,
however, specially in fostering and encouraging the cause
of federation, and in educating the members in regard to its
nature, functions, and scope, and in stressing the necessity of
its attainment as a means of fuller national life, that Di.
Quick found a responsive field for his labours. It was on
22nd March, 1888, that he gave an able and educative lecture
to the Sandhurst Branch on “ The Inauguration of _ Parlia-
mentary Government in Victoria,” which was published in
pamphlet form by the branch for distribution.
In December, 1889, the Board of Directors of the Aus-
tralian Natives Association issued invitations to an inter-
state conference on federation, at Melbourne, to be held in
January, 1890. All the States except Tasmania were repre-
sented, and two resolutions were passed: —-(1) Affirming
that the time for federation had arrived; (2) broadly defin-
ing a federal constitution, of an Australian character, to
include New Zealand. Although federation was then
actively and widely discussed, it was, in all the States, a
subject for constantly divergent political opinions, with
the result that no effectual means of bringing matters to a


practical basis for common agreement seemed to be forthcom-
ing. In 1891, the necessity of united action regarding
colonial defence brought about a convention which met at
Sydney, the outcome of which was the drafting of a Bill
to constitute the Commonwealth of Australia —the first
practical scheme, which, when submitted to the State Parlia-
ments, was generally considered and discussed from such
narrow stand-points of party aims and selfish interests as
seemed to preclude any finality in agreement. In Victoria,
the Australian Natives Association kept the subject in the
forefront, and on 31st July, and Ist August, 1893, a famous
congress of representatives was called at Corowa, on the
Murray, to endeavour to evolve some effective means of
securing early federal union. Seventy-four delegates from
federation leagues and interested associations were present,
with nineteen members of the Victorian Parliament, includ-
ing J. B. Patterson, Premier of Victoria, and Sir Graham
Berry, head of the Opposition. In the absence of Sir George
Dibbs, the delegates were welcomed by W. J. Byne, for New
South Wales, and its representatives. The Sandhurst
Branch of the Australian Natives Association, of which the
writer at that time had the honour of being vice-president,
was very hopeful of some definite good resulting from this
conference, and sent as their competent delegates, Dr. John
Quick and J. B. Young. The conference affirmed that an
early union was in the best interests of all the colonies, and
that the time for such union had arrived. Its deliberations,
however, gained their distinctive importance from the prac-
tical and constructive contribution of Dr. Quick, who, in
advocating the establishment and extension of the Aus-
tralasian Pederation League, proposed
“That the aims and objects of the League shall be as
follows:—-
(a) To advance the cause of the federation of the Aus-
tralian Colonies by an organization of citizens
owning no class distinctions or party influence,
which shall use its best energies to assist parlia-
mentary action, from whatever source prevailing,
calculated to further the common aim of Aus-
tralian union.
(h) To advocate, promote, and, after its attainment, to
defend the federal union of Australia on such lines
as may be constitutionally approved by all the
Colonies concerned, after further deliberation
and report by assembled representatives.


(c) To co-operate fully and earnestly with all similar
kindred bodies not influenced by the aims and
interests of parties contending on matters of
domestic policy, and to promote the formation
of such associations throughout the several
Colonies.
(d) To unite in due course all such bodies throughout
the Colonies under one organization, with one
plan of action.
( e ) At the next ensuing general elections in the
Colonies of Hew South Wales and Victoria to
call upon the electors to vote for such candidates
only as will pledge themselves to form a federa-
tion party in their respective Legislatures, and
to support no Government which will not place
the question in the front rank of proposed
measures.”
He concluded by saying that he believed all present would
agree with him when he said the time had now arrived when
it was necessary to devise some ways and means for giving
expression to what they all so much desired.
The resolution was put and carried with enthusiasm. Dr.
Quick then moved —
“ That in the opinion of this conference the legisla-
ture of each Australasian Colony should pass an Act
providing for the election of representatives to attend
a statutory convention or congress to consider and adopt
a Bill to establish a federal constitution for Australia,
and upon the adoption of such Bill or measure, it he
submitted by some process of referendum to the verdict
of each Colony.”
This historic motion was carried unanimously, amid
cheers for the mover.
These two motions gave a definite purpose and a stimulus
to action, and were far-reaching in their operation. Federa-
tion leagues were immediately formed in every State.
Among the first in Victoria was the Bendigo Branch Aus-
tralasian Federation League, formed on 31st October, 1893.
Its officers were: —President, John Quick, LL.D.; Vice-
President, A. S. Bailes, MX.A.; Secretary,'J. H. Curnow;
Treasurer, J. B. Young; Executive Committee, J, R. Hoskins,.


V. McLean, E. H. S. Abbott, D. Egan T. Front, J F.
Hogan, D. A. Campbell, Chas. Daley, A. J. Hampson, M. J.
Cahill,’ J. Moody, and L. Brackenbnrg.
At its inauguration, a monster public meeting was held
in the Town Hall, Bendigo, at which the veteran bir Henry
Parkes, was present by invitation, and stressing the necessity
of federal union, delivered in characteristic manner an
impressive and masterly speech, in which, as a striking fore-
cast of the Congress of Nations of to-day, he said, It was
as certain as the rising* of the sun to-morrow that a council
O ' the various nations would be established settle matters
of dispute without reference to armed force.
He proposed the first motion, “ That the time has arrived
when the Colonies should federate.” Dr. Quick the second,
« That this meeting approves of the recommendation of the
Gorowa conference.” He said, “When the federation of the
Colonies was achieved, the name of Sir Henry Parkes wou d
be regarded with gratitude.”
Both resolutions were carried unanimously, and the
formation of the branch proceeded with.
Great satisfaction at the success of the conference was
expressed on reception of the delegates report. Dr. Quick
had been requested to frame a draft of an enabling Bill “ to
provide for the representation of the Colonies at an Austral-
asian congress, legally created, to frame a constitution for
the federation of the Australasian Colonies, and further to
provide for the reference of such constitution, when framed,
to the vote of the people.”
A draft of this Bill of 72 clauses and 2 schedules was
submitted for consideration to the Bendigo Branch of the
Federation on 21st November, 1893. Briefly, the chief pro-
visions were that when two other Colonies agreed to a similar
measure, the Colony should be divided into federal electoral
districts to elect members to a federal congress to promulgate
a federal constitution. Any person qualified to vote for the
Legislative Assembly was to be qualified as a candidate or a
voter, but no person should vote more than once under a
severe penalty for so doing. All the elections in the Colony
were to be on the one day; and, if possible, on the same day
in all the Colonies. Members elected would receive a guinea
per day, and also a guinea per sitting, and their railway
fares. No free passes were to be allowed. Time and place
of session were to be determined by the majority of the


Colonies, the Premier of the senior Colony to have a casting
vote. When the congress agreed on a constitution, a copy
of such, with an official report of the debates, should he
to each elector, and a referendum, on the principle of “ one
man, one vote ” he held, to decide for or against the measure.
If a majority of the electors in each of two or more Colonies
should be in favour, the Bill would be forwarded for ratifica-
tion to the Imperial Parliament.
Dr. Quick’s draft was first submitted to the executive of
the Bendigo League, and following parliamentary usage
passed the second reading. Afterwards it was to
a committee of the branch, which for many nights during
four or five weeks, under the helpful and expert guidance
of its framer, freely and carefully discussed every clause
until finality was reached, and the amended draft was
adopted by the Bendigo Federation League. Immediately
afterwards, the Enabling Bill was published, widely dis-
tributed, and generally approved.
Dr. Quick went to Sydney to submit the proposal to the
Central Federal League, and on 15th January, 1894, at a
large meeting for its consideration, Dr. Quick lucidly ex-
plained its general principles. Mr. E. Barton, MX.A.,
in conveying a vote of thanks to Dr. Quick for his services
in the cause of Federation, eulogized his efforts to secure
a definite settlement of the question. He agreed that the
ultimate adjudication upon it should he by the whole of the
people in their electoral capacity in some way or other.
There seemed to he strong reasons in favour of the mode
adopted by Dr. Quick, and his arguments were so strong
that he urged that the matter should he considered by the
Central League at Sydney, and a report he furnished without
delay. This was approved. The Intercolonial Labour
Conference at Sydney in January also affirmed, “ that the
Bendigo federation draft he submitted to the labour bodies
throughout Australia for consideration.” The Berrigan
Advocate, in comment, pertinently remarked: “In Dr.
Quick was found one who was familiar with the working
of constitutional politics, one who had held a commanding
position in Australian legislature, moreover, one who was
a legal authority of the highest standing; and, lastly, an
Australian with a patriotic sense of an Australian’s duty
to Australia. It is doubtful if the execution of this motion
(at Corowa) could have been put into abler hands, and
Dr. Quick’s position as a layman freed the movement from


any taint of subterfuge that would have been imparted to
it had the work been done by a professional politician,
however honest or sincere.”
On 12th February, Dr. Quick explained the provisions of
the Bill at a public meeting convened at Hawthorn by the
A.FT.A. Federation Conference. The Herald, reporting,
said, “ Dr. Quick of Bendigo comes forward with his draft
Bill containing definite, clear, concrete proposals upon
which the politicians of the colonies can make up their
minds, aye or nay. The cordial reception of the Bill in
Sydney indicates that it is likely to have the effect of
magnetizing the affinities of the various colonies into an
earnest mass.” And again; “ The happy feature of the
position is Dr. Quick’s own admirable attitude, as distinct
from his own opinions and convictions. ‘ There is a prac-
tical plan,’ he says, in effect, ‘ I do not claim any originality
for it. It consists only of the resolution of the Corowa
conference embodied in a Bill. Take it and do what you
like with it. Improve it, by all means, for I do not claim,
even suggest, that it represents finality.’ Here we perceive
the difference between ardour and bigotry.” On Bth
February a large meeting was held to form a Federation
League, and the Enabling Bill was favorably received.
On 15th March the report of the Australasian Federal
League at Sydney was submitted and adopted, the general
principles of the Bill being approved, and slight amend-
ments suggested. In reporting on the meeting at Ballarat, the
Age pointedly referred to the negative result of the Sydney
Convention Bill of 1891, “ debated by the most prominent
statesmen of Australia, and every clause —well considered.
The lesson taught by the experience of the Commonwealth
Draft Bill (of 1891) shows clearly that it is idle to care-
fully prepare a measure, and then cast it into some dozen
or fourteen legislative chambers there to be worried by
ill-informed persons. It is doubtful whether a second
convention could have so reconciled the amendments of the
various Parliaments as to have secured general acceptance.
The probability is, on the contrary, that each Parliament
would have gone on amending till the day of doom. In
order to escape this Dr. Quick proposes the summoning of
a convention, the members of which should be elected by
manhood suffrage in the several colonies; and, when the
convention has agreed upon a Federal Constitution, it should
be submitted to a plebiscite vote of the people in the


colony.” Again, in speaking of the A.N.A. conference on
18th March, 1894, the same journal writes: “It may be
that the convention’s scheme (1891) was too elaborate for
a beginning, and it was with this idea that Dr. Quick, who
has run away with all the honours of the game, by the aid
of a practical mind, drafted a simple measure to be dis-
cussed by a convention, and finally submitted to a popular
vote for adoption or rejection.”
Dr. Quick, supported by the Australian Natives Associa-
tion, continued the advocacy of the scheme, until the obvious
advantages of the two main points were freely admitted;
first, the complete transfer of the consideration of a Com-
monwealth Bill from futile deliberations in the States’
Parliaments to a convention of representatives from the
States, specially elected by the people for framing a con-
stitution; secondly, the submission of the Bill so framed
for approval or rejection by the people of Australia.
Ultimately, with modifications to meet the views of the
league at Sydney, Dr. Quick’s Enabling Bill became the
accepted basis on which the Eederal Convention of 1897-8
was summoned. The points of the Bill were its simplicity,
its essentially democratic character, its practical nature, its
effective cutting of the Gordian knot of parliamentary in-
action entangling the elaborate Convention Bill of 1891.
In a period threatened with stagnation and deadlock in
federal matters, Dr. Quick’s Enabling Bill kindled en-
thusiasm anew in Victoria, dissipated in great measure the
apathy and indifference in New South Wales, and to quote
Sir Robert Garran, “ created the legal machinery which was
so important a factor in making Federation possible.”
In the year 1894, while president of the Sandhurst
Branch of the A.N.A., I had the honour, in the presence of
a large number of representative citizens, to open the
A.N.A. hall at Bendigo. At the subsequent banquet, Dr.
Quick, in responding to the toast of “Federation,”
candidly advised the Hon. Robert Reid, Minister of Defence,,
who had previously spoken eloquently on the subject, to
endeavour on his return to Melbourne to induce his
apathetic colleagues of the Ministry to seize the great
opportunity provided for actual realization of the federal
movement, and to deal with it in a statesmanlike spirit
“ without petty parochialism or bickering for place and
pay.” Sir John also praised the efforts of Sir George Reid
directed strenuously at the time to further the cause in New


South Wales. Sir George later was invited by the Bendigo
Federation Branch to deliver an address on Federation,
which worthily supplemented that of Sir Henry Parkes
previously referred to.
In the midst of the campaign in 1896, Dr. Quick found
time in further educating public opinion on federal matters
by submitting to the Bendigo Branch of the A.H.A. his
useful work entitled A Digest of Federal Constitutions,
a timely contribution of enlightenment as to their nature
and operation in other lands. This little work was pub-
lished in pamphlet form by the local branch of the
association.
The States, having accepted the Enabling Bill, proceeded
severally to hold elections for representatives to the
Convention to be held at Adelaide. Of the ten represen-
tives elected for Yictoria, in March, 1897, Dr. Quick was
second on the poll, Sir George Turner being first, the result
testifying to the confidence, esteem, and popularity won by
Dr. Quick for his patriotic labours.
Representatives of Hew South Wales, Yictoria, South
Australia, Tasmania, and Western Australia met in
Adelaide on 22nd March, under the presidency of 0. C.
Kingston, Premier of the State, with'E. Barton as “ leader,”
for the drafting of a Commonwealth Bill. By the end of
the year, with earnest and careful deliberations, the draft
approached completion. The last session was fixed for
January, 1898, at Melbourne, when the Bill received close
revision and thoughtful re-consideration. The last sitting
was on 13th March, 1898.
The Commonwealth Bill was now a subject for much
discussion and diverse criticism, both by the general public
and the press. At this juncture when approval or dis-
approval seemed to weigh in the balance, a strong lead was
given by the Australian Hatives Association in conference,
fitly enough at Bendigo, on Tuesday, 15th March. On
the previous . night the board of directors met for a
momentous decision, whether to furnish to the conference
next morning a favorable or an adverse recommendation re-
garding support to the Bill. After anxious consideration
the Board unanimously resolved to endorse the Bill. At
the conference, J. Hume Cook moved, and W. A. Watt
seconded, a motion virtually committing the association to
that course. This was enthusiastically carried. At the


banquet that night feeling ran high when Hon. Isaac
Isaacs, a member of the convention, and also Attorney-
General of Victoria, made a guarded speech on the Bill of a
non-committal character —a speech which was acceptable to
no one, drew a characteristic outburst from J. L. Purves, and
evoked the famous oration from Alfred Deakin —one of the
most impressive speeches that he ever made. To quote
Hume Cook in The A.N.A. —its Genesis and History,
“ With friendly flashing eyes . . . this master orator
stood up to deliver a speech, which for matchless eloquence
and spirited enthusiasm, no A.KA. gathering had even
heard before. He swept away all doubts and fears; he
stormed and vanquished subtle reservations and paltering
delays; he inspired afresh and filled with hope the hearts
and minds of all supporters of the federal cause. Closing
a really great speech, he most appropriately quoted from the
poet Gay;—
Our country’s garment,
With hands unfilial we have basely rent;
With petty variance our souls are spent —
And ancient kinship underfoot is trod.
Oh, let us rise united, penitent,
And he one people, mighty, serving God.
When he had concluded, there was neither need nor room
for further utterance. After these many years I have still
a vivid recollection of that stirring speech and the effect it
produced. The decision of the conference and the zealous
support of the association assured the acceptance of the Bill
in Victoria.”
In the Argus of 6th April, 1898, for the enlightenment
of all electors, w r as published a special edition, with the
heading-—-
THE FEDERATION BILL.
Complete Official Text.
Full explanation ly Dr. Quick, Delegate to Convention.
Herein will be found everything that an elector will desire to
know of the contents of this historic measure, and the whole Bill is
so impartially described that no one need be in doubt as to what
he votes for.
This was the final contribution by Dr. Quick before the
referendum, appropriately marking the great struggle in
which, supported loyally by the A.IST.A., he had done such
splendid service towards the achievement of a worthy ideal.


The next step was the submission of the Bill to the State-
Parliaments for adoption. South Australia, Victoria,
Tasmania, and Hew South Wales returned majorities at the
referendum in favour of the Commonwealth Bill; but, in
the last-mentioned State, where a minimum of 80,000
affirmative votes had been fixed for acceptance of the Bill,
that number was npt reached, thus making the majority
decision inoperative. Sir George Reid took vigorous action
against the great opposition in Hew South Wales, and held
a conference with State Premiers in Melbourne, at which
Queensland was also represented. Certain amendments
were agreed to in order to placate Hew South Wales,
among which was one that the capital should be in that
State, but not less than 100 miles distant from, Sydney.
The changes rendered necessary new enabling Acts; and
the Commonwealth Bill was then passed in the five
Colonies and submitted for Imperial ratification, a delega-
tion being sent to London to facilitate its sanction. The
Hon. Jos. Chamberlain urgently advised Western Australia
to join the union, and on 21st August that State also sent
its address to the Queen. The Commonwealth Bill was
passed in England, and approved by the Queen to come
into operation on Ist January, 1901.
At the first federal election, Dr. Quick was returned
unopposed for the constituency of Bendigo, a fitting tribute
to his splendid services. At the distribution of honours
in 1901, at the opening of the first Eederal Parliament, he
received the well-merited title of knighthood from the
Sovereign. In this year, in collaboration with Mr. (after-
wards Sir) Robert Garran, Sir John published The
Annotated Constitution of the Australian Commonwealth ,
a most valuable contribution to the literature on federal
matters. During his career in the Eederal Parliament,
where his talents and attainments were invaluable to his
party, in 1905, Sir John was chairman of the Royal Com-
mission on the revision of the tariff. He favoured the
protection policy, and the tariff introduced was based
practically on the determinations of the commission from
the evidence submitted. After the year 1906, Sir John
joined the Victorian Liberal Corner, opposed to domination
by the increasingly aggressive labour influences. With
others he was instrumental in bringing about the fusion
of the Liberal sections, resulting in the United Liberal
Ministry under Messrs. Deakin and Cook, in which Sir


John accepted the portfolio of Postmaster-General. The
■coalition, however, although it passed useful measures, had
not the condition of permanence, and at the elections in
1910 was badly defeated. At the coronation of George Y.
in June, 1911, Sir John was one of the eighteen eminent
■citizens chosen as worthy of honour to represent Australia
in London on that signal occasion. In the election of
1913 Sir John was defeated by Mr. J. Arthur, his
.service in the Pederal Parliament thus coming to an end.
After his defeat Sir John took no very active part in
political affairs, but was always keenly alive to questions
of national importance, and ready with fluent tongue or
ready pen to give expression to well-considered and thoughtful
views thereon. In conjunction with Sir Littleton E.
Groom, he had published another work, The Judicial
Power of the Commonwealth, which, supplementing his
previous work, increased his reputation as an authority on
constitutional law. Then, in 1919, there appeared the com-
prehensive work, The Legislative Powers of the Common-
wealth and the States of Australia, completing a trilogy of
valuable standard works on the constitutional relations "and
aspects of the Federal Government. Sir John was now able
to devote more attention to his profession and private
interests, and issued a work on Yictorian Liquor Licensing
Law (Quick and Murphy), and one entitled The Vic-
torian Magistrates (Quick and Berriman), works useful
for reference and for practice in judicial procedure.
On 26th June, 1922, Sir John was appointed Deputy
President of the Federal Arbitration Court, a position which
for renewed periods he kept until 25th March, 1930. In
replying to congratulations tendered to him on his appoint-
ment in which reference was made to certain qualifications
he possessed, Sir John recalled the existence of others
resultant from the strenuous experiences of his youth and
early career. He said, u I think that I can claim some
qualifications additional to those which have been described
by a friendly critic as 'academic and juristic.’ I ex-
perienced my first baptism of fire at the age of ten years
in an iron foundry whilst the fire blast was smouldering,
and sparks were flying from the molten metal. Other hard
work and varied experiences followed, and after being
engaged at a printing office, I was appointed to the position
of reporter on a newspaper. Whilst so engaged, I became


acquainted with the hardships and grievances of workers.
In later stages of my career, I attained personal knowledge
of the responsibilities of an employer, both in my private
life and as a director of public companies.” Thus, for this
responsible and onerous position, Sir John was indeed
specially fitted from his sympathy with genuine workers,
his sound democratic principles, his long and varied ex-
perience in legal matters and in constitutional procedure,
and his thorough knowledge of social and industrial con-
ditions in Australia. Under his consideration for arbitra-
tion came the awards for railway services over five States,
comprising nearly 800 grades of work. Sir John’s arbi-
tration work was tactfully performed with “ dignity, im-
partiality, and fearlessness,” and won the approval alike of
employers and employees. Sir John said that with one
exception all the awards made had been loyally adhered to
without strikes or threats of violence.
When retired at the age of 78 years from this re-
sponsible office, Sir John’s energy and capacity for work
were still unabated. As previously mentioned, in earlier
years he had been much interested in literature and literary
societies. He had contributed theses such as “ Vestiges
of Architecture,” “ Ruins of Ancient Empires,” essays on
Shakespearean subjects, &c. This active interest continued
in Melbourne, where Sir John was a member of the
Authors’ Society, and also a patron of the Australian
Literature Society, in whose aims and objects he took special
interest. In Sir John Quick’s note-book, published in the
Herald, are given his reminiscences of earlier days. He had
for many years been an active worker in Freemasonry.,
In 1899 he was master of the Zenith Lodge at Bendigo,
and secretary of the Royal Golden Arch Chapter of the
Royal Arch Freemasons, being elected First Principal in
1902. Sir John, in 1915-16, held the important rank of
Deputy Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Victoria.
Owing to the exigencies of his work, he declined nomination
for the office of Grand Master of the craft in Victoria. He
maintained his connexion with the Boroondara Lodge.
On retirement from the position in the Arbitration
Court, he turned his attention to the completion of a com-
prehensive bibliographical work, which he had commenced
two years before, to be entitled The Booh of Australian
Authors. I had several letters from him concerning
the outline and progress of this book, for which I was able


to contribute information. The following, referring to his
literary work may be quoted. On 16th April, 1929, Sir John
wrote: —
“ Dear Mr. Daley,
I thank you for your letter of 16th inst. lam glad
to see your name turning up in such an interesting com-
munication. You must be doing very good work in the
Historical Society. I am getting . . . my old
pamphlets on Early Victoria re-bound, and propose to
lend them for exhibition on the occasion of the forth-
coming Centenary of Victoria.
Yours sincerely,
John Quick/"
From his residence at East Camberwell, he wrote in June,
July, and August, 1930, several other letters to me concern-
ing work on which he was engaged. The following were
among them: —
“ I have received your letter of 9th inst., for which I
thank you very much. I may want a few lines about
. . . similar to a sketch in Who’s Who. I have
already been over some of your work in the Public
Library, and was very pleased with it, particularly with
your Baron von Mueller. I was glad that you did him
justice. ... I shall be glad to consult you on many
matters before I have finished.”
“ I have written a chapter on 1 Squatting Days,’ with
an accompanying section of catalogue. I will send it
for your opinion soon.”
“In your list of publications you mention Early
Squatting Days. I have drafted a chapter on the
origin of squatting in Victoria, and my assistant editor
in Queensland has sketched the genesis of squatting in
that colony. Would you help me in drafting a sketch
on “ The Beginning of Squatting in Hew South Wales?”
In my History of Land Tenure (1883), I have fully
explained the irregular tenure to the original occupants
of waste lands of the Crown. Could you send me your
notes on Early Squatting Days?”
“ I have received your letter of 15th inst., together with
your pamphlet, for which I thank you. It will be, of
course, included in a section of my proposed catalogue


described Early Squatting Days. I have compiled
sufficient material to enable me to complete an introduc-
tory sketch, of Early Squatting Days in New South
Wales, Victoria, and Queensland. I have also compiled
a draft of catalogue under the same heading. I will be
pleased to submit it to you later. You may then be in a
position to make suggestions.”
Sir John later informed me of the completion of the major
part of the work, and at present this contribution to the
bibliography of Victoria, his last work, to which he devoted
much time, research, and energy, is in the publisher’s hands.
Early in the year 1932 occurred an event which vividly
recalled to me the stirring days of 1893-4, when federation
was so vital a question. Once again the annual conference
of the Australian Natives Association, commencing on 15th
March, 1932, was held at Bendigo. Eemembering the in-
timate association of Bendigo with the federal issue, the
prominent part played by the Bendigo League under Dr.
Quick, and the memorable A.N.A. conference of 1898 at
Bendigo, which so definitely and emphatically assured the
acceptance of the Commonwealth Bill, the board of directors
considerately invited the five surviving members of the
Federal Convention of 1897-8 to be present. Of these only
two, Sir xklexander Peacock and Sir John Quick, were able
to come. Invitations were also extended through the local
branch to the very few survivors of the executive com-
mittee of the Bendigo Branch of the Australasian
Federation League of 1893-94, of whom only two,
Mr. J. B. Young and I, could attend. The majority
of them had passed away, and the quondam fighting
secretary of both branch and league, Mr. J. H.
Curnow, Bendigo’s foremost citizen, was on his death-bed.
At this conference of 1932 in the A.N.A. Hall, which build-
ing I had opened 38 years before, Sir John (who had been
present) was accorded a most enthusiastic reception, and
in a fine address gave a thoughtful review of Australian
federation “ in the living guise of national life, institutions,
and power.” The great works, national undertakings, and
functions of the Commonwealth were recalled, a masterly
analysis of expenditure submitted, and the “ danger spots ”
in the federal system pointed out i first, the danger of cer-
tain States passing laws and regulations in conflict with,
or detrimental to, the Commonwealth Parliament as a


whole; secondly, the tendency of the Commonwealth Par-
liament to vote appropriations of money for purposes
unauthorized in any manner hy the Constitution; thirdly,
the growing tendency of the minor States to solicit financial
aid under section 96 of the Constitution. Instances of these
dangers were cited, and means of restraint suggested. The
fact that the great mass of Australians were not dissatisfied
with the Constitution as it stood was shown hy the rejection
of the attempts to amend it hy increasing the powers of the
Commonwealth. Sir John pointed out that owing to a
much wider interpretation than was justifiable of “ the
purposes ” for which money might be appropriated, millions
of money had been expended for “ purposes ” neither men-
tioned nor contemplated by the Constitution. The scope
of purposes should be closely restricted to those within the
'Commonwealth jurisdiction. Again, at the A.IST.A. social
to delegates in the evening, Sir John was heard to advantage
in proposing the toast, “ Australia and the A.H.A.,” in an
eloquent and ringing speech, full of hope and confidence in
the future of Australia. “ Whatever had been the dis-
appointment and failure of federation,” said Sir John, “ in
regard to trade and commerce, interstate and foreign,
external relations, and naval and military defence, it had
been pre-eminently successful.” This was, I believe, Sir
John’s last public utterance on the cause for which he had
so laboured, and it was given with all his old force and
convincing style.
Just a week before his death X met Sir John at the
.Public Library, and walked down Swanston-street with him.
He appeared to he in good health and spirits, and interested
in the forthcoming completion of his hook. On 17th June,
not feeling very _ well, Sir John remained in bed, and about
noon, when sitting up to take some refreshment, he sud-
denly collapsed. Although 80 years of age, up to the last
week Sir John maintained his customary vigour and
energy. He had always enjoyed good health, .and taken
reasonable exercise. He had played golf a few days pre-
viously, and had arranged to play a game with Sir Charles
Powers on the very afternoon of his death. He had just
given an address to fellow members of the first Federal Par-
liament on “ Federation, its Ideals and Accomplishments,”
■a fitting swan-song before his passing from us. His un-
expected death was a great shock to his numerous friends,
and deep regret was expressed everywhere throughout the
C ommonwe alth.


lii his private life Sir John was of simple tastes, sociable
in disposition, fond of his home, kindly and courteous in
manner. Although a keen student, he was always actively
interested in public afiairs. Broadly tolerant in his religious
views, he was a loyal member of the Methodist Church.
Whatever he took in hand he did with all his might. While
at Bendigo he successfully cultivated an experimental plot
on Quarry Hill for citrus cultivation, to show the possi-
bilities in that now established industry. His eminence
in his profession was fully recognized, and in the domain
of constitutional law, from his sound knowledge, wide ex-
perience, and impartial outlook, he could speak with,
unquestioned authority. In his political career Sir John
subordinated personal aims and advancement to the welfare
of his country. Always tolerant and independent in his
views, he was fearless and outspoken in debate, with a true
sympathy for the workers. Hncramped by narrow
partisanship, he was truly catholic in his outlook. As
a speaker he was eloquent, earnest, logical, and con-
vincing in argument, with an attractive and magnetic
personality that always commanded attention to his utter-
ances. To few men in Australia has the lot fallen to
have had such a remarkable and eminent career, enriched with
so full a measure of unselfish and invaluable achievement
for the public welfare —a notable and significant service
which for all time will be remembered in connexion with
the history of the Commonwealth of Australia. Such work
as Sir John’s is the more creditable and noteworthy, because
it is recognized that his distinguished career was directly
the result of his conquest of adverse circumstances by per-
sistent industry, well-directed ability, and conscientious per-
formance. With resolute aim, laudable ambition, and self-
restraint he worked indefatigably until, step by step, he won
well-deserved success and distinction.
The brilliant career of Sir John Quick who, like Abraham.
Lincoln, rose from the humblest vocation to the highest
honours, should be a constant source of inspiration and
encouragement to our Australian youth. In very truth
“the boy,” with his grit and independence of character,
was “ the father of the man,” who by his attainments, his
patriotism, and splendid record of faithful public service
has left a name so honorably inscribed in the annals of
Australian nationhood.




