

SIR JAMES READING
FAIRFAX
BORN, OCTOBER. 17TH, 1834
DIED, MARCH 28TH, 1919
"Whose armour was
his honest thought
And simple truth
his utmost skill."




(FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY)
Sir James Reading Fairfax
Born October 17th, 1834
Died March 28th, 1919
“HIS WORKS DO FOLLOW HIM”


NOTE
'THE record of a life like that of Sir James
* Reading Fairfax cannot easily he given in
short compass, and it is not proposed to offer a
biography here. Rather is it intended to show the
esteem in which Sir James was held, and to give
some of the tributes to his worth and character
which came so spontaneously at his death to those
who remain behind. Such obituary notices as
have appeared in the press are also given; while
the account of the funeral, the description of the
service at the Woollahra Congregational Church,
and the details of the ceremony at South Head,
are taken as they appeared in the columns of “ The
Sydney Morning Herald.” These are part of a
verv general expression of public respect and
regard for one who spent and was spent in serving
the community.




The Late Sir James Fairfax
An Appreciation
c MERSON has said tha,t “Around the man who seeks a noble
■l—' end, not angels but divinities attend.” In beginning an
appreciation of Sir James Fairfax’s life and character, after close
association with him for nearly seventeen years, these words came
to mind as a reasonable explanation of much of his influence and
activity.
The last time I saw him and talked with him was not long
before his death. We had lunched together, and afterwards on the
verandah we discussed matters near to his heart. He knew that
the final scene was not far* off, but he showed no change in his
outlook upon the things of time and sense. The essentials remained
whether for this life or the next; and one of his great demands, so
near the break between the two, was for a recognition of the need
for the best men in positions of authority. Especially was he
concerned at the moment with an imminent appointment to the
judicial bench. He did not discuss personalities but principles;
and what he felt and said then was in harmony with what he had
expressed in my presence many times before. An upright judge
in a British community was to him the embodiment of true national
life, and the shield and buckler of our liberties. But he insisted
always that the leader in public life not pledged to straight dealing
and honesty, as much in Parliament as between man and man, was
a blind leader of the blind. Such is my last impression of Sir James
Fairfax. He was not only interested in vital public questions but
he was earnestly concerned to help in dealing with them. In this he
was consistent. Right through his life he followed events with keen
interest, and the divinities, rather than the angels, aided him. They
attended an experience ranging over a long period of Australian
history and were never far from his consciousness.
Sir James Fairfax came of God-fearing stock. His Warwick-
shire ancestry had the uncompromising Puritan salt in its blood,
and the Church of his fathers was well called Independent. Sir


James never lost his sense of the divinities of life. From his boy-
hood duty and responsibility were not words with little sense, but
realities. He came here as a child, and as he passed through youth
into manhood Australia was never associated in his mind with
broken faith or weakened pledges. When he became an integral
part of the newspaper, so long identified with the name of Fairfax,
his father was for him a leader and luminary, not only in all private
relations but for the community. John Fairfax put his stamp upon
all that he did; and it was natural that the son who was tempera-
mentally akin should be impressed. But it was a milder spirit that
grew up under the burden of a great responsibility. Always the
newspaper with a fine tradition was his charge; but as the years
lengthened, and the old and the new world joined hands, the son
found himself in a changing atmosphere. He had to make momen-
tous decisions under altered conditions, yet he never faltered in
his faith. He believed in the great things. Truth, justice, honesty,
were at the foundation of all life for humankind worth the name;
and there he stood steadfast to the last. The divinities were always
about him; and upon the great principles of Christianity he rested
without needing to explain or extenuate. I remember vividly his
account of his reply to the deacons who waited upon him and his
wife in the first days of their married life. They had called, by
appointment, to discuss with the young couple their admission to
Church membership. What was their warrant for seeking admission ?
Upon what did they propose to base their life together and as Church
members? The family Bible was brought forward by the youthful
husband and laid before the elders, as the first and last word upon
the subject, and it was considered sufficient. I never remember
discussing religion at length with Sir James, but I was always
conscious that every question between us had to be settled, not in
terms of mere expediency, but upon the firm foundations of honour
and straightforwardness, of truth dealing and truth telling.
Perhaps the first thing that impresses me as I look back upon
seventeen years of intercourse is a sense of the value to Australia
of the immigration represented by men of the stamp of John Fairfax
and his family. They were of the best British stock; and their
English mind and ways were reflected in a sturdy faith in the
Empire. This was a prime factor in Sir James Fairfax’s discussion
of public questions. Moreover, he never ceased reading and thinking
about the Empire; and from all his travels he brought back a firmer
conviction that Australia must look for life and progress to the
Imperial connection. Nobody was more Australian at heart than


he, and few could talk as he would about the intimate things of
our history. He was an encyclopaedia upon men and events. He
could go back from point to point in the development of Sydney
and in the general life of Australia with accurate knowledge and
appreciation; and because he knew so much he valued more fully
the links which bind us to the mother land. He always looked upon
"Young Australia as the finest flower of Empire, because good stock
had been transplanted to conditions which made for strength and
sturdiness. But he was immensely concerned to see that the rising
generation did not abandon the faith or the traditions of the men
and women who made the Empire, and who were so worthily repre-
sented in this continent among thousands of homes in different
latitudes.
Sir James was a reader almost to the end. Right through his
life he read the books that were worth while, and he remembered
what he read. His daughter had in mind his assimilation of so
much reading in a recent note upon the subject: “When travelling
one noticed this very much. There scarcely seemed anything he did
not know a good deal about, especially when it had a historical
connection. It gave an intense interest to our travels to have such
a mind at hand, stored with such wonderful and varied knowledge;
and his appreciation of what we saw when travelling—quite small
incidents that happened—and of the people we met, was really
extraordinary. ”
But now especially is this companionship missed by those who
were nearest to him. It was only necessary, during the war and
after, to raise some important point, and Sir James was ready. He
could not only discuss the problems that were arising, but he’ had
always something to add to the general fund of facts, perhaps
gleaned from his close reading of the magazines, or stored up from
other debates and discussions which had been worth remembering.
But more than anything do his dear ones miss his calm outlook upon
life. His steadfastness was unshaken even in the pain and suffering
that appeared so strangely sent at the close of a good life; and
this surely may in part be credited to his constant intercourse with
the best minds and to the resulting sound judgment. But beyond
all was the larger view in which mind and spirit were combined;
mid to the end his faith in the victory of the right and the true
never faltered.
The last lustrum of Sir James’s life was practically a period of
war. His mind grasped at once the essential issues in 1914, and
every phase of the conflict was discussed with remarkable shrewd


ness and interest. But the weight of anxiety wore him down. His
very freshness of mind, with long years of attention to the develop-
ment of public policy in Europe, made him realize to the full what
the world war meant. While Australians in so many instances
made no attempt to visualize the conflict he caught the significance
of each menace to the Empire, and he could see only too clearly
what Germany would make of this sunny land if she laid hands
upon it. The revelation of German brutality and beastliness were
like physical blows. Sir Janies did not say much —he had the gift
of quiet reticence —but sometimes he would speak with a stern
concentration of horror that such things as the happenings in
Belgium and France were possible in the 20th Century. There can
be no doubt that the strain of it all hastened the end. He never
wavered in his belief that the Allies would win. Through the
darkest days he kept firm confidence in an overruling Providence;
and he was heart and soul with Australia’s efforts and sacrifices.
But he suffered as he kept abreast of the times. The strenuous
striving of war workers here and abroad and the self-denial of our
women everywhere moved him to the depths; and soon the over-
wrought body gave way. The mind, however, never flagged; and
the strong spirit followed the course of our warfare without
blenching. Yet in the natural anxiety of one so burdened with
responsibility, though relieved from its strain in the main essentials
of administration, it was impossible for Sir James to live apart.
He was one with his wife, his daughter and his sons to the close,
thinking of them and working with them, until the call came. But
always he lived with the community, thinking out its problems
sharing its difficulties, and eager to be of service whether in its
defence or as party to a great offensive for the right and the true.
C. BRUNSDON FLETCHER.


A Long Chapter Closed
The “Sydney Morning Herald” Leading Article
of Saturday, March 29, 1919
WITH the passing of Sir James Fairfax a
long chapter has been closed in the
history of Australian journalism. The personal
side in this relation has been given at length
elsewhere; and it is unnecessary here to do more
than emphasise the fact that Sir James had
been identified with the Press for nearly seventy
years. He had seen it grow from the humble
status it occupied in far-off times to the position
of dignity and usefulness it occupies to-day.
Practically the whole of his long life was spent
in association with this paper, which can be
said not only to have been moulded in an im-
portant part of its development by him, but to
have reflected, in a very intimate way, his
character and ideals. Sir James Fairfax was
a man of exceptional rectitude and a journalist
of unblemished honour. His personal relation-
ships with his fellowmen were of the kindliest.
His judgments in affairs were always on the
side of tolerance. They could not, indeed, be
otherwise, for no one disliked extremes more
than he did. It was on this plane he strove
to keep the paper whose destinies depended so
largely upon his guidance. That he succeeded
we take leave to think the public of New South
Wales has had daily evidence for longer than
most men can remember. Sir James had the
very highest conception of the rights and the
privileges of journalism. To him its freedom
was very precious. But its obligations he
placed no less high. He insisted upon the
dignity of journalism and upon the grave
responsibility resting on the shoulders of those
who are charged with the task of direction and
of control. Contempt and bitterness and resent-
ment were not in his nature —and because of
that he was able to do so much in building up
a great newspaper.
It is impossible to deal with a life covering
so much of the formative period of Australian
journalism without realising how broad its
foundations have been laid. We are proud of
our Press because in the main it does represent
something of the very best of British journalism.
The principles of truth, honesty, and fair deal-
ing which Sir James Fairfax upheld and placed
foremost have not been confined to one place
or State, but have been rooted wide and deep
through the Commonwealth. Yet the beginnings
were seen when Wentworth began his campaign
against the autocratic rule of men who thought
first of their own prerogatives and last of the
liberties of Britons beyond the seas. The seed
was well sown. From it has grown a great
and spreading tree, and under its shade five
millions of people may discuss the problems of
peace after a devastating war, no man daring
to make them afraid. A period of censorship,
with its failures and futilities against a back-
ground of undoubted achievement, has helped us
to realise how far free comment has brought us,
and how utterly intolerable would be any
reversion to the old track which Wentworth
turned into a broad highway. Sir James Fair-
fax entered upon his great inheritance when the
road was fairly marked and made, but was still
waiting for the ballast and metal which to-day
give us a free and full thoroughfare. His life,
therefore, was spent in yeoman service for a
journalism which has become the best expression
of a large life in a continent destined to be the
home of many millions of liberty-loving Britons.
This is the explanation of any success that has
accompanied the efforts of seventy years of
close association with the Press of Australia.
Sir James Fairfax had strong' convictions. Some
of them he held with great tenacity. But the
strongest of all his convictions—and nothing
could shake it —was that the “Herald” should
at all times stand for the fair statement of
conflicting causes, for cleanliness and decency
in public and private life, and for social justice
in its best forms. No considerations of passing
expediency amid the heat and turmoil of
political disputation were permitted to shake
his judgment. This is not eulogy of an indi-
vidual, however, but the indication of a general
sense in the community. Our newspapers have
no value as they seek to force opinion, but as
they interpret it and make it fruitful. Surely
never more than now was the sane, just view so
needed; and yet we believe that because the
Pi ess of Australia has 'consistently aimed at
sanity and justice in its daily appeal to the
people, the Commonwealth will find relief from
its present troubles and win out into the
brighter sunshine of an enduring and enlarged
liberty. Sir James Fairfax has made it possible
for this paper to take a prominent place in the
fight for freedom, and to his memory this
tribute may fairly be paid.


Death of Sir James Fairfax
Doyen of Australian Journalism
CIB JAMES FAIRFAX, senior proprietor of
the “Sydney Morning Herald’’ and the
“Sydney Mail,” died yesterday afternoon at a
quarter to 2 o’clock, at “Ginahgulla,” Bellevue
Hill, after several months’ illness.
Sir James Reading Fairfax was born at
Leamington, Warwickshire, on Octobep 17th,
1834, and was the second son of the late Hon.
John Fairfax, member of the Legislative Council
of New South Wales. He married Lucy,
daughter of the late Mr. John Armstrong, of
Sydney, and he is survived by Lady Fairfax
and five sons and one daughter, Miss Fairfax.
The sons are Mr. Charles Burton Fairfax, Mr.
Geoffrey E. Fairfax, Mr. James O. Fairfax, Mr.
Hubert Fairfax, and Lieutenant-Colonel Wilfred
Fairfax. One son, Mr. Harold Fairfax, died six
years ago. Sir James Fairfax received his early
education at private schools (from the Rev. Dr.
Woolls and the Rev. Henry Cary, M.A.) at
Parramatta and Sydney; but he often used to
say that a man’s education only began on leav-
ing school—that life itself was the real school
of instruction.
To Sir James Fairfax had been granted not
only a long life, but a full one —a life of use-
fulness to his fellow men. A great newspaper
is a public institution. It is a part of our life.
And for nearly 70 years—for he first entered
the service of the “Sydney Morning Herald” in
1852—Sir James Fairfax had been identified in
a very real sense with the life and progress of
Australia. Work was his gospel, and through-
out his days he gave of his best to the people ;
and now that he has gone from us, full of years
and honour, we may be permitted to say some-
thing of this quiet man of many talents who
saw so much history made in this country—-
and who himself helped to make so much of it.
When, in the early ’Thirties, the “Sydney
Herald” rose, phoenix-like, from the ashes of the
old “Australian” and the “Monitor,” the title
carried immediately beneath it Pone’s well-
known couplet
In moderation placing all my glory,
While Tories call me Whig—and Whigs
a Tory.
And above the leader was the motto: “Sworn
to no master, of no sect am I.” Started under
the proprietorship of Messrs. Stephens, Stokes,
and M'Garvie, on the 18th of April, 1831, the
“Herald” was, in 1840, purchased by Mr.
Charles Kemp and Mr. John Fairfax, and soon
afterwards it appeared as a morning daily paper
under its present title. Later, the name of the
firm became that of John Fairfax and Sons.
Right through the years the “Herald,” which
continued the battle of freedom and advance-
ment which William Charles Wentworth and Dr.
Wardell began in the “Australian,” has been
tiue to its old motto, sworn to no master and
of no sect, its one concern the welfare of the
people. As it was in the time of John Fairfax,
so it was in the time of James Fairfax —the son
carried the banner which his honoured father
had carried before him.
The Hon. John Fairfax, M.L.C., was a be-
liever in the principle that the man who would
command must first learn to serve, and in
order that he should be thoroughly conversant
with the business which he was later to control,
James Reading Fairfax entered, at the age of
17, the establishment of the firm of Kemp and
Fairfax, as it was known then, and in due time
became thoroughly familiar with the mechanical
and literary departments of the newspaper and
printing office. He “went through the mill” in
the practical work of each department of the
paper. At length, being fully equipped with
a knowledge of the working of the office, Mr.
Fairfax assumed active managerial direction,
which continued for many years.
On the retirement of Mr. Kemp, the Hon.
John Fairfax took his eldest son Charles, and
later his son James, into partnership, and the
name of the firm of John Fairfax and Sons was
then assumed. When the death of Mr. Charles
Fairfax took place, a third brother, Mr. Edward
Ross Fairfax (who died in England in 1915)
was taken into the firm, and next came Mr. C.
B. Fairfax, eldest son of Sir James. A further
change was made when Mr. G. E. and Mr. J.
O. Fairfax, sons of Sir James, entered the firm.


A LIFE CROWDED WITH INCIDENT.
To review a life so long and so crowded with
incident as that of the late Sir James Fairfax
is no easy task. Here was a man who had
seen this City of Sydney grow from a little
town to a great city—the fifth port of the
British Empire, one of the great cities of the
world, having a population of three-quarters of
a million. Into one life had been crowded
the evepts of nearly two-thirds of the life of
Australia since Phillip landed and Sydney
began—the granting of responsible government
to this country, the discovery of gold, the con-
struction of the first railway, the birth of the
Sydney University, and, coming to later times,
the birth of the Australian Commonwealth. He
saw the British Empire grow till its flag was
flying over half the world, carrying the bless-
ings of freedom and civilization to millions of
people. He saw Queen Victoria add to the title
of Queen of Great Britain and Ireland that ot
Empress of India. He saw the marvellous rise
of Japan to the position of one of the Great
Powers of the world, China and Portugal be-
come Republics, the birth of the Duma in
Russia, and a thousand other wonders. He saw
many wars and revolutions. The Indian Mutiny,
the Crimean War, the Franco-Prussian War, the
war between north and south in America, the
Zulu War, the Russo-Japanese War, the Spanish-
American War, the Boer War, all took place in
his lifetime —and then, last of all, the greatest
of all wars the world has ever seen, in which a
hundred of the late Sir James Fairfax’s em-
ployees took part. When he was a boy it took
some 90 days to come to Australia from Eng-
land in the old days of the sailing boats —he
came out with his parents in one when he was
a mere lad ; and he saw the invention of steam
and the construction of steamships. He saw the
Chusan, the first mail steamer to come to Aus-
tralia, and he saw, as the years went on, the
building of larger steamships to cope with the
ever-increasing trade of Australia, until to-day
we have huge 18,600-tonners like the Ceramic.
What else? The beginning of that annihilator
of distance, the submarine cable, the wonder of
wireless telegraphy, the marvel of airships.
THE PRINTING WORLD
And in the world of printing, what changes!
When he walked into his father’s office in George
Street in 1852 to begin the work which he was
to continue all his life, James Reading Fairfax
never dreamed of the newspaper revolution he
was to see. The “Sydney Morning Herald” of
that time was a small thing. From the curious
old printing-press that was worked on the
principle of the old-fashioned mangle, and re-
quired five men to work it, to the six great
printing-presses of to-day, which can together
turn out their 100,000 24-page papers in an
hour, is a long stride; and when one remembers
how the electric telegraph and the submarine
cable, and now wireless telegraphy, have
revolutionized the news side of the paper, the
romance and the marvel of the story are brought
heme to us.
No man loved more to tell of the old days
than Sir James Fairfax. None loved Old Syd-
ney better, and when, as he so often used to
do in his leisure moments, he recalled some of
the incidents of bygone days, it was a delight
to himself and the listener alike. His own
lovable personality threw a charm over all he
said and did. He possessed a fund of knowledge
regarding Old Sydney equalled by very few
Australians. He was, indeed, a distinct link
between the early days of colonial settlement
and the present day, and his recollections of
men and affairs that have played their part in
the building of Sydney were of intense interest
and of great historical value. In July, 1918,
he wrote a paper on Old Sydney for the Aus-
tralian Historical Society. In this he told an
entrancing story of the days of the old Tank
Stream, where the wives of the soldiers used to
do their washing; of the times when Circular
Quay was a rocky foreshore from which the
youth of the day fished; when Redfern was
really half a day’s journey from the embryo
city. The paper was rich in memoirs, too, of
Wentworth and Lang, of Martin and Parkes, of
Robert Lowe (afterwards Lord Sherbrooke), and
William Bede Dailey, all of whom did much
journalistic work in their time in Sydney, and
of other famous men in our history.
Speaking of the old newspaper days, he used
to tell of the races in whaleboats out of Sydney
Harbour by the representatives of rival papers,
each one anxious to reach the incorfiing ship
first, and get back to the office with the latest
overseas news. That was before the days of the
overland telegraph. Then, he used to delight
in telling of the many devices resorted to, when
the telegraph line only extended as far west as
Adelaide, in order to get the first news from
the outside world and telegraph it to Sydney.
The “Herald” was usually ahead of its rivals,
for its plans were the most perfect.
THE CAPTAIN OF THE SHIP.
Sir James Fairfax passed through all depart-
ments of newspaper life, and it was largely
because of his wide and comprehensive grasp
of the great business of which he was the head
for so many years that he had such a full under-
standing of all that went on in it, and proved
such an able administrator. He was the captain of
the ship, and he was the beau ideal of a captain.


The throbbing engines, the work in all depart-
ments, bore witness to it —tiiat loyal devotion
of all to the man at the head, all the parts of
the great machine combining to make a perfect
whole. Not all men succeed in doing that. A
man must have special gifts for it, and Sir
James Fairfax had those gifts jn a marked de-
gree. He was not only gifted with a mind that
was steeped in the good things of literature and
art, he was also a consummate man of business ;
and rare almost as great poets, it has been said,
are consummate nien of business. A man of
regular and methodical habits in his earlier
days, Sir James Fairfax never departed front
those habits, and almost up to the last he had
attended at his office, still showing the same
interest in the production of the daily paper,
still the same interest in the welfare of his em-
ployees.
There never was an employer who showed
more thought for his staff than Sir James Fair-
fax ; there never was one more highly esteemed
by those who worked for him, and it is not
strange that there should be employed on the
“Herald” gtaff to-day men whose service extends
over half a century.
FOR THE GOOD HE COULD DO.
Whatever measure of greatness the “Sydney
Morning Herald” has attained, it owes it in
very large part to the splendid personality of
Sir James Fairfax. Just as in his private life,
he gave of the bounty to our religious, chari-
table, and philanthropic institutions, so in the
sphere of his immediate work as head of the
firm of John Fairfax and Sons his efforts were
directed towards improving the welfare of the
people of this country, without regard to sect
or party. He resisted the wrong that needed
resistance; he assisted the cause that deserved
assistance; he lived for the good he could do;
and he dies honoured and revered by those who
had the privilege of his acquaintance, and by
an innumerable army of others who, whilst
never having geen him, yet were able to judge
of the man,
Among hi* activities Sir James Fairfax
was for many years a director of the Bank of
New South Wales, and at one time a director
of the Commercial Banking Company Of Syd-
ney, the A.M.P. Society, the Perpetual Trustee
Company-~of which he was one of the. founders
—and of Burns, Philp, Ltd. He retired from
all these directorates, with the exception of that
of Burns, Philp, Ltd., on account of failing
health. In connection with the A.M.P. Society,
it is of interest to note that three generations
of the Fairfax family have been represented on
its directorate- —the Hon. John Fairfax, M.L.C.,
Sir James Fairfax, and then Mr. J. O. Fairfax.
PILLAR OF THE CHURCH
In the work of the Congregational Church Sir
James Fairfax took a prominent part. He was
a life member of the executive committee of
the Congregational Union. He was a liberal
supporter of the London Missionary Society, and
all denominational funds in connection with
Congregationalism, such as that of Camden
College, instituted in 1864, and of which the
late Dr. J. G. Frazer, M.A., a brother-in-law
of his, was for many years the principal. Sir
James took a special interest in the supple-
mentary stipend fund for Congregational
ministers, and he issued an invitation to some
60 or VO leading laymen of the denomination
to a luncheon party, at Which between £3OOO
and £4OOO was subscribed. That was in 1914.
The aim was to raise £IO,OOO, and Sir James
Fairfax had the satisfaction of seeing practically
all of this sum raised.
An old friend of his, Mr. E. K. Satchell,
recently said of him: “Sir James Fairfax, by
his many generous contributions to the various
Congregational funds, has but followed in the
footsteps of his father, who Was one of the
early pioneers, and had a great deal to do with
establishing all the little churches of his day,
among them the Bourke Street, Redfern, Bal-
main, and Burwood Churches. John Fairfax
was one of the founders of Camden College, and
Sir James Fairfax has been on the council
of the college for many years, besides being one
of its largest supporters in a financial sense.
Sir James was for a great many years Connected
with the committee of the Home Mission —called
in the early days the Church Extension Society.
For some years he was the Home Mission
treasurer. I remember that his father, on the
occasion of the annual outing of the Congre-
gational Union, used to give a luncheon every
year to the ministers and delegates, and Sir
James Fairfax followed this example for a long
time.
“On the occasion of prominent Congregation-
alists visiting the State he would frequently
give receptions at his own home, as well as
luncheon parties in the city, to which the
ministers of other denominations were often
invited. For instance, Dr. J. D. Jones, when
he came out from England, was the guest of
Sir James at “Ginahgulla,” and during his
stay Sir James gave a luncheon in the city in his
honour, many prominent citizens being invited.
Many of these visitors also enjoyed his' hospi-
tality at “Woodside,” his Moss Vale home.”
For many years Sir James Fairfax, like his
father before him, was a member of the Pitt
Street Church, and later he attended worship in
the Woollahra (Jersey Road) Congregational
Church, of which Dr. Frazer (before he became
Warden of Camden College), and later Dr. For-
dyce, a valued friend, were for some time the
pastors.
When some years ago a forward movement
was instituted in the denomination, with a view
to increasing' the capital of the building fund,
Sir James Fairfax took an active part. Such
funds as the Ministers’ Retiring Fund, and such
organizations as the London Missionary Society,
always had his warmest support.
“It was not merely a question of pounds
shillings and pence with him,” said the Rev.
N. J. Cocks, the present Pitt Street pastor, “he
gave his services as well. And when he did
give he gave wisely, with a full knowledge of
the work that was being done. His quiet, ster-
ling Christian character endeared him to us all.”
THE Y.M.C.A.
The late Sir James Fairfax was president of
the Young Men’s Christian Association in Syd-
ney at the time he was knighted by Queen
Victoria in 1898, and he maintained a lively
interest in its work right up to the time of his
death. The Y.M.C.A. was very close to his
heart, as also was the University Student
Christian movement, on the advisory board of
which he held an honoured place.
Sir James Fairfax was repeatedly elected
president of the Y.M.C.A. It was only the
splendid financial support given by him and a
few others like him that made the work of this
institute possible in other days—for to-day the
Y.M.C.A. is an established institution in our
midst, and for the most part is kept going by
its members themselves. The support he gave
to the institution in the days of the old build


ing was continued in the days of the new one,
and nothing delighted him more than to enter-
tain distinguished visitors connected with the
Y.M.C.A. in other lands. Many were the re-
ceptions he gave and the meetings of citizens
he called to do honour to such visitors from
England and America.
One of the last receptions of this kind was
the one he gave in honour of the visit of the
Rev. Dr. Fraser, principal of Trinity College,
Gandy, who visited Australia in order to
deliver a series of addresses at the universities
in connection with the Student Christian move-
ment.
ROYAL PRINCE ALFRED HOSPITAL.
Sir James Fairfax was one of the founders
of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, which is
now celebrating its jubilee, and he was actively
associated with its management almost con-
tinuously up to the time of his death. The
lecent death of Sir Phillip Sydney Jones left
him the only surviving member of the original
general committee .which was formed to estab-
lish the hospital fifty years ago. In 1877 . (on
the death of his father) he became a member
of the board of directors. It is a notable fact
that, with the exception of two short periods
from 1881 to 1884, and from 1902 to 1903,
when Sir James Fairfax was absent in England,
the name of Fairfax has never been absent from
the managing body of the Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital, and this fact is commemorated by the
“Fairfax” Ward. Sir James continued to sit
as a .director till 1881, when he went to England
and resigned, but in 1884 he was reappointed,
and sat till 1889. Then again for a term he
was absent, but in his place his son, Mr.
Geoffrey E. Fairfax, was elected, and he sat
till 1892, when Sir James returned, and he re-
signed in favour of his father. Thus there have
sat on the board three generations of Fairfaxes
in direct descent —again a unique circumstance.
Sir James held office till 1902, and was absent
for one year, when he was re-appointed as a
Government representative, and as such he had
sat on the board ever since. During his term
of office from 1892 till 1899, Sir James filled
the post of honorary treasurer, and on the de-
parture of the present chairman (Sir Tho\
Anderson Stuart) for England, in 1904, he was
appointed acting chairman.
BOYS’ BRIGADE AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS
One of the founders of the Boys’ Brigade, Sir
James Fairfax took a keen interest in this
admirable institution up to the last. Upon Sir
James Fairfax, who was never tired of showing
his interest in the boys, some of whom, as the} 7
grew older, he helped to make their way in life
in various spheres of activity, the lads looked
with affection and veneration. In many ways
he was a second father to them, and on those
occasions when he provided picnics for them —
“Gi’and-dad’s picnic” some of them used to call
it —there never was a more happy lot of boys
than those of the Boys’ Brigade.
He was also identified with the early begin-
nings of such institutions as the Ragged Schools
and the Mission to Seamen. He was a trustee of
the Royal Naval House, of the National Ship-
wreck and Relief and Humane Society, and of
the Queen Victoria Home for Consumptives, and
was also a director of the Carrington Convales-
cent Home.
THE RAGGED SCHOOLS.
Sir James always took a lively interest in the
welfare of the poor and neglected children of
the city and suburbs. At the time of his death
he was chairman of the Sydney Ragged Schools
Committee, which was founded some 60 years
ago by the Hon. John Fairfax and others.
There are now under the committee’s control
five schools, which are located at Miller’s Point,
Glebe, Woolloomooloo, Campbell Street, and
Waterloo, and are open to all denominations.
The daily meals for the children in winter time
were first started at the suggestion of Sir James.
These meals have proved a great blessing to the
little ones.
NAVAL HOUSE.
Sir James Fairfax’s association with the Royal
Naval House extended as far back as the early
’eighties, when it was known as Goodenough
House, and was situated in Princes Street. He
took an active part in connection with the
representations made to the Government for the
granting of a suitable site on which to make
more adequate provision for the sailors of the
Royal Navy who were stationed in these waters.
His efforts, coupled with those of the late
Admiral Sir George Tryon and others, resulted
in the present site in Grosvenor Street being
dedicated for the purpose of the erection of the
Royal Naval House, which was built in 1890,
and added to in 1907. Sir James was a trustee
of the Royal Naval House up to the time of his
death, and a 1 ways took a very keen interest in
the welfare of our sailors. He was also on the
executive of the New 7 South Wales branch of
the Navy League, and assisted materially in con-
nection with its formation in 1917.
AN ART LOVER.
Throughout his long life Sir James was a
devoted lover of art. Gradually, by study and
observation in European galleries, he acquired
a highly cultivated taste in painting, and be-
came recognised as a connoisseur wdiose judgment,
was always sound and reliable. The weaknesses
of Certain developments of the extreme section
of the modern school, “post-impressionism,”
“cubism,” and the like, were abhorrent to him,
as largely founded upon a deficiency in drawdng.
He held that the pow 7 er of accuracy in form and
colour must always constitute that sure basis
of fine painting upon which the imaginative and
poetic qualities of the highest art might then
be properly imposed. Accordingly, with the
idea of fostering correct draughtsmanship, he
offered valuable prizes for pencil-drawing com-
petition at the National Art Gallery, to which
students and artists from all parts of the State
responded; Amongst his many donations to the
national collection was a score of exquisite
classic casts from the antique as an object-
lesson to students. In the same way, in 1910,
he sent his collection of reproductions from
original sketches of old Italian and Dutch and
Flemish masters, which were exhibited to the
number of many score on rotundas in the
“Black and White” court. These were executed
by the Vasari Society, and showed portraits and
also preliminary drawings of figures for after-
wards wmrld-famous compositions by Titian,
Campagnola, Del Sarto, and many others. The
highly educative influence of such an exhibition
will be readily recognized.
It would, indeed, be difficult to overrate the
influence for good exercised by Sir James upon
that increasing section of the public wdiich loves
a fine picture. During 1909 he lent his most
interesting private collection of oil and water-
colour pictures, including a beautiful woodland
scene by Sir Alfred East, R.A., whose style he
greatly admired, Brett’s captivating “On the


Coast of Cornwall,” some important examples
of Sir Oswald Brierly, including a naval battle
piece, and attractive works by Nicholas
Chevalier, Walter Severn, Wimperis, Birket
Foster, and other famous artists. During the
long period of years in which Sir James actively
filled the position of a vice-president of the
trustees of the National Art Gallery—becoming
president on the death of Mr. Du Faur—he
supplemented numerous efforts of this kind by
generous gifts. Amongst the casts special
mention must be made of “The Gates of the
Baptistery in the Church of San Giovanni at
Florence” in ten panels, representing scenes
from the Old Testament. The original, in
bronze, by Ghiberti (died 1455), were pro-
nounced by Michael Angelo “worthy to be the
Gates of Paradise.” The State was fortunate
in an art enthusiasm which secured this model
in 1890, as from that date the Italian Govern-
ment refused to allow any more models to be
taken. It may fairly be acclaimed the most
important donation to our national collection.
He also added to it a whole series of British
war medals and clasps (38), Maundy money
(11 pieces), a facsimile of the Bayeux tapestry
(9 frames), the quaint old reproductioris of the
Arundel Society, and Sevres vases.
THE NATIONAL GALLERY.
With the death of this great art lover and
patron, there passes hence the last founder of
the National Art Gallery, the last survivor of
a group of whom it might be said, “Si quaeris
monumentum, circumspice!” The preface to
the illustrated catalogue compiled by the
director, Mr. G. V. F. Mann, opens with the
words, “The origin of all that we now enjoy
in the possession of a notable National Art
Gallery, and of Government subsidies for those
societies that undertake the instruction of
students, may be traced to a meeting convened
by Mr. Edward Reeve, on April 25, 1871.”
The names of only two or three members are
quoted, and that of J. R. Fairfax is omitted,
but the historical list may now be correctly
given as follows: —T. S. Mort (chairman),
Judge Josephson, J. A. C. Willis, W. G.
Pennington, Signor Steffanoni, E. L. Montefiore,
Samuel Lyons, Sir Terence Aubrey Murray, Dr.
F. J. S. Patterson, William Macleod, Ander-
son, J. R. Fairfax, C. E. Pilcher, T. Hodgson,
Edward Daintry, and Edward Reeve. These
gentlemen were joined by Mr. E. Du Faur (after-
wards for many years president of the National
Art Gallery) in forming the New South Wales
Academy of Art, with classes for students in a
building subsequently transferred to the Royal
Society. In 1875 a Government subsidy was
obtained, and a Gallery of Art sprang into
existence, with various of the abovenamed as
trustees. The patriotic movement grew rapidly
in importance, until the present nobly housed
collection was formed. The almost incredible
fact is recorded that this now extensive
exhibition was started by these intrepid
pioneers with six watercolour drawings.
Sir James by no means confined his interests
to the National Gallery. The above brief
reference to its origin shows that the first idea
of that memorable meeting was to engage
teachers, and thus sow the seeds of a future
School of Painting. This in due course led to
the establishment of the Royal Art Society of
New South Wales, with Mr. W. Lister Lister as
president, followed by the Society of Artists,
over which Mr. Julian Ashton long presided.
Sir James sympathised with every effort of this
kind, but more especially with the former
institution, and here again the Fairfax prizes
encouraged the students to persevere with the
black and white course. From time to time he
found leisure to forward the success of indi-
vidual artists by formally opening their
separate exhibitions, frequently so in the case of
Mr. Lister Lister and also for Miss Ethel
Stephens, and others, and his kindly presence at
all art gatherings until quite recent years, will
now be sadly missed. There was no thought of
patronage in his presidency on these occasions.
They were manifestly a pleasure to him, and
his evident sympathy was warmly reciprocated
by the artists concerned.
Not only the very wide circle of his personal
friends and acquaintances, but also the general
body of art lovers will rejoice to hear that a
portrait from the hand of John Longstaff is now
on its way here from London.
In the sister art of music Sir James also
took a keen interest for a long period of years,
though his attendance at evening concerts
latterly diminished under doctors’ orders. When
the Royal Philharmonic Society of Sydney was
founded in 1884, he accepted office as vice-
president, and rejoined in the same capacity in
1893, assisting in the consultations of the com-
mittee until 1900. He was also similarly con-
nected with the Sydney Amateur Orchestral
Society in its palmy days under Signor Hazon’s
direction, and made generous donations of music
to it, whilst he was one of the helpful guaran-
tors of the Sydney Symphony Orchestra.
ROYAL SYDNEY YACHT SQUADRON.
The mention of seamen recalls the fact that
Sir James Fairfax was himself a lover of the
water. For many years he took a keen interest
in aquatic sports, and in his time he won
numerous yachting races. He was for years the
commodore of the Royal Sydney Yacht Squad-
ron. There is an old photographic group in the
possession of the committee which shows the
late Sir James Fairfax wearing the commodore’s
cap. It was taken on the occasion of the open-
ing cruise of the squadron for 1885, the year
following the election of Sir James as commo-
dore. There are some notable men in the group,
many of whom have since passed away. Among
them are Lord Carrington (then Governor of
New South Wales) and Admiral Tryon, who
were the principal guests. Others are the late
Mr. George Thornton, M.L.0., at one time
Mayor of Sydney, the late Sir Robert Lucas
Tooth, the late Mr. Critchett Walker, Sir
Edmund Barton, Mr. R. J. Black, M.L.C., and
Mr. A. G. Milson, who was then the vice-
commodore. And there is also in the club rooms
a beautiful trophy known as the Fairfax Cup,
presented to the squadron by Sir James Fairfax
in 1912, to be raced for annually. It cannot
be won outright, and so the name of the
honoured commodore will always be perpetuated
by this cup, on which is engraved a picture of
his famous yacht, the Magic. Sir James (then
Mr.) Fairfax was first elected commodore of
the club in 1884, and he held office until 1889,
when he was succeeded by Mr. A. G. Milson.
In 1893 he was again elected commodore, and
was re-elected the following year. Then, in
succession came Dr. (now Sir Alexander) Mac-
Cormick, Lord Beauchamp, and T. A. (now Sir
Thomas) Dibbs, until 1904, when Sir James was
again elected to the pdst of honour, and he con-
tinued as commodore until after the celebration
of the squadron’s jubilee in 1912.
Though he was also well-known as the owner
of the steam yacht Isis, Sir James Fairfax’s
name will always bo associated in yachting
circles with the Magic, which won many races
for him —out of 73 starts she had 23 wins—


and was for years without a peer. The Magic
formerly belonged to the late Mr. Alfred Fair-
fax, another honoured name in the history of
the squadron—a man who loved a good boat,
and revelled in a keen race.
Sir James was also for a term president of
the Royal Sydney Golf Club.
VOLUNTEERING AND RIFLE SHOOTING
Sir James Fairfax always took a keen interest
in volunteering and rifle shooting. He was
associated with the late Sir William Windeyer
and others in the formation of the Volunteer
Rifles in the ’Sixties, and was captain of No. 3
Co. Sydney Battalion. He also assisted in
establishing the National Rifle Association, of
which he was at one time vice-president. He
took an active part in raising the patriotic fund
of £30,000 to send the New South Wales con-
tingent to the Soudan —in connection with
which the name of William Bede Dailey will
always be remembered —and was honorary
treasurer of the movement.
Failing health during the last few months
kept Sir James confined to his house, and thus
prevented his active participation in the affairs
of the many institutions with \yhich he was
associated. To the last, however, he displayed
the keenest interest in their welfare, as well as
in Australian and international affairs generally.
CONDOLENCE
“HERALD” AND “MAIL” STAFFS.
The members of the Literary staff of the
“Sydney Morning Herald” met last night, and,
on the motion of the editor, Mr. C. Brunsdon
Fletcher, passed a resolution of condolence with
the widow and family of the late Sir James
Fairfax.
The “Sydney Mail” staff met in the editorial
rooms in Warwick Chambers, Hamilton Street,
and on the motion of Mr. W. R. Charlton
(editor) passed a resolution of condolence with
the widow and family of the late Sir James
Fairfax.
The Composing and Reading staffs of the
“Herald” and “Sydney Mail” also met in the
composing room last evening, and passed the
following resolution, proposed by the father of
the, chapel (Mr. L. W. Bullot), and seconded
by Mr. G. Brown: —-“That a message of condo-
lence, conveying the profound sympathy of the
‘Herald’ and ‘Mail’ Composing and Reading
staffs, be forwarded to the family of Sir James
Fairfax in their bereavement.”


The Public’s Tribute
IMPRESSIVE FUNERAL SERVICE
From “THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD ”of MARCH 31, 1919]
THE remains of the late Sir James Fairfax
were laid to rest in the South Head Ceme-
tery on Saturday afternoon.
Long before the doors of the Jersey Road
Congregational Church, where the funeral ser-
vice took place, had opened, people had
assembled outside; at the gates of the cemetery
several hundreds —most of them employees of the
“Sydney Morning Herald” and “Sydney ' Mail”
-—who had journey ed out in special trams,
awaited the arrival of the long funeral pro-
cession to pay their reverent respect. The
presence of so large a concourse, representative
of every section of the community, was a high
tribute, testifying to the degree of affection and
esteem Sir James had won by a lifetime of
honourable service and kindly actions. Fpw
have been laid to rest amidst such spontaneous
expressions of warm appreciation and genuine
attachment, and it was a desire to express this
admiration and love, each after his own way,
that brought so many to this “last scene of all.”
Every seat in the church in which the service
was held was occupied. Scores of people had to
stand in the porch and in the aisles. The build-
ing was beautifully draped. The service opened
with the old hymn, “O God, our help in ages
past,” and then “Jesu, Lover of My Soul” was
sung. The prayers, the readings and the funeral
oration were delivered by the several clergymen
who officiated in low, tense tones that were in
keeping with the solemnity of the occasion. It
was a most impressive service, and its im-
pressiveness was reflected on the faces of every-
one who figured in it.
The cortege, one of the longest seen in Sydney
for many years, proceeded to the cemetery along
the South Head Road. The hearse was followed
by a callage laden with wreaths, and then came
six mourning coaches conveying the relations
and intimate friends, and between 30 and 40
private cars, a large number of other vehicles
bringing up the rear.
The burial took place just inside the gates
of the cemetery, overlooking the blue ocean.
No more beautiful spot could have been chosen
as a last resting place.
The wreaths sent as a mark of sympathy
came from every class. Pride of place was
given to the one made up of flowers from Sir
James’s own garden at “Ginahgulla,” and to a
very beautiful wreath from the employees of
the firm.
THE CHURCH SERVICE.
SIMPLE AND IMPRESSIVE.
The service at the Congregational Church in
Jersey Road, which was very largely attended,
was simple and impressive. While the mourners
were assembling, the church organist, Mr. W.
J. Stewart, played Mendelssohn’s “Hearts Feel
that Love Thee,” and as the coffin was carried
in, to rest amid great masses of wreaths in
front of the pulpit, the beautiful strains of
“0 Rest in the Lord” were heard. The princi-
pal mourners, the members of the late Sir
James Fairfax’s family and relatives, occupied
the front pews. They were as follow: —Miss
Fairfax (daughter), Messrs. Geoffrey E. Fairfax,
J. 0. Fairfax, Hubert Fairfax, and Lieutenant-
Colonel E. W. Fairfax (sons), Mesdames
Geoffrey E. Fairfax, J. O. Fairfax, Hubert Fair-
fax, and E. W. Fairfax (daughters-in-law) Miss
Elizabeth Armstrong (sister-in-law), Mr. Walter
Armstrong (brother-in-law), Mr. Basil Fairfax
Ross: (nephew), Messrs. Vincent Fairfax, John
Fairfax, and Desmond Fairfax (grandsons),
Miss Margaret Fairfax (granddaughter), Mrs.
Vincent Dowling, Mr. F. W. Hixson, Dr. E.
Reading, Dr. Fairfax Reading, and Mr. H. C.
Thompson (representing Miss A. C. Fairfax,
London).
A brief prayer was offered by the Rev. Perci-
val Watson (Chairman of the Congregational
Union) and the congregation sang “O God Our
Help in Ages Past.”
Passages from the Twenty-third Psalm, the
fourteenth chapter of St. John, and the seventh
chapter of Revelations were read by the Rev.
W. L. Patison, Superintendent of the Home
Mission Board.
The Rev. N. J. Cocks delivered an address.
“He was a good man,” said the minister. “The
Master of us all exalts simple goodness to a
wonderful height. We have come together to
express our recognition of a man who deserved
commendation, even that of our Master Himself.
We have known him as one of pur foremost
citizens, who delighted in doing gopd wherever
he found it to do. I have come to ask jtou
to think with me of the secret of that good-
ness. Such a reputation, such a personality
rather, must have an explanation. We turn
back at once to those who went before him,
especially those who were closely associated
with the old church. His father w'as a man
who delighted to walk in the humble paths of
service; and his mother, and her mother before
her, were counted among the saints of the
beautiful old order, w r ho waited on His will.
But, it is not in human parentage, however fine,
that we seek for the whole secret of his good-
ness. And there is no secret. He trusted in
the Lord, he had faith in the Good Shepherd,
and the Light guided him, even in the darkest
places. He was all that a good citizen, a good
man, and a good father in his own home should
be. It was the fact that he was in intimate
touch with God, explain it as we may, that was
the secret of his goodness.”
The Rev. Professor R. G. Macintyre, in prayer,
offered thanks for a man who had lived a life
of righteousness, and for the many years during
which he was spared to do good service for his


fellow-men. “We thank Thee for his sense of
eittseaship, for his public spirit, for the humble-
ness of his heart, and for the kindness of it.
We thank Thee for the loyalty of his service,
that it was of the highest and best, and we
trust that the memory of it will remain with
us as an influence for good for many days. We
know that it is not death that has conquered,
but life —that it is not the power of death that
we see, but that the King of Life and Love
has come gently to His own, and taken him
unto Himself. We beseech Thee that the com-
fort of this great faith be given those who feel
their loss so acutely to-day. God be with them
and assist them.. . . We beseech Thee that the
memory of a good and righteous life may ever
abide with his family as a benediction, and as
an inspiration in their lives.”
The hymn “Jesu, Lover of My Soul,”
announced by Chaplain-Captain Robertson, was
sung, and the service closed with the pronounce-
ment of the Benediction by the Rev. N. J.
Cocks.
As the coffin was borne from the church the
organist played Chopin’s Funeral March.
AT SOUTH HEAD
A SIMPLE SERVICE
At the graveside, Within a few yards of the
gates of the South Head Cemetery, and over-
looking the sea, were a large gathering of people
—many representative of the public, many to
mourn the passing of, and to pay their last
tribute of respect to, an employer who had won
their deep affection. Others present, apart
from the family circle, were representative
largely of the various phases of philanthropic
life and public movements with which the
deceased had been associated.
The service was simple and brief. Forming
part of the cortege to the graveside were many
who had assembled at the cemetery gates, in-
cluding the heads and other members of the
various departments of the “Sydney Morning
Herald” and “Sydney Mail”. Many others,
who were unable to attend the crowded service
at l Woollahra, were also at the graveside.
A wealth of beautiful floral tributes was laid
upon the grave. These were carried from the
church on the hearse and in a carriage specially
set apart for the purpose.
The service was conducted by the Rev. Perci-
val Watson, Chairman of the Congregational
Union of N.S.W. ; the Rev. N. J. Cocks, M.A.,
ex-Chairman of the Union; and Professor Mac-
intyre, ex-Moderator-General of the Presbyterian
Church of Australia.
The Rev. Percival Watson read the Scripture,
and the Rev. N. J. Cocks offered a prayer of
thanksgiving for the life now closed and of in-
tercession for those bereaved. “We pray,” he
said, “that his influence in our State for
righteousness, for kindness, and for simple faith
and goodness of life, may be indeed increased
and not diminished by his departure; we pray
that many may rise up to call him blessed, and
to carry on that which he has so well begun.”
The service was closed by Professor Macintyre
pronouncing the benediction.
THE MOURNERS.
In addition to the principal mourners, whose
names have already been given, the following
attended at the church or at the graveside:—
Representative officials and citizens included
the following: —Captain A, W. M. d’Apice,
A.D.C., representing his Excellency the Governor ;
Mr. J. Garland, Solicitor-General, and Mr.
David Storey, Hon Minister, representing the
Premier and Ministry of New South Wales;
Mr. W. C. Layton, Deputy Town Clerk, repre-
senting the Lord Mayor; Sir Alexander Mac-
Cormick, Commodore of the Royal Sydney Yacht
Squadron (which office was at one time held by
Sir James Fairfax) ; Sir William McMillan, Sir
Edmund Barton, Sir Albert Gould, Colonel Sir
James Burns, Sir Thomas Dibbs, Sir J. Russell
French (General Manager of the Bank of
N.S.W.), Sir Robert M‘C. Anderson, and Messrs.
A. P. Anderson Stuart and B. Anderson Stuart
(representing Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart,
M.D.) ; and the following members of the Legis-
lative Council: ; —Messrs. James Ashton, Reginald
J. Black, A. W. Meeks, and G. F. Earp.
Representatives of Churches present included
the following:—Archdeacon D’Arcy-Irvine, Arch-
deacon Boyce, the Revs. Joseph Robertson,
Robert Dey, D. A. Harper (Principal of St.
Andrew’s College), M. Scott Fletcher (Principal
of Wesley College), G. J. Prescott (Principal
of Newington College), Allan F. Pain (Seamen’s
Institute), C. Whyte, F. V. Pratt, S. J. Field-
ing, H. Gainsford, J. Buchan, William Highlett,
A. E. West, and W. Morley (London Missionary
Society).
The following represented the Congregational
Union of New South Wales (in addition to the
Chairman and others who officiated at the ser-
vices or represented other bodies) :—The Rev.
J. H. Toms (Secretary), the Rev. A. E. West,
the Rev. Edward Moore (Secretary of the Syd-
ney City Mission), Mr. H. J. Renwick. The
deacons -of the Jersey Road Congregational
Church present were: —Dr. G, E. Rennie, Messrs.
F. W. Latimer, M.L.A., Mayor of Woollahra, F.
Rathgen, H. J. Renwick, J. W. Clay.
The National Art Gallery, of which Sir James
Fairfax was Chairman, and one of the founders,
was represented by Messrs. John Sulman (Vice-
President), E. W. Knox, P. H. Morton, and
John Lane Mullins, M.L.C. (Trustees), G. V. F.
Mann (Director), Wm. Bartlett and Thos. Hall
(Members of the Staff).
Messrs. Leonard Stephen (Hon. Secretary), A.
C. L’Orange (Superintendent), and W. A. Allen,
J. McGoldrick, W. Daniels and V. Winders
(senior members), represented the Boys’ Bri-
gade, Surry Hills, of which Sir James Fairfax
was one of the founders.
Mr. Alfred G. Milson represented the Royal
Naval House, of which Sir James Fairfax was at
the time of his death and for many years
previously trustee.
Captains S. G. Green (Chairman) and A. W.
Webber (Secretary) represented the Royal Ship


wreck Relief and Humane Society.
Messrs. J. M. Sandy (President in New South
Wales, which office was at one time filled by
Sir James Fairfax), E. K. Satchell, and R. A.
Dallen (Vice-Presidents), and J. J. Virgo
(National Secretary) represented the Y.M.C.A.
Various journalistic interests were represented
as follows;—The Sydney “Daily Telegraph,”
Major J. Randal Carey (President of the Board
of Directors) and Messrs. Watkin Wynne
(General Manager) and L. Carey; the “Even-
ing News,” Messrs. Keith Bennett, Walter
Jeffery, and G. Hawksley ; the Country Press
Association, Messrs. G. H. Varley, M.L.C., and
T. M. Shakespeare; Gordon and Gotch (Sydney),
Ltd., Mr. Thomas Ridley; the News Agents'
Association, Mr. R. B. Pitt (President) ; the
Executive Committee of the International Press
Congress, Captain J. W. Neseigh; the “North
Shore Times,” Mr. James Hobson.
Others present included the following.
Mr. A. Wigram Allen.
Messrs. Horace Bridge, Wilson Bailey, F. E.
Bryant, J. H. Burnet, P. G. Black (General
Manager, Burns, Philp, and Co., Ltd.), C. T.
Burfitt (representing the Historical Society),
and H. E. Barff (Registrar of the University).
Professor Carslaw, Messrs. Alan Cook, S.
E. Cook, E. S. Cape, Henry A. Cape, Alfred
J. Cape, F. E. Cape, T. B. Clegg, and Miss
Curnow.
Mr. W. S. Dun (President of the Royal So-
ciety, of which Sir James Fairfax was the
oldest member, having been elected in 1868),
Captain John Dart, Messrs. J. C. Dunbar, Hugh
Dixson, H. Dean, and Miss Doasey.
Brigadier-General Finn, Mr. Eustace Fosbery,
Miss Fowler, and Miss Reid (representing Young
Women’s C.A.).
Mr. Justice Gordon, Messrs. P. Griffiths, M.
S. Grant, Ross Gore, M. F. Gread, and Aider-
man Gendle (Mayor of Petersham).
Messrs. Thomas Hawkins, A. F. Howe, J.
Henderson, W. Stanley Hall, H. W. Huntingdon,
B. Haigh (General Manager of the United In-
surance Company), Major Harper, and Mr. R.
S. Heunert.
Messrs. E. Lloyd Jones, Alex. Jobson, and L.
C. B. Johnson.
Messrs. Charles Kilgour, Adrian Knox, K.C.,
Kelso King, and Alderman T. H. Kelly.
Messrs. Copland Lethbridge (Manager Per-
petual Trustee Company, Limited), F. W. Lea-
royd, S. E. Laidley, C. W. Little, G. Lewis,
Edward A. Lamb, J. T. Lingen, K.C., E. Lufft
(representing Ed. Lloyd, Ltd., and R. Hoe
and Co.).
Messrs. H. H. Massie (General Manager Com-
mercial Banking Company of Sydney). Denison
Miller (Governor of the Commonwealth Bank),
J. Surfleet Marks (Chairman of the Public Ser-
vice Board), G. M. Merivale, Arthur L. Mullens,
J. T. P. Marsh, Robert Martin, H. Campbell
Munro, E. J. B. Macarthur, and R. McCoy.
Messrs. Langer Owen, K.C., R. J. Nos worthy,
H. S. Nicholas, and J. H. Newman.
Dr. A. Murray Oram and Mr. Stuart Osborne.
Messrs. T. P. Purves, H. C. Piper, and N. G.
Pilcher, and Miss M. Pettifer.
Colonel R. L. R. Rabett, Messrs. P. A.
Rabett, Edward Reading, Dr. R. F. Reading, F.
Rathgen, T. Reddington, and S. D. Rodgers,
and Mrs. Alice Skinner.
Judge Scholes, Messrs. Colin Stephen, A.
Oonsett Stephen, G. Somerville, J. W. Street,
Montgomerie Severn, S. Shimizu (Consul-General
for Japan), and G. H. Steed.
Mr. F. Turner, F.L.S.
Mr. C. A. Vivian (Town Clerk of Woollahra).
Messrs. John C. Woodhouse, A. Gordon
Wesche (representing P. and O. Company), W.
H. Wyatt, Professor J. T. Wilson, F. B. Wilkin-
son, Walter Watt, J. L. Watkin, J. R. Wallace,
C. A. Le Maistre Walker, A. J. Warry,
ex-Senator J. T. Walker, and Alderman W.
Williamson (Mayor of Vaucluse).
EMPLOYEES.
Mr. W. G. Conley, General Manager “Sydney
Morning Herald” and “Sydney Mail,” who was
unavoidably detained in Melbourne, was repre-
sented by Mr. C. T. Harris (who also represented
the Sydney Daily Newspaper Employers’ Associa-
tion).
Mr. C. Brunsdon Fletcher (Editor of the
“Sydney Morning Herald”), and members of the
literary staff; Messrs Mungo L. MacCallum,
Charles Theakstone, G. J. Reeve, H. K. Williams,
G. Marr Thompson, Wm. Duncan, W. Crane, P.
S. Allen, T. Crouch, R. W. Robson, F. Pascoe,
J. E. Davenport, A. R. Wilkie, A. H. Haupt-
mann, R. J. D. McCallum, A. H. Stuart, A. W.
Miller, J. T. Donovan, W. R. Stirling, R. A.
Henderson (Newcastle Branch), E. Downey, J.
H. Baillie, R. R. Nott, F. J. Kirby, J. W.
Robinson, A. T. Shakespeare, and H. A. Reeve.
Administrative Department: Messrs. H. E.
Dadswell (Secretary) and P. H. Brenchley.
Clerical Staff: Messrs. J. J. Goldsborough
(Advertising Manager), S. B. Levick (Chief
Clerk), H. H. Judson (Advertising Clerk), F.
W. Pratt (City Representative), A. E. Boyd,
G. T. Walker, and H. S. Tebbutt (Country
Representatives), T. E. Walker, O. S. Lamb, C.
E. Richards, A. W. Davis, J. Evatt, A. W.
Macauliffe, F. Rayner, P. S. Thompson, A.
Evans, J. Simmonds, V. Souter, W. J.
Macauliffe, L. P. Solomons, H. B. Robb, and L.
Gau niche.
Composing Staff: Messrs. J. F. Ellis (Over-
seer), J. K. Small (Sub-overseer), W. White-
hair (Day Overseer), L. W. Bullot (Father of
the Chapel), W. Dyson and H. Pidgeon (Com-
mittee), T. Higgison, R. Bale, O. Stockley, J.
Coonan, P. J. Downey, R. J. Barker, G. Smith,
O. Fox, O. Kemp, W. Watson, G. Hanchard, T.
Summers, A. Semple, H. Middleton, J. S. Small
(sen.), J. S. Small (jun.), G. Small, G. Brown,
T. Wall, C. Nuttall, W. Mason, G. Buckleton,
W. Ball, A. W. Smith, T. Dubois.
Reading Staff: R. J. Baldwin, H. B. St. John,
H. O. St. John, F. S. Gardiner, R. Evans.
Stereotvpe Department; Messrs. Vitou (Over-
seer), E.‘C. Corbett, C. T. Leigh, J. A. Leigh,
G. Saunders, R. Veitch, A. Middleton.
Machine Room: Messrs. W. T. Coles and C.
H. Parker.
Engineering and Electrical Departments;
Messrs. T. H. Grozier, S. G. Judson, C. Taylor,
J. W. Ward, F. W. Stephens, S. Bradney, S.
Davy, G. King, A, Merriman, J. Barker, P.
Jones, D. Macfarlane'.
Publishing Department: Messrs. Jas. Hender-
son, H. Outten, J. Outten, and W. Parsons.
Stores and Cutting Department: Mr. A.
Hastie.
The staff of the “Sydney Mail” was repre-
sented by Messrs. W. R. Charlton (Editor), D.
J. Stewart, (Sub-editor), T. Tyrer (Overseer).
W. Lloyd (Printing), A. W. Hockey (Process
Engraving Department), H. H. Fishwick, and
George Bell (Photographic Department).
Included in the above employees were three
—Messrs. J. S. Small (sen.), J. R. Pegg, and
James Henderson —whose service with the firm
extended over a period of more than half a
century.


THE WREATHS.
Those w T ho sent wreaths which covered the
resting-place of the late Sir James Fairfax in-
cluded; —“Basil and family, with loving sym-
pathy” ; “Love from Geoff and Lena”; “from
Elizabeth” ; “from Mabel and Jim, in loving
memory” ; “in loving memory from Wilfred
and Marguerite” ; “in loving memory from
Hubert and Ruth” ; “in loving memory of
Grandfather, from John, Desmond, and
Margaret” ; “with love for Grandfather, from
Vincent” ; “from Mabel and Walter” ; “in
loving memory, Elsie” ; Mrs. Edith Fairfax-Ross
(London), the Premier (Mr. Holman) and
members of the Ministry; Mr. C. Brunsdon
Fletcher (Editor of the “Sydney Morning
Herald”), Sir Alexander and Lady MacCormiek,
Sir Thomas and Lady Dibbs, Sir Albert Spicer
(London), Sir Samuel and Lady Hordern; the
Board of Directors, Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital; the Red Cross Society Executive ; Red
Cross Sewing Guild; Red Cross, Warwick
Building; the Trustees, National Art Gallery;
the Roval Sydney Yacht Squadron ; the Directors
and Officers, Australian Gas Light Company;
Directors and Staff, Perpetual Trustee Company ;
Burns, Philp, and Co., Ltd; the Society of Arts
and Crafts; New South Wales Institute of
Journalists, Royal Sydney Golf Club, the Union
Club, the Warrigal Club, the Boys’ Brigade, the
Seamen’s Institute; President and Board of
Directors, Young Men’s Christian Association
of Sydney; Board of Directors, Young Women’s
Christian Association; Woollahra Congregational
Church Women’s Guild, Woollahra Congre-
gational Church, Staff of “Ginahgulla,” Staff of
“Elaine,” Staff of “Fairwater,” Mr. F. E.
Bryant (Manager Union Bank of Australia),
Dr. Gellatly (Melbourne), Mr. W. Farmer
Whyte, Dr. A. Murray Oram, Dr. Clayton, family
of the late Mr. Samuel Cook.
Mr. and Mrs. Denison Miller, Mdlle. Sou-
beiran, Miss Gurney, Mr. and Mrs. Justin
Brenan, Mr. and Mrs. T. H. Kelly, Miss Knox,
Miss Katie Knox, Mrs. Douglas Cox, Mr. Walter
O. Watt, Mr. F. I). Kent, Mr. and Mrs. P. F.
Marich, Mr. T. E. Skinner (Moss Yale), Mrs.
T. R. Davis and family, Mr. and Mrs. C. Theak-
stone, Mr. and Mrs. G. J. Reeve, Mr. Harold
Reeve, Mr. H. K. Williams, Mr. and Mrs. Percy
S. Allen, Mr. and Mrs. Tom Willis, Mr. and
Mrs. H. E. Dadswell, Mr. P. H. Brenehley, Mr.
J. 0. Gates, Mrs. and the Misses Garran, Lieut.
Cecil H. Denison, Mr. and Mrs. E. Lloyd Jones,
Mr. and Mrs. Bruce Smith (Bowral), Mrs.
Merifleld (Bowral), Mrs. and Miss Richardson,
Mrs. Reginald Laidley, Mr. and Mrs. H. A.
Russell.
Adminstrative Department of “Sydney Morn-
ing Herald,” combined literary staffs of the
“Sydney Morning Herald” and the “Sydney
Mail,” clerical staff of the “Sydney Morning
Herald” and “Sydney Mail,” heads of the
mechanical departments of the “Sydney Morn-
ing Herald” and “Sydney Mail,” employees of
the “Sydney Morning Herald,” employees of the
stereotyping department of the “Sydney Morn-
ing Herald” and “Sydney Mail,” country repre-
sentatives of the “Sydney Morning Herald,”
library staff of the “Sydney Morning Herald,”
night staff publishing employees of the “Sydney
Morning Herald,” and the “Sydney Morning
Herald” Companionship.
S. Bennett, Ltd. (“Evening News,” “Town
and Country Journal,” and “Women’s Budget”) ;
Mr. H. D. Mclntosh, M.L.C. (Managing Director
of the “Sunday Times” Newspaper Company,
Ltd.) ; Messrs. R. L. Houston, H. L. McDonald,
F. W. Marks, and E. Covell (Directors of the
“Sunday Times” Newspaper Company, Ltd.) ;
Board of Directors of the “Sun” Newspaper,
Ltd. ; and the Staff of the “Sunday Times”
Newspaper Company, Ltd. ; Board of Directors
and Staff of the “Daily Mail,” Brisbane; the
Staff of the “West Australian,” Directors of
“Smith’s Weekly.”


Obituary Notices
The Times, Tuesday, April Ist, 1919.
SIR JAMES READING FAIRFAX.
The death last Friday, at Sydney, in his 85th
year, of Sir James Reading Fairfax, removes a
notable figure in Australian life and ends one
of its most remarkable careers in journalism.
Sir James Fairfax was for many years the
head of the great newspaper proprietary of John
Fairfax and Sons, and the senior proprietor of
the “Sydney Morning Herald” and the “Sydney
Mail,” the former of which was established by
his father in 1831. James Reading Fairfax
joined the staff of the “Herald” in 1851 as an
apprentice, and worked both at the case and at
one of the hand-printing machines of (hat date.
By his admission to partnership with his father
in 1856 the firm of John Fairfax and Sons came
into existence, and his own share in the work
of the “Herald” office was a continuously active
one until quite recently, when ill-health, though
it failed to diminish his interest in the daily
issue of the journal, compelled his retirement
from his accustomed active service on it. His
career covered thus a period of 68 years. For
63 years of that period he was a proprietor and,
while his close personal touch with all the im-
provements of newspaper production on its
technical side assured to the “Herald” a first-
rate equipment of modern machinery and
appliances, the high ideals which distinguished
his personal life were the chief contributing
cause of the fine tone and the high journalistic
standard generally of the paper. Its reputa-
tion in those regards is widespread. Sir James
Fairfax was ever careful to maintain for it that
reputation.
His social activities also deserve a word. He
was a man who exercised himself in many good
works, and had a large share in the philan-
thropic activities of his time and place. Among
the many offices he usefully filled in Sydney the
following deserve mention: —Director, Bank of
New South Wales; Director, Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital; Trustee, Queen Victoria Home
for Consumptives; President, National Art
Gallery of New South Wales; President,
Y.M.C.A. ; Trustee, National Shipwreck Relief
and Humane Society of New South Wales;
Commodore, Royal Sydney Yacht Squadron.
[Note. —The “Herald” was started in 1831
by Messrs. Stephens, Stokes and McGarvie, and
bought by Messrs Chas. Kemp and John Fairfax
in 1840; Mr. C. J. Fairfax joined Mr. John
Fairfax before Mr. J. R. Fairfax as he then
was.]
The P.F.A. Quarterly Magazine, June, 1919.
A GREAT LOSS.
The death of Sir James Fairfax removes one
of the most notable figures and personalities
from Sydney life. Eighty-five years is a long
span ; the eighty-five years that ceased on Marc h
28th of this year brought an honourable record
to a lamented close. The rest was well-earned.
Full and active years, identified always with a
generous and charitable hand and mind, with
the suppression of wrong, and with a whole-
hearted, vigorous upholding of right. No man
could leave a fairer name behind him to leaven
the sorrow of his loss for his family and his
friends.
The head of the firm of John Fairfax and
Sons and the chief proprietor of the “Sydney
Morning Herald” made the power that was his
the servant always of good. In that high place
the slightest deviation from the narrow path
would be distantly evident and magnified by the
jealous and the enemies that a prominent man
must have. But during all the long life no
word of slander was heard, no spot appeared on
the reputation of the doyen of the Australian
press. The great power was used in the ser-
vice of justice, of freedom, of all the causes
that lead ultimately to good. Moderation and
conservation of outlook have one great advantage
over hastiness and uncontrolled activity. If the
latter may lead to great results sometimes, the
former must lead in the end to good always.
For that moderation Sir James stood ; for it he
worked through the long years, making his
newspaper—his public voice—stand for it, too.
Sydney history was busy during the life of
Sir James Fairfax. He saw the small town
grow to a great city—the fifth port of the Em-
pire. Nearly two-thirds of the town’s life since
the days of Phillip’s landing have gone by
during the life just closed. He saw responsible
government granted to the land, the discovery
of gold, the construction of the first railway,
the inauguration of the Sydney University and
of the Australian Commonwealth. The Indian
Mutiny, the Crimean War, the Franco-Prussian
War, the Civil War in America, the Zulu War,
the Russo-Japanese War, the Spanish-American
War, the Boer War, and the greatest war in
history—all these came and passed in his life-
time. He saw the great changes that followed
the invention of steam, the submarine cable,
wireless, the aeroplane. From the one “mangle”
printing press in his own office, in 1852, he saw
the six great machines of to-day turning out
100,000 copies of a 24-pages paper in an hour ;
while the wireless and electric telegraph revolu-
tionised the news that he could give his sub-
scribers.
A charitable man’s private charities are
known only to himself, and those who receive
them. These speak of the help given, and if
they are many, as in the case of Sir James
Fairfax, his private good deeds become public
property. Many still bless his name for the
help that came when they needed it. In a
larger and more prominent field (although
prominence was the last thing he desired
in such matters) he was identified with many
religious, charitable and philanthropic institu-
tions, regardless of sect or party. The
Y.M.0.A., Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, the
Boys’ Brigade, the Ragged Schools, the Mission
to Seamen, the Humane Society, the Queen Vic-
toria Home for Consumptives, and the Carring-
ton Convalescent Home, are a few only of the
institutions that will have good and grateful
cause to remember his name.
Too much of good, of kindliness and thought
and word for others was crowded in the long


life for any record to hope to do justice to it.
Posterity will do justice to the great figure that
is gone, as we in our time bring our meed of
praise and sorrow. , (
The honoured name is written in the history
of our land for all time, identified with justice
and the ultimate good of high endeavour. Our
loss is lessened by that, and by the knowledge
that there is good rest now for the active,
purposeful mind and the kindly heart that are
gone.
The Hawkesbury Agricultural College Journal,
May 1 st, 1919.
SIR JAMES FAIRFAX.
It is difficult to adequately convey to a new
generation any complete impression of those
features of a man’s character and personality
which were transparently apparent to his con-
temporaries. Thus we make reference to the
genial presence, charming personality, and
mature judgment of the late Sir James Read-
ing Fairfax. His quiet but persistent and sub-
stantial interest in all public matters affecting
the welfare of the community will be an
abiding memory to all residents of this State,
and to none more grateful than the present and
future students of the Hawkesbury Agricultural
College.
The College loses a benefactor whose provision
for annual prizes for all time forms one of the
stimulating factors in establishing a healthy
rivalry for the leading position at our annual
examinations. He was wise enough to realize
the immense influence technical education has on
a pioneering population. His influence was
always directed towards the permanent estab-
lishment of public institutions designed to carry
this into effect.
We share with the sorrowing members of his
distinguished family our affectionate regard in
mourning the loss of so able a citizen.
The Sydney City Mission Herald, May Ist, 1919.
IN MEMORIAM.
THE LATE SIR JAMES R. FAIRFAX.
A GENEROUS SUPPORTER.
The death of Sir James R. Fairfax, on the
28th March last, at the advanced age of 84,
removes one from the active list of friends of
the Sydney City Mission, whose sympathy was
shown in generous gifts and services.
His father, Hon. John Fairfax, M.L.C., was
one of its founders, and his son, Sir James,
continued the same kindly interest, and per-
haps the greatest service Sir James made for
the Mission was the part he took in the opening
of the Paddington District for the City Mission
work. When one contemplates the vast volume
of Christian usefulness which that deed began,
we bless God that He put it into the heart of
His servant to make it possible. Other openings
still present themselves for the stewards of
God’s gifts to go and do likewise.
The offer to provide the salary of a Missionary
was made to the council in 1886, and Missionary
Fred Smith, of Woolloomooloo District, was
selected to pioneer the way. All who know the
long career of this brother will concur that no
wiser choice could have been made. In all the
difficulties and trials of opening up the work,
Sir James was Mr. Smith’s sympathetic and
generous patron. He saw the work grow' and
expand, and took a delight in all the depart-
ments of the Mission Hall, especially as it re-
lated to the young. He continued this through
Mr. Smith’s tenure of office, and no one was
sorrier than Sir James Fairfax when Mr. Smith,
through ill health, had to retire. The latter’s
restoration, which permitted of him taking up
full work again at Newtown, was followed by
Sir James with keen interest, and every time
the writer had the pleasure of meeting him, his
invariable question was, “How is my friend, Mr.
Smith ?” For other missionaries of the past he
too had affection, Mr. M. H. Bowmaker, and
Mr. Fred Freeland, with whom a comradeship
sprung up when they were both young men in
the volunteer movement, Sir James as his com-
manding officer. It was always “Well, com-
rade,” and a twinkle of the eye with which the
two met.
Sir James took a lively interest in the Jubilee
of the Mission in 1912, .when he contributed
£SOO towards the objects selected to commemo-
rate that memorable event, viz., the establish-
ment of a Retiring Fund for the Aged
Missionaries, and for the erection of a Central
Hall and Headquarters, to take the place of the
temporary place at “Nithsdale,” situated where
the Majestic Picture Theatre now stands, in.
Liverpool Street, .Hyde Park.
He also was present at the Jubilee Banquet,
held in the Sydney Town Hall, and spoke of the
good work City Mission before Admiral
Sir G. B. King-Hall and other leaders of Syd-
ney life. An entry stands in his name in the
Mission’s Testimonial Book, dated 22nd
February, 1895, as follows; —■
“It has been my privilege to be a subscriber
to the Sydney City Mission for many years. 1
have been acquainted with some of the
Missionaries and their work, and from personal
knowledge can testify to their devotion in the
service of their Great Master. During the past
two years of depression, not only have many in
want found spiritual comfort, but through the
means of the City Mission have had their
temporal necessities supplied. I know no
Society more deserving of support than this. I
am sure its work commends itself to ■our best
consideration.”
Sir Janies Fairfax was a member of the
Council since 1892, and though of later years
he was not able to attend the meetings, one
could always be assured of his co-operation, and
his name was in itself a great commendation
of the Mission to the community at large.
When we entered into the new Mission Home
at Elizabeth Street, and were gathering a collec-
tion of photos of the early friends of the Syd-
ney City Mission —which makes a considerable
gallery, and an object of interest at our annual
luncheon —Sir James presented us with one of
his father, and we hope presently that one of
himself will be added to the number.
Professor Macintyre’s words at his funeral
sums up Sir James Fairfax’s long useful life;
“He had many interests outside his business
interests, in arts, and in literature, but the
chiefest interest of his long life was the King-
dom of God, and among these we are thankful
that of the poor, through the Sydney City
Mission, had a prominent place. Blessed is he
that considereth the poor.”
To Lady Fairfax and family we tender
sincere and respectful sympathy.


The Sunbeam, April, 1919.
IN MEMORIAM.
SIR JAMES READING FAIRFAX
SENIOR AND LIFE DEACON.
Sir James Fairfax was called Home after a
life of great usefulness and true nobility, on
Friday, March 28th, 1919, in his 85th year.
The Press notices of his career and the
wonderfully representative gathering at the
funeral services, bear eloquent testimony to his
greatness as a public man.
We knew him best as the Father of our
Church, one of the most beloved of our mem-
bers. What his service has meant to a long
succession of pastors and several generations of
worshippers, no one can estimate. We knew, of
course, that he was a great man of affairs, but
all his possessions and the honours that were
showered upon him did not spoil his deep
humility, his simple faith, and his love for
the Kingdom. Amongst all his honours he
valued not least that of First Life Deacon of
the Church he loved and served so well.
The history of Jersey Road Church was
interwoven with his life, and the work will
stand in a sense a monument to his memory.
At the April church meeting the following
reference was made: —
“Sir James Fairfax, who was transferred to
this fellowship as 1 young man from the Pitt
Street Congregational Church, on July 3rd,
1872, 47 years ago, was appointed deacon three
years later, and became active in all the affairs
of the church, and showed the deepest interest
in all its organizations. Reference to the
church records shows him to have been connected
with every movement introduced for the exten-
sion of the Master's Kingdom. He was especi-
ally active in the movement to erect the present
church building. His assistance was freely
given in every possible way. Whatever the
matter at issue, large or small, he always gave
it his earnest and deliberate consideration.
“His cheerful, genial personality endeared him
to all with whom he came in contact, and
church matters he was always happy to discuss,
with a view to betterment, with his pastor, his
fellow-deacons, or the officers. During the 47
years of his connection with the church, his
attachment to it and its institutions was loyalty
itself.”
The following resolution was carried: —-
“That we place on the records of the church
our sense of the loss sustained by the death of
Sir James R. Fairfax, which took place on
Friday, March 28th, 1919. Becoming a member
of this fellowship by transfer from Pitt Street
Church on July 3rd, 1872, and a deacon on the
17th February, 1875, he entered cheerfully into
its fellowship of service. As member and dea-
con he rendered valuable and ungrudging help,
and we can but rejoice that he was enabled by
Divine Grace to adorn his profession as a
Christian until he fell asleep in Jesus. By
personal service and consistent liberality he did
what he could to promote the welfare of the
church in all its organizations. We shall long
miss his familiar presence at the services, but
the loss is ours, the gain is his, and we rejoice
that, after a long and full life spent in the
service of his Master, he has entered into his
reward. We also wish to express our deep
sympathy with Lady Fairfax and the bereaved
family in their sorrow and pray that the God
of all Grace may graciously sustain them and
sanctify their trial to their good and to His
own glory.”


Tributes
THE STATE GOVERNOR.
His Excellency the Governor, Sir Walter
Davidson, telegraphing from Hill View, Sutton
Forest, said:—
“Sir James Fairfax was of the best type of
citizen, deeply attached to Sydney and his life’s
work therein, using his good heart and his clear
head to improve and beautify this glorious city.
“But he was more than a citizen of Sydney.
He fostered the development of the State, and
he grasped the potentialities of the Common-
wealth. He worked for the good of both with
all his might.
“In these days, when the daily Press is the
most potent instrument whereby men’s minds
are taught and their opinion shaped, Sir James
realised the responsibilities of power. He used
his opportunity with clear sanity and reason-
able moderation.
“My personal admiration for him was deep:
I did not hear the sad tidings until too late for
me to attend the funeral in person as I should
have wished.”
THE STATE PREMIER.
“The news of Sir James Fairfax’s death,”
said Mr. Holman, Premier, last night, “will be
heard with universal regret. It removes a most
striking figure in Australian journalism.
“The late Sir James Fairfax was not only
a leader in all the tenets upon which the re-
putation of Australian journalism is based,”
went on the Premier. “He also always in-
culcated and acted upon the principle that the
newspaper man should himself be a vigorous
participant in the social activities of his time.
That Australian journalism is where it is to-
day is largely due to his personal influence,
continuously exerted over more than half a
century. The dignity and humanity of the
Press, which public men, smarting under
occasional criticism, are sometimes apt to over-
look, continue amongst us practically without
diminution. No one can doubt that the
deceased gentleman’s influence was one of the
principal factors which have produced this effect.
“The cause of charity and the interests of
enlightenment have both suffered irreplaceable
loss,” added Mr. Holman.
SIR WILLIAM CULLEN.
The Chief Justice, Sir William Cullen, last
night said: —
“I have heard of the death of Sir James
Fairfax with sincere regret. His memory will
stand high in the esteem of the public. The
late Sir James Fairfax has been associated so
prominently and so long with so many move-
ments for the benefit of the community that we
cannot at present measure the loss which has
been sustained by his death. But this we do
realize; He has left vacant a place of honour
in our midst. His sterling integrity and high
standard of good citizenship, combined with the
qualities of a gracious Christian gentleman,
have had their effect not only in the preserva-
tion here of the best traditions of the Press,
but also in the safeguarding of those things
which are of the most value, in the national
sense, to the Australian people.”
SIR ALBERT GOULD.
Sir Albert Gould writes: —
“I have heard with great regret of the death
of Sir James Fairfax, whose innate courtesy
and kindly disposition made him welcome with
all those who had the privilege of his friend-
ship. I had the honour of being associated
with him in several public movements, but
more particularly in connection with the Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital; and as a member
of the board of that institution, we were col-
leagues for very many years, during many
of which he held the position of honorary
treasurer until one of his visits to England
long since; and, although he did not resume
the duties of that office upon his return, he
yet devoted much valuable time to the de-
velopment and advancement of its interests;
his advice was at all times greatly appre-
ciated by his fellow members on the board,
who always recognized it as that of a man
of mature judgment and ripe experience. He
was one of the early founders of what may
now be regarded as one of the great hospitals
of the Empire; and in it leaves a great
memorial of his untiring services to the cause
of humanity and the alleviation of misery and
sickness.”
PROFESSOR MACINTYRE.
The Rev. Professor R. G. Maclntyre, ex-
Moderator-General of the Presbyterian Assembly,
said yesterday:—“The divine epitaph on Moses
is beautiful in its simplicity and its compre-
hensiveness, ‘Moses thy servant is dead,’ and
my first words on hearing the news this day,
‘A good man gone home,’ sums up Sir James
Fairfax as I knew him.
“He had many interests outside his business,
interests in art and in literature, but the
chiefest and deepest interest of his long life
was the Kingdom of God, because to him it was
the kingdom of good to his fellow-men.
Whether his work lay on a hospital board or
a Y.M.C.A committee, or a boy scout council,
it was all part of that larger whole which made
for the divine rule of love and righteousness.
The service of his fellow-men was the service
of God, and because it was so he never wearied
in the work. Some men flash with meteoric
splendour for a brief season, then pass into the
dimness of waning interest in the cause which
for a moment stirred their enthusiasm. Sir
James never sought to shine, most modest of
men, but his light was always burning and
guided many a good cause to success. He could
always be depended on, and when that can be


said of a man through sixty years of public life,
one begins to realize how great his loss is to
this community. Every cause of charity or
piety, of nation or of Empire, turned instinc-
tively to him for help and counsel, never denied.
Modestly, firmly, and consistently, he stood for
the higher ideals of life, and laboured for their
fulfilment.
“Such men are all too few in our midst, and
this intensifies our loss in his passing. He
gave not only of his wealth, but the greater
gift of himself in untiring service to whatever-
made for the uplift of the distressed or the
needy.
“Of the inner life thus expressed in public
service I am not permitted to speak, for when
we talked together of these things he would
often add, ‘this is only between ourselves.’ But
were I free to speak it would be of an inner
sanctuary of humble devotion, fed upon the
Word of God and prayer, in the simple faith
which trusted because it had tested.
“Gratitude to God for such men lifts our
sorrow from darkness to light!”
METHODIST CONFERENCE PRESIDENT.
The Rev. J. G. Wheen, President of the
Methodist Conference, referred to the death of
Sir James Fairfax at last night's session of the
Conference. He referred to the deceased's long
and honourable career, and his connction with
one of the great daily newspapers. Sir James
Fairfax had been responsible in no small way
for the high moral tone of the Sydney Press,
which compared favourably with any' in the
world. Sir James’s long and honourable connec-
tion with church life and various philanthropic
agencies would cause him to be sorely missed.
REV. N. J. COCKS.
Rev. N. J. Cocks, ex-Chairman of the Con-
gregational Union of New South Wales: —
“Sir James Fairfax in religion came from
the strong God-fearing stock that has been the
heart of the British Empire. His father and
mother helped to make the Pitt Street Congre-
gational Church a vital force in the country.
They joined, too, in every movement they
believed would make for faith and righteousness
throughout the country. And Sir James counted
it his duty and his privilege to further what
his parents had begun. He was first a member
of the old Church and then for many years of
the Jersey Road Church, where he had specially
happy association with the late Revs. Dr. Fraser
and Dr. Fordyce. He has helped as a deacon
and leader amongst the laymen, quietly but
efficiently for nearly half a century. Outside his
own Church he has been an honoured member of
the council of Camden College, which his father
largely helped to establish for the training of
ministers. The Home Mission Board and the
associations for Church aid have been consider-
ably' indebted, not only to his generosity, but
also to his unfailing sympathy and courtesy.
Individual churches, not only of his own order,
have from time to time felt the touch of his
helpfulness. To join with him another who
recently passed away, and who was a bov with
Sir James in church and school, the late Sir
Phillip Sy'dney Jones, the leaders of religious
life in Sydney feel a great loss has been sus-
tained by the removal of two outstanding men
so clear in their faith and so loval to its
traditions,”
MR. J. J. VIRGO.
The National Field Secretary of the Y.M.O.A.
writes-r—
-“I enjoyed the personal friendship of the
late Sir James Fairfax for 30 years, and the
news of his demise was not a surprise, for I
was privileged to have a short interview with
him recently, and felt then it was likely to be
the last. He was one of the oldest members
of the Y.M.C.A., and one of the best supporters
during my Sydney regime. An unfailing friend,
he kept up a regular correspondence with me
since I left this State, and his letters indicated
a close knowledge of the organization in all its
ramifications and an intense interest in its
activities, not merely local, but world-wide. In
the passing of Sir James I lose one of my best
friends.”
ST. JAMES’S CHURCH.
Before his sermon at St. James’s Church,
King Street, yesterday morning, the rector, the
Rev. P. A. Micklem, said: —“‘Know ye not
that there is a prince and a great man fallen
this day' in Israel ?’ In the death of Sir James
Fairfax the State, and, indeed, the whole
Commonwealth, has sustained a great loss. He
was a man who played a great part in the life
of Sydney for half a century and over, and did
much to impart a high tone to journalism; and,
indeed, to the whole public and private life of
the State. A many-sided man, he shared in a
great variety of enterprises in the commercial
and educational life of the community. Not a
member of our Church, he was yet a devoted
Christian and a faithful member of his own
communion, and one whose interest and
generosity were always in support of any insti-
tution established for the helping and uplift-
ing of any section of the community. It is well
that we should remember him here, and honour
his memory, and as a tribute of respect for him,
and of sympathy with his family, I will ask you
to stand for a moment in silence.”
PITT STREET CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH.
The Rev. N. J. Cocks, in the Pitt Street Con
gregational Church, yesterday referred to the
death of Sir James Fairfax. x
“Sir James Fairfax,” he said, “was not only
a leading citizen and personality of outstanding
influence in the community, but one who showed,
in an unfailing way, insight and s.vmpathy in
dealing with the varying problems' and diffi-
culties of Church life and work. More than
that, he lived before us a life of quiet faith
and goodness. He belonged to an order of men
far too rare in the community, and combined a
keen interest in public affairs with real religious
faith.”
HISTORICAL SOCIETY.
The Hon. Secretary of the Royal Australian
Historical Society (Mr. Cramp) writes: —“Sir,
■ —Will you kindly express the regret with
which the members of the Royal Australian
Historical Society learn of the death of Sir
James Fairfax. The departed gentleman
recently prepared a paper on his recollections
of early Sydney', which was read on his behalf
by his Honor Judge Backhouse at our monthly
meeting in July last. The article is now in the
press,”


HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY.
Mr. J. H. Maiden, ! President of the Horti-
cultural Society, writes: —“In your great
enumeration of Sir James Fairfax’s activities
and artistic tastes, his love of a garden has
not been mentioned. He always kept a first-
class garden, the list of prizes for flowers and
vegetables from it in the shows of the Horti-
cultural Society and Horticultural Association
is a very lengthy one, while on more than one
occasion he gave me a handsome cheque in aid
of some good cause the Horticultural Society
had in hand.”
“HERALD” BENEFIT SOCIETY.
In the Sixty-fourth Annual Report and
Balance Sheet of the “Herald” Office Benefit
Society of December 31st, 1919, the Secretary
(Mr. George Brown) says :—Gentlemen —In
placing before you the 64 th Annual Report
your Board of Management regrets having to
place on record the death of Sir James Fairfax,
who died on Friday, March 28th, 1919, aged
84 years and five months. Sir James had been
a contributor to the funds of the “Herald” Office
Benefit Society for about 64 years, and took a
keen interest in its affairs. A few months be-
fore his death I had the pleasure of a long chat
with him about old times in the “Herald”
Office; and he thanked me for the many
references to companions of his early manhood
which were occasionally made in the Annual
, Reports of your Society, and which, he stated,
“Opened his floodgates of memory.” On that
occasion Sir James showed me a small oil paint-
ing, which was hanging in his room, and stated
that it was w'orth £lOO. It was a scene from
Hunter to Bridge Streets, on the western side
of Pitt Street, and he pointed out to me the
“pump” from which the residents used to get
their water. It was situated a little below the
Mutual Provident Building. Fancy getting
water from a pump in Pitt Street these days!
On Saturday, March 29th, 1919, Sir James was
laid to rest in that charmingly-situated cemetery
at South Head, from which can be seen Sydney
Harbour, with its bay's and estuaries, the golden
setting sun at the head of Parramatta River,
and within hearing of the ceaseless song of the
sea —a fitting resting place for one who took
such interest in all things Australian.
On June 25th, 1918, Sir James read a paper
before the Australian Royal Historical Society
on “Some Recollections of Old Sydney,” which
was delightfully' interesting to students of Syd-
ney’s early days. At the conclusion of that
paper he stated: “And now I have done.
Presently I shall go down again to Dawes Point
and stand and look upon Sydney Cove and gaze
from east to west on the waters of Port Jackson
-—the waters that Phillip sailed upon, and in
which he cast anchor 130 years ago; the Cove
on the shores of which the British flag was first
broken to the breeze, proclaiming the birth of
a .new world of commerce and one of the
brightest diadems in the Crown of our Empire.
And what a busy scene I shall gaze upon—of
ocean and coastal steamships, ferry boats and
lighters and all sorts of craft, speaking to us of
the richness of our commerce and the wonderful
productivity of our soil! Then I shall turn
and look upon the great city that has grown
up here —upon the splendid modern buildings
all around us and the foreshore and heights of
the northern Sydney, stretching almost from
Middle Head till lost in the western distance and
the river beyond, and here and there some old-
time building, some historical memorial, which
speaks to us of the beginning of things in this
land and the labours and forethoughts of our
fathers! It has been a pleasant task (and I
trust not an unprofitable one) to go digging,
as it were, in these fields of the past. They
have been ploughed over many times by other
members of your Society and have yielded
golden grain, but it may be that here and there
in the pages I have written you may find a
grain or two that is worth adding to the har-
\est. We look back fifty or sixty, or perhaps
seventy, years, and see the small things from
which our city and State and Commonwealth
have grown—and it is wonderful! We see Syd-
ney as it is to-day, and take, I hope, a just
pride in it ; but there are some of us who some-
times long, just a little, for some of the things
of the past. The whole story is, as Sir Walter
Davidson, remarks, a romance; but I fancy we
are more prosaic and less romantic than of old.”
Nine months after reading this essay Sir
James was laid to rest in South Head Cemetery,
from where all who like can gaze upon the
beautiful picture described by hiih in the above
paragraph.
Sixty-three years ago, in 1857, at a period
when the high cost of living couldn’t have been
perplexing the residents of Sydney, the
“Herald” Chapel, on the motion of Mr. Andrew
Ramage and Mr. Henry Bone, voted the
magnificent sum of £5 ! “for tne purpose of
enjoying themselves in a sociable manner,” and
they invited Sir James Fairfax (who would be
about 22 at this date) and his brother Charles
(his senior) to an excursion to Manly Beach
and a dinner at the Pier Hotel, and were con-
veyed thereto by the steamer Phantom. Both
Sir James and his brother attended, and a week
later the following letter was received from Mr.
Charles Fairfax: —“To Executive of Excursion.
Gentlemen, —I beg to enclose the sum of £lO
for self and brother James towards defraying
the expenses of Saturday’s delightful excursion;
and we hope, if our lives are spared, to be
present at many anniversaries.” About seven
years after this letter was written, Mr. Charles
Fairfax was killed through being thrown from a
fractious horse he was riding on the Parramatta
Road, but Sir James lived for 62 years after the
excursion. Of all the merrymakers on that
occasion only one survives, Mr. Harry Lee, who
is nearing his 82nd birthday.


Messages of Condolence
Government House, Melbourne,
30th March, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I was much grieved to read the news of Sir
James’ death and would offer you my warmest
sympathy in your sorrow. You have the conso-
lation of looking back on his long career of use-
fulness during which he and you gave so much
generous help and sympathy to every good cause,
and the feeling that his life, which has closed,
was one of which you and the country may be
justly proud. Again with all heartfelt sympathy
from the Governor-General and myself.
Yours sincerely,
HELEN MUNRO FERGUSON.
Hill View, Moss Vale,
March 29th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
It is with the deepest regret that we heard
this morning of the death of Sir James Fairfax,
and I venture to intrude on your sorrow just to
offer you His Excellency’s and my sincerest
sympathy.
Sydney and New South Wales have sustained a
real loss —for, indeed, Sir James was a great
man. His long life has been a full one, and
his memory will ever be kept green by all the
good works which he has fostered.
In your great sorrow 't will come as some
little comfort to you to know how widely he was
revered, and how many are grieving with you
and for you.
With deepest sympathy,
Yours sincerely,
MARGARET DAVIDSON.
Bishopscourt, Sydney,
April 2nd, 1919.
My dear Lady Fairfax,
I write to express our very deep sympathy
with you and your family in the loss of Sir
James Fairfax. Personally I recognize that in
him I have lost a very real friend. I shall
never forget his constant old-world courtesy and
his deep kindliness of heart which made it such
a pleasure to meet him during these last ten
years. His loss renders the world of social life
so much the poorer and emptier. Then, as a
citizen of public spirit and noble integrity, we
have lost a factor in our public life that we can
ill spare.
But his memory and lofty example live, and
I am quite certain that we are all continuously
the better for having known him and been with
him.
How in the hope of the glorious resurrection
we look forward to the fuller life, the thought
of which is brought home to us by his departure,
and sets this present life in its true proportion.
May the presence of the blessed Master com-
fort you in your bereavement is the prayer of
us all.
Yours sincerely,
JOHN CHARLES SYDNEY.
“Avenel,” Darling Point,
April 18th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I did not write at once because letters of
sympathy received immediately after the death
of one whom we have loved often cause more
grief than comfort. But I cannot withhold an
expression of my feeling that the country has
lost a son who was her loyal friend. Sir James
was a great power for good in our midst; for
the “Herald,” under him, ever exerted a far-
reaching influence in favour of a just view of
public questions. All lovers of Australia will
own that he did all that one man could to
establish as a tradition the principle that the
Press must base its claim to guide the people
upon the morality of its policy and not upon
mere opportunism. That is not an easy course
to steer ; but, firmly held, it wins, as it deserves
success, which in its turn brings benefit to the
people themselves. In that way the “Herald ’
has become, and in that sense it is, a great
paper.
One could not observe Sir James for many
years without asking oneself the reason for the
serenity of his aspect. Enemies ascribed it to
self complacency engendered by wealth. That
was an unjust view. The unprejudiced saw that
it was the outward sign of a clear conscience;
the calm outlook upon life of a man who did
no unworthy act because he harboured no un-
worthy thought.
Believe me, yours very truly,
EDMUND BARTON.
My wife bids me to add the expression of her
deep sympathy and warm regard.
“The Sydney Morning Herald,”
March 30th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
The members of the Literary Staff of “The
Sydney Morning Herald” met on Friday night
and passed a resolution expressing their
sympathy with you and the members of your
family on the death of Sir James Fairfax. It
was realized that the staff had lost a real
friend, and its sorrow, though embodied in the
formal words of a resolution, is deep and
sincere.
I am, yours faithfully,
C. BRUNSDON FLETCHER.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
“Glenlea,” 16 Johnston Street, Annandale.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
Mrs. Dallen and I desire to express to you
and your family our deep sympathy. The State
is the poorer in the loss of Sir James —as a
Christian citizen there was none greater, he was
always ready to encourage what was highest and
best in and for the community. The Congre-
gational Church has lost in him a loyal member


and one who was a devout and humble follower
of Our Lord and Saviour.
May I say as one who has been and is still
actively engaged in many of the institutions and
societies in which Sir James was also interested,
that ore could always rely on his deep interest
and sympathy, and his loss will be very keenly
felt.
But his is the gain of immortal bliss and of
the rest which remaineth to the beloved of the
Lord.
AVe pray that the. Divine consolation may be
yours and that you may be upheld by His
Grace.
Yours faithfully,
ROBERT A. DALLEN.
“Dareuth,” Strathfleld,
March 31st, 1919.
To Lady Fairfax.
Dear Lady Fairfax —I have thought much of
your loneliness since the news reached me of the
passing of Sir James. I hope that I shall not be
intruding upon your grief if I venture to offer
my deep sympathy in your bereavement. After
so long a life shared together so happily, you
will miss him now at every turn, and all his
quiet, wise and kindly ways. But how much
it is that he fulfilled his days beyond the
allotted span, and how much more it is to be
thankful for that he won and kept the esteem
of so many people—in lofty places and lowly.
His last letter to me was one of deep sympathy
for me in the loss of our mutual and old friend,
Sir Philip. It was full of tenderness and the
memory of past years breathed through it like
a benediction.
One other memory I have which is quite un-
forgetable. I called to see Sir James at his
office. We spoke of the late Dr. Fordyce, and
as we talked it touched me to see his eyes fill
with unshed tears.
Belief in the Eternal Life becomes more and
more inescapable when one has had long fellow-
ship with even a few steadfast souls who
realized that life is just our chance of learning
how “love might be, hath been indeed, and is.”
With deep sympathy, I remain,
Dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours as ever,
GEO. LITTLEMORE.
St. Andrew’s Manse, Ballarat.
March 30th, 1919.
My dear Lady Fairfax,
I have read with much regret of the death
of your dear husband. Though he was spared
to a good old age, and was ripe for the call to
“go up Higher,” yet you will miss him the more
after your long and loving partnership. Within
you and about you, however, are the consolations
of God, the glorious assurances of the Gospel of
Jesus. And my prayer is that you and yours
may experience the peace and strength of those
promises. 1 have known you and your husband
for some 40 years. At least, it is that time
since I first met him; you, I met some years
later. The more I knew your dear husband, the
more did I respect his character; and he was
always most courteous to me. Our experiences
of bereavement lead us nearer to God, and make
the vision of the Better Land ever more insistent
and precious. The separation from our dear
ones who have died in the faith of Christ, is
but for a little while. Mrs. Walker wishes me
to convey to you and Miss Fairfax her loving
sympathy. Will you please convey to Miss Fair-
fax and your sons my sorrow at their loss and
my true sympathy. May the God of all comfort
console you.
With sincere regards,
I am, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours sincerely,
JOHN WALKER.
“Koorali,” March 30th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
Just a few lines to convey to you on behalf
of my wife and family and myself our heartfelt
and sincere sympathy with you all in your
sorrow. The earthly life has closed, full of years
and honour and respect from all. He rests from
his labours and his work and his influence follow
on and persist as a fragrant memory.
AVe shall never forget his letters to us in our
times of deep sorrow and bereavement, and we
can only hope and pray that you all may be
comforted in your hour of sorrow.
With our united kindest regards and deepest
sympathy.
Very sincerely yours,
GEORGE E. RENNIE.
Australian Club,
April 3rd, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
You and yours have been much in my thoughts
during the last few days, and I am writing to
offer my hearfelt sympathy in your deep sorrow.
I can never forget Sir James—l had the
greatest admiration for him and his beautiful
character. Since my boyhood I have always
looked up to him and admired him. He has
shown us many kindnesses which I shall always
remember, and was one of the best friends 1
ever had.
He has left behind him an honoured name and
a great example to every one, and it can be truly
said of him that the world is better because he
lived in it.
The loss to you and yours is terrible, but
there must be great consolation in knowing that
he has left with you nothing but sweet memories.
With my deepest sympathy,
Very sincerely yours,
F. B. WILKINSON.
P.S. —Dorothy joins with me in deepest
sympathy.
“San Remo,” Queen’s Avenue, McMahon's Point,
May 12th, 1919.
Dear Miss Fairfax,
Whenever I see your father’s name —as I do
almost daily—l feel that I must write to you.
One of the first to recognize my work and to
encourage me in my early attempts at journal-
ism was your father. Before I entered the
University and again before I went to Europe,
he found time in his busy life to chat to me
about my work and give me introductions that
helped to make my path very pleasant—and this
quite unsought, for I was far too shy to have
asked for such favours, and quite unknown except
for one or two articles in the “Herald.”
Although for the last five years I have been
teaching instead of writing, I felt, with your
father’s death, that I had lost a kind friend and
wise adviser.
Though I never had the privilege of meeting
your mother, may I join now in truest sympathy
with you both in such a loss.
Sincerely yours,
ANNETTE MACLELLAN.


St. James’ Rectory, Croydon.
March 31st, 1919.
My dear Lady Fairfax,
It came as quite a shock to open the paper
and find that dear Sir James had passed from
us. Our real and deep sympathy goes out
especially to you and Miss Fairfax. At his ripe
age we ought not to be surprised, but the separa-
tion is none the less painful because of that.
What a wonderfully full and useful life his
has been, and from so many points of view.
Best of all it has been a rooted life drawing
its strength and beauty from the river of God’s
grace in Christ Jesus.
You will not sorrow as those without hope in
your loss, and you will try to remember all the
gain of the change for your loved one.
I am sorry that an engagement prevented me
from attending the funeral.
Please give Miss Fairfax my kindest regards
and sympathy.
Yours very sincerely,
CHAS. HUGHESDON.
The Manse, Pyrmont,
April 3rd, 1919.
To Lady Fairfax.
Dear Lady Fairfax—Mrs. Buchan joins with
me in conveying to you and the members of
your family, our deep sympathy in the loss you
have sustained through the death of your dear
husband, Sir James R. Fairfax.
The loss to our community, not to speak of
other things, seems to us almost irreparable, for
although not taking much part in public affairs
lately, the weight of his opinion and approval,
were with all good and gracious work.
To the special work in our own denomination
he was a continuous friend, not simply by con-
tributing, but as a real friend in what was being
done.
I do not think I can ever forget the words
of comfort to Mrs. Buchan and myself when the
news came that our youngest boy had fallen in
the great war; words so simple, yet noble and
uplifting, and so tender withal.
Commending you to the God of all comfort.
I am, yours sincerely,
JAMES BUCHAN.
to add my word of appreciation to all that has
been said. In the far-off days when work was
difficult in Paddington I never appealed in vain
for his sympathy and help. Many, many times
his cheering words were a help and an inspira-
tion. He had a way of being kind that made
his kindness linger in one's memory. And now
in this life we shall not see or hear his kindly
voice again. The city is poorer for his absence,
but infinitely richer than if he had never
exercised his gifts for God.
May God comfort you all in this separation,
and may his family follow his steps. I was un-
able to be at his funeral because I am on the
sick list again.
Please accept of my sympathy.
I am, yours sincerely,
FREDERICK SMITH,
City Missionary.
Newington College, Stanmore.
March 30th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
May I be allowed to offer to you and your
family sincere sympathy in the loss you have
sustained by Sir James’s death. I think there
was one feeling uppermost among those who
attended his funeral yesterday. We have lost a
good citizen. That is written large upon his
life, and it is a great thing that our city is not
only beautiful for situation, but is beautiful also
in some of the types of citizens she delights to
honour. If unworthy ones at times are raised
to power, it is nevertheless true that Sydney in
her heart respects the good. And that Sir James
has markedly. In his sympathy with the best
things in our life, he leaves behind to his family
and his city an untarnished and honoured name.
The “Herald” stands as his own and his
father’s monument and it strikes many of us that
its traditions count among the fine ones of
modern journalism.
The heaviest loss is on you and your family.
We can only look on that as a sacred thing, and
offer you sympathy from without. My wife
wishes to unite with me in all that I say.
I am, yours sincerely,
C. J. PRESCOTT.
Seamen's Institute, George St. North, Sydney,
March 31st, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
Mrs. Pain joins me in this little note to ex-
press the deep sympathy we both feel in your
irreparable loss. Sir James seemed to me never
to be too busy to give his gracious attention to
anything to do with this work here, and I shall
miss his kindly advice very much indeed. 1
know there are many things we wanted to see
fulfilled. May the same spirit which guided all
his activities be handed on in our generation.
We felt very much for you all at the beautifully
impressive and stately service on Saturday, and
prayed that our God of all comfort would fufil
His gracious promise to you in this sad hour.
Believe me, yours sincerely,
ALLAN F. PAIN.
“Bethany,” Yerrick Rd., Belmore.
March 30th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
It was with deeply-stirred feelings that I read
of your dear husband’s departure. I would like
“Ravenstone,” Katoomba,
March 31st, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
Will you permit me to express how deeply 1
sympathize with you in the great loss which you
have sustained. To lose the loved and faithful
partner of so many years must be a grief beyond
words. But I increasingly feel, as the years
pass and the old familiar faces leave the earthly
scene, that heaven is coming nearer, getting more
real, and the thought of those who will be wait-
ing and watching for our coming is a great
assuagement of sorrow. What a rich society is
gathering in heaven !
“May all love —
His love, unseen but felt, o’ershadow thee,
Till God’s love set thee at his side again.”
The public loss is a very great one. But we
must thank God for the long blessing of his
blameless life. He had great power and he
always wielded it under a deep and noble sense
of responsibility.
Please excuse my intrusion upon your grief.
I feel how poor and inadequate words are at


such times as that through which you are now
passing.
Believe me, my dear Lady Fairfax,
With deep sympathy,
Very faithfully yours.
WALTER MATHISON.
it was not to be. You have had your sorrow
and we have had ours, but with all the shadows,
1 feel sure you can look back on a very happy
life crowded with good deeds and work for
others. Forgive me for not having written
before, but somehow I felt I could not.
Believe me, yours very sincerely,
EVAN SPICER.
Australasian United Steam Navigation Co. Ltd.
S.S. “Wyandra,” Melbourne,
March 30th, 1919.
My dear Lady Fairfax,
Mrs. Nelson and I were shocked to receive the
sad news last night of the passing of Sir James.
Our hearts go out to you in prayerful and
loving sympathy.
I am more grieved than I can say that 1
was not with you in these last days to render
what little help and comfort lay in my power.
My own heart is sad for 1 have learned to love
Sir James. I shall always count it one of my
greatest privileges to have known him. He was
always kindness itself to me, as you know. He
will be deeply mourned by thousands. I have
been looking at the last letter he wrote me.
He was referring to the fact that it was Sunday
and you had gone to the service. “It is com-
munion, to-day,” he said, “I would dearly love
to be present but that cannot be ; still I am able
to be in the spirit and ‘this do in remembrance
of Him.’ ” He had great reverence and devotion
for His Lord and Master and his whole life was
set to obey His will. It is indeed great to have
such an one as husband, father and friend. The
Church he loved so much and served so faith-
fully all through the years will miss him in a
hundred ways, but his memory will be an in-
spiration for man}- years. For him we can have
no doubt. We know he is with his Lord. No
one but you can know the depth of your grief.
Out of the depths we cry unto God and He
answers and leads us to the rock that is higher
than we, and may God comfort and sustain you
and yours is our earnest prayer.
With loving sympathy,
Your affectionate Pastor,
ARTHUR C. NELSON.
“Belair,” Dulwich, S.E., 21,
June 10th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
My wife wrote to Mary a couple of months
ago when we heard the sad news of your loss,
and of my old’s friend’s death ; and this morning
I have been reading “The Sydney Morning
Herald” of his “passing,” and of the respect and
love in which he has been held by all com-
munities. I know you have been overwhelmed
with letters, but I must write myself and offer
you my heartfelt sympathy. During the last
weeks my mind has been constantly recalling the
events of our friendship. The first time I ever
remember seeing Sir James was at Woodford,
when he came over with his father —then we
think how nearly 46 years ago you and Sir
James came to Halifax to be present at out-
marriage—it was so kind of you. My happy
time in Sydney I look back upon as one of the
red letter days of my life; and, if it had not
been for the" war, I think I should have been
in Sydney two or three years ago. I should
have liked to have seen you both once more, but
“Lisbon,” Kelvingrove, Brisbane.
April 14th, 1919.
Dear Miss Fairfax,
I have refrained from intruding on your great
sorrow, not for want of thinking of you and
Lady Fairfax, but because I felt you would wish
to be left alone with your own deep thoughts.
And words are but poor things at the best ot
times.
Still, 1 do want to write to you and ask you
to accept my deepest and sincerest sympathy.
Will you please also convey the same to Lady
Fairfax and Mr. Geoffrey and Mr. J. O. Fairfax.
To live an honourable and useful life of ser-
vice to one’s fellowmen is a great thing, and it
may be that “to die is far better” ; but whilst
death is swallowed up in victory and reward,
those who are left must mourn with aching
hearts.
For myself, the memory of your father brings
back many happy recollections of kind thoughts
and acts.
Believe me, yours sincerely,
W. FARMER WHYTE.
The Women’s College, University of Sydney,
March 29th, 1919.
My dear, dear Mary,
I was so grieved for you and your mother
when I saw the notice of your father’s death in
the paper this morning. Even the sadness at
the thought of what the passing of one who had
played so great a part in the history and life
of the community must mean to all whp belong
to it, was covered and hidden by the sympathy
for you two to whom the personal loss is so
overwhelming. I knew, from what you said,
that the end could not be far off and at intervals
since your last visit I have thought how much
of charm and interest, and knowledge and
thought—all the things that made the old
society here so attractive —would be lost when
Sir James passed over to the other side. To
speak of his work as a citizen is absurd. On
every hand there are monuments to it, alike in
his profession, in philanthropy, in the wider
aspects of social life where wisdom plays an
equal part with human kindliness. But some-
how to everyone who knew him even slightly,
the loss is almost personal. He will be missed
even more for what he was than for what he
did, and you and Lady Fairfax will have from
people you never knew a personal sympathy in
your grief which must if even unconsciously
have a power of consolation.
I wish I could have come to the service, but
I am tied to the house.
Please give my kindest regards to your
mother, and with much love to yourself,
I am, always yours affectionately,
LOUISA MACDONALD.


“Honiton,” Bellevue Hill,
March 29th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
It was with sorrowful surprise that the sad
intelligence came upon me this morning of the
loss of a near neighbour and friend, whom my
wife and I have regarded with the very warmest
feelings and respect. It is hard to realize what
must be those of his wife, daughter and sons,
who have lived so many years with him in close
and affectionate companionship, tempered tho’
they be with the thoughts that the trials of a
very advanced age are ended. We can measure
those of the community when we read the tribute
to his exemplary and most useful services to it.
My wife and I cannot but offer our sincere
sympathy.
I have long ago found myself quite unable to
pay the last marks of respect and esteem, and
could not be present to-day.
My wife joins me in this feeble attempt of
mine to express what I mean. I too am
experiencing many of the shortcomings of ad-
vanced old age.
Yours sincerely,
M. H. STEPHEN.
James impressed me as a noble extra gentleman,
and what can one say more than that ? Easily
the greatest gentleman I met on your side of the
world. That makes the sense of loss all the more
keen —for the place of such a man is really
never filled up. But on the other hand, it does
fill us with a blessed and glorious hope as we
think of him. That has been my comfort in my
own sorrow, the absolute assurance I have had
that my dear one is more gloriously alive than
ever. And that is true of your husband also ; he
is blessedly alive. What gaps have been made
in our circles during the last four years. How
strange Australia will seem to me (if I ever
again visit it) without Sir James, Sir Philip
Sydney, Dr. Bevan, and Dr. Jefferis. And how
strange it will be to come (if I do come) with-
out my wife. But happily for us all, the part-
ing is but for a season and there is a Father’s
house in which we shall all meet again. I know
how poor the very warmest words must seem in
face of a loss like yours; but I felt I should just
like to tell you that I was thinking of you and
praying for you. My daughter unites with me
in kindest remembrances and in affectionate
sympathy.
Yours very faithfully,
S. D. JONES.
“Rona,” Bellevue Hill,
April 2nd, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
May I add a few lines to the very many
expressions of regret that you are receiving
about the death of Sir James. What 1 would
say is that, for many years I have always felt
great and sincere respect for his high character
and unblemished life. Sir James stood midway
in age between my father and myself, and 1
know that my father, who was a good judge of
men and for a long time was closely associated
with him in many ways, held the view also
that I have just expressed.
Taken by itself, this does not mean much,
but it is being said on every side, and since pur
own loss, nearly 20 years ago, I have not heard
so general an expression of the sense of loss for
the community as has been that for Sir James.
May his memory long be green among us.
With kind regards,
Believe me, yours very truly,
EDW. W. KNOX.
The Manse, Richmond Hill, Bournemouth,
April 18th, 1919.
My dear Lady Fairfax,
I saw a brief notice in the “Times” the other
day which told me the sad news that your dear
husband had been taken from your side. I have
continually since prayed that in your loneliness
and sorrow you might have the presence and
comfort of our blessed Lord Himself; but I felt
I would also like you to know that on this side
of the world there are hearts full of affectionate
sympathy for you and anxious to help you to
bear your burden. I have been through the
same sore trouble since those happy days we
spent together in 1914. I know something
about the desolation of heart you must feel;
but I know also (if you will allow me to say
it) that the promise of the “sufficient grace”
does not fail. I am glad I was privileged to
know Sir James and to have those three weeks
beneath your roof. My dear wife and I always
looked back to our stay with you as the happiest
time in the whole of our Australian tour. Sir
“Merioola,” Edgecliff Rd., Woollahra,
March 31st, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
When I heard of Sir James’ death on Friday
evening last, I could not help feeling doubly
sad; first at the great sorrow his death brings
to you all, and secondly, at the breaking of a
tie which was always full of interest and senti-
ment to me, as Sir James was one of the few
living people who remembered my father and
mother so well in their young days. It has
been delightful for you all that Sir James has
been spared to be with you for such a long time,
but that does not make his death any the less
sad, because no matter how old Sir James got,
he was always the same delightful person. At
the Club, where of course I saw him most, he
often used to sit after lunch with a few of us,
and no matter what we were talking about he
always took a keen interest in it. There was
no man kinder or more courteous to the younger
generation than Sir James was, and there are a
great many of us who will miss him very much.
The large crowd at the church and at South
Head on Saturday showed the great respect in
which he was held by everyone. The remains
of both my father and mother are very close
to where Sir James now lies at South Head, and
I could not help thinking on Saturday that not
one of the three of them could have a better
burying place. With kindest regards and much
sympathy to you and to Miss Fairfax and all
the family,
Believe me, yours faithfully,
A. W. ALLEN.
“Woodlands,” Pennant Hills Rd., Carlingford.
March 29th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I see dear Sir James has gone to his reward.
It was a great blessing that Mr. J. O. and
Colonel Wilfred were here before the “passing.”
He was always a true friend and supporter of
mine, and I enjoyed nothing better than when
ho came by himself on a tour of inspection
through P. A. Hospital, after Sir Alfred


Roberts and Sir Edward Knox had severed their
connection with the Hospital, and the present
chairman assumed authority in that institution.
He (Sir James) then had his note book and
entered there all requirements, etc., etc. If 1
drew his attention to any nurse or sister whose
relations were known to him he would stop and
address them and they seemed so pleased.
Truly a great and good man has gone from us
and the community will miss him.
1 sincerely hope he had little suffering. 1
trust you will all be comforted in your great
bereavement.
Believe me, yours very sincerely,
S. B. McGAHEY.
10 Lancaster Gate, W. 2,
2/4/’l9.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
The sad news of Sir James’s death reached
us on Saturday last, and on Monday I sent a
cable assuring you of very sincere sympathy
from all associated with me at home and at the
office. It was only a little more than a month
ago that I received quite a long letter from
him in his own style and referring to a number
of things in which we both had interest. It
was written in a much firmer handwriting than
some I had received in recent times; the only
comment I made to my wife about it was that
his handwriting was becoming so like that of
his honoured father. His death is to me a
great personal loss, but I am very thankful to
have enjoyed his friendship for so many years,
and now look forward to the great Reunion.
The “Times” yesterday has a very appreciative
obituary notice', but I look forward to see in due
course those from his own city and country,
where he was so well known and admired for
his work and high Christian character. With
regard to yourself, and may I add Mary, I hope
and pray that you both have been sustained and
comforted by a loving Father who is ever a
shield to those who trust Him.
With all kind thoughts to you, Mary and your
sons,
Your very sincere friend,
ALBERT SPICER.
Judges’ Chambers, Supreme Court, Sydney,
Friday.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
Please pardon me intruding on your grief, but
I would like to send you a line to tell you how
sorry I am that one has been removed from
among us whose plac e is impossible to fill. His
uniform kindness and courtesy to myself ever
since many years ago I was introduced to him,
I shall never forget, and shall always bear his
memory in grateful and respectful remembrance.
I am sure my mother would wish me to convey
to you and your family her sympathy in your
loss similar to what she and we sustained when
my father went over to the other side.
Yours sincerely,
ALEXANDER GORDON.
Camden College, Hereford Street, Glebe,
March 30th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I am very sorry that I was confined to my
house yesterday by a sudden and severe cold,
and so' was unable to show my respect and
sympathy by attending the service at Woollahra
yesterday. I know I scarcely need to tell you
how deeply I sympathize with Miss Fairfax and
yourself in the separation for a time from one
so long your loved companion.
I still retain delightful memories of Sir James’
kindness when I first stayed at “Ginahgulla”
nearly thirty-one years ago, then of my lunch
a j'ear or two later at Balliol College.
The knowledge that Sir James was a Fellow
of Camden College gave me confidence in accept-
ing my present position at a time when 1 knew
very little else about the College. During the
last nine years it has been a source of strength
to see him from time to time, and to know that
he was always interested in our college work.
I know I am only one of very many who will
tell you how much they feel they have lost.
May the God he trusted so thoroughly give you
both that comfort which is His own peculiar
gift.
Yours sincerely,
G. W. THATCHER.
INSTITUTE OF JOURNALISTS
“Sydney Morning Herald” Office Pitt St.,
Sydney, March 31st, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Madam,
The committee of the Institute of Journalists
has asked me to convey to you the sincere
sympathy of members in the loss you have sus-
tained. Sir James Fairfax has been a member
of the Institute for three years, and he was
respected and revered by the other members for
all the qualities which made him the man he
was.
I am, sincerely yours,
H. K. WILLIAMS,
Hon Secretary.
N.S.W. COUNTRY PRESS CO-OPERATIVE CO.
March 31st, 1919.
Geoffrey Fairfax, Esq.
J. O. Fairfax, Esq.
“S. M. Herald” Office, City.
Dear Sirs,
On behalf of the Country Press Association
and N.S.W. Country Press Co-operative Com-
pany, I beg to tender to Lady Fairfax, Miss
Fairfax, your good selves, and the other mem-
bers of your family, the sincere sympathy of
our members in your recent sad bereavement.
Australian journalism is largely indebted to
your revered father, who for over half a century
preserved the best traditions of the Press. His
memory will stand high in the esteem of pro-
vincial pressmen of this State.
Quite a number of country newspapers were
established by men who had been trained, or
engaged, in the “Herald” office during the
period of Sir James’ management. Several of
the papers referred to hold a prominent position
in the State, and some of those responsible for
such attribute much of their success to the high
conception of journalism and strong convictions
of your father.
With heart-felt sympathy,
Yours faithfully,
G. H. YARLEY,
Managing Director.


CONGREGATIONAL UNION OF NEW SOUTH
WALES.
264 Pitt Street, Sydney,
April Bth, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
'‘Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Lady Fairfax —I wish by direction of the
Executive Committee to inform you that at the
monthly meeting of the Committee held on
Thursday a resolution was passed, all the mem-
bers standing, expressing the very sincere and
deep sympathy of the members with you and
the members of your family in the great loss
you have sustained by the death of Sir James,
and the Chairman of the Union in prayers
tenderly commended you and all who sorrow
with you to the comfort of the Heavenly Father.
Sir James’s loss is especially felt by the Com-
mittee, as he was the one surviving life member.
The Committee cherish with heartfelt thankful-
ness to God the memory of his beautiful
Christian life, of his unfailing and generous
interest in the work of the Union and the
denomination generally, and of his repeated acts
of kindness to ministers and churches; and they
trust that the high example set by him as
Christian and citizen will be a powerful incen-
tive to mans' to follow in his steps and to be
his living memorial in the community, as they
are sure it must be an abiding treasure of
recollection to those nearest and dearest to him,
now that he has been withdrawn “within the
veil.”
Believe me to remain, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours sincerels’,
J. HENWOOD TOMS,
Ministerial Secretary.
CONGREGATIONAL UNION OF NEW SOUTH
WALES.
Home Mission Board, 264 Pitt St., Sydney,
April 3rd, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I have been instructed by my Board to write
expressing their sincerest sympathy with you
and Miss Fairfax, and the members of your
family, in your great loss and sorrow. At the
church and the grave, last Saturday, the great
and reverent gathering w'as eloquent testimony
to the regard in which Sir James was held by
all; but the Board, and our churches, will miss
him sorely, as a wise counsellor and friend, and
as one who always contributed to denominational
work with true sympathy and insight. Will you
allow me to say, personally, how thankful I feel
for the opportunity that was given to me of see-
ing something of the beautiful home-life that
was his, when I was at “Ginahgulla” recently.
I have frequently had in mind when thinking of
you, the Apostle’s closing words in Ist Cor. xiii.
“And now abidefh faith, hope, love, these three ;
but the greatest of these is love.”
May He comfort you Who alone can truly
sustain at such a time.
I am, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours sincerely,
WM. L. PATISON.
WOOLLAHRA CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH.
April 3rd, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
It is my very sorrowful duty to convey to , you
and your daughter and the other members of the
family the sincere sympathy of this Fellowship
in the great trouble which has come to you.
Many of us, during longer or shorter periods,
had come to know Sir James Fairfax and to
respect and esteem him for his upright
Christian character, and genial, happy person-
ality ; and while as a Church we mourn for the
loss of our senior deacon, as individuals we also
feel keenly the vacancy in our lives his re-
moval will make. At the church meeting, held
last evening, loving and kindly reference was
made to his long and useful association with the
church, and it was decided that the following
resolution should be placed on the books of the
church
Resolved—“ That we place on the records
of the church our sense of the loss sustained
by the death of Sir James R. Fairfax, which
took place on Friday, 28th March, 1919.
“Becoming a member of this Fellowship by
transfer from Pitt Street Church on July 3rd,
1872, and a deacon on the 17th February,
1875, he entered cheerfully into its fellow-
ship of service.
“As member and deacon he rendered
valuable and ungrudging help, and we can
but rejoice that he was enabled by Divine
Grace to adorn his profession as a Christian
until he fell asleep in Jesus.
“By personal service and consistent
liberality he did w'hat he could to promote
the welfare of the Church in all its organiza-
tions.
“We shall long miss his familiar presence
at our services, but the loss is ours, the gain
is his, and we rejoice that after a long and
full life spent in the service of his Master,
he has entered into his reward.
“We also wish to express our deep
sympathy with Lady Fairfax and the bereaved
family in their sorrow, and pray that the God
of all Grace may graciously sustain them and
sanctify their trial to their good and His own
glory.”
Please accept this poor expression of our feel-
ings at this time to you and yours.
On behalf of the Church,
Believe me, very sincerely yours,
H. J. RENWICK.
PITT STREET CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH.
264 Pitt Street, Sydney,
April sth, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I am desired by the members of this church to
convey to you and your family their sympathy
in the loss of your husband. Sir James and the
name of Fairfax has long been associated with
this Mother Church. We feel that the Church
has been greatly blessed by the work and ex-
ample of Sir James and his family.
Assuring you again of our deep sympathy,
Yours sincerely,
W. N. CUTHBERTSON,
Hon. Secretary.
ROCKDALE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH.
Frederick . Street, Rockdale,
April Bth, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
This church extends to you its deepest
sympathy and prays that you may be sustained
in your great trial. Members in the church
here, like Mr. Judd, who have known Sir James


for many years, speak most highly of his
character and work.
I would like to express my own thankfulness
to God for his life and service.
Praying that you all may be blessed with
every spiritual blessing.
Yours most sincerely,
ABSALOM DEANS,
Pastor.
CONGREGATIONAL UNION OF VICTORIA.
Independent Hall, Collins St., Melbourne,
May Bth, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I have the honour and pleasure of sending to
you a resolution which was moved by the Rev.
Samuel Bryant and carried with unanimity by
the Council of the Congregational Union of
Victoria at its half-yearly meeting yesterday.
Believe me, very faithfully yours,
(On behalf of the. Council),
ALPELL JONES,
Hon. Sec.
RESOLUTION.
“This Council of the Congregational Union
of Victoria respectfully offers its sympathy to
Lady Fairfax and her family on the decease
of Sir James R. Fairfax, and desires to
assure them of the veneration in which Sir
James was held for his personal virtues, his
loyalty to the Church of his fathers, and his
generous aid to Congregational institutions,
and to every good work that required his
assistance, in this following the example of
his father, the Hon. John Fairfax.”
SYNOD OF THE DIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
Sydney Diocesan Registry, George St.,
Sydney, April 29th, 1919.
Madam,
1 forward herewith copy of a resolution
unanimously passed by the Standing Committee
of the Synod of the Diocese of Sydney.
I have also sent this day a copy of the reso-
lution to the Editor of “The Sydney Morning
Herald.”
I remain, Madam, yours faithfully,
Registrar.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
The Resolution of the Standing Committee of
the Synod of the Diocese of Sydney.
Moved by the Vicar-General.
Seconded by Yen. Archdeacon Boj r ce.
“That the Standing Committee of the Synod
of the Diocese of Sydney expresses its apprecia-
tion of the great public services of the late
Sir James Fairfax, and condoles with Lady
Fairfax and her family in their bereavement.
“That this resolution be communicated to
Lady Fairfax.”
Carried by members rising in their places.
PRESBYTERIAN ASSEMBLY OF N.S.W.
The Manse, Kempsey,
March 31st, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
Will you please accept from me, as Moderator
of the Presbyterian Assembly of N.S.W., the
sincere condolence of the Church with you and
yours in your great loss. I would at the same
time express my high admiration, and that of
the Church, of the noble and consistent life, and
long and useful career of the late Sir James, and
of the debt the whole State, and, indeed Aus-
tralia, owes him for the high tone he has always
given to the great journal over which he has
presided.
Mrs. Smith joins me in heartfelt sympathy
with yourself and the members of the family.
I am, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours faithfully,
DAVID SMITH,
Moderator Presbyterian Church in N.S.W.
YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION
OF SYDNEY, N.S.W.
327 Pitt Street, Sydney,
April 11th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At the meeting of the Board of Directors, held
last evening, the following resolution, moved by
the President, Mr. J. H. Sandy, was carried by
the members standing in their places:—-
“The Board of Directors of the Sydney
Young Men’s Christian Association places on
record its deep sense of loss in the death of
Sir James Fairfax, whose high Christian
citizenship had won the confidence of the com-
munity. He had shown a keen personal
interest and sympathy in the work and pro-
gress of the Association, and his foresight,
judgment and liberal gifts were highly
appreciated. For many years he was a
director, and for nine years held the office of
President of the Association.
“That a copy of the resolution be for-
warded to Lady Fairfax and family with ex-
pression of deep sympathy in their loss.”
Believe me, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours very sincerely,
WILLIAM GILLANDERS,
General Secretary.
YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATIONS.
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE.
Elizabeth Street, Melbourne,
May 2nd, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Woodside,” Moss Vale, N.S.W.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At the meeting of our National Committee
Executive this week, the first since the decease
of Sir James Fairfax, sincere sorrow was ex-
pressed at his decease, and I have been instructed
to convey to you a sense of our deep sympathy
in your sad bereavement.
We have always regarded Sir James as one of
the outstanding friends and supporters of the


Association Movement in Australia. He has
always been ready with his kindly counsel and
advice in dealing with the problems of Associa-
tion service, and has given most generously of
his personal and financial assistance. At this
time when Christian leaders are so necessary in
the Commonwealth, we sincerely mourn with you
in the loss that has come to the Commonwealth,
and to the various Christian organizations, and
more particularly to yourself and the other
members of the bereaved family.
Will you therefore please accept this expres-
sion of what we all feel towards you at this
time.
Believe me, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours sincerely,
T. THOMAS,
Chairman.
YOUNG WOMEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION
OF SYDNEY.
189 Liverpool Street, Sydney,
April 10th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At the wish of the Board of Directors I am
writing to express their continued sympathy,
and the following resolution was passed at their
last meeting, all members standing:—
“That we, the Board of Directors of the
Young Women’s Christian Association of
Sydney, desire to place on record the loss sus-
tained, not only by the Association, but by the
whole community, through the death of Sir
James Fairfax, a member of the Board of
Advice, and a generous supporter for many
years. Many tributes of the highest nature
have been paid by the Churches, philanthropic
organizations, public bodies, private citizens,
and others, and these will prove a lasting
monument to the honoured career of a great
and good man,”
The Board also wishes me to assure you and
Miss Fairfax of their loving thoughts and
earnest prayers in your great sorrow. Few, out-
side your own family, will sympathize more
keenly than those on whose behalf I now write.
Yours in sincere sympathy,
LIZZIE M. FOWLER.
Hon. Secretary.
LADIES’ AUXILIARY OF THE Y.M.C.A.
“Gwenllian,” Windsor St., Paddington,
April 3rd, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
Bellevue Hill, Double Bay.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
On behalf of the members of the Ladies’
Auxiliary of the Y.M.C.A. may I extend to you
my sincere and deep sympathy in your recent
sad bereavement.
I had not the privilege of knowing Sir James,
but from my husband’s many eulogistic remarks,
and those of others concerning him, I know
many share at least a little of your great
sorrow, for he was a much loved man.
I feel any remarks of mine would be totally
inadequate on an occasion such as this.
May I assure you the members of my Auxiliary
are wholly with you in your hour of great
trouble.
Yours sincerely,
PEARL DUNBAR,
Hon. Secretary,
Ladies’ Auxiliary of the Y.M.C.A.
LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY, N.S.W.
AUXILIARY.
242 Pitt Street, Sydney,
April 24th, 1919.
To Lady Fairfax,
Double Bay.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
On behalf of the Executive Committee of the
N.S.W. Auxiliary of the London Missionary
Society, I have to express its deep and sincere
sympathy with you and your family in the pass-
ing from us of one so greatly honoured, and
whose life service was devoted to all that is best
in the community.
Whilst recognizing that his interests were
manifold, the constituency of the London
Missionary Society felt that he always took a
special and deep interest in its work, its
missionaries (of whom some of the most notable,
such as Chalmers and Dr. Lawes, were his
personal friends), and the problems of its world-
wide endeavours for the spread of the Gospel.
We thank God for the noble life and splendid
example of Sir James Fairfax, and earnestly
pray that the Divine love and help may abound
unto you in these days of bereavement.
With all respectful sympathy,
Faithfully yours,
W. MORLEY,
General Secretary.
LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
315 Little Collins St., Melbourne,
April 25th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax, Sydney.
Dear Lady Fairfax —I have purposely refrained
from writing to you because I felt that you
would be almost overwhelmed with correspon-
dence and expressions of sympathy from your
multitudinous friends. At the same time my
thoughts were very much with you and yours
when I heard of the passing away of Sir James.
I have always felt about him that he was a really
historical figure amongst us. His simple, noble
and influential life constituted him a person the
like of whom we do not often see. And it was
always a pleasure for me when I was in Sydney
to have even a few minutes chat with him. He
was in very deed one of our Christian stalwarts,
and his personality was in itself an exhibition
of Christian influence and character. We can
ill afford to lose such- a man and we very much
need to pray that there may be others raised up
to take his place. I trust that you and Miss
Fairfax and all your family will be sustained in
the time of bereavement which has come to you
all.
Mrs. Williams joins me in this expression of
very sincere sympathy.
With kindest regards from us both,
I am, yours very sincerely,
GEORGE WILLIAMS.


LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
16 New Bridge Street, London, E.C.,
June 27th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
C/o Thos. Pratt, Esq.,
18 Castlereagh St., Sydney.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At our Board meeting on June 25th the news
of the death of Sir James Fairfax was received
with the deepest regret. Everyone who knew
anything about Australia knew of the services
which he has performed in the work of the
Church at home and abroad, and we of the
L.M.S. have cause to remember his unfailing and
generous care for our missionary work. We are
also proud that it should have fallen to a
Congregationalist to set so high a standard as
has been set by the “Herald.”
Mr. Yiner and I, of course, have peculiar
memories of his goodness to us. I believe it
was he who was largely responsible for our
expenses while we were in Sydney, and 1 shall
not readily forget the kindly hospitality of your
own home. As you will remember, John
Wycliffe Wilson is my uncle and I had heard
the Fairfax name long before I came to Sydney.
You must be very proud and thankful to have
had so many years to live with such a man.
For you at least sorrow will be very speedily
turned into joy, for it cannot be very long that
you will be separated, and 1 am coming more
and more to believe that our loved ones are
linked to us in a spiritual way ever after they
have gone. I do not mean that we can get at
them by seances or any materialistic inter-
course of that kind, but simply that they are
near to us, and I believe are allowed to be the
channels of God’s mercy. But when you are
lonely may you feel the special comfort and the
resurrection power of Jesus Christ.
We know how much we owe to you as well
as to your husband, for without you he would
never have done such a work.
Yours very sincerely,
FRANK LENWOOD.
BRITISH & FOREIGN BIBLE SOCIETY,
N.S.W. AUXILIARY.
Centenary Bible House, 242 Pitt St., Sydney,
May 22nd, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
Bellevue Hill, Double Bay.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At the General Committee Meeting held
yesterday, reference was made to your recent
bereavement. The late Sir James had been a
regular subscriber to the funds of the Society,
and had shown his interest in the good work by
qualifying for Life Membership. The Committee
desires me to assure you of its heartfelt sym-
pathy with you in this your hour of need, and
prays that you may be sustained by Divine Grace.
I am, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours faithfully,
CHAS. E. BOWEN,
General Secretary.
ROYAL PRINCE ALFRED HOSPITAL.
Camperdown, Sydney,
May Ist, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Madam,
At the meeting of the Board of Directors on
Tuesday last, the fact was announced that Sir
James Fairfax, who was one of the Government
representatives upon the Board had, since the
previous meeting of the Board, passed away.
1 am directed to assure you that the Board
received the news with the deepest regret, and
that the members felt that there had passed
from them one who had, for a period of 50 years,
been one of the greatest friends of the Hospital,
and one who had been of the utmost service to
it during the whole of this period.
The Board has passed the following resolution,
which will be recorded upon its minutes, and a
copy of which I am forwarding to you
RESOLUTION.
“The Board having received intimation of
the death, since its last meeting, of one of
its members, Sir James Fairfax, desires to
record its deep regret at the loss of its senior
member, and to express its sincere apprecia-
tion of the valuable work and sympathetic
assistance which have been rendered by him
over a period of more than fifty years. The
Board feels that by the death of Sir James
Fairfax it has lost a link with the past, as
he was the last surviving member on the
Board of the Committee formed in 1868,
which was responsible for the establishment
of the Hospital.
“Following upon the death of his father,
the Hon. John Fairfax, he became a member
of the Board of Directors in 1877, and with
the exception of two short periods from 1881
to 1884, and from 1902 to 1903, while he was
absent in Europe, he has been a member of
the Board ever since. During the years from
1899 he filled the post of Honorary Treasurer,
and in 1904, during the absence of the Chair-
man (Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart) in Europe,
he was appointed Acting Chairman. It is
very gratifying to the Board to know that,
upon its representation, one of the sons of the
deceased gentleman has been appointed by the
Government to the vacant position, and that
the name of Fairfax will thus continue to be
associated through three generations with the
management of the Institution.”
I trust that you will permit me to add my
own sympathy in the great bereavement which
has fallen upon you. I always received from
Sir Jamps the greatest kindness and considera-
tion during the period we have been associated.
Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM EPPS,
Secretary.
THE CARRINGTON CENTENNIAL HOSPITAL
FOR CONVALESCENTS.
April 25th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Madam,
The Directors of the Carrington Convalescent
Hospital desire to extend to you and the mem-
bers of your family an expression of their pro-
found sympathy with you in your great loss
sustained through the death of the late Sir
James Fairfax.


At their last meeting the following resolution
was recorded :
“That the Directors of the Carrington
Convalescent Hospital record with deep
sorrow the death of their esteemed colleague
and vice-president, the late Sir James Fairfax.
Associated with the hospital since its estab-
lishment, as a member of the Board for 26
years, and as vice-president for the past three
years, he took the keenest interest in the wel-
fare of the institution. To this and kindred
charities be devoted much time and assistance.
His memory will be revered for the charity
which prompted his actions; and for the
courteous manner in which he conducted the
business of meetings. His ever-willing co-
operation and valued advice will be greatly
missed.”
I am, dear Madam, yours faithfully,
CECIL PURSER,
Hon. Secretary.
QUEEN VICTORIA HOMES.,
Sydney, April 25th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At the Monthly Meeting of the Board of
Directors of the Queen Victoria Homes, held on
the 14th inst., on the motion of the President,
the following resolution was carried unani-
mously :
“That the Board desires to place on record
its deep sense of the loss which the Queen
Victoria Homes has sustained by the death of
Sir James Fairfax, one of its Vice-Presidents,
and to express its sincerest sympathy with
the family in the irreparable loss it has sus-
tained.”
I beg to remain, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours faithfully,
ANNIE McC. HUGHES,
Secretary.
THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH
WALES.
5 Elizabeth Street, North,
Sydney, April Ist, 1919.
Madam,
I am directed by the President and Council
of the Royal Society of New South Wales to
convey to you the deep sympathy of members
in your sad bereavement.
Sir James Fairfax was the oldest member of
the Society, having been elected in 1868, and
the call which he has now answered has
resulted in the removal of another of the
Society’s links with the past.
During the many years which Sir James has
been in public life he has always succeeded in
commanding the esteem and affection of those
with whom he came in contact, and as a bene-
factor, both in the cause of humanity and
science, his efforts have been of the greatest
value. To your Ladyship and family the Royal
Society tenders its sincere sympathy in the loss
of one so beloved.
Yours faithfully,
R. H. CAMBAGE,
Hon. Secretary.
Lady Fairfax, Bellevue Hill, Double Bay.
NATIONAL ART GALLERY OF N.S.W.
Outer Domain, Sydney,
April 14th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I am desired by the Board of Trustees to
convey an expression of their deep sympathy
with you, Miss Fairfax, and other members of
your family in the loss you have sustained, and
to forward also a copy of a resolution passed by
the full Board at a special meeting held on the
11th inst.
Resolution moved by Mr. John Sulman, Vice-
President, and unanimously adopted :
“That there be placed on the records of the
National Art Gallery of N.S.W. the Trustees’
deep sense of the great loss that the Institu-
tion has sustained by the death of Sir James
R. Fairfax, whose valuable services in the
cause of Art commenced as early as 1871, in
connection with the Academy of Art, which
subsequently led to the formation of the
National Art Gallery of N.S.W. in 1875.
“Sir James was appointed a Trustee in
1876, Vice-President in 1899, 4th President
of the Trustees in 1915, all of which
positions he held with much honour and
credit.
“He was officially connected with the Art
Gallery for 43 years, during which time he
gave his personal interest to the welfare and
advancement of this Institution, which he en-
dowed with many valuable donations.
“That a letter of condolence embodying the
resolution be forwarded to the family of the
late President.”
Yours faithfully,
E. W. MANN,
Director.
Lady Fairfax, “Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
ROYAL ART SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH
WALES.
Vickery’s Chambers, Pitt St., Sydney,
April 3rd 1919.
Lady Fairfax, Bellevue Hill.
Dear Madam —At the Council Meeting of this
Society, held last night, the President, Mr. W.
Lister Lister, paid a tribute to the memory of
the late Sir James Fairfax who, besides being
a great patron of Art, had been a member of
this Society for many years, and always took a
keen interest in its welfare.
The President and Council desire me to con-
vey to you, and the members of your family,
their sincere sympathy in this time of your
bereavement.
Yours faithfully,
E. H. OXNARD SMITH,
Hon. Secretary.
THE NAVY LEAGUE.
New South Wales Branch, Royal Naval House,
April Ist, 1919.
Dear Miss Fairfax,
The President and Members of the Ladies’
Organizing Committee of the Navy League
desire to express their sincere condolence with
you in your recent sad bereavement, and deeply
regret the loss sustained by the Navy League


in the death of your esteemed father, Sir James
Fairfax, who has ever proved himself a most
generous benefactor and supporter of all its
interests.
Yours faithfully,
MURIEL E. KING,
Hon. Secretary
Ladies’ Organizing Committee.
Miss Fairfax, “Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
BURNS, PHILP & COMPANY.
Bridge Street, Sydney,
April 2nd, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At a meeting of our Board to-day I was asked
to write you and say how much we all
sympathized with you in your great bereave-
ment, and how we would in the future ever miss
the kindly and much appreciated presence of
your late husband.
We can only assure you of our deepest
sympathy in the great loss ssustained by you
and your family.
Yours sincerely,
JAMES BURNS,
Chairman B. P. & Co.
MUNICIPALITY OF PETERSHAM.
Town Hall, Petersham,
April 2nd, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
Bellevue Hill, Double Bay.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At the meeting of my Council, held last even-
ing, reference was made by His Worship the
Mayor (Aid. R. Gendle) to the recent death of
your husband, Sir James Fairfax, and I was
directed to convey to you and the members ot
your family an expression of the very sincere
sympathy of the Mayor and Aldermen of this
municipality with you in the great loss that you
have sustained. The long public career of youi
late husband, and his many activities in all
movements for the good of the community, had
earned him the respect and esteem of all classes,
and my Council feels that by his death citizens
of this city have lost one of their best friends.
Again assuring you of the sympathy ot the
members of my Council.
Believe me, yours sincerely,
D. CLIFFORD,
Town Clerk
p.S.—I should also like to add my personal
sympathy to you and yours in your bereavement.
PERPETUAL TRUSTEE COMPANY LIMITED.
33 Hunter St., Sydney,
April 2nd, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill, Double Bay.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I have been requested by my Board of Direc-
tors to convey to you and your family their veiy
sincere sympathy in the irreparable loss which
you have sustained in the death of your husband.
I am sure you will be interested to know that
at their meeting to-day the Board placed on
record the following minute: —-
“The late Sir James Reading Fairfax.
“The Board desire to place on record their
expression of extreme regret on learning of
the death of Sir James Reading Fairfax, one
of the founders of the Company, and of their
deep sense of appreciation of the services
rendered by him during the years he, from
time to time, occupied a seat on the Direc-
torate.
“The Board, at the same time, direct that
a letter be forwarded to Lady Fairfax, asking
her to accept for herself and on behalf of her
family, the Directors’ sincere sympathy in the
great loss they have sustained.”
I need hardly say that I would like to
associate myself personally with the Board in
their expression of condolence.
Yours faithfully,
R. COPLAND LETHBRIDGE,
Manager.
AUSTRALIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY,
N.S.W. DIVISION.
Moss Vale Branch,
April sth, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I am directed by my Committee to tell you
how very deeply we sympathise with you and
with your family in your great loss.
Apart from the fact that we, as Red Cross
members, must deplore the loss of one of our
wisest and worthiest men, the knowledge that
Sir James Fairfax spent so many happy sum-
mers in Moss Vale adds a specially personal feel-
ing to our gratitude for such an example, and
also to our sorrow for the end of a life so finely
lived. We need not tell you that we also, in
common with so many other philanthropic
societies in Australia, will always keep his
memory green and greatly value the record of
his unselfish and high-minded life.
With our deepest sympathy and regret,
Yours sincerely,
VIOLET LYTTON-HITCHINS,
Hon. Secretary.
ROYAL SYDNEY GOLF CLUB.
Rose Bay, Sydney,
April 7th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
The Committee and Members of the Club
desire me to write and express their deepest
svmpathy with you and your family in the loss
you have sustained by the death of Sir James,
who has been our honoured President for so
many years.
Believe me, yours sincerely,
ROSS GORE,
Secretary.


ROYAL SHIPWRECK RELIEF AND HUMANE
SOCIETY OF N.S.W.
Royal Exchange, Bridge Street,
Sydney, April 11th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Madam,
It was. resolved at the meeting of this Society,
held yesterday, to convey to you and the mem-
bers of your family the sincere sympathy of the
Committee in your sad bereavement.
Sir James Fairfax was Trustee for our Society
for a good many years, and my Committee wish
to place on record his many acts of kindness
and interest shown.
Yours faithfully,
A. W. WEBBER,
Secretary.
ROYAL NAVAL HOUSE.
Sydney, April 16th, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At the monthly meeting of the Trustees of the
Royal Naval House, held on the 11th inst.,
sympathetic references were made to the death
of Sir James Fairfax, one of the original
Trustees of the Institution, and it was resolved
to tender to yourself and family the condolences
of the Trustees in the great loss you have been
called upon to bear.
Sir James always took a very keen interest
in the Institution, and was always foremost in
helping along the work it was called upon to
perform. Needless to say we shall miss him
much in our councils.
The Trustees unanimously decided to recom-
mend to the Government the appointment of Mr.
Geoffrey E. Fairfax to the vacancy, so that the
name may be retained on the Trust.
May I offer you my personal sympathy, for 1
always regarded Sir James as an old and dear
friend, associated as I was for years in the
yachting world.
Believe me, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours very sincerely,
A. G. MILSON,
Hon. Secretary.
Lady Fairfax, “Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
SEAMEN’S INSTITUTE.
George St. North, Sydney,
April 17th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Madam,
I am directed to inform you that at a meet-
ing of the Committee of the Rawson Institute
to Seamen, held this day, it was resolved unani-
mously that: the Committee place on record its
keen appreciation of the interest taken by the
late Sir James Fairfax on behalf of the Insti-
tute, and expresses its deep sympathy with Lady
Fairfax and the members of his family in their
bereavement.
Yours faithfully,
F. J. GARRICK,
Hon. Secretary.
SYDNEY ROWING CLUB.
Sydney, April 30th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill, Sydney.
Dear Madam,
At the last meeting of my Committee the
members present were saddened by the report of
the death of our old friend, member and
esteemed Vice-President, Sir James Fairfax.
My Committee have requested me to forward
to you our sincerest sympathy with you in your
sad bereavement, at the same time expressing
the loss we feel in this, to us, sudden severance
of a long and valued friendship.
I am, yours sincerely,
F. WILKINSON,
Hon. Secretary.
QUEEN’S JUBILEE FUND.
The Builders’ Exchange, Castlereagh St.,
Sydney, April 2nd, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
I am directed by the Council of the Queen’s
Jubilee Fund to express to you their very deep
sympathy in your great loss. With yourself
Sir James had always shown a great and
practical interest in the Fund, and the Council
feel that his death is a personal loss to them,
as well as to the State.
Yours faithfully,
M. G. GARRAN,
Secretary.
NEW SOUTH AVALES BUSH NURSING
ASSOCIATION.
Twyford House, 17 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney, May 30th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At the quarterly meeting of the Council of
this Association, held yesterday, I was directed
to express to you the sympathy of members in
the loss you have sustained by the death of Sir
James Fairfax. Sir James had been President
of the Association since its foundation in 1911,
and it owed much to his generosity.
Yours faithfully,
W. S. GARRAN,
Secretary.


SYDNEY CITY MISSION.
276 Elizabeth Street, City,
April 23rd, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
My Council at its last meeting adopted the
resolution of appreciation for what Sir James
had done for the City Mission, and of con-
dolence with yourself and family, a copy of
which I am directed to forward. The sympa-
thetic attitude he took in all Christian efforts
was a marked feature of his long and useful
life, and the world is poorer for his leaving it,
though the remembrance of his goodness will
remain with us as an incentive to greater
achievements for the glory of God and the
betterment of mankind.
Sir James was a good and generous friend to
our work and we shall cherish his memory.
Praying that God will comfort you and the
members of your family.
I am, dear Lady Fairfax,
Yours obediently,
E. MOORE,
Secretary.
RESOLUTION.
The Council of the Sydney City Mission
unanimously resolved: —-
“That this Council desires to express its
grateful appreciation of the good services
rendered by the late Sir James R. Fairfax to
the work of the Sydney City Mission. It was
upon his suggestion that the Mission began
its operations at Paddington in 1886, when
Missionary F. Smith was transferred from
Woolloomooloo to take charge, and whose
salary for several years he wholly defrayed,
and continued in part to his death. He was
also a generous supporter to the local Mission
objects, especially in the erection and mainte-
nance of the two Mission Halls, wherein good
work has been done. He was specially
interested in the work among the young
people, and seconded the Missionary’s efforts
with his presence and gifts. His gift of
£5OO to the Jubilee Fund of_the Mission, and
others at various times, were proof of his con-
fidence and attachment to the work.
“This Council wishes to add its testimony
to the many already borne by others to a
life of simple goodness and generosity.
“That this minute be entered in the Mission
records, and a copy forwarded to Lady Fair-
fax and family, with sincerest sympathy.”
SYDNEY RAGGED SCHOOLS.
The Manse, Pyrmont,
July 25th, 1919.
To Lady Fairfax.
Dear Madam —I am directed by the Committee
of the Sydney Ragged Schools to convey to you
and your family the following resolution: —
“That this Committee of the Sydney Ragged
Schools expresses their very deep regret at
the loss by death of their Chairman, Sir James
R Fairfax, and conveys to Lady Fairfax and
members of the family their sincere sympathy
for the loss they have sustained.
“The members would also express their high
appreciation of the great and constant ser-
vices of Sir James for the young and
neglected children of our vast population.”
The motion was carried by all the members
standing.
I have to remain,
Yours sincerely,
JAMES BUCHAN,
Secretary.
AUSTRALASIAN STUDENT CHRISTIAN
MOVEMENT.
The Parsonage, Waverley,
March 29th, 1919.
Lady Fairfax,
Bellevue Hill.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
Will you permit me, on behalf of the N.S.W.
State Council of the Australasian Student
Christian Movement, to offer you our united and
very sincere sympathy with you and your
family in the great loss that you have just sus-
tained ?
We shall always remember with deep grati-
tude the many services Sir James has so will-
ingly rendered to our Council, and indeed to
our Movement as a whole. We have always
appreciated his keen interest in, and practical
sympathy with, our work in all its activities,
and we have been very touched by the fact that,
though he has been in indifferent health during
the past several months, he has nevertheless been
glad to continue to help us as Treasurer.
We shall miss, in many directions, the benefit
of Sir James’ wise counsel, his interest, and his
assistance, but we assure you that we have
counted it a high privilege to have retained his
services for so long, for we realise that his in-
fluence and help have been exceedingly valuable
to us.
We pray very earnestly that the God of all
consolation may indeed be known to you and
yours in this your hour of sorrow by His best
name of Comforter, and that sustaining grace
and blessing may be yours in rich measure.
On behalf of the Council,
I am, yours very truly,
JOHN C. WOODHOUSE,
Hon. Secretary.
SYDNEY BETHEL UNION.
60 Margaret Street, Sydney,
June 16th, 1919.
La dy Fairfax,
“Ginahgulla,” Bellevue Hill.
Madam,
The Trustees of the Sydney Bethel Union, at
their meeting held to-day, being the first meet-
ing since the death of Sir James R. Fairfax,
passed a resolution of sympathy with you and
the members of your family, in the severe
bereavement from which you are suffering, and
place on record their appreciation of the in-
estimable services which he rendered for so long
to the Sydney Bethel Union.
I have the honour to be,
Yours faithfully,
GEO. LITTLEJOHN,
Hon. Secretary.


THE COUNCIL FOR CIVIC AND MORAL
ADVANCEMENT.
April Bth, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
This Council, of which Sir James was an
honoured member, deeply sympathizes with you
in the exodus of such a splendid and noble man.
We rejoice in the memory of his life and his
ungrudging service for his fellowmen. Words
are feeble and an inadequate vehicle for the ex-
pression of our gratitude for having known and
shared in some humble degree the work he
sought to do. We assure you that our thoughts
and prayers are all with you, and with the other
members of the family in this sore but in-
evitable parting. May grace, mercy and peace
be ever yours.
Most sincerely,
ABSALOM DEANS,
Secretary.
JUNIOR CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR.
“Ellerslie,” Jersey Road, Woollahra.
March 31st, 1919.
Dear Lady Fairfax,
At the meeting of the Junior Christian
Endeavour yesterday morning a vote of sincere
sympathy was passed with you and the members
of your family in your great loss.
We pray that God will comfort you in your
sorrow and that His Presence may be very real
to you.
We thank God for the long and useful life
of Sir James Fairfax, and trust that the memory
of it may inspire us to more faithful service
of the Master he loved and served.
With loving sympathy,
Believe me, yours very sincerely,
IRENE R. HERBERT,
J.O.E. Superintendent.


W. C. Penfold & Co. Ltd.. Printers, 88 Pitt St., Sydney.




