

1 PRICE
< pi
t I
1 •
1 ' * ’ ' ' * ' :
SIR GEORGE GREY :
HIS FRIENDS AND FOES.
A POLITICAL SATIRE.
ALEXANDER STUART
“ Prepare for Rhyme—l’ll publish—right or wrong,
Fools are my theme —let satire be my song.”— Byron.
ONE SHILLING.
CHRISTCHURCH :
Printed at the •* Lyttelton Times** Company’s Printing Office, Gloucester Str* t, and published
by Stuakt and Co., 64, Madras Street South.


i


SIR GEORGE GREY:
HIS FEIENDS AND EOES.
♦
A POLITICAL SATIRE.
S .
is the Patriot above pay or price ?
Is it great Atkinson, or Pasha Bryce ?
' ' Those mighty pillars of our infant State
Or Johnny Hall —Sir John you know of late ;
Or Whitaker, the steersman of the realm,
Lashed, while relieving Johnny, to the helm,
Sticking thereto with grim determined grip,
The pay too good to let the billet slip ?
Though round the vessel fearful storms prevail,
He clings tenacious to her slippery tail.
“ If hraks the tail you’ll know ta reasons why,”
Perspiring Highlander did once reply,
And here the story, which of course is true,
Time being no object, I relate to you.
’Twas in Otago, on McKenzie’s run,
Two Highland “ Shentlemen ” you knoAV, for fun
Went forth pig-hunting on a sunny day,
With guns and knives and plenty usquebay ; *
They took long strides, and ere the hour of noon,
Marched single file through “ Tapanui toon,”
Where pretty girls at windows peeped to see
The swinging kilt that barely reached the knee.
* Whiskey.


Right through the town and up the Mountains Blue
They held their way, and soon were lost to view ;
’Mong rocks and fern and cabbage trees and “ toot ”
They snuffed and whiskied “ turn and turn aboot,”
Till fortune smiled, and lo ! before their eyes
A sight that filled them with supreme surprise—
Upon a little hill, twelve little pigs
Danced in the sun, the queerest kind of jigs ;
They danced and sported, kicking up their heels,
And raised a concert of discordant squeals ;
But soon their fun to fear was changed, I ween,
When through the fern blue bonnets twain were seen ;
With sudden rush they fled, as fled of yore
The pigs made famous in Judean lore,
And sought for safety in their native lair
A cave, which soon the hunters keen laid hare.
Then Donald said to Dugald, “Ha me gra,*
This is the queerest row she ever saw,
The pawrent pigs are baith to market gane
And left the young anes by theirsells, alane ;
Here, tak a whiskey, Tugall, to mak ye prave,
And creep awa into ta piggies’ cave ;
Stick a’ the leetle deevils wi’ ye’r knife,
I’ll watch the auld ane here, and tak her life ;
In case she comes when you are in the den,
I’ll tak good care she dinna venture ben.”
To this big Dugald, foolish man, agrees,
And in he goes by creeping hands and knees,
While Donald sternly at the entrance stood
And smacked his lips, and swore “ tat whiskey’s good !
And while he raised once more in admiration
His flask, to take another observation—
Like one big thunderbolt, with sudden roar,
# I say.


Upon him rushed a wild and hideous hoar,
Tusks sharp as lances —eyes all fiery red,
Gleaming like furies in his bristly head.
The little pigs had raised a fearful din,
Which reached his ears and roused the ire within ;
To save his offspring from impending woes,
He’d die a thousand deaths or crush his foes.
Ere Donald time to draw his knife had got,
Between his legs the hoar went like a shot ;
But Donald smartly clutched him hy the tail
And stuck to that like harpoon to a whale,
Within the cavern’s month they tug and strain
The hoar to enter, Donald to restrain.
“ What’s that you do ?” cried Dugald from within,
“ Why shut ta hole that lets ta taylight in ?
Ta little pigs she canna see to find,
Its tark as pitchers here and worse as blind.
Donald, I say, why tont ye make reply ? ”
“ If hraks ta tail ye’ll know ta reasons why,”
Roared Donald fiercely —purple in the face,
“ If hraks ta tail ye’ll petter say ta grace.”
And so with Whitaker and all his crew,
Once break the tail, then what a hullabaloo !
Poor Whit’ himself would tumble heels o’er head,
And Major A. most likely take to bed ;
Great Bryce, once more astride his ghostly moke,
Would sally forth to frighten honest folk,
Destroy their cabbage gardens and proclaim
‘Mong blasted pumpkins his triumphant fame ;
While Johnston, Rolleston, and Honest Dick,
Losing fat billets would feel sad and sick.


Such dire results from this slight cause would flow,
Our Empire city would he plunged in woe :
“ Ye powers that rule the politician’s fate,
That lift him high above our low estate,
Let banks collapse —let barbers disappear
With all our savings in their pockets clear !
Let measles flourish, earthquakes shake the city,
But spare, O spare, the reign of gentle Whitty ! ”
So doth the Wellingtonian mind betray
The fear of change, that prompts it thus to pray.
Who is the Patriot above pay or price ?
That is the question —and I’ve asked it twice.
Bise noble Grey ! thou art indeed the man,
The friend of progress —ever in its van ;
Of all New Zealand’s famous men thou art
The noblest, greatest, truest at the heart ;
No selfish, narrow, twilight views are thine,
But clear and bright thy thoughts and actions shine ;
Of purse-proud cliques the sworn determined foe,
Hated by money-grubbers, high and low ;
The greedy land-sharks hovering round their prey,
Detest, and fear the very name of Grey.
Pain would they shark him, and gridiron too,
He who exposed their shabby tricks to view.
The people’s Tribune, he —the poor man’s friend,
O’er all New Zealand doth his fame extend ;
Erom Stewart’s green isle to Auckland’s furthest shore,
They own allegiance to the Veteran hoar.
In settlers’ homes, by mountains lone and far,
In Maori pahs, where swarthy natives are ;
In diggers’ huts, where politicians blow
Great clouds of smoke, and ruddy faces glow ;


Around the camp fires, on the unpeopled wild,
In woolsheds great with snowy fleeces piled ;
On steamers ploughing thro’ the seething foam,
In forests deep where wayward tourists roam—
Where mighty rivers pour their gathered store
Through fertile lands, to swell the ocean’s roar ;
In new horn cities, busy haunts of men—
Late desert scenes of lonely moor and fen,
In smithy, workshop, factory, or bar,
On trains that roll their noisy ways afar ;
Wherever true and liberal minds are found,
• V.
His fame and influence circle round and round.
He sways the people, as the summer breeze
Sways to their tops the green and growing trees.
But he who bears the people’s burdens, still
Must bear a load of envy and ill-will.
The selfish schemers after selfish ends
Have at their beck a crowd of needy friends —
Curs ever yelping in the lion’s rear,
Their snarling venom full of rage and fear ;
Scribes of the day with witless brains equipt,
Their rusty pens in gall and wormwood dipt,
Like turncoat Pilliet who returned, can see
Now nought in Grey, but “hopeless lunacy,”
(He dared not thus before th’ electors spout —
Or Stanmore’s boys had quickly kicked him out),
Or legal critics trembling for their fees,
Should law be freed from their monopolies.
The friends of land-sharks muster all their wits,
And sling big type to give the Patriot fits.
But little recks he all their feeble spite,
Mere shadows flickering round his glorious light.
I’ve mentioned Pilliet ! turncoat Hypolite —
Of thee, or of thy deeds, what shall I write ?


The pride and hope of Stanmore’s heart, of late,
How art thou fallen from thy high estate !
Ealse to the friends who served yon well and true,
Ealse to the Liberal trust reposed in you !
“ A rat ! a rat ! dead for a ducat ! dead ! ”
Such be the epitaph to mark your head.
Brothers in arms, so like, yet so unlike,
The genial Bracken, and the jovial Pyke.
Beady to sing a song or vent a pun,
Shooting their shafts of raillery and fun —
Their native blarney and their mother wit,
At friend or foe on due occasion fit ;
Great in the house and glorious at the bar
(Bellamy’s) where congenial spirits are ;
Where Paddy Murphy tunes his native lyre,
And Hennessy with Dunville pure, inspire
Those wondrous tales that Vincent loves to spin,
Tales that profane ones say are far too thin !
Health, peace, and plenty to these members twain,
Truly we ne’er shall see their like again !
Poetic Bracken, with Shakespearian brow,
No truer friend has great Sir George than thou.
Invincible and ever-radiant Pyke,
In freedom’s cause yet many a blow shall strike ;
His after dinner countenance shall shine,
With full moon splendour down the battle-line.
And thou, too, Mac, Otago’s champion proud !
Why soarest thou no more above the crowd ?
Shall Green and Eish, and even smaller fry,
(Mere Cockabullies) claim the public eye,
With laboured dulness nightly on the floor,
Proving, or not, that two and two make four ?


And thou sit silent ! thou whose speech could charm
Our weary senses, and our cold hearts warm ;
Whose pawky eloquence in days gone by
Delighted many an Old Identity.
Arise ! Macandrew, he yourself again !
Allied with Grey, inaugurate the reign
Of Liberal Government in the land once more,
And sweep the present rabble to the door.
With elephantine movement —sure, hut slow,
See rise Montgomery, lord of Akaroa,
Dealing around him many a ponderous blow ;
Nor less effective in the battle hour
The quick and galling cuts of De Latour ;
While light-armed Weston, swift of hand and eye,
Doth many a skilful dart and lance apply ;
But when the stubborn foes they fain would rout,
How much they miss the aid of Robert Stout,
Who soon would send them to the right-about.
Te Whiti ! noblest of a noble race,
Dragged from thy home to prison and disgrace ;
Served as a felon by a stronger power —
The upstart tyrants of a little hour ;
Who wrested law to serve their selfish ends,
Destroyed the homes of thee and all thy friends ;
With wanton cruelty laid waste and hare
The fields you tilled with honest toil and care,
Prom wives and little ones remorseless wrung
The little all on which existence hung.
How will our children, and their children too,
Blush when they read of Pasha Bryce, and you
Of Parihaka’s vile and wanton deed,
And Bryce, high prancing on his ghostly steed !


Shall Harry All wright “ pass unnoticed here,”
To Ly tteltonian Liberals ever dear ?
Harry, the painter, greater none than he !
Whose works adorn the walls by Norwich Quay ;
Wliose paint-pots oft along the footpath lying,
Have tripped old mariners—for grog hard hieing !
Each sign-hoard creaking when nor’-westers blow
Shall ’Arry’s works to future ages show !
Rejoice Oh Lyttelton, and Stanmore too,
Of long-tailed rodents what a pair have you !
When Dame Zealandia started keeping school,
People there were who thought her quite a fool ;
So young a mistress scarce, they said, could hold
Her own, with youngsters overgrown and hold.
They little knew who thus their fears expressed,
The pluck and “ metal ” in Zealandia’s breast ;
With cane and strap well armed, she taught, and held
Dominion firm, and all disturbance quelled.
There was a hoy at Dame Zealandia’s school,
Who long was Dux, and helped the Dame to rule ;
George was his name, a tall and clever boy,
Beloved by all, except a few ; the joy
And pride of Madame’s gentle heart was he,
So brave and generous too, you ne’er could see
His match ; and skilful at all manly games,
In short the foremost scholar at the Dame’s.
There was another boy, called Johnny Hall,
He was not half so good, nor quite so tall,
But smart and sharp, and spry as any needle,
And quick at figures too ; he used to wheedle
The Dame herself, and as for all the boys —
» .
He played them low, and won up all their toys ;


But these, and other favours, he divided
Judiciously with those who with him sided —
Whene’er he quarrelled with the big boy Grey,
(That’s George you know) when at their games and
Now Dame Zealandia had a piece of ground,
As nice a place as any could be found,
And this she gave the boys for space to play,
And to divide among themselves, as they
Might choose, though always in an equal way ;
But Johnny Hall, being very cute and clever,
He and his favourites laid their heads together,
And spite of Grey, who tried his level best
To get a fair division for the rest,
They robbed the smaller boys of all their ground.
And with gridironed sections hemmed them round ;
And as for Grey, disgusted with their tricks —
After he gave them sundry cuffs and kicks,
He found a little island in the sea,
And there he played alone quite merrily.
It chanced upon a warm and sunny day —
As all the boys were busy at their play,
George, and a friend or two, a sudden whim
Took, and away they went to have a swim ;
And while they sported in the briny deep,
Sly Johnny Hall came down to have a peep,
And soon upon the beach, with longing eye,
A nice new suit of tweeds he did espy,
The same that George —his rival —late had on,
And oh, he thought, how well they’d do for John !
And tempted thus, to play another trick,
He snatched them up unseen, and vanished quick
Into the bush, and though a deal too big,
He changed them for his own old-fashioned rig.


When George and party, their ablutions o’er,
With shouts and laughter splashed their way ashore,
Lo ! and behold, the Chieftain’s suit was gone —
And nothing left, to speak of, to put on ;
Nothing hut native dignity and grace
Wherewith Zealandia and her school to face.
Great was his wrath at such unseemly larks,
You may he sure he made some strong remarks ;
But being close to his adopted isle
He took canoe, and landed there—in style —
A style befitting Eden’s blissful scene
Ere Eve with serpents had familiar been,
And there he found, within his own domain,
Armour, wherewith to face the world again.
Meantime at school, before the scholars all,
Compeared that sad delinquent Johnny Hall,
Looking so good and virtuous ; hut the figure
He cut was ludicrous, and made them snigger,
To see him struggling in a Liberal suit—
Which made a guy of him from head to foot ;
And finally they hurst out with a shout
Uproarious, bringing Dame Zealandia out
Erom her own sanctum, looking quite astonished ;
But ere she got the noisy crowd admonished,
Her eye caught Johnny’s—and the situation,
At one quick glarce—hut not of admiration !
“What’s this,” she cried, “I say, John Hall, what’s this?
Something there is—l know not what —amiss.
Whose clothes are these, you wear ? They’re not your own,
Or if they are, how small and thin you’ve grown
Since they were made. Why ! this is Liberal tweed,
And you’re a Tory, John, you are indeed.”
Just then a small hoy blurted out “ I thay,
He stole them close mum, yeth he did, from Grey,
When George wath ha thin down there in the Bay.”


Tims did that small boy let the cat escape,
And Johnny Hall was in a pretty scrape ;
The Dame was furious when the tale she heard—
And went for John, right bang, without a word ;
Across her knee she laid the guilty chap,
And strapped —hut found that there was nought to strap,
Save Grey’s good trousers built of Liberal tweed !
********
It seemed a hollow mockery to proceed !
She therefore raised him by the longest ear,
And spake her mind in language most severe ;
She lectured Johnny to her heart’s content,
Until she made him of his sins repent.
A sadder and a wiser boy he rose,
Next morning, dressed in his accustomed clothes.
But ever since—his tailor shows his sense,
By copying skilfully, to all intents,
The Liberal cut of Grey’s habiliments.
Old Mother Goosef who lives across the sea
(And by the way a warm old dame is she),
Hearing of Johnny at Zealandia’s school—
And all his tricks—from some officious fool,
Took quite a fancy for the sprightly youth,
And made of him a valiant knight, forsooth !
So that he might be on an equal lay
With George, his rival, known as Sir George Grey,
And ever since—at school—the youngsters all,
Are proud of Johnny—alias—Sir John Hall.
And now I’ve done, or nearly so ; my rhyme
Is rough and rude, as doth befit the time,
I’ve railed in verse at Ministerial pride,
And Tory critics may my muse deride ;
t Britannia.


I care not. Let them : be it right or wrong,
“ Pools are my theme and satire is my song.”
The wisest man was foolish in his day,
And many fools are friends and foes of Grey.
But to his critics this I fain would tell,
His folly doth their wisdom far excel !
Behold the splendour of his last unthrift,
Oh, Auckland ! cherish long his noble gift. Î
X'A Valuable Gift.—( Auckland , August 19, 1882.). —Sir George Grey
has telegraphed to a gentleman here, signifying his intention of presenting
his library to the Citizens of Auckland. The Mayor and Corporation for the
time beingare to'act as trustees. There are some very rare volumes in the
collection, valued at from £lOOO to £2OOO each. —Per Press Association .
Lyttelton Times Office, Christchurch .


■
*
■
• • -
- ' * V .
*
•-
t
(07 ?
\ ■ .


J. A. MORGAN & Co.,
54-, MADRAS St. SOUTH, CHRISTCHURCH.
CORDIAL, CORA FLOUR,
ICE MANUFACTORY.
ON SALE:
TEMPERANCE LIQUEURS, Viz.
Ginger Wine, Ginger Brandy, Cherry Brandy
Raspberry, Cloves, Peppermint, Sarsaparilla
Pure Apple and Lemon Cordial, Cider
Peruvian Wine, Quinine Wine, Curagoa.
Also, Corn Flour, Farina and Ice, in Wholesale quantities.
Hotels, Properties, Farms, City and Rural Sections, for Sale.
Valuations effected on Hotel Stocks, Furniture, and all kinds
of Properties.
Loans Negotiated. Licensed Land Brokers. Shares Bought & Sold.
ALEXANDER STUART,
(Late Stuart and Ooiv , Otago),
HOTEL AND PROPERTY VALUATOR,
ESTATE AGENT.
Hotels, Stores, Farms, City Properties, Businesses of every kind for
Sale in Otago and Canterbury.
ADDRESS-54, MADRAS STREET SOUTH,
C HH.ISTO KCURC U.
