

Cnt was a yi»uliiUil Knight,
\ youthful knight with a gallant air,
Who left his stately ancestral halls.
And all for love of a lady fair.
He sailed away o’er the ocean wide,
He sailed away from his native land.
Until in three weeks he stepped ashore,
' And in the port of Rio did stand.
At length to Sir Roger a rumour came,
A rumour there came that his father was dead,
When he loaned a horse from a rival in trade,
And in haste from Wagga-Wagga he fled.
Now envy, that ever attends the great,
The action called by a baser name,
But its shaft could only at Castro strike,
It could not wound Sir Roger’s fair fame.
He shook the captain by the band,
He said good bye to the mate so bold,
Then he wished the cook in his copper was stewed,
And he gave to the sailors a handful of gold.
In fishing and shooting, and manly sport,
He pleasantly passed his time for weeks;
When a letter he wrote to his father to say
That now he new fields of adventure seeks.
He hastened to Sydney, and there by chance.
By a fortunate chance one Bogle he met,
Who d faithfully served in his kinsman’s house,
And well remembered Sir Roger yet.
He told how at home they believed him dead.
And how his broad acres another possessed;
How his mother believed that her son would return,
Nor till he came back should she ever know rut*
Then fie bade farewell to his new made friends,
And his passage he took in a Yankee brig;
Next day he embarked, in the highest glee,
On board of the Bella, of schooner rig.
They left the port with a favouring wind.
But they had not been three days at sea,
When a storm arose, and the vessel went down,
And left not a vestige of the Bella to see,
Then without more delay, he chartered a ship,
He chartered a ship of native build.
With the faithful Bogle he then embarked.
And the hold with Australian meat well filled.
As they sailed, each day, they sat and talked,
Of all that had happened when he was young,
And Sir Roger listened with greedy ear,
And to every word of old Bogie he elung.
Save a boat, bottom upward, that chanced to float,
By a vessel that left the same port was found;
And, as no tidings of Sir Roger were heard.
By all ’twas concluded he must be drowned.
As months passed by and no tidings came.
His friends determined no longer to wait,
So his will was proved and his goods were shared.
And his heir took possession of his estate.
They reached the Nore with a favouring wind.
With a favouring wind up the Thames they sailed,
Until they anchored in Woolwich Reach,
When the steamer Osprey Sir Roger hailed.
To Wapping Old Stairs then he made his way,
To visit the scenes of his early youth;
For a lady there lived who in sunnier days
Sir Roger had plighted his fondest troth.
Now, all this time, though it seems most strange,
Sir Roger was living a pastoral life
’Mid the flocks and herds that he loved so well,
And far removed from envy and strife.
How he escaped from the sinking ship,
And Melbourne reached, there was none to tell;
But he’s in the bush, in the best of health,
And looking, it seems, remarkably well.
When he landed at Wapping he found alt changed,
Changed was the Wapping he’d formerly known,
And the lady a youthful maiden he’d left,
Was now to a portly matron grown.
Then he turned away with a heavy heart,
And thought, as he rode in the cab to town,
When lie might visit bis ancestral borne.
Should he by the tenantry there be known.
Sir Roger soon found his cash all gone,
His cash all gone nor could look for more,
For he was then thousands of miles from home.
Nor could he for months replenish his store.
Then like a gallant true hearted knight.
He scorned not to follow a menial trade.
In Wagga-Wagga, he’s a butcher now,
And deftly he handles the butcher’s blade.
Next morn when at breakfast Sir Roger sat,
Some dear old friends to visit him came.
But they, like himself, had time so changed,
He|d quite forgotten both them and their name.
But his mother—she clasped him in her arms
And shed on his neck a flood of tears,
My ion you’re not a bit like Roger,
But yet you’ve got my Roger i ears.
Sir Roger then lived a jovial life,
A jovial life he lived for years,
Nor minded he aught what people said,
Or what he did as it since appears.
Of Sir Roger no tidings his kindred heard,
For he’d changed his name that he might not disgrace
Those friends at home whom he dearly loved,
And still in his heart held the foremost place.
He now learnt with dismay that his vast estates,
All his vast estates by a stranger were owned,
Who refused to believe that Sir Roger lived,
And firmly maintained that he must be drowned.
For seven long years did he patiently wait,
Id hopes that at length he might justice get:
The trial took place, but with no result,
And he’s not had justice yet.
Now tired of roving, he longed for home,
He longed for home where’er he might be,
And if in the bush Sir Roger strayed,
He carved his initials on every tree.
When his pipe he smoked, he thought of home.
On its bowl he scratched R. C. D. T.
Wherever he went, or wherever he stayed.
Those well known initials you're sure to see.
Now all young heirs to large estates,
Take warning by what to Sir Roger befel,
Never roam when young over foreign lands.
Nor ever leave home if your father’s unwell.
Had Sir Roger but followed this simple plan.
He would not have got into such disgrace,
And instead of now lying in Newgate gaol.
He’d be feasting his friends at Tichborne Place*


CLARKE’S WHIMS AND ODDITIES.
Each Number consists of a Humorous Poem, with 16 Droll Illustrations.
Price Id. Plain , 6d. Coloured,
1 A Handful of Nonsense.
2 The Tichborne Trial, as told to our
Grandchildren.
3 The Boat Race, and who went to it
4 The Courtship and Marriage of Mr.
Tomkins.
8
The Race Course and the Road to it.
Sir Roger : a Tichborne Ballad.
The Life and Surprising Adventures
of Arthur Orton, of Wapping,
Butcher 7/
The Yarn of the Claimant.
H. G. CLARKE AND CO., 2, GARRICK STREET. COYENT GARDEN,
CLARKE’S LITTLE MODELLER;
OE, HOW TO MAKE THE CARD-BOARD MODELS.
Price Id. each , plain; 6d. coloured.
22 How to make a Model of a Water Mill
23 f How to make a Model Village.
24 t Large size, Part 1 & 2.
25 (How to make a Model Railway.
26 \ Large size. Part 1 & 2.
27 How to make a Windmill at Work,
28 Homeward Bound.
29 How to make a Model Velocipede.
30 How to make a Model Whale Fishery
31 How to make a Model Punch’s Show.
32 Punch’s Show; a Serio-ComicalTra-
gedy, in Three Acts.
33 How to make a Marionette Show.
34 Punch’s Show.—Large size.
35 The Ghost! The Ghost! Six startling
.^Hlusions,
36 How to make a Dioramic Show.
37 How to make a Chinese Show.
38 How to make a Fairy Fountain.
39 How to make an Automaton Leotard.
40 How to make a Model Poultry Yard, \
41 How to make a Cobbler’s Stall
42 The Automaton Dancing Sailor
1 How to make a Model Village.
2 How to make a Model Railway.
3 A Model of Windsor Castle.
4 How to make a Model Farm.
6 A Model of a Wreck Ashore,
6 How to make a Model Race Course.
7 How to make a Model Cricket Field.
8 HowtomakeaModelWateringPlace
9 A Model of Shakespeare’s Birthplace.
10 Shakespeare’s Birthplace. An Artist’s
Pilgrimage to Stratford-upon-Avon
How to make a Model of Anne Hath-
away’s Cottage.
A Model of a Volunteer Review.
A Model of a Game of Croquet.'
14 How to make a Model Drawing Room.
15 Model Drawing Room Furniture.
16 How to make a Model Circus.
17 How to make a Model Swiss Cottage.
18 A Model Zoological Gardens.
19 A Model of a Village in Winter.
20 A Model of a Butcher’s Shop.
21 A Model of a Fishmonger’s Shop.
11
12
13
Each number contains full instructions , by following which a pretty Model
can be constructed ; and when nicely coloured and put together , they form a
pleasing ornament to the study, and serve as an agreeable pastime Jor wet days
and winter evenings.
H. G. CLARKE AND CO.. 2, GARRICK STREET, COYENT GARDEN.
SIR ROGER
A TICHBORNE BALLAD.
