





Sir William MacGregor’s Upper Fly River
Exploration, British New Guinea,
By J. P. Thomson, Esq, e.r.s.g.s., etc., Hon. Secretary and
Treasurer of the R.G.S.A., Brisbane.
IRead at the June Meeting of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Brisbane, 1890.]
[abstract.]
Sir William MacGregor left the S.S. “ Merrie England” near
the village of Odagositia, some fifty miles from the mouth of the
Ely River, and started on the 26th December, 1889, with a party
of eighteen —consisting of Mr. Cameron, Mr. Douglas, Charles
Kowald, two other Europeans, also George Belford, three
Papuans, and nine other colored men.
The party travelled in a steam launch and had two whale boats
in tow, with provisions and supplies for six weeks. On the first
day, fifty miles were accomplished, and a point some ten miles
above the village of Tagota was attained. The natives all proved
very friendly, notwithstanding the fact that on the 14th Decem-
ber these very people had attacked Sir William's previous
expedition. After a night’s experience of camping in the boats,
it was decided to discontinue the practice, as unhealthy, when-
ever practicable. On the second day two men were seized with
fever, but further attacks were warded off by prompt remedies.
At 150 miles from the mouth of the river the tide’s influence was
uncertain. A magnificent creeper having large bunches of scarlet
flowers was here found sparsely distributed. The average depth
of the river here was 39 feet, the width 600 yards, the current
vfitocity 8'25 miles an hour. The country along the banks was
found to be very poor, low, swampy and devoid of any timber
beyond a few cedar, malava , nutmeg, and sago trees. Upon the
place of union of the Strickland River and the Ely the name of
Everill Junction was bestowed, in honour of the leader of the
jXIS.W. branch of the Australasian Royal Geographical Society’s
expedition. Here the Ely is 1,000 yards broad; above the
junction it is 300 yards, and the Strickland 400 yards. Eor
the next forty or fifty miles, the land lying between the two rivers


SIE WM. MACGEEGOE’s UPPEE ELY EIYEE EXPLOEATIOIjr.
is chiefly occupied by swamps and lagoons. A village contain-
ing about thirty houses was seen, but a great swamp lay between
it and the river, and time did not admit of its being visited. The
people appeared to be settled in agricultural communities.
Gleese, ducks, hornbills, parrots, and cockatoos were seen, but no
pigeons. The lagoons are covered with a magnificent pink water
lily, the leaf of which is two feet in diameter. Whenever canoes
were discovered tied up .0 the bank of the river, presents were
left in them to conciliate the natives. One word of the language
of the latter was accidentally acquired and proved to be of great
value ; it was the “ open sesame ” to the upper districts of the Fly
Eiver. This word, “ Sambio ” and “ Sambi ? ” (interrogatively)
seemed to set the native mind at rest.
The native canoes appeared to be all of the same pattern,
having been chopped into shape and hollowed out by means
of the stone adze; they are ten or twelve inches broad, nearly
as deep, twelve to fifteen feet long, sharp at both ends,
and with no outrigger; it seemed a marvel how the occu-
pants could stand up and paddle these canoes, and at the same
time preserve- their equilibrium. The natives attached great
value to empty bottles, meat tins, knives, and tomahawks, but
could not be persuaded/ to part with articles of head gear or
drums for any amount of the coveted “ trade.” All were armed
with bows and arrows, and had the left arm defended as high
as the elbow, by a guard of cane twisted spirally. In order to be
in readiness for any possible attack on the part of the natives,
every night the camp was fortified by a sort of low parapet of split
saplings. This fence usually assumed the form of a triangle, the
open base being towards the river, close to where the launch was
tied up. Sir William describes a timber most valuable for steaming
purposes when coal is not available. It is found all along the
c >urse of the river, is light, easy to cut and split. On the 4th of
January, 1890, the explorers had reached latitude 7° 3' south,
331 miles from the mouth of the Fly, and 88 miles from
Everill Junction. Here the width of the stream varied from
150 to 350 yards, with a current at from 2 to 3 miles an hour.


S T?T J. P. THOMSON, ESQ., E.8.5.G.5., ETC. d
On the 6th of the month the first real grass patches
were met with, 370 miles from the mouth. The hanks were
still low and wet, but were becoming gradually better defined
and higher. The first warlike demonstration occurred on the 7th
January. On the bank of the river where it was some forty or
fifty feet high, there were sixteen or seventeen houses, from thirty
to fifty feet in length. To the utter astonishment of the party,
the first thing to meet the eye was a long line of 100 men, each
armed with a bow and a sheaf of arrows, and all got up in gala
dress. Many were painted in divers colors. Fortunately the river
was 300 yards wide there, which enabled the launch to steam up
at 200 yards from the occupied bank. The explorers kept
shouting “Sambio!” and making signs to the natives to come
to them. After various demonstrations of war and peace, a sort
of half confidence was established and canoes came off to the
launch, anxious enquiries being first made by the natives in the
terms “Pu ? Pu?” This evidently referred to puff, puff, i.e.,
guns. Probably Signor L. M. D’Albertis had come across this tribe,
and thus they had learned the power of the rifle. However, Sir
William and his party dauntlessly landed and carried on some
trade with them. Here a new word which seemed to mean
“peace” was learned, “Magisio.” These natives chewed the
betel nut, the lime used therewith being made from mussel shells.
After a short stay, the launch went on its way, leaving favourable
impressions of its occupants with the tribe. On the Bth, a camp
was made, 423 miles from the sea ; the banks of the river rising
a little but sloping away into swamps, and the country being quite
unfit for permanent occupation. At 486 miles, in the clay of the
red hills, was found the first stone met with on the river’s course
—pebbles of quartz, basalt, limestone, sandstone, &c.; birds were
few, and forest food scanty.
On the 13th of January, the party met with the first and only
aggression offered by the natives. A red bank about forty feet
high having been noticed, consisting of three different layers of
deposit —the middle one, twelve feet thick, composed of sand
and shingle —it was at once decided to prospect this layer for


SIR WM. MACGREGOR’S UPPER PUT RtVER EXPLORATION.
gold. Good colors were obtained by washing, and whilst a
second dish was being washed, a flight of arrows whizzed past
them and wounded a Malay, named Lario, on board the launch.
No aggressors were seen and it was considered advisable to leave
the locality, although the inclination of all, and of the leader
himself, was to fight it out, as their going away might be set down
to fear, by the natives. The arrows were of the usual type—a
reed shaft and a palm-wood point, unbarbed. In a week Lario
was at work again.
The river was now found to contain spits of sand and islands
of small stones, pebbles of granite, limestone, conglomerate,
quartz, slate, basalt, flint, petrified coral and shells. One fine
specimen of petrified palm was found. Specimens of all were
obtained and forwarded to Mr. Jack, Government Geologist,
Queensland. At one place, where the river was 300 yards wide,
a sandstone bar extends right across, but a passage wide and
deep enough for the launch was found close to the right bank.
The current of the river now became more swift, and rapids were
encountered. The first was a mile long, and here there is an
island, covered by old forest, three-fourths of a mile long, and a
quarter of a mile broad. It was named “ Macrossan Island,” in
honour of the Minister for Mines of Queensland. It is 523 miles
from the mouth of the Ely. Sir William concludes
S. T)’Albertis’ steam launch could not have reached this point, as
the course of the river beyond D’Albertis’ Junction, as given by
the Italian explorer, differs utterly from what was now found to
be the true course.
Difficulties were now encountered amongst the rapids. The
launch very nearly capsized after being swept down a rapid she
had already negotiated. She succeeded in again surmounting it,
and a mile and a half further on came to a rapid of the same
length. After gallantly forcing her way through the turbulent
to the smooth water above, it was found that she could not gain
another inch with a full head of steam, so it was decided to let
her drive down again, and the conclusion was arrived at that the
head of steam navigation in the Ply River had been reached, at


Bt J. V. THOMSON - , ESQ., F.R.5.0.5., ETC,
535 miles from the mouth, in latitude (by observation)
5° 58' 15" S.
Arrangements were now made to prosecute the trip by means
of the boats. Mr. Douglas, three Europeans, one Papuan, and
four other colored men were left with the launch. Sir William,
Mr. Cameron, Mr. Belford, two Papuans, and five Polynesians
went in the boat. The principal method of advance was by
dragging the boat by a rope through the rapids. Only a few
natives were seen dragging their canoes by the help of the
branches of the trees.
The junction of a narrow, deep, sluggish river with the Ely
was named the Palmer, and the newly-discovered river itself, the
Palmer, in honour of Sir Arthur Hunter Palmer, of Queensland,
“ who has done much to facilitate the work of this Government.”
The country here consists of low hills about 300 feet high, all
forest clad, the trees being the same as those met with on the New
Guinea lowlands. Traces of gold were also found. The hills
are all of sandstone formation, and the alluvial soil contains more
sand than humus. A seam of lignite six inches thick w r as found —
useless for all practical purposes. It is merely a layer of trees,
leaves, and vegetation of various kinds recently deposited and
covered over by sand, which has got a certain amount of cohesion-
The process can be seen in earlier stages, at scores of places on
the recently cut river banks. Several tobacco plants were found
growing in a clearing, at a house built on a red hill, about sixty
feet high. This was considered remarkable, as the natives 180
miles lower down the stream, knew nothing of tobacco. Seeds
were brought away. 590 miles of the river had now been
traversed, and the Victor Emmanuel Eange, 5000 to 6000 feet
above sea-level was in full view, within about thirty-five miles.
The more distant chain, about forty-five miles away, probably
rises to 10,000 to 12,000 feet, and runs nearly east and west. A
little above the point where this view is obtained, a large branch
sixty to seventy yards broad, entered the river on the left bank.
This affluent was named the Black Kiver, in honour of the Hon.
M. H. Black, Minister for Lands in Queensland. The course of


SIB WM. MACGREGOR’S TIPPER PLY RIVER EXPLORATION.
the Palmer, which the explorers were now ascending, now became
encumbered with snags, so it was not considered advisable to
take the boats on, without due examination of the river. A
fortified camp was therefore constructed at a spot, in round
numbers 600 miles ffi m the mouth of the Ply. Ihis camp was
therefore called the “ 600 mile camp.” There is no grass country
visible here, hut vast stretches of reeds occupy the surface. The
thermometer stood at 90° in the shade, and fell to / 4 at night.
Thunderstorms seem to have occurred every afternoon during the
voyage. Here again fine colours of gold were found.
Two Polynesia and one Papuan were left at the camp. The
remainder went on by boat with three days provisions. Again a
fine view of .the Victor Emmanuel Ranges was obtained. They
appeared hopelessly inacct ~.ble, being exceedingly rugged and pre-
cipitous ; they also appeared to be entirely in German territory.
A range lying between the explorers and the Victor Emmanuel
Range, about 5000 to 6000 feet high, was named Mount Donaldson
in honour of the Treasurer of Queensland, and a portion of it which
appeared to lie in Kaiser-Wilhelm Land, Mount Bliicher.
The party was now thoroughly split up, and Sir William
MacGregor was not without anxiety on account of his scattered
companions. “ Nine were in I he steam launch 4 miles below
Palmer Junction, three were in the 600-mile camp fourteen miles
from the whaleboat, two were with the whaleboat, and five of us
were travelling in the bush up the Palmer,” Yet no attack was
made on any of these parties. There was clearly a large native
population at this point, and judging from the size of their
gardens, they appeared to be of more fixed habits than those
farther south.
There was now no more to do. It would take three months to
explore the ranges, and the party had neither the time nor means
for such an undertaking, and the Administrator did not feel
justified in entering on such an exploration, without the con-
currence of the Government of German New Guinea.
The return journey was started on the morning of the 24th.
The dispersed parties were found in safety and fairly free from


BY J. P. THOMSON, ESQ., F.R.S.G.S., ETC.
fever, and all started in good spirits for the mouth of the river
and the “ Merrie England.” On the way down, they were
received on all sides with the utmost friendliness by the natives,
who were eager to trade. One of the tribes was estimated to
consist of 2,000 souls.
The information obtained by this voyage is important from an
administrative point of view. But its commercial value is not so
apparent, at least above Everill Junction. There is uo reason to
suppose that gold can be procured in payable quantities.
Climatologically, there seems to be no rainy season here.
Thunderstorms are the rule after 2to 3 p.m. The temperature
during the day ranged from 85° to 90°, but the latter figure is
unusual. At night the thermometer registered 72° to 76°, possibly
owing to the N.'W’. wind blowing over snow-clad ranges in Dutch
New Guinea. The upper districts are fairly free from mosquitoes
and sand flies. On an average, there were about two cases of
sickness a day, amongst a party of nineteen. None of these
were serious except one, which gave the doctor some anxiety.
Ethnologically no race of natives has been found inland distinct
from the coast tribes. Those seen at the boundary of British
and German New Guinea were of a light colour, but that may
not signify much. The dialects differ, and every word ends
in a vowel. On the lower part of the river they are agricul-
turists and live in settled communities; on the upper part
they cannot do so, owing to the occurrences of floods over
the low wet country. They all use the bow and arrow; all
suffer from the same diseases. The men tattoo their bodies,
the women are all clothed. They differ greatly in type and size.
Any future examination of i.i interior, in this direction, should
be made in June or July, in o der to procure information res-
pecting the climate enuring the 3.E. monsoon. At that season,
too, the birds would be in plumage and could be collected for
scientific purposes. A considerable addition has been made to
the official collections, but, probably, not much that is new to
science. The expedition was absent five weeks and four days,-
and in that time the party travelled about 1,200 miles.






l/Cgy. , 5 s
JL
/
fe ?7W. JLu^yv^J.
*2.
/ . oc- Cxc/ f .
/. /
/. < */ z> ■ C. /^ AA^/ ■
*?. " / cy^\T.
//». Cf~£b~ y\ a~V~ cyy (^Mrru^ot ; J? o. Co - 'hj-fajL-. s
/ .
i/i . cJLjaa-/S f 3P. 0. "
I " I,-, a ~ fl?. 0 - -
I .
6 . (L <nx.ca “£> x 0?. 0 . "
3 . £ Jxcv^o~e-o~'o_ocA T\cco-<xO n-E.


