

sagg ■ I
- ■ ‘ ifta*T j, F‘jyi»i '■ ■ ~' I
sm- - • - I
m [gM
(Sw s» *Srt§M I
i!S«ag^ J p c^ r tBsBL-. I






SIR THOMAS WARNER


•*:•;.■. -Iv • ■ M
Bp|» i : .; ;; pv ** - iJflii B
% ;»«
9 ,.;Ma ? f V * ‘M - - v W «?%£■■: *' ajjjBi
J £ $L~ ' .’■' ; * •*■■■•' ’ jli
•*"* *J « ,,,: iHLE JhL> ='
[Photo, Elliott & Fry
THE AUTHOR


SIR THOMAS WARNER
PIONEER OF THE WEST INDIES
A chronicle of his family by
AUCHER WARNER
formerly Attorney-General and K.C. , Trinidad
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY THE
RT. HON. VISCOUNT ELIBANK
London
THE WEST INDIA COMMITTEE


J 500 copies of this Edition have been
printed by Butler and Tanner Limited,
Frome and London.
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN - . ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


DEDICATED
TO MY MOTHER


The object of the writer has been to collect
from reliable sources all that is known of
Sir Thomas Warner, the founder of the British
West Indian Colonies in 1623, and of his for-
bears and descendants, and to arrange the material
collected in a form that will not only serve as a
family record, but may also prove of interest to
the general reader to whom a story of seventeenth-
century adventure, and of Empire expansion, may
still appeal.
The tables of descent, which occupy consider-
able space, will show any descendants of Sir Thomas
their relationship to other descendants, and may
also serve to supply evidence from which the con-
nection of other branches of the family may be
established.
I have to acknowledge my indebtedness to the
authorities quoted, of whom a complete list is set
out in the Appendix, and to the valuable libraries
of the Society of Genealogists, the Royal Empire
Society and the West India Committee, and especi-
ally to Vere Langford Oliver, author of The History
oj the Island oj Antigua , and to Jas. A. Williamson,
author of The Caribbee Islands under the Proprietary
Patents , to whose exhaustive research I owe much.
To my friends Edward Salmon, Editor of
United Empire , and Sir Algernon Aspinall, C.M.G.,
C.8.E., Secretary of the West India Committee,


author of West Indian Tales of Old, I am indebted
for much kind advice and suggestion, and for read-
ing these pages. To my kinsman, Oliver Warner,
I am indebted for his valuable help and advice
in the business of printing, and to Mr. E. E.
Wilkinson, Librarian of the Colonial Office, for
his courtesy in supplying me with copies of Sir
Thomas’s letters of 1636.
I have to thank the West India Committee for
the loan of the blocks of the Essex Ring, and all
those who have helped in the production of the
book, especially my brother Raymond.
A. WARNER.


THE RT. HON. VISCOUNT ELIBANK
I gladly respond to the invitation of my old
friend, Mr. Aucher Warner, K.C., whom I knew
for many years in Trinidad as Attorney-General,
to write an introduction to his book on the life of
his ancestor. Sir Thomas Warner, Pioneer of the
West Indies. I myself spent eight interesting and
pleasant years administering two of His Majesty’s
West Indian Colonies, and I now have the honour
to hold the position of President of the West India
Committee. It is, therefore, a special pleasure to
me to write this foreword to a work which brings
out so vividly the spirit of courage and tenacity of
the early settlers and which is so descriptive of the
struggles and difficulties connected with the laying
of the foundation of these Colonies. These diffi-
culties and dangers are well illustrated by two
letters from Sir Thomas Warner to King Charles I,
which are published in their original form for the
first time, and constitute a special feature of the
book. They also show the resourceful and deter-
mined character and tactful personality of the writer
of them. Sir Thomas Warner was a man of ancient
lineage, and came of that fine old English stock
which has done so much to build up our Empire.
Unlike some of his contemporaries, who sought only
gold and precious minerals as a reward for their


adventures and hardships, Warner’s object in under-
taking, in the year 1624, what was then a long
and risky voyage, was to create a permanent settle-
ment in the Islands. His definite aim was to
build up a new British centre of Overseas Settle-
ment and of agricultural development and trading.
The measure of success that he attained is graphi-
cally described in this book. It is very notable
that through his direct descendants, Warner has
continued until the present day to be associated in
name and administration with the Colonies he
founded under such troublous conditions three hun-
dred years ago. By profession he was a soldier,
and in his early career a member of the Bodyguard
of James lof England. Many of his descendants,
however, believing evidently in the maxim that
‘the pen is mightier than the sword,’ embraced
the more peaceful profession of the Law, so that
we find successive generations of able and dis-
tinguished men bearing the honoured name of
Warner, holding high legal and administrative
offices in these West Indian Colonies, and thus carry-
ing on the work so courageously and ably begun
by their great and famous ancestor. We are much
indebted to Mr. Aucher Warner for giving us such
interesting glimpses of the lives of the early settlers
of these Colonies, and of their differences and
troubles with the Caribs, who were the aboriginal
inhabitants of these Islands. Mr. Warner has also
added interest to his narrative by raising a some-


what controversial issue as to the authenticity of
the famous Essex ring at present reposing upon
Queen Elizabeth’s monument in the Henry VII
Chapel in Westminster Abbey. The arguments
with which he supports his contention that the so-
called ‘Warner’ ring was the actual ring given to
the Earl of Essex by Queen Elizabeth, are worthy
of study. Mr. Warner also deals with the original
causes of the struggles between the French and the
British in these Islands. In these days when people
are too apt to forget the trials and tribulations
suffered by our forefathers in building up our
Colonial Empire, a service has been rendered in
bringing afresh to our memories the troubles and
difficulties and sacrifices that were involved in
settling and developing these beautiful and valuable
possessions of the Crown.
EUBANK.
x 933-




CHAPTER I
Origin and Early History—Name probably Anglo-Saxon —Warners
an Ancient Manor at Great Waltham in Essex—Edmund
Warner Lord of the Manor 1360 —Inquisitions Post Mortem
—Visitations of Heralds, Records of Parish Church—Of
Robert Warner and the several branches of his descendants I
Thomas Warner of the Parham and Framlingham Family—The
‘Old Hall,’ Parham, the Parish Church, its History and the
Iconoclasts—An Old Gateway—Warner with Roger North
in his attempt to establish a Settlement in Guiana—Warner’s
Enterprise in the Caribbean Islands —Same East Anglian
stock as Settlers of the American Colonies—Early hardships
of Settlers—Conflict with Caribs, French and Spaniards—
Settlement of other Islands—Warner first Governor of the
Carib Islands under Letters Patent—Necessity for a Patron
at Court: Lord Carlisle—Thomas Warner Knighted—Com-
missioners of Plantations—Development of the Islands under
his Governorship—His Death in 1648-9 —What he achieved
—His Character—His Epitaph 18
CHAPTER 111
Philip Warner—Deputy Governor of Antigua—Conflict with
Caribs of Dominica—Accusation and Imprisonment in the
Tower of London—His Letters from the Tower and Report
upon the Islands for the King’s Council—Dampier’s Account
of the Affair—Warner’s Acquittal and Vindication, and his
Election as President of the Council 59
CHAPTER IV
Sir Thomas’s Right to Arms —History of, and of Quarterings—
Pedigree reproduced in two Parts; Part 1, including Collateral
Relations in England down to the early part of the Eighteenth
Century; Part 11, Descendants in Main Line and Principal
Branches 83


CHAPTER V
Of Sir Thomas’s Grandfather, Francis of Framlingham and his
Families by his two Wives, Elizabeth Appleyard and Mary
Rous; of the Cratfield and Parham Branches—Some Brasses,
Monumental Inscriptions and Wills, of Edward Warner,
Merchant Taylor
CHAPTER VI
Of Sir John Warner, Bart.—He and his Wife become Roman
Catholics—Charles IPs Reference to him—Sister Clare of
Jesus —English Order of ‘Poor Clares’—‘Ladies of Pontoise’
—Sir John’s brother Francis drowned at Nieuport
CHAPTER VII
Of Edmund Warner, Merchant of London—The ‘lnfant’ Edmund,
and his sister Mary—The Warner Almshouse and the ‘Boyton
Trust’
CHAPTER VIII
‘The Essex Ring’—The Claim of the ‘Warner Ring’ and the
‘Thynne’ to be the ‘Essex Ring’ considered, and the Claim
of the ‘Warner Ring’ to be the one given to Elizabeth by
Mary Queen of Scots
CHAPTER IX
Joseph Warner, F.R.S., 1717—1801 —William Warner—Colonel
Edward Warner—Note re Sir Charles Shipley—Pelham
Francis Warner —Daniel Francis Warner, 1795-1870 —
Joseph Warner, second son of Joseph Warner, F.R.S.
CHAPTER X
CHARLES WILLIAM WARNER
A. The Fear of Death, an Address by Charles Warner, C.8.,
i 873
B. Main Line of Descent
Pedigrees
Authorities


The Author Frontispiece
Old Gateway, Moat Hall, Parham facing page 19
Parham Church 21
Scene near Woodbridge, whence Sir Thomas Warner sailed 23
Original Commission in an Old Frame 27
Tomb of Sir Thomas Warner, Middle Island, S. Christopher 57
John le Warner (from the Original Pedigree) 8 5
Detail from the Original Pedigree 87
The Quarterings subsequent to 1629 88
Lady Warner (Sister Clare of Jesus) 101
Boy ton Almshouses i°7
The Warner Ring and the Thynne Ring 11 5
Joseph Warner, F.R.S. IT 9
Sir Thomas Warner’s Banner 1 27
Charles William Warner, about 1842 13 1
Charles William Warner, C.8., in later life 133
xvii b


ERRATA
page 28, line 7. ‘Pedigree, Part 11. B’ in lieu of ‘Pedi-
gree, Part 11, C.’
page 56, line 29. ‘St. Christopher’ in lieu of ‘St. Chris-
topher’s.’
page 117, line 10. ‘Effigium’ in lieu of ‘Effugium.’
P a g e x 33> line 2 9- ‘And what should they’ in lieu
little ye.’
page 160, line 16. ‘Brodrick’ in lieu of ‘Broderick.’
page 160, - Under ‘lssue of F. A. Warner’ add ‘1
daughter, Sydney Jeanetta, b. 1890.
0.8.E.’
page 165, line 22. ‘Hasted’s’ in lieu (^‘Halstead’s.’
After name Catherine Jane Mathew read ‘daughter of
General Sir Charles Shipley.’
In last line delete ‘Garcia’.


CHAPTER I
Origin and Early History—Name probably Anglo-Saxon—
Warners an Ancient Manor at Great Waltham in Essex—
Edmund Warner Lord of the Manor 1360 —Inquisitions Post
Mortem —Visitations of Heralds, Records of Parish Church—
Of Robert Warner and the several branches of his descendants
Warners was the name of an old Manor in
the parish of Great Waltham, formerly also
known as Much Waltham, the largest parish in the
County of Essex. It lies about six miles north of
Chelmsford on the road to Dunmow. In Saxon
times Great Waltham constituted a division of the
county known as a Half Hundred, and, together
with seven other parishes, with which it borders,
was in the possession of Asgar and Unwin. Later,
these were held by Geofrey de Magnaville and
under him by Hubert Walter, Turchill and Roger.
The whole was afterwards divided into seven Manors
of which Warners was one, the others being Chat-
ham Hall, Hide Hall, South House Manor, Lang-
leys, Rectory Manor, and Bullochs. Edmund
Warner held the Manor of Warners under Hum-
phrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, in 1360, and
resided in the Mansion House. The property is
described as being the fifth part of a fee, and as
lying about two miles from the Church, beyond
How Street on the left-hand side of the road from
Waltham to Dunmow. It continued in that family
till it was purchased in 1536 by Lord Rich, who
previously had obtained a grant of the Priory of


Little Lees with the land and domains belonging
to that house, which was divided from the manor
of Warners by the road. Of these domains. Lord
Rich formed a park about four miles in circum-
ference which extended from this parish into those
of Lees and Felsted. It was called Little Lee Park,
and along the southern side of it a pleasant green
is called Little Lee Green. This Manor of Warners
with Lees Priory was enjoyed by the posterity of
Lord Rich till, upon the partition of the whole
inheritance of that peer, they were, with the other
estates, allotted to Charles Montague, Earl of Man-
chester, whose son and successor sold them to the
Guardians of Edmund Sheffield, Duke of Buck-
ingham. The Manor subsequently passed through
different hands and recently to Guy's Hospital,
London.
This account is given at some length, as it not
only tells of the origin of the Manor of Warners
and of what became of it, but includes the names
of places which come into the story of the family.
Little Lees Priory, now known as Leighs Priory,
is supposed to have been part of the guerdon given to
Lord Rich by Henry VIII for his aid in dissolving
the larger monasteries. Something like a hundred
manors were the further reward for his services.
The Manor of Warners took its name from ‘the
ancientist possessors of it upon record, the Warners,
who had also the Manor of Boys otherwise spelt
Bois in Halstead. It is sometimes called Warners


alias Wallis’s with Asteleyns or Old Warners. From
this family are descended the Warners of Parham
and elsewhere in Suffolk.
‘John Warner, Esq., who died 18 Henry VI,
married Joane, sister and heir of John Maldon, by
which he had John his son and heir then aged
eight years. He died 13 Edward IV, holding the
Manor of Waleys and 200 acres of arable, 10
meadow, 16 pasture at Great and Little Waltham,
Plasse, High Ester and Good Ester of Elizabeth
of England as of her Manor of Great Waltham.
John his son was then nineteen years old.
‘Henry Warner, Esq., probably son of the last,
died 21 st March 1504, holding the Manor of
Warners of his Manor of Great Waltham. He held
the Manor of Warners alias Warleys and 10 messu-
ages, 200 acres of arable, 40 of meadow and 100
shillings rent with appurtenances in Great Waltham
and 6 messuages, 130 acres of arable, 30 of meadow,
60 of pasture, 30 of wood called Astelyns, Philips
and Newlands in Great Waltham of Sir Richard
Rich, Lord Rich of his manor of Great Waltham
by the yearly rent of £2 f° r services worth
£2 B<£ per annum, also the Manor of Bureas
alias Burches of the King in Capite.
‘John Warner who was 19 in 1504 died 27th Sep-
tember 1554, and his next heir was his brother
Henry, then aged upwards of 60.
‘Henry Warner of Finchingfield died on the
4th March 1556, leaving no male issue.’


An abstract of the Inquisition held upon his death
is here set out, as showing the procedure of the day
in such cases, and as affording an account of the
misfortunes which befell him. 1
HENRT WARNER , ESQ.
‘lnquisition taken at ford in Co Essex
2 September 4 & 5 Phil & Mary 1557 before
the Escheator thereby the oaths of 16 jurors (named)
‘The said jurors say on oath that the said Henry
Warner was seised in his demesne, as of fee, of
the Manors of Burcesse alias Burches with appurten-
ances in T and of 2 messuages, 20 acres of
arable, 20 acres of meadow, 60 acres of pasture
called Old Warners in Great Waltham, Playshye,
Higfy Ester, and Good Ester, [and other lands
described].’
Being so seized the said Henry made his will at
Fynchingfeld on 1 March 1556, 3 & 4 Philip &
Mary, wherein he described himself as Henry
Warner of Fynchyngfeld, Co. Essex, gentleman, and
states:
‘Whereas I am indebted unto the Kynges and
Quenes highness for the syning of Lyverye and
unto dyvers and sundrie other persons in great
sommes of monye as dothe appere by dyvers
meanes and evil Counsell of one William Emsam
in whom heretobefore I have put all my trust do by
this my last will give and bequeathe will and devyse
unto Robert Kemp esquyer my good and singuler


frynde in whome I have founde muche comforte
and helpe in the tyme of my greate necessitie all
my landes and tenements and all other my heridita-
ments whatsoever they be sett lying and being in
the Townes parishes of Playshe Muche Waltham
Thundersley within the Countie of Essex and else-
where to his sole use, he paying my debts to the
King & Queen and all others.
‘Afterwards Henry Warner aforesaid died at
Fynchingfield 4th March 3 & 4 Philip and Mary
( x 556/7) and Thomas Nudigate, son and heir of
a certain Ann Warner, Elizabeth Thomas and Mar-
gery Thomas, daughters of Thomasine Warner
deceased, are heirs of the said Henry Warner, and
are all aged 21 and more.’
These seem to have succeeded to but a barren
inheritance, as the Inquisition establishes that all
Henry’s property was left to Robert Kemp. This
Kemp is on record as owning property at Fynching-
field at the time.
As to the cause of Henry Warner’s troubles, the
Inquisition is the sole source of information; he
was probably a sufferer of the unsettled times in
which he lived, of which it is recorded with reference
to the neighbouring county of Norfolk and to the
great feuds existing between the Dukes of Norfolk
and Suffolk that ‘the county was full of private
strifes, land snatching and ward lifting were
common, and it stood right wildly without a mean
may be that justice be had.’ 2


The reference is to the year 1450, but the con-
ditions continued to exist long after.
Where Henry Warner is buried is not known.
Among some brasses in the Church of Mildenhall, a
small town near the Cambridge border, there is a brass
of one Henry Warner, who is represented in armour,
with headpiece removed and a ruff round his neck.
As to who that Henry was, there is no record. 3
Here may be given some account of the origin
and history of Inquisitions Post Mortem and of
another institution, the Heraldic Visitations of the
Counties, as these two together form the chief
foundation of English Genealogy of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries.
Inquisitions Post Mortem were introduced in the
3rd year of Henry 111 (1219) and were continued
to the 20th year of Charles I (1645), when they
ceased in consequence of the abolition of tenure of
land by Knight Service. An Inquisition was held
on the death of every tenant in capite, that is to
say, of one who held his land direct from the crown
and not of a mesne lord. The Inquisition was taken
by an officer called the Escheator, in pursuance
of a writ directing him to hold an inquiry, by a
jury sworn to return a verdict upon the following:—
1. Of what lands the tenant died seised.
2. The service by which the lands were held, and
their yearly value.
3. Date of tenant’s death.
4. The age and name of the next heir.


Heraldic Visitations began about 1530, and were
continued to 1686. They were made every twenty
or thirty years, and were discontinued upon the
abolition of the office of Lord High Constable. It
was the duty of the Heralds to satisfy themselves
of the title of all those who claimed to be ‘armiger,’
that is, entitled to bear arms. A shield could not
be assumed at pleasure. To parade a shield without
a title was as though a man in these days should
pretend to be an earl or a baronet.
The Visitations had been instituted principally
for the protection of the King’s revenue, and to
secure to him the guardianship and privileges in-
cident to the control of the property of minors, but
the exercise of these rights bore heavily upon land-
owners, and also the Heralds’ inquiries were looked
upon as prying for purposes of taxation: so that by
the time of their discontinuance, the visitations had
come to be generally regarded with disfavour in
the counties.
Both John Warner of Warners, son of John le
Warner, and his son John, married heiresses, and so
added to their property, the former by his marriage
with Joane Maldon acquiring Maldon, Packlesham,
and Dines property; the latter by his marriage with
Elizabeth Helion acquiring Helion, Swinborne,
Boutetort, and Gernon property, together with the
right in each case to quarter the arms of their wives.
‘Packlesham also called Pahelsham or de Pahel-
sham and Pahesham is a parish in the Hundred of


Rochford in Essex, forming a kind of peninsula,
having in the East Wallasea Island. Pahol or Pagel
seems to have been the name of some Saxon holder.
Ingulf gave the Manor to the Church of St. Peter
at Westminster 29th December 1066. Under the
Abbey it was held by families surnamed de Maldon
and Warner. John Warner of Warners Hall in
Great Waltham, son of Joane, sister of Maldon, held
in fee farm in 1439, and his son John Warner in
1444, being then succeeded by his son John Warner,
who at the time of his decease in 1473 held the
Manor of Pakelsham alias Church Hall and other
lands referred to, of the Abbott of Westminster/
It is of interest to note that as far back as 1439
Warners held lands as direct tenants of Westminster
Abbey, and, incidentally, that in those times, when
travel was difficult, men generally married in their
own neighbourhood.
The relationship of these families is shown in the
table of descent on opposite page. They are all of
great antiquity. Further references to them appear
in Chapter IV.
Valuable evidence of the early history of the
family is afforded by the records of the Parish
Church at Great Waltham. This church, like so
many others in England, has suffered from so-called
‘restoration.’ Ancient monuments and stones have
been removed, and old brasses have been carried
off by ‘collectors,’ but a record of the monuments
formerly in the church has been preserved in an


. I
I
I 1
MALDON, PACKLESHAM AND DINES
John de Packelsham, Lord of the = Margerie, sole daughter and heiress
Manor of Churchall, alias Packle- of John de Dines, Lord of the
sham in Halstead, Essex Manor of Dines, alias Boys in
Halstead
ibell = Robert de Maldon
Izabell
William Maldon of Dines and
Packlesham
= Matilda
John Warner who died 18 = Jane Maldon, sister and sole heiress
Henry VI (1436) of John Maldon
HELION: SWINBORNE: BOUTETORT AND GERNON
William Swinborne of Horkesley = Phillipa, daughter and heiress of
Ralph Gernon
t Swinborne = Joane, daughter and heiress of
I Boutetort
Sir Robert Swinborne
= Alice, daughter and heiress of Sir
I Robert Swinborne
John Helyon of Bumsted
John Warner who died 2nd May = Elizabeth Helyon, daughter and
1554 heiress of John Helyon 4
old manuscript book of about the year 1729 of
Mr. Samuel Tufnell of Langleys, from which the
following extracts were made by A. Bingham
Wright, Vicar of Stabbing, Chelmsford:
‘ln the South aisle of the Church there were three
stones belonging to the Warners.


‘Orate pro aia Johis Warner Armigeri’
Out of his mouth a label speaking these words
oAog rco 6eo). y
On another stone, ‘Orate pro aia Johne Warner.’
Another stone with one escutch on the first corner:
‘Hie jacet Johes Warner quondam filius Johis Warner
Armiger qui obiit IX die Feb MCCCCXXXIX.’
In a later part of the book is this: ‘Warners arms
are carved in several places on the roof of the south
aisle. In the north window of the north aisle is a
helmet or chapeau, crest a man’s head, crown’d
cap, turn’d up on ye top, or, tuft arg. From ye
helm is a shield pend’t having on it Warner’s arms
on a label “o/log rco oeo>,” his cap is argent, fac’d
or. The man’s face is sideways, his shoulders and
arms coup’d, azure.’
Mr. Tufnell’s note is borne out by the Roll of
Sir Thomas Warner’s pedigree (see Chapter IV),
upon which are recorded the three stones and the
carving on the roof, to which Mr. Tufnell refers.
The only Warner memorial remaining in the
church to-day is the shield, or, a bend engrailed
between six roses, three and three, gules, carved on
the roof of the south aisle referred to above. On the
roof of the same aisle, there is also the Everard
shield. It is supposed that this south aisle was a
Lady Chapel, built by the Warners and Everards
who were connected by marriage. There is a fine
tomb of the Everards, two recumbent figures in
marble, in good preservation, with two children


in marble at the foot, one on each side. The
Everards were the former owners of Langleys, one
of the original manors comprised in Great Waltham;
it had been bought by them in 1529. In the parish
register there is a record that, on the wall over this
tomb, there had hung a helmet of the Warners,
which had been stolen in 1853 when the church
was being restored. The nail from which it hung
is still in place on the wall.
The name is preserved in an old farm-house, on
land known as ‘Warner’s Farm,’ and so described
on the map to which reference has already been
made.
No record exists to-day of where the Manor
House stood, nor is there any contemporary descrip-
tion of what Morant refers to as the Manor House
held by Edmund Warner in 1360, and also as
Warner’s Hall, but the Rector of the parish writing
in 1894 speaks of the farm as follows: T believe
that the present house is the original manor house
as it is certainly of considerable age and is situated
in the position you would expect the old Manor
house to occupy.’ The Rector’s surmise is cer-
tainly consistent with Morant’s location of the prop-
erty bought by Lord Rich, as ‘lying about two
miles from the Church on the left-hand side of the
road from Waltham to Dunmow.’ The old oak
beams of the kitchen and in other parts of the house
are evidence of its antiquity. The probability is,
that, when Lord Rich built Leighs Priory, the old


Manor House fell into decay, and that the farm-
house is all that remains of it.
With reference to the name itself—whether le
Warner or Warner —the name Jack-le-Warner
appears in the Norfolk Hundred Rolls in 1273 and
Walter le Warner in the Patent Rolls of 15 Edward
in, and there is a record about 1280 of a grant
by John Gernon to St. John of Colchester, of land
which Richard le Warner held of him. In the Anglo-
Saxon Chronicles a monk of the name is mentioned.
The first recorded owner of Warners is referred to
by Morant as Edmund Warner, not le Warner.
The probability is, that the name, like Packle-
sham, Maldon, Gernon and others with whom the
family had intermarried, is Anglo-Saxon, and that
the prefix was adopted at some time, as in many
other cases, as a concession to Norman custom, and
subsequently came to be dropped. As to any
relationship between Edmund Warner who held
the Manor in 1360 and John le Warner from whom
the pedigree is traced, it may be noted that Morant,
in stating the names of the holders of the Manor in
succession, passes directly from the former to the
latter; thus apparently regarding them as one and
the same family, and treating the latter as holding
in the right of the former.
Here a departure is made from the line of descent
hitherto followed, for the purpose of introducing
the story of one of the name who comes from the
Eastern Counties, and so seems to fall within the


category of those of whom Robert Warner is stated
by Morant and Burke to have been the common
ancestor.
SIR EDWARD WARNER, , 1511-65
Sir Edward Warner was born in 1511. He was
the elder son of Henry Warner of Besthorpe, Norfolk,
by his wife Mary, daughter of John Blenerhasset.
He died without leaving surviving issue, on the
7th November 1565, and was succeeded in his
estate by his younger brother. Sir Robert Warner.
He is buried in Plumstead Church at the upper
end of the church, where there is a monumental
inscription to his memory.
Sir Edward first comes into notice as Lieutenant
of the Tower of London. The date of his appoint-
ment is not known, but it is on record that he was
removed from his office on the 28th July 1553
by Queen Mary, upon her accession to the throne,
on account of his having fallen under suspicion of
being in sympathy with the claims of Lady Jane
Grey. He was committed to the Tower, but by
January 15 54 he seems to have succeeded in clearing
himself of the charge, and was released at that time,
upon his finding security for his good behaviour.
In 1561, not long after her accession, he was re-
appointed Lieutenant to the Tower by Queen Eliza-
beth, and to him was committed the custody of Lady
Catherine Seymour, a sister of Lady Jane Grey,
who had married William, Earl of Hertford, in 1560.


Lady Catherine had fallen under the royal dis-
pleasure, because of her marriage, which had been
kept secret, coming to the knowledge of the Queen
through the birth of a son. At the time of the
Countess’s committal to the Tower her husband was
absent from England, being engaged in the wars
in the Netherlands.
Sir Edward’s instructions were to the effect that
‘Many persons of high degree were known to have
been privy to the marriage’ and he was ordered to
urge Lady Catherine to a full confession of the
truth. On the 22nd August, however, he reported
to the Queen that he had questioned Lady Catherine
and that she had confessed to nothing. Afterwards
upon the return of the Earl of Hertford from the
wars, he also was committed to the Tower, with
strict orders that he and his wife were to be kept
apart; ‘but after a time by the persuasion or corrup-
tion of their keepers the doors of their prison were
no longer secured against each other and the birth
of a second child rekindled the anger of Elizabeth.’
The Lieutenant, however, succeeded in avoiding
dismissal, for, soon afterwards, in 1563, it was to
his custody that we find the Bishops, who were
deposed by Elizabeth for refusing to acknowledge
her supremacy of the Church, were committed. 5
In concluding this reference to Sir Edward
Warner, it is of interest to note some contemporary
events of which the Tower of London is the
melancholy scene.


In 1553 Lady Jane Grey, then only eighteen,
and her father-in-law the Duke of Northumberland,
perished on the scaffold, the former the innocent
victim of the ambition of the latter in his attempt
to set her upon the throne for his own ends and
so exclude both Henry VIII’s daughters Mary and
Elizabeth from the succession.
Elizabeth herself was long detained by Mary
in the Tower, her fate trembling in the balance.
Those were days in which the execution of possible
claimants to the throne was regarded almost as a
high act of state, for the purpose of ‘quieting the
succession,’ and thus Elizabeth stood in special
peril, it being considered that her removal would
have been a great blow to the Reformation.
In the Record Office there is preserved an account
of Sir Edward Warner’s, a ‘tally’ as it was called,
detailing disbursements made by him as Lieutenant
of the Tower, for ‘Dyett’ and other services provided
for persons in his custody. In accordance with the
custom of the day this account is on a parchment
roll, in this case many feet in length, and includes
the names of the Duke of Northumberland and
many other well-known persons.
Sir Edward Warner’s lieutenancy of the Tower
certainly covered a period of great historic interest.
To return to the line of descent, the issue of
Henry, the eldest son of John, having died out in
the male line, the succession passes to his younger
brother Robert, who, as is stated by Morant, ‘went
*5 c


into Suffolk and became the ancester of the several
houses of ye Warners now subsisting in Suffolk.’
Robert married Christian, daughter of John Seck-
ford of Seckford Hall, within a mile of Woodbridge,
where the Seckford family flourished from the time
of Edward I to that of Charles I.
Sir Thomas Seckford was Master of Bequests in
the reign of Elizabeth, and was a great benefactor
of the town, where he built the Shire Hall about
1575, and the Seckford Almshouses, which he
endowed.
Robert had a son, Robert of Wingfield, who
married twice, and died in 1541. The name of his
first wife is not recorded, but by her he had William
of Wingfield, his eldest son, and Robert of Winfard-
ing, in the County of Norfolk, his second son.
The name of William, the elder son’s wife, is not
recorded, but he had a son, Robert, who married
Christian, daughter of Mrs. Powle of Wingfield,
and they had a son Francis who married Mary,
daughter of Mrs. Godfrey of Wingfield, and had
two sons, Francis and John. Of Robert of Win-
farding, the second son of the first family, all that
is known is that he married and had a son, but the
name of neither his wife nor his son is recorded.
Here we must leave the Wingfield and Winfarding
branch, the elder branch of the family.
By his second wife, Joan, Robert of Wingfield had
Francis of Framlingham and Anthony of Strad-
brook. Anthony, the younger son, married Eliza


Moyster, and died without male issue. He had
one daughter Dorothy, who married Edmond
Pooley, and died in 1625.
Francis, the elder son, married first Elizabeth
Appleyard, and secondly Mary Rouse. By his
first wife Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Robert
Appleyard, he acquired the right to quarter the
arms of Appleyard, Everard and Thornbee. By
his second wife, daughter and co-heiress of Sir
Edmond Rouse, those of Rouse, Roide, Spriggey,
Philips, Erpingham, le Wafre and Hubberd. By
his first wife Francis had two sons, Robert the first
son, who died without issue, and William, who
married Margaret Gernigan or Jerningham, and
had issue three sons, Robert of Cratfield, John, and
Thomas. John died without issue ; Robert, the
eldest son, married Elizabeth, daughter of Alex-
ander Courthop of Cranbroke, Kent, and had issue.
Of Thomas’s elder brother, Robert of Cratfield,
and of his grandfather’s issue by his second mar-
riage, an account will be given at a later stage (see
Chapter V). It is Thomas and his descendants
whose fortunes we now proceed to follow.


CHAPTER II
SIR THOMAS WARNER
Thomas Warner of the Parham and Framlingham Family—
The ‘Old Hall,’ Parham, the Parish Church, its History and
the Iconoclasts—An Old Gateway—Warner with Roger North
in his attempt to establish a Settlement in Guiana—Warner’s
Enterprise in the Caribbean Islands—Same East Anglian stock
as Settlers of the American Colonies—Early hardships of
Settlers—Conflict with Caribs, French and Spaniards—Settle-
ment of other Islands—Warner first Governor of the Carib
Islands under Letters Patent—Necessity for a Patron at Court;
Lord Carlisle—Thomas Warner Knighted—Commissioners of
Plantations—Development of the Islands under his Gover-
norship—His Death in 1648-9 —What he achieved—His
Character—His Epitaph
Of the date of Thomas Warner’s birth we have
no record. He was born about the year 1575,
certainly not later.
As to the position and circumstances of the family
at the time, it would seem that the Essex possessions
or such of them as came to Henry of Finchingfield
had disappeared in the misfortunes which overtook
him. Of what Robert ‘who went into Suffolk’ was
possessed, there is no certain record, but his position
seems to have been a substantial one, as his wife
was the daughter of a man of good standing in the
county, and his son, Robert, is described as of Wing-
field, and other descendants of his, as of Parham,
Framlingham, Stradbrook, Cratfield, and other
places in the neighbourhood, in the numerous
records to which reference is made hereafter.


OLD GATEWAY, MOAT HALL, PARHAM


From early in the sixteenth century the family
had established itself at Parham, occupying what
was known as the ‘Old Hall,’ under the Lords
Willoughby of Parham, and continuing to reside
there until the year 1669, when they sold to John
Corrance of Rendlesham, who then occupied the
‘New Hall’ nearer the Church. 1
Parham, where probably Sir Thomas Warner was
born, calls for more than passing notice.
The records of the existing church date from
1538, and its list of rectors dates from 200 years
earlier, but as far back as the Domesday survey
there was a church at Parham.
In the Chancel are the coats of arms, and monu-
mental inscriptions of many whose names are known
to history, including memorial stones to numerous
members of the Warner family; one to ‘Edmund
Warner, one time Lord of the Manor who died in
1617,’ and many others.
Like many another, Parham Church suffered
from the fanaticism of the Reformation; and many
of its religious relics and adornments were destroyed
as ‘Savouring of Popery.’
By an ordinance of the 23 rd August 1643, Parlia-
ment had directed the general demolition of altars,
the removal of candlesticks, and the defacement of
pictures and images. Certain fanatics were selected
to carry out the demolition more thoroughly. Of
these William Dowsing, a notorious iconoclast, was
appointed visitor of the Suffolk churches under a


warrant dated the 19th December 1643. one
day, on the 29th January 1644, in and about
Ipswich, no fewer than eleven churches were muti-
lated. Dowsing kept a journal specifying the work
to be done at different places, which contains the
following entry with reference to the Churches of
Parham and the neighbouring parish of Hackeston.
‘There was 21 Cherubims with Wings, in Wood;
and 16 superstitious Pictures and popish Saints;
with a double Cross in the Church, and the repre-
sentation of the Trinity on the Font, and the Spears
and Nails, that Christ was pierced and nailed with;
and 3 Crosses, all in Stone; 4 superstitious Pictures
in the Chancel, and a Cross, all in Glass; and the
steps to be levelled by Mr. Francis Warner, by
October 15th. All to be done.’
There is some difficulty in identifying the Francis
Warner here referred to. There is one of that name
of whom the following is recorded: ‘Francis Warner
Gent was an Armour Keeper of the Castle of Fram-
lingham, temp. Elizabeth, also a Bailiff of Loes
Hundred.’ A Francis Warner is included among
the Copyholders 19 Elizabeth, probably the same
individual. 2
Francis Warner of Moulsey (see Chapter V) is
more likely to be the one indicated, and, although
described as of Moulsey, his connection with Par-
ham is clear from the terms of his will and generally.
To-day the ‘Old Hall,’ believed to have been
erected in the early sixteenth century on the site


** * "
vF^ ;: * ,.J : - v :
. . |K ' . ? <


of an ancient castle surrounded by a moat, the seat
of the UfFords, Earls of Suffolk, has ceased to exist,
and its site is now occupied by a farm-house.
Until quite recently, at a time within the memory
of men now living, the old gateway remained as the
sole memorial of the past. Nothing now is left of
it but the two stone pillars by which it was sup-
ported, the whole structure with its coats of arms
and other heraldic devices having been sold, taken
down stone by stone, and removed for re-erection
in the United States of America.
Who the people are who have acquired it, and
where it now is, are unknown. Its owners, probably
the descendants of some old Parham family, while
showing their appreciation of such a link with the
past, have left Parham the poorer by the loss of so
unique a memorial of its history. 3
As a young man Thomas Warner was a Captain
in James Fs bodyguard, and, like Sir Edward
Warner, of an earlier day, held the office of Lieu-
tenant of the Tower.
But these were times of great opportunity abroad
for Englishmen; and, as will appear, Thomas
Warner was no stay-at-home.
The defeat of the Spanish Armada had opened
the seas and the Western World to trade and settle-
ment by the nations of Europe, and the younger
generation of English birth, moved by the spirit
of adventure, and supported by the enterprise of


friends and associates in the City of London, were
quick to seize the opportunities offered.
Among the adventurers was Captain Roger
North, also a Suffolk man, and a friend of Warner’s,
who organized an expedition for the establishment
of a settlement in Guiana, the El Dorado of Sir
Walter Raleigh. With him Captain Warner threw
in his lot. The venture was not a success, and had
to be abandoned, but among those engaged in it
was Thomas Painter, a mariner of wide experience,
who, early recognizing the difficulties in the way of
establishment upon the mainland of a great con-
tinent, impressed upon Warner the greater possibili-
ties of success among the islands of the Caribbean
Sea.
In 1620, Painter being then dead, Warner
returned to England, passing through the Islands
on his way home with the object of deciding which
of them were most suitable for carrying Painter’s
project into execution. He was attracted by St.
Christopher, where he was well received by the
chief, Togreman, and he decided to establish his
first settlement there.
With this object he returned to his native Suffolk,
and having induced John Jeaffreson of Pilistree
and Clopton, an old friend and neighbour and a
navigator of repute, to join in the venture, they
together approached Ralph Merifield, a merchant
of London, proposing that he should join them,
with the result that it was agreed between them as


Q
w
<
C/ 3
Pi
W
£
Pi
<
£
C/ 3
<
%
o
X
h
cn
w
CJ
£
W
K
£
w"
O
Q
Pi
CQ
Q
O
O
£
p!
<
w
Z
w
Z
w
o
c/ 3


follows: (i) That Warner should collect a sufficient
number of suitable men and proceed to Virginia,
and thence to St. Christopher and establish himself
there; (2) That Merifield should secure a vessel
suitable for a voyage to St. Christopher and load
her with provisions, tools, and supplies of the kind
that would be required in the new settlement; (3)
That Jeaffreson should take command of this vessel,
and sail to join Warner at St. Christopher as soon
as news should be received of his arrival.
Warner with his wife and a young son Edward,
then 13 years old, and fourteen men chosen from
among men of his own county, sailed from the port
of Woodbridge, Suffolk, within a few miles of his
home at Parham, and crossed to Virginia. At
Kyson point, about a mile below Woodbridge, are
still to be seen the remains of the old dock from
which Warner is said to have sailed. From Vir-
ginia he took passage in a vessel hired for the
purpose, arriving at St. Christopher on the 28th
January 1623 (modern reckoning 1624), where he
met with a friendly reception from the native Caribs,
and their chief.
The names of those who accompanied Warner
besides his wife and son were ‘William Tasted, John
Rhodes, Robert Binns, William Benifield, Sergeant
Jones, Mr. Ware, William Ryle, Rowland Grass-
cock, Mr. Bond, Mr. Langley, Mr. Weaver, Ser-
geant Aplon, a nameless sailor, and an unnamed
cook.’


The party on arrival set to work, and when the
Virginian ship started on her return voyage, they
were busy making huts to live in, and preparing for
the cultivation of maize and tobacco, the former as
food, and the latter to provide a cargo for Meri-
field’s ship to take back to England. Then in
September disaster fell upon the young settlement
in the form of a hurricane which swept away huts,
crops, and almost everything they possessed, and
all but put a stop to further effort; but they were
not to be discouraged, and set to work again, and
by the following February, 1625, they had another
crop of tobacco ready for shipment. Shortly after,
on the 18th March 1625, Jeaffreson arrived at St.
Christopher in the Hopewell , the ship which Meri-
field had agreed to supply. Thus each party to
the agreement had fulfilled his part.
Within a short time the Hopewell sailed on her
return voyage with the first crop of tobacco reaped
from the new settlement; and by her, or by the
Black Bess of Flushing, as some authorities say,
Warner returned to England on his first visit home.
Here should be noted the great difference between
the motives of the early Elizabethan adventurers and
those of the English pioneers of the Stuart period
in the Carib islands. The former were attracted
by the prospect of gold and mineral wealth, and
opportunities of trade and barter with the natives;
the latter were in search of land suitable for planting
and establishing the cultivation of tropical crops


by the labour of white men, and of natives, under
the guidance and supervision of white men. In
the Carib islands there was no mineral treasure, and
but little scope for the disposal of cotton goods, the
principal product of English manufacture of the
time.
Raleigh’s settlement in Virginia was in its motive
of the same kind as that of the settlers of the Carib
islands and therefore to be classed with these and
not with the former.
The object of the settlement of the islands is
emphasized, and its early story is given in some
detail, as, apart from the interest attaching to the
subject itself, and the difficulties and misfortunes,
arising from natural causes only, incident to enter-
prises of the kind, of which it gives a lively im-
pression—it is of historical value in relation to
another movement of the time, which was destined
to have a far greater effect upon the history of the
world.
‘The migration of the early Stuart times was a
World Movement, akin, in its importance, to the
Anglo-Saxon and Norse settlement of England a
thousand years before. The Elizabethans had pre-
pared the sea-way for the host of immigrants who
used it in the following reigns. It was migration
from England that laid the foundations of the
British Empire and of the United States, and the
majority of the first Anglo-Americans came from
the South-East of England and represented her most


pronounced Nordic stock. Of 25,000 English
settled in New England in 1640, it has been cal-
culated by statisticians and genealogists that fifty
per cent came from Suffolk, Essex and Hertford-
shire. A great part of the emigration under James
and Charles I ran indeed, not to New England, but
to the Bermudas, the West India Islands, and to
Raleigh’s Virginia, the first of English Colonies,
refounded in 1607. In these latitudes the climate
was in some respects alluring; in Virginia, tobacco
culture, and in the islands, sugar, offered a way to
rapid wealth. Some of these emigrants were well-
to-do and the colony of Massachusetts was backed
by money, supplies, and good organizers in Eng-
land, wealthy Puritans, lords, squires and London
merchants who stayed at home themselves, but
supported these ventures partly from motives of
religion, partly as an investment of capital.’ 4
This account supplies a reliable historical back-
ground to the story of Warner’s settlement, and
shows among other things that the settlers of both
the American and West Indian colonies were of
the same East Anglian stock, a fact which goes to
explain why it was that Warner made Virginia the
advance base, as it were, from which he sailed to
the Islands.
Associated with Warner and Jeaffreson in overseas
ventures of the same kind was another Suffolk man,
John Winthrop of Groton, a neighbour and friend.
His sphere lay not in the West Indies but in the


n
wm
PIP
l&j
-iv-'
isfe;
| | | 1 "" v' |
Wm
JOfi
C*.Jn
’!" '••"''■■■. -.>-*> -»-».<••.•!..• > Cvttffte.rfv. ,.„• ..,,*• irtviv.-tiJ- ,v . .1-,,
,.J *V'. <, A-oSfox.i,. H i-:iv '.“'■ •-. . . ,,. ( , ..,
'' ■•'■•“-» «*•«*«•* Mm «MMt tM>- ..Mm* - .< tW «V V.'.,' ,. ., - „ A",','.
mu-Jk t>v ,,M<Kvt-ut* £fet#P|4v«i« >.ifW »->,•»..>.>•* lv t v‘ «•»<. .ft»v «v -A." of n•».♦«'«- - ,* 4 •• * w ,. , 4 ,,.
I.-. 1'-.. Jtll?- ■ , ‘ ... ... ...
-*"*? - ,«.iw. .M».|.„Kl(r.-!k.W..», . ■ ,M> .-. • ... .W,,M.V.I
wtt\:v^4T ( ‘ ,* V' ,-r •; •* * iw r
Of;.
-— —— —
■
Pi;
..., v *»' / vjiwT,, r v \< T< * \ ,i *v w <v t 9v: % *
'12*1**:*' *, &*«*«* ,W, v 4^ ( :i ... . . .
;::,rrJTvtT&TT- *;:.i:r:** ::^;rj: z%L m *.T: ‘ r. ■■'." ’ '■“; • ,::i - «
,
l|
ifeP
r—*»^l
: Cw L <
■ :
;;.; ',/.. ... ,.:. „. u .,, , - ••; ■
1^
rnar^Pm
'"m
IPP
1 ■*
' ‘ \ ' 1. . * • • , '
■ ' '*; ■ .,y i ‘ . ’ • ■ /
ORIGINAL COMMISSION IN AN OLD FRAME


American Colonies with which his name is
intimately associated, and it was from Suffolk that
he, like Warner, principally recruited his followers.
‘Warner and Winthrop were the great leaders who
lured men from the Old to the New World and
planted them in the latter by hundreds and by
thousands.’ 5
In returning to England, Warner had two main
objects in view: one, to secure the protection of
the Crown for its new acquisitions, and support in
influential quarters, on the many occasions upon
which Royal patronage would be required, in the
development of a young colony; the other, to spread
abroad the story of the initial success of the settle-
ment, and thus attract recruits for its development.
In both of these objects he was eminently successful.
The former captain of the bodyguard was well
received at Court, and soon after, on the 13th Sep-
tember 1625, King Charles, on the representations
of Merifield, issued to Warner, under the Great
Seal of England, the first Letters Patent ever granted
in respect of any West Indian Islands, appointing
him Governor of St. Christopher, Nevis, Barbados,
and Montserrat.
The alternative name of St. Christopher, viz.:
‘Merwars Hope,’ given to the island in the Letters
Patent, is made up of the names of Mmfield and
Warner, the organizers of the enterprise.
In Six Months in the West Indies in I Si} by
H. N. the author, referring to a visit to


the house of ‘Mr. Warner, President of the Council
of Antigua and a descendant of Sir Thomas,’ says
that he saw the original grant by Charles I framed
and set up over the door of the dining-room. The
grant, now in the possession of Lionel Ashton Piers
Warner, of Club' House, Bidston Hill, Cheshire
(Pedigree, Part 11, C), is here reproduced. The
Mr. Warner referred to is Samuel Warner, a grand-
son of Ashton and Elizabeth Clarke (Pedigree,
Part 11, A).
TEXT OF GRANT
Charles, by the Grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc. To all to whom these presents shall
come, Greetings:—Whereas we have been credibly
informed by our well-beloved subject Ralph Meri-
field of London, Gentleman, and on behalfe of our
well-beloved subject Thomas Warner, Gentleman,
that the said Thomas Warner hath lately discovered
four several islandes in Main Ocean toward the
Continent of America, the one called the Isle of
Saint Christopher alias Merwars Hope and other
the Isle of Mevis and other the Isle of Barbados
and other the Isle of Monserate which said Islandes
are possessed and inhabited only by Savages and
Heathen people and are not nor at the time of
the Discovery were in the possession or under the
Governement of any Christian Prince State or Poten-
tate, and thereupon the said Thomas Warner being


set forth and supplied by the said Ralph Merifield
for that purpose made entry into the said Islandes
for and on behalfe of our dear father and hath
sithence with the consent and good likinge of the
Natives made some beginninge of a plantation and
Colony and likewise of an hopeful trade there
and hath caused divers of our subject of this our
Realme to remove themselves to the said Islandes
with purpose to proceed in so hopeful a work; know
therefore that we in consideration of the premisses
and to the intent that the said Ralph Merifield and
Thomas Warner may be encouraged and the better
enabled with the more ample maintenance and
authoritie to effect the same doe by these present
take as well the said Islandes as all the inhabitant
there and allow the said Thomas Warner and all
other our lovinge subject under his command or
governement resident on the said Islandes or any of
them and all landes and other thinges within the
said Islandes or other neighbouring islandes to them
or any of them adjoining already by the said Thomas
Warner or his Company inhabited or possessed or
hereafter to be inhabited or possessed not being in
the possession of any other Governement of any
Christian Prince Potentate or State into our loyal
protection: And of our especiall greate certaine
knowledge and meere motion have given and
graunted and by these presents doe give and graunt
unto the said Thomas Warner duringe our pleasure
the custodie of the aforesaid Islandes and of everie


of them together with full power and authentic
for us and in our name and as our Lieutenant to
order and dispose of any landes or other thinges
within the same Islandes and to govern rule and
order all and singular persons which now are or
hereafter shall be abiding in the said Islandes or
any of them as well our natural born Subject as
the Natives and Savages of the said Islandes and
all other that shall happen to be or abide there by
such good and reasonable orders articles and ordin-
ances as were heretofore made and agreed upon
between them the said Ralph Merifield and Thomas
Warner or such other good and reasonable orders
and ordinances as shall be most requisite and needful
at the discretion of him the said Thomas Warner.
And all such as shall disobey, to chastise correct
and punish according to their fault and demeritt.
And also with force and strong hande to repress
and annoy all such as shall in hostile manner attempt
or go about to encounter the said Thomas Warner
or his Company or to possess or invade the said
Islandes or any of them or to ympeache our posses-
sion thereof or to hurt or annoy him or our subjects
there being or any others which hereafter shall go
or transport themselves to the said Islandes or any
of them and generally to doe all such act as shall
or may tend to the establishment of our governe-
ment settling a Colony or plantation advance any
Trade or Commerce there which the said Ralph
Merifield and Thomas Warner or either of them


shall find meete or beneficent for us our Kingdomes
or subjects straightlie charginge and commandinge
all manner of persons which now are or hereafter
shall be abiding in the said Islandes or any of them,
that they be obedient aiding and assisting to the
said Thomas Warner in all thinges as to our Lieuten-
ant and for as much as the said Ralph Merifield
hath at his own charges not only furnished and set
forth the said Thomas Warner in the premisses but
also been the means of transporting our well beloved
John Jeaffreson, Gentleman, and many other our
subject thither and hath been the especiall furtherer
of that whole designe we doe by these presents
give and graunt to the said Ralph Merifield and
to his Partners, Deputies, Suitors, Servants and
Assignees full power and Authoritie freely to trade
and triffique to and from the said Islandes for all
manner of good marchandises and commodities
whatsoever. Having the Customes and other duties
therefore due and also to transport and convey unto
the said Islandes and plantation or any of them
for the maintenance and strengthening of the same
all and everie such our lovinge subject as already
are or hereafter shall be willing or desirous volun-
tarily to enter into, be sent, transported or go unto
the said Islandes and plantation aforesaid upon with
and under such Covenant, Contract and Agreement
as between them are or shall be made and agreed
upon and to defend themselves in the same by all
lawful wages and meanes. And generally to doe
31 D


and perform all such act as shall or may tend to
the establishment of our said Governement settling
a Colony or plantation upon the said Islandes or
any of them and the advancement of our trade or
commerce there with the said Thomas Warner and
his Company upon the said Islandes or any of them
without let disturbance or interruption of any person
or persons being our natural born subject denizens
or strangers. And our further will and pleasure is
that in case the said Thomas Warner be at this
present dead or hereafter shall die our Lieutenant
as aforesaid then in such case we do hereby authorise
and appoint the said John Jeaffreson if he shall be
then livinge in his room and place. And we do
hereby give and graunt unto him the like power
authentic and preheminence during our pleasure as
is before in these like present and we doe hereby
give and graunt unto him the power authentic and
preheminence during our pleasure as is before said
and if the said John Jeaffreson be at this present
dead or hereafter shall die our Lieutenant as afore-
said then our English subject being or with designe
resident in the said Islandes shall and may set some
other able and fit person there resident to be our
Lieutenant who by virtue of these present shall
have the like power authentic and preheminence
during our pleasure as is before committed meant
or intended to the said Thomas Warner. And so
from time to time upon the decease of the Lieuten-
ant the English subjects there residing shall and


may elect a new Lieutenant who shall have the like
privilege author!tie and preheminence during our
pleasure as is above mentioned.
In witness whereof we have caused these our
letters to be made patent.
Witness ourself at Southampton the thirteenth
day of September in the first year of our reign.
per ipsem regem
Barum & Wolseley
In 1626 Warner returned to St. Christopher
having succeeded while on his visit to England in
securing for his undertaking the patronage of James
Hay, Earl of Carlisle, a favourite at Court, one of
those who had come with James from Scotland upon
his accession to the throne of England.
It has been supposed that it was owing to Carlisle’s
influence that the first commission was granted,
but the document itself seems to negative such an
idea, Carlisle’s name not being mentioned.
It was not long, however, before Carlisle suc-
ceeded, in June 1627, in obtaining from the Crown
a Proprietary Grant for himself, of St. Christopher
and the other islands, the subject of the Letters
Patent to Warner.
There can be little doubt but that in Tudor times
the grant would have been made direct to Warner
himself, but with the Stuarts on the throne, Crown
patronage and support for any enterprise could


only be secured by a Court favourite, and it was
doubtless in pursuance of an arrangement between
them, that Carlisle on the 2nd September following
his grant, appointed Warner sole Governor of the
islands for life. 6
Later, when the Proprietary Grants ceased to
be operative, and the islands came under the control
of the Parliamentary Commissioners of Plantations,
it was Warner who was appointed Lieutenant-
General of the Caribee Islands under Robert Rich,
Earl of Warwick, and again afterwards under Lord
Willoughby of Parham, Governor-in-Chief over all
the plantations in America.
That was the position which, whoever the titular
authority, and whatever the form of his commission,
Warner occupied during the whole of his life in
the islands. He was the man in whom was vested
the actual direction and control of affairs.
The other principal object of Warner’s visit to
England was also attained. His early fear had
been, lest from an insufficient supply of men, he
would be unable to develop St. Christopher, or
extend his operations beyond that island, but from
the time of his first visit home in 1625 there was
no further anxiety on that score. For some years
no ship sailed from England to the West Indies
without immigrants for St. Christopher. They
came in numbers from the Eastern Counties, especi-
ally Suffolk, where Warner and his family had been
known for generations, and where he was trusted


as a leader. He was thus enabled to start a settle-
ment in Nevis in 1628, and later, in 1632, one in
Antigua * and Montserrat under his son Edward
as Governor.
But these early successes were not achieved with-
out great difficulties and reverses. Colonizers in
the West Indies were exposed to attack from many
sources. Although the Caribs had been friendly
on the first arrival of the settlers, and for some
time the two peoples had lived together without
clashing, it came about, as has always happened
where races of different origins or degrees of civiliza-
tion are thrown together, that suspicions and differ-
ences arose, which led to the events to be now
narrated.
On the day of Warner’s return to the colony or,
as some authorities state, shortly afterwards, there
arrived at St. Christopher another famous colonizer,
a Frenchman, Monsieur de Nombre, Pierre Belain,
Sieur D’Esnambuc, by which latter name he is
generally known in West Indian history, in which
he was destined to play a prominent part.
With the intention of establishing a settlement in
the West Indies, D’Esnambuc had sailed from
Dieppe in a brigantine carrying four guns, and
some pierriers (petereros) with forty picked men.
At the Kaymans he had been attacked by a Spanish
galleon of 400 tons and 35 guns from which, after
an engagement lasting three hours, he had made
* So named by Columbus after the Church of St. Mary of Antigua in Seville,


his escape with 8 or 10 of his men killed, and most
of the others wounded. In this sorry condition he
had succeeded in reaching St. Christopher.
There were there at the time, besides the Caribs
and the English, a few Frenchmen who had been
cast upon the island by storm at different times, and
had taken refuge and remained there.
By both the Caribs and the English D’Esnambuc
and his party were made welcome; by the former
because of the good relations which had always
existed between them and the English—the only
other settlers of whom they then had any knowledge
—and by the latter, partly out of sympathy with
the new arrivals in their pitiful state, and also as
being regarded as likely to be valuable allies against
Spain, the common enemy. Spain had always
claimed for herself absolute dominion in the West
Indies, and invariably showed the greatest resent-
ment to settlers of other powers, attacking them,
and destroying their settlements and plantations,
whenever opportunity offered.
These were the circumstances in which French
interests in St. Christopher originated, and out of
which developed the conflict between the settlers
of the two nations to be hereafter described.
But in the meanwhile trouble was brewing among
the Caribs. There is no record of any particular
grievance of the natives, nor have we any knowledge
of what it was that led to their change of attitude
towards the settlers, but it has been generally sup-


posed that it was the result of the sinister influence
of their ‘boyos’ or witch doctors.
This curse of savage peoples has always been
the dangerous element in their relations with civi-
lized races. The ‘boyos’ realize that their power,
in reality the power of life and death, must neces-
sarily suffer from the new contacts, and they are
quick to stir up suspicion and hostility against
strangers.
Under these influences the Caribs of St. Christo-
pher combined with those in the neighbouring
islands to make a surprise attack upon the English
and French settlers. The scheme was well planned.
At the next full moon, the Caribs from the other
islands were to arrive in their piraguas (native boats)
and were to join the St. Christopher Caribs in an
attack upon the unsuspecting settlers, and utterly
destroy them. To such an attack there could have
been no successful resistance, and the settlers would
doubtless have been exterminated. But the Caribs’
plans had come to the knowledge of a country-
woman of theirs named Barbe, who, being well
disposed to the settlers, divulged the plot to Warner
and D’Esnambuc.
There was no time to be lost. That same night
the settlers fell upon the Caribs, killing 120 of them,
and promptly set about making preparations to
receive the others, who were to arrive at full moon.
Ambuscades were laid and watches set.
At the appointed time a number of piraguas


arrived carrying between them 3,000 to 4,000
Caribs; part were allowed to land, and were then
so vigorously attacked that the survivors fled in
confusion to the sea, pursued by the settlers. Of
these 100 were wounded by poisoned arrows and
died in consequence, one named Tresenville, and
several others who were slightly wounded, dying
raving mad within four hours.
Of the Caribs 2,000 are said to have been killed
and wounded, and 150 of their piraguas captured.
After this event Warner and D’Esnambuc deter-
mined that their only safe course was to rid the
island altogether of Caribs, and to divide it between
them.
This regrettable incident has been made the
ground of an accusation, originating with foreign
writers, and ignorantly and carelessly followed by
others, to the effect that the plot had no existence
in fact, and that it was invented by the English as
a justification or excuse for their action.
D’Esnambuc is not included in the accusation,
the date of the occurrence being represented as prior
to his arrival. The fact is that the chronology of
these early transactions at St. Christopher is very
unsatisfactory, the State Papers in the Record Office
containing practically no information. But Du
Tertre, the French historian, represents the attack
upon the Caribs as having taken place after the
arrival of D’Esnambuc and his party, and the author
of the Historic Naturell et Morale des Antilles de


UAmerique refers to the event as the outcome of
the discovery by Warner and D’Esnambuc of a plot
against them by the Caribs. 7
When it is borne in mind that native labour was
urgently required by the new settlers in the establish-
ment and working of their plantations it is hard to
believe that they would destroy it, except upon
grave necessity, and the charge seems to be com-
pletely met by the fact of the attack by the Caribs
of the other islands as planned.
In attempting to arrive at a fair conclusion upon
this incident weight must be given to the universal
judgment of historians upon the character of the
Caribs that ‘their secret and mendacious mentality
rendered them a formidable obstacle to the early
settlers and the ultimate solution of the problem
was provided only by a war of extermination’ —as
history unfortunately bears out.
About eight months after these events Warner
again returned to England, and D’Esnambuc about
the same time returned to France, taking with him
a cargo of tobacco. There he succeeded in obtain-
ing the support of Cardinal Richelieu for his en-
terprise in St. Christopher, and on the last day
of October 1626 a company was incorporated in
France named ‘The Company of the Islands of
America,’ to which the Cardinal himself subscribed
10,000 livres.
The commission to the Sieurs D’Esnambuc and
Du Rossey to be the company’s captains is notable


for the amazing incorrectness of some of its state-
ments.
After reciting that for fifteen years the two cap-
tains named ‘have been at great expense in search-
ing for a desirable place to be colonized by the
French and having discovered that the islands of
St. Christopher and Barbados and others situate at
the entrance to Peru Jr om I at. nN. to lat. 18 N.
were not possessed by any king or Christian prince,’
the commission directs them to build two forts on
the said islands and to fortify any adjacent islands.
There are provisions as to the King’s share; as to
the ports from, and to which, the ships shall sail
and return; and as to the time for which the
colonists shall be bound to stay in the settlements.
As representatives of ‘the company of the Islands
of America’ D’Esnambuc sailed from Havre in a
ship called La Catholique , of 250 tons, and, being
joined by Du Rossey in Le Cardinal with 70 men,
and La Victorie with 140 men off Port Louis, sailed
from there on the 24th February 1627.
‘The vessels were badly equipped, and were over
10 weeks upon the passage. Since the islands were
discovered, never had there been a voyage so full
of misery.’
They arrived at Sandy Point, St. Christopher,
on the Bth May. In Le Cardinal only 16 were alive
out of the 70 that embarked, and those who landed
were in such a distressed state and so feeble that
their countrymen, who had expected ‘their arrival


with great impatience, lost all joy upon seeing their
misery.'
D’Esnambuc, with those who were able, fixed
their quarters at Cabesterre; the rest remained with
Du Rossey. More than half of both parties died.
Warner had arrived just before with 400 men well
provided with everything, and in good health and
spirits. He received the Frenchman with great
kindness; and on the 13th May, within a week of
their arrival, a formal treaty giving effect to the
agreement already referred to, was entered into,
between Warner of the one part, and D’Esnambuc
and Du Rossey of the other part, in the name of
their respective sovereigns.
After making provision for the division of the
island between the signatories, distinguishing be-
tween the Cabesterres and the Basseterres—the hill
lands and the flat lands—and providing that the
use and enjoyment of rivers, anchorages and the
salt ponds and the rights of fishing and hunting
are to be enjoyed in common, the treaty imposes an
obligation on both parties ‘to fortify and support
the said island of St. Christopher with all their
power against all efforts descents and incursions of
their public enemies and others who would disturb
and hinder them in their possessions’ and concludes
with the following: ‘And for the purposes of living
in peace and union, which is absolutely necessary
for the preservation of the colonies, and which,
from the difference of the two nations, may be


impaired, the three chiefs shall prepare Articles to
augment the peace and friendship established be-
tween them and their followers. Which having
been proposed in the same assembly was signed by
them the same day to the great comfort of all the
inhabitants who promised themselves an everlasting
tranquillity.’
Articles concluded and agreed upon between the
French and English in the Island of St. Christopher
by Messrs. D’Esnambuc, Du Rossey and Captain
Warner:
(i) Seeing that the French and English com-
bined have conquered the Isle of St. Christopher
from the Indians, and that the Kings of France and
England have come forward and given them their
commissions both the one and the other shall remain
governors for the said kings, each in their quarters,
according to the division, which has been made
between them, and both shall bear the quality of
governors each in their district.
(2) All the French who may be in the island
shall not receive or obey any orders except from
the King of France or the governors proposed by
His Majesty, and the English from the King of
England and his generals.
(3) No vessel can trade in the island but by
permission from the said governors: if it is English
the English governor shall give the order and fix
the price of the merchandise; if it is French the
French governor shall also give the order and fix


the price of the merchandise; if the vessel is Flemish
the two together shall give permission.’
(4) Provision against harbouring each other’s
slaves. . . .
(5) If there should be a war to be waged in the
island against the Indians each shall contribute all
the men, boats and arms which they possibly can.
(6) If a descent is made on the island by the
Spaniards to the place of descent each shall be
obliged to send the most powerful assistance he can
and to succour each other with all their power.
(7) If there shall arise between the companions
of either any quarrels or battles, the delinquents
shall be judged by the French and English and
then sent each to their own district.
(8) If any war should happen in Europe between
the French and English the said Messieurs cannot
for that make war except they have been expressly
commanded so to do by their princes: and in case
of such command, shall be obliged to inform the
other before any act of hostility is committed.
The treaty and articles of agreement were ‘done
and read upon the same day, 13 V 1627.’
Shortly after the signing of the treaty Du Rossey
had gone to France to obtain further support for
the French Colony. In 1628 he returned with a
small reinforcement. He had sailed in Le Cardinal
with 150 men, but most of them had died on the
voyage, and those who survived were too weak to
be of any service to their countrymen.


In the meanwhile the English were so increased
in numbers and wealth that Warner was able to
send a small colony to Nevis in 1628, and, as the
French, owing to lack of numbers, did not culti-
vate their lands at St. Christopher, the English
encroached upon them. D’Esnambuc protested,
and Warner promised to keep his people within
their limits, whilst D’Esnambuc made a voyage to
France to obtain settlers and further aid from the
Government or the Company. Du Rossey was left
in command during his absence.
In August 1629 D’Esnambuc returned from
France in command of a pinnace, one of two which
formed part of a fleet of six sail of the line and an
armed merchantman, all under the command of
Monsieur de Cusac. The fleet also carried 300
colonists sent out by the Company.
Sir Thomas, who was then on a visit to England,
returned shortly afterwards to find that the success
of the English settlement had excited the jealousy
of Cardinal Richelieu, and that D’Esnambuc had
exaggerated the question of encroachment—which
had always been capable of easy adjustment—into
a serious grievance, and with the strong support of
Monsieur de Cusac had taken up a threatening
attitude.
The matter in dispute was settled, under the
circumstances, in favour of the French, but the Eng-
lish settlers had come to realize that their former
ally had now become an enemy, ready to take


advantage of them whenever he should be in a
position to do so.
About this time the Grant to the Earl of Carlisle
of June 1627 had become the subject of a famous
dispute between the Earl of Pembroke and the Earl
of Carlisle, the former alleging a claim to Barbados,
based upon prior occupation, and setting up that that
island was not intended to be included in the Letters
Patent to Thomas Warner, and that it was included
by mistake for another island, Barbuda. Into the
dispute it is not proposed to enter, further than to
state that the matter was submitted to the judgment
of the Lord Keeper Coventry who, after hearing the
evidence on both sides and the arguments thereon,
decided in favour of the Earl of Carlisle as follows:
‘Yet finding so many witnesses in the affirmative
as it is difficult to counterpoise them either with
negative witnesses or with circumstances my opinion
is that the proof on the Earl of Carlisle’s part that
this island in question was intended to be passed
in his Patent is very strong.’
18th April 1629
(Signed) Thomas Coventry.
This judgment has been the subject of strong
adverse criticism, the evidence of Warner and the
many other witnesses on behalf of the Earl of Carlisle
being impugned. It is but fair, however, to re-
member that Lord Coventry’s reputation both for
capacity and honesty was of the highest.


In the same year Warner was again in England.
On 21st September 1629 he was knighted by
Charles I at Hampton Court, and as a token of
the Royal favour was presented with the famous
Essex Ring by the King. The story of this ring
is told in Chapter VIII.
It was in this year also that Sir Thomas, as he
then became, considering the conferring of knight-
hood an appropriate occasion for so doing, had his
pedigree established and recorded at the Heralds’
College.
In the British Museum in a small volume of
printed sermons, is the following: 8
‘A Sermon preached to the Nohely Deserving Gentleman
Sir Thomas Warner
and the rest of his companie Bound to the West Indies
for their Farewell
At St. Butolphy Alder London September 6 1629
John Featly , Treacher
of the Word of God.
London
Printed for Nicholas Bourne
at the South Entrance of the
Roy all Exchange. 1629.
To The Right Honourable
James Earle of Carlisle etc.
Count Palatine of the Province
of Carlisle


‘The Sermon itself is the Defenders of the faith , and
though brief yet orthodox all [sic],
'lf any carpe at it , per adventure it may prove a Man-
chenile apple (whereof I have seen divers in the West
Indies ) that blisters the tongues of them that taste'
‘The Epistle Dedicatorie.
‘The noble worth of my deserving Commander
Sir Thomas Warner made me a traveller in the West Indies
being thereby the first preacher upon Saint Christophers
Islands'
This John Featly is one of the witnesses to the
Will of John Warner, a cousin of Sir Thomas’s,
dated at St. Christopher the 20th of January 1629,
Sir Thomas being another witness. It was proved
in England on the 10th August 1630.
From the dates of other events it is clear that
Sir Thomas could not have sailed until some time
after the delivery of the sermon.
To return to the Colony, in September 1630,
but a short time after the settlement of the dispute
between the English and the French to which
reference has been made, Don Fadrique de Toledo
arrived in command of an overwhelming Spanish
fleet, and proceeded to lay waste and destroy almost
the entire plantations, driving most of the settlers,
both English and French, off the island; but
upon the retirement of the enemy the settlers re-
turned once more, and set to work to repair their
fortunes, but ever in open or secret enmity, till
again, in 1635, D’Esnambuc, aided by the negro
slaves with a promise of freedom, succeeded in


wringing yet further concessions from the English
settlers.
But the French settlement at St. Christopher was
destined to failure. Although they made some
attempt to return after the destruction suffered from
the Spanish fleet the effort was ineffective, and
ultimately the English were left in undisturbed
possession, the French at a later date establishing
themselves in Martinique and Guadeloupe.
By degrees, better times had now begun to dawn
for the sorely tried West Indian islands, resulting
principally from the change of production from
tobacco—grown on small holdings, of which the
supply had come to exceed the demand, and by
men of little or no capital—to sugar, employing both
capital and labour on a large scale. It was to the
strong rule and vigorous personality of Sir Thomas
in bringing about the change to the new enterprise
that credit was due. By the time of his death sugar
had come to be recognized as the currency of the
islands, and it had become the practice for jointures
and legacies to be expressed in terms, not of tobacco,
as theretofore, but of sugar.
There is a record of the same time of an interesting
comparison of the benefits to be derived by the
Mother Country from the trade with the East Indies
on the one hand, and the West Indies on the other,
concluding in favour of the latter, also a memoran-
dum ‘propounding a way to make those islands past
fear of the King of Spain.’


This condensed narrative may serve to convey
some idea of the magnitude of the obstacles
under which the settlement of these islands was
effected in their early days, but the difficulties
and conflicts to which reference has hitherto been
made were local only, and, geographically, West
Indian.
As great and greater than these, were the perils
and dangers of sea voyages, and the risk of capture
and destruction by enemy ships and privateers at
a time when, under James and the greater part of
the reign of Charles I, the power of England at
sea had fallen to the lowest. There were no convoys
in those days, and against such risks the settlers
had to provide their own defence.
Of this fact the Colonial State Papers supply
ample evidence:
On the 23rd January 1626 a Letter of Marque
was issued to The Gijt of God , 40 tons, owner
R. Merifield, Captain Thomas Warner, and during
that year Warner made prizes.
In 1625 there is a record of the capture of a
small vessel off Dunkirk by Warner and Smith,
and of an order for her release to them by the
Admiralty.
In the library of the Colonial Office are two letters
of Sir Thomas’s dated September 1636, addressed
the one to the King and the other to Secretary
Windebank. These letters are here published for
the first time. 9 They not only supply a record of


loss from the perils and dangers of the sea, but are
of special interest in two other respects, first as serv-
ing to convey a clear impression of the capacity,
good judgment and moderation of Sir Thomas in
the conduct of delicate negotiations, and secondly
because of their reference to the conflicting claims
which arose on the death of Lord Carlisle between
his son and his creditors. To this origin are to be
traced also the political differences between the
‘Cavaliers and Roundheads in Barbados,’ which led
ultimately to the blockade of Barbados by a Parlia-
mentary fleet in 1652. 10
TEXT OF THE LETTERS
Right Hono b le
Yo u were Pleased when I tooke my Leaue of
yo u at Hampton Co rt to enioyne mee to this duty
And I am sorry I cannott at p r sent pforme it as
I ought beinge lately arrived yet unsettled and
pestred w th many Controwsies of the Planters w ch
slept on purpose for my Comeinge
Many and great have been my losses and hinder-
ances in my voyage and affaires this yeare, I pvided
for the voyadge two good shippes, and in them
ffoure thousand pounds adventure of my owne.
The Plough my Viceadmirall a shipp hired to
attend mee the whole yeare sett sayle from the
Downes w th a fayre wynde but without order three
dayes before my Comeinge downe, And is in myne


and all mens Judgem* loste, she had in her aboute
150 psons w th the better pte of my Victuall
Apparrell and Amunicon pvided for my new
Dessignes, Besides much goods of other mens, In
my owne shipp I hadd a great sickness and Mortal-
ity, The Sickness not above 20: of 200 escaped,
whereof there Died at Sea and since my comegnge
a shore about 40 psons, Some neere to mee in blood
and many of especiall quality and use, the re-
maynder are much enfeobled, but now I hope
uppon recowye.
Notw th standinge these Losses I intended to have
placed a Colonge uppon Metalina vnder the Com-
maunds of a Sonne in Law of my owne (who had
the Earle of Carlisles Comission for that place) and
a good adventure of his owne estate, And for that
purpose touched at the Barbados (a Wynward
Island most out of Danger, and inhabited w th about
6000 English) where accordinge to my Comission
I intended to have Settled Some orders in Matters
Military and raised such Voluntiers as were neces-
sary, Many of the Islanders uppon the ffirst rumor
of my intent refr ed to my self and officers offringe
themselves for the Service, And I assure my selfe
that duringe my staye there to refresh my owne
sicke (w ch was not above ten dayes) I could have
had five hundred able men, fitted with Armes and
Victualls (though I had not brought one of my
owne) had not the Gowno r Capt Henry Hawley
opposed himselfe to my Comission and the Kings


Confirmatory Lres (Notw th standing my best reasons,
and fairest pffers and pswasions, Not w th obstinat
or rebellious petences, but w th spetious Allegacons
in behalfe of his owne Comission, bee held myne of
fforce uppon all Islands but his, Yett bee acknow-
ledged his a Member of the Province and the same
Lords, not Excluded from my generall Comission
by any Exception therein, nor exempted by any
non abstante in his owne, some five of his Councell
(Such as I suppose hee best trusted) hee Called to
the hearinge of this businesse who all at his Devotion
would be all of his opynion, Soe that I must either
make waye by force w th a partye of his own people
or Depte thence a private man, for when against
his ffrivolous vrged post date to myne, I opposed
the Kings Ires, with a post Date to both, and an
Expresse Commaund to him and all Gowno rs con-
cninge my place and pson; he answeared that he
beleived his Ma tre tooke noe notice of o r Com-
missions but sett his hand to the Lre as it was
p r sented to him, Not doubtinge in his own behalfe
to Contradicte his Ma tie , whoe in the same Lre
Professes to have taken notice from tyme to tyme
of the Earle of Carliles Loyall pceedings in these
ptes, which for divers reasons I assure my selfe hee
hath done.
I knowe I could have effected my businesse by
force w th a pty of his owne people, whoe willinglye
attended the Beate of my Drums, but it might have
Cost some blood, and would much have hindered


the Comons, who for payment of great Debts, were
Peaceably Labouringe in a frutfull Cropp, w h for
divers yeares they have wanted, I therefore chose
rather to Suspend my businesse for a tyme and to
expect right from home, I forbeare the pfecte
relation as it must be p r sented to our Judges, uppon
prmise to Capt Hawley to tarry for his Defencs and
send my Complaynts by the same shipp, till when
I would have bene absolutely sylent, but that his
Longe Delaye makes me a Lyttle Doubte his
Sincerity, and I am loath to be to Confident to my
own p r indice; At the other Islands uppon publica-
tion of my Comission and the Kings Lres, I found
all willinge recepcon and due respect both from
Govnores and people, but beinge peeces newly
Planted and the Colonies small, I rather seeke to
strengthen them w th good officers and orders then
drawe any from them, Yett I hope that even they;
in very few yeares shall assist towards the Plantings
of others, This relacon I thought belonged toyyeo e
Hono whoe it concernes to undstand what recepcon
the Kings Lres findes in all places. Especially
amongst his owne Subiects whoe at their farthest
from home should be quickest in their obedience.
This Doctrine I learnt in the Campe and cann better
practize then Preach it, which the Kinge (and those
that under his Ma tie Commaund mee) shall eur fynde
by my readie doeinge or sufferinge whatsoever I
shall receive their warrant for, whereof the speedy
execucon uppon my selfe or any other shall give


faithfull Testimony uppon their first order, The
Intimation whereof as occasion serves and yo u
hono ble and iuste supporte in my absence shall for
ever oblige mee to remayne
Yo r hon rs most affecionate
and most humble freind
and Servant
Thomas Warner
St xpophers the 10th
of September 1636
Secy Windebanke
endorsed 10 September 1636
Capt Warner from St. Christofers
Maye it Please yo Ma tie
Yo r Mat ts Gratious Lres which after the Earle
of Carlile’s Death I humbly sued for and obtained.
To Confirme the People of those ptes in theirc
obedience to yo r Matie under his Lopp® officers, and
those under my selfe as his Lopp® Lieutennent
Genall were humbly rec d and obeyed by all the
Gounor 8 and Officers of yo 1 Mat 8 Islands of this
Province Exceptinge the Govno r of the Barbados,
Capt Henry Hawley, whoe Confident of ffreinds
or Covetous of Greater power then others of his
qualitie refused to admitt of my Comission vppon
his Island, Notw th standinge Yo r Mat 8 Dread Com-
mands w Oll hee seuall tymes heard read, and was by
all faire and gentle reasons pswaded to submitt to:
of this I durst not but breefly informe yo r Ma tie


Somewhat more of the pticlers I have written to
Secretary Wimbancke, but most at Large to the
Earle of Carlile whoe by yo r Ma ts Bounty to his
father Inherits this Province and my service, of
whose Care to inform yo r Ma tle of the prste State
thereof, and whatsoever heere maye Concerne yo r
Ma tB hono r and service, I nothinge Doubte. Nor
maye Iw m out breach of Modesty and my duty
beinge his officer pr e sse neerer yo r Royall Eare
w th out his Lo ds pmission or yo r Ma ts exprsse
Commands To w h I shall willingly Sacrifie my life
and ffortunes with a promptitude and Carefullnes
becomminge.
Yo r Ma ts
Most Loyall and faithfull
Souldier and
Subieste
Thomas Warner
St Xpophers the 15th
of September 1636
addressed
To the King’s Most Excellent M tle of Great
Brittaine; my most Dread Sovraigne
endorsed 15 Sept. 1636
Captain Warner to His Majty


The attempt made in these pages to give an
account of Sir Thomas Warner’s great work in the
settlement of the West Indian Colonies does not
aspire to be more than a mere outline. The full
story is the whole of the early history of the West
Indies incomplete, confused, and often contradic-
tory as it is, especially as to chronology, 11 but
historians agree that ‘Sir Thomas laid the founda-
tions of the greatest centre of Colonial wealth in
the world at the time, and for many years after-
wards, and that at the time of his death the con-
dition of the English Caribees was one of solid
prosperity comparing favourably with the achieve-
ments of the French, and yet more when contrasted
with the results of the long Spanish occupation of
the Greater Antilles.’
Unfortunately no portrait of Sir Thomas is in
existence, ‘no little candle lighted,’ as Carlyle ex-
presses it, to give an idea of what manner of man
he was. We have little beyond a description of
him by one contemporary as being ‘of an active
and agile body’ and by another of his being ‘truly
honest and friendly to all men.’ All that is known
of him goes to show that he was a man of a very
vigorous personality.
Sir Thomas died on the 10th March 1649 (new
reckoning), probably without having heard of the
tragedy at Whitehall of the 30th January. 12 He
is buried at St. Christopher’s. On his tombstone
is the following epitaph:


TOMB OF SIR THOMAS WARNER, MIDDLE ISLAND, S. CHRISTOPHER


An Epitap upon The
Nohle and Much Lamented Gen 1 Sir
Tho Warner , K l Lieutenant
General of Te Carrihee
Islands and Gov r of Te
Island of St Christopher
Who Departed This
Life the 10th of
March 1648
First Read then Weepe when thou art hereby taught
That Warner lyes intern'd here , one that bought
With loss of Noble bloud Illustrious Name
Of a Commander Create in Acts of Fame
Trayned from his youth in Armes , his courage bold ,
Attempted brave Exploites and uncontrold
By fortunes fiercest Frownes , he still gave forth
Large Narratives of Military worth
Written with his sword's poynt , but what is man
In the midst of his glory , and who can
Secure this Life A moment since hee
Both by Sea and Land , so long kept free
[At Mortal Strokes ]* at length did yield
[Grace]* to conquering Death the field
•Obliterated. fi ni Coronat
Sir Thomas was married three times. His first
wife was Sarah, daughter of Walter Snelling, of
Dorchester, and by her he had two children, a
daughter Mary, and a son Edward.
The son Edward, who has been referred to as
the first Governor of Antigua, appointed by his
father in 1632, died without male heirs at a date
of which there is no record. His wife and child
were carried off by Caribs in 1640.
Of the circumstances of this tragedy no record


exists, but the following legend has been handed
from one generation to another of Antiguans.
In a night attack by Carib canoes upon the Gover-
nor’s house, not far from the shore, while he and his
people were engaged in resisting the attack, some
of the Caribs entered the house from the back and
carried off the Governor’s wife and two children.
The Caribs were driven off, but succeeded in
reaching their canoes and getting away under cover
of night with the wife and one child.
Of the other child the story is that to prevent its
cries leading to their discovery as they ran away, one
of the Caribs, swinging it by its feet over his head,
dashed its brains out on a rock. The scene of the
outrage is shown to this day.
At daybreak next morning search was made in the
bays and creeks of the neighbouring islands and the
unfortunate wife is said to have been found, but of
her ultimate fate nothing is known.
Sir Thomas’s second wife was Rebecca, daughter
of Thomas Payne of Surrey. By her he had two
sons, Thomas and Philip. His third wife was Ann
by whom he had no issue.
His son Thomas married Grace, a daughter of
Major-General Fowke. Admitted a student of the
Inner Temple on the 29th January 1660, called
to the Bar 1666, Attorney-General of Barbados
and knighted by Charles 11. He was buried 23 rd
July 1679 at St. Michael’s, Barbados. He left two
daughters, Ann and Grace, but no male issue, and
the succession devolved upon his brother Philip.


CHAPTER 111
PHILIP WARNER
Philip Warner—Deputy Governor of Antigua—Conflict with
Caribs of Dominica—Accusation and Imprisonment in the
Tower of London—His Letters from the Tower and Report
upon the Islands for the King’s Council—Dampier’s Account
of the Affair—Warner’s Acquittal and Vindication, and his
Election as President of the Council
In 1672 Sir William Stapleton had been ap-
pointed Captain General and Commander-in-
Chief of Antigua and the other Leeward Islands
by William Lord Willoughby, Governor of Bar-
bados and the Caribbee Islands.
Sir William, preferring to reside at Nevis, had
appointed Colonel Philip Warner, Sir Thomas’s
second son by his second wife, to be Deputy
Governor of Antigua.
In 1674 the inhabitants of Antigua presented a
petition to Sir William setting out their grievances
against the Indians of Dominica, and praying him
to grant them a commission ‘to make war against
them.’ The commission was granted as prayed; a
large party of volunteers from Antigua and the
neighbouring islands was formed; and at the urgent
request of the inhabitants, Colonel Warner, then
President of the Council, and Colonel of a Regi-
ment of Foot in Antigua, was appointed to the
command of what, in these days, would be called
a punitive expedition.
At the time and for some years before there was


settled among the Caribs of Dominica an Indian,
who was generally reputed to be the son of Sir
Thomas Warner by a Carib woman, and had come
to be known by the name of ‘lndian Warner.’
This man appears to have been quite a remarkable
personage, having earned the good opinion of Lord
Willoughby, by whom he had been appointed
Governor of Dominica, then occupied entirely by
Caribs. Of the part played by Indian Warner in
the events about to be narrated very little is really
known. On the one hand he is said to have been
well disposed towards the English in the islands,
and to have exercised his influence in endeavouring
to promote peace and goodwill between the two
peoples. But the Caribs of Dominica were them-
selves divided into two parties, one accepting the
leadership of Indian Warner, the other constantly
engaged in attacking the English settlers in Antigua
by whom, as will appear, it was believed that Indian
Warner’s friendship was a pretence, and that he
was in reality the instigator of the attacks from
which they suffered. The truth will never be
known. As to the conflict which ensued, the most
reliable account of what took place is that given by
Daniel Francis Warner in his memoranda of the
family history (see Chapter IX) as follows:
‘Philip Warner having arrived at Dominica pro-
posed a conference with his half-brother in order
to settle the disputes between them, when the
English were invited to a feast and all hostilities


between them seemed in a fair way of being
amicably adjusted. This, however, unhappily
proved not to be the case, for during the entertain-
ment, the parties having become influenced with
liquor, their ancient animosities revived and a
furious quarrel was the immediate consequence.
The battle continued to rage with unabated violence
until it was terminated in the utter destruction of
the Carib Warner and the people under him.’ This
account, although written many years after the
event, comes from a most trustworthy source. The
quarrel was but the natural result of the failure of
the conference. The relationship between the
parties and the fratricidal character of the conflict
have added a sensational interest to this unhappy
story.
The date of this affair is not certain, but it prob-
ably took place about January 1675, as in a despatch
of Bth February of that year Sir William Stapleton
reports the matter to the Home Government, stat-
ing that it was carried out under his authority by
his Deputy Governor and that ‘lndian Warner’ fell
‘among his fellow Heathens, who, though he had
an English Commission, yet was a great villain and
took a French Commission.’
Early in May, Colonel Warner went on leave to
England. About the same time Lord Willoughby
died in Barbados, and was succeeded by Sir Jonathan
Atkins. The new Governor immediately pro-
ceeded to address a despatch to Mr. Secretary


Coventry reporting that Colonel Warner had, with-
out his authority, led an expedition to Dominica,
which was included in the writer’s government, and
that ‘he had invited his brother and party on board
to a treat, made them drunk with rum, and there
massacred them all’; and in support of his state-
ment he forwarded the sworn deposition of one
William Hamlyn.
Acting upon the uncorroborated testimony of
this single witness; without any inquiry into his
antecedents; without a reference to Sir William
Stapleton; and without an opportunity being
afforded to Colonel Warner to defend himself,
Secretary Coventry writes to the Governor of Bar-
bados on the 23 rd June informing him that ‘His
Majesty is highly offended at that barbarous murder
or rather massacre, and has ordered that speedy and
exemplary justice be done, while the Indians are to
be conciliated by sending them some heads as a
demonstration of the punishment of the authors.’
Soon after (the date is uncertain but probably
some time in August 1675) Colonel Warner, to his
great astonishment, is committed to the Tower.
Upon these proceedings coming to the know-
ledge of Sir William Stapleton, at Nevis, he
addressed a despatch dated 20th December to the
Secretary of State, indignantly denying Hamlyn’s
statement, relating the true facts, and strongly
urging Colonel Warner’s immediate release.
In January 1676 the Leeward Islands Merchants


in London presented a petition to the Secretary
of State, supporting Sir William Stapleton’s repre-
sentations.
To both of these the authorities turned a deaf
ear, as we find Colonel Warner on the 25 th March
1676 still in custody in the Tower, writing to the
Government, saying that he had heard that it had
been decided to send him to Barbados for trial,
begging that there should be no delay, and that
he might be sent out on the Phcenix. Then follows
a further despatch from Sir William Stapleton to
the Privy Council, enclosing the sworn depositions
of seven persons of position and repute in the
Colony, confirming his previous representations to
the effect that Hamlyn’s deposition was utterly
untrue, and that ‘lndian Warner was killed in fair
and open fight, but by whose hand no one knew.’
The decision to try Colonel Warner at Barbados,
brought forth a ‘Remonstrance’ from the inhabi-
tants of Antigua signed by the most influential men
in the Colony and addressed to the Court at Barbados
in the following terms:
A Remonstrance of the inhabitants of the island of
Antigua why they soe very earnestly craved
authority and commission from his Excellency,
William Stapleton Captain General and Governor
in chief , in and over all his Majesties Leward
Cariba Islands in America, To kill and destroy
the Indians inhabiting in y e Island of Dominica
63 f


and likewise jor y e craveing aydefrom the neigh-
bouring Islands under his Excellency's command
which was promised us.
‘lt is to well knowne as well to y e inhabitants of
this Island as to y e other merchants and traders
amongst us since its first being inhabited by Chris-
tians, or very near that time that y e said Indians
have not ceased by their continual incursions and
very many horrid murders, ripping up women with
child, burning of houses, and carrying away into
miserable captivity, their children and others, all-
most to y e utter ruine of this collony, whilst Indian
Warner of late going under the name of Thomas
Warner was a chief leader and actor amongst y e
said Indians untill the year of our Lord 1657 when
some of y e inhabitants of this Island with the assist-
ance of Mountserrat and others went against them
although by their subtility it proved almost in-
effectual, yett in y e year 1660, y e said Indian
Warner with other Indians came to Coll 0 Xpher
Keynell * then governor of this Island, to make
peace which was then agreed unto and wee had
for some small tyme rest from their allmost continual
Alaroms, but they soon fell to their accustomed
cruelltys by robing, murdering and carrieing away
others of the inhabitants, so that we were again
constrained to make war against them to our exceed-
ing charge and y e losse of our crops at which tyme
• Christopher Reyoall.


we requested Coll 0 Phillip Warner to goe in pson
against them in hopes he might by faire means
have brought y e said Indian Warner to have been
helpful to our party in finding out and persueing
those othere breakers of y e sd peace, but all our
endeavours proved fruit-lesse and procured us noth-
ing more but fair promises, but he would not
go or appear against those that himselfe would say
were our enemies, but on the contrary would give
them notice of our arrival, although we spared not,
at any tyme, to furnish him and those he called
his friends with what necessaries they wanted.
‘Notwithstanding in the year 1666 they began
again their old villainies and outragious practices,
not regarding that peace, but rather lookeing on
us as their tributaries, a barbarous conclusion drawn
from our kindnesses, Indian Warner being all this
while amongst them, and would never give us any
notice of y e designs against us, which drew us to
conclude he was still against us, by consent, if not
in pson, for those by him protected as his friends
and nearest relations, were chief in comitting many
outtrages murders, rapes and burneings, by which
means we were wholly putt from labour, which if
at any time wee attempted to follow their poisoned
arrows were soon in some of our sides, which spake
nothing but death, soon after y e said Indian Warner
was carried prisoner by the French to St. Xphers *
being however his friends and nearest relations still
* St. Christopher's.


persued their bloody practises against the poore
Inhabitants of this Island for as often as y e men
engaged the Ffrench enemy, the said Indians were
comitting their murders, rapes and other villanyss
amongst y® women and children, and when the
Ffrench had subdued y e Island and disarmed our
inhabitants and carried away our negroes and what
else they thought fitt, then did these Indians pros-
ecute all villanies imaginable against our naked
inhabitants haveing nothing but the mercy of God
to protect ourselves from their cruelties, at which
time, we having submitted to the Ffrench on their pro-
mise of safety from y e barbarisme of the said Indians,
y® said Indians came to the house of Coll 0 Cardine late
Govern 1 of this Island who cyvilly treated them,
but at their departure desired him in friendship to
walk with them to the sea-side, where they cruelly
murdered him, and those that were with him, cut-
ting off Coll o Cardine’s head, broyled it and carried
it to Dominica in triumph. But before their depar-
ture returned to Coll 0 Cardine’s house, and carried
away his wife children and others, with them into
captivity, where some of them perished.
‘Neare to this same tyme they went to the house
of Mr. Thomas Taylor pretending friendshipp and
by him they were kindly entertained, but before
they departed they murdered y e said Taylor, Mr.
Thomas Beadle minister, Mr. Robert Boyers,
wounding others with poisoned arrows to death
and carried away M ra - Taylor and children, M rs -


Chrew and children, M rs - Lynt * and children,
with many too tedious to relate, and in these and
y e like bloody practises they continued untill a peace
was proclaimed betwixt our more gracious king,
y e Ffrench, and Dutch. All which bloody cruelties
were acted and done by y e Chiefs of Indian Warner’s
friends, without the least cause or provocation on
our part.
‘And since y e peace made with them by the
Lord William Willoughby, although they have been
kindly received and entertained by our inhabitants
out of respect to the said peace, yett they soon
begain their accustomed cruelties fore comeing to
Parham Hill plantation in agreeable manner were
civilly and librally entertained at their departure
murdered several seamen that were taking in
tobacco, and planters that were carrying the same
to y e boats with out any manner of provocation.
‘Some of y e said Indians being soone after appre-
hended at Mountserrat by our generall, who
intended to have given them a due reward for y®
said murders, but such was our clemency towards
them, that if by any means wee could have brought
them to live peaceably by us, wee made our humble
addresses unto our generall to lett them goe, which
we hardly obtained from his Excellency, but no
sooner were they loose but they comitted roberies
upon y e said Island.
‘Such hath always been their requitalls of any
* Lynch.


kindnesses or civilities shewn them, and amongst
these Indians were the friends and associates of the
said Indian Warner and by him then interceeded
for alledging they were not the persons that had
done the said murders, although afterwards appeared
that these whom he a called his friends were the
men that comitted y e said murder.
‘And to manifest the truth thereof, one of his
nearest allies, in the yeare 1674 came with other
Indians to the plantation of Coll 0 Phillip Warner
and killed severall Christians and carried away six-
teen negroes, and one Christian child, whom they
afterwards cruelly murdered, and at the return of
the said Indians from this Island, Indian Warner
mett them at Guardeloup and craved share of the
booty they had brought from Antigua, and after-
wards some of y e goods [obliterated] Coll 0 Warner’s
boyling house at their being last there comitting
of murders aforesaid were found in the village
belonging to Indian Warner in Dominica and were
brought back by some of Coll o Warner’s servants.
‘Thus hath the said Indian Warner often dealt
treacherously, pretending friendshipp, but proving
an absolute enemy, not only to this Island, but to
our whole nation, for himself declared that he had
a Ffrench comission, and said that he would rather
serve y e Spaniards then y e English and finding our-
selves to be neare our utter ruine by his fraud and
treachery, we were constrained humbly to crave
ayde of our captain generall to give us his comission


to make war against the said Indians, without excep-
tion that we might labour by his just power to redeem
ourselves from those cruel practices which wee had
long laine under, which he was pleased to grant.
‘We then besought Coll 0 Phillip Warner, our
governor to goe in person against them, which at
our earnest request he was pleased to undertake
and with very great difficulty and hazard did doe
such service upon them which hath procured our
ease and rest in some measure to this tyme, although
not without continuall watching and warding to
our great charge and trouble, they still threatening
a bloody revenge upon this place.
‘And it is evident, had not Coll 0 Warner’s party
beene quick in giving the first blow, upon those
our bloody enemies, he and those with him had
received the same measure from our pretended
friends but utter enemies. Who had agreed with
those bee called our enemies to destroy Coll 0 Warner
and his party and to that end had them at rediness
at hand, but God Almighty prevented them, not
sufferinge him any longer to raigne in his barbarous
practices of which this Island might give a large
acompt for neare forty yeares past and whether y e
said Indian Warner with his associates received not
a due recompense for their villanys and barbarous
practices wee appeal to God and all y e world.
[Signed) Richard Boraston and 15 others.’
(’ Autographs )
1676


‘May it please your honours,
‘The sense wee have of the sufferings of Coll 0
Phillipe Warner, our late governor by and for an
action by which wee have received soe many advan-
tages, and which the prayers of our inhabitants
constrained him by [i undecipherable ] comission to
undertake, hath highly obliged us to suplicate your
honours, on his behalfe. Not that we doubt his
being justly dealt with, and according to law, but
to give your honors to understand that it was not
by any designe or private concern of Coll 0 Phillip
Warner that carried on that warr and that action
wherein it is said Indian Warner fell. But it was
founded on the supplication of the inhabitants here,
that for many yeares enjoyed little rest from the
incursions of those Indians of Dominica and amongst
them those of Warner’s family. Some crying for
their husbands slaine with poisoned arrows, others
for their children snatcht from them. Those and
the such like were the common complaints here.
Until by their humble addresse to our generall they
obtained comission to goe under the command of
Coll 0 Warner who was not easily wrought upon
to undertake it; but being highly importuned by
all, he at length complied and by that action we
have since enjoyed much peace and they have not
dared to putt foot uppon our shoare, which we
wholly attribute to God’s mercy towards us, but
that action as the second cause. This wee humbly
offer unto your honors fearing you may not other-


wise be given to understand, what was the first
cause that moved to that action, as will appear if
all papers relating thereunto may be perused. We
have not more to request from your hon rs than to
give your favourable constructions of the matter
humbly take leave and subscribe ourselves your
most humble servants.
‘Richard Boraston, &c. &c.
‘Palm o July y e 25 th , 1676.
‘To y e Honble. his Maties. justices of Oyer and
terminer appointed for the triall of Coll o Phillip
Warner in y e Island of Barbadoes
‘These humbly are sent.’
It was not Colonel Warner alone who was im-
plicated in this affair, although he plays the most
prominent part. Many of the offenders had their
lands taken from them, until the issue of their trial
was known; but Colonel Warner and Lieutenant
Ffrye, of their own free will, delivered up their
possessions, immediately upon their being charged
with the crime already narrated, as may be learnt
from the following passage extracted from an old
record (speaking of those persons who had been
dispossessed of their lands):
‘Excepted the lands of Coll 0 Phillip Warner at
the ffig tree, and at the Road being resigned up
freely by himself. Also excepted the lands of Lieut.
John Ffrye, lying and beinge in the body of this
Island beinge resigned up freely by him.’


At the trial by the Court of Oyer and Terminer
of Barbados, Colonel Warner was acquitted, and
Hamlyn was convicted of perjury, the jury finding
as facts that ‘lndian Warner was killed in fair fight
together with other Indian confederates of his,
and that they were all treacherous and bloody
malefactors, and that he was not Sir Thomas’s
son.’
On the 22nd November 1676 Sir William Staple-
ton reports the result of the trial to the Home
Government as follows:
‘Colonel Warner, after his great sufferings, is
come off with credit by a learned Ignoramus of
the Grand Jury and was cleared by Proclamation
which could not be otherwise unless they would
hang him right or wrong. The man who falsely
deposed against him is sent to Holland in Irons.’
After his acquittal Colonel Warner had petitioned
to be restored to His Majesty’s favour and on the
17th May 1677 the King’s Council had reported
on the petition: ‘Whatever we have heard of Colonel
Warner before this action had been to his advantage
and suitable to the behaviour of a deserving subject
and the son of that Father who besides many other
signal services first brought the Caribee Islands to
a dependence to this Crown. As for the fact
whereof he was accused we have been informed by
Sir Jonathan Atkins that he was cleared by Proc-
lamation. And from Col. Stapleton we are by
many letters told that Hamlyn who was the sole


accuser was an infamous fellow and since that time
ran away with a sloop from the Leeward Islands
to the Dutch from whom he has got a commission
under which he has stolen negroes and fired on
boats of Ye Mjty’s Service.’
The Report ends with a submission that ‘some
signification should be made of the ceasing of His
Majesty’s displeasure which may not only revive
his drooping spirits but engage him in a vigorous
care for the preservation and defence of those Islands
wherein he hath formerly acted a very good part
for your Majesty’s service.’
The report of the Council notwithstanding, on
the 18th May the King ordered that Colonel
Warner should be ‘put out of his Government of
Antigua and not hold any office of trust under the
Crown.’
This is a strange story.
Upon the facts established Colonel Warner clearly
suffered grave injustice from the Governor’s unfair
action, and the prejudice which it necessarily created
with His Majesty the King and the Home Govern-
ment.
With Sir William Stapleton’s, and all the other
evidence available upon the spot, it was a gross
abuse of his newly acquired authority for the
Governor to act as he did.
Some idea of the extent of the prejudice created
may be gathered from the extreme and grotesque
terms of Mr. Secretary Coventry’s letter to the


Governor of the 23 rd June, and from the refusal
of the King to restore Colonel Warner to his favour
even after his acquittal and the favourable report
of his Council.
So harsh a judgment is difficult to reconcile
with the well-known disposition of His Majesty,
and affords grounds for suspicion of some sinister
influence at work.
Some light is thrown upon the subject by a letter
from Colonel Warner to Sir Jonathan Atkins written
in 1676 upon his arrival on the Fhoenix at Barbados;
he writes:
‘At my first going to Whitehall I was much sur-
prized to meet with the King’s displeasure against
me, being conscious that neither my father’s former
services nor my own could undeserve his favour
but the disappointment was great and a complaint
sent home by you did soon pervert my expectation,’
and he proceeds: ‘The complaint comprehended
in Hamlin’s oath was so contradictory and full of
untruths that it found little faith among sober
minded men, though generally believed among the
ordinary multitude even to the making me a
monster, but your letter which went with it to Mr.
Secretary Coventry mett with the better credit,
and was the consequence [? cause] of all my misfor-
tune for you were pleased to inform Mr. Secretary
in your letter that the killing of the Indians in
Dominica was very ruinous to our trade and
absolutely destructive to all the Leeward Islands


which information made so great an impression
upon the King and Council that indeed I should
not have dared to stand a Justification but that
my own experience and the many depositions from
all the Leeward Islands do manifest the contrary,
and I hope by this time your Excellency is con-
vinced likewise, and that in truth that action is
really good service to the King.’
Upon the subject of the trade of the islands and
Government policy thereon Colonel Warner was
a recognized authority.
While in the Tower, at the request of Sir Robert
Southwell, then Clerk of the Privy Council, he
drew up a report for the information of the Council,
which he calls ‘An account of the Charriby Islands,’
in which he deals exhaustively with matters of
trade and defence and general administration. This
report in his own handwriting is among the manu-
scripts of record in the British Museum. It is dated
3rd April 1676 and is addressed to Sir Robert
Southwell, and concludes with a personal note dated
7th April 1676 as follows: ‘Your letter gives me
the ill news of my expected doome from New-
market. I apprehend upon the Captn’s most idell
inquire of my usage abord will make the King
order me all the way in the billbows, or a prisoner
between decks (Quod fiat voluntas Dei,) I am
resolved to suffer it with an invincibell patience to
bear all, I pray God in mercy turne his heart . . .
and send me the deliverance out of this oppression.’


There are also two other letters to Sir Robert
Southwell from Colonel Warner, the first dated 16th
April 1676, his last from the Tower, in which he says
‘my trial will Suit both my own disposition as well
as any righting of my inward innoncency, in order
to restore my honour that has languished under a
severe calumny for seven months,’ and the second,
written the next day, from on board the Phoenix ,
in which he, after acknowledging some considera-
tion shown him by Sir Robert, refers to the ship
as affording him ‘more room to breathe out my
melancholy contemplations than in the Tower’ and
continues: ‘As to your favourable thought concern-
ing a turne of my fortunes after a cessation of my
present afflictions, I am so conscious my slender
abilities are infinitely unfitt for any public under-
taking either civil or military and my unparalleled
troubles have so habituated my resolution to designe
a retired private life nothing in the World can
possibly invite me from it.’
The earliest account of the Dominica affair is
found in Dampiers Voyages. In 1674, and there-
fore immediately after the occurrence, Dampier was
on the ship Content oj London on a voyage to
Jamaica, and narrates the following which is quoted
in his own words and the Editor’s notes.
Although to a great extent a repetition of the
story as here related, it is set out in full as being
founded upon entries made at the time in Dampier’s
famous Diary. As to the genuineness of the narra-


tive, there can be no question, but it must be
remembered that it purports to be hearsay only,
and that it was not written until many years after
the events recorded.
‘We passed between the islands, and seeing a
smoke on St. Lucia, we sent our boat ashore there.
Our men found some Caribbee Indians and bought
of them plantains, bonanoes, pine apples, and sugar
cane and returning on board, there came with them
a canoe with 3or 4 Indians. These often repeated
the word Captain Warner and seemed to be in
some disquiet about him. We did not then under-
stand the meaning of it, but since I have been
informed that this Captain Warner whom they
mentioned was born in Antigua, one of our English
Islands and the son of Governor Warner (Old Sir
Thomas Warner, the Governor of the Caribbee
Islands) by an Indian woman, and bred by his
father after the English manner: he learned the
Indian language also of his mother, but being grown
up and finding himself despised by his English
kindred he forsook his father’s house, got away to
St. Lucia, and there lived among the Caribbee
Indians, his relations on his mother’s side, where
conforming himself to their customs he became
one of their captains and roved from one island to
another, as they did. About this time the Carib-
bees had done some spoil on our English plantations
in Antigua: and therefore Governor Warner’s son
by his wife, took a party of men and went to suppress


those Indians and came to the place where his
brother Indian Warner lived. Great seeming joy
there was at their meeting; but how far it was real
the event shewed for the English Warner providing
plenty of liquor and inviting his half-brother to
be merry with him, in the midst of his entertain-
ment ordered his men upon a given signal to murder
him and all his Indians which was accordingly per-
formed. [Note, —Governor Warner’s son by his
wife was Colonel Philip Warner, Deputy Governor
of Antigua. After the dispute was over, Colonel
Warner invited Thomas Warner and his Indians,
to the number of 60 or 70 men, women and
children to an entertainment of thanks, and having
made them very drunk with rum fell upon
them and destroyed them (Deposition of William
Hamlyn.)] Colonel Warner was sent to England
to stand his trial and remained a year in the Tower,
after his dismissal from the King’s Service. At his
trial it appeared that the Indian Warner was not
his half-brother: that the Indians slain at the
massacre were always confederates with those that
attacked us.’
‘That they were treacherous and bloody male-
factors, and that they were killed in fair fight. He
was acquitted and William Hamlyn was punished
for perjury, but many hold that Warner was guilty
and that the trial was not rightly conducted. The
reason of this inhumane action is diversly reported:
some say that this Indian Warner committed all the


spoil that was done to the English: and therefore
for that reason his brother killed him and his men.
Others that he was a great friend to the English
and would not suffer his men to hurt them, but did
all that lay in his power to draw them to an amicable
commerce; and that his brother killed him for
that he was ashamed to be related to an Indian.
But be it how it will, he was called in question for
the murder, and forced to come home to take his
trial in England.’
In the catalogue of the Pepysian Manuscripts,
Vol. IV, page 299, there is the following reference
to a minute of the Board of Admiralty: ‘Sir Thomas
Warner, brother of Colonel Warner who is now
going prisoner from hence to Barbados in the
Phoenix which is going to Jamaica, praying a passage
for himself and a servant to accompany his brother;
the same is granted. [Note, —Philip Warner,
formerly Governor of Antigua, was being sent to
Barbados to be tried for a massacre of natives in
Dominica.] ’
Upon the question whether Indian Warner was
the son of Sir Thomas or not, Pere Labat, the French
historian, states that many years after, while among
the Caribs of that Island, he came across a very old
woman, who lived among them, and was held in
great respect. She was known as Madame ‘Ouar-
nard’ * and by general repute among her people
• Owing to the lack of the ‘W’ or double ‘V’ in their language the French historians
spell the name Warner in a variety of ways, ‘Varnaer,’ ‘Vaernaer,’ ‘Ouarnard’ (Du
Tertre, Pere Labat, Historic des lies de UAmerique).
79 g


had lived with Sir Thomas Warner, and was the
mother of ‘lndian Warner/ Although P&re Labat’s
statement is evidence of reputation only, he is ac-
knowledged to be a most reliable historian and his
account has come to be generally accepted.
To the like effect is the evidence of Daniel
Francis Warner, who says that Sir Thomas ac-
knowledged Indian Warner as his son and brought
him up with his other children. He describes
him as having ‘a large forehead and aquiline nose,
his eyes bright large and full with a peculiar
gravity of countenance which clearly indicated his
noble temper and courage.’
He relates that Philip Warner recognized him
as Sir Thomas’s son and befriended him against ill-
treatment at the hands of Sir Thomas’s widow, which
led to his escaping and settling with his mother’s
people.
A full consideration of all the known facts cannot
but lead the impartial reader to the conclusion that,
the finding of the Barbados Court notwithstanding,
Indian Warner was the son of Sir Thomas.
After the acquittal of Colonel Warner the Mem-
bers of the House of Assembly appointed him their
Speaker, a testimony to his capacity and imparti-
ality, and an expression of their resentment at the
injustice which he had suffered.
On the 3rd November 1679 by Royal Grant of
that date his property which he had formerly held
under a grant of 1668, then known as ‘Savannah’


(which he had voluntarily surrendered upon his
accusation), was regranted to him, and at his request
was renamed and described in the new grant as the
‘Manor of Framlingham,’ a reminiscence of Suffolk,
the consideration for the grant being expressed as
‘yielding and paying therefor yearly for ever unto
His Majesty his heirs and successors a full grown
Bore at and upon Ye Feast and Birth of our Lord
Christ if lawfully demanded.’
From the return to him of his property it would
seem that the King had by this time in some measure
relented, but there is no other evidence of a restora-
tion to the Royal favour.
Here ends this sorry tale. The only conclusion
seems to be that drawn by Vere Oliver, the historiart
of the West Indies, that ‘Sir Jonathan Atkins was
prompted, perhaps by jealousy and sour temper,
originating with some personal animosity, and that
Colonel Warner was the victim of jealousy and
intrigue.’
Other cases of the kind will occur to the reader
(of which that of Warren Hastings is the best
known), cases of grievous wrong suffered by the
pioneers, who, while serving their country overseas,
were the victims of malignant gossip and jealousy
at home.
Colonel Warner continued to hold the office of
Speaker of the House of Assembly till his death.
His letters from the Tower convey the impression
of a man of great strength of character, brave in


adversity, sensitive of his honour, anxious to meet
his accusers and clear his good name, and resentful
of, and disgusted at, the arbitrary and unfair treat-
ment to which he had been subjected.
Philip Warner married Henrietta, daughter of
Colonel Henry Ashton and sole heir to her brother
Henry. He died on the 23rd October 1689, leav-
ing one son and four daughters, and was succeeded
by his son Thomas.


CHAPTER IV
Sir Thomas’s Right to Arms —History of, and of Quarterings—
Pedigree reproduced in two Parts: Part I, including Collateral
Relations in England down to the early part of the Eighteenth
Century; Part 11, Descendants in Main Line and Principal
Branches
It is now proposed to defer following the line
of Philip Warner’s descendants to a later stage,
and to give here an account of Sir Thomas’s pedi-
gree and of his right to armorial bearings, with some
observations on the history of Family Trees.
In early times, before the general adoption of
any effective system of registration, unless a family
were of such standing as to come within the scope
of the Inquisitions Post Mortem, or the Visitations
of the Heralds, there was great difficulty in
obtaining the necessary proofs in cases where people
had married or settled in other parts of the country,
or gone to live abroad, or where any considerable
period had elapsed since the happening of the event
requiring proof. It was therefore advisable, and
still is, that pedigrees should be kept up to date,
from time to time, while the memory of persons
still living is available, as a source of information.
‘The term Family Tree is itself of historical interest,
the word “Stemma” being used both as a family tree
and as a botanical one.
‘The Biblical “Stem of Jesse” came to be repre-
sented in England and on the Continent by medieval
artists and craftsmen by “Jesse Windows,” as they


were called, showing the figure of the original
ancestor as the root, and those of his descendants
distributed among the branches. Instances of these
and of altarpieces in stone, which must once have
rivalled them in brilliance of colour, are to be found
in many Cathedrals and Churches.
‘By the time of the Middle Ages the Family Tree
had come to be represented much more simply, the
branches had become merely straight lines and the
names of the descendants were inscribed in circles
dependent from them. Sixteenth-century manu-
scripts on vellum are in existence, showing pedigrees
of English nobility, the lines being in red and the
circles having a narrow edge of light green.
Beautifully illuminated coats of arms are placed in
the margin or in convenient spaces in the descent;
while this is shown quite clearly the general effect
is equally satisfactory from the artistic point of
view.’ 1
The vellum roll of Sir Thomas’s pedigree in the
possession of the family conforms in detail with the
description here given.
Owing to the impossibility of reproducing the
full roll in its original form upon any adequate scale
in a volume of this size, the principal features only
are reproduced. The pedigree is dealt with in two
parts, Part I being the 1629 pedigree beginning
with John le Warner temp. Edward 111, and ex-
tended to include Sir Thomas’s kindred in England
down to the early part of the eighteenth century;


I |i is .
JOHN LE WARNER
(From the Original Pedigree)


Part II setting out the line of descent from Sir
Thomas in the main line and its principal branches.
The Roll begins:
‘An exact genealogy of the antient and worthy
familie of the Warners whose antient seat was at
Warners in Great Waltham in Essex with such
illustrations and vouchers as are faithfully collected
out of the Records in the Tower of London, the
Registers of the Heralds Office, private evidences
of this familie, divers monuments in Churches and
other venerable proofs exactly setting forth how
the Antient house was alienated and where it ended
and how all these families of this surname now in
existence in Suffolk are truly descended and
derived.’
Then follows a picture (see illustration facing
this page) inscribed:
‘John le Warner the first of the familie that is men-
tioned in the Records of the Tower of London
flourished at Great Waltham in Essex under King
Ed. 3rd/
} Further on is shown a picture (facing page 87)
to which is appended:
‘The Graphical description of John Warner, Esq re ,
in the very same equipage as he appeared at the
Tournament in Essex in the tyme of King
Edward IV, and is depicted in an ould book in
the Heralds Office made at the same time.’
In the body of the Roll appear the Monumental


Inscriptions in the Parish Church of Great Waltham
referred to in Chapter I.
At the end of the Roll is depicted Sir Thomas
Warner’s coat of arms with its quarterings (facing
page 88).
i. Maldon.
2. Packelsham
3. Dines.
4. Helion.
5. SWINBORNE.
6. Gernon.
7. Boutetort.
8. Appleyard.
9. Thornbee.
Later quarterings are:
10. Everard.
11. Ashton.
12. Shipley.
13. Rudyerd.
14. Harvey.
15. Maddox.
16. Aucher.
The Arms of Ashton come in with the wife of
Philip Warner in 1667. The others with the wife
of Col. Edward Warner in 1804.
NOTES UPON SOME OF THE QUARTERINGS
Boutetort . A John Boutetort is included in the
‘Roll of Caerlaverock.’ * He was Warden of the
• The Roll of Caerlaverock is one of the accepted sources of English Heraldry. It
comprises the names of all those entitled to Arms who were engaged in the siege of
the castle of that name in Dumfriesshire by Ed. lin 1300. It was compiled by the
monks of a neighbouring monastery.


DETAIL FROM THE ORIGINAL PEDIGREE


Forest of Dean in 19 Ed. I, an admiral of the
King’s Fleet. He is styled ‘Lord of Mendelesham’
in a letter to the Pope, 5 Ed. 11. Governor of
Framlingham Castle.
Gernon is the name of the family from which the
Manor of Theydon Gernon in Essex, by which
name it is included in Domesday, takes its name.
From this family also is derived the name of another
Essex manor, Stansted Mountfichet, Mountfichet
being the surname of William Gernon to whom the
lordship was granted by William the Conqueror.
In or about 18 Rich. II John Gernon held the
manor of Esthorp in Essex of the King in
Chief.
Helton . Roll of Hen. 11l
Gernon and Swinburne, Roll of Ed. II
Thornbury, Roll of Rich. 11.
The Roll ends with a statement that it was ‘col-
lected out of the most authentical records of this
Kingdom by Jno. Philipott, Somerset Herald at
Armes in ye yeare of Grace 1629’ and a certificate
by Henry St. George, Norroy King of Arms, that
the pedigree is ‘Very Rightly drawn.’ ‘
The pedigree is deduced from the following
authorities: {a) ‘The Collection of Philpot,’ by
which name is known a volume of manuscript in
the Heralds’ Office, collected and arranged by John
Philpot, who became Somerset Herald in 1624 and
died in 1645. These papers cover the first five
generations, {b) The Visitations of the Counties.


Reference, Suffolk 1612, C. 15.64 and Norfolk
VII. 132. 2
These records have been kept at different places,
formerly at the Tower, now some at the Public
Record Office, and some at the Heralds’ Office.
The right to arms originates either in user or in
grant, in many cases in both, as where ancient user
is followed by subsequent grant, as here.
The arms ‘Or a bend engrailed between six roses
gules* were allowed by Camden, Clarencieux King
at Arms, in 1609 and were granted to ‘Warner of
Essex now of Parham in Suffolk.’
The Crest is ‘A Saracen’s head couped below the
shoulders habited chequy or and gules wreathed about
the temples or and gules on the head a cap argent.’
The origin of the motto: ‘Du Roye je le tiens’
is unknown. It was probably adopted either by
Sir Thomas or one of his descendants in reference
to the Essex Ring. The scroll OAOE TQ OEQ ,
Wholly in or for God, issuing out of the mouth
of the figure as shown in the Parish Church of
Great Waltham, was at one 'time thought to be
the family motto, but that is an error. Scrolls of
the kind are commonly found upon coats of arms
and monumental inscriptions, and are now recog-
nized as being merely invocatory.
The tabular form of pedigree has been used for
the main line only; the branch lines are distin-
guished by the letters A, B, C.


i|i, ;||l f|f : PH jjfc- As |||| .jjjl j|K|
■ < *S& M ; l^3!ud#lf.iS3BiBy
'" "* |^'> ° JyW
JOHN LE WARNER
[From the Original Pedigree)


CHAPTER V
Of Sir Thomas’s Grandfather, Francis of Framlingham and
his families by his two Wives Elizabeth Appleyard and Mary
Rouse, of the Cratfield and Parham Branches—Some Brasses,
Monumental Inscriptions and Wills; of Edward Warner,
Merchant Taylor
The family history of this period might be
written almost entirely from its monumental
inscriptions alone. The parish churches of Parham
and Cratfield in Suffolk, and the churches of St.
Andrew Undershaft and St. Andrew’s, Holborn,
in London, contain monumental inscriptions ex-
tending from 1617 to the most recent times.
Some of these, particularly such as supply
evidence of relationship, are reproduced here, and,
together with the wills of which extracts are given,
furnish valuable evidence not only of relationship but
also of the position of the family from time to time.
Francis of Framlingham’s family by his first
wife Elizabeth Appleyard.
WILLIAM OF FRAMLINGHAM
In St. Mary’s Church, Cratfield, is an escutcheon
commemorating the marriage of William, displaying
the arms of Warner four coats Appleyard, Thorn-
bury, Courthope, Gernegan, impaling Jernegan
eight coats, Warner, Inglethorpe, Fitzos-bert-Har-
ling, Gonville, Kelvedon, Clyfton, Jernigan. 1
By his will dated 10th October 1558, proved
7th March 1559 (new style), Robert Appleyard,


otherwise styled Appleton, of Framlingham-at-the-
castle, bequeathed property in Cratfield, Linstead,
Wethendale and Fressingfield in Suffolk ‘to grand-
son Robert Warner at the age of 21/ other lands
to ‘Francis Warner my son-in-law and Anne my
wife for life and then to my grandchildren William,
Francis and Priscilla Warner in tail* (Book 66,
Vesye, p. Norwich Consistory).
Robert Warner, the grandson, died without issue.
ROBERT OF CRATFIELD
In the church at Cratfield are two memorial
brasses bearing the Warner Arms and inscribed:
ROBERT WARNER SENIOR , 1654
Hie Jacet Robertas Warner Sen Gen. Fir Prudens Puis
et Honestus Filius et Haeres Gulielmi Warner nap. de
Cratfield Filii et Haeredis Francisci Warner de Parham
Arm. et Margaretae Jernegam unius filiae Gergii Jernegam
nuper de Somerletowne militis aetatis suae 80 164$ et E/iz
uxor epis filia Alexandri Courtope de Crombrooke in Comitat.
Cantuariensi Armiger aetat. Suae \undectpherable\
ROBERT WARNER JUNIOR, 1641
Hie Jacet Robert Warner Jun. Gent, son and heir of
Robert Warner and Margaret his wife , died in August
1641 aged 23. 2
FRANCIS WARNER
Francis Warner, Robert of Cratfield’s younger
brother, was High Sheriff of London in 1659/60.
He married Eleanor, daughter of Sir Thomas


Andrews, who was Lord Mayor of London in
1649 an d 1651.
In 1668 he bought the manor of Badmondisfield,
Wickhambrook, Suffolk, from Sir Henry North,
where he settled and lived till his death in 1684 at
the age of 71. 3 Badmondisfield Hall is a moated
house dating back to the early Stuart period, and
is celebrated in story as the scene of In the Golden
Days by Edna Lyall.
Sir Henry North, from whom Francis bought
Badmondisfield, was a member of the same family
as Captain Roger North with whom Sir Thomas
was associated in the Guiana venture.
Andrews Warner, the only surviving son of
Francis, married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard
Cutts of Clare, Suffolk. He died 17th December
1717 at the age of 60. His son Poulett Warner
inherited the estate, but, dying without male issue,
the property passed to his sister Damaris, thus
bringing to an end this branch of the Warner
family (Warner Bromley pedigree).
The line of descent from Robert of Cratfield
then reverts to the issue of Sir Thomas Warner.
Francis of Framlingham’s family by his second
wife Mary Rouse. In his will he is described as
of Parham.
Mary Rouse was the daughter of Sir Edmund
Rouse of Henham Hall, which came into the
possession of the Rouse family in 1533. Sir John
was a staunch supporter of the Royalist cause, and


Henham Hall was the scene of many a secret meet-
ing of the adherents of the Stuarts when the toast
of ‘the King over the water 5 was drunk.
WILL OF FRANCIS WARNER
Francis Warner of Parham Co. Suffolk. Gent.
Will dated 5 Jan. 3 Jac: proved 14 May 1606 by
Ex s ors (28 Stafford) ‘To be buried at Parham.
Wainefarthinge where I was born. 5 To Edmund
Warner my son my Mansion House etc in Parham
& Framlingham & Lands in Stradbrooke & his
heirs male, in default to Edward Warner my son,
Henry Warner my son, Robert Warner my grandson,
John Warner my grandson. To Edward Warner
my son lands in Leiston. Henry Warner my son
lands in Crannesford and Great Glemham. Mary
Girlinge my grand child lands in Sutton, Hollisley,
Shottisham, & Eyke. 30 acres in Framlingham
Park by lease to me by Thomas Colvill, Gent, my
son in law. Anne Warner my dau. in law a chain
of gold. To Edmund Warner my son plate, armor,
seal at arms. Dan Colvill £2O. Dorothie my niece,
Ursula Warner dau. of my son Edmund Warner,
Frances Girlinge dau. of Wm Girlinge Gent.
Elizabeth Warner wife of Robert Warner Gent;
Eliza Cocke dau. of Robert Buxston Esq.; Mistris
Saunders of Buxton, Eliz dau. of cozen Reynoldes,
Ann Spalding, Kath Hogge, Anne Manchepe,
widow, Frances Holbeck wife, Francis Asteley my
grandchild. Thos. Asteley my best horse. To Isaac


Asteley & Dorothy Asteley, children of the said Thos
silver spoons. Wm Girling Gent a gelding. Cousin
Robt Buxston Esq a cup. Cozen Calles wife 40 s.
Wife of John Reydon of Hacheston 20 s. Francis
Warner my grandchild. John Warner my grand-
child £IOO on condition he give up all right of any
of my lands bequeathed by this Will & to Robert
Warner my grandchild £IOO on the same condi-
tion after his said brother John is paid. Francis
Call son of Anthony Call 40 s. Furniture etc to
my 3 sons Edmund, Edward, & Henry equally.
Son in law Thos Colvill, Gent, £WP, My 2 sons
Edmund & Edward Ex’ors.
Witnessed by Thomas Wythe,
Thomas Stofer,
Robert Northall,
Edmund Jordane
EDMUND OF PARHAM
In the church at Otteley about six miles north of
Woodbridge there is a monument to John Gosnold,
Edmund Warner’s brother-in-law, who died in 1628,
setting forth that he was descended from the right
ancient and worthy families of Nawnton and Wing-
field, and was a gentleman usher to Queen Elizabeth
and King James, and afterwards to Charles I.
Of the family of Gosnold it is recorded that they
suffered much at the time of the Great Rebellion.
ANTHONIE WARNER
By his will dated 14th April 1601 Anthonie


Warner of Stradbrook, about 4 miles west of Crat-
field, devised his lands in Stradbrook and Wing-
field, about 3 miles north-west of Stradbrook, to
‘my nephew Edmund Warner’ and he makes refer-
ence to ‘my nephews Edward and Robert and my
daughter Dorothy, Francis my brother, Eliza Covell
my niece, Thomas Astley my kinsman, Augustin
Blowe my cousin’ (Will proved 25th May 1601,
Norwich, folio 289).
In the parish church at Parham is a memorial
stone, the earliest of the family there, to Edmund
and his wife Anne, reproduced below.
PARHAM CHURCH , SUFFOLK
TO EK TOY UNEYMATOZ EEEEMMEMENON HNEYMA EETI
HIC IN OCCIDUO CINE RE, USQ DUM SOL JUSTITIAE EXORIATUR
EXTINCTUS JACET EDMUNDUS WARNER
E GENEROS A IN HOC VIVINIO FAMILIA, ARMIGER
FIR SANE PIETATE EXIMIO VITAQ INTEGERRIMA
PRUDENS VRBANUS SOBVIUS
IN DILUTES LVITA ET PAUPERES HOSPITALIS
PATRIA SUAE COMMODIS GRAUITER INSERUIENS
VIRTUTIBUS PATRONUS
FITTS INIMICUS
FXOREM DUXIT ANN AM FILIAM ROBERTI GOSNOLD
DE OTELY ARMIGERI
QUAE SUB HOC ETIAM MARMORE, STELLAM
EXPECTAT MATUTINAM
OBIJT LLE 20 DIE SEPTEMBRIS ANNO i6iy
HAEC EUSDEM MENSIS 26 ANNOQ JESU SALF 1652
QUA NATURA PERMISERIT ORDINE SEQUEMER
TO EK TESSAPKOZ rEEEMMEMENON ZAPS EZTI *
• The Greek characters mean;
That which is begotten of the Spirit is Spirit
That which is begotten of the Flesh is Flesh
(Mem; Stone) x.


WILL OF EDWARD WARNER
Edward Warner Citizen and Merchant Taylor
of London.
Will dated 13th June, proved 31 October 1628
by Francis Warner the nephew (87 Barrington).
To the poor children of Christ’s Hospital £lO. To
the hospitals of Bridewell and Bethelem each >£so.
For a dinner at my funeral £lO. To the mercht
taylors £3O for a dinner, 6c to the clerk and
beedle each £5. £3O for a supper to my friends.
£6 1 or. each to the widows in the almshouses of
the mercht taylors. To the same Company my 3
gilt silver wine boles, to be new gilded and my
arms to be thereon engraven, £lO to the 5 following
prisons viz the Counters in the Poultry, Woodstreete,
Ludgate, Newgate, 6c the King’s bench in South-
wark. To my cousin Francis Ashley of Gray’s
Inn, Gent, for a ring, and the like sum to
Frances Ashley his mother. To my sister Ann
Warner, late wife of my brother Edmund Warner,
deceased, £lO 6c to my nephews Henry, John, 6c
Robert Warner £IOO each at 21. To another of
his sons Edward my godson £2OO at 21. To my
said brother’s daughters viz Ursula, Ann, Dorothie,
6c Mary Warner £IOO each at 21. To my brother
Henry Warner £IOO, 6c to his wife 6c to his
son Francis £SO at 21. To my brother in law
Tho Covell £lO 6c release him of his debt of
£6134. To Mary Savage, one of my late wife’s
sisters £5, 6c to Sarah Hall, another one, £lO. To


John Okins my late apprentice £2O. To my cousin
Robert Warner of Cratfield, co Suffolk, £2O, 5c to
his wife 40 s. To his brother Tho. Warner £2O,
5c to Edward Warner my godson, son of the said
Thos Warner £2O at 21, and to the dau of the said
Thos Warner, who lives with my sister Covell in
Suffolk £lO at 21. To Mary Curling, widow, late
wife of my cosin Wm Curling (vide Note) late of
Graie’s Inn deceased, 40J. To my loving friend
Robt Graye £$ for a supper to my friends Mr.
Elnor, Mr. Underhill, Mr. Mildmay, etc. To my
son in law Wm Lewis 5c Abigail his wife, the dau
of my late wife Margaret Warner deceased, £lO
each if they give up all claim to benefit by her will.
All residue to my nephew Francis Warner of the
Inner Temple, Gent, son 5c heir of my late brother
Edmund Warner, deceased, and appoint him sole
Ex’or. A monument to be erected to my memory
with my arms engraven thereon. To my sister
Eliz Covell, wife of Thos Covell £2O a year charged
on my lands at Parham, Hacheston, Eson, 5c Fram-
lingham, co Suffolk, 5c £lO 6s. a year for ever to
buy bread to be distributed to 40 poor people viz
12 in Parham, 12 in Hacheston, 5c 16 in Framling-
ham.
Note. —George Girling, son and heir of
William Girling of Stradbrook, Esq., deceased,
entered Gray’s Inn 21 Nov. 1627; and William
Girling of Stradbroke co. Suffolk, son of William


Girling of Gray’s Inn, deceased, on 11 Febr.
1632-3.
In the parish Church of St. Andrew Undershaft,
London, on the wall of the south aisle is a monu-
ment to Edward Warner bearing the following
inscription:
Edward Warner Esq a worthy Citizen and Merchant
of London , who departed this mortal life the 28 day of
October 1628, he was the second son of Francis Warner of
Parham in the County of Suffolk, Esquire by Mary his
second wife Laughter and Co-heire of Sir Edmund Rowse
of the said County , Knight which Frances Warner was
truelly and lineally descended from the ancient and generous
Family of the Warners who possessed a place of their own
name at Warners Hall in Great Waltham in the County
of Essex.
He dyed without issue and made Francis Warner of Par-
ham aforesaid Esquire his Nephew and next heire in blood
the Executor of his will and principall heire of his estate
who out of duty & affection to the memory of his dear Uncle
hath dedicated this Monument.
He had to his first wife Mary , daughter of Master Aylmer
of Risden in Hartfordshire , and to his second , Margaret
daughter of Master John Cheynie
St. Andrew Undershaft at the corner of Leaden-
hall Street and St. Mary Axe, is one of many
churches of great antiquity in the City of London,
in which are to be found numbers of memorial


tablets and brasses not of historic interest only but
of great artistic value as examples of the craftsman-
ship of their day. St. Andrew is especially rich in
these. The monument to Edward Warner is of
handsome design and workmanship, of alabaster and
black marble, with its armorial bearings well pre-
sented, the whole conveying a pleasing sense of
proportion.
Among the other monuments in the church is
one to John Stow, the historian of London, one of
great interest, and many others. The monument
of John Stow is visited annually by the Lord Mayor
and aldermen, and a new pen put in the hand of
the historian.
St. Andrew was rebuilt 400 years ago. Its Rector
to-day is the Rt. Rev. Bishop W. W. Perrin, D.D.,
to whom grateful acknowledgment is due for the
work of cleansing and restoration of the monuments
and memorials in the church which has but recently
been carried out.
FRANCIS OF MOULSET
Eldest son of Edmund. Will dated 20th August
1651. Gifts ‘to poor of Parham, Lancheston, Boy-
ton, Stradbrooke and Framlingham’; ‘my eldest
son John all my lands.’ Legacies to his daughters
Ann, Eliza, and Mary; directs that his sons Francys,
Edmond, and Robert be bound to merchants; to
his brother Edward * Doctor of Physicke, his best
• ‘Edward Warner’ (see Chapter VI).


horse, to his brother Robert his next best horse, ‘to
every of my own three sisters and to my niece Mary
Alston’ money to buy a ring; ‘my brother in law
John Rouse and my kinsman Francys Warner * of
London to be executors during minority of my son
John.’ Proved with a codicil 24th September 1658.
Mary Warner then dead. (541, Wooton.)
* Second son of Robert of Cratfield.


CHAPTER VI
Of Sir John Warner, Bart.—He and his Wife become Roman
Catholics—Charles IPs Reference to him—Sister Clare of Jesus
—English Order of ‘Poor Clares’, ‘Ladies of Pontoise’—
Sir John’s brother Francis drowned at Nieuport
Sir John is not to be confused with another of
the same name, who was born in Warwickshire
in 1628, and was educated and ordained a priest
in Spain. He became a confessor to James II and
died in Paris in 1692.
Of the John Warner with whom we are concerned
a very complete account has been preserved in an
old book entitled The Life of the Lady Warner of
Parham in Suffolk: ‘ln Religion called Sister Clare
of Jesus/ written by a Catholic gentleman. Lon-
don. Printed by Thos. Hales in the year 1693.
It is dedicated to the Queen, the wife of James 11,
who was still alive at the time.
It is of special value as containing evidence of
family relationship, and is of interest generally for
the story it tells of the times and its many references
to contemporary persons and events.
Sir John, who is described as ‘of the ancient family
of Warner of Warner’s Hall in Great Waltham,
Essex,’ was born on the 14th May 163 8. 1 He was
the eldest son of Francis of Moulsey. He married
Trevor, daughter of Sir Thomas Hanmer of
Hanmer Hall in Flint, Bart., formerly cup-bearer
to Charles I. Her mother was Elizabeth Baker,
of the ancient family of the Bakers of Whittingham


. ■ • •/
|j|||i« graver tc/lr w/a/.s//ze. waJ /tesr
an? tel/uz/ats/iee zo now 111111
LADY WARNER
(Sister Clare of Jesus)


Hall, Suffolk, a Maid of Honour to Queen Henrietta
Maria. Sir Thomas after the death of his first wife
lived at Hengrave Hall near Bury in Suffolk and
married his second wife Susan, daughter of Sir
Thomas Harvey, whose wife was Lady Penelope
Gage.
Sir John and his wife were married in London
by Dr. John Warner, Lord Bishop of Rochester,*
upon the 7th June 1659. *660 Sir John was
qualified as a Knight of the Royal Oak and was
created a Baronet by Charles II in the same year.
Sir John and his wife met for the first time as
spectators of the ‘splendid and magnificent’ funeral
of the Protector. They lived at first at his house
at Parham and had two daughters, Catherine born
23rd March 1660 and Susan born the 15th July
1663, but no sons. Both Sir John and his wife
subsequently became Roman Catholics, Lady
Warner first, and Sir John shortly afterwards, but
in the meanwhile, the times being troublous, they
determined to leave England. Rumour of their
intentions having got abroad. Sir John’s uncle, Dr.
Edward Warner,f one of the King’s physicians,
‘procured an order to stop them and petitioned the
King and Council for a grant of Sir John’s estate
to keep it out of the Jesuits’ hands, who, as was
• The Dr. John Warner, Bishop of Rochester, who officiated at the marriage of
Sir John, does not appear to be any relation. He was a son of Harman Warner of
London, Merchant Taylor. It is from him that the family of Lee-Warner of Wal-
singham Abbey, Norfolk, derive the name of Warner, his niece having married a Lee.
f Of Emanuel College, Cambridge; M.A., 1638; a Doctor of Medicine of Padua,
1648; Hon. Fellow, College of Physicians, 1664.


alleged, had persuaded him out of his estate as well
as his religion, and had been the principal authors
of his rash undertaking so imprudent a course of
life.* The King, who loved not importunities of
this kind, endeavoured to put him off with a jest,
telling him, Tf Sir John had a mind to make himself
one of God Almighty’s fools he must have patience,
and that if he would let him alone a little he himself
would soon be weary of the course he had under-
taken.’ The King’s jest is characteristic. Sir John,
however, before leaving England, had made a settle-
ment of his property upon his brother Francis.
In January 1667 Francis Warner went to Liege
‘to thank Sir John for the Estate he had given him,’
and in an attempt to return to England during a
storm he was wrecked on a sandbank at the entrance
of the harbour of Nieuport, and was drowned on the
3rd April of that year. His body was discovered
at low tide by fishermen, who cut off his fingers so
as to get the rings which he wore, and took them
to a jeweller for sale. In this way his body came
to be identified, and was buried by the Carthusians,
of which Order he at that time intended to become
a member. The death of Francis led to Sir John’s
returning to England to resettle the property upon
his second and then only brother Edmund, a mer-
chant of London. His arrival fell out about the
time that the Dutch designed to land in England,
and appeared upon the coasts of Suffolk about seven
miles from his house at Parham, whereupon some


malicious persons gave out that he was privately
come to England and lay hid in his house with a
great many Papists he had brought also with him
to join the Dutch.’
Acting upon this information the Earl of Suffolk,
Lord-Lieutenant of the County, had committed Sir
John’s steward to prison, and had searched his house,
and put a guard upon it.
‘Sir John [whose family as well as himself had
always been Loyal Sufferers for the King], being
more concerned to be accused of such black crimes
as Treason and Rebellion were than he would have
been for any other accusation they could have laid
to his charge,’ immediately addressed himself to the
Lord-Lieutenant, ‘who assured him that the former
orders he had given were rather to secure his house
from the rabble that threatened to pull it down than
out of the least suspicion or doubt of his Loyalty,
and ordered that the steward be put out of prison
and the guards discharged.’
Sir John then, having been received at Framling-
ham by his friends with great rejoicing, and the
‘ringing of bells,’ proceeded to London, resettled
his property, and then returned to the Conti-
nent where, at Graveling in the Church of the
English Poor Clares on the sth May 1667, he
became a member of that Order.
His two daughters and his sister Elizabeth fol-
lowed Sister Clare in taking the veil.
‘At Sir John’s decease the title became extinct.’


Among the records of the Convent of ‘The Eng-
lish Ladies of Pontoise/ near Paris, there is the follow-
ing entry in the handwriting of the Lady Abbess
Neville who died in 1689, a g e d 84: ‘A token to ye
Community from Mrs. Susan Warner when she
entered to be religious at Dunkirk which was no
less a concurring kindness from her worthy Father
Revd. Father Clare (Sir John Warner) and ye
consent and goodwill of his other daughter Dame
Agnes* Warner: 428 livres. 12 sous.’
* Apparently a mistake for Catherine, Sir John’s other daughter.


CHAPTER VII
Of Edmund Warner, Merchant of London—The ‘lnfant’
Edmund, and his sister Mary—The Warner Almshouse and
the ‘Boyton Trust’
Sir John’s brother Edmund (to whom he had
transferred his property as related in the last
chapter), a London merchant, died in 1696 in-
testate, leaving an only son Edmund, -an infant,
his heir-at-law, and his widow Ann, formerly
Ann Hawes, a daughter Mary, and two other
daughters.
At the time of his death he was possessed of con-
siderable property both freehold and copyhold,
including the manor of Hickling Hall and a capital
messuage called Parham House at Parham, the
Manor of Boyton and other property in Suffolk.
In order to satisfy charges upon the property
arising out of settlements which had been made
by Sir John, and to meet liabilities of Edmund’s
arising from losses in trade occasioned by the war
with France, it became necessary to seek the aid
of Parliament which led to the enactment of two
Acts, Nos. 18 and 43 Will. 111, ‘enabling Trustees
to sell part of the estate of Edmund Warner deceased
for the payment of his debts and for preserving the
rest for the benefit of his heirs.’ The Infant
Edmund died in 1721 unmarried without issue,
and his property became vested in his sister Mary
Warner. 1 By her will dated the 10th November


1724, proved the 24th April 1738, in which she
is described as of the Parish of St. James, Clerken-
well, Middlesex, after directing that she is to be
‘buried in the chancell of the Parish Church of
Parham in the County of Suffolk, being the burying
place of our family,’ she gives her Manor of Boyton
and all her lands in the parishes of Boyton, Strad-
brook, Denington and elsewhere in the county of
Suffolk to her Mother for life, and after her decease
to ‘her trusty and faithful friends Sir Edward Duke
of Benhall, Bart.; Sir John Rowe of Henham, Sir
William Barker of Ipswich, Bart.; Dudley North
of Glemham Hall, Esq.; Thomas Leman, and
Thomas Hawes of London upon trust, to build a
house or hospital at Boyton for the convenient
accommodation and reception of 12 poor old
decayed persons whereof 6 are to be men and 6
women, all of them being members of the Church
of England.’ Provision is made for the weekly
payment to each of these persons of ‘the sum of
five shillings into their own hands that they them-
selves may be better enabled to take care and provide
for their own respective maintenance without being
liable to so great impositions as often happens when
the case is otherwise,’ and provision is made for the
keeping up of the numbers of the inmates, for pref-
erence being given to ‘retainers or servants of our
family,’ also for the payment of £lO a year to the
minister of the Parish Church of Boyton as a reward
for his reading the Church prayers every Wednes-




day and Friday to the inmates, and a like sum of
jTio to the master of the school at Stradbrook for
teaching 10 poor children, and the sum of £5 at
Christmas to be divided between the poor families
of each of the Parishes of Denington and Parham
who shall not receive any monies from the Parish
rates. ‘Any surplus funds to be applied for the
discharging of such insolvent debtors within the
county of Suffolk whose respective debts shall not
exceed £lo.’ A sum of £250 is given to the
poor of St. Bartholomew’s Hospital and a like sum
to the Hospital for Incurables in Mind. Mary
Warner died unmarried in 1736 and is buried at
Parham.
In the Parish Church at Denington, a small
village about two miles north of Framlingham, on
the north wall a record of Mary Warner’s benefac-
tion to the parish is inscribed.
Since Mary Warner’s death, the income of the
Trust being much greater than the expenditure,
under various orders of the Court of Chancery the
surplus has been appropriated to the extension of
the Alms House, and to the increase in the numbers
of its inmates and their allowances.
The property comprised in the Charity includes
in addition to Government securities the perpetual
advowson of the Rectory of Boy ton St. Andrews,
the Manor and Quit Rents of Boyton, Boyton Wood,
and farm lands of over 1,200 acres at Boyton,
Stradbrook and elsewhere. 2


This chapter affords interesting evidence of a
custom of the period. ‘The maintenance of the
poor through the agency of local public authorities
was first attempted in Tudor and Stuart times. By
the time of Queen Anne’s reign these efforts had
come to be greatly supplemented by the establish-
ment of Almshouses through the private benefaction
of well-to-do people. The age of Anne was very
generous in foundations of this type.’ 3 The
Boyton Trust is a case in point, as also are the
benefactions under the Wills of Edmund Warner
and Francis Warner of Moulsey.
Another custom of the time of which the will of
Francis Warner of Moulsey (see Chapter V) sup-
plies evidence was the custom of apprenticing
younger sons to merchants, of which it has been
stated: Tt was one of England’s great advantages
in her struggles with the continent that the younger
sons of the landed gentry were willing, as the
cadets of the continental nobility were not, to mingle
in the common avocations of mankind and not to
“stand upon their gentry.” It was the close per-
sonal connection between the landed and trading
interests that gave stability and unity to the social
fabric of England which was lacking to the regime
in France with its sharp distinction of interest
between noblesse and bourgeoisie.’ 4
Trade and commerce, like adventure in the proper
sense of the term, were the natural outlet for the
energies of younger sons. It was not till a later


date, and then for a relatively limited time, that
under Hanoverian influences the snobbish idea that
commerce was beneath the dignity of one of gentle
birth came to be entertained.


CHAPTER VIII
‘The Essex Ring’—The Claim of the ‘Warner Ring’ and the
‘Thynne’ to be the ‘Essex Ring’ considered, and the Claim
of the ‘Warner Ring’ to be the one given to Elizabeth by
Mary Queen of Scots
Here it is proposed to relate the story of the
great family heirloom, the ‘Essex Ring,’ a
subject of great historical interest.
There are two rings known respectively as the
‘Warner Ring’ and the ‘Thynne Ring’ in respect
of both of which it is claimed that it is the identical
ring which, as the old story goes, was given to the
Earl of Essex by Queen Elizabeth with a promise
that, should he ever be in extreme peril and should
send her the ring, she would protect him; how Essex
in the Tower of London under sentence of death,
sent the ring to the Queen, but it miscarried, falling
by mistake into the hands of the Countess of
Nottingham instead of those of her sister Lady
Scroope, to whom Essex had sent it, and that the
Countess, acting under the influence of her husband,
then Lord High Admiral of England, and an enemy
of Essex, instead of delivering the ring to the Queen,
kept it. The story goes on to tell how when the
Countess was on her death-bed she sent a message
to the Queen, begging her to come to her as she
had a secret for her ears only, and that she could
not die in peace without revealing it, and how the
Queen, when told, was so enraged that ‘she shook


the dying Countess on her bed, saying, “God may
forgive you, but I never can,” and that the Queen
died within a month of a broken heart.’
This is the story upon which generations of
Englishmen have been brought up. Upon them
the story and the scene of the Countess’s death has
made an indelible impression.
The story of the two rings is as follows:
The Warner Ring was given by Charles I to Sir
Thomas Warner in 1629 on the occasion of his
being knighted at Hampton Court ‘for his energetic
activities in extending His Majesty’s dominions in
America.’ From him it descended to his son, and
so on from father to son as an heirloom until it came
to Charles William Warner, C.8., Attorney-General
of Trinidad, from whose house in Port of Spain it
was stolen in the year 1863.
It has always been a treasured tradition of the
family that the ring was the ‘Essex Ring,’ and it is
in reference to it that the family motto ‘Du Roi je
le tiens’ is believed to have been adopted.
Two hundred years ago, in the Will of Colonel
Edward Warner of Antigua, great-grandson of Sir
Thomas, dated December 1731, the ring is
described as ‘the diamond ring in the shape of a
heart supposed to be that which was given by Queen
Elizabeth to the Earl of Essex’; and Ashton Warner,
brother of Colonel Edward Warner, in his will dated
July 1750 devises as follows: ‘the diamond ring I
have commonly called Queen Elizabeth’s ring and


my great Bible, shall go to my son Thomas and
descend for ever to my heirs-at-law as heirlooms.'
The Thynne Ring is said to have descended from
Lady Frances Devereux, the daughter of the Earl
of Essex, in unbroken succession in the female line
till it came to Louisa, daughter of John, Earl of
Granville, who married Thomas Thynne, second
Viscount Weymouth.
In comparing the history of the two rings the
Warner ring clearly has the advantage of origin.
It came to the family direct from Charles I, to whom
in the ordinary course of succession it would have
come through James I from Elizabeth.
In the case oj the Thynne ring the question is, from
whom did Lady Frances acquire it; how did it get
into the family?
The Lives and Letters of the Devereux by Captain
Walter Bourchier Devereux, R.N., published in
1853, fr° m which an answer might have been
expected, is silent upon the point, the author seem-
ing to discredit the idea that the family ring ever
belonged to Lady Frances, as he makes a point of
the fact that in ‘the very long curious and minute
will of Lady Frances, afterwards Duchess of Somer-
set, no mention is made of any such ring’: and
in referring to the ring as being in the possession
of the Rev. Lord John Thynne of Hamnes in Bed-
fordshire, he says: ‘Whether it be the ring or not
it is both as a work of art and as an historical relic
of great value and of high interest.'


Does it not seem inconceivable that, if Lady
Frances owned a ring of such historic value and
artistic merit, she could possibly have failed to make
reference to it in a will of the character described?
If Captain Devereux’s conclusion is right, and
the ring did not come through Lady Frances, the
whole foundation for the claim goes.
If he is wrong, and the ring did come through
Lady Frances, the question from whom she obtained
it still remains unanswered.
Among many letters upon the subject that have
appeared in the Press of late years there has been
a suggestion that ‘the ring must have come through
a member of the Nottingham family or even from
the Queen herself; but this is the merest surmise,
and there is no evidence to support either suggestion.
Is not the only fair conclusion that the Thynne
ring, while undoubtedly a ring of the period, and
such as may well have come into the possession of
a family of the position of the Devereux, has no
claim whatsoever to identity with the Essex ring?
Upon the subject of the Ring Episode, as the old
story has been called, modern historians are divided
in opinion, some discrediting it as lacking historical
foundation, others inclining to accept it. The
former lay stress upon the fact that its first appear-
ance in print, about 1650, was in a publication
called The History oj the Queen and her Favourits
by a ‘Person of Quality,’ which they discredit as
being of no historical value and quite unreliable.


The author of The hives and Letters of the
Devereux, on the other hand, after a careful
examination of all the authorities, inclines to accept
the story as true.
As will be seen, there is older and better authority
for the acceptance of this view than the source
selected for condemnation by those who are of a
different opinion.
The history of the story —which, wherever told,
is always the same as related here—is as follows:
i. It is first heard of as being told to Prince
Maurice of Nassau, the son of William the Silent,
by Sir Dudley Carlton, afterwards Lord Dorchester,
who was Ambassador at Nassau during the reign
of James I.
2. It is next referred to in an early pamphlet of
Lord Clarendon’s entitled Disparity between the Lari
of Essex and the Duke of Buckingham , written while
Lord Clarendon was still at Magdalen College,
Oxford, of which he became a member in 1621.
3. It appears later in Paris in 1688 in A
Memorandum to serve for a History of Holland ,
written by Mr. Aubrey de Maurier, as having been
told by Prince Maurice to his father, and by his
father to him.
Surely evidence originating from such a source as
the word of a British Ambassador upon such a
subject is not to be lightly discredited.
In any attempt to form an opinion upon the
subject, the following should be borne in mind:


THE WARNER RING
THE THYNNE RING


(a) Queen Elizabeth died within a month of Lady
Nottingham’s death.
(b) After the warrant for Essex’s execution was
signed by the Queen, she delayed its
being carried out, and it was only after
some days had passed without any petition
coming from Essex that she gave the final
order.
(c) The historian Camden expresses it as his
opinion that Elizabeth’s chief reason for
allowing the Earl to be executed was his
supposed pride and obstinacy in not apply-
ing to her for mercy.
Old beliefs die hard. Does not the verdict of
those who do not accept the story amount at most
to but one of 'Not proven,’ a verdict that might as
well be applied to no small part of what is accepted
as history?
No contemporary description or drawing of the
Essex Ring exists, with which to compare the
Thynne and the Warner rings, which differ totally
in kind and appearance. The former is a sardonyx
cameo upon which is carved a portrait of Queen
Elizabeth in profile, the latter is a rose diamond in
the shape of a heart. Woodcuts of the two rings
are here reproduced, and are also shown in Finger
Ring Lore by W. Jones, F.S.A., published by Chatto
and Windus in 1898, in the Lives and Letters oj
the Devereux, and in other publications.
The recent history of the Thynne ring is that it


was sold at Christie’s on the 18th May 19 11 at the
sale of the Thynne heirlooms when it was bought
by Duveen Bros.
It was sold again at Christie’s on the 12th July
1927 and was bought by Mr. Ernest S. Macower,
who subsequently presented it to Westminster
Abbey, where it now occupies a position of honour
upon Queen Elizabeth’s monument in Henry Vll’s
chapel.
The question necessarily arises, how does it come
about that the Abbey authorities were so ill advised
as to accept for such distinction an object of so
doubtful a history? They certainly would not
knowingly be parties to allowing the Abbey to be
used as a repository of unreliable historical exhibits.
Of the Warner ring no trace has been found
since its loss in 1863, when it was stolen from Mr.
Warner’s house in Trinidad during his wife’s tem-
porary residence in England, out of an escritoire
in which he kept small articles of personal value.
His letter breaking the news to his wife gives some
idea of his great distress at the loss of the historic
family heirloom.
But the Warner ring claims to be of historical
value upon quite another ground.
When in 1564 Mary Queen of Scots married
Darnley she sent Elizabeth, ‘her cousin of England,’
a diamond ring in the form of a heart as a present
in token of the event, and of her affection.
The ring was accompanied by some Latin lines


by George Buchanan, the eminent Scottish scholar
of the day.
These lines are included in the Poemata of
Buchanan, a small volume published in 1641, and
together with the introductory words which pre-
cede them, are printed here in the original Latin
with a translation. 1
GEORGE BUCHANAN
POEMATA 1641
P 393 Loquitur Adamas in cordis efugium
sculptus , quem Maria Elizabethae
Angl. misit.
Quod te jampridem fruitur , vid'et ac amat abiens
Haec pignus cordis gemma et imago mei est
Non est Candidior , non est haec purior illi
Quam vis dura magis, non mage firma tamen
This gem behold the emblem of my heart
From which my cousin's image ne'er shall part ,
Clear in its lustre , spotless does it shine ,
’Tis clear and spotless as this heart of mine.
What tho’ the stone a greater hardness wears
Superior firmness still the figure bears.
Buchanan’s lines must strike an impartial critic
as a most accurate description of the Warner ring.
Is it possible to conceive words more aptly suited
to describe ‘a diamond in the shape of a heart,’ the
accepted description of the Warner ring?
Buchanan’s reference to the hardness of the stone


on the one hand and the constancy of the emblem
on the other excludes any other interpretation.
In connection with the tradition of the Warner
family that their ring was the one given by Mary
to Elizabeth, it is related that the descendants of
Mary’s French and Scotch servants in the neigh-
bourhood of Craigmillar Castle near Edinburgh,
where Mary was at one time a prisoner, used to
request Colonel Edward Warner’s wife, whose habit
it was to wear it, ‘to let them kiss their bonny
Queen’s ring.’ The date must have been about
the very early part of the last century.


HhHMb 1 %a ’ jSsS^^^
tigySgrit,, "• 5 '4. 'flfe «... I'HK: ’ ,v ? .■'■-■
||?|IS; r l|rjB *— w*f Jp 3
TliHrafffP , ■’■ jEHL jf Hi . :.-.‘VV'.^$'>
"'iSS* ? f Jlv •-rtfciEaBfei
JOSEPH WARNER, F.R.S.


CHAPTER IX
JOSEPH WARNER, F.R.S. , 1717-1801
Eminent Surgeon. Second son of Ashton
Warner of Antigua, born 16th December 1717,
educated at Westminster. In 1734 he was appren-
ticed for seven years to Samuel Sharpe, surgeon of
Guy’s Hospital. In 1745 he volunteered to accom-
pany the expedition under the Duke of Cumberland
to suppress the rebellion in Scotland, was wounded
at the Battle of Culloden, 'the ’4s’ as it came to be
called, and in February of the next year he was
recalled to London and appointed Surgeon to Guy’s
Hospital. In 1750 he was Master of the Corpora-
tion of Surgeons and was the first member of the
College of Surgeons, founded in that year. He
lived at 35 Hatton Street, Hatton Garden, and was
one of the three leading surgeons of his day. From
his father he inherited the sugar plantations ‘Hatton
Garden’ in Dominica and ‘Clarke’s Hill’ in Antigua,
and appears to have been a man of considerable
substance. In 1786 he settled ‘Clarke’s Hill’ on
his eldest son William and his heirs.
By his will (Abercrombie, 562) he directs that he
is to be buried in ‘the new burial ground of St.
Andrews Holborn in Gray’s Inn Lane.’ He died
at his house in Hatton Street on the 24th July 1801.
His picture by Samuel Medley is in the possession
of the Royal College of Surgeons.


WILLIAM WARNER
In the deed of settlement of 1786, William
Warner is described as ‘William Warner, late of
Dominica, now residing in Devonshire Street near
Queen Square, eldest son and heir apparent of
Joseph Warner the elder.’ William’s brother Joseph
is described as ‘Joseph Warner the younger of
Hatton Street, Esq. (the youngest son of Joseph
Warner the elder),’ and his sister Elizabeth is
described as ‘Elizabeth Thornton, wife of Robert
Thornton of Hatton Street, only daughter now
living of Joseph Warner the elder.’
In his will William Warner is described as residing
in Berners Street, London. From these and other
documentary evidence of the time it appears that
by the middle of the eighteenth century Joseph
Warner’s family, like many other descendants of
Sir Thomas Warner in the West Indies, had settled
in England, making it their home and leaving
their West Indian property, except for occasional
visits, to the care of agents. Among those to
whom compensation for slaves was paid there
appears in the records of the House of Commons
the following:
£ s. d.
1836 Samuel Warner
do
339 slaves 1832 9 7
349 » 2 334 18 7
1837 William Shand
and
Samuel Shand
246 „ 3674 13 3


Samuel Warner was a nephew of Joseph Warner,
and President of the Council of Antigua, 1831-5.
Rodie Charles Shand and William Shand of Liver-
pool were related to the Warners by marriage.
William Warner’s widow Mildred lived after her
husband’s death at Ralf House, Eltham, and died
there. It was at Eltham that William Warner’s
great-uncle, Colonel Edward Warner, who died in
1732, settled when he came to reside in England.
William Warner’s issue:
Joseph Thomas, eldest son, was killed on board
the West India Packet Boat Duke of Marlborough
in action with a French Privateer on 25 th April
1804. By his will, proved 13th May of that year,
he left all his property to his mother for life and
after her death his real estate to his brother Edward,
and his sister Jane. His executors were Thomas
Norbury Kirby, of Antigua, and Brooke Taylor
Ottley, Merchant of Dublin.
William, 3rd son, died an infant.
Ashton, 4th son. Midshipman on Latine frigate.
Captain Skyner: lost on the coast of Holland with
all her company in 1799.
In the burial ground of St. Andrew’s, Holborn,
in Gray’s Inn Road, is the family vault with monu-
mental inscriptions to those buried there, among
whom are included Joseph Warner the elder and
his wife, William his son and his wife, Charles
Warner’s first wife and many other members of
the family.


COLONEL EDWARD WARNER
‘Edward Warner, second son of William Warner,
commenced his career very early in life as Secretary
to his Uncle, General Sir Adam Williamson, whom
he accompanied to his command in Jamaica. He
entered the Army in 1798 and after serving in
the Mediterranean, at the express desire of the
Prince of Wales received a Lieutenancy in the
10th Hussars, and in 1803 acted as Aide-de-Camp
to the Earl of Harrington on the London Staff.
In 1805 he served in the West Indies as Major of
Brigade and Aide-de-Camp to that distinguished
officer Sir Charles Shipley, and was conspicuous
for his gallant conduct at the capture of the French
Colonies of Martinique and Guadaloupe, for which
he was lately honoured with a Military Medal and
Clasp. In 1812 he was promoted to a Majority in
the 26th Regiment of Cameronians, but on the
reduction in 1814 was placed on half-pay. In 1824
he was appointed Major of Brigade of the forces
in Trinidad, and continued to hold that command
until 1827. From 1830 to 1833 he was employed
on the Staff of the Army as Assistant Royal Engi-
neer. ’ 1 The date of his Colonelcy is 28 th J une 1838.
He was known among his friends as ‘Handsome
Ned,’ and later on also as ‘Warming-pan Warner’;
that article of domestic use, a silver one, being the
form of gift he chose for presentation to the Prince
Regent, the Hon. Colonel of his regiment, on the
occasion of his marriage.


In 1807 he obtained a grant from the Crown of
640 acres of land in Trinidad which he developed
as a sugar plantation at a cost of over £1 5,000.
Owing to the rapid fall of the price of sugar the
investment turned out a disastrous one.
He died in London on the 22nd August 1849.
He married Katherine Jane, eldest daughter of
Major-General Sir Charles Shipley.
The following story was related to the author by
his father, Charles Warner, as having been told him
by his father, Colonel Warner. When a subaltern
in the 10th Hussars he was present at a Review in
France when Napoleon, referring to a display of
cavalry which had just taken place, out of courtesy
to a young officer of the same arm, said to him,
‘Well, what do you think of them?’ ‘Fine, Sire,
very fine,’ said Warner. ‘Yes, yes,’ said Napoleon,
‘but in comparison with your own?’ ‘Oh, we would
gallop over them,’ was the reply.
The occasion of this incident cannot be fixed with
any certainty. Between the Treaty of Amiens in
March 1802 and the Declaration of War by Great
Britain on 18th May 1803 numbers of reviews, and
receptions of Ambassadors and Foreign Ministers,
were held by Napoleon, upon which occasions junior
staff officers would be present. It has not been
found possible to fix the time and place, or do more
than limit the period between the dates stated.
Napoleon’s habit of taking notice of junior officers
is well known.


Sir Charles Shipley was a distinguished officer.
His services are recorded in the Dictionary oj
National Biography. He accompanied Sir Ralph
Woodford to Trinidad in command of the Royal
Engineers when the Spaniards surrendered the
island on 17th February 1797. In 1805 he was
appointed Brigadier-General to the Forces serving
in the West Indies, and received the thanks of both
Houses of Parliament, 1813; Governor of Grenada,
where he died in November 1815.
NOTE re SIR CHARLES SHIPLEY
‘Sir Charles Shipley married Mary, daughter of
James Teale, Esq., and grand-daughter of Hester
Aucher, daughter of Sir Anthony Aucher, Bart.,
of Bishopsbourne; and on the death of her brother,
Sir Hewitt Aucher, the last baronet, co-heir with
his elder sister Elizabeth and representative of that
very ancient family. (See Burke's Extinct Baronet-
age.) Sir Charles Shipley himself represented the
family of Maddox (Bart.), of Wormley, Herts,
through his mother Jane Rudyerd (an heiress). Sir
Charles left at his decease three daughters and
co-heirs: Katherine Jane, widow of Col. Edward
Warner: Augusta Mary, married James Alexander
Manning, Esq., and has an only child Mary Erskine
Shipley Manning: Elizabeth Cole, married Henry
Earl of Buchan and died in 1828. The two elder
of these ladies and Lord Cardross the heir of the


youngest are now representatives of three of the
oldest families in England; Aucher, Rudyerd and
Maddox.’ 2
‘The name Aucher is derived from Ealcher or
Aucher, first Earl of Kent, who had the title of
Duke from his being entrusted with the military
power of the country; eminent in history for his
bravery against the Danes, 853.’ 3
The name appears in the Roll of Caerlaverock
as Fitz-Auger.
Jane Rudyerd’s only brother, Captain Benjamin
Rudyerd, of West Woodhay, Berks, was aide-de-
camp to Lord Stair at Dettingen. Upon his death
his sister became sole heiress of the families of
Maddox and Rudyerd.
Benjamin Rudyerd is celebrated by Smollett in
the Memoirs of A Lady of Quality as ‘Mr. R.’, and
is referred to by Thomas Carlyle thus: ‘Then there
is the silver-toned Sir Benjamin Rudyerd (from
Wilton), an elegant young gentleman about
Town; on whom Ben Johnson has congratulatory
epigrams; most strange to hear gospel-texts and
mellifluous Puritanic preaching from a young
gentleman with that cut of beard, in ruffs of that
quality.’ ‘How serious is the face of young Sir
Benjamin; yet with delicate smiles on occasion.’
‘Trumpet-tongued Sir Benjamin still on the side of
the court.’ 4
In 1643 Sir Benjamin Rudyerd was one of the
Commissioners of Plantations appointed under the


Earl of Warwick as Governor-in-Chief. Among
the others were John Pym and Oliver Cromwell.
The name appears in Domesday Book.
In the Cloisters of Canterbury Cathedral:
Sacred to the Memory of
DAME MART SHIPLEY
Wife of General Sir Charles Shipley who died at his
government of Grenada , Nov. 30 1813 , aged 38. And
grand-daughter of Ralph Blomer , D.D., Chaplain to
Charles If and Canon of this Cathedral, She died at
Boulogne sur Mer August 6th 1820 , aged 5 8 , and was
re-interred in this Cloister Sep. 18th 1831.
This stone is placed in grateful and affectionate Memory of
her revered parents hy their daughter Catherine Jane Warner
a.d. iB6O
PELHAM FRANCIS WARNER
Fourth son of Charles Warner by his second
marriage. Educated at Rugby and Oriel College,
Oxford. An acknowledged authority upon the
great national game of Cricket, and identified with
all that is best in it. An ardent believer in the
moral value of the game, a first-class bat and most
efficient captain. Has ‘played the game’ in every
sense all over the world. In 1903-4 and again in
19 11-12 captained England in Australia, ‘recover-
ing the Ashes’ on both occasions.
Author of Cricket in Many Climes , and many
other publications upon the game. Served at War
Office during the War.


1 \ -Jr %
\ I # ■ ■''&!?€Ml
-A'"’** > fi ■ " ff ~ ' a " w W{*mi /
y
00KSpf*'"' I i .. *** ■'
® Jr <' A . -jf
' ' 4 *
SIR THOMAS WARNER’S BANNER
(In the possession of the New Zealand branch of the family)


DANIEL FRANCIS WARNER, 1795-1870
(Pedigree, Part lI—A, p. 159)
He was the eldest son of Thomas Warner and
Dorothy Ffrye, born on the 9th June 1795,
educated at Magdalen College, Oxford, Vicar of
Hoo St, Warburg, Kent, and Canon of Rochester.
He was the genealogist and historian of the family.
To him subsequent generations are indebted for
having brought the pedigree up to his own time,
1838, at the Heralds’ College. The voluminous
notebooks which he has left behind him are a
mine of information upon family history and a
model of their kind, every statement of fact being
supported by the authority upon which it is made.
To one principal source of information he refers
as follows: ‘The memoranda inserted in our Family
Bibles which have been continued with great exact-
ness ever since the time of Ashton Warner give a
very detailed account of his immediate family and
their descendants.’
The Ashton Warner referred to was the great-
grandfather of the memorialist, Attorney-General
of the Leeward Islands and a man of high character
and distinction. The Bible is the ‘Great Bible’
bequeathed by him together with the Essex Ring
as an heirloom to his son Thomas (see Chapter VIII).
Among other heirlooms and family possessions there
had come into the possession of Daniel Francis
Warner, as the member of the family interested in
127 K


such things, a banneret or flag, bearing the family
arms, which was reputed to have belonged to Sir
Thomas Warner. Of the origin of this flag, there
is no actual evidence, but it has recently been
submitted by the author to experts in London for
examination, it having been entrusted to him by
the owners, for the purpose. The opinion expressed
is that the fabric is of silk of the early seventeenth
century, possibly earlier, which seems to have been
treated with wax as a preservative, and that its
general appearance entirely supports the tradition
of its antiquity.
Daniel Francis Warner’s papers and records with
his heirlooms passed upon his death in 1870 to
his son Ashton, and are now in New Zealand, where
that branch of the family is established.
JOSEPH WARNER
Second son of Joseph Warner, F.R.S. (Pedigree,
Part 11-B), owner of sugar plantations in St. Vincent,
lived in Gower Street, Bloomsbury. On a voyage
to St. Vincent in 1795 with his wife and daughters
the ship was captured and taken into Guadaloupe,
then in the hands of Victor Hugues, the com-
missary in the West Indies of the French Revolu-
tionary Government. The passengers were released
and allowed to proceed to St. Vincent.
It is through Richard, second son of Joseph, that
the connection with the Protector’s family occurs,
Richard’s second wife, Emma Bridget, being the


daughter of Elizabeth Oliveria Russell, the daughter
of Oliver Cromwell, the last male descendant of
Henry Cromwell, the Protector's son.
There is a story in the family to the effect that
upon the marriage of Thomas Russell it was pro-
posed that he should assume the name of Cromwell,
but that objection came from the King, who said,
‘ No, No, No more Cromwells.'
Ashton Cromwell Warner and Wynyard
Huddleston Warner, the eldest and third sons
of Captain Richard Warner, served with distinction
throughout the Mutiny. (Pedigree, Part 11-B,
p. 162.)
Ashton Cromwell of the East India Company
Service; in the 7th Light Cavalry, in the defence of
Lucknow; A.D.C. to General Walpole; twice men-
tioned in despatches. Retired in 1859 as Major,
20th Hussars; Chief Constable of Bedfordshire.
Wynyard Huddleston, 101 st Royal Bengal
Lancers, Siege of Delhi, Relief of Lucknow, his
brother Ashton being among the relieved. In
Army List of 1881 he is recorded as ‘One of Six
Captains of Invalids’ at Chelsea Hospital, and ‘Cap-
tain Half-Pay.’


CHAPTER X
CHARLES WILLIAM WARNER
Charles William Warner was born at sea on
the 19th October 1805, between England and
Barbados, where his grandfather, Colonel Sir
Charles Shipley, was then in command of the Royal
Engineers, and resided at Shot Hall. His childhood
was spent in England and he was educated at Eton.
At the age of 24 he arrived in Trinidad with his
wife, whom he had recently married, on a visit to
his cousin Ashton Warner, then Chief Justice of
the Colony.
Attracted by local conditions and the prospects
at the Bar, he practised for some time as a licensed
advocate before returning to England and being
called to the Bar by Lincoln’s Inn in 1840.
In 1841 he became Solicitor-General and in 1844
Attorney-General. In 1849 a g a i n in 1868 he
was offered the Chief Justiceship, which he declined,
and continued as Attorney-General until 1870. In
1859 the honour of Companionship of The Bath
was conferred upon him, he having declined a
Knighthood in 1857.
In The History of Trinidad by Lionel Fraser,
written many years after, the author refers to the
position occupied by Mr. Warner during the event-
ful years of his official career in the following terms:
Tn the History of Trinidad from 1797 to 1840


lilHl'"
' St .'
CHARLES WILLIAM WARNER, ABOUT 1842


there are but two prominent figures, Picton and
Sir Ralph Woodford: all others are insignificant
in comparison, but in that latter year another actor
appears upon the stage who in a short time will
monopolize the attention of the student of that His-
tory, so completely will he fill the canvas upon which
it is portrayed. Governor will succeed Gover-
nor, and each will play his part more or less skilfully,
but he, the real Governor, the master mind, will
be there, like Warwick, or Wolsey, or Richelieu,
nominally the adviser, really the ruler. For five-
and-twenty years he held absolute sway.’
In 1870, finding that the policy of the Governor
of the day, Sir Arthur Gordon, afterwards Lord
Stanmore, was at variance with his own great object,
which had always been to make Trinidad an Eng-
lish Colony not in name but in fact, he resigned the
Attorney-Generalship, and thereafter devoted him-
self to his very considerable private practice at the
Bar. ,
The following extract from The Port of Spain
Gazette , the leading newspaper of the Colony at
the time of Mr. Warner’s death, expresses the public
esteem and respect in which he was held:
‘Of Mr. Warner’s ability as an advocate, of his
brilliancy as an orator, of his fame as a special
pleader we need say nothing, they are not only
known throughout the length and breadth of this
colony, but throughout the West Indies and far
beyond. As the eldest member of the local Bar


he was looked up to with just pride and veneration
by the whole profession. The list of Mr. Warner’s
public services is a long and an important one, cover-
ing as it does, every subject of importance connected
with the progress and prosperity of the colony during
the past half-century. We will select but two of
these subjects. Immigration and Education, and
these, every one will readily admit, have been the
leading factors during the past forty years. In
those dark days in the early years of ‘the forties’
when almost every one in the colony had lost heart
and hope, Charles Warner stands boldly out as the
ever-hopeful, eloquent, we might almost say fervent,
apostle of a new faith—a faith which, if not
originated by him, had in him its most devoted
adherent, and its warmest advocate. As the great
English statesman proposed to redress the balance
of the old world by calling the new world into
independent existence, so the new faith had for
its cardinal point the re-establishment of the pros-
perity of these Western Colonies by importing
labourers from among the teeming millions of the
East. Now that the great problem has been solved,
and most successfully solved, we are apt to under-
value the manful struggles of those early supporters
of that system of Coolie Immigration which not
only saved the Colony from absolute collapse and
ruin at the time, but which has been the chief factor
in its subsequent rapid progress and development.
For his services in this connection alone the name


■ *w
£ ■ " V - r
,
.
■ ■*
jlf
:V \*j... • *■ .■•:••. * .'■’ i?. flthbBp j -y* / A. 2
v . 1 , JL wJi iV. *
Sk X ®kt* i\\ Ofi <3%£L 1 4A \\ m
"% >. \ mKHi,
■’'*' 4 Tk JR-
JL \ ; .-- smS 1 *
: |flL jJHl * v .1-M 1 ,
# A I &. :^00^wi’ mSBSm®% mm
''' 1 * .' f | gKfgfm I W'5 .
*.:;,i- . i; • ■ i Wi** --' - .sMBtHB&SSSk.. Mm**,
:3i ' *■ -»T *
t - Jgrr.i;, mH““
CHARLES WILLIAM WARNER, C.8., IN LATER LIFE


of Charles Warner deserves to be gratefully
remembered by every one interested in the colony/
After the great battle between Exeter Hall and
the Anti-Slavery Society on the one hand and Lord
Harris and his Attorney-General on the other, it
fell to the latter to draft the legislation necessary to
introduce the new system. The absolute fairness
and sense of justice of the provisions, for regulating
the relations between planter and immigrant, were
such as to earn the commendation of Sir William
Harcourt, when, many years later, in dealing with
the affairs of another colony, he referred to the
Trinidad legislation as ‘that humane ordinance.’
After referring to Mr. Warner’s great services in
the cause of education, both primary and secondary,
the newspaper quoted continues:
‘His own splendid attainments, and the respect
and attention they commanded, in the power and
influence they gave him among every section of
the community were an ever-present stimulus and
bright example to the youth of the country, and
contributed in no small degree to awaken a keener
sense of the great advantage of education.’
Some idea of the value of his influence may be
gathered from an address delivered by Mr. Warner to
The Young Men’s Christian Association in 1873 u P on
‘The Fear of Death’ (reproduced in Appendix A).
To many in this country
How little ye know of England
Who only England know,


it will corners a surprise that an address of such
scholarly charm and attraction should emanate from
so remote a corner of Empire, and from one who, save
for occasional visits to England, spent his life far away
from the centres of literary thought. But it must be
realized that he was ever a great reader, keeping up
his knowledge of the classics and reading Pindar and
Thucydides in the original Greek almost to the last,
while at the same time keeping in intimate touch with
general literature and the great questions of the day.
Upon his retirement from office in 1870 he was
the recipient from his admirers in London of a
handsome gold cup and salver bearing the following
inscription:
PRESENTED
TO
CHARLES WILLIAM WARNER
ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF TRINIDAD
IN TESTIMONY OF THEIR APPRECIATION
OF HIS ZEAL AND TALENT
IN PROMOTING
THE INTEREST OF THAT COLONY
BY THOSE WHOSE NAMES ARE HEREON INSCRIBED
William F. Burnley & Co.
Lord Harris
Cavan Lubbock & Co.
William Burnley Hume
Andre Knox
Joseph Marryat Sons
James Richardson & Co.
Charles Tennant Sons & Co.
iByo


These names, representative of the great sugar
interests of the West Indies, recall the memory of
Sir Nevile Lubbock, so closely associated with
Mr. Joseph Chamberlain in his successful efforts
to secure the abolition of the continental sugar
bounties which operated to the great prejudice of
the West Indies.
To the end of his days Mr. Warner’s venerable
form was still often to be seen in the Courts.
In private life Mr. Warner was a great lover of
flowers, nowhere happier than in the beautiful
garden which he had laid out and planted himself
round about his house. There, in the early
mornings and late afternoons—the cool hours of
the tropical day—he was to be found among his
flowers and in the shade of the great trees of his
own growth, accompanied on occasion by some
intimate friend or privileged client seeking his
counsel and advice.
No one of any distinction in England ever
visited the colony without an introduction to Mr.
Warner, and without enjoying the proverbial West
Indian hospitality which it was his pleasure to
extend, but
While he feasted all the great
He ne’er forgot the small.
Mr. Warner was a fine type of the old school,
of great distinction in appearance, and of rare
courtesy to all ; welcome to the company of old
and young alike. To have been in close and in-


timate association with him was indeed a privilege,
and a happy memory.
Anthony Froude visited Trinidad in 1887 about
a month before Mr. Warner’s death.
In The TLngltsh in the West Indies he speaks of
the family as ‘among the oldest of the West Indian
families, distinguished through many generations
not the least in their living chief and representative,
Charles Warner, who, in the highest ministerial
offices, had steered Trinidad through the trying
times which followed the abolition of slavery.’
Then, after describing his meeting with Mr.
Warner, he proceeds:
‘No statesman had done better practical work
than he, or work which had borne better fruit,
could it be allowed to ripen. But for him, Trinidad
would have been a wilderness, savage as when
Columbus found the Caribs there. He belonged
to a race that make empires, as the orators lose
them, who do things and do not talk about them,
who build and do not cast down, who reverence
ancient habits and institutions as the organic func-
tions of corporate national character. A Tory of
Tories, who nevertheless recognized that Toryism
itself was passing away under the universal solvent,
and had ceased to be a faith which would be believed
in as a guide to conduct,’ and he concludes: ‘To
have seen and spoken with such a man was worth
a voyage round the globe.’


APPENDIX A
THE FEAR OF DEATH
AN ADDRESS DELIVERED BY
CHARLES W. WARNER, Esq., C.B.
BEFORE THE
Trinidad Young Men’s Christian Association
On the 2 ist January 1873
The subject on which I propose to address you is
the Fear of Death.
The subject, although it has a sad sound, need not
be treated in a spirit of sadness.
I must necessarily deal with it imperfectly, not merely
because under.no circumstances could I be equal to it,
but because many of the higher and religious considera-
tions which belong to the question may not with pro-
priety be touched in a mixed assembly like ours. But
there are, on the other hand, considerations, which lie
beyond the limits of Theology, or which are the common
property of the Study and the Pulpit, and these con-
siderations may justify the attempt to give shape and
consistency to those thoughts of death, which follow us
into the business of life and break the flow of our most
intense enjoyment with a sigh.
‘lt is as natural to die as to be born,’ says Lord Bacon
in his essay on Death which begins with the words,
‘Men fear death as children fear to go into the dark.’
And if this be so, is it not natural to inquire what Death
means; what is the dark, into which we ‘grown children*
fear to go? Whether the removal of the fear (in the
negation of an hereafter) would add to the happiness or
misery of life, and, if there be a future existence for
man, what are its conditions?


From this thought of death we cannot run away.
The very sweetness of the flowers of our garden sug-
gests it—the brighter the light, the deeper the shadow
—the greater our enjoyment of life, the nearer to us
will be the recollection of its uncertainty. It is told of
Sir Samuel Romilly, as he looked from the portico of
Castle Howard over the wide and fair demesne spread
before him, he was heard to say, ‘These are the things
which make death terrible.’
And as we cannot run away from the thought of
Death, so may we not defy it, nor measure our strength
against it, like the warrior of old, who refused to meet
Death, except standing and in full armour. But it
depends on ourselves whether the thought shall come
to us, as a Ghost intercepting the light of the Sun, or
as a solemn visitant whose converse may lift us into
higher thought, and from gazing into whose face we
may gain strength and repose. Never did man pass
from the presence of that thought without feeling him-
self a stronger or a weaker being.
I assume that by all who listen to me, the doctrine
of a future life is admitted, and to those who admit of
this doctrine, not only is it natural to die, but Death
is not a disruption of Being, but as a necessary part of
it, and the condition of our immortality. This theory
of the continuity of life, of personal individuality and
identity, that Death works not any miraculous change
in our moral being but that the ‘ego’ of this world per-
vades infinity, is the very groundwork of our interest in
the life to come; and perhaps the true solution of the
difficulties which surround the question of a state of
suffering hereafter.
There are, indeed, those who call themselves Philoso-
phers, who not merely suggest, but assure us authorita-
tively, that there is no God, and for man no hereafter.


We must believe them to be earnest and sincere, for
sadder doctrine and less acceptable to man’s notion of
his own dignity and his sense of his own importance in
space cannot be conceived.
It is indeed, to use the language of Sir Thomas Browne
in his ‘Urn Burial,’ ‘the heaviest stone that melancholy
can throw at a man, to tell him that he is at the end
of his nature, or that there is no further state to come,
unto which this seems progressional and otherwise made
in vain.’ And it is curious reflecting on the doctrines
of these Philosophers, and it may profit us, to consider
how far human life would gain in happiness by the
acceptance of these doctrines, and for this purpose to
look back on societies in which the belief in an here-
after had no place. At least it did not enter into the
theory of individual or social life, but was left to the
dreams of poetry or the speculations of philosophy.
‘Happy are we,’ I again quote the words of Sir Thomas
Browne, ‘who live not in the disadvantage of Time.
They could say little for felicity, but from reason, where-
by the noblest minds fell upon doubtful deaths and
melancholy dissolution.’
The Jew to whom the one living God was ever present
found in the dispensations of this world those rewards
and punishments which our Christian belief postpones
to another state of existence. But to the Greek there
was neither belief in a present God nor any assurance
of a future life. His imagination, in this respect the
very opposite of the Jewish mind, peopled Olympus
with Deities flushed with life; but a life which, after all,
was purely sensual, ‘of the earth, earthy.’ This anthropo-
morphism was carried into every form of nature. Each
tree or fountain or stream had its cognate but still half-
human life. But nothing can be more gloomy than the
view of human life which Greek literature presents. For


man there was no happiness in the present, and no hope
in the future. The grave concluded all the exertions
and aspirations and affections of humanity within the
narrow circle of life. Existence was a sorrow more or
less protracted, from which the best, the only escape,
was the eternal sleep of the grave. ‘Whom the Gods
love, die young’ was their consolation, one entirely
opposed to the spirit of Christianity, for surely that is
not the most fortunate soldier who falls out of the march
and dies on the road-side, but he who lives to bear him-
self bravely in the battle whatever its result. The Greek
mother’s prayer for a blessing on the piety of her sons
sleeping in the Temple, found its answer in their never
awaking from their sleep. What a sadness lingers in
the lyric song which sums up the nothingness of life
and despair of an hereafter in the melancholy words:
‘Earth and home and pleasing wife must be left behind,
nor of the trees which you cultivate will any follow you,
their short-lived master, except the sad cypress.’
Ovid, who abounds in delicate touches of natural
affections, makes Philemon pray that as one day united
him and Baucis, one day may take them both, that he
may never look on her tomb; and he adds with infinite
grace and feeling, ‘nor she live to deplore me,’ but of
hope of an union after death, there is none.
And worse still, not only was man’s life limited by
the grave; but even in this life he could not attain the
notion that he was a free agent. Far above the bright-
ness of Olympus and the laughing earth hung the shadow
of a terrible fate overruling gods and men. Not only
was death inexorable and inevitable, but all human exer-
tion was overruled by a fatality from which there was
no escape. A higher will than that of Jove; a will at
which Jove himself trembled; a will, silent, unreasoning
and inexorable, determined all the issues of human action.


It has been observed that in this theory there was
something tonic. Rather it may be said that there is
something which bears witness to the grandeur and
dignity of Man’s nature in the refusal to submit to this
fatality, which met will with will, and disdained to test
the dignity of human exertion by its success. We recall
the answer of Hector, the most touching and in many
respects the noblest embodiment of the Greek mind.
To all the hostility he opposes the calm resolution of a
sense of duty, ‘one augury is the best, to stand in defence
of the Fatherland.’
And to this dark gloom of earth and human life, the
burthen and the mystery, the inefficacy of human exer-
tion, the world beyond the grave offered no redress, no
compensation. A belief in a future existence did not
enter into the general and popular mind. Undoubtedly
many apprehensions rested in opinions of some state
beyond the grave. But existence beyond the grave is
sadder than on this side of it. The Hades of Homer
is peopled only by pallid shadows, haunted by passion-
ate regrets. Ulysses descends to the Hades, sacrifices
are offered and the trenches are filled with the blood
of the victims. The scene has more of the grotesque
‘diablerie’ of some German witch-history than the calm
and statuesque beauty of Greek poetry. The Ghosts,
thin shadows of the dead-wives, old men bent with suf-
fering; virgins in the freshness of their regrets; warriors
in their blood-stained armour, stalk ‘squeaking and gib-
bering’ round the trenches, greedy for the taste of blood.
No face wears the light of happiness, no voice has the
sound of joy. Ulysses addresses Achilles in the lan-
guage of congratulation, that having enjoyed large hon-
our on earth, he now holds wide sway among the dead.
‘Mock me not’ is the gloomy answer; ‘I would rather
serve on earth, the poorest of its hinds, than rule all the


realms of Death.’ One touch of joy, but from the world
above, and not from his present state, moves him as he
strides away over the fields of Asphodel. Ulysses had
told him that his son was honoured among the living.
In Homer not one ray of light breaks the universal
gloom of Hades. There is no Elysium near. His
Elysium is not visited by Ulysses. It lies far away in
the happy Isles, but there enjoyment is purely physical
—a remission of the bodily sufferings of life. ‘There,’
so runs the song, ‘is neither snow, nor sharp winter, nor
rain, but the ocean sends a restoration to man in the
soft breathings of the West wind.’
In Virgil the happy are separated from the unhappy
spirits. Elysium lies close to, but apart from Hades.
‘Over it are spread the roseate hues of a wider sky than
that of earth and its indwellers gaze on their own sun
and their own stars.’ But the pursuits of the happy
are but a prolongation of their pursuits in this world.
The clog of the purely human life is never removed.
These are indeed dreams of the Poets pallid and in-
distinct, but they have, I think, one important intima-
tion. From whatever source derived, whether or not
they be the refraction of some primal belief, of which
to use the image of Humbolt, the fragments are found
on every shore throughout the world, these dreams con-
vey one great truth. They assume the continuity of
individual life, and the unity of the human being in the
Here and Hereafter. They reject the notion of the
absorption of the Individual soul, and ‘its recession
into the common being.’
But if the dreams of the Poets be pallid and indistinct
neither do the speculations of the Philosopher give forth
any certain sound. To the very highest Philosophy of the
Greek, a life hereafter is only a great possibility. Socrates
in the Apology hangs between the two possibilities—


Death may be a dreamless sleep, or it may introduce
us to the society of the wise and good. In all the range
of human composition, are there words more sad than
the concluding words of the Apology? ‘The time is
come,’ he says, addressing his Judges, ‘for us to go our
different ways, you to life, I to death, but which of the
two is better, who but the Divinity can say?’ In this
view of life, lie on one side sorrow and inevitable pain
—the rubs which patient merit of the unworthy takes
—‘intolerable wrong,’ human exertion baffled by an un-
reasoning fatality, and on the other side, a dreamless
sleep, or the pale and uncertain light of a bare possibility.
Some 300 years after the Apology, we have a picture of
human life drawn by the elder Pliny. It anticipates in
some degree the melancholy of Pascal, though its views
of humanity rest on far different foundations. Pliny
taunts men in words of irony and scorn, as the only
animal subject to grief, to luxury (for each member a
different form) —the prey of ambition, of avarice, and
a passionate love of life, careful about his sepulture and
(lowest of all infirmities) anxious about his future; and
after a long detail of the varieties of the human race,
and the incidents of mortality, he returns to scoff at
human vanity which projects itself beyond the grave,
and makes to itself a lie of a life within the realm of
Death. He puts aside with equal scorn the suggestion
of the immortality or the transmigration of the soul and
the existence of sensation beyond the grave. He laughs
at the worship of the dead, and the making of a God
of him who has ceased to be even man. What madness
(he exclaims) is this that life is renewed in Death I What
rest for man is there, if the soul does indeed retain per-
ception. Out on this soft credulity which robs nature
of its chief consolation and good, and multiplies the pangs
of dying by the suggestion of a future state, in which


whatever little happiness life may have given will be
cancelled by the recollection that we have ceased to live.
Far better and wiser is it for each of us to trust to his
own experience, and estimate what is to follow after life,
at the same nothing which preceded it. Undoubtedly
in this picture of life there is much of rhetorical exag-
geration. It is well to know that there were other and
nobler minds which entertained higher notions of man
and his moral worth, and which conceived a hope of
immortality. But the ‘Nihilism’ of Pliny was un-
doubtedly accepted by the popular mind, and by the larger
portion of the philosophical mind of the Roman world.
Let us turn to Pascal. He regards man with a melan-
choly as profound, but not with the discouragement or
the hopelessness of Pliny. In that capacity for grief
which Pliny ‘flings as a stone’ at man, Pascal finds the
evidence of his original dignity. Pascal had received
into his inner soul all the meaning of those words, the
simplest, the most touching, and the most suggestive—
‘Jesus Wept.’ Man is indeed to Pascal a miserable
creature, the prey of his own restlessness, seeking his
repose (to use the words of Montaigne) in agitation as
a child in the rocking of its cradle. But this restless-
ness is the evidence of Man’s dissatisfaction with his
present lot, and of his recollection and his impatience
for a return to his higher and original condition. Man
indeed is fallen, but the very term presupposes a higher
condition. His grandeur is proved by his knowledge
that he is miserable. He is dethroned and dispossessed,
but he has had and may have again the throne and
seizure of a King. Mr. Hallam has pointed out the
fallacy of Pascal in ascribing a real universality to human
nature. But the term sufficiently describes the result of
the combination in man of the two distinct elements of
soul and body, the earthly and the spiritual.


And surely apart from the assurances of Revelation,
theory for theory, rhetoric for rhetoric, dream for dream,
to man without the assurances of Revelation, the belief
merely as a philosophical speculation in a future state
in which the intellectual and the moral faculties will
receive a higher development is the happier and more
ennobling. An eternity of pain would be less degrading
to our notions of Man’s importance in space than this
theory of his nothingness. Annihilation, it is not —for
the doctrine supposes no power capable of annihilating
him—there is a law, we are told, but no law-giver.
Apart from these speculations, and whether Death be
or not an entire cessation of Being, lies the consideration
of the physical pangs of dying. The anticipation of
death is more fearful than death itself. The physical
pang is often greater in appearance to the spectator than
in sufferance to the dying. Livingstone tells us that
when he was struck down and seized by a lion, ‘the
shock produced a sort of dreaminess, in which there
was no sense of pain, nor feeling of terror, though he
was quite conscious.’ He suggests that this ‘peculiar
state is probably produced in all animals killed by the
carnivora and is a merciful provision for lessening the
pain of death.’ The form of death the most shocking
in the impression which it makes on the spectator, and
the most disgusting from its associations, is death by
hanging, said by those who have been resuscitated not
to be in itself painful. Whilst death by the guillotine,
although instantaneous, is in the conclusions of physicians
an intense agony.
Of the moral pangs of dying the degree is not in all
cases a just measure of the intellectual and moral facul-
ties. ‘The contempt of death,’ says Sir Thomas Browne,
‘from corporal animosity (he means physical courage)
promoteth not our felicity. They may sit in the orchestra


and noblest seats of Heaven who have held up trembling
hands in the fire, and humanly contended for glory.’
One of the best of men so far as man may venture to
judge his fellow-man, Dr. Johnson, evinced almost to
the last a great horror of death. Men have died in a
compliment, says Lord Bacon. Some, like Sir Thomas
Moore, have made the scaffold echo to a jest. In others
the last dying words have summed up the passion or
business of life. As the storm shrieked over Longwood,
the last words of Napoleon were ‘tete d’armee.’ To
those who care for historical coincidences, I may recall
that to Cromwell also a storm heralded the way from
life to death. And our Cowley has turned this incident
of nature to great advantage in his great essay on the
Death of Cromwell. Lord Tenterden parted from life
with the words ‘Gentlemen of the Jury.’ There is no
passion in the mind of man so weak, says Lord Bacon,
but it makes a mastery of death. In the terror of the
French Revolution men whose lives had been one long
frivolity, women who seemed to have no more consistency
than the foam on the surging and maddened waters,
lived on from day to day in the expectation of death
with a light defiance, more wonderful as resting on
slighter foundations, than the resignation of the Chris-
tian or the stoicism of the philosopher;
Well did they brook the turning tide,
With that innate untaught philosophy,
Which be it wisdom, coldness, or deep pride,
Is gall and wormwood to an enemy.
Many, perhaps, found a support in pride of birth,
which, like their Norman stone, hardening by exposure
to the elements, draws firmness and strength from ad-
versity and indignity. With a sad grace, grim enough
to us, they trifled with the fashion of their death. Its


very details were turned into a sport. A chair was re-
versed so as to resemble the sliding plank of the guillo-
tine, and the rivalry among the women was—which
should fall the most gracefully.
As the mode and circumstances of death cannot be
determined by any forethought, so will no wise man
care to anticipate them, or to form any strong wish on
the subject. To our first considerations a sudden death
by which life slips away unawares and without pain,
might seem to recommend itself. But we are taught
to pray against sudden death, and rightly so, not only
as the matter touches religious considerations, but as it
touches our human affections. To which of us, is it
not an addition to our sorrow, that those whom we have
loved have died afar from us, and that we have been
denied those last words which would to us have summed
up a life of affection! And would any one of us, in
order to avoid a little bodily pain, steal away from life
like an ungracious guest, without one word of affection
or assurance to those whom we leave behind, a little
word it may be, but which may gather into itself the
essence of long years, and remain ‘a token and a tone
even from our very mould ’ ? We recall the language of
Tacitus, true now as it was eighteen hundred years ago.
Speaking of the death of Agricola, he says, ‘to his
daughter and myself it adds bitterness to our grief that
we were not permitted to tend his last illness, to cheer
his failing strength, to take our fill of his last looks, and
his last embraces’ —and he adds, with a touch of nature,
which moves us still after this long interval of time—
‘and for thee too, in this, thy last day, thy eyes have
longed in vain for what they might not look upon.’
If, indeed, death were only the termination and con-
clusion of life, and not a mode of Being, and the con-
dition of its continuance; if death were to be regarded


only as the great teacher and judge, we might address
him in the words with which Sir Walter Raleigh con-
cludes his History of the World'. ‘lt is he who puts into
man all the wisdom of the world without speaking a
word. It is death alone that can make a man suddenly
know himself. He tells the proud and the insolent that
they are but abjects, and humbles them at the instant,
makes them cry, and complain, and repent, yea, even
to hate their fore-past happiness. He takes account of
the rich and proves him a beggar, a naked beggar, which
has interest in nothing but the gravel which fills his
mouth. He holds a glass before the eyes of the most
beautiful and makes them see their deformity and rotten-
ness, and they acknowledge it. Oh, eloquent, Great
and Mighty Death, whom none could advise thou hast
persuaded. What none has dared, thou hast done, and
whom all the world has flattered, thou only hast cast
out of the world and hast despised. Thou hast drawn
together all the far-stretched greatness, all the pride,
cruelty, and ambition of this world; and covered it all
over with these two narrow words, Hie Jacet.’
But great as Death is, we are, in the words of Pascal,
greater than that which kills us. Death is himself
mortal —we are immortal. We shall die, but we shall
not perish. And if this be so, our interest in our being
does not cease in the mouth of the grave.
Dull indeed must that imagination be, which limits
its vision to this world, and does not sometimes seek
to pierce the mystery of ‘The Hereafter.’ It may be
objected to that whilst Scripture is distinct and positive
in its assurance of a future life, it dwells little on the
mode and conditions of that life. Lazarus is raised
from the tomb, but the Apostle who relates the miracle
does not pause even for an instant to reveal the secrets
which Lazarus brought from the grave, or to offer any


solution of the questions which then agitated so deeply
the Jewish mind. And it may be objected that this
silence is an argument that we too should be silent, nor
seek to pry into mysteries about which we cannot attain
to certainty. But we are not prohibited from enquiring,
and in the absence of an express prohibition the subject
is of too deep an interest for human speculation to for-
bear it. In such speculations, however, we must not
surrender ourselves to our imaginations. We are to
proceed slowly and soberly by argument drawn from
analogy. The speculations I shall offer to you are not
my own. They are borrowed from, and will be but an
imperfect outline of, the speculations of Isaac Taylor,
in his Physical Theory of Another Life. The whole argu-
ment is founded on that doctrine of St. Paul (to which
the writer to whom I have referred has given the term
Corporeity) of the continued union of the soul with the
body, not an earthly but a spiritual body, but still a
body under a law by which Being will still be as in this
world, an amalgam or mixture of spirit and body. The
doctrine meets and negatives the Oriental dream that
the individual soul will return to and be absorbed in
the great whole. It asserts distinctly the continuance
of the individual life. And this doctrine of Corporeity
distinguishes the nature of Man in his future state from
that of God—the Creature from the Creator. Of God,
we may, and must think as immaterial, as purely spiritual,
but in the sense in which God is immaterial, the creature
even in another state cannot be. ‘No effort of the mind
can enable it to conceive a mode of existence essentially
and totally unlike our actual mode of life, for this were
to imagine ourselves endowed with a real creative faculty.’
The notion of our identity projects the individual being
into infinitude, the same essentially in its intellectual and
moral powers and in its affections greatly enlarged and


intensified. We shall love and know, with a love and
knowledge of which the love and knowledge of this
world are but pale and faint anticipations, but still the
anticipations. And let no one be startled by this notion
of our intellectual powers being carried into another
state. We approach God by knowledge as well as by
love.
Many persons, and very good and pious persons, are
willing to rest in the conclusion that the happiness of
the next world will be one, uniform and passive, ‘an
invariable, inactive, and unproductive ecstasy.’ There
is the saying of Dr. Johnson, in answer to a question
as to the degrees of happiness in the next world: ‘A
cup can be but full, and a bucket can be but full, but
the tub holds the most.’ This answer would seem to
suggest that there is no progression, that the individual
soul is, as it were, stereotyped and incapable of acquisi-
tion or enlargement. But if the analogy of our consti-
tution in this world be retained, our future existence
must still be one of movement and of progression, the
mind always rising higher and higher, ‘cycle on epicycle,
orb on orb,’ towards the infinitude.
But whilst there will be this essential identity the
conditions will be greatly altered and enlarged. Let us
try to consider these conditions of time and space, of
memory and perception, as they tie us down and limit
us in this world, and as we may believe them to be
modified and enlarged in the next. It is difficult for
us even in imagination to free ourselves from the con-
dition of time as affecting all our intellectual and moral
powers. Time is the measurement to us of all things.
To our comprehension life is diluted and diffused into
a long series of years. We are born—we gain our first
perceptions—we are glad, and we grieve. But through
all, joy or pain is measured by the same calculation of


time; and so we fall into the mistake of believing that
all things go, as it were, ‘By our Clock.’ Yet how do
we know but that the life of the Ephemera which is
that of a summer’s day to our notion of duration, may
concentrate into itself a physical enjoyment, an intensity
of sensation, which by us would be diluted into and
computed by years. And so in the next world, where
time will not enter, may we not concentrate, into what
in the language of this world is called a moment, the
perceptions and sensations of what in the same language
would be called a century?
Again, take space and our perceptions of space as
limited by our faculties in this world, and as we believe
they will be to our enlarged intelligence. We look upon
the stars of Heaven. From either pole of our orbit
round the sun, streams the unspeakable beauty of the
Milky Way. If our orbit were greatly enlarged, it is
probable that other spaces of the Milky Way would again
be revealed to us; but extending beyond our sight.
Some of the nebulae of the Milky Way are already sub-
mitted to human science, and the most powerful lens is
able to resolve what appears a single light into a double
star of which one is the sun and centre of the other.
The numbers of arithmetic give us not the slightest
comprehension of the distances of the remoter suns
which we see. We approach to some faint notion of
their distance when we are told that notwithstanding the
rapidity with which light travels, the stars that we look
at to-night may have been crushed into darkness 3,000
years ago. But with this change of a terrestrial body
for a spiritual body, we may well believe, arguing still
by analogy, that our command of space will be wonder-
fully enlarged, if space be not altogether annihilated to
us. And if this be so, the human sense ‘fades into
dimness with its own delight’ as it tries to seize the


notion of all those mighty worlds, those patines of bright
gold, being made subject to our faculties, and that we
shall embrace them not slowly, and part by part, but
the whole in one instantaneous and comprehensive glance.
And so again with regard to memory. We know
how imperfect it is under our present bodily limitations.
Be it past joy or sorrow, with ‘what a faint perplexity
the picture of the mind revives it again?’ In another
state with the removal of the limitations of time and
space, the action of the memory will be instantaneous.
It will be like the lightning flash which reveals to us
the whole horizon at a glance. Terrible thought! (for
the physical theory in no way determines the question
of happiness or misery in the next world). Terrible
thought! which supposes all the evil of an evil life
brought back upon the memory in one sudden instan-
taneous whole!
Nor will this enlargement of our intellectual powers
exclude the enjoyment of our moral faculties or of the
affections of this world. We love God, but we love
Him partly through our love for His creatures. Our
affections make up a large portion of our moral identity
in this world. To suppose that these affections belong
merely to the terrestrial body, that they are ‘of the earth,
earthy,’ is to degrade them. To suppose that they will
cease with this world is to impeach or impair the notion
of our identity. ‘There is no marriage or giving in
marriage in heaven.’ True—the purely human relation
will not exist; but the affection which was the sub-
stratum of, and which sanctified the relation, will still
be ours. And with the removal of the impediment of
the flesh will come an enlarged perception, moral and
intellectual, ‘Je mourrai seul,’ says Pascal, and how large
a part even of the kindliest and most loving life is soli-
tary! ‘Not even the fondest heart, and next our own,


knows half the reason why we smile or sigh.’ We know
not half the love which is borne to us; others know not
half the love we bear to them. In this world’s inter-
mixture of false and true, the deepest affections have
their modesty and reserve; we fear to bring a suspicion
on the truth of our feelings by a word of exaggeration.
In another world, where there will be no falsehood,
where light and truth will permeate all things, we shall
know each other, not darkly and through the imper-
fection of language, but with the rapidity and certainty
of intuition. May it not even be that of the kindly
thoughts which here below we have entertained for others,
and others have entertained for us, although never
fashioned into act or word, the record may be open to
us? We hear of and remember the sharp and bitter
sayings and doings of this world. Their pungency
recommends them to our sense; but I for one believe
that even in this world there is a large fund of gentle-
ness and pity and kindliness of man for man. It were
better that our benevolence always took the form of
beneficence; but as it is, its perfume will not be lost.
And so we pass on to the thought of that great
Brotherhood which we believe will be a part of the
economy of Heaven. ‘The spirit of adventure, the love
of travel, the extension of commerce are breaking down,
slowly it is true, the demarcations of geography, and the
distinction of races.’ ‘All these activities are guided by
the Divinity to that fusion of mankind,’ to be brought
about, not by a miraculous exertion of power, but through
human agencies, which will find their consummation and
reward in Heaven. May it be so.
Such is the song which I have learned, not among
the rocks from Pan piping to the Nymphs and Satyrs,
but from one of the most thoughtful and charming of
English writers. To him I refer you. Happy shall I


be, if in the attempt to discharge the duty which your
Association has imposed on me, I have furnished an
amusement for an idle hour. Happier still if I shall
have turned your attention to works which lie a little
apart from, but which are not less interesting than, the
lighter literature of the day. But happy above all, if
I shall have raised, if it be only one or two, to thoughts
which ‘are but a little way above our heads waiting for
ours to keep them company.’


. March
i “ — —r —— L ~n
PEDIGREE: PART I
John Warner, of Great Waltham, Co. Essex =
M.I. there: ‘Orate pro anima Johannis
Warner At’
John Warner, of Warners Hall in Great Waltham. M.I. there : = Jane, dau. of William Maidon
‘Hie jacet Johannes Warner quondam films Johannis Warner and sister and sole heir of John
Armigeri, qui obiit 9 0 Februarii 1439’ Maidon
. . . ist wife = John Warner, of ‘Warners,’ Esq., son and heir ; = Elizabeth, dau. and heir of
s.p.s. at. 18 at his Father’s death ;d. 13 Edward IV, John Helyon, 2nd wife.
1 473 (See the Visitations of Essex.)
John Warner, Henry Warner, of ‘Warners,’ = . . . Robert Warner, = Christian, dau. of
d * S -P- had the inheritance younger son, George Seckford, of
20 Henry VII; d. 21st March went into Suffolk Seckford, Co.
Edmund Warner, 1504 Suffolk, Esq.
d. s.p.
John Warner, of‘Warners,’ Henry Warner, of‘Warners,’ Two daus. ... = Robert Warner, of Wingfield, = Joan,
ist son and heir, at. 19 m heir to his brother John, at. ist wife Co. Suffolk, and Winfarthing, 2nd wife
1504; d. 2nd Sept. 1552 10 in 1504. Sold or gave away Co. Norfolk. Died 32 Henry VIII,
his lands. Died s.p. Inq. p.m.
4th March 1556
William Warner, of Wingfield, =. . . Robert Warner, of Winfarthing; =. . . Margaret Warner,
ist son and heir, at. 30 in mar. | ux. John Buxton, of
33 Henry VIII, 1542 Tibenham, Co. Norfolk; d. 1572
I Son
Robert (Part I — A)
Anthony Warner, of Stradbrook, Gent., = Eliza Moyster Elizabeth, dau. and heir = Francis Warner, of Parham = Mary, dau and
youngerson (Wm dated 14th Apr,land of Robert Appleyard, Esq., and Framlingham, Gent., co-heir of Sir
proved 25th May 1601 at Norwich.) Inq. of Framhngham. ist wife b. at Winfarthing; bur, Edmund Rouse,
p.m. 43 Elizabeth Tan _ n . _ . T?
in H- ot rrarmmgham. ist wife b. at Winfarthing; bur. Edmund Rouse,
_ _ „ I 4 t h Jan. 1605 at Parham Bart. 2nd wife
Dorothy = Edmund Pooley, d. 1625 art
I"~ " f
Robert Warner, Margaret, dau. of George Jernegan, = William Warner, of
a. young s.p. of Bilstede, son and heir of Sir John Framlingham
Jernegan, of Somerleyton, Knt.
Robert Warner, = Elizabeth, Sarah, dau. of =Sir Thomas Warner = Rebecca, = Anne
of Cratfield; d. dau. of Walter Snelling,
1654, at. 80 Alexander of Dorchester,
Courthope, of ist wife
Cranbrook,
Co. Kent
I \ 1
Mary Warner. Edward Warner, Sir Thomas Warner, = Grace,
Bur. 29th Dec. died s.p. admitted to Inner heir of
1635, at Putney
Temple 29th Jan. 1660,
Called to Bar 1666.
Knighted by Charles II
Bur. 23rd July 1679,
at St. Michael, Barba-
dos. Had two daus.,
Ann and Grace
bm I homas Warner = Rebecca, = Anne .. John Raynold Ann
of St. Kitts, Colonizer dau. of 3rd wife, Warner, Warner Margaret
of the Leeward Thomas She mar. bapt. Katherine
Islands; d. 10th March Payne, of andly Sir 24th Aug.
1648. M.l.at St. Surrey, George 157631
Christopher’s living Marsh or Cratfield.
1629. Marche of Died s.p.
2nd wife Limehouse,
Knt. Her
will dated
16th July
1692, proved
27th Feb. 1693
(35 Box)
I ~ ' ~|
Warner, = Grace, only dau. and Col. Philip Warner, = Henrietta, sole dai
nner heir of Gerard Fowke, Governor of Antigua of Col. Henry Ash
Jan. 1660, Maj.-Gen. in service of 1672-75; d. 23rd Oct. ton, Governor of
• 1666. Charles I and 11. Re- and bur. 24th Oct. Antigua, and sol
Charles 11. mar. William Bean, son 1689 at St. Paul’s. heir of her brothe
ly 1679, and heir of the Bishop of Left 2 sons and 4 daus. Henry Ashton. Bui
:1, Barba- Llandaff. Her will dated 31st Aug. 1697, a
to daus., 18th Nov. 1700. Proved St. Paul’s. Wil
tee 12 Nov. 1705 (232, Gee) dated 5 . .* . 1697
sworn 4th Oct. 169'
s-p.m. See Pedigree;
Ps,rf TT
Col. Philip Warner, = Henrietta, sole dau.
Governor of Antigua of Col. Henrv Ash-
ton, Governor of
Antigua, and sole
heir of her brother
Henry Ashton. Bur,
31st Aug. 1697, at
St. Paul’s. Will
dated 5 . . . 1697;
sworn 4th Oct. 1697
See Pedigree;
Part II


r—: ; —i "II
Pettus, Bart.
2nd wife
s,p.
i I .
I — r - .—“1
PEDIGREE: PART I—A
Alice, dau. of = Robert Warner, of = Christian, dau. of
Spalding, I Wingfield Powle,
ist wife I 2nd wife
I i fTI
Francis Warner, John Warner, Three daughters
at. 8 in 1612 at. 2 in 1612
Francis Warner, = Mary, dau. of
son and heir Godfrey,
of Wingfield
PEDIGREE; PART I—B
I
Francis Warner, of Parham = Mary, dau. and co-heir
and Framlingham of Sir Edmund Rouse,
Knt. 2nd wife
Anne, ux. . . . Norton.
Her will dated 24th Oct.
4 James; proved
4th May 1607 (46
Huddleston)
,—| 1 j
Edmund Warner, heir to = Anne, dau. of Robert Edward Warner, 2nd son. Henry Warner, Thomas Warner
his Uncle Anthony 1601; Gosnold, of Otley, Esq.; Mar. twice, but died s.p.m. of Cransford.
d, 20th Sept. 1617; bur. d. 26th Sept. 1652; 28th Oct. 1628 Mar. and had
at Parham bur. at Parham issue
Elizabeth, dau. of Francis Warner, Anne, dau. Edmund Henry John Warner, Robert Edward Ursula Warner,
of Sir John Rous, ist son and heir, of Anthony Warner, Warner, bapt. 22nd June Warner Warner, bapt. xoth Nov. 1601
rvP llAnknm ..*.L A TT* 1 _ T 1_ 1. ,
of Henham, Knt.,
d. 3rd Nov. 1649,
bur. at Parham,
ist wife
bapt. 12th May
1603. the
Inner Temple,
1627; d. sth Sept.
1658; bur. at Par-
ham
Everard of born
Stow Park, 2nd July
Esq., and 1610
relict of Sir
Thomas
bapt. 1609 at Par-
31st Aug. ham; of St.
1607; bur. Kitts 1629.
10th April Will dated
1630 at 20th Jan. 1629,
Parham proved xoth Aug.
1630 (72
Scroope)
bapt. at Parham
19th Aug. Anne Warner, bapt.
1612 at 4th Dec. 1610. Bur.
Parham 25th May 1642 at
Parham. Will dated
24th May and proved
28th June 1642 at
Ipswich
Dorothy Warner,
bapt. sth Feb. 1614
Mary Warner, bapt.
22nd July 1617
I
Robert.
Sir John Warner, Bart., = Trevor, dau. of Sir Francis Warner, Edmund, = Anne, dau. of
b. 14th and bapt. 24th Thomas Hanmer bapt. 23rd April bapt. 2nd Oct. Nathaniel Hawes Dead in 1667
May 1638 at Parham. 1643 at Parham; 1644; d.
Created Baronet 1660 drowned at Nieu- 26th June
port 3rd April 1696; bur. at
1667 Parham
s.p.m ,
Edmund, ‘The Infant,’ Mary, b. at Parham,
d. 1721, unmar. d. a spinster 1736.
(See Chap. VII.)


PEDIGREE: PART II
Col. Philip Warner = Henrietta, dau. of
Henry Ashton
Gertrude Henrietta, Ann, Frances, Grace, Mary,
m ar. mar. mar. mar. mar.
Col. John William Barnes John Tempest Col. Henry (i) Valentine Russell,
Fr Y e Pearne (2) Dr. Isaiah Burgeois
I homas, of the ‘Folly’ and ‘Savannah’ = Jane, dau. of Henry Walrond, Chief Judge = Richard Lightfoot, Esq.,
Plantations, bur. nth Nov. 1695, at of Court of Common Pleas at Barbados, 2nd husband
St. Paul’s. Will dated 27th Sept., by Deborah his wife, and sister of Edward
and sworn 19th Nov. 1695 Walrond of Antigua, Esq.
Edward, bur. = Elizabeth, dau. Ashton, Attorney- = Elizabeth Ann,
i9thFeb. 1732 and heir of General of Lee- dau. of George
at Eltham, Co. Richard Scott, ward Islands, d. Clarke, of
Kent. Will of Barbados, 1 ith Feb. 1752, Clarke’s Hill,
proved 21 st Esq. M.I. St. at. 61; bur. 12th and wid. of Maj.
Feb. 1732. John’s Church, Feb. 1752, at St. Samuel Byam,
Colonel in the Antigua John’s. Will dated mar. Bth April
Army; Mem- 6th July, 1750; 1714
ber Legisla- sworn 13th Feb.
live Council, 1752
Antigua
I 1 1 1
Richard Scott, Grace, mar. rst Elizabeth Ann, Jane, mar.
bur. 2nd Sept. Samuel Byam, mar. John John- Rev. Francis Byam
1729, at Eltham, 2ndly, William son, Esq., of
Co. Kent. Fauquier Bloomsbury Sq.
Henry, b. 1693. = Phyllis Maria .. . , Philip Warner, Jane
Clerk of As- mar. Capt. Francis living 1700 John-
sembly in 1724. Kirke • son,
M.I. at ‘ Savan- living
nah’ Estate. 1732
Will dated 26th
Feb. 1729
Thomas, the elder, == Elizabeth, dau. of Joseph = Elizabeth Sanders, 5 sons 1 (Pedigree,
b. Oct. 1716; bur. Thomas Kerby, (See Chap. IX.) mar. 1735, d - l6th Mar. 4-daus.J Part ll—-A)
3rd June 1779 at mar. rBth Feb. 1804, at. 88. M.I.
St. John’s 1741 at St. George’s, in Gray’s Inn Lane
Hanover Sq.; d.
15th Aug. 1763
at. 40. M.I. at St.
John’s
Charles, bapt.
15th March 1752,
Hanover Sq.
William, of Dominica, = Mildred Johns, Elizabeth, dau. of = Joseph Warner, = Laura Elizabeth, Mary, Elizabeth, mar.
Ist son and heir, d. Ist Nov. 1833, Richard Ottley, of 2nd son, d. 2nd dau. of Rev. Rob- d. spinster at St. Andrew’s,
bapt. 23rd Feb 1745; at. 81, at Ralf St. Vincent, Esq., Sept. 1833, *t'. ert Hoadly Ashe, Thomas Holborn, Robert
d. 23rd Feb. 1793, House, Eltham d. 29th April 1801 77; bur. at D.D., mar. nth Ashton Thornton, of Mug-
*t. 48 at sea, Co. Hants. Wrington, Co. May 1802 at St. Anne, mar. gerhanger, Co.
Ist wife Somerset Marylebone; d. ... Hadley. Beds. She d. s.p.
(Pedigree, Part 28th May 1836 at o.s.p. before Sup. 9th Jan. 1817,
II—B) Bath. 2nd wife 1786 at. 63
(Pedigree, Part
ll C)
m 1 m
Joseph Thomas Warner, Edward Warner, = Catherine Jane Mathew, Mary Pe
ist son 2nd son. mar. i8oa; d. in London Eliza Hu
Edward Warner, = Catherine Jane Mathew,
2nd son. mar. 1804; d. in London
(See Chap. IX.) 4th Aug. 1863
Mary Pelham
Eliza Hungerford
Jane H,
William Warner,
3rd son, d. an infant
Ashton Warner,
4th son
All bur. St. Andrew’s,
Holborn
Isabella Ann Carmichael. = Charles William Warner, C.B. = Ellen Rosa Garcia. Mary,
Ist wife 2nd wife bur. St.
Andrew’s,
(See Chap. X.) Holborn


Mau-.
Somerset
i L —n : —n
PEDIGREE: PART II
Charles William Warner, C.8., = Isabella Ann Carmichael, Ist wife,
b. 19th Oct. 1805 ; m. 10th Aug. 1829 at Worcester;
m. 10th Aug. 1829 at Worcester;
d. 26th Feb. 1887 d. 29th March 1841
Shipley Ashton, b. 4th Dec. Edward John Rudyerd, = Eliza, dau. of Charles William Pole, Isabella Jane, mar, Margaret Frances,
1830 at Trinidad; d. 3rd June b. 3rd Nov. 1838; St.
1849 India. An ensign, John’s Coll., Oxford;
2nd Native Infantry Advocate-General, North-
Western Provinces, India,
William
b. 13th March 1841 in Robert Farquhar, d. unmar.
London, o.s.p. 3rd son of Sir
Michael Shaw-
Barroll, mar.
15th Dec.
i 866; d. 1916
Stewart, Bart.
1874-7; d. 1877 at Alla-
habad
Shipley Charles, b. 19th Dec. = Gertrude, dau. of Harold Rudyerd,
1867. Captain, ‘P. & O.’ R. C. Elmsley, of b. 10th Sept. 1872.
Service. Present heir-general Toronto, b. 13th Indian Police Ser-
to Sir Thomas Warner Aug. 1875; mar. vice
13th Oct. 1909;
d. Sept. 1927
Miriam
Ethel Norah, dau. of Augusta Edith, mar. Mildred Emily
John David Elliott, John Hugh Cox,
English Civil Service; 1.C.5., son of Surg.-
mar. Ist Oct. 1910 Gen. Charles Lindsay
Cox
John Rudyerd Maddox,
b. 22nd March 1923
PEDIGREE: PART II
Charles William Warner, C.B. = Ellen Rosa, dau. of John Joseph Cadiz,
2nd wife, mar. 26th Feb. 1848;
d. 7th May 19x3
Francis Charles William, Robert Stewart Aucher, = Maud Isabel, dau. of Raymond John Richard,
b. 20th Aug. 1853; Naval b. 9th May 1859; Queen’s Sir William Robinson, b. 19th July 1861;
Cadet; d. at Dartmouth Royal College, Trinidad, G.C.M.G., mar. Queen’s Royal College
30th June 1868 and Oriel College, Oxford. 27th April 1886 and Pembroke College,
Inner Temple; Attorney- Oxford
General and K.C., Trinidad
Sybil Julia Maud = Geoffrey, son of Henry Phyllis Mildred = Douglas, son of Marjorie Violet = Basil, son of Eileen Isabel
Sir Henry Aucher
Jackson,
G.C.M.G.
Frank Broome
Bailward, of Horsington
Manor, Templecombe,
Somerset
Pamela Sybil Constant
Pamela
Margarita Isabel
Peter
6th March 1916
Pelham Francis, = Agnes, dau. of Mildred Shipley, Ellen Gemma, Dorothy Mary, Mary
b. 2nd Oct. 1873; Henry Blyth, mar. Henry Hamil- mar. Charles mar. Ist, Thomas Frances
Rugby and Oriel of Stanstead, ton, son of Monro Graham Heath- Ulric Thynne, Audrey
College, Oxford Essex Pasea, of Trinidad; cote, Colonel R.N., 2nd, Basil
3 sons and 3 dans.; 98th Regt. Lubbock, M.C.
d. 1889
= Geoffrey, son Charles Esmond, John Pelham, Elizabeth Mary
of William Cox, b. 1907; Eton and b. 1918; Eton Pelham, mar. Har-
of Cardiff, Magdalen College, old Pitcairn, Lieut.-
R.A.F. Oxford; Lieut. Commander, R.N.,
Coldstream Guards son of David Hen-
derson, of Vachery,
Cranleigh, Surrey
Diana


APPENDIX B
MAIN LINE OF DESCENT
1. John le Warner
2. John Warner
3. John Warner
4. Robert Warner
5. Robert Warner
6. Francis Warner
7. William Warner
8. Sir Thomas Warner
9. Philip Warner
10. Thomas Warner
11. Ashton Warner
12. Joseph Warner
13. William Warner
14. Edward Warner
15. Charles Warner
16. Edward John Rudyerd
17. Charles Shipley


PEDIGREE: PART lI—A
OTHER ISSUE OF ASHTON WARNER AND
ELIZABETH CLARKE
Ashton, 3rd son, b. 10th Dec. 1721. President of the Council, Antigua.
Owner of ‘Hornes’ and ‘Belvedere’ sugar plantations. A Doctor
of Physic, practised in London; resided in Percy Street, Middlesex.
Bur. 17th April 1789 at St. John’s, Antigua. Will dated sth April
1789. Mar. Rachel, dau. and co-heir of John Pare. o.s.p.
Daniel, 4th son, b, 10th June 1724. Treasurer, Antigua. Killed on
board H.M.S. Virgin 25th March 1760 in an action with French
Privateers. Will dated 21st January 1759. Mar. Rebecca, dau.
of Thomas Freeman; left issue a son Thomas, b. 12th Feb. 1753
at St. John’s.
Edward, sth son, b. nth July 1725. Merchant of Austin Fryars.
Mar. Catherine Johnson of Eltham, Kent. o.s.p.
William, 6th son, b. Bth Nov. 1728. Member of Council and Treasurer,
Antigua. Mar. Elizabeth, dau. of Stephen Blizard. Died nth
Oct. 1771. Monumental inscription at St. John’s, Antigua, o.s.p.
(Lawrence Archer’s M.I. of the West Indies, p. 411.)
Samuel Henry, 7th son, b. nth Dec. 1733. Deputy Provost-Marshal,
Antigua. Mar. (1) Margaret Marchant, by whom he had a son
Ashton; (2) Ann Ash, by whom he had a son Samuel.
Four daughters:
(, a ) Jane, b. 3rd Jan. 1715; mar. Jonas Langford.
{h) Barbara, b. 9th May 1720; mar. William Dunbar.
(c) Ann, b. 3rd Aug. 1726; mar, Hamilton Kerby.
( d ) Elizabeth, b. 17th June 1735; mar. Richard Ottley.
ISSUE OF SAMUEL HENRT WARNER
(a) By his first wife:
Ashton, bapt. 21st Feb. 1750. Planter, Antigua. Mar. Sarah,
dau. of Anthony Brown and left issue 2 sons and 3 daughters.
(3) By his second wife;
Samuel, bapt. 26th April 1770. President of the Council of
Antigua, 1831-5. Mar. Ann Hurst. Bur. 9th April 1838,
aged 70. No issue by her.


ISSUE OF DANIEL WARNER AND REBECCA FREEMAN
Thomas, b. 12th Feb. 1753 at St. John’s, Antigua. Was resident at
Bristol 1759 an d 1814. Mar. Dorothy, dau. of Francis Ffrye.
Died 25th Dec. 1825 at Sevenoaks, Kent, leaving 3 sons and 1
daughter.
1. Daniel Francis (see Chap. IX), b. 9th June 1795; mar-
Sylvania Maria, dau. of Robert Vaughan, of Bristol.
Died 17 Nov. 1870, leaving 1 son, Ashton.
2. Thomas Shirley, b. 24th May 1797. Clerk of The Council,
Antigua, 1831. Magistrate, Montserrat. Mar. Rebecca,
dau. of Henry Hamilton. Died in Trinidad, leaving 4
sons and 3 daughters.
3, Samuel Ashton, b. 30th May 1799 at Park Street, Bristol.
Rector of St. George’s, Antigua, 1826. Mar. Mary, dau.
of Stephen Roe Willock of Antigua, and left issue 3 sons
and 1 daughter.
4. Rebecca Dorothy, b. 31st Oct. 1790; mar. Archibald Arm-
strong of Grenada, Living 1837.
ISSUE OF DANIEL FRANCIS WARNER AND
SYLVANIA MARIA VAUGHAN
Ashton, b. 21st July 1833. Went to Australia. Clerk of Committees,
Legislative Assembly of Melbourne. Returned to England.
1869-91, Secretary of East London Hospital for Children, now
‘The Princess Elizabeth of York Hospital for Children.’ Mar,
Maria Lily, dau. of Major-General Whannell of the Indian Army.
Died in 1925, leaving 3 sons and 2 daughters:
1. Francis Ashton, b. 25th Aug. 1861 at Melbourne. Settled
in New Zealand in 1891. Mar, Margaret, eldest dau. of
David Maxwell, 20th April 1898. Died in 1926, leaving
3 sons; (1) Francis Ashton, b. 13th Jan. 1902; (2) Lionel
Allan; (3) Marmaduke Maxwell Shirley, and 6 daughters
(Muriel, Grace, Daphne Ella, Sylvia Constance Ashton,
Norma Maurine Ashton, and Evadne Pauline Sheila).
2. George Brunton, b. Ist April 1863. Stipendiary Magistrate,
Durban, Natal. Mar. Catherine Whitelaw. One son,
Cromwell, and 2 daughters, Sylvia and Dorothy Mary.
3. Ashton, b. 25th May 1877.


PEDIGREE: PART lI—B
ISSUE OF JOSEPH WARNER AND
ELIZABETH OTTLEY
2 sons:
1. Ashton, b. 12th Aug. 1780. Ed. Harrow and St. John’s Coll.,
Camb. Chief Justice, Trinidad. Mar. 1809, Elizabeth Jane,
dau. of Dr. Ross of St. Vincent. Died 4th Sept. 1830.
2. Richard, b. 19th April 1782 at Hatton Garden, London. Ed.
Harrow. Capt. Vth Foot. Mar. (1) Hannah Dove, dau. of
Rev. John Hoadley Ashe, D.D., 19th May 1808, of whom
no issue; (2) Emma Bridget, dau. of Thos. Artemidious
Russell, of Cheshunt Park, Co. Herts, 2nd June 1834. Died
24th April 1863 at Snitterby.
3 daughters;
1. Elizabeth, died 1863.
2. Louisa, mar. Lieut.-Gen. Wynyard.
3. Charlotte, mar. Rev. James Bush.
ISSUE OF ASHTON WARNER AND ELIZABETH ROSS
4 sons:
1. Thornton, b. 10th March 1812. Ed. Harrow. Col. Civil
Service. Mar. 1836, (1) Jane Clogstoun, dau. of J. Johnson,
Chief Justice of Trinidad; (2) 1845, Harriet Anne, dau. of
Captain Span, Indian Army.
2. Henry, b. 23rd Oct. 1813. Barrister. Mar. Louisa Gambs,
Died 25th July 1843.
3. Frederick, b. 1815. Ed. Harrow. Barrister; Senior Un-
official Member of Legislative Council, and Solicitor-General,
Trinidad. Mar. Jeanetta Maria, dau. of Rev. W. Gun-
thorpe, of Antigua, at St. Marylebone, London, 1843. Died
1890.
4. Richard Albert, b. March 1817. Rector of St. Patrick and
St. David, Tobago. o.s.p.
1 daughter:
Georgiana Woodford, b. Sept. 1819 in London; mar. Sept. 1840,
Anthony Clogstoun, of Trinidad.


ISSUE OF THORNTON WARNER AND JANE JOHNSON
A son:
Ashton Henry, b. 10th Nov, 1838. Colonel, 41st Regt. Mar.
186-, Leila, dau. of Surgeon-Major Hastings. Settled at
Launceston, Tasmania. Governor of the Gaol at Hobart.
1 son, Hugh, fruit farmer, Tasmania.
ISSUE OF THORNTON WARNER AND HARRIET SPAN
4 sons:
1. Oliver William, b. April 1846. Ed. Clifton. Immigration
Agent of Trinidad in India. Mar. 1871, (1) Lucie, dau. of
E. Mathieu, Esq., of Trinidad, who died without issue; (2)
1885, Leila, dau. of General Justice.
2. Reginald Richard, b. Oct. 1850. Ed. Clifton Coll. Settled
in Australia, Died 1927 in New Zealand. o.s.p.
3. Thornton Henry, b. 1853. Ed. Clifton Coll. Civil Service.
Mar. 1879, Isabella Laetitia, dau. of Colin Dick, of Trinidad.
Died 1918.
4. Henry Charles, b. 1854; died, unmarried, 1929.
2 daughters;
1. Katherine Eliza, b. 1855; mar. Henry Anson, who afterwards
assumed the name of Horton, and has issue.
2. Emily Maud, b. 1858; mar. Edmund Wilder, and has issue.
ISSUE OF OLIVER WILLIAM WARNER AND
LEILA JUSTICE
4 sons;
1. Oliver Clive, b. Sept. 1887. R.N. Served in Battle Cruiser
Squadron. Retired as Commander, Nov. 1929.
2. Charles Thornton, b. Aug. 1889, 22nd Punjabis. Siege of
Kut. Mentioned in Despatches. Died Sept. 1920. 0.8. E.
(military).
3. Arnold Ashton, b. Aug. 1893. Ist Batt. Grenadier Guards.
Killed in action at St. Leger, Aug. 1918.
4. Clive Wynyard, b. Nov. 1898. Enlisted 2nd Batt. Dorset Regt.,
commission Skinner’s Horse. Died at Quetta, Oct. 1918.
2 daughters:
1. Leila May, b. 1891; mar. Frank Stamford Thackeray, Comman-
der of a Brigade in France. D.5.0., M.C.
2. Olive Wynyard, b. 1898.
159 M


ISSUE OF THORNTON HENRT WARNER AND
ISABELLA DICK
2 sons:
i. Thornton Span, b. 1883. Ed. Clifton. Mar. Mildred, dau.
of Henry Pasea of Col. Police Service, 1910. Capt., Glouces-
ter Regt. Killed at Battle of the Somme, 23rd July 1916.
Issue;
Charles Henry Thornton, b. Oct. 1910. Pilot, R.A.F
2. Frederick Archibald, b. 1884; mar. Marjorie, dau. of Jas. M,
Winantsof Brooklyn, N.Y., 1917. Commander,R.N. D.S.O,
Killed in action, coast of Holland, 1917. Issue:
Frederick, b. 1918. Naval Cadet.
ISSUE OF FREDERICK WARNER AND
JEANETTA GUNTHORPE
2 sons;
1. Broderick Shipley, b. 1847. Barrister. Died 1881. o.s.p.
2. Frederick Ashton, b. 1859. Ed. Queen’s Royal College,
Trinidad. London Doctor and Surgeon. Assistant Surgeon
in France, 1915. Mar. 1887, Sydney Anne, dau. of Christo-
pher Grove, of Hertfordshire.
3 daughters:
1. Alice Louisa, mar. Rev. E. Murray, of Trinidad.
2. Georgiana Frances, mar. N. Cox of Col. Civil Service, o.s.p.
3. Jeanetta, died an infant.
ISSUE OF FREDERICK ASHTON WARNER AND
SYDNEY GROVE
2 sons
1. Broderick Ashton, b. 1888. Ed. Winchester Coll. Col. Civil
Service.
2. Christopher Frederick Ashton. Scholar, Winchester. Demi-
ship, Magdalen Coll., Oxford. Diplomatic Service. Capt.,
Royal Fusiliers. Wounded.
ISSUE OF RICHARD WARNER AND EMMA BRIDGET
RUSSELL
3 sons
1. Ashton Cromwell, b. Aug. 1835; mar. 1868, (1) Geraldine,
dau. of Marmaduke Jefferies of Kernel Hempstead, Co. Herts;
(2) 1872, Florence Louisa, dau. of William Stapleton Piers of
Tristernagh Abbey, West Meath. (See Chap. IX.)


2. Richard Edward, b. Nov. 1836. Ed. Exeter Coll,, Oxford.
Rector of Snitherby. Canon of Lincoln. Vicar of Gains-
borough. Mar. 1864, Mary Janetta Hale, dau. of Major
Constantine Yeoman.
3. Wynyard Huddleston, b. Sept. 1838; mar. Jane Davidson,
dau. of W. Bell of Litchfield. (See Chap. IX).
ISSUE OF ASHTON CROMWELL WARNER AND
FLORENCE LOUISA PIERS
1 son:
1. Lionel Ashton Piers, b. April 187$. C.B.E. (Civil). Mar.
Nina Mary, dau. of Capt. Matthew Liddon, Bth The King’s,
of Iron Acton, Glos.
3 daughters:
1. Bridget Nora Cromwell.
2. Marjorie Ellen.
3. Esther Hastings, mar. James Graham Bush, 1901.
ISSUE OF RICHARD EDWARD WARNER AND
MART JANETTA HALE YEOMAN
6 sons
1. Leonard Ottley, b. March 1867; mar. 1898, Florence, dau.
of Thos. Ed. Fenwick, Leeds. Rector of Kerby Misperton,
Yorks. Served in S. African War.
2. Basil Hale, b. 1871; mar. Hilda Reade, dau. of Henry Wood-
roffe, Canon of Grahamstown. Rector of All Saints’, Chard-
stock. Served in S. African War. Native Commissioner in
Swaziland. 1.5.0.
3. Richard Cromwell, b. 1872; mar. (1) Grace Rankin, dau. of
Colonel Thompson Wilson of Beccles; (2) Theodora Mary,
dau. of William Henry Lucas, Canon of Winchester.
4. Laurance Dundas, b. 1873. Served in S. African War. Died
1927, unmarried.
5. Wynyard Alexander, b. 1875; mar. 1909, Olive Gertrude, dau.
of Charles Henry Wright, of Lillington Hall, Stafford. Died
1926, leaving 1 daughter Mary, b. 1911. Served in Great
War. M.C., Battle of the Somme.
6. Marmaduke, b. Feb. 1878. Vicar of St. Germans, Roath.
Served as a private in S. African War and Chaplain to the
Forces in the Great War.


2 daughters:
1. Constance Emma Cromwell, b. 1865; mar. George Edward
Weigall, Major, R.A.
2. Mary Chaloner, b. 1868.
ISSUE OF LIONEL ASHTON PIERS WARNER AND
NINA MART LIDDON
2 sons:
1. Ashton Cromwell, b. 1908.
2. William Henry Cromwell, b. 1918.
1 daughter:
Kathleen, b. 1910.
ISSUE OF LEONARD OTTLEY WARNER AND
FLORENCE FENWICK
3 sons
1. Ashton Christopher Fenwick, b. 1901; mar. 1929, Inez, dau.
of A. H. Ransdale, of Rosario de Santa F£.
2. John Martin, b. 1906.
3. Richard Ottley, b. 1911.
3 daughters;
1. Audrey Elizabeth Cromwell, b. 1900; mar. Alexander Outh-
waite Joy, 1930.
2. Joyce Trevor, b. 1905.
3. Mary Yeoman, b. 1909.
ISSUE OF BASIL HALE WARNER AND
HILDA READS WOODROFFE
2 daughters:
1. Joan Ottley Cromwell, b. 1907; mar, William Bray.
2. Monica Mary Hale, b. 1912.
ISSUE OF RICHARD CROMWELL WARNER
1. By his first wife, Grace Rankin Wilson, he had 1 son, Oliver
Martin Wilson, b. 1903, who mar. Dorothy Jenny Blanchard
in 1925 and has 1 dau., Bridget Cromwell, b. 1928.
2. By his second wife, Theodora Mary Lucas, he had 2 daus.:
( a ) Grace Elizabeth, b. igoSjinar.toT. W.B. Jennings, 1930;
{£) Margaret Elizabeth, b. igio.


PEDIGREE: PART lI—C
ISSUE OF JOSEPH WARNER BY HIS SECOND WIFE,
LAURA ELIZABETH ASHE
4 sons:
1. Joseph, b. 1804.
2. Robert, b. 1806.
3. William Kirby, b. 1811.
4. John, b. 1816.
1 daughter:
Laura, b. 1808; mar. 1836, Frederick Angelo Bradburn of
Chichester.
William Kirby, mar. Frederika Elizabeth, dau. of George Battye in
1841, and left 1 son, William Banatyne, b. 1842, and 1 dau., Ellen
Morris, b. 1845.


AUTHORITIES
CHAPTER I
Statements in the text as to the early history of the family, where not
the subject of special reference, are made upon the authority of one or
more of the following: Wright’s History of Essex, Vol. I, p. 193; History
and Antiquities of the County of Essex, 1816, Philip Morant, Vol. I,
pp. 84, 311; Vol. 11, pp. 93, 100, 250.
j. Chancery Inq. P.M., Series 11, Vol. 111, No. 40.
2. Victoria History of the County of Suffolk, Vol. 11, p. 175. Brit. Mus,
3. Suffolk. William A. Duff (Methuen).
4. Coppinger’s Records and MSS. of Suffolk, Vol. V.
History of Rockford Hundred, by Philip Brenton, p. 403.
Visitations of Suffolk, 1577-1612. Harleian Collection.
5. De Ross’s Memorials of the Tower of London, p. 105.
London, by Walter Besant, p. 158.
Bayley’s History of the Tower. West Indian Committee Library.
CHAPTER II
1. Country Life, Vol. X, p. 264.
‘Suffolk Parishes, Their History and Romance; Parham,’ East Anglian
Daily Times, 3rd August 1927.
2. History of the Manor of Framlingkam, Vol. X, pp. 264, 348, 379.
(Loder.)
3. Archaeological Antiquities of Suffolk, Davy’s Suffolk Collections.
4. Trevelyan, Hist, of England, pp. 437, 438.
5. A Young Squire of the Seventeenth Century, by John Cordy Jeaffreson,
Vol. I. (Hurst & Blackett, 1878.)
Antigua and the Antiguans. Anon. (Saunders & Ottley, 1844.)
6. fas. A. Williamson, p. 71.
Egerton MSS. 2395, ff. 15, 16.
7. Arnould Leers. (Rotterdam, 1658.)
8. Brit, Mus. printed papers, 4453, f. 4 (3).
9. Col. Office I, Vol. 9, Nos. 21, 22.
10. Cavaliers and Roundheads in Barbados, N. Darnell Davis.
11. Williamson, p. 25, note.
12. Idem., p. 31.


CHAPTER 111
1. The History of the Island of Antigua, Vere Oliver, Vol. 11. (Mitchell
& Hughes, 1899.)
2. William Dampler, Clennell Wilkinson, pp, 30, 31. (John Lane.)
CHAPTER IV
1. ‘Family Trees,’ by O. G. Knapp, Genealogists’ Magazine, June, 1931.
2. Collections by Henry Davy, Add. MSS. 19154.
CHAPTER V
1. Visitations of Suffolk, 1577-1612. Harleian MSS.
2. Suckling’s History of Suffolk, Vol. 11, p. 215.
3. Supplement to the Suffolk Traveller, by Page, p. 904. Brit. Mus.
CHAPTER VII
1. The Manors of Suffolk, Coppinger, Vol. VII, p. 241.
2. Suffolk Travellers, by John Kirby, pp. in, 103 ddq.
3. 4. England under Queen Anne, Blenheim. (Trevelyan.)
CHAPTER VIII
1. Guildhall Library.
CHAPTER IX
1. United Services Magazine, Vol. 111, p. 477. (1849.)
2. D.N.B.
Burke's Peerage, 1857. Sub. Buchan, Earl of.
3. Halstead’s History of Kent.
4. Figures in Parliament, by Thomas Carlyle, pp. 166-201.


Andrews, Sir Thomas, 9 1
Anne, Queen, 108
Antigua, 35
Aplon, Sergeant, 23
Appleyard, Elizabeth, 17,
89
Appleyard, Robert, 90
Arms of Warner, 8 8
Asgar, 1
Ashley, Francis, 95
Ashton, Col. Henry, 82
Asteley, Dorothy, 93
Asteley, Francis, 92
Asteley, Isaac, 93
Asteley, Thomas, 92, 94
Astelyns, 3
Atkins, Sir John, 61, 72,
81
Aucher, 125
Aylmer, 97
Badmondisfield, 91
Baker, 100
Barbados, 28
Barbe, 37
Barbuda, 45
Barker, Sir William, 106
Bartholomew’s Hospital,
107
Beadle, Thomas, 62
Benifield, 23
Bethlehem, 95
Binns, Robert, 23
Black Bess , 24
Blenerhasset, 13
Blomer, Ralph, D.D., 126
Blowe, Augustin, 94
Bohun, Humphrey De, 1
Bond, Mr., 23
Boraston, Richard, 69
Boutetort, 7, 9
Boyers, 62
Boyers, Robert, 96
Boyos, 37
Boys or Bois, 2
Boyton, Chapter VII
Bridewell, 95
Buchan, Earl of, 124
Buchanan, George, 117
Bullochs, 1
Bureas or Burches, 3
Burnley, W. F. & Co., 134
Buxton, Robert, 93
Call, Anthony, 93
Call, Francis, 93
Calles, 93
Camden, 88
Cardinal , Le, 39
Cardine, Col., 66
Caribbean Sea, 22, 75
Carlisle, Lord, 33, 34, 35
Carlton, Sir Dudley, 114
Catholique , La, 39
Cavaliers and Roundheads
in Barbados, 50


Cavan, Lubbock & Co.,
*34
Charles, King, 27
Chatham Hall, 1
Chelmsford, 1
Cheynie, 97
Chrew, 67
Clarendon, Lord, 114
Clare of Jesus, Sister, 100
Clyfton, 89
Cocke, Elizabeth, 92
Coleridge, H. N., 27
Colvill, Dan, 92
Colvill, Thos., 93
Corrance of Rendlesham, 19
Courthope of Cranbroke,
17, 89
Coveil, Eliza, 96
Coveil, Thos., 95
Coventry, Secretary, 45
Crannesford, 92
Cratfield, 17, 18, 89
Crombroke, 90
Cromwell, Oliver, 129
Culloden, Battle of, 119
Cusac, De, 44
Cutts, Richard of Clare, 90
Dampier, 76
D’Esnambuc, 35 et seq.
Dennington, 107
Devereux, Lady Francis,
112
Devereux, Walter Boucher,
Capt., 112
Dines, 7, 9
Domesday, 19
Dominica, Chapter 111
Dowsing, William, 19, 20
Duke, Sir Edward, 106
Dunmow, 1
‘Du Roye je le tiens,’ 88
Easter or Ester, Good, 3, 4
High, 3, 4
Elizabeth, Queen, 13, Ic,
and Chapter VIII
Elizabeth of England, 3
Elnor, 96
Emsam, William, 4
Erpingham, 17
Eson, 96
Essex Ring, Chapter VIII
Everard, 10, 17
Eyke, 92
Featley, Rev. John, 46, 47
Felsted, 2
Ffrye, Lieut. John, 71
Finger Ring Lore , 115
Fitz-Osbert-Harling, 89
Framlingham, 18
Fressingfield, 90
Froude, Anthony, Chap-
ter X, 136
Fynchingfield, 3 et seq.
Gernon, 7, 9
Gift of God , 49
Girling, Francis, 92


Girling, Mary, 93, 96
Girling, William, 92, 93
Godfrey, Mrs., 16
Gonville, 89
Gordon, Sir Arthur, 13 1
Gosnold, Ann, 94, MI
Gosnold, John, 93
Grasscock, Rowland, 23
Graye, Robert, 96
Great Glenham, 92
Grey, Lady Jane, 13, 15
Guadeloupe, 48
Guy’s Hospital, 1
Hackeson, 20
Hall, Sarah, 95
Hamlyn, William, 62, 78
Hanmer, Sir Thomas, 100
Harrington, Earl of, 122
Harris, Lord, 133, 134
Hatton Street, 119
Hawes, Ann, 105
Hawes, Thomas, 106
Hawley, Capt., 51, 54
Helyon, Elizabeth, 7, 9
Hengrave Hall, 101
Henham Hall, 9
Henry VII, Chapter, 116
Henry VIII, 2
Heraldic Visitations, 6, 7
Hertford, Earl of, 13, 14
Hickling Hall, 105
Hide Hall, 1
Hogge, Catherine, 92
Holbeck, Frances, 92
Hollisley, 92
Hopewell , 23
How Street, 1
Hubberd, 17
Hugues, Victor, 128
Hume, W. 8., 134
‘lndian Warner,’ Chap-
ter 111
Inglethorpe, 89
Ingulf, 8
Inquisition P. M., 4, 6
James I, 21
Jeaffreson, 22 et seq.
Jerningham, 17, 89
Jesse Windows, 83
Johnson, 125
Jones, Sergt., 23
Kelvedon, 89
Kemp, Robert, 4, 5
Kirby, T. N., 121
Knox, Andre, 134
Kyson Point, 23
Labat, Pere, 80
Lancheston, 98
Langley, 23
Langleys, 1, 11
Latine , 121
Lees Priory, Leighs, Little
Lees, 2,11
Leman, Thos., 106
Le Wafre, 17


Lee Warner, ioi
Lewis, Abigail, 96
Lewis, William, 96
Linstead, 90
Little Waltham, 3
Lubbock, Sir Nevile, 135
Lyall, Edw., 91
Lynch, Mrs., 67
Maddox, 124
Magnaville, 1
Maldon, 3, 7, 9
Manchepe, Anne, 92
Manning, 124
Marcower, Ernest, 116
Marryat, Joseph, & Sons,
134
Martinique, 48
Mary Queen of Scots, 116
Maurice, Prince, 114
Maurier, Aubrey de, 114
Medley, Samuel, 119
Merchant Taylors, 95
Merifield, Ralph, 22 et seq.
‘Merwar’s Hope, ’ 27
Mildenhall, 6
Mildmay, 96
Montague, Earl of Man-
chester, 2
Montserrat, 28
Morant, 12, 15
Moyster, 17
Nawnton, 93
Nevis, 27, 35, 44
Newlands, 3
Nieuport, Chapter VI
North, Capt. Roger, 22,
9i
North, Dudley, 106
North, Sir Henry, 9 1
Northall, Robert, 93
Northumberland, Duke of,
.*5
Nottingham, Countess of,
Nudigate, Thomas, 5
Oliver, Vere Langford,
Chapter IX, 81
Ottley, Brooks, 121
‘Ouarnard,’ Madame, 79
Packlesham, 7, 9
Painton, Capt. Thos., 22
Parham, 18, 89, 107
Pepysian Manuscripts, 79
Perrin, Bishop, 98
Philips, 3, 17
Phillpot, 87
Phcenix , H.M.S., 63, 79
Plasse, 3
Playshye, 4
Plumstead Church, 13
Pontoise, 104
Pooley, Edmond, 17
Powle, Mrs., 17
Quarterings and Pedigree,
Chapter IV


Raleigh, Sir Walter, 22,
25
Ralf House, Eltham, 21
Reydon, John, 93
Reynall, 64
Reynoldes, 92
Rhodes, John, 23
Richelieu, Cardinal, 39
Riche Lord, Earl of War-
wick, 1, 2, 3, 34
Rochford, 7
Roger, 1
Roide, 17
Rossy, Du, 39, 43, 44
Rouse, Mary, 17, 91
Rouse, Sir Edmund, 17,
9 1
Rouse, Sir John, 9 1
Rudyerd, 124, 125
Ryle, William, 23
St. Andrew’s, Holborn, 89
St. Andrew Undershaft, 89,
97
St. Botolph, 46
St. Christopher, 22, 23
St. Peter, Westminster, 8
Saunders, Mistress, 92
Savage, Mary, 95
Seckford, John, 16
Seckford, Sir Thomas, 16
Seymour, Lady Catherine,
13, H
Shand, Samuel, 120, 121
Shand, William, 120, 121
Sharpe, Samuel, 119
Sheffield, Edmund, Duke
of Buckingham, 2
Shipley, Sir Chas., 123, 124
Shottisham, 92
Smollett, 125
South House Manor, 1
Southwell, Sir Robert, 75,
? 6
Spalding, Ann, 92
Spanish Armada, 21
Spriggey, 17
Stapleton, Sir William, 59,
72, 73
Stofer, Thos., 93
Stow, John, 98
Stradbrooke, 18, 94
Surgeons’ College, 119
Swinborne, 9
Tasted, William, 23
Taylor, Thomas, 66
Teale, Mary, 124
Tennant, Sir Charles, Sons
& Co., 134
Tertre, Du, 38
Thornbee, 17
Thornbury, see Quarter-
ings
Thornton, Robert, 120
Thundersley, 5
Thynne, Rev. Lord John,
112
Thynne Ring, 112
Togreman, 22


Toledo, Don Fadrique de,
47
Tower of London, 13, 14,
Tresenville, 38
Tufnell, Samuel, 9
Turchill, 1
Ufford, 21
Unwin, 1
Virginia, 25, 26
Waleys, Manor of, 3
Wallasea Island, 8
Walter, Hubert, 1
Waltham, Great, Much,
Little, 2, 3
Ware, Mr., 23
Warner;
Andrews, 91
Ann, 5
Anne (Gosnold), wife of
Edmund, 95
Anthony of Stradbrooke,
16,19.93.94
Arms of, motto and crest,
88
Ashton, Atty.-Gen. Lee-
ward Islands, 111
Ashton Cromwell, 129
Ashton, son of William,
121
Charles William, C.8.,
Chapter X
Warner, continued —
Damaris, 91
Daniel Francis, 127
Edmund, of the Manor
of Warners, 1
Edmund, of Parham, son
of Francis and Mary
Rouse, 92, 93, 94
Edmund, son of Francis
and Elizabeth Rouse,
98, 102, Chapter VII
Edmund, ‘The Infant,’
Chapter VII
Edward, Col., son of
William, 122
Edward, Col., of An-
tigua, in
Edward, merchant tay-
lor, 95, 96 et seq.
Edward, physician, 98,
101
Edward, son of Sir
Thomas, 57
Edward, Sir, Lieut, of
Tower, 13 et seq.
Francis, of Parham and
Framlingham, 16, 89,
9i
Francis, High Sheriff of
London, 90
Francis, of Moulsey, 20,
9 s .
Francis, Sir John’s bro-
ther, 98, 102
Francis, of Wingfield, 16


Warner, continued —
Francis, of Wing-
farding, 16
Henry, of Finchingfield,
3> 4> 5> 6
Henry, son of Francis,
92, 93
Henry, of Warners, 3
Jack le, 12
John, Sir, Bart., Chap-
ter VI
John, Dr., Lord Bishop
of Rochester, 101
John, grandson of Fran-
cis, 92, 93
John, of Warners, 7
John, of Warner’s Hall,
3> 7
John le, 7, 12, 84, 85
John, son of Francis of
Framlingham, 17
Joseph, F.R.S., 19
Joseph, second son of
Joseph, 128
Joseph Thomas, son of
William, 121
Lionel Ashton Piers, 28
Pelham, Francis, 126
Philip, Col., in
Poulett, 91
Richard le, 12
Richard, second son of
Joseph, F. R. S., 128
Robert, of Cratfield, 17,
9°, 96
Warner, continued —
Robert, of Cratfield,
Junior, 90
Robert, grandson of
Francis, 92, 93
Robert, son of Edmund
and Anne Gosnold, 98
Robert ‘ went into Suf-
folk,’ 16
Robert, of Wingfarding,
16
Robert, of Wingfield, 16
Samuel, 28, 120
Susan, dau. of Sir John,
104
Thomas, Sir, Chapter II
Thomas, Sir, son of Sir
Thomas, 58
Thomasine, 5
Ursula, dau. of Edmund,
92
Walter le, 12
William, of Dominica,
120
William, of Framling-
ham, 17
William, of Wingfield,
16
Wynward Huddleston,
Warner’s Farm, 11
Warners, Manor of, 1, 2,
3> 4
Warren Hastings, 41
Weaver, Mr., 23


INDEX
Westminster Abbey, 8 Winthrop, 26
Wethendale, 90 Wolseley, Cardinal, 33
Willoughby, Lord, 5, 19, Woodbridge, 23
34, 61 Wright, Rev. Bingham,
Windebank, 49, 54 9
Printed in Great Britain by Butler & Tanner Ltd., Frome and London


