

COPYRIGHT.
Unauthorised
Biography
Sir Joseph Ward,
Premier of Mew Zealand,
price Sixpence.




Sir Joseph Ward.
How He Became Premier of
New Zealand.
Being an unauthorised biography of our
Right Hon. Prime Minister, Sir Joseph George
Ward, Knight Commander of the Most Distin-
tinguished Order of St. Michael and St. George,
Privy Councillor, etc., etc.; together with sundry
remarks on the Gentle Art of Getting On, for the
edification of the young, and hints on high finance,
bluff, and plunging for the edification of business
men, and ambitious youths aspiring to become
Aristocratic Knights and Colonial Premiers.
O


BIOGRAPHY
Sir JOSEPH WARD.
CIIAFTER I.
*
The career of the titled gentleman who represents the Bluff, and,
fora brief space, the people of the Dominion, affords a most striking ob-
ject lesson of how to get on in this world, and is perhaps more fitted for
the realm of romance and fiction than mere newspaper articles of a bio-
graphical nature.
But truth is ever stranger than fiction, and tlie romantic career of
our present premier reads more like a chapter from Lawson’s “Frenzied
Finance” or some American political novel, than the simple life history
of an ordinary colonial premier. It has been a common enough occur-
rence in the history of the colonies for self-made men to reach the dizzy
heights of a title and a premiership, and in many other cases this emin-
ence has not been reached by a strict observance of the ten command-
ments, the lesser litany, or even common law, but wo might search the
political history of the Empire in vain for so highly coloured an instance
of a man recklessl}’ disregarding every accepted canon of commercial
and political morality, and then being accepted by a complacent people
as Prime Minister.
It needs only a quiet, critical and dispassionate study of Sir Joseph’s
meteoric career to demonstrate to any man with a speck of true patriot-
ism in his breast, that if there is one man in New Zealand to-day whose
life history and business transactions have rendered him unfit fer the re-
sponsibilities of a premier, it is the same Sir Joseph Ward, And it is be-
cause the people here have such short memories, that wo think the pre-
sent time a proper one to point out these defects in his character and the
folly of trusting an individual possessing such a poisonous history, with
the control of the destiny of these fair islands of ours 1 To us it would
scorn infinitely more reasonable to make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear
or butter out of churning water, than to make an upright, honest and
trustworthy leader out of a party politician with the amazing and rotten
record of Joseph Ward.’
In a community where common honesty and ordinary fair-
play are regarded as preferable to trickery, cheating, swindling and lying
a politician with a public record like JosephJWard would have been in-


continently tired into the obscurity from whence he came, and a shnddet
would run through every honest citizen when his name was mentioned.
Instead, we find our Joseph decorated with a title which at one time was a
reward in recognition of gallant conduct, public service, or gentlemanly
behaviour, but which now is a tawdry thing which conveys about as
much merit as a Jay-Pay-ship, and is obtainable by such dubious means
that decent and honest politicians would never dream of accepting it.
Put Sir Joseph always had a good eye for circus and limelight, and so
well has he brazened out his past career that during, his recent visit to
England, ho was the pampered pet of Kings, Princes, Dukes and Peers,
who would have fainted had they ever read, say r , Judge Williams’ re-
marks on the bank-breaker of the Bluff.
Some readers may ask, ‘'Why not forget it ? We know that Ward’s
early career was shady, and that he sailed as near the gaol gates as man
possibly could without getting inside, but the man was punished by the
publicity and ho paid his debts, and why rake it up again ? ” We do
not believe in this specious and Jesuitical reasoning. We believe that
the Ward of to-day is no different to the Ward of old. He has shown
no signs of being a reformed character, but there is every indication that
he is the same unscrupulous plunger to-day that he was thirteen y'ears
ago, and tlie assertion that he paid every penny of the losses he was re-
sponsible for is absolutely untrue, and those who suffered from his reck-
less speculation and shady finance are still suffering, and Ward has not
yet shown any sign of making restitution.
When, therefore, Ward asks the country to believe his word as
against that of a man of proved honesty like A.. W. Hogg, wo ask what
Ward has done that we should believe him before Hogg ? Let those
who doubt it read the facts set forth in this history of Sir Joseph, and wo
feel no hesitation in saying that sooner or later the smash must come,
and with a man of Ward’s character at the helm of the ship of State wo
had better look out for rocks ahead. His past career shows that ho has
never hesitated to bolster up his private operations in "Oats” and other
produce, and he is quite capable of doing it again.
For much of the copy wo are indebted to Mr. Y. M. Brauud, who
has fearlessly 7 stuck to his guns in defence of Right and Justice, and has
denounced "Ward’s misdeeds with a courage and pertinacity worthy of far
greater recognition than they have so far received. Through his efforts
many people have had their eyes opened, and perhaps time will bring
to Sir Joseph Ward the retribution which Fate holds over the heads of
all sinners, and ho will yet have to reap the harvest of his political and
financial wild oats which he sowed so lavishly and so recklessly.
CHAPTER 11.
The early career of Sir Josepdr Ward contains nothing ot particular
interest or importance. He sprang from humble and obscure parentage,
in's mother at one time keeping a poor sort of a pub at the Bluff. Sir
Joseph himself first started out in life as a messenger boy in the Post
Office, and, by his push and ability, worked his way up to the position


of telegraph operator. A disagreement with the Department ended his
career as a civil servant, and we next learn of him as a casual tally-clerk
on the wharf at the Bluff.
All this, however, has very little concern with this narrative. Suf-
ficient to say that he started in business on his own as a grain, mutton,
and general produce agent, iu a small way, and his upward journey to
his present dazzling eminence was given a big impetus by his marriage
with the daughter of a well-to-do publican at the Bluff.
By 1892 Sir Joseph Ward, by his push, plunging and speculating,
had built up a large business —in fact an unwieldy and risky business.
Sir Joseph himself had for some years represented the Bluff in Parlia-
ment, and on the death of Ballance became Colonial Treasurer in Seddon’s
first Ministry.
On December 2nd, 1892, he converted his business into a company,
with the imposing title of the “J. G. Ward’s Farmers Association of
New Zealand, Ltd.” This concern, with its big mouthful of high-
sounding nomenclature, took over Ward’s business, and was intended to
be a sort of co-operative affair. Apparently Ward’s idea was to allow
the Southland farmers to be the “C 0.,” while he did the “operating,”
with the Association’s cash.
The conditions under which the “J, G. W's. F.A.N.Z., Ltd,, was
floated was characteristic of Sir Joseph, whose striking feature right
through his career has been his bounce and bamboozle. “Bluff” has
been the ke} r -note of his life, and still is. He started out iu life at the
Bluff; he built up his business on the bluff; and for many years he has
fittingly and thoroughly represented Bluff in Parliament. His re-election
there on his forced retirement as a bankrupt was not surprising when we
see the prodigality with which he distributed largesse, and the people’s
cash, among them.
But to our muttons. The Articles of Association of the Ward’s
Farmers Ass, contained, inter alia, the following clause : —“ Purchase
money of £50,000 to be paid to J. G. Ward as follows, viz., £3O in cash,
balance by the issue of 9993 shares of £5 each, forming part ot the
capital of the Company, and credited in its books as paid up.” Apart
from Sir Joseph there were only seven other shareholders in the concern
when floated, and each of these held only one share. Of the 10000
shares at £5, Ward owned 9993, which were designated “paid up, ’’ but
for which he had never paid a shilling. They were simply shares given
to him as veudor, for the purchase of his business. The method ot
flotation was, of course, a clever bit of high finance, although we doubt
if even the Auckland Stock Exchange would quote on its board a wild-
cat concern floated on such lines as these, and in spite of the obvious fact
that the shares of Ward’s were never paid for in cash, the bluff was
tried that the Ward Farmers Ass. had paid up £50,000, and the bluff
came oft.
It must be apparent to the reader that a concern iu which, at the
outset, one man held 9,993 out of 10,000 shares was purely a one-man
■show, and it was simply Sir Joseph turning himself and his business,
with all its ramifications, into a joint stock co. of which he was 99.93 per
cent and in which he held a 99.93 per cent interest. As to Ward’s
position at the time of this conversion, it is difficult to know how he


stood. A few months afterwards he was able to declare boastfully from’
his seat on the Government benches that “ last year I was one of the 75
people in the colony who paid income tax on an income of over £3OOO a
year, and was not then in receipt of a Ministerial salary. I also paid a
•considerable sum for land tax,” and went on to assert that his property,
with one trifling exception, was unencumbered. This latter statement
was the usual bluff, and was utterly false, as the Colonial Bank held a
little monkey of £53,000 over his property.
However, one thing is certain, and that is that two days before
Ward’s Farmers Ass. was formed Sir Joseph’s owed the Colonial Bank
£81,635. His Ass. started on December 2nd, 1892, with a credit balance
of £787 in the same bank, which balance three days later become an
overdraft of £15,269; while by some peculiar coincidence Sir Joseph’s
private debt to the Bank of £81,631 was reduced by just about the amount
of his new Ass’s, overdraft to £70,375.
However, the J. G. Ward’s Farmers Association of New Zealand Ltd.
was successfully floated with much flourishing of trumpets, and a grand
display of the verbal fireworks for which Sir Joseph has become so justly
famous. The points to be remembered at this stage are that Sir Joseph
held 9,993 out of 10,000 shares in the newly floated Company, and it
was practically Ward, and no one else, who owned and controlled it.
.'l'.
CHAPTER 111.
■Our readers will by now have realised the position Sir Joseph stood in
regarding the "‘J. G. Ward’s Farmers’ Association of N. Z., Ltd.,” and
Lor a brief space we would like to wander a little into another affair
which Ward was interested in at this time, for it throws an interesting
side-light on his prosperity and the dubious methods by which he made
Lis position sure. It also shows how it was that Sir Joseph secured such
a footing in the hearts of the simple farmers of Southland in general, and
Awarua in particular, a confidence which, singularly enough, he has re-
gained to the present day.
One of the great industries of Southland has always been mutton,
;and from 1888 to 1891 the Southland Freezing Company had a monop-
oly of the freezing business there. Its business was so good that its profits
reached to 39 per cent on the paid-up capital. Ward was a director of
this concern, and while director the company entered into an agreement
with Nelson Bros, to sell all their mutton to Nelson’s, while the latter
•agreed not to erect or be in any way connected with any opposition
which might start and cut into the Southland Company’s monopoly.
Shortly after this agreement was made Joseph resigned from the
directorate, and soon the whisper went round that Joseph was
going to have a plunge into the frozen mutton business. Nelson’s agent
in Southland wrote to his chief that Ward had a big business at the
Bluff, and did not like to see a monopoly in mutton out of which he got
nothing. They offered Ward a discount of two and a half per cent on
all sheep supplied by his clients, a joint agency in the Tyser Line, and
-other minor advantages described as “real good business.”


. CHAPTER IV. «
This, however, did not suit Sir Joseph's game, and after a lot of dip-
lomatic correspondence with Nelson’s, Ward announced that unless tbey
came in with him he would arrange for freights outside their steamers
and cut their throats as Avell as that of the Southland Freezing Monopoly.
Nelson Eros, then had to choose between keeping faith with the Freez-
ing Company, or fighting a Cabinet Minister for business. The upshot
was that Ward started his Ocean Eeaeh Freezing Works in opposition
to the Southland Freezing Co., and with a secret agreement with Nel-
son Eros, by which he received specially favourable terms for his
mutton.
Sir Joseph himself wrote to Nelson's, “I think it better, both in the
interests of Nelson Eros, and myself, that no publicity should be given to
our relationship. It would certainly render the buying of sheep more
difficult for me, and Nelson’s opponents would feel that a large monopoly
of Southland was in his hands, and thus might create further oppos-
ition.” So that with the idea in his mind of bursting up the Southland.
Freezing Co. and at the same time kidding the farmers ho was a free
lance coming out for their benefit. Ward started his Ocean Eeaeh Freezer.
As may be imagined, competition between him and the Freezing Co,
was very lively, and things were cut so fine that Sir Joseph at one time
was paying Ids Gd a head for wethers which were converted into freezers
fetching 12s. Naturally the famners were delighted with a man like Sir
Joseph, who gave them half-a-crown more a head for their sheep than
he got fur them, and it is no wonder they returned him to Parliament
and have always stuck to him since. A man who scatters largesse in
this style is bound to be a popular candidate, and under the present sys-
tem any ass, such as Witherford for instance, with two or three thousand
pounds could buy any electorate in N.Z.
Of comse this generosity on Ward’s part did not in its final analysis
ceme out of Sir Joseph’s pocket, but with the rest of his financial burdens
was lumped on the Colonial Bank shareholders. After a year or so Ward
entered into a fresh agreement with Nelson Eros, in regard to his Oeeaii
Eeaeh Freezer < and wrote as follows :
“I would be glad if you would consider whether your firm would
come into the concern independently of all other j^eople. I want to keep
entirely free from farmers, as, once associated with them the work's be-
come a lever to grind down the profits of the works to assure additional
value to their stock. As far as you are concerned, and as far as the
works at Ocean Eeaeh are concerned, the less independent they are, (which
of course, means the farmers) the-better it will be for all the works and
you. My own idea, roughly, is that 1 should company the concern, yon
taking an interest to be agreed upon, and*that wo should work for our
join interest.”
The ultimate upshot of Ward's little flutter in mutton was that h©
sold his Ocean Eeaeh Freezer to Nelson Eros, for f &0,000 an cl the South-
land Co. brought an action against Nelson's for breach of agreement-
They secured FT,OOO damages, but the result was upset by the Appeal


Court. That Ward, as a director of the Southland Co., should enter into
a solemn compact with Nelson’s that the latter should not be connected
with any rival concern, and then, immediately on leaving the Southland
Co., to start a freezer of his own, and finally sell out to Nelson’s, shows
the commercial morality with which he was inspired.
However Sir Joseph never worried much about morals, either in
mutton, oats, or any other line of business. He was after the boodle
—to get it honestly if he could, but to get it. At this time Ward was
Colonial Treasurer, and as a sidelight on the connection between business
and politics, it is interesting to note that the Southland Freezing Co. wrote
to the Hon. A. J. Cadman, Minister for Bailways, accusing the Depart-
ment of deliberately lowering the railage for live sheep by 30 per cent,
and thus giving a big concession to Ward’s business.
On January 1, 1894, Sir Joseph drops out of the Ocean Beach
concern, and is appointed the Southland agent for Nelsons, at £650 a
year. By this time he was in an enviable position as far as the public
could see, He had sold out his freezer at a good profit, and dropped
into a nice fat extra at £650 per annum. His J. G. Ward’s Farmers
Ass. was apparently flourishing, and Sir Joseph had unloaded his shares
to the tune of £12,000 on the farmers. He had a big interest in the
binder twine monopoly, which had the farmers under its thumb.
But those behind the scenes knew what sort of a foundation Ward’s
seeming prosperity possessed. The Hon. W. H. Eeynolds, who was a
director of the Colonial Bank, told the Upper House Committee, years
after, —when the smash came —that he had declared at a Board meeting
that there would be a loss of £50,000 to £60,000 on Ward’s accounts,
and that the directors protested at every meeting against the size of Sir
Joseph’s overdrafts. This evidence was corroborated by another director,
Larnach, but evidently the Bank did not like to pull the Colonial Treas-
urer up with a round turn, and to all appearances Sir Joseph was
flourishing like a green bay tree.
On June £3O, 1894, the second balance-sheet of the J. G. Ward’s
Farmers Ass. o N.Z., Ltd., was “made up,” and when submitted to the
shareholders, four mouths later, disclosed a profit for the year of £7,777
(evidently Sir Joseph had great faith in seven as a lucky number), and
an overdraft of £26,584.
That this was a cooked balance-sheet is shown by the fact that on
June 30,1894, according to the official liquidator, the overdraft of the
J.G.W.F.A.N.Z. was £60,150, but was reduced £35,000 by a cheque
from Sir Joseph, making Sir Joseph’s debit balance £75,328. And two
days later this tansaction of £35,000 was reversed.
The plain English of this is that Ward’s Farmers Ass. owed the
Colonial Bank £60,000; but this would look bad in the balance-sheet—
it might prevent Sir Joseph unloading his shares on to the farmers ; it
might hurt the Bank’s reputation, and would certainly mean adverse
criticism —which Sir Joseph, as Colonial Treasurer, did not want. So in
order to make the overdraft look more respectable, Sir Joseph draws a
cheque for £35,000 on the Colonial Bank (although at the time he did so
he already owed them £40,000), and this cheque is paid into the Farmers
Ass. account to reduce the debt for balance-sheet purposes. The balance-
sheet is then made up, and two days later the Ward’s Farmers Ass draws
a cheque for £35,000 and pays it back to Sir Joseph,


This pea-and-thimble trick is a common one in high finance, and
comes off all right so long as both accounts have not to be balanced at
once ; but that it was a deliberate bluff to fool the public as regards the
true position of the J. G. Ward’s Association is only too apparent. The
following letters show that this cooking was done deliberately, and with
this end in view :
Colonial Bank of New Zealand,
Invercargill, 20th June, 1894.
Dear Mackenzie.
The Ward Farmers’ balance on 30th inst., and Mr.
Ward proposes drawing his own cheque for £40,000
on that day and handing the amount to the Farmers
(i.e., the J. G. Ward’s Farmers’ Association) till Monday,
2nd July, I presume the transaction will he in order.
We must not show all the overdraft to the public this
time, as there are too many timid people about at pre-
sent. If I do not hear from you I take it silence gives
consent.
Yours sincerely,
G- A BIRCH,
(Local Manager, Colonial Bank).
Private.
Wellington,
29th June, 1394.
My dear Ward,
I intended to show you the enclosed letter, but re-
membered to do so only after I left your office- I have
not replied to it—fact is, I cannot—but I have no ob-
jection to your wiring that you have seen me and I
have no objection to the matter being arranged in the
way indicated.
Yours,
H. MACKENZIE.
(General Manager, Colonial Bank.)
The brutal frankness of the local bank manager at Invercargill
shows the reason for this faking of the overdraft, and the deliberate
shuffling of the General Manager in Wellington shows how reluctant he
was to oppose the crooked proposition of the Hon. Colonial Treasurer,
and so the thing went through.
Surely this sort of thing justifies us in saying that the man who is
guilty of such financial trickery in the past is unfit to be our Premier
to-day, and have the handling of the Dominion’s credit and millions of
money. But the people get just the Government they deserve, and Sir
Joseph has a carte blanche to go to London and interview our pawn-
brokers, and we know nothing of what goes on. When a question is
asked in the House about our loans, or our financial position. Sir Joseph
gets up and vomits a volume of figures, stringing out millions after
millions until the members get a headache and go out into Bellamy’s for
a little fresh air and something with it, and Sir Joseph sits down with a
triumphant smile, and the tame Government goats like Poole bleat


Hear, hear !” and marvel that such an enlarged head as Ward’s could
contain so many figures.
These tame pets of Sir Joseph’s, who feed from his hand, are perhaps
typical of hundreds of thousands in New Zealand who still believe in
Ward, and have forgotten that for thirteen years the same old game of
bluff was going on, and Sir Joseph was swearing bj r all he held holy
that he was as sound as the Bank (the Colonial Bank, we suppose), and
that his account ran into thousands ami thousands (on the wrong side of
the ledger). But ol course, some of our politicians were infants then.
Millar was busy “labour agitating”; Eowlds was a
“soft ” goods man : and Poole was selling family bibles, home doctors,
or the “ Lord’s Prayer on a dime ” to the struggling farmers in the wilds
of Wyoming, U.S.A.
tu \U
✓ Is ✓
CHAPTER Y.
This little history of J. G. Ward, as a business man, has now reached
Juno, 1894, when the second yearly balance-sheet was “made up.”
Wo have described how the Association’s overdraft of£Go,ooo was re-
duced by Ward paying into the Association’s credit his personal cheque
for £35,000, a day or so before the balance was closed, and- then with-
drawing it immediately afterwards. Two months after cooking the bal-
ance-sheet by this pea-and-thimble, now-you-see-it-now-you-dont bus-
iness, our bravo Sir Joseph drew on Cooper, Son and Nephew, the Eng-
lish sheep-dip people, for £25,000 and discounted the bill locally.
This bill was sent to London for collection in the usual way, but was
never presented. About a year later it was returned to the Colony, and,
according to an officer of the Colonial Bank, was taken up and paid by
cash remitted from some people in Wellington.
To the ordinary reader who has never had a chance of dabbling in
“high finance” and fails to understand its little points, we might explain
that in the ordinary way of business, if Smith in Loudon owes Brown of
Auckland £I,OOO, Brown can draw a bill on Smith in London, take it to
the banker in Auckland, and discount it for cash, the Bank charges
Brown interest and exchange, gives him the balance in cash and sends
the bill to their London agents to collect from Smith. In this case Ward
drew on Cooper’s in England, discounted the bill in New Zealand, but
it was never collected from Cooper in England, but returned back to
Now Zealand. We know that when Ward drew his cheque for £35,000
to cook his Association’s balance sheet it left him £75,000 in debt to the
Colonial Bank on his personal account, and his draft on Cooper for
£25,000 which was never presented, must have made up his personal
overdraft at the Colonial Bank up to about £IOO,OOO.
We do not sa} r that Sir Joseph’s bill on Cooper was a bogus one, or
that he was drawing on a firm for £25,000 that did not owe him an oat.
That would have simply been getting cash on false pretences and meant
getting time “without option,” but it does seem strange that a man in
Ward’s position should have drawn on a well-known British firm to the
tunc of £25,000 and then for the bill never to have been presented but


to be returned to this country, and taken up in Wellington. Ward was
desperately hard up at the time—he owed the Bank £75,000 and in
view of the advances obtained on oats which had no objective existence,
(about which we will speak later), it is quite possible this alleged indebt-
edness of Ccoper, Son and Nephew, which stood good for £25,000 from
the Bank, only existed in the fertile imagination of the J. G. Ward’s
Farmers Association.
However, he this as it may, the faked balance-sheet was presented
to the shareholders of the J. G. Ward’s Farmers’ Assrciation of New
Zealand, Ltd., at its annual meeting on the 20th October, 1804, and
with the true financial position lying unrevealed the Ass. looked a very
flourishing boast indeed. The shareholders and employees were treated
Avith fattening generosity. A dividend of 10 per cent was paid, a rebate
of 25 percent, was made to the shareholders on the charges they had paid
to the Association, a bonus of two and a half percent. Avas gp-en to those
Avho had made purchases, and tho salaried officers got a bonus of 3 per
cent, on their Avages.
Truly even the high-fainting nomenclature Sir Joseph had chosen
for his Association failed to conA r ey any idex of xvliat a gigantic lucky
bag it was, and how its salaried officers must have felt it when the As-
sociation snuffed out, and they had to be satisfied with a miserable Gov-
ernment billot. Not only Avas the cash flung about in this lavish man-
ner at the annual meeting, but it xvas actually proposed to increase its
capital to £250,000, Avhich meant increasing it ten-fold, in order, as Sir
Joseph put it, “to render the sphere of its usefulness considerably
greater.”
Sad to relate, the cool quarter-of-a-million Avas not forthcoming,
and in its place Ward issued debentures a couple of months later for
£50,000. At the next annual meeting Sir Joseph said that £50,000
of debentures had been floated, of Avliich £40,000 were hold in London
This Avas a deliberate falsehood, for Avhen the smash came, the official
liquidators state that £30,000 Avere placed with the Colonial Bank,
and £20,000 Avith the Bank of New Zealand. But it was characteristic
of Sir Joseph, and still is, that he never allows any absurd regard for
Truth to interfere Avith business or politics, so he Avent on plunging
deeper and deeper in the morass of high finance, building his house
of cards higher and higher, till at the end of 1894, the indebtedness
of his inflated Association Avith the Colonial Bank, amounted to
£123,189.
\G vG
CI!ALTER VI.
Our last article took ns to the second annual meeting of the share-
holders in the J. G. Ward's Farmers’ Association of New Zealand, on
October 20th, 1894, Avhen a highly-flourishing business Avas announced,
and largo dividends and bonuses were scattered with a free hand. At
the close of 1894 the directors of the Colonial Bank grew uneasy about
the debt of the J.G.W’s. Farmers’ Ass., which at that lime showed an
overdraft of £122.198.


But Ward was at his zenith. x\s Colonial Treasurer he had millions
of borrowed cash to play with, and as Postmaster-General, Minister of
Marine, Industries and Commerce, and Customs, he had the gift of a large
number of fat billets in his hands, and the number of Southland people
who got Government jobs was phenomenal.
As a business man ho was regarded as a commercial genius with
wonderful business instincts and extraordinary ability. He seemed to
have become possessed of some Philosopher’s Stone which transmuted
everything he touched into 24-carat gold, and the lucky settlers of
Southland were the fortunate recipients of the shower of sovereigns
which Sir Joseph, by waving his magic wand, could precipitate into their
laps. As a matter of fact, Sir Joseph never was, and never has been, a
business man. He was, is now, and ever will be, a pure, cold-blooded
plunger, with the speculative or gambling instinct running hot through
his arteries, and an unscrupulous detenuination to plunge with anybody's
money in the hopes of bringing off a coup, and getting something for
nothing.
In proof of this we can see that in his business transactions, with all
the advantages which his official positions and inside knowledge gave
him, he invariably plunged and plunged till ho went smash. He
cornered oats, paid fancy prices for them, and lost. He chartered ships,
•sent them far and wide, and fell in with a splash. He bought sheep at
half-a-crown more than he got for them, and got blown out. He under-
sold everyone in sheep dip, sugar, sacks, etc,, and took the knock.
And combined with all this reckless gambling, he showed a reckless
disregard for even the primitive and elastic ethics of our present business
system, and things went on which have landed many a business
buccaneer into a stone-breaking and tree-planting iob.
The bogus cheque system of handing in cheques for amounts which
he did not possess, fn order to fake the Association’s overdraft for the
balance-sheet, was bad enough. The- bill drawn on an English firm,
which was never presented, was sailing pretty close to the wind, but the.
famous “ oats ” fraud was a piece of bare-faced swindling Avhich ought
to have lauded someone in gaol.
The third annual meeting of shareholders in Ward’s concern was
held on the 7th September, 1890, and a few days before Mr. Davidson,
the Colonial Bank Inspector, was sent to inspect and report on the
accounts of the Invercargill branch, where J. G. Ward’s Farmers’ Asso-
ciation of New Zealand, Ltd., banked their sugar. The following letter
from the Bank Manager to the General Manager, explains what
happened :
Private-
Invercargill,
3rd September, 1895.
Dear Mr. Mackenzie,
Before this reaches you Mr- Davidson’s report on
his investigation of the affairs of the Ward Farmers’
•Co. will be in your hands, and you will see uy it that
terrible disclosures have come to light. The day Mr.
Davidson appeared an engagement was made with Mr
Fisher for half-past-seven in the evening, and half-an-


hour before that time the latter came along to the
Bank and made a confession of his crimes that fairly
staggered me- The amount owing to the J. G- Ward’s
Farmers’ Association by Mr. Ward is a perfect revela-
tion, and fully explains why I could never keep the
account down. The outcome now is that instead of Mr.
Ward being a rich man, as he led me to believe, and I
always thought, he has lost every shilling, and is some-
thing like £30,000 behind besides Fisher owns up to
being 75,000 sacks of oats short of my warrants (exclu-
sive of the 80,000 sacks attached to the British bill for
£30,000) and says he has lied and deceived me hundreds
and hundreds of times during the past live years; in
fact, he says, the truth has not been in him. This is a
nice confession for a man holding the position he does,
and from one I had the greatest respect and trust in.
It is truly apalling to me, and is the rudest shock I have
ever experienced in my life. My own opinion is that we*
could put Fisher. Anderson, the directors, the auditor,,
etc., in gaol over this, to me, huge swindle, if necessary.
You, of course, will know what is best to be done, and I
therefore await your instructions before moving further.
With very much regret at the outcome of things,
I am, etc.,
G. A. BIRCH.
\V \U
CHAPTER VII,
The letter from the local manager of the Colonial Bank to the Head
Office in Wellington shows clearly that the J. G. Ward’s Farmers’ Assoc-
ciation had got enormous advances from the Bank on the security of oats,
which only had a mythical existence. It is only fair to Ward to state
that he was in London when the bogus bill for £30,000 was drawn on
McConnell and Co., London, for oats which never wore. Joe
stated in his evidence before Judge subsequently that on his
return to the Colony in June, 1895, he found there was something
crooked about this bill for ghostly oats which had not materialized, and
that in consequence of this he would not allow the draft to go forward to
London. But one cannot entirely acquit Sir Joseph of complicity in this
oats swindle, for although the Association received the cash loan on the
imaginary oats, the cash went to the credit of Sir Joseph’s private account
with his Association, and even when he returned in July and found the-
draft to be bogus he did not prevent it remaining as a genuine draft with
the Bank and the money at his credit till after the last annual meeting
ol his Association in September, till after the signing of the amalgamation
agreement with the N.Z. and Colonial Banks in October, and till after


the Colonial Bank meeting in November—tbe draft not being debited
back till November 13tb, 1895, four months after Sir Joseph had
discovered it to be a dummy.
Of course Sir Joseph could always make the bluff that he knew
nothing of the funny business connected with his Association, because ho
was so busy with his Cabinet functions ; but the manner in which his-
private account with the Association was manipulated shows that most of
the crooked business must have come under his knowledge. For instance
he debentures for £1.0,000 which Ui6> Association placed with the N.Z-.
and Colonial Banks, and which Sir Joseph said were “ held in London,”
brought £lO,OOO in cash into the Association, and should have gone to’
the credit of a debenture account, but Ward admitted on oath that the
money was placed to his private account instead, and when sheer neces-
sity compelled a transfer of the amount foi the purposes of the balance-
sheet, the bogus oats advance of £30,000 and two credits of London firms
for £lB,OOO and £6,500 were transferred wrongfully to Sir Joseph's
private account, and so making it appear that he had no indebtedness to
the Association, and at the same time hiding liabilities.
For instance, the last balance-sheet of the Association in 1895 had
no reference to bills or drafts. The overdraft was set down as £1,186,
A net profit was shown for the year of £6,516. At the time this meeting
was held Ward knew all about the bogus oats draft, and so did the Bank
officials, but nothing seems to have been done, and Sir Joseph went on
bluffing and plunging as gaily as ever. The banking legislation Avhich
he had passed apd had on hand promised to provide an opening for
wiping out his losses, and hiding the enormous deficit of his reckless
gambling, and, no doubt with every belief in the truth of what he was
saying, Sir Joseph faced his final annual meeting of shareholders with
his final faked balance-sheet, and prophesied with his usual modesty and
diffidence that the ensuing year would be a prosperous one for the-
Association and be better than any since its birth.
CHAPTER VIII.
Our readers may have been somewhat wearied with the brief history
given of the meteoric J. G. Ward’s Farmers’ Association, and be wonder-
ing now what it has all been leading up to. Its history, so far as this
narrative is concerned, closes with the third annual meeting referred to
in our last article, when Ward announced the dividend, presented a
cooked balance-sheet, and prophesied an even more prosperous time for
the J. G. Ward’s Farmers’ Assoriation in the dim and distant future.
Unfortunately Sir Joseph’s ability in the plunging and bluffing of
high finance did not extend to his power as a seer. For the Association
went bung, and there was no more talk of the glowing future. Perhaps
the best and most concise history wo can give in brief is contained in the
summing-up of Judge Williams, who held the inquest and gave the-
following verdict: —


“ Here, then, is a company or association with a capital
actually paid in cash of £12,450. When it has been only three
years in existence that capital has been lost and the association
has become hopelessly insolvent, showing a deficiency of over
£lOO,OOO. It has been shown that the association obtained
credit for a large amount by fraud ; that it put forward an
utterly false balance-sheet, and that its affairs were managed
with a reckless disregard of ordinary business principles.
“ Of this Association Mr, J. Q. Ward was the Managing
Director. Of the £12,450 of the paid =up capita! he held £B,OOO,
which carried with it a contingent liability of £32,000. He also
held shares of the par value of £15,000 which had been alloted
to him as fully paid-up.
“ His private account with the Association was in debit
£ssDs<>, showing that he freely used the credit of the Associa-
tion for his own private ventures.
“ In such circumstances it is hardly too much to say that
in substance Mr. Ward and the Association must, for most
business purposes, have been identical. Mr. Ward is now
hopelessly insolvent. A- iew pence in the pound is the utmost
that his estate can be expected to realise. What, under ordin =
ary circumstances, would happen would be that the Association
would go into liquidation and that Mr. Ward would become
bankrupt.
“ That the career of the Association should be brought to
an end, and its proceedings investigated, and that those who
were responsible for its management should no longer be per-
mitted to roam at large through the business world is a result
so obviously desirable in the interests of commercial morality
that it ought, if possible, to be attained.”
In referring to the faked balance-sheets of the Association, and
which were signed by Sir Joseph as Managing Director and boss rooster,
the learned Judge said :
“ That some traders may habitually make out balance-
sheets in this way is possible, just as some traders may,
unfortunately, be guilty of other dishonest practices, but, not-
withstanding that, the practice is obviously a dishonest one.”
_\V_
fir 7ir
CHAPTER IX.
After Judge Williams’ scathing judgement on the J. G. Ward’s
Farmers’ Ass., and those responsible for the management of it,
Ward retired into sweet obscurity for a time, while some of his trusty
friends tried to clean up the mess.
In the first place Messrs. Lee-Smith and J. B. Reid came forward
■and offered the official liquidators the modest sum of £62,750 to purchase
the assets and liabilities of the Ward Assn, and Sir Joseph’s personal
obligations. The total indebtedness was £168,229, and those responsible
for winding up the affairs were prepared to accept the offer. But the


Court refused the offer on the grounds that it was, “in effect, an offer qf
hush money,” and so the crest-fallen Joseph retired temporarily from
the blazing publicity of several portfolios into sweet obscurity in Sunny
Southland; because it was obvious, after Judge Williams’ remark :
“It is thus an offer to "buy off' from bankruptcy and
its consequences, a man who ought not to escape them,”
that Sir Joseph had to go through the mill.
However, twelve months later a Mr. John Batger, of Invercargill,
came forward and offered £8,500 for Ward’s debt to the Colonial Bank
of £96,000. But here, again, the Court stood in the way, and Judge
Williams rubbed it in stronger than ever. He said :
“To sanction a compromise in such circumstances
would be for the Court to allow itself to be made the
instrument to protect persons guilty of commercial ir-
regularities from legal consequences.' If there is evidence
in existence of grave commercial irregularities, then the
better the terms of the compromise offered, the more
probable it is that the offer is made with a view, of hush-
ing up such irregularities.”
As a result of the failure of these altempls to hush matters up, Sir
Joseph had lo become bankrupt and lose his seat in Parliament. But to
everyone's astonishment he steed again for the vacancy caused by his
becoming bankrupt, and was thumphantly returned while still an
undischarged bankrupt. The question was raised in the House as to the
right of Sir Joseph to sit as a member until he had received his discharge
and by a special Act the Court of Appeal was appointed a “ Court of
Construction ” to find out what the Electoral Act meant ■when it said :
“The feat cf any member shall become vacant if he is a
bankrupt.”
The Court, after long and involved argument, decided that while a
seat became vacant on the bankruptcy of a member, there was nothing
to prevent his nominating as a candidate for the vacancy, and, being
elected, to fill it. So that while Sir Joseph was debarred from being
elected to the Tipper House, a local body, or even a Conciliation Board
he was still able to sit in Parliament as the honourable member for
A warn a.
However. Sir Joseph had not long to wait for his discharge, for on
Guy Fawkes’ day, 1897, he applied to Judge Ward for his discharge, and
found in him a much more merciful and reasonable judge than Mr
Justice Williams, who had shown a tendency to make unkind remarks,
about the ease. Sir Joseph’s application was unopposed, and Judge
AY aid, in a weak and apologetic judgment, granted an unconditional
discharge. The nature of the ceremony can he gathered by the follow-
ing from the “ Southland Times” :
“Was it an ordeal at alt? To our mind it partook
more of the character of a pleasing ceremony. The
applicant was certainly submitted to no indignity—not
even to harshness or dose scrutiny. On the contrary he
received the utmost consideration and courtesy all -
round.” 1 ' !


CHAPTER X,
The reader who has attentively followed the career of Sir Joseph
Ward, as outlined in these articles from the flotation of his insolvent
business into a Joint Stock Company in December, 1892, up till his
discharge from bankruptcy by Judge Ward on November 9th, 1897,
will have had brought before his mental vision a succession of financial
jugglery,, chicancery, and barefaced dishonesty, any one act of which
would have landed the ordinary person behind the prison bars.
The records of J. G. Ward’s Farmers’ Association furnish the most
discreditable story of headloug plunging over unravelled.
This overdraft fed concern, beginning its career with a swamping liab-
ility, ended it by carrying desolation to the homes of hundreds of innocent
victims who depended on the honesty and good faith of the trustees
of the money they had invested in the Colonial Bank, money which
found its way into the hands of J. G. Ward, who squandered it recklessly
in speculative efforts to enrich himself, not caring twopence for those
deluded people in whose eyes dust was being systematically thrown.
Yet, in spite of all this, in spite of the legal strictures of Judge
Williams, who gave his opinion that those responsible for the man-
agement of the J. G. Ward Association “should no longer be permitted
to roam at large through the business World.”
Sir Joseph was given his discharge as above, and on the same
date, the Appeal Court delivered its judgement, pronouncing the ban-
krupt member for Awarua a duly qualified member of the House of
Representatives.
Sir Joseph had successfully run the gauntlet, sailed within an ace
of the prison gates, and once again he breathed freely.
The sun shone brightly upon Sir Joseph’s fortunes, but it was not
long before the clouds began to gather again.
Rumour began to circulate that certain shareholders of the J. G.
Ward Farmers’ Association were not at all satisfied with the free and
easy position in which Mr J. G. Ward had been allowed to slip
through the Bankruptcy Court.
After, it came out that some “friends of Mr Ward” had purchased
back all his Invercargill properties, running into many thousands of
pounds, a petition signed by a number of victimised shareholders of
the Ward Farmers’ Association was ]iresentcd in the Supreme Court,
Dunedin, asking for the prosecution of Joseph George Ward and John
Fisher, late Managing Director, and Manager respectively, under the
Penal Clauses of the Companies Act.
CHAPTER XI.
On March 8, 1898, a petition was presented by a number of the
unfortunate victims of Ward’s financial plunging for the prosecution of
Messrs. J. G. Ward and J. Fisher, late managing director and manager,
respectively, of Ward’s Farmers’ Association, under the penal clauses of
the Companies Act. Here are the penal clauses referred to :


Section 234. —Everyone is liable to seven years imprisonment with
hard labour who, being a director, manager*, public officer, or member of
any body, corporate or public company, with intent to detraud.
1. Destroys, alters, mutilates, or falsifies any book, paper, writing or
valuable security belonging to the body corporate or public body.
2. Makes, or concurs in making, any false entry, omits or concurs
in omitting to enter any material particular in any book of account or
other document.
Section 235,—Every one is liable to seven years imprisonment with
hard labour who, being a promoter, director, public officer, or manager,
of any body corporate or public company either existing or intended to
be formed, makes, circulates, publishes or concurs in making,
circulating or publishing any prospectus, statement or account which he
knows to be false in any material particular
1. With intent to induce persons (whether ascertained or not) to
become shareholders or partners or
2. With intention to deceive or defraud the members, shareholders,
or creditors or any of them (whether ascertained or not) of such body
corporate or public company.
3. With intent to induce any person to entrust or advance any
property to such body corporate or public company or enter into security
for the benefit thereof
Having carefully absorbed the eccentricities of the financial
transactions recorded in the articles which have appeared in the previous
pages, and having perused the penal clauses set forth above, the reader
will be in a position to see whether there was substantial foundation for
the charges made against Sir Joseph
These charges were clearly sot out in the petition to Judge Williams,
which was as follows :
“ The humble petition of the persons whose names are hereunder
signed showeth as follows—Your petitioners are all shareholders and
contributors to the J. G. Ward’s Fanners Association of New Zealand,
Ltd,, in liquidation, and are interested in the winding-up thereof and in
this matter are acting for themselves aud also for other shareholders.
“ The said Association was registered as a Company under the
-Companies Act,] 1882.
*• An order was made by the honourable Court on the 14th day of
July, 1896, for winding up the said Association, and it is now in course
■of being wound up.
William Eichard Ceok, of Invercargill, Commission Agent, was on
the 4th day of August, 1896, appointed to be and he still is the official
liquidator of the said association, and it is now in the course of being
"wound up.
It has appeared in the course of such winding up that a certain
•director of the said Association—to wit, the Honourable Joseph George
Ward—and also a certain manager or officer of the said Association—to
•wit, John Fisher—have been guilty of offences in relation to the said
.Association for which they are criminally responsible, to wit—
(a) They made, circulated, published and concurred in circulating
and publishing statements and accounts which they knew to bo
iajse in materia] particulars with intent to induce persons to beeome


shareholders, and with intent to deceive or defraud the members,
shareholders, and creditors of the Association,
(b) And they also with intent to defraud, falsified certain books
belonging to the said Association,
(c) And they also with intent to defraud, made, or concurred in
making, false entries, and omitted or concurred in omitting to-
enter material particulars in the books of account and balance sheets
of the said Association,
(d) And they also falsified the books of the said Association, and
were privy to the making of false and fraudulent entries in the books
of the said Association with intent to deceive.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray—(l) That this honour-
able court will direct tie official liquidator of the said Associafion to
institute and conduct prosecutions for the said offences : and (2) that
the costs and expenses thereof and of this application be paid cut of
the assets of the Association,
And your petitioners will ever pray, etc.
(Signed) Thomas Fleming, Invercargill, flaxmiller; Wm Eonald.
Waianiou : Jas. Young, Wright’s Bush ; Adam Myross
Bush; William Laing Kerr, Oteramika; Geo. McLeod, Waianiwa;
Thomas Kirkpatrick, Wairio; Eichard James, Otautau : Kobert Baird,
Limestone Plains, farmer.
Judge Williams, before whom the petition was heard, decided not
to grant the order for Ward and Fisher’s prosecution on the ground that
it would not be fair to use the creditors money in prosecuting Ward and
Fisher for the benefit of the shareholders. If the petitioners chose to
pay all the costs of the prosecution they could go ahead, but the law
would not allow the asset? to be used for the purpose. And so Ward
was whitewashed' All those concerned in the affair who were on
Ward’s side are in Government billets to-day, the books have all
been burned, and Ward reigns a high financier.
CONCLUSION.
The foregoing chapters have very briefly thrown a little searchlight
on the past career ,gf our patriotic premier. Much more could have been
said of Ward’s meteoric career, and of incidents iirhisdife similar to thostf
which have been referred to. In fact a 500 page biography could easily
be writ ten around Sir Joseph's rise, fall, and resurrection. Much, too,
might have been said of the connection between the bankrupt Colonial
Treasurer and the banking legislation which was introduced by him
in the hopes of saving his skin-and dodging his creditors, but suffi-
cient has been written to -give our read or s a better idea of the chat-
act or of the effusive and voluble gentleman who now runs this Do-
minion. We leave dnr readers to judge how far they are justified hi
allowing a man with a past .like Ward possesses to controHhe finances,
legislation,’ and administration of New Zealand.


We can only couchule by appealing to patriotic citizens to do some-
thing to turn a stream of caustic disinfectant on to our putrid political
dung heap. Purity and honesty of administration are more needed now
than ever.
The present administration, to those who can peep behind the scenes,
is as rotten as any of Tammany Hall or San Francisco. While the Gov-
erunent’s idea of justice, as displayed in the Kuyvett case, would bring
a blush to the cheeks of of the French autocrats who sent Dreyfus to his
doom.
Some may agree with us as to the rottenness which is rampant, but
ask, “ What is the remedy ? ” Well, in a democratic, adult-suffrage,
educated community like this, the people get just the sort of government
they deserve, and the only cure lies in the ballot-box. When the general
election arrives, the citizen with a stroke of lead decides the fate of New
Zealand. Perhaps the day will come when the people will vote on all
laws and measures. When with the initiative and referendum we will
govern ourselves by ourselves without the assistance of the professional
politician or the superior person. For, like other professions, our pro-
fessional politicians are mostly fools or rogues, either ignorant or venal,
and when the people are educated the whole lot will be relegated
scrap-heap as criminal records of ancient history, and another Joseph
may arise who will be as pure, as, the Joseph of old who, lost even his
shirt in the defence of his virtue, and lead his people to the Promised
Land.


Printed by the Typographical Art
Printing Works, 13 Gore Street,
Auckland, and Published by James
Black, of Vincent St., Auckland.
Copies for Sale can be obtained
from L. Black.
13 Gore Street, Auckland.




