

Sir Henry Parkes
Chronological Record of the principal events
and occurrences in the Parliamentary and
Official Life of Sir Henry Parkes.
FIRST ELECTION FOR THE CITY OF SYDNEY MAY 2, 1854.
[The city was at that time one electorate. The franchise was based on a
property qualification with open voting. The vacancy had been caused by the
resignation of Mr. W. C. Wentworth on his departure for England. There were
two candidates —Mr. Kemp and Mr. Parkes.]
Result of the Poll
CHARLES KEMP 779
HENRY PARKES 1427
EARLY LABOURS.
Nautical School. —On the 12th July following his election,
Mr. Parkes obtained the appointment of a Select Committee to consider
and report upon the expediency of establishing a Nautical School for
the Training of Deserted and Vagrant Boys. The Report was brought
up on the 24th November, recommending the establishment of such
institution. The effort was made to carry it out by private contributions,
but did not succeed. Nothing was done by any of the early Ministries,
nor until Mr. Parkes took office as Colonial Secretary in 1866, when
the ship Vernon was purchased and the School established by him.
In 1891 the Vernon was replaced by the ship Sobraon at the instance of
Sir Henry Parkes. There are now on board the training ship 324 boys,
and 2,691 have passed into various walks of industry, of whom 92 per
cent, are reported to be doing well.
Asiatic Labour. —On the 15th August, 1854, Mr. Parkes
obtained the appointment of a Select Committee on the subject of Indian
and Chinese immigration. A valuable body of evidence was taken by
the Committee, The Report was brought up November 27th following.


Adulteration of Food. —On the 3rd July, 1855, Mr. Parkes
obtained the appointment of a Select Committee to enquire into and
report upon the adulteration of the common articles of food. The
Report was brought up the 14th November following.
Agriculture and the Land. —On the 3rd July, 1855,
Mr. Parkes obtained the appointment of a Select Committee “to enquire
into and report upon the state of agriculture, with special reference to
the raising of wheaten grain, and to the causes of hindrance or failure
in that great industrial pursuit.” Among others, the late Sir John
Robertson (then a comparatively unknown man) was a valuable witness
before this Committee. The Committee took considerable evidence and
recommended that the subject be taken up by the new Assembly (then
on the eve of being elected ) “in connection with the reconstruction of
the public land system ” and “ under the free and vigorous action of
the representative principle.” The Report was brought up on the
17th December following.
The Electric Telegraph. —On the 31st October, 185 G (in
the first session of the first Parliament), Mr. Parkes obtained the appoint-
ment of a select Committee to consider and report upon the subject of
the introduction into New South Wales of the Electric Telegraph; and
the first Telegraphic line was, in fact, constructed on the recommendation
of his Report. The Report was brought up on the Ist December
following.
The Prisons of the Colony. —On the 23rd January, 18G1,
Mr. Parkes obtained the appointment of a Select Committee to enquire
into and report upon the state and management of the public prisons,
and the Report, brought up on the 10th May in the same year, made ten
specific recommendations, which have been carried out substantially in
the present industrial organisation, discipline and general regulation of
the prisons. The first appointment of Inspector of Prisons, or
Comptroller General, was offered to Mr. Parkes and declined by him.
A copy of this Report w r as sent to Charles Dickens, who had paid great
attention, as is generally known, to the condition of prisons in England,
and Mr, Parkes received from that distinguished man the following
letter:—
Gad’s Hill Place,
Higham by Rochester,
Kent, 26th August, 1862.
I beg to acknowledge the safe receipt of your very obliging letter, and its
accompanying report and evidence. I have perused that public document with
great interest and not a little horror, and with a sincere admiration of the spirit
in which the whole enquiry was conducted. It is very honorable to the gentlemen
concerned and to the great country they represent.
Faithfully yours,
Henry Parkes, Esq.
CHARLES DICKENS.


Besides these investigations, Mr. Parkes, during the early years of
his Parliamentary life, conducted several other enquiries, by Select
Committees, into subjects of much importance, among which may be
enumerated the “ Condition of the Working Classes,” the “ Office of the
Government resident at Port Curtis ” (Queensland being at that time
part of New South Wales), and the “ Unauthorised Expenditure by the
Governor on the Circular Quay.”
Though invited to join different Governments, Mr. Parkes did not
accept office until 1866, twelve years after he took his seat as Member
for Sydney in 1854. He then became Colonial Secretary, with the
late Sir James Martin as Premier.
The following are some of the measures introduced and carried
through Parliament by Mr. (now Sir Henry) Parkes: —
1866. —The Public Schools Act. Under this Act the School
Administration was entrusted to a “ Council of Education,” which for
some years consisted of the Hon. George Allen, Mr. Speaker Arnold,
Sir James Martin, Mr. Parkes and Professor Smith. Mr. Parkes was
four times elected President of the Council.
1866. —The Act to provide for the Inspection of Hospitals and
other institutions aided by the State.
1867. —The Municipalities Act, which still remains the municipal
law of the country, and under which 170 municipal bodies have been
established.
1867. —The Volunteer Regulation Act which is still the law with
some amendments, and under which all companies of Volunteers have
been enrolled.
1872. —An Act to establish Freetrade on the River Murray between
New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia.
1872. —An Act to authorise the dedication of a site for the Prince
Alfred Hospital.
1873. —An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to
Friendly Societies.
1873. —The Prisons Regulation Act.
1879. —The Act to secularise the Church and School lands.
1879-80. —The Water Supply and Sewerage Acts (city and
country).
1880. —The Act to provide for the better Representation of the
People in the Legislative Assembly.
1880. —The Act to provide for the acquisition by the Government
of lands for public purposes.


1880. —The Cattle Sale Yards Act.
1880. —The Public Instruction Act. The system of public
education established by this statute and by the Public Schools Act of
1866 at the present time embraces 2,448 schools, 4,456 trained teachers,
and 181,853 pupils.
1880. —The Fisheries Act.
1880. —The Act to regulate the Boarding out of Destitute Children.
1881. —The Chinese Immigration Restriction Act.
1887-8. —The Act to regulate the Liquor Traffic, and to give
effect to the principle of Local Option.
1887-8. —The Act for more stringently protecting the colony
from the disturbances and National dangers of Chinese immigration.
1887-8. —The Government Railways Act, under which the
present Railway Commissioners were appointed.
1888. —The Public Works Act.
SOME EXCEPTIONAL MINISTERIAL ACTS.
In 1866 Mr. Parkes, then Colonial Secretary for the first time, had
his attention directed to a case of deplorable negligence in the Sydney
Infirmary. In consequence of this sad case, Mr. Parkes communicated
with Miss Florence Nightingale, asking her to select and engage for the
colony a staff of trained nurses. Miss Nightingale undertook the duty,
and in due time the Nurses arrived, under the superintendence of Miss
Orburn, an accomplished lady, who will be remembered only with kind
feelings by all who knew her. This was the first introduction of trained
nurses to the hospitals of Australia.
In 1866 Mr. Parkes, on entering upon official life, found the
Asylums for the Insane in a condition little short of barbarism. The
doors were locked, the windows barred, the inmates close prisoners,
outdoor exercise was unknown. Mr. Parkes was fortunate in securing
the services of Dr. Manning, the present Inspector-General, and the
change which has been brought about, in contrast to the former state of
things, is simply wonderful in its ameliorative influences for the comfort
and general good of the unhappy sufferers.
Many other instances of legislation and administration might be
given to the credit of Sir Henry Parkes, but this bare mention of the
principal cases is sufficient.
The last Administration formed by Sir Henry Parkes, of which
Mr. McMillan was Treasurer, and Mr. Bruce Smith Secretary for Public
Works, is not included in this record.
Turner and Henderson Printers, Hunter Street, Sydney.
